===== Sabourin2009_StemCells_SpinalCordNSCniche+ZEB1 =====
THE STEM CELL NICHE
A Mesenchymal-Like ZEB11 Niche Harbors Dorsal Radial Glial
Fibrillary Acidic Protein-Positive Stem Cells in the Spinal Cord
JEAN-CHARLES SABOURIN,a KARIN B. ACKEMA,b DAVID OHAYON,a PIERRE-OLIVIER GUICHET,a FLORENCE E. PERRIN,a
ALAIN GARCES,a CHANTAL RIPOLL,a JEROEN CHARITE´,c LIONEL SIMONNEAU,d H. KETTENMANN,e AZEL ZINE,a
ALAIN PRIVAT,a JEAN VALMIER,a ALEXANDRE PATTYN,a JEAN-PHILIPPE HUGNOTa
aInstitut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´dicale (INSERM) U583, Physiopathologie et The´rapie des
de´ﬁcits sensoriels et moteurs, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, Hoˆpital St. ELOI, Montpellier, France;
bGrowth & Development, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland; cDepartment of Cell Biology,
Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; dLaboratoire interdisciplinaire de recherche en didactique
et formation, University Montpellier, Montpellier, France; eMax-Delbru¨ck-Centrum fu¨r Molekulare Medizin
(MDC), Berlin, Germany
Key Words. Neural stem cells • Spinal cord • Niche • ZEB1
ABSTRACT
In humans and rodents the adult spinal cord harbors neu-
ral stem cells located around the central canal. Their iden-
tity, precise location, and speciﬁc signaling are still ill-
deﬁned and controversial. We report here on a detailed
analysis of this niche. Using microdissection and glial
ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP)-green ﬂuorescent protein
(GFP) transgenic mice, we demonstrate that neural stem
cells are mostly dorsally located GFAP1 cells lying epen-
dymally and subependymally that extend radial processes
toward the pial surface. The niche also harbors doublecor-
tin protein (Dcx)1 Nkx6.11 neurons sending processes into
the lumen. Cervical and lumbar spinal cord neural stem
cells maintain expression of speciﬁc rostro-caudal Hox
gene combinations and the niche shows high levels of sig-
naling proteins (CD15, Jagged1, Hes1, differential screen-
ing-selected gene aberrative in neuroblastoma [DAN]).
More surprisingly, the niche displays mesenchymal traits
such as expression of epithelial-mesenchymal-transition
zinc ﬁnger E-box-binding protein 1 (ZEB1) transcription
factor and smooth muscle actin. We found ZEB1 to be
essential for neural stem cell survival in vitro. Prolifera-
tion within the niche progressively ceases around 13 weeks
when the spinal cord reaches its ﬁnal size, suggesting an
active role in postnatal development. In addition to hippo-
campus and subventricular zone niches, adult spinal cord
constitutes a third central nervous system stem cell niche
with speciﬁc signaling, cellular, and structural characteris-
tics that could possibly be manipulated to alleviate spinal
cord traumatic and degenerative diseases. STEM CELLS
2009;27:2722–2733
Disclosure of potential conﬂicts of interest is found at the end of this article.
INTRODUCTION
Compared with brain neural stem cell niches (subventricular
zone [SVZ]) and hippocampus), very little is known about stem
cells in the adult spinal cord [1–3]. Bona ﬁde neural stem cells
able to form long-term passageable neurospheres appear to be
located only around the central canal [4]. After spinal cord
trauma and also in various degenerative diseases, these migrate
to the lesion site and differentiate into both astrocytes and oli-
godendrocytes [5]. This may contribute to the exacerbation of
the glial scar or inversely to axonal regeneration. Formation of
neuronal-like cells and oligodendrocytes from the adult spinal
cord both in physiological and pathological situations has also
been reported [6–10]. The precise identity and diversity of
stem/progenitor cells around the central canal is not yet known.
Single cell puriﬁcation and studies with transgenic animals
expressing green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) in cells around the
canal led to the conclusion that neural stem cells are glial ﬁbril-
lary acidic protein (GFAP)-negative ependymal cells [11, 12].
Stem cells in the adult spinal cord can also be sorted based on
their high aldehyde dehydrogenase activity and these can then
be induced to differentiate in vitro to form motoneurons thus
opening new approaches to treat motoneuron disease [13]. We
recently reported the existence of a Sox2þ Nestinþ stem/pro-
genitor cell niche around the human central canal cord [14].
Author contributions: J.C.S., K.B.A. P.O.G., F.E.P., and C.R.: conception and design; D.O., J.C., L.S., H.K., A.Z., and A.P.: provision
of study material; A.G.: collection and/or assembly of data; A.P. and J.V.: ﬁnancial support; J.P. H.: conception and design, manuscript
writing, ﬁnal approval of manuscript.
A.P. and J.P.H. contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence: Jean-Philippe Hugnot, Ph.D., Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´dicale (INSERM) U583,
Physiopathologie et The´rapie des de´ﬁcits sensoriels et moteurs, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, Hoˆpital St. ELOI,
Montpellier, France. Tel: 00 33 4 99 63 60 08; Fax: 00 33 4 99 63 60 20; e-mail: hugnot@univ-montp2.fr
Received May 11, 2009;
accepted for publication September 8, 2009; ﬁrst published online in STEM CELLS EXPRESS September 25, 2009. V
C AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2009/$30.00/0 doi: 10.1002/stem.226
STEM CELLS 2009;27:2722–2733 www.StemCells.com

The two brain neural stem cell niches have been exten-
sively described but on the contrary the cellular composition,
organization, and molecular signalings in the spinal cord
niche remain ill-deﬁned. Here we report a detailed analysis of
this third central nervous system (CNS) niche and show an
unexpected cellular and molecular complexity. Neural stem
cells
were
accurately
identiﬁed
as
mostly
dorsal
radial
GFAPþ cells lying in a multicellular niche displaying mesen-
chymal features. These cells maintain correct rostro-caudal
Hox gene pattern and require the epithelial-mesenchymal tran-
sition transcription factor zinc ﬁnger E-box-binding protein 1
(ZEB1) for their expansion in vitro. A better knowledge of
this niche may ultimately allow its manipulation, permitting
endogenous regeneration of the spinal cord.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Spinal Cord Dissection and Neural
Stem Cell Culture
Mice were handled in compliance with French regulations. Spinal
cords from 12- to 15-week-old OF1 wild-type (Janvier, Le Gen-
est-Saint-Isle, France) or transgenic (hGFAP-GFP [15]) mice
euthanized with CO2 were dissected and rapidly processed for
neurosphere assay as described in Johansson et al. [12] without
the bovine serum albumin step. For ﬂow cytometry, erythrocytes
were lysed between the dissociation and sucrose centrifugation
steps with a solution containing 0.15 M NH4Cl, 1 mM KHCO3
and 0.1 mM Na2EDTA. Neural stem cells were cultured as
described in Deleyrolle et al. [16] and Dromard et al. [17]. Neu-
rosphere assays were performed with a cell density of 1 cell per
microliter in T25 or T75 ﬂasks. Flask manipulation was mini-
mized to decrease neurosphere aggregation. Using mixtures of
ﬂuorescent (actin-GFP) and nonﬂuorescent neurospheres, we
checked that under these conditions the vast majority of spheres
were clonal. The total number of neurospheres formed was
assessed 10 days later by carefully microscopic scanning of the
entire ﬂask. For the neurosphere assay using spinal cord sections,
lumbar spinal cord was sliced with a tissue chopper (McIlwain;
Mickle Laboratory Engineering Co., Guildford, U.K., http://
www.micklelab.co.uk) set at 750 lm and slices were collected in
Hanks’ balanced salt solution (HBSS). Under a binocular micro-
scope, each section was microdissected in two or three parts (Fig. 1)
using a diamond blade (Sapphire knife 0.22 mm, 15; World Preci-
sion Instruments, Sarasota, FL, http://www.wpiinc.com) or the cen-
tral canal region was removed by punching with a ﬁre-reduced Pas-
teur pipette (Fig. 1). Spinal cord fragments were then incubated in
250 ll HBSS, 30 ll trypsin 13 mg/ml, 30 ll hyaluronidase 7 mg/ml,
7 ll DNaseI 10 mg/ml, and 13 ll kinureic acid 4 mg/ml for 30
minutes at 37C and dissociated by pipetting with yellow tips. The
cell suspension was ﬁltered on a 40-lm sieve (BD, Franklin Lakes,
NJ, http://www.bdbiosciences.com) and plated in neurosphere me-
dium at clonal density (1 cell per microliter).
Figure 1.
Proliferation in the niche and localization of spinal cord neural stem cells. (A): Example of a Ki67þ cell (red) in the niche. (B): Aver-
age number of Ki67þ cells per section (13-lm thick, 32 sections per animal) in the niche from 0–13 weeks after birth. Values are means 
standard error of mean (SEM) (n ¼ 96 sections from three animals). (C): Spinal cord length from 0–13 weeks after birth measured with a ruler.
Values are means  SEM (n ¼ 3 spinal cords analyzed). (D): Photographs of spinal cord 1 or 9 weeks after birth (scale bar ¼ 5 mm). (E, G, I):
Schematic representations of lumbar spinal cord microdissections. (E): An approximately 550-lm diameter central fragment (red circle) was dis-
sected from the parenchyma and both parts were processed for neurosphere formation. (G): Spinal cords were cut in half. (I): A narrow dorsal
medial strip (3) was dissected. (F, H, J): Number of neurospheres formed per 1,000 cells seeded from dissections shown in (E, G, I). Values are
means  SEM (n ¼ 7 ﬂasks) of one experiment representative of three completely independent experiments. For experiment in (G), the absolute
numbers of neurospheres (deduced from the total number of cells obtained in the dorsal and ventral parts  frequency of neurosphere formation)
were 84,000 in the dorsal versus 36,000 in the ventral part. For experiment in (I), the absolute numbers of neurospheres were 1,500, 5,500, and
22,690 for the three indicated parts. Long dorsal GFAPþ cells are depicted in green in (E, G, I) to indicate that they may be damaged by the
excision procedure in (E) but preserved in (G) and (I). (K): Diameter of neurospheres derived from the different spinal cord regions shown in
(I). Dorsal medial-derived neurospheres are larger. Number of neurospheres measured from regions 1, 2, and 3 are 21, 9, and 30, respectively.
(L): Multipotency of dorsal medial neurospheres. After differentiation for 4 days, most individual neurospheres show the presence of three cell
types: astrocytes (GFAP; green, yellow arrow), oligodendrocytes (O4; blue, white arrow), and young neurons (Dcx; red, arrowhead). Abbrevia-
tions: C, central canal; D, dorsal; Dcx, doublecortin protein; GFAP, glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein; P, parenchyma; V, ventral.
Sabourin, Ackema, Ohayon et al.
2723
www.StemCells.com

Statistical Analysis
Tests were performed using one-way analysis of variance. Sim-
ple, double and triple asterisks indicate, respectively, 0.05%,
0.01% and 0.001% statistically signiﬁcant differences.
RESULTS
Proliferation in the Central Region Ceases
Around 13 Weeks and Correlates with
Postnatal Spinal Cord Extension
As the postnatal development of the central canal region has
been barely explored, we started by exploring the rate of pro-
liferation from 0–13 weeks after birth using immunodetection
of Ki67þ cells (Fig. 1A). We found a progressive decrease of
proliferating cells around the central canal until 9 weeks, after
which proliferation was no longer detected (Fig. 1B). This was
conﬁrmed by injecting bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) for 4 days
every 4–8 hours and counting the number of BrdUþ cells. No
BrdUþ cells were found around the canal in 42 sections corre-
sponding to 500 lm in thickness, whereas positive cells were
constantly found in the parenchyma. To test the possibility that
postnatal central canal proliferation is linked to postnatal spinal
cord extension, spinal cord length was measured during the 13
postnatal weeks. As shown in Figure 1D, spinal cord length
increases 2-fold after birth and a clear opposite correlation
exists between cellular proliferation and extension (Fig. 1C).
This substantiates the involvement of the central canal prolifer-
ation in the increase of spinal cord length after birth and shows
that this region is not or hardly proliferative in adult.
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells Are Principally
Located Dorsally
Although proliferation in the central region is completed
around 13 weeks, neural stem cells are still present after this
age as evidenced by the formation of neurospheres by approx-
imately 0.2% of clonally seeded cells (not shown). We speci-
ﬁed the location of these neurosphere-forming cells using
microdissection. As the lumbar spinal cord has more neural
stem cells than at other levels [1], our study was concentrated
on this region. Using a ﬁre-reduced Pasteur pipette (diameter
540 lm) as a puncher on adult spinal cord sections, we ﬁrst
conﬁrmed
that
neurosphere-forming
cells
are
essentially
located around the central canal (Fig. 1E, 1F). Microdissec-
tion was then used to divide spinal cord sections into dorsal
and ventral regions (Fig. 1G, 1H), which were then processed
for neural stem cell assay. Surprisingly, the majority of neuro-
sphere-forming cells were found to be located dorsally. Dis-
secting further down to a dorsal strip including the central
canal showed the highest enrichment for neurosphere-forming
cells (Fig. 1I, 1J). After 2 weeks, the neurospheres reached a
size larger than 500 lm, suggesting that they originate from
stem rather than progenitor cells [18]. Upon differentiation
(Fig. 1L; supporting information Fig. 3F), the neurospheres
generate astrocytes, O4þ oligodendrocytes, and young Dcxþ
neurons. The latter were GABAergic as indicated by GABA
immunodetection (data not shown). Neurosphere formation
and multipotentiality were maintained even after nine pas-
sages (supporting information Fig. 3F). Neurospheres arising
from the other regions might be due to contamination or to
the presence of few non dorsal-medial located neurosphere-
forming-cells. Such neurospheres are smaller (Fig. 1K), sug-
gesting that they may be derived from progenitors rather than
stem cells [18]. Of note, fourfold more neurospheres were
obtained from 1,000 cells of the dorsal medial part (Fig. 1J)
than from the central part (Fig. 1F), indicating that punching
the central region for excision may damage part of the neuro-
sphere-forming cells, as would be expected if these possessed
long radial processes (see below).
The Central Canal Region Is Composed
of Several Cell Types
The predominant dorsal location of neural stem cells prompted
us to investigate the identity of these cells using a series of
antibodies known to label different immature cells of the neural
lineage. Simple histological examination of the adult mouse
central canal shows that this region is not composed of a single
layer of cells but like in humans contains several cell types dif-
fering in their morphology and position (ependymal and sub-
ependymal) (Fig. 2A). Here, the term ‘‘ependymal’’ indicates
that the cell nucleus is within the ﬁrst row of cells. Most cells
around the canal express the immature intermediate ﬁlament
proteins vimentin (Fig. 2B) and nestin (not shown), the Sox2
and Sox9 transcription factors (Fig. 2E, 2F), the polysialated
form of neural cell adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM, Fig. 2D),
and Cadherin 13 (also known as t-cadherin, Fig. 2H), an adhe-
sion molecule expressed by various neural precursor cells in
vitro [19]. Cadherin 13 levels are however higher in young ani-
mals than in adults (supporting information Fig. 1A). Sox4, a
marker of the oligodendrocytic lineage, was not detected in
adults; however we found positive cells in younger animals
(Fig. 2G). Anti-CD133, a well-known marker of neuroepithelial
and neural stem cells, stains the apical side of central canal
cells (Fig. 2C). The endothelin receptor B (EdnrB), which is
strongly
expressed
in
spinal
cord
neurospheres
[16],
is
expressed by most cells around the canal but, signiﬁcantly, dor-
sal cells extending a process toward the pial surface are
strongly stained (Fig. 2I). Anti-brain lipid binding protein
(BLBP; also known as fatty acid binding protein 7), a radial
glial marker, labels a small population of cells with radial mor-
phology most often situated in the dorsal part (Fig. 2J). Staining
for GFAP, an astrocytic/neural stem cell marker, labels several
cell types (Fig. 2K, 2L; supporting information Fig. 1B, 1C,
1H). Of note, these GFAPþ cells are detected with a polyclonal
antibody and only a fraction can be detected with a monoclonal
antibody (not shown). A group of cells extending very long
GFAPþ processes toward the pial layer were always observed
in the dorsal part (Fig. 2L; supporting information Fig. 1B, 1C).
These cells were either in the ependymal layer adjacent to the
canal (supporting information Fig. 1B, 1C) or further above in
a subependymal location (supporting information Fig. 1B, 1C,
1H) when they sent a process toward the canal (Fig. 2K, 2L;
supporting information Fig. 1H). Interestingly a fraction of
these cells express the radial glia marker BLBP (Fig. 2K). Ep-
endymal and subependymal GFAPþ are also occasionally
observed in the lateral and ventral part of the canal (Fig. 2L;
supporting information Fig. 1C). CD15 (also known as Lewis
X antigen or stage-speciﬁc embryonic antigen-1), a marker for
various stem cells including neural stem cells [20], stained the
central spinal cord region dissymmetrically with the dorsal
region around the canal displaying a higher diffuse staining
than the ventral part (Fig. 2P). Central canal cells were not la-
beled but remarkably a fraction of dorsal GFAPþ cells and their
luminal extension were labeled (Fig. 2Q). Double-labeled
BLBP and CD15 could also be observed (not shown).
Staining for b-III-tubulin (Fig. 2M) revealed the presence
of neuronal cells lying close to the ependymal region often
extending a process toward the lumen. These neurons express
Dcx, a marker for young neurons, indicating that they may
retain immaturity characteristics (Fig. 2N). Interestingly, these
cells show a large bulge at the tip of their process in the canal
2724
Adult Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cell Niche

lumen (Fig. 2M, 2N). The presence of these neurons was con-
ﬁrmed by the observation of ﬂuorescent cells using a trans-
genic mouse expressing GFP under a Dcx promoter (support-
ing information Fig. 1D). To gain further insight on this
neuronal subtype, we colabeled Dcx with the homeoprotein
Nkx6.1, as during spinal cord development, the central canal
region is derived from a ventral domain expressing this gene
[21]. Nkx6.1 cells are mostly subependymal (Fig. 2O) and
coexpressed Dcx, suggesting a ventral developmental origin
of these central canal neurons (Fig. 2N, inset). Nkx6.1þ rarely
stained GFAPþ dorsal cells (data not shown). Since we
detected postnatal proliferation within the niche, we evaluated
the possibility that these neuronal cells were born postnatally.
Three-week-old mice were injected with BrdU for 5 days,
then the presence of Dcx or b-III-tubulin neurons was
assessed after 3 or 7 days. No BrdUþ neuronal cells were
detected, suggesting that these cells are generated during the
embryonic or the early postnatal period. As in the lumbar
central canal, a diversity of cells (CD133þ, GFAPþ, and
Nkx6.1þ) is also observed at the cervical level (supporting in-
formation Fig. 1E–1G).
We further examined the cellular diversity around the
canal with electron microscopy and immunogold techniques
(supporting information Fig. 2). There is a clear ventral/dorsal
dissymmetry of the central canal organization with the most
dorsal part showing a higher cell density (supporting informa-
tion Fig. 2A) often organized in two or three rows (supporting
information Fig. 2C). In agreement with immunoﬂuorescence
analysis, cells with long radial extensions containing interme-
diate ﬁlament recognized by GFAP antibodies were observed
Figure 2.
Diversity of cells in the spinal cord niche. (A): A lumbar spinal cord section stained with toluidine blue. Arrows indicate subependymal
cells and arrowhead points to a cell with neuronal features. (B–Q): Immunoﬂuorescence detection of indicated marker on adult spinal cord sections.
(C): CD133 labeling is conﬁned mainly to the apical pole of cells around the canal (arrowhead). (G): Sox4 labeling (arrow) is often observed in
twin cells, suggesting recent mitosis. (I): The EdnRB stains central canal cells and long dorsal radial processes (arrow). (J): BLBP (red) stains a few
dorsal cells with a radial process. (K): High magniﬁcation of the BLBPþ cell in (J). This cell coexpresses GFAP (middle picture). (L): GFAP stain-
ing shows processes contacting the lumen (arrows) and a dorsal group of GFAPþ cells (arrowhead). (M, N): b-III-tubulinþ and Dcxþ neuronal-like
cells extending a process into the lumen (arrow). A bulge (arrowheads) is often observed at the tip of the processes. (O): Nkx6.1 cells (red nuclei)
are located mostly subependymally. These cells coexpress Dcx (inset in [N]). (P): CD15 staining is present mostly dorsally. (Q): High magniﬁcation
of box in (P). CD15 stains a fraction of GFAPþ dorsal cells (arrowhead) and some luminal extension (arrow). Ventral central canal is at the bottom
on all images. Scale bar ¼ 10 lm. Abbreviations: BLBP, brain lipid binding protein; Dcx, doublecortin protein; EdnrB, endothelin receptor B;
GFAP, glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein; PSA-NCAM, polysialated form of neural cell adhesion molecule; Vim, vimentin.
Sabourin, Ackema, Ohayon et al.
2725
www.StemCells.com

in this region (supporting information Fig. 2B). Subependymal
cells were common all around the central canal (supporting
information Fig. 2D). These cells had either similar ultrastruc-
tural features to ependymocytes or were clearly distinct (sup-
porting information Fig. 2D). This analysis provides evidence
for a dorsal-ventral dissymmetry of the central canal and the
presence of several ependymal and subependymal cell types.
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells Are Radial
GFAP1 Cells
Since in both humans and mice, many data indicate that neu-
ral stem cells in the adult brain are GFAPþ cells closely asso-
ciated with the ependymal cell layer, we investigated whether
the GFAPþ cells around the canal behaved like neural stem
cells in vitro using a human GFAP promoter-GFP transgenic
mouse [15]. Around the canal of the lumbar spinal cord, most
bright GFPþ cells (>80%) were found in the dorsal part (Fig.
3A, 3B, supporting information Fig. 1H), located in the epen-
dymal layer in direct contact with the lumen (Fig. 3A), or
located subependymally, sending a process toward the lumen
(Fig. 3B). GFP further revealed the presence of very long ra-
dial processes originating from the GFAPþ dorsal cells
(Fig. 3A). All GFPþ cells around the central canal were found
to be GFAPþ (52 of 52 cells) (Fig. 3B; supporting informa-
tion Fig. 1H), but inversely a fraction of GFAPþ cells are
GFP. To examine whether GFPþ cells could generate neuro-
spheres, after spinal cord dissection GFPþ and GFP cells
were separated by ﬂow cytometry and seeded at clonal den-
sity (supporting information Fig. 1I). We found that 90% of
Figure 3.
Identiﬁcation of spinal cord neural stem cells. (A, B): GFPþ cells around the canal of hGFAP-GFP mouse. (A): Example of three
dorsal GFPþ cells abutting the central canal. These cells are located ependymally (inset). Note the presence of long tortuous GFP dorsal radial
processes (arrow) and, in the ventral part, a group of weakly GFPþ cells (arrowhead). (B): Example of one dorsal GFPþ cell located subependy-
mally (box) sending a process into the lumen (arrowhead). This cell coexpresses GFAP (red, left-hand image). (C): Neurospheres are derived
mostly from GFPþ cells. After dissection of hGFAP-GFP spinal cord GFPþ and GFP cells were separated by ﬂow cytometry (supporting infor-
mation Fig. 1I) and seeded at clonal density. Values are means  SEM (n ¼ 7 ﬂasks) of one experiment representative of four completely inde-
pendent experiments. (D, D0): All primary derived neurospheres contain one or several strongly GFAPþ cells (green). Two examples are shown.
(E): Most of primary neurospheres from the hGFAP-GFP mice contain one or several GFPþ cells that coexpressed GFAP (arrows). Inversely,
some GFAPþ cells did not express GFP (arrowhead). (F–L): Immunoﬂuorescence detection of indicated antigen in undifferentiated neurospheres.
Note that after centrifugation and attachment on coverslips for immunoﬂuorescence analysis, undifferentiated neurospheres can partially disaggre-
gate giving an aspect of dissociated cells (F, H). Scale bars ¼ 10 lm. Abbreviations: BLBP, brain lipid binding protein; DAN, differential
screening-selected gene aberrative in neuroblastoma; EdnrB, endothelin receptor B; GFAP, glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein; GFP, green ﬂuorescent
protein; PSA-NCAM, polysialated form of neural cell adhesion molecule.
2726
Adult Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cell Niche

the neurospheres are formed in the GFPþ fraction (Fig. 3C).
These neurospheres could be cultured for at least 10 passages
(not shown). In all neurospheres (179 of 179) cultured for
only a few days at clonal density at least one or several
strongly expressing GFAPþ cells were found (Fig. 3D, D0),
some of which expressed CD133 (supporting information Fig.
3A). We conﬁrmed the presence of GFAPþ cells by deriving
neurospheres from the hGFAP-GFP mouse. We found that
104 of 158 neurospheres contain one or several GFPþ cells
coexpressing GFAP (Fig. 3E). Spheres that do not contain
GFPþ cells may be derived from the subpopulation of GFAPþ
GFP cells mentioned above. The observation of both GFAPþ
and GFAP cells within a clonally expanded neurosphere sug-
gests cellular diversity, probably resulting from asymmetric
division as would be expected for neural stem cells. The vast
majority of GFAP cells were found to express Olig2,
Map2ab, CD15, and Dcx markers, presumably representing
bipotent neuronal-glial progenitors (supporting information
Fig. 3B–3E). Of note, all neurospheres were found to strongly
express the markers we observed in the niche, namely Cad-
herin 13, Sox4, Nkx6.1, DAN (see below), BLBP, PSA-
NCAM, and EdnRB, (Fig. 3F–3L). All together, these results
demonstrate that the adult spinal cord neural stem cells are
mostly dorsal medial GFAPþ cells directly or indirectly in
contact with the central lumen.
Elevated Signalings and Mesenchymal
Features of the Niche
Various adult stem cells are commonly maintained in their
niche through activation of key signalings. In the central
canal, we evaluated the presence of such local stem cell sig-
nalings by detection of the HES1 protein, a key effector of
Sonic hedgehog and Notch pathways. HES1 is expressed in
the nuclei of most cells around the canal (Fig. 4A), but also
frequently in the cytoplasm, notably in long dorsal processes
(Fig. 4B). This nuclear/cytoplasmic localization may reﬂect
regulatory shuttling of the protein. The Jagged1 protein, one
of the ligands of the Notch pathway, is also readily observed
on the luminal side of the cells around the canal (Fig. 4C).
Several stem cell niches are characterized by the presence of
bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and anti-BMP signaling
molecules, such as BMP4 and noggin in the SVZ. In the adult
spinal cord, we found that DAN, a BMP inhibitor highly
expressed in spinal cord neurospheres [16], is expressed by,
depending on the section, most or a restricted number of cen-
tral canal cells (Fig. 4D). Double labeling indicated that dor-
sal GFAPþ cells express DAN (Fig. 4D). In addition to ca-
nonical stem cell signalings, recent studies have shown the
implication of transcription factors of the epithelial-mesenchy-
mal transition (EMT) in the maintenance of stem cells both in
vertebrates and invertebrates [22]. This prompted us to examine
the expression of ZEB1/2, SNAI1/2, and TWIST1/2 in neuro-
spheres and in the niche. As shown in Figure 4E, reverse-tran-
scription polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis shows the
expression of SNAI2, ZEB1, and ZEB2 genes in spinal cord
neurospheres. Expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2 was also demon-
strated at the protein level by immunoﬂuorescence (Fig. 4F,
4G). The mesenchymal feature of cultured neural stem cells
was further conﬁrmed by the expression of vimentin, ﬁbronec-
tin, CD44, and smooth muscle a-actin (SMA also known as
actin a 2), four proteins commonly found in mesenchymal cells
(Fig. 4H–4K and PCR on Fig. 4E). Upon neurosphere differen-
tiation, the majority of GFAPþ astrocytic cells are SMAþ (Fig.
4L). In the spinal cord, the majority of cells around the canal
were found to express CD44, SMA, and ZEB1 (Fig. 4M–4O),
whereas ZEB2 was not detected. Dorsal-medially or ventral-
medially located cells tended to be stained more strongly for
ZEB1 and dorsal GFAPþ cells were intensely labeled (Fig. 4O,
4P). ZEB1 expression was also examined in the adult brain
SVZ (supporting information Fig. 4A, 4B). The majority of
GFAPþ cells, considered to be stem cells [23], were positive,
whereas only a fraction of PSA-NCAMþ young neuronal cells
expressed ZEB1 at a detectable level.
Collectively, these data provide evidence for the mainte-
nance of several typical developmental signalings and more
unexpectedly of EMT genes in the spinal cord niche and in
cultured neural stem cells. Compared with epithelial cells, mes-
enchymal cells are characterized by a high ability to migrate in
vivo and in vitro. We thus assessed this mesenchymal feature
on cultured adult spinal cord neural stem cells by plating neu-
rosphere cells on laminin and measuring the cellular mobility
by videomicroscopy. Primary mouse skin ﬁbroblasts were used
as a positive control for the mesenchymal phenotype, whereas
HeLa and HEK293 cells were used as two control lines for epi-
thelial phenotype. As shown on Figure 4Q and supporting in-
formation Videos V1–V4, we found that neurosphere cells
were as motile as ﬁbroblasts, whereas as expected, epithelial
cells were nearly immobile within this studied time frame.
Critical Role of ZEB Proteins in Spinal Cord
Neural Stem Cells In Vitro
The ZEB transcription factors constitute a family of transcrip-
tional factors acting as essential regulators of the epithelial to
mesenchymal transition [22]. They are also involved in the regu-
lation of apoptosis, proliferation, senescence, and cellular polar-
ity. As their expression in spinal cord neural stem cells has not
been reported, we explored their role in these cells by generating
a transgenic mouse conditionally expressing DB-ZEB, a domi-
nant negative form of ZEB proteins [24], and GFP (Fig. 5A).
DB-ZEB contains only the DNA-binding domain of ZEB1 and
blocks the activity of both ZEB1 and ZEB2. Translation of DB-
ZEB and GFP is blocked by an upstream loxed-stop cassette
that can be removed by cre-mediated recombination. Neuro-
spheres were derived from the adult spinal cord of DB-ZEB ani-
mals and no overt proliferation deﬁcit was observed, as expected
since no expression of DB-ZEB was detected in these cultures
(data not shown). Recombination and DB-ZEB expression were
performed in this culture by infecting with a canine adenovirus
(CAV) expressing cre recombinase (CAV-cre). More than 75%
of the cells were infected and recombined as measured by the
presence of GFPþ cells (Fig. 5B). The capacity of this culture to
form new clonal neurospheres was compared with culture
infected with control CAV-GFP virus. Figure 5C and 5D show
that the expression of DB-ZEB causes a massive reduction of
the neurosphere number and a concomitant reduction of the total
number of cells. As a control, neurosphere cells derived from
nontransgenic animals and infected with CAV-cre and CAV-
GFP show no signiﬁcant differences for the formation of new
neurospheres (Fig. 5E), demonstrating the absence of cre recom-
binase-induced toxicity. To examine how DB-ZEB affects cells,
during the 3 days following infection, the number of apoptotic
cells was measured by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-
mediated dUTP-biotin nick-end labeling. Figure 5F shows that
CAV-cre infection triggers a rapid and drastic increase of apo-
ptotic cells, suggesting an essential role of ZEB transcription
factors in the maintenance of spinal cord neural stem cells.
Maintenance of a Hox Gene Pattern in Adult
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells Along the
Rostro-Caudal Axis
Recent data have demonstrated that the SVZ harbors a hetero-
geneous population of neural stem cells derived from several
Sabourin, Ackema, Ohayon et al.
2727
www.StemCells.com

Figure 4.
Elevated signaling and mesenchymal features of the spinal cord niche. (A, B): Hes1 staining. Hes1 protein is mostly nuclear (A, red)
or in the cytoplasm (B, arrowhead), notably in long dorsal processes (B, arrow). (B): A magniﬁcation of white box is presented on right-hand
image. (C): Jagged1 staining (red) is conﬁned to the apical part of central canal cells. (D): Cells in the niche express DAN (red), notably the
GFAPþ cells (green) on right-hand image. (E): Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction expression analysis of indicated mRNA in neuro-
spheres with (þ) or without () reverse transcriptase during cDNA synthesis. Sizes in base pair. (F): ZEB1 staining was heterogeneous in neuro-
sphere cells: absent (yellow arrow), nuclear (arrow), or cytoplasmic (arrowhead), whereas in (G), ZEB2 was mainly cytoplasmic. (H–K):
Neurospheres express high level of vimentin, ﬁbronectin, CD44, and SMA. (L): Immunocytochemistry on differentiated neurospheres showing
cells coexpressing the astrocytic marker GFAP (green) and SMA (red). Most of cells around the canal stained for CD44 (M, red staining on lumi-
nal side), SMA (N, red), ZEB1 (O, red). ZEB1 is often more strongly expressed in the dorsal part (arrow in [O]). GFAPþ dorsal cells display
intense ZEB1 staining (P). SMA staining was also observed with a polyclonal and another monoclonal antibody (clone O-N-5) (data not shown).
Scale bars ¼ 10 lm. (Q): Velocity of indicated cells measured by videomicroscopy during 6 hours. NSC and ﬁbroblast velocity did not differ
signiﬁcantly. Abbreviations: bp, base pair; DAN, differential screening-selected gene aberrative in neuroblastoma; Fibro, primary mouse skin
ﬁbroblasts; GFAP, glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein; NSC, mouse adult spinal cord neurosphere cells; Sma, smooth muscle a-actin; Snai2, Snail hom-
olog 2; Vim, vimentin; Zeb, zinc ﬁnger E-box-binding protein.
2728
Adult Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cell Niche

embryonic regions that generate speciﬁc neuron subtypes
upon differentiation ([23] for review). This diversity of stem
cells relies on the adult maintenance of different embryonic
patterning genes such as homeobox genes. During spinal cord
development, the regionalization of the neural tube results
from expression of different rostro-caudal combinations of
genes of the large Hox family [25]. It is not known whether
these genes are still expressed in adult spinal cord neural
stem cells and whether stem cells from different rostro-caudal
levels would maintain regional fetal combinations of Hox
genes. This was explored by growing neurospheres derived
from the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar levels for four pas-
sages and assessing the expression of the 39 Hox genes by
semiquantitative PCR. For comparison, Hox gene expression
was also measured in the three adult spinal cord levels. We
found that Hox genes are differentially expressed in the adult
spinal cord, with a clear propensity for genes located toward
the 50 end of a given cluster to be uniquely or more highly
expressed in the adult lumbar region (see for instance Hox
a13, b13, c13, d13) (Fig. 6). In neurospheres, Hox genes were
expressed and their rostro-caudal pattern was, overall, very
well conserved. Whereas some genes expressed in the lumbar
spinal cord were not detected in lumbar-derived neurospheres
(a13, d11, d13), all other genes expressed only in lumbar
Figure 5.
Critical role of ZEB proteins for survival of cultured neural stem cells. (A): Schematic representation of cre-inducible ZEB dominant
negative (DB-ZEB) construction injected to obtain the DB-ZEB mouse. Upon recombination, the loxed Stop cassette is removed allowing transla-
tion of an IRES-mediated bicistronic DB-ZEB and GFP messenger. (B): Immunodetection of GFP after infection with CAV-cre adenovirus in
DB-ZEB transgenic neurosphere cells. For this experiment, neurospheres were plated on adherent substrate. IRES-mediated GFP expression was
too low to be detected by direct ﬂuorescence. (C, D): Histograms show the number of neurospheres and the total number of cells obtained 7
days after seeding 1,000 noninfected or infected cells in T25 ﬂasks. In this experiment, neurospheres were derived from adult spinal cord of DB-
ZEB mice, passaged four times, then infected with CAV virus as described in Methods. This experiment is representative of three independent
experiments. Value given are means  standard error of means (n ¼ 7 ﬂasks). (E): Control experiment of (C) performed with neurospheres
derived from nontransgenic mice showing that CAV-cre virus is not toxic to the cells. Value given are means  standard error of means (n ¼ 7
ﬂasks). (F): Percentage of TUNELþ cells after infection with CAV-GFP and CAV-cre. The latter induces massive cell death of neurosphere cells.
Value given are means  standard error of means (n ¼ 3 coverslips). Abbreviations: CaV, canine adenovirus; CaV-cre, CaV expressing cre
recombinase; CaV-GFP, CaV expressing green ﬂuorescent protein; GFP, green ﬂuorescent protein; h, hours; TUNEL, terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick-end labeling.
Sabourin, Ackema, Ohayon et al.
2729
www.StemCells.com

spinal cord were expressed only in lumbar-derived neuro-
spheres (b13, c11, c12, d10). Hoxa11, expressed mainly in
lumbar spinal cord but also weakly expressed in thoracic spi-
nal cord (maybe as a result of a small dissection contamina-
tion), was detected exclusively in lumbar-derived neuro-
spheres.
The
only
exception
was
Hoxc13,
which
is
moderately expressed in lumbar spinal cord and neurospheres
but was also detectable, albeit at a lower level, in cervical
neurospheres. These data provide evidence for the preserva-
tion in the adult spinal cord of a range of regionally speciﬁed
neural stem cells expressing speciﬁc rostro-caudal Hox gene
combinations.
DISCUSSION
In contrast with recently published data [11], we provide evi-
dence here that the spinal cord ependymal niche is composed
of at least three cell types (Dcxþ Nkx6.1þ neuronal cells,
GFAPþ radial cells, and BLBPþ cells) in addition to typical
ependymocytes. A schematic view of the central canal niche
is presented in Figure 7. Proliferation within this niche corre-
sponds to the period of spinal cord extension. The neural
stem cells present in this niche are represented mainly by dor-
sal GFAPþ cells in contact with the central canal. In vitro,
spinal cord neural stem cells derived from different spinal
cords accurately maintain the rostra-caudal Hox gene pattern.
The niches expresses high levels of Notch signaling and anti-
BMP protein and, more surprisingly, display typical mesen-
chymal traits. Finally, we demonstrated the requirement of the
ZEB transcription factors for neural stem cell expansion
in vitro.
Several cell types in the ependymal region of the adult
spinal cord (tanycytes, cerebral-ﬂuid contacting neurons) have
been described in several species [28, 29] since the ﬁrst
observations of Ramon y Cajal [30]. Less is known about mo-
lecular markers characterizing cellular subpopulations and dif-
ferences between the ventral and dorsal parts of the canal.
Whereas most of cells around the canal express Sox2, Sox9,
Cadherin 13, and EdnrB, the dorsal part is distinguished by
the presence of higher CD15 staining and by a group of
GFAPþ radial cells, at least some of which have stem cell
properties. This is also consistent with our observation that in
the hGFAP-GFP mouse, the dorsal part consistently contains
GFPþ cells, whereas in the ventral and lateral of the canal
this was only occasionally observed. The central canal dorsal-
ventral dissymmetry can be further demonstrated by checking
the GENSAT expression database (http://www.gensat.org),
which reports that some markers are restricted to the dorsal or
ventral ependymal regions. In human spinal cord, CD15 and
PSA-NCAM labeling of central canal cells also revealed a
manifest ventral-dorsal dissymmetry [14].
Recently Meletis et al. [11] did not ﬁnd any molecular
markers delineating subpopulations of central canal cells and
concluded that spinal cord neural stem cells are GFAP
unlike in the SVZ. Here, in contrast, we found abundant
GFAPþ cells around the canal, the discrepancy most probably
resulting from the use of different antibodies. There are sev-
eral isoforms of GFAP, some of which are expressed mostly
around the ventricle [31]. The use of a monoclonal rather
than polyclonal antibody (as in this study) may not reveal all
GFAPþ cells. The presence of such cells was conﬁrmed in
our study using polyclonal and monoclonal GFAP antibodies,
a hGFAP-GFP transgenic mouse, and immunogold analysis.
These cells either are located directly in contact with the cere-
brospinal ﬂuid or lie subependymally sending a process
between the cells, a situation quite different from that in the
SVZ where GFAPþ cells are mostly subependymal.
As in the SVZ, we found that most spinal cord neural
stem cells express GFAP. However considering that in the
SVZ, GFAP transit-amplifying cells cell can be converted
into stem cells with epidermal growth factor [32] and that
neurospheres are composed mainly of GFAP cells, the possi-
bility still exists that, similarly, in the spinal cord a limited
fraction of neurospheres could be derived from GFAP cells.
Dorsal GFAPþ cells have a radial morphology and some
expressed BLBP, a typical radial glial marker. In the spinal
cord, these cells have been classiﬁed as tanycytes by other
investigators [33–35]. This cell population is however hetero-
geneous [29] and we could distinguish a subpopulation of
dorsal radial GFAPþ expressing BLBP or CD15. This subpo-
pulation may constitute a signiﬁcant fraction of adult spinal
cord neural stem cells as (a) during development BLBPþ ra-
dial glial cells are considered as the main population of multi-
potent neural cells [36], (b) neurospheres are composed
mainly of BLBPþ and CD15þ cells (this study and [17]), and
(c) CD15 can be used to purify neural stem and progenitor
cells in the adult SVZ and radial glial stem cell in the embryo
Figure 6.
Hox gene expression in spinal cord neural stem cells.
(A): Examples of RT-PCR showing expression of 50 Hox genes re-
stricted to the lumbar part of the adult spinal cord and in correspond-
ing neurospheres. Hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl transferase (HPRT)
ampliﬁcation was used as a PCR quality control. (B): Schematic rep-
resentation of expression of the 39 Hox genes in adult spinal cord and
in neurospheres. A black square (nd) indicates that no expression was
detected using 2 ll of cDNA and 40 cycles. A colored square indi-
cates that a product of the predicted size was obtained with 2 (dark
red), 0.2 (red), and 0.02 (orange) ll of cDNA corresponding to low,
moderate, and high expression, respectively. Abbreviations: C, cervi-
cal; L, lumbar; NS, neurospheres; SP, spinal cord; T, thoracic.
2730
Adult Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cell Niche

[20]. The interaction of tanycytes with the vascular system is
reminiscent of the situation observed with type B1 astrocyte
in the SVZ [26, 37, 38] and, signiﬁcantly, we observed that
these cells strongly express the B receptor for endothelins, a
family of cytokines released by endothelial cells that inﬂuen-
ces neural stem cell proliferation in vitro [16].
Using FoxJ1-GFP transgenic mice, a gene involved in
the formation of motile cilia and expressed only by cells
around the canal in the spinal cord, Meletis et al. [11]
found that neurospheres are derived from FoxJ1þ cells.
This supports the conclusion that neural stem cells are
GFAP in the spinal cord since, in the SVZ, type B astro-
cytes have a single primary cilium [27] considered as
immotile and are thus supposed to be FoxJ1, assumptions
remaining to be formally demonstrated. In contrast, dorsal
radial cells are likely to express FoxJ1 as these were clearly
GFPþ upon cre activation in FoxJ1-cre Z/EG transgenic
mice [11].
In addition to GFAPþ and BLBPþ cells, cerebrospinal-
ﬂuid contacting neurons (CSF-Ns) were commonly observed
around the canal. They have already been noted in various
brain regions and in the spinal cord from cyclostomes to
mammals [28], although their function is still unknown. They
could act as mechanoreceptors sensitive to pressure or ﬂow of
the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) or to spinal cord ﬂexion, or they
might release neurotransmitters into the CSF as they express
GABA and vasoactive intestinal peptide. The Dcx expression
reported here may reﬂect an immature trait of these cells as
Dcx is expressed transiently during development. It is how-
ever unlikely that these CSF-Ns are produced from a continu-
ous adult spinal cord neurogenesis as we did not detect
BrdUþ cells after 13 weeks. In addition, we provided evi-
dence that these neurons are not generated postnatally and a
recent study performed in the rat showed that they are in fact
produced during embryogenesis [39]. The expression of the
Nkx6.1 homeogene we found in these CSF-Ns is consistent
Figure
7.
Schematic
representation
of
adult spinal cord niche. The presence of a
single short cilia on GFAPþ cells was not
investigated in this study but was extrapo-
lated from the study in the SVZ performed
by [26, 27]. Red shapes indicate CD15
staining.
Sabourin, Ackema, Ohayon et al.
2731
www.StemCells.com

with the fact that the adult central region is derived from the
embryonic ventral Nkx6.1þ pMN/p2 domains [21].
The persistence of immature cells around the central canal
coincides with the presence of a high level of both Notch
(HES1, Jagged1) and transforming growth factor b (TGFb;
DAN) signaling proteins. As in CNS development [40], Notch
signaling in the adult spinal cord may help to maintain the
BLBP radial cell. HES1 and Jagged1 expression is however
not restricted to the dorsal stem cells but extends to other
cells around the canal. The latter appears to be able to gener-
ate neuroblasts, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes after lesions
[10, 11, 41] and can thus be considered as progenitor cells.
This region is thus a new illustration of an adult CNS niche
where developmental signals maintain and regulate various
cells with different proliferation and differentiation potentials
(stem cells, progenitors, young neurons) [42]. One remarkable
protein we observed in the niche is DAN, also known as
NBL1, a member of a cystine knot protein family that
includes Noggin, Cerberus, Gremlin, and protein related to
DAN and cerberus [43]. These proteins act as secreted inhibi-
tors of BMP and growth differentiation factor proteins and
are thus key regulators of TGFb signaling. In the brain SVZ,
Noggin is expressed by ependymocytes [44]. Here we found
that DAN is expressed by cells of the spinal cord niche, nota-
bly by the dorsal group, and in vitro by most cells of the neu-
rospheres. DAN causes growth suppression of a variety of
cells lines and thus its expression in the spinal cord niche and
in neural stem cells may serve a similar function.
In addition to the presence in the niche of typical stem cell
signaling pathways, one important ﬁnding is the expression of
SMA and ZEB1, two genes typically expressed during EMT.
This suggests the existence of close relationships between
EMT and stemness, as has recently also been found in breast
cancer stem cells [45, 46]. We conﬁrmed this hypothesis by
showing that (a) ZEB protein inactivation in cultured neural
stem cells led to a massive cell death, (b) neurospheres
expressed several mesenchymal markers, and (c) neurosphere
cells are as motile in vitro as typical mesenchymal cells. ZEB
transcription factors are important regulators of the EMT
required for development and cancer [22] and their expression
is controlled by a number of ligands including TGF b1, proges-
terone, estrogen, insulin-like growth factor 1, and several
micro-RNAs. They operate as transcriptional activators or
repressors (notably for E-Cadherin) for controlling several cel-
lular processes such as migration, senescence, and apoptosis.
Signiﬁcantly, ZEB1 transactivates the SMA promoter [47] and
thus may be directly implicated in the expression of smooth
muscle actin in central canal niche cells and in the neuro-
spheres. As both ZEB1 and ZEB2 are expressed in neuro-
spheres and DB-ZEB inactivates both, it is difﬁcult to decide
how much each protein contributes to the survival of neuro-
sphere cells. The detection of only ZEB1 in the spinal cord ep-
endymal region indicates it plays a predominant role in the
maintenance of several cell types in the niche. In Drosophila,
the orthologous ZEB protein Zfh-1 was recently shown to have
a critical role in maintenance of the somatic stem cell compart-
ment in the testis stem cell niche [48]. ZEB proteins may thus
have a general role in the maintenance of stem/progenitor cells
in the SVZ and spinal cord adult niches. Finally, EMT is asso-
ciated with cellular delamination and migration, two phenom-
enon observed in CNS lesions such as in spinal cord injury
where neural precursor cells readily leave their niche to migrate
to the lesion site [10, 11]. The expression of EMT genes in the
niche may be involved in keeping the cells competent to, or to
prime them to, perform this process. In a normal situation, the
EMT genetic program could be counterbalanced by local sig-
nalings to keep the cells in their normal position.
Whereas CNS adult neural stem cell niches display com-
parable gene expression and organization, it is now becom-
ing clear that these niches harbor different types of neural
stem cells capable of generating distinct types of neurons
and glial cells [49]. This implies that expression of particular
genes and epigenetic modiﬁcations operate to retain neural
stem cell diversity in adult CNS. Here, we found that cul-
tured spinal cord stem cells maintained distinct Hox gene
expression proﬁles typical of the embryonic spinal cord pat-
tern [25], suggesting that different Hox gene combinations
still operate in adult spinal cord stem cells probably to spec-
ify their rostro-caudal features, as recently observed by Kul-
batski and Tator [50]. The maintenance within the SVZ and
along the rostro-caudal spinal cord axis of different pattern-
ing genes in neural stem cells suggests that not all neural
stem cells may be equivalent and useful for stem cell-based
therapy [51].
CONCLUSION
Compared with the brain SVZ and hippocampal niches, the
role of this adult spinal cord niche is unclear, as the produc-
tion of new cells is absent or low. In contrast, we found that
after birth, this niche is mitotically active until 9 weeks in
association with a higher expression of two markers (Sox4,
Cadherin 13) so its role may be limited to postnatal spinal
cord development. Since the spinal cord extends 2-fold in
length after birth, this niche may be involved in the produc-
tion of new cells for the central canal wall to extend in paral-
lel with the spinal cord. As the spinal cord niche cells are
able to produce neurons, oligodendrocytes, and astrocytes in
vitro, this niche may produce such cells in the postnatal pe-
riod. In the adult brain, the activity of the neural stem niches
is modulated by various environmental parameters and, like-
wise, the adult spinal cord niche may be reactivated in partic-
ular physiological situations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the European Union FP6 ‘‘Rescue’’
STREP, the ‘‘Association Franc¸aise contre les Myopathies’’
(Evry, France), the Princess Grace of Monaco Fundation (Mon-
aco). We are very grateful to Dr N. Heintz (New York), Dr P. Jay
(Montpellier, France), Dr Darling (Louisville, KY), Dr Sudo
(Toray, Japan), Dr Wegner (Erlangen, Germany), Dr A. Postigo
(St. Louis), and Dr T. Walker (Brisbane, Australia) who gener-
ously provided us with BLBP, Sox9, ZEB1, Hes1, Sox10 anti-
bodies, DB-ZEB construct, and Dcx-GFP mice, respectively.
J.C.S. is a recipient of an AFM Ph.D. fellowship. We thank Dr C.
Cazevielle (electron microscopy platform), Dr C. Duperray
(cytometry platform), Dr H. Boukhaddaoui and C. Sar (cell
imaging platform), I. Sassetti (histology platform), and Y.
Gerber/G. Bonniface for high-quality technical assistance and
experiment designs. We are grateful to Dr K. Langley for critical
reading of the manuscript. A.P. and J.P.H. contributed equally to
this work.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS
OF INTEREST
The authors indicate no potential conﬂicts of interest.
2732
Adult Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cell Niche

REFERENCES
1
Weiss S, Dunne C, Hewson J et al. Multipotent CNS stem cells are
present in the adult mammalian spinal cord and ventricular neuroaxis.
J Neurosci 1996;16:7599–7609.
2
Kehl LJ, Fairbanks CA, Laughlin TM et al. Neurogenesis in postnatal
rat spinal cord: a study in primary culture. Science 1997;276:586–589.
3
Shihabuddin LS, Ray J, Gage FH. FGF-2 is sufﬁcient to isolate pro-
genitors found in the adult mammalian spinal cord. Exp Neurol 1997;
148:577–586.
4
Martens DJ, Seaberg RM, Van der Kooy D. In vivo infusions of exogenous
growth factors into the fourth ventricle of the adult mouse brain increase
the proliferation of neural progenitors around the fourth ventricle and the
central canal of the spinal cord. Eur J Neurosci 2002;16:1045–1057.
5
Barnabe´-Heider F, Frisen J. Stem cells for spinal cord repair. Cell
Stem Cell 2008;3:16–24.
6
Danilov AI, Covacu R, Moe MC et al. Neurogenesis in the adult spi-
nal cord in an experimental model of multiple sclerosis. Eur J Neuro-
sci 2006;23:394–400.
7
Shechter R, Ziv Y, Schwartz M. New GABAergic interneurons sup-
ported by myelin-speciﬁc T cells are formed in intact adult spinal
cord. Stem Cells 2007;25:2277–2282.
8
Ke Y, Chi L, Xu R et al. Early response of endogenous adult neural progeni-
tor cells to acute spinal cord injury in mice. Stem Cells 2006;24:1011–1019.
9
Chi L, Ke Y, Luo C et al. Motor neuron degeneration promotes neural
progenitor cell proliferation, migration, and neurogenesis in the spinal
cords of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mice. Stem Cells 2006;24:34–43.
10 Moreno-Manzano V, Rodriguez-Jimenez FJ, Garcia-Rosello M et al.
Activated spinal cord ependymal stem cells rescue neurological func-
tion. Stem Cells 2009;27:733–743.
11 Meletis K, Barnabe-Heider F, Carlen M et al. Spinal cord injury reveals
multilineage differentiation of ependymal cells. Plos Biol 2008;6:e182.
12 Johansson CB, Momma S, Clarke DL et al. Identiﬁcation of a neural stem
cell in the adult mammalian central nervous system. Cell 1999;96:25–34.
13 Corti S, Locatelli F, Papadimitriou D et al. Transplanted ALDHhiS-
SClo neural stem cells generate motor neurons and delay disease pro-
gression of nmd mice, an animal model of SMARD1. Hum Mol
Genet 2006;15:167–187.
14 Dromard C, Guillon H, Rigau V et al. Adult human spinal cord har-
bors neural precursor cells that generate neurons and glial cells in
vitro. J Neurosci Res 2008;86:1916–1926.
15 Nolte C, Matyash M, Pivneva T et al. GFAP promoter-controlled
EGFP-expressing transgenic mice: a tool to visualize astrocytes and
astrogliosis in living brain tissue. Glia 2001;33:72–86.
16 Deleyrolle L, Marchal-Victorion S, Dromard C et al. Exogenous and
ﬁbroblast growth factor 2/epidermal growth factor-regulated endoge-
nous cytokines regulate neural precursor cell growth and differentia-
tion. Stem Cells 2006;24:748–762.
17 Dromard C, Bartolami S, Deleyrolle L et al. NG2 and Olig2 expres-
sion provides evidence for phenotypic deregulation of cultured central
nervous system and peripheral nervous system neural precursor cells.
Stem Cells 2007;25:340–353.
18 Louis SA, Rietze RL, Deleyrolle L et al. Enumeration of neural stem
and progenitor cells in the neural colony-forming cell assay. Stem
Cells 2008;26:988–996.
19 Gurok U, Steinhoff C, Lipkowitz B et al. Gene expression changes in the
course of neural progenitor cell differentiation. J Neurosci 2004;24:
5982–6002.
20 Capela A, Temple S. LeX is expressed by principle progenitor cells in
the embryonic nervous system, is secreted into their environment and
binds Wnt-1. Dev Biol 2006;291:300–313.
21 Fu H, Qi Y, Tan M et al. Molecular mapping of the origin of post-
natal spinal cord ependymal cells: evidence that adult ependymal cells
are derived from Nkx6.1þ ventral neural progenitor cells. J Comp
Neurol 2003;456:237–244.
22 Peinado H, Olmeda D, Cano A. Snail, Zeb and Bhlh factors in tumour
progression: an alliance against the epithelial phenotype? Nat Rev
Cancer 2007;7:415–428.
23 Chojnacki AK, Mak GK, Weiss S. Identity crisis for adult periventric-
ular neural stem cells: subventricular zone astrocytes, ependymal cells
or both? Nat Rev Neurosci 2009;10:153–163.
24 Postigo AA, Dean DC. ZEB, a vertebrate homolog of Drosophila Zfh-1, is a
negative regulator of muscle differentiation. EMBO J 1997;16:3935–3943.
25 Carpenter EM. Hox genes and spinal cord development. Dev Neurosci
2002;24:24–34.
26 Mirzadeh Z, Merkle FT, Soriano-Navarro M et al. Neural stem cells
confer unique pinwheel architecture to the ventricular surface in neu-
rogenic regions of the adult brain. Cell Stem Cell 2008;3:265–278.
27 Doetsch F, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A. Regeneration of
a germinal layer in the adult mammalian brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 1999;96:11619–11624.
28 Vigh B, Manzano e Silva MJ, Frank CL et al. The system of cerebro-
spinal ﬂuid-contacting neurons: its supposed role in the nonsynaptic
signal transmission of the brain. Histol Histopathol 2004;19:607–628.
29 Bruni JE. Ependymal development, proliferation, and functions: a
review. Microsc Res Tech 1998;41:2–13.
30 Ramon y Cajal S. Histologie du Syste`me Nerveux de L’hommes et
des Verte´bre´s. Paris: Maloine, 1911.
31 Roelofs RF, Fischer DF, Houtman SH et al. Adult human subventricu-
lar, subgranular, and subpial zones contain astrocytes with a special-
ized intermediate ﬁlament cytoskeleton. Glia 2005;52:289–300.
32 Doetsch F, Petreanu L, Caille I et al. EGF converts transit-amplifying
neurogenic precursors in the adult brain into multipotent stem cells.
Neuron 2002;36:1021–1034.
33 Rafols JA, Goshgarian HG. Spinal tanycytes in the adult rat: a correla-
tive Golgi gold-toning study. Anat Rec 1985;211:75–86.
34 Bruni JE, Reddy K. Ependyma of the central canal of the rat spinal
cord: a light and transmission electron microscopic study. J Anat
1987;152:55–70.
35 Seitz R, Lohler J, Schwendemann G. Ependyma and meninges of the
spinal cord of the mouse: a light-and electron-microscopic study. Cell
Tissue Res 1981;220:61–72.
36 Anthony TE, Klein C, Fishell G et al. Radial glia serve as neuronal
progenitors in all regions of the central nervous system. Neuron 2004;
41:881–890.
37 Tavazoie M, Van der Veken L, Silva-Vargas V et al. A specialized
vascular niche for adult neural stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 2008;3:
279–288.
38 Shen Q, Wang Y, Kokovay E et al. Adult SVZ stem cells lie in a vas-
cular niche: a quantitative analysis of niche cell-cell interactions. Cell
Stem Cell 2008;3:289–300.
39 Marichal N, Garcia G, Radmilovich M et al. Enigmatic central canal
contacting cells: immature neurons in ‘‘standby mode’’? J Neurosci
2009;29:10010–10024.
40 Anthony TE, Mason HA, Gridley T et al. Brain lipid-binding protein
is a direct target of Notch signaling in radial glial cells. Genes Dev
2005;19:1028–1033.
41 Carle´n M, Meletis K, Goritz C et al. Forebrain ependymal cells are
Notch-dependent and generate neuroblasts and astrocytes after stroke.
Nat Neurosci 2009;12:259–267.
42 Ninkovic J, Gotz M. Signaling in adult neurogenesis: from stem cell
niche to neuronal networks. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2007;17:338–344.
43 Balemans W, Van Hul W. Extracellular regulation of BMP signaling
in vertebrates: a cocktail of modulators. Dev Biol 2002;250:231–250.
44 Alvarez-Buylla A, Lim DA. For the long run: maintaining germinal
niches in the adult brain. Neuron 2004;41:683–686.
45 Morel AP, Lievre M, Thomas C et al. Generation of breast cancer
stem cells through epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Plos One 2008;
3:e2888.
46 Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ et al. The epithelial-mesenchymal transi-
tion generates cells with properties of stem cells. Cell 2008;133:
704–715.
47 Nishimura G, Manabe I, Tsushima K et al. DeltaEF1 mediates TGF-
beta signaling in vascular smooth muscle cell differentiation. Dev Cell
2006;11:93–104.
48 Leatherman JL, Dinardo S. Zfh-1 controls somatic stem cell self-
renewal in the Drosophila testis and nonautonomously inﬂuences
germline stem cell self-renewal. Cell Stem Cell 2008;3:44–54.
49 Lledo PM, Merkle FT, Alvarez-Buylla A. Origin and function of ol-
factory bulb interneuron diversity. Trends Neurosci 2008;31:392–400.
50 Kulbatski I, Tator CH. Region-speciﬁc differentiation potential of
adult rat spinal cord neural stem/precursors and their plasticity in
response to in vitro manipulation. J Histochem Cytochem 2009;57:
405–423.
51 Thuret S, Moon LD, Gage FH. Therapeutic interventions after spinal
cord injury. Nat Rev Neurosci 2006;7:628–643.
See www.StemCells.com for supporting information available online.
Sabourin, Ackema, Ohayon et al.
2733


===== Courtine2019_NatMed_SCIrepair+Review =====
Review Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-019-0475-6
1Center for Neuroprosthetics and Brain Mind Institute, School of Life Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL), Geneva, Switzerland. 
2Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Lausanne (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland. 3Department of Neurobiology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. *e-mail: gregoire.courtine@epfl.ch
T
he US national SCI statistical center estimates that the annual 
incidence of SCI in the United States is approximately 54 
cases per million people, or approximately 17,000 new cases 
each year1. The World Health Organization (WHO) approximates 
that between 250,000 and 500,000 people suffer from a SCI each 
year2. SCI has an immediate and devastating impact on the con-
trol of movement and many essential physiological functions. Over 
the past century, progress in the understanding of injury mecha-
nisms has transformed the clinical management of SCI. Surgical 
procedures, supportive measures and rehabilitation protocols have 
improved functional outcomes and decreased morbidity in patients 
with SCI2. However, at this time no randomized clinical trial has 
demonstrated the efficacy of a repair strategy for improving func-
tional recovery from SCI. Due to the limited ability of the cen-
tral nervous system (CNS) to repair itself following injury, many 
deficits remain permanent. Half of the affected individuals remain 
paralyzed, with life expectancies of decades with permanent dis-
abilities3,4. The estimated lifetime cost attributable to SCI ranges 
from US$1 to 5 million per person depending on the location of the 
injury along the spinal cord and its severity1.
While a cure that could repair the injured spinal cord is unfore-
seeable, recent advances in biological and engineering strategies 
have opened promising avenues for improving function after SCI. 
Over the past decade, advances have occurred not only in tradi-
tional research areas such as axon regeneration, inflammation, 
scar formation and engraftment of neural and supporting cells, 
but also in the identification of mechanisms underlying spontane-
ous circuit reorganization, spinal cord automaticity and recovery 
after SCI. These new findings have redefined our understanding of 
requirements for restoration of function after SCI and have altered 
concepts regarding the design of repair interventions (Box 1). 
Additionally, advances in engineering have led to the emergence 
of a new research area — broadly termed neuroprosthetics — that 
leverages our understanding of motor control principles to tap into 
circuits and residual neural pathways spared from injury in order to 
enable and restore function.
Various experimental therapies are moving toward or are already 
in clinical trials — opening a new era for SCI medicine. Here, we 
review these advances in animal models, and where relevant, their 
translation in human patients. The majority of preclinical stud-
ies and experimental read-outs are focused on motor functions. 
Consequently, we primarily discuss motor recovery, but it worth 
noting that the recovery of autonomic and sexual functions are 
among the top priorities of people with SCI3. We first describe the 
main biological approaches and mechanisms for spinal cord repair. 
We then explain the principles through which researchers seek to 
use engineering strategies to enable function and augment recov-
ery with neurotechnologies and rehabilitation. Finally, we consider 
the great potential, but also highlight the complexity, of combining 
biological and engineering approaches in order to target the mul-
tifaceted mechanisms underlying spinal cord repair and recovery.
Biological approaches to SCI repair
Developing mechanism-based approaches to spinal cord repair will 
require understanding the biology of SCI lesions and of the diverse 
axonal growth responses that occur after injuries5. SCI lesions are 
heterogeneous in their severity and cellular organization, and both 
of these factors have implications for developing repair strategies. 
For example, anatomically complete lesions span the entire breadth 
of the spinal cord, thereby eliminating all neural communication 
across the site of transection (Fig. 1). Their repair will require 
restoring neural connectivity across large and hostile non-neural 
lesion cores, which will require invasive treatments. In contrast, 
anatomically incomplete SCI are formed by smaller or discontinu-
ous lesions that spare sufficient neural tissue to support commu-
nication across the injury. Anatomically incomplete SCI are often 
associated with partial recovery that can benefit from strategies to 
augment spontaneous circuit reorganization and improve the con-
ductivity and function of residual neural connections, including by 
non-invasive means.
Diverse SCI compartments and axonal growth responses. 
Regardless of their size or severity, mature lesions exhibit three tis-
sue compartments that present markedly different cellular composi-
tion and functional interactions5–11 (Fig. 1). Non-neural lesion cores 
consist of perivascular-fibroblast-derived stromal cells, meningeal 
fibroblasts and pericytes that proliferate in areas undergoing CNS 
cell death6–8. Reactive astrocyte scar borders formed by newly pro-
liferated astrocytes surround non-neural lesion cores and protect 
adjacent functional neural tissue by corralling inflammatory cells 
within areas of damaged tissue9,10. Spared but reactive neural tissue 
that surrounds astrocyte scar borders contains all cellular elements 
Spinal cord repair: advances in biology and 
technology
Grégoire Courtine   1,2* and Michael V. Sofroniew   3
Individuals with spinal cord injury (SCI) can face decades with permanent disabilities. Advances in clinical management have 
decreased morbidity and improved outcomes, but no randomized clinical trial has demonstrated the efficacy of a repair strat-
egy for improving recovery from SCI. Here, we summarize recent advances in biological and engineering strategies to augment 
neuroplasticity and/or functional recovery in animal models of SCI that are pushing toward clinical translation.
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
898

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
found in functioning neural tissue, including hypertrophic reactive 
astrocytes and microglia that retain their interactions with neurons 
and synapses undergoing circuit reorganization and remodelling5,11.
Diverse forms of axonal growth responses have been identified 
that can occur spontaneously or be induced after SCI. There is a 
growing consensus that the concepts of ‘neural regeneration’ and 
‘axon regeneration’ after SCI should be expanded to encompass 
multiple forms of axonal growth responses that can restore func-
tion, ranging from synaptic remodeling in spared and reorganizing 
neural tissue to axon regrowth across non-neural lesion core tis-
sue5,11,12 (Fig. 2). Understanding how different cellular and molecu-
lar mechanisms regulate different growth responses in different 
lesion compartments over specific temporal windows is essential to 
devising mechanism-based approaches to SCI repair.
Modulating circuit reorganization after incomplete SCI. The iden-
tification of spontaneous circuit reorganization in animal models 
of SCI has provided valuable insights into repair strategies (see 
Box 1). After incomplete injuries, intraspinal projection neurons 
form new ‘detour circuits’ that relay supraspinal information from 
above to below the lesion13–16. In turn, corticospinal and reticulospinal 
tract neurons sprout onto these intraspinal relay neurons that con-
nect to regions below the lesion14–17 (Fig. 1). In general, all descend-
ing systems with residual axons that have been studied in animal 
models exhibit pronounced reorganization after SCI18. For example, 
after lateral hemisection injury in non-human primates, spared cor-
ticospinal axons descending in the contralateral white matter extend 
axon collaterals across the spinal cord midline and sprout into 
functional spinal cord areas below injury19,20. Similar observations 
Box 1 | Requirements for restoration of function
It was long assumed that recovery from SCI would require pre-
cise reconstitution of the neural connectivity present before 
damage. However, several decades of basic research have chal-
lenged this view5.
In the brain, loss of one set of synaptic inputs spontaneously leads 
to the formation of new synapses derived from unaffected afferent 
connections. After forebrain damage, this spontaneous structural 
and functional plasticity allows the brain to reroute neural 
information through alternative circuits to regain functions170. 
Similar circuit reorganization spontaneously takes place after 
incomplete SCI14,15,17,19. For example, a lateral hemisection of the 
spinal cord (Brown–Sequard syndrome) triggers reorganization 
of intraspinal14,16,109, brainstem and corticospinal tract25,26,109 
projection circuits that supports remarkable levels of spontaneous 
recovery, including voluntary skilled movements in humans20. 
Projection neurons spontaneously form detour circuits that 
relay supraspinal information to spinal circuits below the injury. 
Such circuit reorganization can reroute task-specific cortical 
commands to the lumbar execution centers even when all direct 
descending supraspinal connections are interrupted13,15,109. 
These observations have important implications for spinal cord 
repair, as they suggest that intraspinal relay neurons, even when 
newly derived from grafted cells90, may be sufficient to mediate 
meaningful recovery.
Another important consideration is the automaticity of neural 
operations from spinal cord execution centers95,100. These circuits 
have traditionally been referred to as central pattern generators 
(CPGs) that produce stereotypical motor patterns100. This view 
has advanced over the past decade171. It is now recognized that 
the spinal cord acts as a smart information-processing interface 
that translates task-specific sensory information and supraspinal 
inputs into muscle activation patterns that continuously meet 
behavioral goals and environmental constraints35,101. Even after 
the complete loss of supraspinal inputs, spinal circuits remain 
capable of using sensory information as a source of control 
for producing complex motor behaviors, including standing, 
walking over a range of speeds and directions and even climbing 
a staircase31,35,105,172,173. These results suggest that passing a limited 
amount of information to the spinal cord below injury may be 
sufficient to restore meaningful motor control after SCI.
Concepts of spinal cord automaticity, axonal plasticity and 
circuit reorganization after SCI have established the framework 
that is steering emerging biological and technological strategies 
for spinal cord repair and recovery174.
Incomplete injuries
Partial function recovery
Beneficial plasticity of spared circuits
Lesion compartment zoom
Detrimental plasticity of
spinal circuits below injury
Increase
: reverse inhibition
  for excitation
Normal
tissue
Blood
vessels
Surviving
functioning
neurons
Spared but
reactive
neural tissue
Non-neural
lesion core
Surviving
axons
Astrocytes
scar border
Degenerating 
axons
Synapse
reorganization
Lumbar circuit
Proprioceptive cues
Steering circuit reorganization
Retractation
bulbs
Mnα
Mnα
New
detrimental
growth
Proprioceptive
feedback
circuits 
Muscle
Cl¯
Cl¯
Cl¯
Cl¯
Cl¯
Intraspinal
relay circuit
Sprouting
of spared
descending
pathways onto 
spinal circuits
Spinal 
sensorimotor
circuits
Residual connections
New connections
Spared descending pathways
Cl–
Leukocytes
Blood vessels
and progenitors
Pericytes
and fibroblast-
lineage cells
Fluid-filled
cystic cavity
Complete injury
No function 
Detrimental plasticity of spared circuits
Fig. 1 | SCI biology and spontaneous recovery mechanisms. Spinal 
cord damage can be broadly divided into two categories: complete and 
incomplete SCI. A complete SCI is obtained experimentally by a full 
transection of the spinal cord or a complete crush. Anatomically complete 
SCI is less common in humans. A clinically complete SCI is essentially 
defined functionally, when no motor and sensory functions can be detected 
below the SCI, but this can occur in spite of the presence of some spared 
tissue and connections. After such lesions, detrimental changes continue 
taking place for decades below the SCI. An incomplete SCI spares tissue 
bridges containing a variety of ascending and descending pathways, 
depending on the location of the injury. The anatomical and functional 
reorganization of these pathways and circuits below the injury support 
various degrees of functional recovery. Both complete and incomplete SCIs 
exhibit three distinct lesion compartments: (1) a central non-neural lesion 
core often referred to as a fibrotic, mesenchymal or connective tissue 
scar that often contains cystic cavities; (2) a narrow border of reactive 
astroglia and other cells that intimately surrounds the lesion core; and (3) 
a surrounding zone of viable neural tissue that is spared and functional but 
is also reactive and reorganizing. Some of the mechanisms highlighted in 
this figure have been uncovered in animal models, and it is not yet certain 
whether human SCI involves similar mechanisms.
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
899

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
have been described for the reticulospinal, rubrospinal and sero-
tonergic descending systems17,21,22. Indirect evidence suggests that 
similar reorganization and sprouting of descending pathways take 
place in humans20,23,24.
Studies in animal models have established causality between 
sprouting of corticospinal25,26 and reticulospinal27 tract neurons 
and motor recovery. This plasticity within the spinal cord leads to a 
remapping of motor cortex output to spinal circuits; this pronounced 
reorganization confers an essential role to the motor cortex in produc-
ing movement after injury. Intraspinal projection circuits also play a 
critical role in mediating recovery14,15 (Box 1). This dense network of 
ascending and descending connections within the spinal cord28 may 
be a particularly suitable target for SCI repair29. Even when multiple 
incomplete lesions transect all direct descending supraspinal inputs 
to lumbar execution centers, neurons with intraspinal projections 
can establish detour circuits that bypass the injuries and relay suf-
ficient information from the brain to restore rudimentary voluntary 
locomotor functions in rodents13,15. In this model, reducing local 
inhibition within the spinal cord regions embedding these relay 
pathways augments their ability to mediate locomotor recovery29. 
Similarly, intraspinal relay circuits can mediate voluntary fine finger 
movements after loss of direct corticospinal tract input to cervical 
motor centers in nonhuman primates30. Together, these observations 
provide a compelling rationale for conceiving repair strategies that 
seek either to augment spontaneous relay circuit formation after 
incomplete SCI, or to restore neural connectivity by bridging axon 
regrowth across anatomically complete SCI lesions even for short 
distances into functioning neural tissue, as discussed below.
While SCI deprives spinal circuits from all or some of the supra-
spinal signals, the spinal cord below the injury continues receiving 
and interpreting sensory information. Inputs from sensory afferents 
that remain intact below lesions become an essential source of con-
trol in the production of motor behaviors after SCI31. Sensory infor-
mation steers many of the beneficial but also detrimental changes 
that take place below the lesion. For example, inputs from proprio-
ceptive organs are essential to guide the anatomical and functional 
reorganization of supraspinal and intraspinal projection neurons 
that restores locomotion after SCI. Mice with SCI that lack func-
tional proprioceptive circuits display defective rearrangements of 
descending projection circuits, which abolishes recovery16. In turn, 
the depletion of synapses from descending pathways triggers an 
aberrant sprouting of sensory afferents onto the available synaptic 
targets32,33. Due to the absence of signals directing this homeostatic 
plasticity, these changes often lead to degradation of neuronal func-
tions below the SCI, which has been reported in animal models of 
SCI32 and in humans34.
The modification of synapse function and increase of synaptic 
plasticity represent a promising approach to augment the beneficial 
effects of rehabilitation and biochemical manipulations. For exam-
ple, the presence of serotonin, noradrenalin or dopamine agonists 
augment activity-dependent plasticity during training in various 
animal models of SCI35. In addition, transient exposure of rats to 
reduced oxygen levels (intermittent hypoxia) activates midbrain 
raphe serotonergic neurons, the primary source of serotonin to the 
spinal cord, and triggers brain-derived neurotrophin (BDNF) syn-
thesis in the spinal cord, which together induce serotonin-depen-
dent plasticity of spinal projections36. A clinical study has suggested 
that the combination of rehabilitation and repetitive intermittent 
hypoxia may improve walking in humans with incomplete SCI37. 
However, confirmation of these results would require a phase 3 
clinical trial with a large number of patients.
New advances are also revealing cellular mechanisms of synapse 
plasticity. For example, the classical complement signals C1q, C3 
and C3R have been shown to regulate microglia-modulated synapse 
pruning38,39, while molecules such as thrombospondins, glypicans, 
secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) and SPARC like 
1 (also known as Hevin), produced by astrocytes, are partly respon-
sible for synaptic formation40–43. In turn, chondroitin sulfate proteo-
glycans (CSPGs) and tenascins produced by neurons and astrocytes 
form perineuronal nets that constrain this synaptic plasticity and 
associated circuit reorganization44. Signaling related to reticulon 4 
(RTN4, also known as NOGO) and its receptors also restricts syn-
aptic plasticity via perineuronal net molecules during development 
and after injury45. Accumulating evidence suggests that strategies 
against CSPGs or RTN4 receptors primarily target perineuronal nets 
and synaptic plasticity in spared but reactive neural tissue45–48 rather 
than axon regeneration across lesions. Axon guidance molecules, 
such as repulsive Wnt receptors, are also potent inhibitors of axo-
nal growth49. In rat models of incomplete SCI, the use of antibodies 
against these receptors led to a pronounced sprouting from the prox-
imal segments of corticospinal tract axons26, which augmented func-
tional recovery. More work is needed to identify strategies capable of 
modulating synapse plasticity and circuit reorganization after SCI.
Restoring connectivity across complete SCI. Anatomically com-
plete SCI lesions in humans are dominated by large areas of non-
neural lesion core tissue that do not support axon regrowth11,50,51 
Spared but
reactive
neural tissue
Non-neural
lesion core
Surviving axons
Astrocytes 
scar border
Normal
tissue
Spared but
reactive
neural tissue
Non-neural
lesion core
Surviving
functioning
neurons
Retractation
bulbs
Neuron intrinsic
PTEN, mTOR, STAT3,
SOCS3, cAMP, RHOA,
c-Myc, Jun, KLFs, SOX11,
ATF3, MAPKs, MAP3K13
Oligodendrocyte
NOGO, Mag
New
axon
growth
Growth cone intrinsic
Microtubules, DCLK,
NgRs, CSPG-Rs, NTF-Rs
Microglia
C1q
NG2-OPC
Spinal 
sensorimotor
circuits
Local or
systemic
delivery of
modulators
Intraspinal 
projection 
neuron
Descending 
projections
Sensory
input steering 
circuit reorganization
Normal
tissue
Axon
regeneration
Axonal
sprouting
Synapse
formation
Astrocyte
Thrombospondin,
Sparc, Hevin,
C3R, NTFs, PNN,
CSPGs, laminins
Not produced
Chemoattractant NTFs
Astrocyte scar and lesion
core cells
Repellent: CSPGs,
ephrins, sema, slit, plxn,
Wnts, myelin debris
Permissive: laminins, NCAM
syndecans, lgal
Relay 
neuron*
Neuroglia*
* graft-
derived
cells
a
b
Cells and molecules influencing 
synapse and axon growth potential 
Mechanisms underlying
spinal cord repair 
Fig. 2 | Biological strategies and mechanisms for spinal cord repair.  
a, Summary of the diverse types of cells and molecules that are known 
to influence and regulate the potential growth of axons and synapses in 
the different compartments of a SCI. RHOA, ras homolog family member 
a; ATF3, activating transcription factor 3; SOX11, Sry-box 11; NTFs, 
neurotrophic factors; PNN, peri-neuronal net; NgRs, NOGO receptors. 
b, Many mechanisms can be targeted to improve functional recovery, 
including modulation of axonal sprouting and synapse formation in spared 
and reorganizing neural tissue, promoting axon regeneration into and 
beyond non-neural lesion cores, placement of neural-stem-cell-derived 
grafts providing new relay neurons or neuroglia that supports host axon 
growth, and modulation of sensory input steering circuit reorganization.
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
900

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
(Fig. 1). Biological approaches to restoring connectivity across 
such lesions are currently focused on stimulating endogenous axon 
regrowth through the lesions or grafting new neurons into lesions to 
re-establish communication through new relay circuits.
Multiple mechanisms regulate axon regrowth after SCI. After 
development, CNS neurons downregulate their capacity for axon 
growth. Although spontaneous re-activation of intrinsic growth 
programs after injury is limited, a steadily growing amount of evi-
dence shows that manipulating neuron-intrinsic signaling through 
multiple transcriptional regulator pathways in animal models in vivo 
can stimulate the capacity for axon regrowth of various neuron phe-
notypes. These pathways notably include phosphatase and tensin 
homolog (PTEN), mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR), sig-
nal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), suppres-
sor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3), Kruppel-like factors (Klfs), 
c-Myc, cAMP, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 13 
(MAP3K13) and others52–58. Axon-regrowth capacity can be pow-
erfully activated when tissue around mature neuronal cell bodies 
is stimulated with inflammatory mediators, such as oncomodulin, 
zymosan and agonists of toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) and C-type lectin 
domain family 7 member A (also known as Dectin-1) receptors59,60, 
or by stimulation with growth factors such as insulin-like growth fac-
tor 1 (IGF1), osteopontin and ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF)61,62.
Axonal growth in the CNS is also regulated by the presence or 
absence of chemoattractive or chemorepellent growth factors, or of 
substrates that support or repel growth. For example, developmental 
axon growth critically depends on the availability of chemoattrac-
tive growth factors such as brain-derived neurotrophin (BDNF) and 
neurotrophin-3 (NT3)63–65 and on supportive substrates such as lam-
inins, syndecans and heparan sulfate proteoglycans65–69. Although 
growth-repellent molecules, such as myelin-associated molecules 
and CSPGs, can influence axon regrowth in vitro and may modu-
late synapse remodeling after SCI46–49, there is at present no compel-
ling evidence that they play major roles in regulating axon regrowth 
across SCI lesions, as discussed in detail elsewhere5. The support 
or repulsion of growing axons by specific molecular cues has been 
studied in detail in vitro and is determined by relative proportions 
of attractive and repellent molecules, such that increasing the con-
centration of one type of cue can overcome the effects of another70.
Multiple cell types influence axon regrowth in SCI lesions. 
Activated macrophages cause axon retraction and dieback71. 
Pericytes and fibroblast lineage cells in the non-neural lesion core6 
do not spontaneously support axon regrowth, perhaps because they 
do not secrete molecules that stimulate axon growth. Consistent 
with this interpretation, fibroblast cell grafts support robust axon 
regeneration after SCI only when they produce specific factors that 
are chemoattractive to axons72. ‘Scars’ formed by astrocytes along 
lesion borders have long been thought to be the primary cause for 
axon regeneration failure in the CNS73,74. Recent genetic loss-of-
function studies in mice challenge this notion. Neither preventing 
the formation of, nor removing, the astrocyte scar borders in SCI 
lesions resulted in regrowth of descending motor, ascending sen-
sory or serotonin axons65. Furthermore, in both mice and rats, acti-
vated and chemoattracted sensory axons regrew robustly despite 
the presence of astrocyte scar borders65,75, and preventing or remov-
ing these borders reduced stimulated regrowth, suggesting that 
astrocyte borders can support, rather than prevent, axon growth65. 
Intrinsically activated CNS axons also regenerate robustly despite 
astrocyte scar border formation in the rodent optic nerve52,54,59,62. 
Axons grow directly along astrocytes during development76–78 and 
when appropriately stimulated after CNS damage in adult mam-
mals65,75,79 and lower vertebrates80. These combined findings provide 
strong evidence that astrocyte scar borders are not a primary cause 
for the failure of axons to regrow across SCI lesions and that strate-
gies other than simply manipulating these borders will be needed to 
achieve this type of regrowth.
Given the multiple time-dependent mechanisms that influence 
axon regrowth across lesions, rational strategies for therapy after SCI 
will likely require simultaneous targeting of multiple mechanisms 
with distinct temporal windows. There is substantial evidence indi-
cating that using a combination of multiple therapeutic strategies 
increases axon growth. For example, the activation of sensory neu-
rons in animal models of SCI has long been recognized to increase 
growth into permissive cell grafts or across lesions63,81,82. Notably, 
activated neurons do not grow well through non-neural lesion cores 
but do grow well along supportive cues present in spared neural tis-
sue62,79,83. Recent gain- and loss-of-function studies in mouse and rat 
models of anatomically complete SCI showed that neuronal activa-
tion, substrate support and chemoattraction were each required for 
recovery, but only together were these strategies sufficient to pro-
duce robust regrowth of sensory axons65 and propriospinal axons75 
through non-neural lesion cores. Findings from these two neuronal 
systems suggest that achieving robust regrowth of endogenous axons 
across lesion cores will likely have three requirements: (1) activating 
intrinsic neuronal growth programs, (2) availability of axon-sup-
portive growth substrate and (3) providing growth factors that are 
chemoattractive to axons75. It is important to note that the necessary 
axon-chemoattractive factors were different for each of the two neu-
ral systems studied, sensory and propriospinal neurons, indicating 
that more work will be needed to identify specific molecular targets 
that are able to stimulate and attract the growth of axons from the 
heterogeneous populations of brain, brainstem and intraspinal pro-
jection neurons that may be of functional interest after SCI.
In various animal models, cell grafts that repopulate non-neural 
cores with growth-supportive neuroglia, such as Schwann cells84,85 
or astroglia86,87, facilitate the growth of host axons across non-neu-
ral lesion cores and improve the functionality of residual fibers88. 
Clinical trials are evaluating the safety and efficacy of autolo-
gous Schwann cell grafts for SCI89. Another approach to promote 
the formation of relay circuits consists of grafting sources of new 
intraspinal neurons. In the presence of growth factors and support-
ing matrices, caudalized neural progenitor grafts not only survive 
in the hostile non-neural environment, but also differentiate into 
a variety of neurons and glia that repopulate the lesion core and 
send extensive axonal projections into host tissue both caudal and 
rostral to the injury in rodents90. The cell adhesion molecule neu-
ronal growth regulator 1 (NEGR1) is one of the factors enabling 
permissive axon–myelin interactions, which allows myelin to stim-
ulate axonal outgrowth from the grafted cells. Moreover, the grafted 
neurons release various growth factors91 that attract an impressive 
number of synapses from all of the host’s systems that innervate 
the spinal cord, including robust regeneration of the recalcitrant 
corticospinal tract92. Neural progenitor grafts form de novo relay 
circuits that restored a partial communication across anatomically 
complete SCI64,90,92,93. Interestingly, host axons exhibit function-
ally appropriate preferences when forming contacts with grafted 
neurons. Despite this striking reconstitution of spinal cord tissues 
observed in rodents90 and nonhuman primates94, however, func-
tional recovery has remained limited. These results thus provide 
important proof-of-concept information, but additional studies 
are necessary to understand how to guide, control and functionally 
integrate the grafted neurons into the host motor-circuit communi-
cation matrix95 to restore meaningful function.
Biomaterials to improve biological repair. Biomaterials hold 
considerable promise in augmentation of SCI repair. For example, 
injectable and resorbable polypeptide hydrogels can provide tem-
porary depots for the prolonged release of growth factors that 
chemoattract regrowing axons65,75. Such depots, when temporally 
and sequentially placed, can chemoattract axons to regrow across 
complete SCI lesions and into spared neural tissue to contact neu-
rons75. Hydrogel–collagen networks can be engineered to provide 
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
901

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
oriented scaffolds that facilitate the alignment of grafted cells and 
thereby direct axon regrowth96. Bioengineered scaffolds with linear 
guidance channels might prevent regenerating axons from develop-
ing tortuous trajectories12, instead directing their outgrowth along 
linear paths across the lesion site97. Survival and differentiation of 
grafted cells can be enhanced and directed by biomaterial vehicles 
that provide substrate and growth factors90. Biomaterial approaches 
to CNS repair are slowly but steadily advancing98,99.
Technological approaches
Major advances, but also failures, in the fields of neurosurgery, 
robotics, computational neuroscience and neuroengineering have 
populated SCI medicine with a flurry of wearable and implantable 
neurotechnologies to enable and augment function. These treat-
ments have historically been divided into restoration therapies, 
replacement strategies and rehabilitation procedures. However, the 
marriage of these engineering strategies is occurring at such a rapid 
pace that these categories are progressively becoming obsolete, 
if not misleading. Indeed, all current promising strategies share a 
common theme: capitalize on the intrinsic capacity of spared cir-
cuits to produce movement, and on the remarkable ability of these 
circuits to reorganize with training to augment recovery. Early 
achievements of these bourgeoning neuroprosthetic treatments are 
providing a glimpse at the therapeutic potential of technological 
approaches after SCI.
Engineering strategies to enable motor control. Sensorimotor 
circuits embedded in the spinal cord can translate task-specific 
sensory feedback into organized patterns of muscle activity under-
lying a broad repertoire of motor behaviors31,100,101 (Box 1). These 
circuits are often intact after SCI but lack the supraspinal sources of 
modulation and excitation essential for enabling their functionality. 
This understanding has triggered the development of various neu-
romodulation therapies that seek to compensate for these missing 
supraspinal inputs to reactivate spinal circuits. For example, in rats 
with partial SCI, deep brain stimulation of the midbrain locomo-
tor region can engage reticulospinal neurons that retain connec-
tions across the injury. The resulting descending drive leads to the 
activation of spinal circuits, which improves paretic locomotion102. 
However, this neurosurgical intervention is contingent on synaptic 
inputs from reticulospinal neurons, which limits the spectrum of 
SCI severities that might be addressed with this approach. Moreover, 
the relevance of this ancestral brainstem locomotor system for voli-
tional walking activities remains unclear in humans.
To address more severe injuries, both pharmacological and elec-
trical neuromodulation therapies have been delivered directly to 
spinal cord regions containing sensorimotor circuits involved in 
movement production (Fig. 3). Monoaminergic medications31,103,104 
and electrical stimulation protocols applied transcutaneously104, 
epidurally105–112, subdurally113 and intraspinally114–116 have enabled 
unexpected levels of leg and hand motor control in animal models 
and humans with paralysis106,116–118. Electrical stimulation protocols 
may also improve cardiovascular and respiratory functions119,120. 
The underlying mechanisms remain debated121,122, but evidence 
suggests that these electrical stimulations converge on a common 
target. Indeed, dorsally applied electrical fields spread toward dor-
sal roots, where sensory afferents reside123. Due to their lower resis-
tance to electrical currents, large-diameter proprioceptive fibers are 
the first neural structures recruited by the stimulation121. Intraspinal 
stimulation likely relies on the same mechanisms124. If similar out-
comes are confirmed, this technology, which requires arrays of elec-
trodes penetrating the spinal cord gray matter, would become less 
attractive than other strategies.
Due to their broad integration within sensorimotor networks, 
recruitment of proprioceptive afferents increases excitability of spi-
nal circuits, which augments their responsiveness to task-specific 
sensory information and residual signals from the brain. During 
spinal cord stimulation, individuals with motor complete paralysis 
regained the ability to activate paralyzed muscles and initiate iso-
lated movements of the leg106,117,125. In rats with severe contusions, 
pharmacological and electrical neuromodulation therapies applied 
to the lumbar spinal cord instantly enable the motor cortex to trig-
ger and modulate robust locomotor movements of paralyzed legs27. 
Because these injuries abolish all corticospinal tract projections, the 
cortical command is transferred downstream through glutamater-
gic projections originating from the ventral gigantocellular reticular 
nucleus. Due to their distributed topology in the white matter, these 
pathways systematically survive the injury, regardless of the inher-
ently variable location of damage. The anatomy and function of 
reticulospinal pathways are well-conserved across mammals126, and 
reticulospinal systems likely contribute to improving recovery from 
Mnα 
Mnα 
Motor cortex 
Pyramidal
cells
Projection
in the
brainstem
New
relay
circuit
Spinal 
sensorimotor
circuits
Spinal 
sensorimotor
circuits
Intraspinal
relay circuit
Spinal 
sensorimotor
circuits
Electrochemical
neuromodulation
After neuroprosthetic
neurorehabilitation
Spontaneous
Ia 
Spared
but silent
neural 
connections
Respond to
task-specific
sensory input
 No functional 
state
Electrode
array
5HT
Chemical
stimulation
Electrical
stimulation
Supraspinal
control of movement
during neuromodulation
Cortex dependent
recovery without
neuromodulation
Respond to
residual 
supraspinal
input
Silent 
pathways
becoming
functional
Proprioceptive
circuits
Spared but
nonfunctional
pathways and circuits 
Axon growth
and synapse
formation
Mnα 
Mnα 
Immediate
Long-term
Fig. 3 | Engineering strategies to enable immediate and long-term 
recovery of motor functions. After a severe but incomplete SCI, the 
sensorimotor circuits producing motor activity are spared, but they lack the 
essential source of modulation and excitation to be functional. Descending 
pathways are partly spared but fail to activate these circuits in order to 
mediate muscle contractions. The delivery of chemical and/or electrical 
neuromodulation therapies to the lumbar or cervical spinal cord below 
the injury immediately enables spinal sensorimotor circuits to respond 
to task-specific sensory input and residual supraspinal input in order to 
produce functional movements. In conjunction with neurorehabilitation, 
this intervention promotes an extensive reorganization of spared circuits 
and residual connections in the brainstem and spinal cord that mediates 
functional recovery. After training, motor control occurs without the need 
of the electrochemical neuromodulation therapies.
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
902

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
SCI in humans24. These results suggest that clinically complete inju-
ries often spare descending projections, in particular reticulospinal 
pathways, but these residual neural connections are insufficient to 
voluntarily elicit detectable muscle contractions106,117,127,128.
These clinical research results have triggered a surge of interest 
in the development of spinal cord stimulation technologies105,129. 
These new strategies aim to activate the proprioceptive fibers in the 
posterior roots122,123. Consequently, targeting proprioceptive fibers 
located in a given lumbosacral posterior root using a spatially selec-
tive electrode configuration provides preferential access to the pre-
motor neurons and motoneurons130,131 embedded in the segment 
innervated by this root122,123. This translates into closed-loop stimu-
lation protocols whereby short bursts of spatially selective electrical 
stimulation are delivered with a timing that coincides with natural 
activation of motoneurons132. These spatiotemporal neuromodula-
tion therapies enable a refined control over the movements of para-
lyzed legs in animal models and humans105,129. For example, if the 
algorithms that control this neuromodulation are adjusted on the 
basis of real-time movement feedback, this enables rats with com-
plete SCI to climb staircases of various heights and lengths with pre-
cision and fluidity133. Residual supraspinal inputs can also modify 
the impact of the electrical stimulation on the spinal cord execu-
tive centers, both positively and negatively, in order to modulate the 
movements voluntarily27,109,111,117.
Compared to continuous stimulation, spatiotemporal stimu-
lation increases the amplitude and robustness of leg movements, 
which enabled the sustained production of full weight-bearing loco-
motion in animal models and humans105,129,133. These spatiotempo-
ral stimulation protocols enabled graded control over the activity 
of otherwise paralyzed muscles during walking, thus providing the 
opportunity to engage activity-dependent mechanisms during reha-
bilitation, as discussed below.
Engineering strategies to bypass lesions. A brain–computer inter-
faces (BCI) decodes motor or cognitive intentions from a neural 
sensing interface and translates these predictions into executive 
commands for actuators. Historically, BCI treatments have focused 
on connecting people who have lost the ability to speak or move 
with assistive devices. These neurotechnologies allow people with 
paralysis to type words at a fast pace134,135 and to operate multi-
articulated prosthetic arms to execute activities of daily living using 
neural signals recorded directly from the brain136,137.
BCI research is now undergoing a rapid transition from sub-
stitution to restoration therapies. The new waves of BCIs aim at 
re-establishing bidirectional communication between the brain 
and denervated body parts129,138–142 (Fig. 4). For example, cortical 
signals have been directly linked to neuromuscular stimulation 
protocols to reanimate paralyzed muscles. These neural bypasses 
enabled functional upper limb movements in two persons with tet-
raplegia138,139. Conversely, encoding touch pressure information into 
somatosensory cortex stimulation protocols allowed a paralyzed 
person to recognize pressure-like sensations in individual fingers 
of a robotic hand142. Leg motor cortex activity has been interfaced 
wirelessly to spinal cord stimulation protocols to establish a brain–
spine interface that restores natural locomotor movements of para-
lyzed limbs in rodent143 and non-human primate129 models of SCI. 
Similar approaches may improve upper limb functions115,118, but the 
more sophisticated control of manual dexterity and the permanent 
gray matter damage associated with cervical injuries add signifi-
cant challenges. However, contrary to the high threshold required 
to attain useful locomotor function recovery, even relatively mod-
est improvements in hand function can translate into a meaningful 
increase in quality of life3.
The translation of these breakthroughs into common medical 
treatments for people with paralysis is facing a series of practical, 
financial and technological roadblocks144. Practically, the functional 
benefit of BCI devices remains relatively modest in comparison 
with their manifold technical challenges and financial burdens for 
society144. Advanced BCI treatments employ Utah arrays that are 
inserted into the cerebral cortex to record neural activity. Conceived 
in the 1990s, this grid of silicone-based electrodes is the only intra-
cortical neural probe approved for clinical use. However, the quality 
of neural signals extinguishes rapidly. Cortical grids placed epidur-
ally or subdurally allow more stable neural recordings (Fig. 4), but 
their spatial resolution may be insufficient for advanced prosthetic 
control144. Moreover, daily use of these neural prostheses will only 
be possible with the support of wireless recording technologies 
and brain-decoding algorithms that do not require constant reca-
libration. Likewise, current technologies to modulate the human 
CNS do not meet the requirements of prosthetic applications145. 
Advanced therapies rely on implantable stimulation technologies 
endowed with real-time wireless communication, and on next-
generation interfaces targeting specific neural structures with elec-
trical, chemical and even optical stimulation modalities. Multiple 
academic institutions, foundations and companies are addressing 
these challenges.
Engineering rehabilitation to augment recovery. Activity-based 
therapies are common in medical practice for enhancing recovery 
from SCI. The underlying molecular mechanisms remain unclear, 
but it is now accepted that the repeated activation of the sensorimo-
tor system augments activity-dependent plasticity of spared circuits 
and residual neural connections, which leads to functional improve-
ments18,35,146,147. Consequently, a large number of neurotechnologies 
have been developed to augment activity, and thus plasticity, after 
SCI. For example, motor cortex electrical stimulation promotes 
activity-dependent sprouting of spared corticospinal tract axons, 
which improved skilled locomotion in rodent models of partial 
SCI148,149. Despite conflicting results, transcranial magnetic stimula-
tion applied over both the leg and arm regions of the human motor 
cortex also enhance the transmission along residual neural path-
ways, which has improved motor functions and reduced spasticity 
Surface or deep 
brain stimulation
Epidural
electrical
stimulation
Transcutaneous
electrical
stimulation
T11
T12
L1
L2
EEG
Interface
Recording
Neuromodulation
S1 stimulation
(restore sensation)
Epidural
ECoG
Subdural
ECoG
Intracortical
microelectrode array
Kinematic
Muscle
activity
Inertial
measurement
units
Resolution
Spatial coverage
Functional
electrical 
muscle stimulation
(FES)
Peripheral nerve 
stimulation
(PNS)
Brain activity
Low
High
High
Low
Movement feedback 
Fig. 4 | Engineering technologies to interface motor intentions with 
denervated body parts. Current brain recording technologies impose a 
trade-off between resolution, spatial coverage and invasiveness. Motor 
intentions or motor states decoded from neural recordings or movement 
feedback signals can be interfaced to neuromodulation therapies or 
stimulation protocols to enable or induce movements and sensations. EEG, 
electroencephalogram; ECoG, electrocorticogram.
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
903

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
in paraplegic and tetraplegic patients150,151. Similarly, paired associa-
tive stimulation of neural structures above and below SCI promote 
lasting augmentation of cortical and spinal circuit outputs, both 
in animal models and humans with SCI152,153. Electrical stimula-
tion of the spinal cord by single corticospinal tract neurons also 
triggers a durable modification of neural connectivity154–156. This 
activity-dependent stimulation increases the strength of terminal 
projections from single neurons through spike-timing-dependent 
plasticity157. These approaches may increase recovery after partial 
injuries that spare corticospinal tract projections, which is a key 
predictor of spontaneous recovery after acute SCI158. For this rea-
son, various groups are evaluating whether long-term use of the 
neural bypasses described above during rehabilitation may augment 
plasticity and recovery143,159.
Experiments in animal models of SCI illustrate that the extent of 
activity-based plasticity correlates with the volume and intensity of 
that activity147. Due to the depressed excitability of spinal circuits, the 
severely injured spinal cord does not respond robustly to task-spe-
cific sensory information, thus limiting the benefit of activity-based 
therapies147,160. However, neuromodulation therapies restore the abil-
ity of motor execution centers located in the spinal cord to process 
sensory information to produce movement111,112,117,156, which pro-
vides the possibility to train with high levels of activity. Encouraging 
contribution of supraspinal centers is essential to restore volitional 
motor control. Step training on a treadmill, which does not require 
supraspinal contribution in animal models31, mediates robust 
activity-dependent plasticity of spinal circuits31,35 but fails to restore 
functional interactions with supraspinal centers109. Instead, reha-
bilitation in a robotic body weight support system that favors these 
interactions restores volitional motor functions. After injuries lead-
ing to permanent leg paralysis, both rats and humans trained with 
such robotic support and neuromodulation therapies regained the 
ability to transform contextual cues into task-specific motor com-
mands to walk over ground over a range of speeds or adjust their 
step height as needed to climb a staircase27,109,111. However, volitional 
movements also returned without neuromodulation, both in ani-
mal models27 and humans111,161. Unbiased anatomical experiments 
of whole-brain and spinal cord in animal models showed that this 
recovery relies on an extensive and ubiquitous plasticity of residual 
connections whereby the cortical command is rerouted to lumbar 
circuits through de novo brainstem pathways27 and/or intraspinal 
relays109. The mechanisms responsible for this activity-dependent 
plasticity remain enigmatic. Neural activity triggers growth factor 
synthesis162, calcium-dependent myelin sheath formation163, chlo-
ride homeostasis regulation164, synaptic plasticity and many other 
molecular mechanisms that most likely contribute to neural repair.
Accumulating evidence suggests that the interplay between top-
down supraspinal signals and bottom-up proprioceptive informa-
tion plays a critical role in mediating this recovery. The absence of 
proprioceptive information prevents descending pathway reorgani-
zation after injury16. In turn, electrical stimulation enables motor 
control through the activation of proprioceptive pathways122,123. 
Many descending systems that are engaged during rehabilitation 
converge on these circuits27,109. This conceptual framework is steer-
ing the development of new engineering strategies that forcefully 
link top-down and bottom-up signaling pathways during rehabilita-
tion. For example, paraplegic individuals were trained in an exoskel-
eton that was actuated based on non-invasive brain recordings165. 
Artificial sensory feedbacks were delivered to both arms in order to 
feed proprioceptive information from both legs to the spinal cord 
above the injury. Over time, this closed-loop system restored sen-
sation in some of the originally denervated dermatomes. Likewise, 
brain-controlled stimulation of the spinal cord below the injury 
augmented the beneficial impact of rehabilitation on the recovery 
of locomotion in rats with severe SCI143. These rehabilitation pro-
grams closing the loop between circuits located above and below 
the injury may further increase use-dependent plasticity of residual 
connections155,159, but more work is needed to uncover the underly-
ing mechanisms.
While various engineering approaches have yielded impressive 
outcomes in laboratory environments, it is important to realize that 
patients still favor wheelchairs over other alternatives to ambulate166. 
For example, various insurances reimburse the purchase of lower 
limb exoskeletons to patients with SCI. However, current technolo-
gies involve high energy requirements, unpractical setting proce-
dures and complex operations to ambulate at relatively low speed 
compared to wheelchairs. These limitations emphasize the need to 
refine current technologies. For example, implanted devices that 
can be operated with a voice controller open practical perspectives 
for use in daily life. These technologies also offer the opportunity 
to continue effective rehabilitative training at home or in special-
ized gyms in order to take advantage of the continuing potential for 
plasticity that expands beyond the transient rehabilitation programs 
currently delivered to individuals with SCI.
Future directions
Current biological and engineering strategies have shown therapeu-
tic potential in animal models, but their ability to mediate clinically 
important improvements after severe SCI remains elusive. Since 
these treatments target distinct mechanisms, their combinations 
are expected to be synergistic. While logical, merging fundamen-
tally different approaches has turned out to be more complex than 
originally thought. For example, activity-based therapy in the pres-
ence of plasticity-enhancing strategies uncovered complex inter-
actions between both interventions47,167–169. These studies revealed 
that the specific relationships between the practiced exercises and 
the temporal windows for delivering each therapy determined the 
balance between beneficial and detrimental plasticity. Moreover, 
many failed combinatorial attempts still linger in laboratory note-
books. Despite these unexpected outcomes, dubious combinations 
of unproven cell treatments, immature engineering strategies and 
intense exercise programs have unfortunately flourished in clinics 
offering medical tourism.
Thus far, combinatorial attempts were designed algebraically, 
expecting simply additive results without considering the interac-
tions between their respective mechanisms. Based on the knowl-
edge summarized in this review, various combinatorial strategies 
could be envisaged that activate intrinsic neuronal growth pro-
grams, establish a permissive growth environment, deliver chemo-
tropic gradients to encourage axonal regeneration into and beyond 
the environment, graft neural stem cells that form new relay cir-
cuits and deploy engineering solutions that foster the integration of 
regenerating axons and de novo relay circuits into CNS operations 
through rehabilitation. However, this vision may be simplistic and 
deceptively incremental.
With appropriately targeted approaches, however, biological 
and engineering strategies may interact to catalyze each other. For 
example, biological interventions that modulate axonal growth, 
lesion environments and even learning and memory may increase 
the anatomical and functional reorganization of the circuits that 
underlies the recovery of voluntary motor functions in response 
to neuroprosthetic rehabilitation. In turn, engineering strategies 
involving brain-controlled modulation129,143 of genetically targeted 
neurons29 may critically engage neurons with regrowing axons and 
thus facilitate the integration of newly formed connections, which 
have been stimulated to regrow by biological interventions, into the 
operations of the CNS.
The SCI research community must reflect on exploiting engi-
neering solutions to target mechanisms that will amplify biologi-
cal repair treatments, and inversely, envision mechanism-based 
biological strategies able to augment the effects of technological 
interventions. These combinatorial therapies will need to obey strict 
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
904

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
temporal windows. This translational strategy requires a careful 
selection of rodent SCI models and, in many instances, a necessary 
work in nonhuman primate models (Box 2).
We thus advocate tailoring combinations of biological and engi-
neering strategies derived from the identified interactions between 
their respective mechanisms over the course of recovery from SCI. 
Only through these combinatorial, time-dependent interventions 
will we appropriately target multiple facets of spinal cord repair and 
mediate clinically meaningful functional improvements. These con-
cepts may apply to other CNS disorders. While there are challenges 
ahead, only through this partnership between biologists and engi-
neers will treatments be conceived to advance and maybe win the 
fight against paralysis.
Received: 29 January 2018; Accepted: 1 May 2019;  
Published online: 3 June 2019
References
	1.	
National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center. Spinal cord injury (SCI) facts 
and figures at a glance https://www.nscisc.uab.edu/Public/Facts%202016.pdf 
(2016).
	2.	
Fehlings, M. G. et al. A clinical practice guideline for the management of 
acute spinal cord injury: introduction, rationale, and scope. Global Spine J. 
7 Suppl, 84S–94S (2017).
	3.	
Anderson, K. D. Targeting recovery: priorities of the spinal cord-injured 
population. J. Neurotrauma 21, 1371–1383 (2004).
	4.	
Fawcett, J. W. et al. Guidelines for the conduct of clinical trials for spinal 
cord injury as developed by the ICCP panel: spontaneous recovery after 
spinal cord injury and statistical power needed for therapeutic clinical 
trials. Spinal Cord 45, 190–205 (2007).
	5.	
Sofroniew, M. V. Dissecting spinal cord regeneration. Nature 557, 
343–350 (2018).
	6.	
Göritz, C. et al. A pericyte origin of spinal cord scar tissue. Science 333, 
238–242 (2011).
	7.	
Zhu, Y. et al. Hematogenous macrophage depletion reduces the fibrotic scar 
and increases axonal growth after spinal cord injury. Neurobiol. Dis. 74, 
114–125 (2015).
	8.	
Burda, J. E. & Sofroniew, M. V. Reactive gliosis and the multicellular 
response to CNS damage and disease. Neuron 81, 229–248 (2014).
	9.	
Herrmann, J. E. et al. STAT3 is a critical regulator of astrogliosis and scar 
formation after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 28, 7231–7243 (2008).
	10.	
Sofroniew, M. V. Astrocyte barriers to neurotoxic inflammation. Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 16, 249–263 (2015).
	11.	
O’Shea, T. M., Burda, J. E. & Sofroniew, M. V. Cell biology of spinal cord 
injury and repair. J. Clin. Invest. 127, 3259–3270 (2017).
	12.	
Tuszynski, M. H. & Steward, O. Concepts and methods for the study of 
axonal regeneration in the CNS. Neuron 74, 777–791 (2012).
	13.	
Murray, K. C. et al. Recovery of motoneuron and locomotor function after 
spinal cord injury depends on constitutive activity in 5-HT2C receptors. 
Nat. Med. 16, 694–700 (2010).
	14.	
Bareyre, F. M. et al. The injured spinal cord spontaneously forms a new 
intraspinal circuit in adult rats. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 269–277 (2004).
	15.	
Courtine, G. et al. Recovery of supraspinal control of stepping via indirect 
propriospinal relay connections after spinal cord injury. Nat. Med. 14, 
69–74 (2008).
	16.	
Takeoka, A., Vollenweider, I., Courtine, G. & Arber, S. Muscle spindle 
feedback directs locomotor recovery and circuit reorganization after spinal 
cord injury. Cell 159, 1626–1639 (2014).
	17.	
Ballermann, M. & Fouad, K. Spontaneous locomotor recovery in spinal 
cord injured rats is accompanied by anatomical plasticity of reticulospinal 
fibers. Eur. J. Neurosci. 23, 1988–1996 (2006).
	18.	
Raineteau, O. & Schwab, M. E. Plasticity of motor systems after incomplete 
spinal cord injury. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2, 263–273 (2001).
	19.	 Rosenzweig, E. S. et al. Extensive spontaneous plasticity of corticospinal 
projections after primate spinal cord injury. Nat. Neurosci. 13,  
1505–1510 (2010).
	20.	
Friedli, L. et al. Pronounced species divergence in corticospinal tract 
reorganization and functional recovery after lateralized spinal cord injury 
favors primates. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 302ra134 (2015).
	21.	
Belhaj-Saïf, A. & Cheney, P. D. Plasticity in the distribution of the red 
nucleus output to forearm muscles after unilateral lesions of the pyramidal 
tract. J. Neurophysiol. 83, 3147–3153 (2000).
	22.	
Müllner, A. et al. Lamina-specific restoration of serotonergic projections 
after Nogo-A antibody treatment of spinal cord injury in rats. Eur. J. 
Neurosci. 27, 326–333 (2008).
	23.	
Oudega, M. & Perez, M. A. Corticospinal reorganization after spinal cord 
injury. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 590, 3647–3663 (2012).
	24.	
Baker, S. N. & Perez, M. A. Reticulospinal contributions to gross hand 
function after human spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 37, 9778–9784 (2017).
	25.	
Hilton, B. J. et al. Re-establishment of cortical motor output maps and 
spontaneous functional recovery via spared dorsolaterally projecting 
corticospinal neurons after dorsal column spinal cord injury in adult mice. 
J. Neurosci. 36, 4080–4092 (2016).
	26.	
Hollis, E. R. II et al. Ryk controls remapping of motor cortex during 
functional recovery after spinal cord injury. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 697–705 (2016).
	27.	
Asboth, L. et al. Cortico-reticulo-spinal circuit reorganization enables 
functional recovery after severe spinal cord contusion. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 
576–588 (2018).
	28.	
Ruder, L., Takeoka, A. & Arber, S. Long-distance descending spinal neurons 
ensure quadrupedal locomotor stability. Neuron 92, 1063–1078 (2016).
	29.	
Chen, B. et al. Reactivation of dormant relay pathways in injured spinal 
cord by KCC2 manipulations. Cell 174, 521–535 e513 (2018).
	30.	
Kinoshita, M. et al. Genetic dissection of the circuit for hand dexterity in 
primates. Nature 487, 235–238 (2012).
	31.	
Courtine, G. et al. Transformation of nonfunctional spinal circuits into 
functional states after the loss of brain input. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 
1333–1342 (2009).
	32.	
Beauparlant, J. et al. Undirected compensatory plasticity contributes to 
neuronal dysfunction after severe spinal cord injury. Brain 136, 
3347–3361 (2013).
	33.	
Jiang, Y. Q., Zaaimi, B. & Martin, J. H. Competition with primary sensory 
afferents drives remodeling of corticospinal axons in mature spinal motor 
circuits. J. Neurosci. 36, 193–203 (2016).
	34.	
Dietz, V. Behavior of spinal neurons deprived of supraspinal input.  
Nat. Rev. Neurol. 6, 167–174 (2010).
Box 2 | Relevant animal models of SCI
Effective therapeutic developments require selecting experimen-
tal models that are appropriate for evaluating the impact of the 
tested intervention on the targeted repair mechanisms and are 
still relevant for clinical perspectives. The majority of current 
interventions are conducted in rodent models that undergo a 
partial cut of the spinal cord. These precise injuries are useful 
to decipher the mechanisms of recovery since the interrupted 
tracts are well characterized. Moreover, they lead to spontaneous 
functional recovery, which allows monitoring therapy-mediated 
improvements. However, this type of lesion fails to reproduce 
many of the features that characterize the majority of spinal cord 
damage in humans. After partial cut injuries, humans exhibit ex-
tensive spontaneous functional recovery.
Instead, severe contusion or crush SCI in rodent models 
presents all the key hallmarks of the more frequently observed 
injuries in humans, including permanent paralysis. Moreover, 
recovery from contusion SCI appears to rely on mechanisms that 
are distinct from those involved in movement restoration after 
cut injuries27. Due to variable outcomes and severity of deficits, 
however, contusion injuries are not always used in animal 
models for preclinical tests of potential interventions. We believe 
that spinal cord repair interventions should therefore be tested in 
both cut and contusion or crush models, with severities that are 
relevant clinically.
Another key consideration is the importance of nonhuman 
primate models of SCI. The technical difficulties, complex 
logistics, exuberant costs and intimidating ethical issues are 
refraining translational scientists from testing and optimizing 
their therapies in this model. However, we argue that there is 
much to gain in solidifying preclinical results in primate models, 
and adapting procedures and technologies to the size and 
specificities of primate species. Considering the staggering cost 
of clinical trials, we feel that a tremendous amount of information 
may derive from small, well-structured studies in nonhuman 
primate models of SCI before contemplating applications 
in humans.
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
905

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
	35.	
Edgerton, V. R., Tillakaratne, N. J., Bigbee, A. J., de Leon, R. D. & Roy, R. 
R. Plasticity of the spinal neural circuitry after injury. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 
27, 145–167 (2004).
	36.	
Lovett-Barr, M. R. et al. Repetitive intermittent hypoxia induces respiratory 
and somatic motor recovery after chronic cervical spinal injury. J. Neurosci. 
32, 3591–3600 (2012).
	37.	
Navarrete-Opazo, A., Alcayaga, J., Sepúlveda, O., Rojas, E. & Astudillo, C. 
Repetitive intermittent hypoxia and locomotor training enhances walking 
function in incomplete spinal cord injury subjects: a randomized, triple-
blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. J. Neurotrauma 34, 1803–1812 (2017).
	38.	
Stevens, B. et al. The classical complement cascade mediates CNS synapse 
elimination. Cell 131, 1164–1178 (2007).
	39.	
Schafer, D. P. et al. Microglia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity 
and complement-dependent manner. Neuron 74, 691–705 (2012).
	40.	
Kucukdereli, H. et al. Control of excitatory CNS synaptogenesis by 
astrocyte-secreted proteins Hevin and SPARC. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
108, E440–E449 (2011).
	41.	
Christopherson, K. S. et al. Thrombospondins are astrocyte-secreted 
proteins that promote CNS synaptogenesis. Cell 120, 421–433 (2005).
	42.	
Allen, N. J. et al. Astrocyte glypicans 4 and 6 promote formation of 
excitatory synapses via GluA1 AMPA receptors. Nature 486, 410–414 (2012).
	43.	
Tyzack, G. E. et al. Astrocyte response to motor neuron injury promotes 
structural synaptic plasticity via STAT3-regulated TSP-1 expression. Nat. 
Commun. 5, 4294 (2014).
	44.	
Wang, D. & Fawcett, J. The perineuronal net and the control of CNS 
plasticity. Cell Tissue Res. 349, 147–160 (2012).
	45.	
Schwab, M. E. & Strittmatter, S. M. Nogo limits neural plasticity and 
recovery from injury. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 27, 53–60 (2014).
	46.	
Bradbury, E. J. & McMahon, S. B. Spinal cord repair strategies: why do they 
work? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 644–653 (2006).
	47.	
García-Alías, G., Barkhuysen, S., Buckle, M. & Fawcett, J. W. 
Chondroitinase ABC treatment opens a window of opportunity for 
task-specific rehabilitation. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1145–1151 (2009).
	48.	
Mironova, Y. A. & Giger, R. J. Where no synapses go: gatekeepers of circuit 
remodeling and synaptic strength. Trends Neurosci. 36, 363–373 (2013).
	49.	
Onishi, K., Hollis, E. & Zou, Y. Axon guidance and injury-lessons from 
Wnts and Wnt signaling. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 27, 232–240 (2014).
	50.	
Norenberg, M. D., Smith, J. & Marcillo, A. The pathology of human spinal 
cord injury: defining the problems. J. Neurotrauma 21, 429–440 (2004).
	51.	
Fleming, J. C. et al. The cellular inflammatory response in human spinal 
cords after injury. Brain 129, 3249–3269 (2006).
	52.	
Park, K. K. et al. Promoting axon regeneration in the adult CNS by 
modulation of the PTEN/mTOR pathway. Science 322, 963–966 (2008).
	53.	
Liu, K. et al. PTEN deletion enhances the regenerative ability of adult 
corticospinal neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 1075–1081 (2010).
	54.	
Sun, F. et al. Sustained axon regeneration induced by co-deletion of PTEN 
and SOCS3. Nature 480, 372–375 (2011).
	55.	
He, Z. & Jin, Y. Intrinsic control of axon regeneration. Neuron 90, 
437–451 (2016).
	56.	
Chen, Q. et al. Carcinoma-astrocyte gap junctions promote brain metastasis 
by cGAMP transfer. Nature 533, 493–498 (2016).
	57.	
Chandran, V. et al. A systems-level analysis of the peripheral nerve intrinsic 
axonal growth program. Neuron 89, 956–970 (2016).
	58.	
Yoon, C. & Giger, R. J. Inside out: core network of transcription factors 
drives axon regeneration. Neuron 89, 881–884 (2016).
	59.	
de Lima, S. et al. Full-length axon regeneration in the adult mouse optic 
nerve and partial recovery of simple visual behaviors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 109, 9149–9154 (2012).
	60.	
Baldwin, K. T., Carbajal, K. S., Segal, B. M. & Giger, R. J. 
Neuroinflammation triggered by β-glucan/dectin-1 signaling enables CNS 
axon regeneration. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 2581–2586 (2015).
	61.	
Ozdinler, P. H. & Macklis, J. D. IGF-I specifically enhances axon outgrowth 
of corticospinal motor neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 1371–1381 (2006).
	62.	
Bei, F. et al. Restoration of visual function by enhancing conduction in 
regenerated axons. Cell 164, 219–232 (2016).
	63.	 Alto, L. T. et al. Chemotropic guidance facilitates axonal regeneration 
and synapse formation after spinal cord injury. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 
1106–1113 (2009).
	64.	
Bonner, J. F. et al. Grafted neural progenitors integrate and restore synaptic 
connectivity across the injured spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 31, 4675–4686 (2011).
	65.	
Anderson, M. A. et al. Astrocyte scar formation aids central nervous system 
axon regeneration. Nature 532, 195–200 (2016).
	66.	
Plantman, S. et al. Integrin-laminin interactions controlling neurite outgrowth 
from adult DRG neurons in vitro. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 39, 50–62 (2008).
	67.	
Edwards, T. J. & Hammarlund, M. Syndecan promotes axon regeneration by 
stabilizing growth cone migration. Cell Reports 8, 272–283 (2014).
	68.	
Farhy Tselnicker, I., Boisvert, M. M. & Allen, N. J. The role of neuronal 
versus astrocyte-derived heparan sulfate proteoglycans in brain 
development and injury. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 42, 1263–1269 (2014).
	69.	
Masu, M. Proteoglycans and axon guidance: a new relationship between old 
partners. J. Neurochem. 139 Suppl 2, 58–75 (2016).
	70.	
Baier, H. & Bonhoeffer, F. Axon guidance by gradients of a target-derived 
component. Science 255, 472–475 (1992).
	71.	
Horn, K. P., Busch, S. A., Hawthorne, A. L., van Rooijen, N. & Silver, J. 
Another barrier to regeneration in the CNS: activated macrophages induce 
extensive retraction of dystrophic axons through direct physical 
interactions. J. Neurosci. 28, 9330–9341 (2008).
	72.	 Blesch, A. & Tuszynski, M. H. Transient growth factor delivery  
sustains regenerated axons after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 27, 
10535–10545 (2007).
	73.	
Adams, K. L. & Gallo, V. The diversity and disparity of the glial scar.  
Nat. Neurosci. 21, 9–15 (2018).
	74.	
Windle, W. F., Clemente, C. D. & Chambers, W. W. Inhibition of formation 
of a glial barrier as a means of permitting a peripheral nerve to grow into 
the brain. J. Comp. Neurol. 96, 359–369 (1952).
	75.	
Anderson, M. A. et al. Required growth facilitators propel axon 
regeneration across complete spinal cord injury. Nature 561,  
396–400 (2018).
	76.	
Brosius Lutz, A. & Barres, B. A. Contrasting the glial response to  
axon injury in the central and peripheral nervous systems. Dev. Cell 28, 
7–17 (2014).
	77.	
Mason, C. A., Edmondson, J. C. & Hatten, M. E. The extending astroglial 
process: development of glial cell shape, the growing tip, and interactions 
with neurons. J. Neurosci. 8, 3124–3134 (1988).
	78.	
Raper, J. & Mason, C. Cellular strategies of axonal pathfinding. Cold Spring 
Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2, a001933 (2010).
	79.	
Zukor, K. et al. Short hairpin RNA against PTEN enhances regenerative 
growth of corticospinal tract axons after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 33, 
15350–15361 (2013).
	80.	
Mokalled, M. H. et al. Injury-induced ctgfa directs glial bridging and spinal 
cord regeneration in zebrafish. Science 354, 630–634 (2016).
	81.	
Richardson, P. M. & Issa, V. M. Peripheral injury enhances central 
regeneration of primary sensory neurones. Nature 309, 791–793 (1984).
	82.	
Hutson, T. H. et al. Cbp-dependent histone acetylation mediates axon 
regeneration induced by environmental enrichment in rodent spinal cord 
injury models. Sci. Transl. Med. 11, eaaw2064 (2019).
	83.	
Neumann, S. & Woolf, C. J. Regeneration of dorsal column fibers into 
and beyond the lesion site following adult spinal cord injury. Neuron 23, 
83–91 (1999).
	84.	
Pearse, D. D. et al. cAMP and Schwann cells promote axonal growth and 
functional recovery after spinal cord injury. Nat. Med. 10, 610–616 (2004).
	85.	
Williams, R. R., Henao, M., Pearse, D. D. & Bunge, M. B. Permissive 
Schwann cell graft/spinal cord interfaces for axon regeneration. Cell 
Transplant. 24, 115–131 (2015).
	86.	
Shih, C. H., Lacagnina, M., Leuer-Bisciotti, K. & Pröschel, C. Astroglial-
derived periostin promotes axonal regeneration after spinal cord injury.  
J. Neurosci. 34, 2438–2443 (2014).
	87.	
Zhang, S., Alvarez, D. J., Sofroniew, M. V. & Deming, T. J. Design and 
synthesis of nonionic copolypeptide hydrogels with reversible 
thermoresponsive and tunable physical properties. Biomacromolecules 16, 
1331–1340 (2015).
	88.	
Assinck, P., Duncan, G. J., Hilton, B. J., Plemel, J. R. & Tetzlaff, W.  
Cell transplantation therapy for spinal cord injury. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 
637–647 (2017).
	89.	
Anderson, K. D. et al. Safety of autologous human schwann cell 
transplantation in subacute thoracic spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 34, 
2950–2963 (2017).
	90.	
Lu, P. et al. Long-distance growth and connectivity of neural stem cells after 
severe spinal cord injury. Cell 150, 1264–1273 (2012).
	91.	
Lu, P., Jones, L. L., Snyder, E. Y. & Tuszynski, M. H. Neural stem cells 
constitutively secrete neurotrophic factors and promote extensive host 
axonal growth after spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol. 181, 115–129 (2003).
	92.	
Kadoya, K. et al. Spinal cord reconstitution with homologous neural grafts 
enables robust corticospinal regeneration. Nat. Med. 22, 479–487 (2016).
	93.	
Abematsu, M. et al. Neurons derived from transplanted neural stem cells 
restore disrupted neuronal circuitry in a mouse model of spinal cord injury. 
J. Clin. Invest. 120, 3255–3266 (2010).
	94.	
Rosenzweig, E. S. et al. Restorative effects of human neural stem cell grafts 
on the primate spinal cord. Nat. Med. 24, 484–490 (2018).
	95.	
Pivetta, C., Esposito, M. S., Sigrist, M. & Arber, S. Motor-circuit 
communication matrix from spinal cord to brainstem neurons revealed by 
developmental origin. Cell 156, 537–548 (2014).
	96.	
Winter, C. C. et al. Transplantable living scaffolds comprised of micro-tissue 
engineered aligned astrocyte networks to facilitate central nervous system 
regeneration. Acta Biomater. 38, 44–58 (2016).
	97.	
Gao, M. et al. Templated agarose scaffolds for the support of motor axon 
regeneration into sites of complete spinal cord transection. Biomaterials 34, 
1529–1536 (2013).
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
906

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
	98.	
Elliott Donaghue, I., Tam, R., Sefton, M. V. & Shoichet, M. S. Cell and 
biomolecule delivery for tissue repair and regeneration in the central 
nervous system. J. Control. Release 190, 219–227 (2014).
	99.	
O’Shea, T. M. et al. In Smart Materials for Tissue Engineering Applications 
(ed. Wang, Q.) 529–557 (Royal Society of Chemistry, 2017).
	100.	 Grillner, S. Biological pattern generation: the cellular and computational 
logic of networks in motion. Neuron 52, 751–766 (2006).
	101.	 Kiehn, O. Locomotor circuits in the mammalian spinal cord. Annu. Rev. 
Neurosci. 29, 279–306 (2006).
	102.	 Bachmann, L. C. et al. Deep brain stimulation of the midbrain locomotor 
region improves paretic hindlimb function after spinal cord injury in rats. 
Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 208ra146 (2013).
	103.	 Radhakrishna, M. et al. Double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized 
phase I/IIa study (safety and efficacy) with buspirone/levodopa/carbidopa 
(SpinalonTM) in subjects with complete AIS A or motor-complete AIS B 
spinal cord injury. Curr. Pharm. Des. 23, 1789–1804 (2017).
	104.	 Gerasimenko, Y. P. et al. Noninvasive reactivation of motor descending 
control after paralysis. J. Neurotrauma 32, 1968–1980 (2015).
	105.	 Wenger, N. et al. Spatiotemporal neuromodulation therapies engaging 
muscle synergies improve motor control after spinal cord injury. Nat. Med. 
22, 138–145 (2016).
	106.	 Grahn, P. J. et al. Enabling task-specific volitional motor functions via 
spinal cord neuromodulation in a human with paraplegia. Mayo Clin. Proc. 
92, 544–554 (2017).
	107.	 Angeli, C., Edgerton, V. R., Gerasimenko, Y. & Harkema, S. Reply: No dawn 
yet of a new age in spinal cord rehabilitation. Brain 138, e363 (2015).
	108.	 Herman, R., He, J., D’Luzansky, S., Willis, W. & Dilli, S. Spinal cord 
stimulation facilitates functional walking in a chronic, incomplete spinal 
cord injured. Spinal Cord 40, 65–68 (2002).
	109.	 van den Brand, R. et al. Restoring voluntary control of locomotion after 
paralyzing spinal cord injury. Science 336, 1182–1185 (2012).
	110.	 Danner, S. M. et al. Human spinal locomotor control is based on flexibly 
organized burst generators. Brain 138, 577–588 (2015).
	111.	 Wagner, F. B. et al. Targeted neurotechnology restores walking in humans 
with spinal cord injury. Nature 563, 65–71 (2018).
	112.	 Gill, M. L. et al. Neuromodulation of lumbosacral spinal networks  
enables independent stepping after complete paraplegia. Nat. Med. 24, 
1677–1682 (2018).
	113.	 Minev, I. R. et al. Biomaterials. Electronic dura mater for long-term 
multimodal neural interfaces. Science 347, 159–163 (2015).
	114.	 Holinski, B. J. et al. Intraspinal microstimulation produces over-ground 
walking in anesthetized cats. J. Neural Eng. 13, 056016 (2016).
	115.	 Zimmermann, J. B., Seki, K. & Jackson, A. Reanimating the arm and hand 
with intraspinal microstimulation. J. Neural Eng. 8, 054001 (2011).
	116.	 Kasten, M. R., Sunshine, M. D., Secrist, E. S., Horner, P. J. & Moritz, C. T. 
Therapeutic intraspinal microstimulation improves forelimb function after 
cervical contusion injury. J. Neural Eng. 10, 044001 (2013).
	117.	 Angeli, C. A., Edgerton, V. R., Gerasimenko, Y. P. & Harkema, S. J. Altering 
spinal cord excitability enables voluntary movements after chronic complete 
paralysis in humans. Brain 137, 1394–1409 (2014).
	118.	 Lu, D. C. et al. Engaging cervical spinal cord networks to reenable volitional 
control of hand function in tetraplegic patients. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 
30, 951–962 (2016).
	119.	 Phillips, A. A. et al. An autonomic neuroprosthesis: noninvasive electrical 
spinal cord stimulation restores autonomic cardiovascular function in 
individuals with spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 35, 446–451 (2017).
	120.	 Hachmann, J. T. et al. Electrical neuromodulation of the respiratory system 
after spinal cord injury. Mayo Clin. Proc. 92, 1401–1414 (2017).
	121.	 Minassian, K., McKay, W. B., Binder, H. & Hofstoetter, U. S. Targeting 
lumbar spinal neural circuitry by epidural stimulation to restore motor 
function after spinal cord injury. Neurotherapeutics 13, 284–294 (2016).
	122.	 Moraud, E. M. et al. Mechanisms underlying the neuromodulation of spinal 
circuits for correcting gait and balance deficits after spinal cord injury. 
Neuron 89, 814–828 (2016).
	123.	 Capogrosso, M. et al. A computational model for epidural electrical 
stimulation of spinal sensorimotor circuits. J. Neurosci. 33,  
19326–19340 (2013).
	124.	 Gaunt, R. A., Prochazka, A., Mushahwar, V. K., Guevremont, L. & Ellaway, 
P. H. Intraspinal microstimulation excites multisegmental sensory afferents 
at lower stimulus levels than local alpha-motoneuron responses.  
J. Neurophysiol. 96, 2995–3005 (2006).
	125.	 Barolat, G., Myklebust, J. B. & Wenninger, W. Enhancement of voluntary 
motor function following spinal cord stimulation—case study. Appl. 
Neurophysiol. 49, 307–314 (1986).
	126.	 Nudo, R. J. & Masterton, R. B. Descending pathways to the spinal cord: a 
comparative study of 22 mammals. J. Comp. Neurol. 277, 53–79 (1988).
	127.	 Minassian, K. et al. Stepping-like movements in humans with complete 
spinal cord injury induced by epidural stimulation of the lumbar cord: 
electromyographic study of compound muscle action potentials. Spinal 
Cord 42, 401–416 (2004).
	128.	 Carhart, M. R., He, J., Herman, R., D’Luzansky, S. & Willis, W. T. Epidural 
spinal-cord stimulation facilitates recovery of functional walking following 
incomplete spinal-cord injury. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 12, 
32–42 (2004).
	129.	 Capogrosso, M. et al. A brain–spine interface alleviating gait deficits after 
spinal cord injury in primates. Nature 539, 284–288 (2016).
	130.	 Tripodi, M., Stepien, A. E. & Arber, S. Motor antagonism exposed by spatial 
segregation and timing of neurogenesis. Nature 479, 61–66 (2011).
	131.	 Levine, A. J. et al. Identification of a cellular node for motor control 
pathways. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 586–593 (2014).
	132.	 Formento, E. et al. Electrical spinal cord stimulation must preserve 
proprioception to enable locomotion in humans with spinal cord injury. 
Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1728–1741 (2018).
	133.	 Wenger, N. et al. Closed-loop neuromodulation of spinal sensorimotor 
circuits controls refined locomotion after complete spinal cord injury.  
Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 255ra133 (2014).
	134.	 Gilja, V. et al. Clinical translation of a high-performance neural prosthesis. 
Nat. Med. 21, 1142–1145 (2015).
	135.	 Jarosiewicz, B. et al. Virtual typing by people with tetraplegia using a 
self-calibrating intracortical brain-computer interface. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 
313ra179 (2015).
	136.	 Hochberg, L. R. et al. Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using a 
neurally controlled robotic arm. Nature 485, 372–375 (2012).
	137.	 Collinger, J. L. et al. High-performance neuroprosthetic control by an 
individual with tetraplegia. Lancet 381, 557–564 (2013).
	138.	 Bouton, C. E. et al. Restoring cortical control of functional movement in a 
human with quadriplegia. Nature 533, 247–250 (2016).
	139.	 Ajiboye, A. B. et al. Restoration of reaching and grasping movements 
through brain-controlled muscle stimulation in a person with tetraplegia: a 
proof-of-concept demonstration. Lancet 389, 1821–1830 (2017).
	140.	 Ethier, C., Oby, E. R., Bauman, M. J. & Miller, L. E. Restoration of grasp 
following paralysis through brain-controlled stimulation of muscles. Nature 
485, 368–371 (2012).
	141.	 Moritz, C. T., Perlmutter, S. I. & Fetz, E. E. Direct control of paralysed 
muscles by cortical neurons. Nature 456, 639–642 (2008).
	142.	 Flesher, S. N. et al. Intracortical microstimulation of human somatosensory 
cortex. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 361ra141 (2016).
	143.	 Bonizzato, M. et al. Brain-controlled modulation of spinal circuits improves 
recovery from spinal cord injury. Nat. Commun. 9, 3015 (2018).
	144.	 Borton, D., Micera, S., Millán, JdelR. & Courtine, G. Personalized 
neuroprosthetics. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 210rv2 (2013).
	145.	 Lacour, S. P., Courtine, G. & Guck, J. Materials and technologies for soft 
implantable neuroprostheses. Nat. Rev. Mater. 1, 16063 (2016).
	146.	 Côté, M. P., Murray, M. & Lemay, M. A. Rehabilitation strategies after 
spinal cord injury: inquiry into the mechanisms of success and failure.  
J. Neurotrauma 34, 1841–1857 (2017).
	147.	 Torres-Espín, A., Beaudry, E., Fenrich, K. & Fouad, K. Rehabilitative 
training in animal models of spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 35, 
1970–1985 (2018).
	148.	 Carmel, J. B. & Martin, J. H. Motor cortex electrical stimulation augments 
sprouting of the corticospinal tract and promotes recovery of motor 
function. Front. Integr. Neurosci. 8, 51 (2014).
	149.	 Zareen, N. et al. Motor cortex and spinal cord neuromodulation promote 
corticospinal tract axonal outgrowth and motor recovery after cervical 
contusion spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol. 297, 179–189 (2017).
	150.	 Tazoe, T. & Perez, M. A. Effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulation on recovery of function after spinal cord injury. Arch. Phys. 
Med. Rehabil. 96, S145–S155 (2015).
	151.	 Long, J., Federico, P. & Perez, M. A. A novel cortical target to enhance 
hand motor output in humans with spinal cord injury. Brain 140, 
1619–1632 (2017).
	152.	 Mishra, A. M., Pal, A., Gupta, D. & Carmel, J. B. Paired motor cortex and 
cervical epidural electrical stimulation timed to converge in the spinal cord 
promotes lasting increases in motor responses. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 595, 
6953–6968 (2017).
	153.	 Dixon, L., Ibrahim, M. M., Santora, D. & Knikou, M. Paired associative 
transspinal and transcortical stimulation produces plasticity in human 
cortical and spinal neuronal circuits. J. Neurophysiol. 116, 904–916 (2016).
	154.	 Jackson, A., Mavoori, J. & Fetz, E. E. Long-term motor cortex plasticity 
induced by an electronic neural implant. Nature 444, 56–60 (2006).
	155.	 Nishimura, Y., Perlmutter, S. I., Eaton, R. W. & Fetz, E. E. Spike-timing-
dependent plasticity in primate corticospinal connections induced during 
free behavior. Neuron 80, 1301–1309 (2013).
	156.	 Nishimura, Y., Perlmutter, S. I. & Fetz, E. E. Restoration of upper limb 
movement via artificial corticospinal and musculospinal connections in a 
monkey with spinal cord injury. Front. Neural Circuits 7, 57 (2013).
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
907

Review Article
NAture MedICIne
	157.	 Holtmaat, A. & Svoboda, K. Experience-dependent structural synaptic 
plasticity in the mammalian brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 647–658 (2009).
	158.	 Freund, P. et al. MRI investigation of the sensorimotor cortex and the 
corticospinal tract after acute spinal cord injury: a prospective longitudinal 
study. Lancet Neurol. 12, 873–881 (2013).
	159.	 McPherson, J. G., Miller, R. R. & Perlmutter, S. I. Targeted, activity-
dependent spinal stimulation produces long-lasting motor recovery in 
chronic cervical spinal cord injury. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 
12193–12198 (2015).
	160.	 Harkema, S. J. Plasticity of interneuronal networks of the functionally 
isolated human spinal cord. Brain Res. Rev. 57, 255–264 (2008).
	161.	 Rejc, E., Angeli, C. A., Atkinson, D. & Harkema, S. J. Motor recovery after 
activity-based training with spinal cord epidural stimulation in a chronic 
motor complete paraplegic. Sci. Rep. 7, 13476 (2017).
	162.	 Gómez-Pinilla, F., Ying, Z., Roy, R. R., Hodgson, J. & Edgerton, V. R. 
Afferent input modulates neurotrophins and synaptic plasticity in the spinal 
cord. J. Neurophysiol. 92, 3423–3432 (2004).
	163.	 Baraban, M., Koudelka, S. & Lyons, D. A. Ca2+ activity signatures of myelin 
sheath formation and growth in vivo. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 19–23 (2018).
	164.	 López-Álvarez, V. M., Modol, L., Navarro, X. & Cobianchi, S. Early 
increasing-intensity treadmill exercise reduces neuropathic pain by 
preventing nociceptor collateral sprouting and disruption of chloride 
cotransporters homeostasis after peripheral nerve injury. Pain 156, 
1812–1825 (2015).
	165.	 Donati, A. R. et al. Long-term training with a brain-machine interface-
based gait protocol induces partial neurological recovery in paraplegic 
patients. Sci. Rep. 6, 30383 (2016).
	166.	 Gorgey, A. S. Robotic exoskeletons: the current pros and cons. World J. 
Orthop. 9, 112–119 (2018).
	167.	 Maier, I. C. et al. Differential effects of anti-Nogo-A antibody treatment and 
treadmill training in rats with incomplete spinal cord injury. Brain 132, 
1426–1440 (2009).
	168.	 Fouad, K., Bennett, D. J., Vavrek, R. & Blesch, A. Long-term viral 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor delivery promotes spasticity in rats with a 
cervical spinal cord hemisection. Front. Neurol. 4, 187 (2013).
	169.	 Chen, K. et al. Sequential therapy of anti-Nogo-A antibody treatment and 
treadmill training leads to cumulative improvements after spinal cord injury 
in rats. Exp. Neurol. 292, 135–144 (2017).
	170.	 Overman, J. J. & Carmichael, S. T. Plasticity in the injured brain: more than 
molecules matter. Neuroscientist 20, 15–28 (2014).
	171.	 Arber, S. & Costa, R. M. Connecting neuronal circuits for movement. 
Science 360, 1403–1404 (2018).
	172.	 Rossignol, S., Dubuc, R. & Gossard, J. P. Dynamic sensorimotor interactions 
in locomotion. Physiol. Rev. 86, 89–154 (2006).
	173.	 Dominici, N. et al. Versatile robotic interface to evaluate, enable and train 
locomotion and balance after neuromotor disorders. Nat. Med. 18, 
1142–1147 (2012).
	174.	 World Health Organisation (WHO). International perspectives on  
spinal cord injury http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/94190/ 
9789241564663_eng.pdf (2013).
Acknowledgements
The authors kindly thank J. B. Mignardot for drafting the figures. This work was 
supported by a Consolidator Grant from the European Research Council (ERC-2015-
CoG HOW2WALKAGAIN 682999 to G.G.), the Swiss National Science Foundation 
including a bonus of Excellence (310030B_166674) and the National Center of 
Competence in Research (NCCR) Robotics (to G.C.), the US National Institutes of 
Health R01NS084030 (to M.S.), the Dr Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Medical 
Foundation (to M.S.) and Wings for Life (to G.C. and M.S.).
Competing interests
G.C. holds various patents in relation to the reviewed work, and is a founder and 
shareholder of GTX medical, a company developing a therapy for spinal cord injury.
Additional information
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence should be addressed to G.C.
Peer review information: Hannah Stower was the primary editor(s) on this article 
and managed its editorial process and peer review in collaboration with the rest of the 
editorial team.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© Springer Nature America, Inc. 2019
Nature Medicine | VOL 25 | JUNE 2019 | 898–908 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
908

