# Extracted PDF text — 2026-07-16 — part 5/9
# papers Labusch2020_FrontCDB_Zebrafish+SCI .. Marinelli2019_SciRep+SCI_DHA
# anchor per paper: ===== <note-stem> =====

===== Labusch2020_FrontCDB_Zebrafish+SCI =====
REVIEW
published: 30 June 2020
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.00525
Edited by:
Flavio Zolessi,
Universidad de la República, Uruguay
Reviewed by:
Raúl E. Russo,
Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas
Clemente Estable (IIBCE), Uruguay
Sepand Rastegar,
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
(KIT), Germany
*Correspondence:
Laure Bally-Cuif
laure.bally-cuif@pasteur.fr
†These authors have contributed
equally to this work
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Stem Cell Research,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental
Biology
Received: 01 May 2020
Accepted: 03 June 2020
Published: 30 June 2020
Citation:
Labusch M, Mancini L, Morizet D
and Bally-Cuif L (2020) Conserved
and Divergent Features of Adult
Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh.
Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 8:525.
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.00525
Conserved and Divergent Features of
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
Miriam Labusch1,2†, Laure Mancini1,2†, David Morizet1,2† and Laure Bally-Cuif1*
1 Zebraﬁsh Neurogenetics Unit, Institut Pasteur, UMR 3738, CNRS, Team Supported by the Ligue Nationale Contre le
Cancer, Paris, France, 2 Sorbonne Université, Collège Doctoral, Paris, France
Adult neurogenesis, i.e., the generation of neurons from neural stem cells (NSCs) in the
adult brain, contributes to brain plasticity in all vertebrates. It varies, however, greatly
in extent, location and physiological characteristics between species. During the last
decade, the teleost zebraﬁsh (D. rerio) was increasingly used to study the molecular
and cellular properties of adult NSCs, in particular as a prominent NSC population was
discovered at the ventricular surface of the dorsal telencephalon (pallium), in territories
homologous to the adult neurogenic niches of rodents. This model, for its speciﬁc
features (large NSC population, amenability to intravital imaging, high regenerative
capacity) allowed rapid progress in the characterization of basic adult NSC features. We
review here these ﬁndings, with speciﬁc comparisons with the situation in rodents. We
speciﬁcally discuss the cellular nature of NSCs (astroglial or neuroepithelial cells), their
heterogeneities and their neurogenic lineages, and the mechanisms controlling NSC
quiescence and fate choices, which all impact the neurogenic output. We further discuss
the regulation of NSC activity in response to physiological triggers and non-physiological
conditions such as regenerative contexts.
Keywords: neural stem cell, zebraﬁsh, pallium, adult neurogenesis, quiescence, radial glia, cell fate choice
decisions
Adult neurogenesis, ﬁrst identiﬁed as such in birds (Goldman and Nottebohm, 1983), has been
documented in all vertebrate species studied (Altman and Das, 1965; Eriksson et al., 1998; Byrd
and Brunjes, 2001; Suh et al., 2007). The persistence of neuronal production in the adult brain is
the product of specialized neural precursor cells, the neural stem cells (NSCs). In rodents, newly-
born neurons are physiologically important for the plasticity of speciﬁc circuits, notably involved
in learning and memory, and impaired adult neurogenesis can correlate with emotional disorders
(Anacker and Hen, 2017; Jorgensen, 2018; Toda et al., 2019). NSCs have also been postulated
to be at the origin of some brain tumors (Fan et al., 2019; Matarredona and Pastor, 2019). The
fundamental importance of NSCs stimulated an explosive research ﬁeld during the last 20-years,
and, more recently, the development of a new study model: the zebraﬁsh adult brain. The large
amount of adult NSCs in this system, their widespread distribution and varied properties, and
their reactivity toward regeneration, all propelled the zebraﬁsh model to the forefront of adult
NSC research, as a complementary and synergistic model to rodents (Anand and Mondal, 2017;
Lindsey et al., 2018; Zambusi and Ninkovic, 2020). The time to reach sexual maturity in zebraﬁsh
(3 months) and the adult lifespan also approximate those of mouse, allowing to draw direct
temporal parallels. With speciﬁc focus on NSCs of the dorsal telencephalon, we will review here
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
1
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
these diﬀerent attributes, stressing the contribution of the
zebraﬁsh model to understand basic NSC properties such as their
lineages, quiescence, fate choices, heterogeneities, population
behavior and their physiological and pathological recruitment.
NEURAL STEM CELLS: A VARIETY OF
PROGENITOR CELL SUBTYPES DRIVE
NEUROGENESIS IN THE ADULT
ZEBRAFISH CENTRAL NERVOUS
SYSTEM
Active Neurogenesis From Multiple
Neurogenic Niches
The persistent and widespread neurogenic activity of the
zebraﬁsh adult brain was ﬁrst recognized using classical tracing
methods employing thymidine analogs: 16 proliferation domains,
present across all brain subdivisions, proved to be at the origin
of neurons within a few weeks of chase (Figure 1A; Adolf
et al., 2006; Grandel et al., 2006). Using similar approaches,
physiologically silent but activatable neural progenitors were
also identiﬁed in the adult zebraﬁsh spinal cord (Reimer
et al., 2009). These constitutive and facultative neurogenic
niches raised important interest. Indeed, by their variety, they
permit comprehensive comparisons of neurogenic progenitor
identities and properties, and of neurogenesis modes, in the adult
vertebrate central nervous system.
We will focus in this review on adult neurogenesis in the
zebraﬁsh telencephalon, which hosts the territories homologous
to two main neurogenic niches of adult rodents: the sub-
ependymal zone of the lateral ventricle (SEZ) and the sub-
granular zone (SGZ) of the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus
[for completeness on other territories, the reader is referred to
other recent reviews or articles (Than-Trong and Bally-Cuif,
2015; Anand and Mondal, 2017; Lindsey et al., 2018)]. Following
a process of eversion, likely involving both morphogenetic
cell shape changes and anisotropic growth, the ventricle of
the zebraﬁsh dorsal telencephalon (pallium) becomes exposed
dorsally, covered by an enlarged choroid plexus, with its
dorsal midline ﬂipped to lateral positions (Folgueira et al.,
2012). This results in a medio-lateral inversion of homologous
pallial territories between zebraﬁsh and mammals. A tentative
correspondence, based on ontogenetic and functional grounds,
has been proposed (von Trotha et al., 2014; Dray et al., 2015; Ganz
et al., 2015).
Neural Stem Cells and Neural
Progenitors in the Adult Zebraﬁsh
Telencephalon
A variety of genetic and non-genetic tracing methods (Table 1),
coupled
with
precise
immunohistochemical
or
molecular
characterizations, identiﬁed several neural progenitor subtypes
in the adult zebraﬁsh telencephalon. Some of them, notably
radial glia (RG) of the pallium, are considered NSCs (discussion
of the “NSC” versus “neural progenitor” nomenclature in
Box 1, and see below).
Pallial Radial Glial Cells Are Molecularly and
Cellularly Similar to Rodent Adult NSCs
Pallial RG are organized as a tight monolayer with their cell
bodies lining the pallial ventricle. They exhibit overt apico-
basal polarity, exposing a small apical membrane domain
to the cerebrospinal ﬂuid and extending a long and highly
branched basolateral process across the pallial parenchyma
(Figures 1C–D’). Pallial RG express astroglial markers (Glial
Fibrilary Acidic Protein - gfap-, Brain Lipid-Binding Protein
- blbp-, Nestin, Glutamine Synthetase -GS-) as well as S100β,
which highlights NSCs and ependymal cells in rodents, and
Aromatase B (Adolf et al., 2006; Grandel et al., 2006; Pellegrini
et al., 2007; März et al., 2010a). Parenchymal astrocytes are
absent from the adult zebraﬁsh pallium before aging (Ogino
et al., 2016); this observation and the expression of factors
encoding astrocytic function in RG (GS, and the glutamate
transporters Glast and Glt1) suggest that pallial RG serve the
function of parenchymal astrocytes, and extend this function into
the parenchyma via their basal process. Overall, the morphology
and astroglial markers of pallial RG resemble those of adult
NSCs in the mouse SEZ and SGZ (Than-Trong and Bally-Cuif,
2015). They also morphologically resemble radial glial cells of
the developing mouse cortex, but diﬀer from these in several
other aspects such as their proliferation potential and activity,
and their transcriptome (Götz et al., 2016) (and see below).
In detail, distinct morphologies were described among pallial
RG depending on their location (März et al., 2010a). To date,
these diﬀerences have not been related to functional (whether
astrocytic or stem) properties.
Like adult mouse NSCs, pallial RG co-express progenitor
markers, such as the transcription factors Sox2, Hey1, and Her4
(mouse Hes5) (Kroehne et al., 2011; Than-Trong et al., 2018;
Than-Trong et al., 2020). Of these, only the function of Hey1
was tested to date in zebraﬁsh, and shown to be necessary for the
maintenance of progenitor potential in vivo (Than-Trong et al.,
2018). Hes5 (together with the related Hes factor Hes1) as well
as Sox2 are, however, necessary for NSC maintenance in adult
mouse (Ehm et al., 2010; Boareto et al., 2017; Sueda et al., 2019),
and are likely to play a similar role in zebraﬁsh.
At any given time, approximately 5% of pallial RG are
found within the cell cycle (i.e., express the proliferation parkers
PCNA or MCM2/5; these cells are referred to as “activated”).
The remaining 95% are out of the cell cycle and interpreted
as quiescent (see below) (Chapouton et al., 2010; März et al.,
2010a). This interpretation as well as the self-renewal and
neurogenic potential of the pallial RG population are supported
by a number of converging arguments, including: (i) tracing
assays demonstrating that individual RGs can oscillate between
the activated and quiescent states, (ii) pharmacological assays
or experimental injuries demonstrating that all, or most, RG
can be brought into the activated state, (iii) genetic tracing
identifying RG progeny at the individual and populational levels
(Chapouton et al., 2010; März et al., 2010a; Kroehne et al.,
2011; Alunni et al., 2013; Than-Trong et al., 2020). The latter
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
2
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
FIGURE 1 | Continued
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
3
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
FIGURE 1 | Progenitor cells in the zebraﬁsh adult brain at 3 months-post-fertilization (mpf). (A) Scheme of a mid-sagittal section (anterior left) showing the
localization of proliferation zones (colored dots) (Adolf et al., 2006; Grandel et al., 2006). (B,B’) Dorsal view of a whole-mount telencephalon from a gfap:egfp
transgenic animal, processed in triple immunohistochemistry for GFP, PCNA (B), and GS (B’). Anterior is bottom left. Note the continuous layer of progenitor cells
visible from the dorsal surface. Pallial territories are indicated by the dotted lines (see Dray et al., 2015). Yellow stars indicate the location of the territory homologous
to the hippocampus (Ganz et al., 2015, and see Rodríguez et al., 2002 in goldﬁsh), and the pink star the territory homologous to the amygdala (von Trotha et al.,
2014). Anti-GS immunohistochemistry (B’) permits to see basal RG processes (arrows). (C–E) Cross-section of a telencephalon from a gfap:egfp transgenic animal,
processed in double immunohistochemistry for GFP and PCNA and counter-stained with DAPI (C) and high magniﬁcations of the domains boxed (C’,C”,E). In
addition, a high magniﬁcation view of the ventricular zone of Dm is shown (D,D’) in 3D (Imaris software) to appreciate radial glial cell morphology. (E) Focus on NE
progenitors at the pallial edge (arrow). Scale bars: (B,B’,C) 100 mm; (C’,C”) 30 mm; (D,D’) 20 mm; (E) 50 mm. Cb, cerebellum; D, dorsal part of the telencephalon
(pallium) (Da: anterior part of D, Dm: medial part of D; Dl, lateral part of D); Di, diencephalon; F&VL, facial and vagal lobes; Hyp, hypothalamus; OB, olfactory bulb;
PO, preoptic area; TeO, tectum opticum.
experiments are particularly important as they demonstrate that
her4-positive RG generate both pallial neurons and persisting
pallial RG that are themselves neurogenic. Thus, at least at the
population level, her4-positive RG act as NSCs. For comparison,
RG of the developing mouse cortex do not exhibit quiescence
phase, and their neurogenic activity is limited to the embryonic
period (Götz et al., 2016).
Non-glial Pallial Progenitors
In addition, non-glial neural progenitors (NPs) (negative for
astroglial markers and for her4) are present interspersed among
RGs along the pallial ventricle (Ganz et al., 2010; März et al.,
2010a). NPs are identiﬁed as progenitors according to their
expression of Sox2, the fact that around 50% of them co-express
proliferation markers at any time, and their neurogenic fate
(assessed by retroviral tracing at short term) (Rothenaigner et al.,
2011; Than-Trong et al., 2020). Cre-lox tracing with short chase
times indicates these cells originate from pallial RG (Than-
Trong et al., 2020). This population, however, lacks speciﬁc
markers and to date was only relatively superﬁcially analyzed.
It is possibly heterogeneous, and in particular the properties
of Sox2+;PCNA- cells have not been directly deﬁned. NPs
are classically considered equivalent to the Transit Amplifying
Progenitors (TAPs) described in mouse (März et al., 2010a).
Neuroepithelial Progenitor Cells Are Maintained at
the Adult Pallial Edge
Neuroepithelial (NE) cells are also present laterally and
posteriorly at the junction of the pallium with the choroid plexus,
a location corresponding to the dorsal midline (Figure 1E). These
cells are ventricular and apico-basally polarized, express neither
astroglial markers nor her4, and are proliferating. Their lack of
astroglial markers and her4 expression, and their cuboidal as
opposed to radial shape, distinguish them from RG. “Negative”
tracing of NE cells in the adult pallium, using as landmark a
neighboring her4.1:ERT2CreERT2 traced domain, suggests that
these cells generate neurogenic RG in the postero-lateral pallial
domain, as well as maintain themselves, acting as a local growth
zone akin to the ones described in the adult optic tectum and
retina (Dirian et al., 2014). Their exact lifespan and fate, however,
remain to be studied in detail.
Highly Neurogenic Radial Glia Line the Subpallial
Ventricle
RG cells also border the subpallial ventricle. They diﬀer from
pallial RG for their high levels of BLBP expression, their thick
morphology, their higher proliferative potential, the interkinetic
migration of their nuclei, and their generation of neurons that
populate both the (subpallial) parenchyma and the olfactory bulb
(Ganz et al., 2010; März et al., 2010a). Progenitors fated to the OB
follow a longitudinal anterior-ward migration, akin to the rostral
migratory stream of rodents, although glial corridors have not
been observed (Kishimoto et al., 2011).
Embryonic Origin of Adult Pallial Radial
Glia: Heterogeneity, Functional Impact,
and Comparison With NSC-Generating
Lineages in Rodents
Cre-lox lineage tracing indicates that pallial RG of the dorsal,
medial and anterior pallial territories originate from embryonic
RG that border the telencephalic ventricle at 1 day-post-
fertilization (dpf) (Dirian et al., 2014). These embryonic RG,
like their adult counterparts, express the Her transcription
factor Her4. In contrast, as discussed above, adult RG of the
postero-lateral pallium originate from the NE progenitor pool
maintained at the pallial edge, itself deriving from dorsal NE
progenitors located at the tel-diencephalic junction at 1 dpf
(Dirian et al., 2014). NE progenitors express typical Her factors
found at neural tube boundaries, such as Her6 and Her9,
and her9 expression is maintained into adulthood (Figure 2A).
The two pallial RG populations remain separated by a cryptic
boundary, and diﬀer in a number of ways: posterior RG have
a higher proliferation rate, higher expression of blbp and lower
expression of GS (these three features possibly being related
with their relatively “younger” age). Further, this population
can be replenished from the NE pool if RG are depleted
at larval stages.
Teleost ﬁsh encompass over 26,000 species across a large
variety of habitats, and display a number of adaptations including
in the morphology, growth rates or sizes of their pallium.
As a response to its ephemeral habitat, N. furzeri follows an
explosive development to its adult size (Blažek et al., 2013),
including accelerated pallial growth and neurogenesis. Recent
work demonstrates that this is not due to the enhanced eﬃciency
of existing lineages, but rather to the long-term persistence until
adulthood of a highly neurogenic embryonic lineage (Figure 2B;
Coolen et al., 2020). This study, which points to the variety of
neurogenic adaptations in the adult vertebrate brain, illustrates
the power of ﬁsh models to uncover the diﬀerent natural
strategies that can be used to amplify neurogenesis.
Finally, in addition to their embryonic origin, a potential
determinant of NSC properties is the duration of their neurogenic
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
4
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
TABLE 1 | Tracing neural progenitors and/or their progeny in the adult zebraﬁsh telencephalon.
Method
Principle
Output (and limitations)
Princeps
publications
Thymidine analogs
These compounds (BrdU, CldU, EdU)
incorporate into the DNA of cycling cells
during the S phase. They are revealed by
immuno-histochemistry or click-chemistry.
Labeling of dividing cells only (thus low efﬁciency to label
dormant cells).
Identiﬁcation of the progeny cells becoming post-mitotic or
dividing infrequently post-labeling (dilution of the label at
each division round, so rapidly dividing progeny cells are
lost).
Detection of cells dividing infrequently, when detected
together with a proliferation marker (PCNA, MCM proteins)
after a chase (“label retention assay”).
Adolf et al., 2006;
Grandel et al.,
2006; Pellegrini
et al., 2007
Retroviruses
Cells with ventricular contact are infected
upon intra-ventricular injection of the viral
suspension. Following infection, the genetic
material carried by the virus is reverse
transcribed and integrates into the host cell
genome.
Integration into dividing cells for simple retroviruses, and
into non-dividing cells as well for lentiviruses, the genetic
material of which can cross nuclear pores.
Permanent labeling of the progenitor and its progeny.
Cell speciﬁcity of expression can be achieved using speciﬁc
promoters.
Rothenaigner et al.,
2011
DNA
electroporation or
lipofection
Cells with ventricular contact are targeted
upon intra-ventricular injection of the virus
suspension and electroporation. DNA
remains episomal.
Cell speciﬁcity of expression can be achieved using speciﬁc
promoters.
Labeling is transmitted to progeny cells but is a priori not
permanent.
Bias toward targeting cells with a large apical surface.
Chapouton et al.,
2010; Alunni et al.,
2013
Conditional
Cre-lox-mediated
genetic tracing
Double transgenic animals (driver-reporter)
are used. Expression of Cre-ER is driven
from the driver transgene by neural
progenitor-speciﬁc promoters, and nuclear
translocation is temporally controlled by
tamoxifen treatment. It recombines the
reporter transgene at LoxP sites to express
a reporter, usually driven by a ubiquitous
promoter.
Cell speciﬁcity of the recombination is achieved using
speciﬁc promoters (so far: her4.1; gfap; nestin); these
promoters may not recapitulate the endogenous pattern in
all lines, and need to drive strong expression for
recombination to be efﬁcient.
Labeling is permanent in the progenitor and all its progeny
cells.
Various extents of recombination can be used (from clonal
to full).
Kroehne et al.,
2011
Tet-rtTA-mediated
genetic tracing
Double transgenic animals (driver-reporter)
are used. Expression of Tet is driven from
the driver transgene by neural
progenitor-speciﬁc promoters, and its
activity is temporally controlled by doxycylin
treatment. It then activates the reporter
transgene.
Cell speciﬁcity of induction is achieved using speciﬁc
promoters (so far: her4.1).
Labeling is transient in the progenitor following arrest of the
doxycycline treatment. If the reporter protein is fused with a
histone (e.g., H2B), it will be diluted in the progenitor cell
upon division, but stably maintained in post-mitotic cells
generated soon after induction, hence also serving as a
birth dating method; like with thymidine analogs, rapidly
dividing progeny cells will be lost by label dilution.
Various extents of induction can be used (from clonal to
full); full inductions can also be used to track non-dividing
progenitor cells that retain the label (although with caution,
as expression levels at induction may be variable).
Furlan et al., 2017
Intravital imaging
2P: Semi-transparent adult animals (casper
or nacre) are used, anesthetized and
imaged using 2P microscopy. Progenitor
cells are tracked using speciﬁc transgenic
reporter backgrounds or following reporter
electroporation.
3P: transgenic casper adults are used,
anesthetized and imaged using 3P
microscopy.
Individual progenitor cells can be tracked over some weeks.
Tracking of progeny cells is transient as they leave the
progenitor niche to reach deep parenchymal areas.
Only applicable so far to the dorsal-most pallial areas (Da,
Dm).
Individual progenitors can be imaged, as well as cells
located much deeper in the parenchyma (at least 200 mm
below the NSC layer), e.g., neurons. Howerver the method
has not been used yet for repetitive imaging.
Barbosa et al.,
2015a; Dray et al.,
2015; Guesmi
et al., 2018
activity. Genetic tracing and birth dating experiments indicate
that most, likely all, RG of the dorso-medial and anterior
pallial domain originate from a constitutively neurogenic lineage,
i.e., generating neurons without interruption from embryo to
adult (Figure 2A; Dirian et al., 2014; Furlan et al., 2017).
This was later shown to be also the case for NSCs of the
adult mouse DG (Song et al., 2018; Berg et al., 2019). In
apparent contrast, NSCs of the adult mouse SEZ were shown
to derive from cells entering quiescence at mid-embryonic
stages, hence pausing prior to being remobilized in adults
(Figure 2C; Furutachi et al., 2015). It is possible, however, that
quiescence instatement in the SEZ is more gradual and that
an asynchrony exists in the control of quiescence entry and
neurogenic activity among SEZ NSCs, reconciling the diﬀerent
models. Finally, it remains to be formally demonstrated whether
the NE progenitors located at the pallial edge, and the young RG
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
5
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
BOX 1 | Neural Stem Cells and neural progenitors.
By deﬁnition, stem cells are individual cells endowed with long-term self-renewal and at least bi-potency. This initial deﬁnition is in line with a classical scheme where
a stem cell upon division generates another stem cell and a differentiated progeny. However, clonal tracing in a number of adult stem cell systems rather supports a
model where stem cells are self-renewing and bi-potent at the population level, choosing stochastically between balanced numbers of amplifying, asymmetric or
differentiative divisions. This is no exception in the adult brain where several studies, both in mouse and zebraﬁsh, are compatible, at least in part, with such
“population asymmetry” ensuring both neural stem cell maintenance and neuronal production. These converging observations suggest to revise the strict deﬁnition
of a neural stem cell toward that of neural stem cell population(s), characterized by their capacity, as a whole, to maintain themselves and generate neurons and/or
post-mitotic glial cells. In the zebraﬁsh adult pallium, these properties are met by radial glial cells (although to varying degrees). One can further distinguish
constitutive and facultative neural stem cells (or population), the former being active physiologically and the latter being normally silent but becoming active, e.g.,
upon lesion (as is for example the case in the zebraﬁsh spinal cord). The term “neural progenitor” is generally used more broadly, (i) to mention progenitors that are
further committed along the neurogenesis lineage than neural stem cells (for example, the “activated neural progenitors” -NPs- of the zebraﬁsh adult pallium or the
equivalent “transit amplifying progenitors” -TAPs- of adult mouse neurogenic niches), (ii) to refer to neurogenic cells whose self-renewal potential has not been clearly
assessed, (iii) or to jointly refer to all cells with neurogenic capacity (for example, NSCs + NPs).
that they progressively generate de novo in the adult pallium, have
an equivalent in rodents.
Adult Neurogenic Lineages in the
Zebraﬁsh Pallium Are Devoid of
Ampliﬁcation and Drive Neuronal
Addition
Different Ampliﬁcation Strategies in Teleosts and
Rodents
Downstream of NSCs, adult neurogenesis in mouse involves
TAPs, i.e., non-stem neuronal progenitors of limited self-renewal.
The ampliﬁcation potential of TAPs greatly varies between the
SEZ and DG: in average, a TAP would divide three to four
times in the SEZ (Ponti et al., 2013), but once or twice in
the DG (Seri et al., 2004; Encinas et al., 2011; Lugert et al.,
2012; Figure 3D). TAP-like progenitors are also present in the
developing mouse cortex, notably as basal progenitors expressing
the transcription factor Tbr2. These basal progenitors originate
from RG and generate cortical neurons following 1 or 2 divisions
(Hevner, 2019). Tbr2 expression is also found in the adult SEZ
in amplifying progenitors generated from the TAPs (Lugert et al.,
2012; Nelson et al., 2020). tbr2 (eomesa) expression in the adult
zebraﬁsh pallium is largely regional and has not been directly
associated with NPs (Ganz et al., 2015). The lineage ampliﬁcation
by pallial NPs is minimal, with at most one or two divisions,
akin to TAPs of the DG (Figure 3C; Rothenaigner et al., 2011;
Furlan et al., 2017). Hence, in the zebraﬁsh pallium, extensive
neuronal production is ensured by the continuous neurogenic
activity of RG (notably in the cortical area, where neurogenesis
is shut-down after birth in mammals) and the de novo addition
of neurogenic RG into the system. The latter occurs through
the activity of NE progenitors at the pallial edge, and currently
unidentiﬁed “source cells” disseminated at the pallial ventricle
(see below) (Than-Trong et al., 2020).
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh Is Additive
Adult neurogenesis in mouse is globally understood to drive
neuronal replacement, following the selective maintenance of a
subset of adult-born neurons in the functional circuitry -while
most adult-generated neurons would be eliminated (Figure 3B).
Some publications, however, report neuronal addition, both in
the DG (Bayer, 1985; Dranovsky et al., 2011) and OB (Platel et al.,
2019). The output of pallial neurogenesis in zebraﬁsh primarily
drives neuronal addition. No cell death was observed, and the
pallial parenchyma (as well as the OB) increases its neuronal
population during adult life and grows (Than-Trong et al., 2020).
Genetic birth dating and lineage tracing experiments showed
that newborn neurons delaminate from the ventricular zone and
stack into the parenchyma in age-related layers until adulthood
(Furlan et al., 2017; Figure 3C). Because there is no extensive
neuronal migration, and little or no death, this process results
in an adult pallium where superﬁcial structures are composed of
young (late-born) neurons and central structures of old (early-
born) neurons, still including neurons born at embryonic and
early juvenile stages. This also applies to the lateral pallium, with
in addition a lateral to medial gradient in RG age (Figures 3A,B;
Furlan et al., 2017).
To date, the identity of adult-born pallial neurons, as well as
their projection pattern and function, remain largely unknown
in zebraﬁsh. Like in the mouse, some adult-born neurons in
the zebraﬁsh OB are TH-positive (Adolf et al., 2006). In the
pallial parenchyma proper, only candidate markers have been
tested to date to characterize RG-derived neurons, including
some transcription factors and neurotransmitters (identifying
for example GABA-ergic and glutamatergic neurons) (von
Trotha et al., 2014; Furlan et al., 2017). A neuron atlas was
recently generated from the zebraﬁsh telencephalon at 21 dpf
using scRNAseq (Raj et al., 2018), and such a description is
long awaited in adult, to permit both functional studies -still
conducted currently through laborious screening to associate
molecularly deﬁned subpopulation with a given function (Lal
et al., 2018)- and information on how NSCs generate diﬀerent
neuronal types. In the developing mammalian cerebral cortex and
the Drosophila optic lobe, columnar organization is generated
through sequential expression of speciﬁc transcription factors
(Mattar et al., 2015; Doe, 2017). The zebraﬁsh pallium is also
built through a sequential stacking process, but in contrast to the
mouse, the “migration-free death-free” neurogenesis process of
the adult zebraﬁsh pallium makes it possible to readily identify
neurons born at adulthood by their (superﬁcial) position (Furlan
et al., 2017). This will then make it straightforward to attribute
them with molecular signatures. Determining whether neurons
at diﬀerent depths have diﬀerent identities and when they are
generated would therefore represent an important step to know
whether there is a temporal heterogeneity in NSCs and how
it might be encoded. Moreover, since the same NSCs remain
active in an adult brain which keeps on growing, one important
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
6
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
FIGURE 2 | Lineages at the origin of adult neurogenic progenitors in the vertebrate pallium. (A) Lineages in zebraﬁsh, generating adult RG from embryonic RG (top)
and NE progenitors (bottom). (B) Lineages in the killiﬁsh, where neurogenesis in adults is ensured by a long-lasting non-glial embryonic lineage (blue) dph: days
post-hatching, wph: weeks post-hatching. (C) Lineages in mouse, where distinct modes of NSC production are described in the DG (top) and SEZ (bottom) (Dirian
et al., 2014; Furutachi et al., 2015; Song et al., 2018; Berg et al., 2019; Coolen et al., 2020).
question would then be whether NSCs maintain a similar
level of plasticity throughout life, either physiologically or in a
regenerative context. Finally, identifying neural subpopulations
in the pallium could also reveal depth-independent areal
heterogeneities, perhaps to be correlated with areal diﬀerences
in NSC potential.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
7
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
FIGURE 3 | Global outputs of adult neurogenesis in zebraﬁsh and mouse. (A) Scheme of a typical neurogenesis lineage in adult mouse. Upon quiescence exit,
NSCs generate neurons via TAPs. TAPs have variable ampliﬁcation capacity, high in the SEZ, lower in the DG. Green and purple shades are meant to represent
shared cells and attributes between the SEZ and DG (color code in Figure 2C, with proliferating cells indicated with a pink nucleus). (B) Scheme of a typical
neurogenic lineage in the adult zebraﬁsh pallium (left) and neuronal output (right). Neurons are generated via an intermediate progenitor (NP: neural progenitor) of
limited ampliﬁcation potential. Because adult-generated neurons persist, however, the number of neurons generated per NSC increases over time in genetically
traced lineages from individual NSCs. (C) Spatio-temporal distribution of the neurogenesis output in the zebraﬁsh pallium, from embryonic stages until adult life.
Radial glia (triangles) generate neurons that stack in age-related order within the telencephalic parenchyma. Old neurons, at the pallial-subpallial boundary, were
generated in the embryo and early larva. In the lateral pallium (orange), the same process operates but radial glia are generated during juvenile and adult stages from
NE progenitors (circles). Arrows indicate the spatial organization of neurogenesis over time. (D) Compared output of neurogenesis in the pallium of zebraﬁsh and
mouse from embryo to adult, represented on schematic cross-sections where the dotted line separates neurons generated at embryonic versus post-embryonic
stages. Neurogenesis is continuous and additive (straight arrows) in zebraﬁsh in all pallial subdivisions (left panel). Neurogenesis stops at birth in the mouse
neocortex, spatially isolating the two persisting neurogenic niches SEZ and SGZ. Neurogenesis in these niches is mostly used for neuron replacement (circular
arrows) (right panel). Color code as in Figure 1 (Seri et al., 2004; Encinas et al., 2011; Rothenaigner et al., 2011; Lugert et al., 2012; Ponti et al., 2013; Furlan et al.,
2017; Than-Trong et al., 2020). D, dorsal part of the telencephalon (pallium); Da, anterior part of D; Dm, medial part of D; Dl, lateral part of D; aNSC, activated neural
stem cell; qNSC, quiescent neural stem cell; NP, neural progenitor; TAP, transit amplifying progenitor; V, ventral telencephalon (sub-pallium).
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
8
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
FIGURE 4 | Long-term NSC and neurogenesis dynamic in the adult zebraﬁsh pallium. (A,B) Genetic clonal analysis driven by the her4:ERT2CreERT2 transgene with chase time over 500 days. The number of
NSCs per clone containing at least one Sox2+ cell (A) and the proportion of clones containing at least one Sox2+ cell (B) display a bi-phasic dynamics at long term. At early time points after induction, neutral drift
is observed -red-. At later time points, a behavior characteristic of single cell-based self-renewal appears -blue-. These two dynamics reﬂect the behavior of two embedded populations (operational and reservoir,
respectively). (C) Total number of Sox2+ cells in the adult Dm between 3 and 25 months post-fertilization (mpf). The Sox2+ population increases in size in the young adult (3–8 mpf), reﬂecting the NSC-generating
activity of a “source” population (orange). (D) Schematic of the proliferative hierarchy of NSC sub-populations sustaining overall NSC maintenance in Dm. Color code as in (A–C) (Than-Trong et al., 2020).
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
9
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
Pallial Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh Is the Output of a
Proliferative Hierarchy Involving Functionally
Specialized NSC Sub-Pools
The zebraﬁsh adult pallium is particularly amenable to NSC fate
studies for several reasons: (i) its superﬁcial location permits
intravital imaging hence the direct tracing, during several weeks,
of NSC fate in the absence of biased genetic tools and under
non-invasive conditions (Barbosa et al., 2015b; Dray et al., 2015),
(ii) its small size permits analyzing clones in whole-mount
preparations, avoiding the risk of losing cells that occurs when
studying brain sections, and (iii) the absence of cell death
and migrations makes it easier to quantify clones in their
entirety (Than-Trong et al., 2020). We made use of these
attributes, and of broad promoters such as her4 and gfap that
encompass the largest progenitor population, to determine the
dynamics of NSC fates in the adult pallium between 3 and 18
mpf (Than-Trong et al., 2020). The combination of intravital
imaging, long-term clonal genetic tracing (Figures 4A–C) and
biophysical modeling revealed that NSC population dynamics
is compatible with an organization in 3 hierarchically-organized
sub-populations, each endowed with a speciﬁc function: NSC
population growth (“source pool”), self-renewal (“reservoir
pool”), and neurogenic activity (“operational pool”) (Figure 4D).
The “source” population accounting for growth remains poorly
deﬁned. In contrast, division modes and transition rates could
be inferred for the reservoir and operation sub-populations,
highlighting the heterogeneities of NSC properties and, within
the operational pool, their stochastic fate choices.
In contrast to this unifying conclusion, the results of a large
number of careful clonal studies in mouse diverge, documenting
NSC loss, maintenance or even gain, in the SEZ and/or DG
(Lugert et al., 2010; Bonaguidi et al., 2011; Dranovsky et al., 2011;
Encinas et al., 2011; Fuentealba et al., 2012; Calzolari et al., 2015;
Urbán et al., 2016; Basak et al., 2018; Bast et al., 2018; Obernier
et al., 2018; Pilz et al., 2018; Berg et al., 2019). The zebraﬁsh data
suggest that these discrepant results could be interpreted by the
targeting of distinct NSC sub-populations, although a unifying
model in mouse remains to be established.
NEURAL STEM CELL QUIESCENCE AND
ITS IMPACT ON NEUROGENESIS
Quiescence Is an Actively Maintained
State Shared Between Zebraﬁsh and
Mouse Adult Neural Stem Cells
Quiescence is a prominent cell state in adult NSCs, as illustrated
in both zebraﬁsh and mice. It is therefore important to consider
how it may aﬀect NSC biology and neurogenesis output, likely
in a similar way in these species. The quiescence phase of
adult NSCs generally corresponds to the G0 state of the cell
cycle. In Drosophila, NSCs can also undergo a G2 quiescence
phase at late embryonic stages (Otsuki and Brand, 2018), and
the existence of a long G2 phase has been suggested in NE
progenitors of the medaka optic tectum at post-embryonic stages,
based on the expression of G2-M arrest genes (Dambroise et al.,
2017). G2 quiescence, however, remains to be demonstrated in
vertebrate adult brains.
Practically, quiescent NSCs are negatively deﬁned by the
absence of proliferation markers. Until now, a positive core
signature for quiescent NSCs has not been deﬁned, although
RNASeq data in both mouse and zebraﬁsh brought deeper
understanding of the molecular players of NSC quiescence:
generally, pathways involved in transcription, translation, DNA
replication and DNA repair, and cell cycle progression, are
downregulated (Codega et al., 2014; Dulken et al., 2017), while
cell-cell communication (Shin et al., 2015; Basak et al., 2018), cell
adhesion (Codega et al., 2014; Shin et al., 2015), cell signaling
and lipid metabolism (Llorens-Bobadilla et al., 2015; Than-Trong
et al., 2018) are upregulated (Figure 5).
Quiescence is classically linked with the maintenance of stem
cell properties (stemness, i.e., self-renewal and diﬀerentiation
potential, see Box 1). This link is, however, not obligatory,
as illustrated in the gut and skin, where adult stem cells
proliferate continuously while staying in homeostasis. In the
brain, however, quiescence is believed necessary for stemness
-hence neurogenesis potential-, avoiding DNA, protein or
mitochondria damage that could lead to senescence or malignant
transformations. But this has been diﬃcult to demonstrate, both
in mouse and zebraﬁsh, in particular because testing for stemness
requires functional assays where NSCs will divide, and because
many quiescence control factors have pleiotropic eﬀects and in
particular are actors of the neurogenesis cascade itself (see below).
Nevertheless, several studies to some extent disentangled the
two properties. For example, in adult mouse, physical exercise
leads to increased SGZ NSC proliferation, but is not followed by
exhaustion of the NSC pool (Van Praag et al., 1999; Wu et al.,
2008). In the adult zebraﬁsh pallium, bulk RNAseq proﬁling of
quiescent versus activated NSCs or in the presence or absence
of Notch3 activity showed that Notch3 promotes quiescence and
stemness in part via distinct molecular cascades (Than-Trong
et al., 2018). While the transcription factor Hey1 mediates Notch3
activity on stemness, the candidate Notch3 eﬀectors controlling
quiescence remain to be experimentally validated. In mouse, the
direct eﬀect of Notch on stemness remains to be unraveled, as
well as whether Hey1 is a target of Notch and could potentially
control stemness. In the mouse SGZ, Notch2 drives expression
of the transcription factor-encoding gene Id4. However, unlike
the depletion of Notch2, the depletion of Id4 induces NSC
activation but does not promote neuronal diﬀerentiation (Zhang
et al., 2019). Thus, in mouse, NSC quiescence and stemness
could also be molecularly uncoupled downstream of Notch2, Id4
controlling only its quiescence-promoting eﬀect.
Quiescence Instatement, Length, and
Depth in Adult Neural Stem Cells:
Variable Geometry Parameters?
Quiescence Length Remains to Be Measured With
Precision
Through genetic lineage tracings and live imaging in zebraﬁsh
and mouse, we know now that NSCs can re-enter quiescence after
activation (Berg et al., 2010; März et al., 2010a; Bonaguidi et al.,
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
10
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
FIGURE 5 | Continued
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
11
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
FIGURE 5 | Schematic of the cell cycle including the most important information about the decision to enter quiescence, remain in cycle or differentiate. (A) General
cell cycle knowledge, illustrating phases G1, S, G2, and M and the most important checkpoints (purple). During the cell cycle, proteins involved in transcription,
translation, DNA replication and DNA repair are upregulated. The schematic includes proliferation markers MCM, PCNA, and Ki67 (gray) that are expressed in
different phases of the cell cycle and commonly used to deﬁne proliferating NSCs. During the cell cycle, cells can enter into the quiescence state in G1, the decisions
for entry happening at a R-point in G1. After passing the R-point, cells are committed to fulﬁll another cell cycle. Another important check-point is the bifurcation
point right after mitosis, a window in which cells are sensitive to mitogen signals that inﬂuence CDK2 (R1 and R2 window on the schematic). Cells with a normal level
of CDK2 will keep cycling, whereas cells with low levels of CDK2 will enter a transient quiescence and will face a second restriction window at the end of G1,
controlled by the CDK inhibitor p21. Only cells that built up enough CDK will be able to bypass quiescence and eventually re-enter quiescence. (B) NSC-speciﬁc
quiescence cycle. Quiescence can be entered in G1, or G2 (this remains to be shown for vertebrates). During quiescence, genes involved in cell-cell communication,
cell adhesion and cell signaling are upregulated, stressing that quiescence is an actively maintained state. Some data (e.g., the dynamics of miR-9 expression)
suggest that quiescence can be seen as a cycle, but alternative models exist. Quiescent cells express p21, p27, p57, and p130. Quiescence is heterogeneous, and
deeper and shallower sub-states exist. miR-9 is nuclear in deeply quiescent cells. Some NSCs that are insensitive to Notch blockade can also be interpreted as
deeply quiescent. A “pro-activated” state precedes activation proper. In this state, NSCs express ascl1, which will also be maintained during activation and
differentiation (Pardee, 1974; Alunni et al., 2013; Spencer et al., 2013; Andersen et al., 2014; Katz et al., 2016).
TABLE 2 | Estimated lengths of cell cycle phases and quiescence in adult NSCs of the zebraﬁsh and mouse telencephalon.
Cell cycle phase
Length
Model
Method
References
G1
0–35 h, most of the
time: 6–15 h
Mouse NSC cell
culture
Hes5:FUCCI line
Roccio et al., 2013
S/G2/M
4–12 h, most of the
time: between 4
and 9 h
Mouse NSC cell
culture
Hes5:FUCCI line
Roccio et al., 2013
Complete cell cycle
17 h
Mouse NSCs in the
SEZ
Thymidine analog
Ponti et al., 2013
S-phase
4.5
Mouse NSCs in the
SEZ
Thymidine analog
Ponti et al., 2013
S-phase
ANP (amplifying
neural progenitors,
higher level of
proliferation): 12.2
± 1.1 QNP
(quiescent neural
progenitors, low
level of
proliferation): 7.8 ±
0.7
Mouse NSCs in the
SGZ
Thymidine analogs
Encinas et al., 2011
Cell cycle
28–35 h
Mouse NSCs in the
SGZ
Thymidine analogs
Encinas et al., 2011
G0
20 ± 4 days
Mouse NSCs in
SEZ
Genetic tracing based on
Wnt-target Troy:GFP. In the model,
qNSCs become activated at
constant low rate, and aNSC go to
quiescence at constant rate.
Basak et al., 2018
G1 G0 transition
5 ± 2 days
Mouse NSCs in
SEZ
Genetic tracing based on
Wnt-target Troy:GFP. In the model,
qNSCs become activated at
constant low rate, and aNSC go to
quiescence at constant rate.
Basak et al., 2018
Division rate
5 ± 2 h
Mouse NSCs in
SEZ
Genetic tracing based on
Wnt-target Troy:GFP. In the model,
qNSCs become activated at
constant low rate, and aNSC go to
quiescence at constant rate.
Basak et al., 2018
Non-proliferating
Mouse NSC in the
SGZ
Live imaging with inducible
Ascl1:tdTomato line
Pilz et al., 2018
G0
24.4 and 143 days
Zebraﬁsh pallium
Genetic tracing based line
Tg(her4:RFP). In the mathematical
model, qNSCs become activated at
2 different rates.
Than-Trong et al.,
2020
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
12
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
2011; Dray et al., 2015; Pilz et al., 2018; Than-Trong et al., 2020).
It remains, however, unclear, and debated, whether NSCs keep
the same properties (fate, quiescence length. . .) upon division
(Bonaguidi et al., 2011; Urbán et al., 2016; Than-Trong et al.,
2020). Quiescence length, as well the duration of cell cycle phases,
also remain to be precisely deﬁned in NSCs, and key studies on
these issues are summarized in Table 2. Overall, S-phase can last
between 4 and 8 h (Encinas et al., 2011; Ponti et al., 2013), and the
complete adult NSC cell cycle will take 10–35 h (Encinas et al.,
2011; Ponti et al., 2013; Roccio et al., 2013). The time between
2 divisions can lie between 14 and 36 days, as observed by live
imaging in the SGZ, but the upper limits of quiescence were
not explored (Pilz et al., 2018). In the zebraﬁsh adult pallium,
mathematical models predict average quiescence times reaching
143 days, which is yet to be conﬁrmed experimentally (Than-
Trong et al., 2020). It is likely that the zebraﬁsh pallium will be
highly instrumental to ﬁll these gaps, as the superﬁcial location of
the pallial progenitor zone (contrasting with the deep location of
mammalian NSCs) permits long-term intravital imaging.
Quiescence Instatement Is Progressive With a
Schedule That May Differ Between Niches and
Species
Progenitors in the SGZ produce granule neurons during
embryonic and postnatal stages and enter quiescence postnatally.
Then, they acquire their radial morphology and organize in
the SGZ (Li et al., 2013; Berg et al., 2019). In contrast, in the
SEZ, stem cells with quiescence characteristics were identiﬁed
at embryonic stages by H2B-mediated lineage tracing (Furutachi
et al., 2015). These cells would slow down their cell cycle at E13.5,
then remain quiescent to re-activate at adult stages (Fuentealba
et al., 2012). As mentioned earlier, these diﬀerences between the
SEZ and SGZ may be apparent and due to tracing some cells
only, or due to using indirect measurements. For example, H2B-
tracing is based on diﬀerential dilution, and a positive read-out
necessitates a minimal quiescence length. In zebraﬁsh, pallial
neural progenitors start entering quiescence at 5 dpf (Alunni
et al., 2013), and the average duration of quiescence -as inferred
from the decreasing proportion of PCNA-positive cells within
the population- gradually increases until adulthood (Dirian et al.,
2014; Katz et al., 2016). It remains unclear whether the data above
can directly be compared, as they use diﬀerent methods with
their inherent limitations. Likewise, measures based on the lack of
PCNA protein will not distinguish cells in early G1 phase (PCNA
transcription and protein stability being low prior to the G1-
S transition) (Chang et al., 1990) from cells in G0. Progressive
quiescence instatement, concluded from the increasing duration
of a PCNA-negative state, may therefore be concluded for cells
that in fact progressively lengthen early G1. Overall, it remains
urgent for the ﬁeld to positively label G0.
NSC Quiescence Is a Heterogeneous State
Several analyses support the idea that G0 quiescence is
heterogeneous. Some studies suggest diﬀerent types of quiescence
(mainly short versus long-term) depending on the cell and its
history (Urbán et al., 2016). Additionally, quiescence can consist
of sub-states, deﬁned as transient phases, arguably harboring
speciﬁc molecular or cellular signatures and properties, that
cells transit through during their quiescence phase. Zebraﬁsh
adult pallial NSCs were instrumental to experimentally exemplify
potential quiescence sub-states. For example, pharmacological
blockade of Notch signaling in zebraﬁsh, which globally leads to
NSC quiescence exit (see below), revealed diﬀerent lag phases to
re-enter cycling, and approximately 5% of quiescent NSCs did
not respond to the blockade (Alunni et al., 2013). Convincingly,
a subset of quiescent NSCs express microRNA-9 (miR-9), and
BrdU chase experiments suggest that the miR-9-positive state
is a transient phase in a quiescence cycle and may reﬂect deep
quiescence (Katz et al., 2016). Indeed BrdU incorporated during
the S phase of dividing NSCs becomes associated with miR-9
staining only after long chase, showing that miR-9 is expressed
in now deeply quiescent NSCs but that were previously dividing.
scRNAseq and expression analyses conducted in mouse also
suggest the existence of a distinct quiescent sub-state close to
activation, as was proposed for muscle satellite cells. The ﬁrst
study reporting such heterogeneity in the mouse SEZ identiﬁed
three non-dividing NSC clusters (Llorens-Bobadilla et al., 2015):
a dormant cluster in the deepest state of quiescence, a second
cluster containing cells expressing markers related to activation
but that do not divide, and a third cluster that falls in between
on the spectrum between quiescence and activation. The same
group reported the same subpopulation structure in a new
study and using a diﬀerent technology, suggesting that these
cells can be reliably and reproducibly grouped into distinct
clusters (Kalamakis et al., 2019). Recently a separate group
reported the most extensive scRNAseq conducted on NSCs so
far (Mizrak et al., 2019), in which they captured close to 40k
SEZ astrocytic cells. They identiﬁed several independent clusters
that also matched distinct regions along the SEZ which diﬀer in
proliferation rate. This can be explained if NSCs along the lateral
ventricles rest in diﬀerent depths of quiescence. An important
limitation to these experiments in the SEZ, however, is the
diﬃculty to distinguish between astrocytes and bona ﬁde NSCs
(Dulken et al., 2017). In the dentate gyrus, astrocytes and RGL-
cells formed distinct clusters (Hochgerner et al., 2018). However
so far only low numbers of stem cells were captured in scRNAseq
experiments conducted on the hippocampus, which prevents
proper analysis of their intrinsic heterogeneity. Two reports were
recently published in zebraﬁsh, based on NSCs isolated from
her4.1-driven transgenes (Cosacak et al., 2019; Lange et al., 2020).
However these studies only captured small numbers of NSCs
(609 and 76, respectively). One of them conclusively shows the
existence of distinct NSC clusters in the pallium (Cosacak et al.,
2019), but more extensive studies will be necessary to get a better
idea of the level of heterogeneity as well as whether and how these
subpopulations diﬀer in quiescence depth.
Control Mechanisms of Quiescence Are
Highly Conserved Between Zebraﬁsh
and Rodents
Control mechanisms of NSC quiescence in zebraﬁsh and rodents
appear similar, yet many mechanisms that were identiﬁed in
rodents remain to be studied in zebraﬁsh and vice versa.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
13
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
FIGURE 6 | Schematic of a quiescent NSC including the pathways controlling quiescence, which are summarized in this review. The scheme highlights knowledge
generated in mouse, and conﬁrmed pathways in zebraﬁsh are illustrated in green. Knowledge generated in zebraﬁsh and later extended to mouse is shown in green
as well. Knowledge generated in zebraﬁsh and still to be conﬁrmed in mouse is depicted in yellow. Differences (Notch2 is not expressed in qNSCs in zebraﬁsh), or
data that need consolidation in zebraﬁsh (Ascl1 expression and its regulation by ID and Hes1, BMP receptor), are shown in black. See text and Table 3 for
references.
Conditional functional studies in the adult zebraﬁsh remain
technically challenging, especially when genetics-based, and this
is still slowing down the ﬁeld. We will focus here only on the
control mechanisms that have been studied in the zebraﬁsh
pallium and compare them to data in mouse (Figure 6)
(but see Table 3). It is to note that, while these studies
convincingly implicate various factors in quiescence control, they
do not resolve their function in controlling quiescence entry,
maintenance, exit, or transition through the diﬀerent sub-states
discussed above.
Notch Signaling Is a Key Quiescence-Promoting
Pathway
One of the most prominent NSC quiescence-promoting pathway
is Notch signaling, as ﬁrst demonstrated in the adult zebraﬁsh
pallium (Chapouton et al., 2010), and later conﬁrmed to be
conserved by numerous studies in mice. In zebraﬁsh and mice,
Notch is highly expressed in NSCs. Whereas notch3 is strongly
upregulated in quiescent cells, notch1 (notch1b in zebraﬁsh)
is strongly expressed in activated NSCs (Aguirre et al., 2010;
Chapouton et al., 2010; Basak et al., 2012; Alunni et al., 2013;
de Oliveira-Carlos et al., 2013; Kawai et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2019). notch2 expression was not detected in the zebraﬁsh brain,
but is expressed in quiescent NSCs in mice (Basak et al., 2012;
Kawai et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019). Blocking Notch signaling
with a gamma-secretase inhibitor dissolved in ﬁsh water leads to
activation of NSCs and expansion of the NSC pool by symmetric
divisions (Chapouton et al., 2010; Alunni et al., 2013), and this
was recapitulated by the selective blockade of Notch3 using
morpholinos (Alunni et al., 2013). In mice, Notch inhibition,
either at the level of the ligands or the eﬀector RBPjK leads to
exit of quiescence and exhaustion of the NSC pool, a phenotype
also often understood to mean that NSC quiescence is crucial for
stemness maintenance (Ehm et al., 2010; Imayoshi et al., 2010;
Kawaguchi et al., 2013; Lavado and Oliver, 2014). In zebraﬁsh,
NSC exhaustion was not observed, but long-term Notch blockade
at adult stage was not conducted beyond 7 days (Alunni et al.,
2013). One transcription factor functionally interacting with
Notch signaling is Fezf2 (Fez family Zinc Finger 2), which is
expressed at high levels in quiescent NSCs in the zebraﬁsh adult
pallium and mouse SGZ (Berberoglu et al., 2014). In zebraﬁsh,
fezf2 expression correlates with the nuclear localization of NICD
and with high expression level of the Notch target her4, and is
necessary for quiescence (Berberoglu et al., 2014).
Other Quiescence Promoting Pathways Are Highly
Conserved Between Rodents and Zebraﬁsh
Another important pathway for NSC quiescence is BMP (bone
morphogenic protein) signaling. NSCs express components of
the BMP pathway like Smads, BMPR I and II (Lim et al.,
2000; Bonaguidi et al., 2008; Mira et al., 2010). Overexpressing
BMP ligands leads to a decrease in NSC proliferation and
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
14
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
TABLE 3 | Quiescence promoting factors.
Quiescence
promoting factor
Model
Method
References
Notch (in general)
Mouse SGZ
Conditional knockout of RBPJk in Glast-expressing NSCs enhances neurogenesis (quiescence
exit) and leads to NSC depletion 2 months after induction
Ehm et al., 2010
Mouse SEZ
Conditional knockout of RBPJk in Nes-expressing NSCs enhances neurogenesis (quiescence
exit) and leads to NSC depletion 3 months later
Imayoshi et al.,
2010
Notch3
Adult zebraﬁsh
pallium
Pharmacological blockade of gamma-secretase (Notch signaling pathway), notch3 mutant and
notch3 MO show that Notch3 maintains quiescence
Alunni et al., 2013
Mouse SEZ
Notch3-null mice and knockdown in adult with lentiviral expressing shRNA targeting Notch3
drive quiescence exit of NSCs, especially in the lateral and ventral wall
Kawai et al., 2017
Notch2
Mouse SEZ
Conditional knockout of Notch2 in Hes5-expressing NSCs and short-term lineage tracing of
Notch2-expressing cells shows that Notch2 maintains NSCs in quiescence, as loss of function
leads to quiescence exit, increased neurogenesis and accelerated NSC exhaustion
Engler et al., 2018
Mouse SGZ
Conditional knockout of Notch2 in Hes5-expressing NSCs leads to proliferation of NSCs and
increased neurogenesis
Zhang et al., 2019
Dll1
Mouse SEZ
Conditional knockout of Dll1 in Nes-expressing NSCs leads to quiescence exit (feedback to
activate Notch in quiescent cells is not ensured anymore)
Kawaguchi et al.,
2013
Jagged1
Mouse SGZ
Conditional knockout of Jagged1 in Nes-expressing NSCs leads to quiescence exit, implying
that the interaction between Jagged1 and Notch is important for NSC quiescence and
maintenance
Lavado and Oliver,
2014
Fezf2
Adult zebraﬁsh
pallium
Vivo-morpholino against fezf2 (short-term knock-down) leads to quiescence exit and increased
proliferation
Berberoglu et al.,
2014
Bone morphogenic
proteins
Mouse SEZ
BMP7 overexpression (virus-mediated) and Noggin expression (through protein puriﬁcation or
virus-mediated) show that expression of BMP maintains quiescence in type B cells/NSCs and
therefore inhibits neurogenesis. It promotes the survival of type A progenitors
Lim et al., 2000
Mouse SGZ
Blocking BMP through Noggin leads to reactivation and expansion of the NSC pool, suggesting
that BMP is involved in quiescence control
Bonaguidi et al.,
2008
Mouse SGZ
Intracerebral infusion of Noggin, lentivirus-mediated ablation of BMPR-1A and conditional
knockout of Smad4 in Glast-expressing NSCs lead to quiescence exit, increased proliferation
and exhaustion
Mira et al., 2010
NSCs derived from
ESCs
NSC culture can be pushed to quiescence by adding BMP4 in 24 h
Martynoga et al.,
2013
Inhibitors of DNA
binding
Mouse SGZ
Conditional knockout of Id4 in Glast-expressing NSCs leads to increased ASCL1 expression
and reactivation of previously quiescent NSCs
Blomﬁeld et al.,
2019
Mouse SGZ
Conditional knockout of Id4 in Gfap-expressing cells using adeno-gfap::Cre viruses leads to
NSC activation and cell-cycle entry without inducing neurogenesis
Zhang et al., 2019
NFIX
NSC culture
derived from
Mouse ESCs
Knockdown in vitro leads to impaired quiescence
Martynoga et al.,
2013
Mouse
NFIX-/- knockout: lethal at 3 weeks. Proportion of cycling NSCs is increased in the mutant.
Martynoga et al.,
2013
Forkhead box O3
Mouse SEZ and
SGZ
Conditional knockout of FOXO1,3,4 in Gfap-expressing cells: decline of NSC pool and
neurogenesis.
Paik et al., 2009
Neurospheres from
NSC culture
Neurospheres from FOXO3-/- versus FOXO3+/+, genome-wide microarray analysis: FoxO3
induces a program to preserve quiescence
Renault et al., 2009
Mouse SEZ and
SGZ
FOXO3-/-: reduced number of NSCs in vivo (NSCs got activated and lost)
Renault et al., 2009
Adult mouse
primary NSC
culture
ChIP: FOXO3 binds proneural genes that are also targeted by Ascl1 possibly as a competitor to
repress their expression and maintain NSC identity
Webb et al., 2013
Mouse SGZ
Conditional knockout of FoxO1,3,4 in Glast-expressing NSCs: leads to quiescence exit,
increased proliferation followed by loss of NSC number
Schäffner et al.,
2018
Mouse SEZ
FoxO3-/- knockout results in quiescence exit and increased neurogenesis
Webb et al., 2013
miR-9
Zebraﬁsh pallium
Vivo-MO targeting mature miR-9 leads to reactivation of previously quiescent mir-9+ NSCs.
Katz et al., 2016
Gaba
Mouse postnatal
SEZ, acute slices
GABAA-R-antagonist bicuculline leads to increase of proliferation in GFAP+ cells
Liu et al., 2005
SGZ adult
Clonal analysis after cKO of gamma2-subunit-containing GABAA receptor in Nes-expressing
NSCs – > quiescence exit and symmetrical self-renewal
Song et al., 2012
SGZ adult
Pharmacological inhibition – > increase of NSC proliferation Genetic deletion of GABAB1
(homozygous mutant) – > increase of NSC proliferation (Sox2+ cells) and differentiation to
neuroblasts. Later loss of progenitors and increased neurogenesis
Giachino and
Taylor, 2014
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
15
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
diﬀerentiation, while overexpression of the BMP inhibitor
Noggin leads to increased proliferation and neurogenesis in
the SGZ, the SEZ and in vitro (Lim et al., 2000; Bonaguidi
et al., 2008; Martynoga et al., 2013). Targets of the BMP
pathway include ID transcription factors (“Inhibitor of DNA
binding/diﬀerentiation”), which are also targeted by the Notch
pathway. IDs are strongly expressed in zebraﬁsh adult pallial
NSCs, and recent work shows that BMP positively controls id1
expression through conserved enhancers in the adult zebraﬁsh
brain (Zhang et al., 2020). In zebraﬁsh, id1 expression is
speciﬁc of quiescent NSCs, and is necessary and suﬃcient
for quiescence (Diotel et al., 2015; Rodriguez-Viales et al.,
2015). In response to injury, id1 is upregulated. It may play
a role in maintaining the NSC pool through stabilizing its
interactor proteins such as the Her factors Her4 or Her6,
also expressed in adult pallial NSCs (Rodriguez-Viales et al.,
2015). In mouse NSCs, Id interacts with and stabilizes Hes1,
the mammalian ortholog of zebraﬁsh Her6. Hes1 represses the
transcription factor Ascl1 (Bai et al., 2007), which itself normally
promotes NSC activation (Andersen et al., 2014; Sueda et al.,
2019). Id4 does not aﬀect Ascl1 transcription, but binds the
normal Ascl1 stabilizing partner E47, leading to Ascl1 clearing
(Blomﬁeld et al., 2019).
Finally, the miR-9 quiescence-promoting factor initially
identiﬁed in adult zebraﬁsh pallial NSCs (see above) (Katz
et al., 2016) is also conserved in mouse, as well as its striking
sub-cellular localization: in both species, miR-9 is nuclear in
NSCs transiting through a deep quiescence sub-state. Further,
primary NSCs in culture derived from the SGZ and pushed
toward quiescence through BMP relocalize miR-9 to the cell
nucleus (Katz et al., 2016). The targets of miR-9 in quiescence
control remain unknown.
Overall,
a
tentative
quiescence
cycle
is
presented
in
Figure 5B, indicating the transient-sub-states (miR-9-positive,
Ascl1-positive, Notch-insensitive) that NSCs transit through.
Activating Factors Are Also Shared Between Rodents
and Zebraﬁsh
A key promoter of NSC activation, mentioned above, is Ascl1
(achete and scute homolog 1), which directly upregulates
the expression of cell cycle genes (Castro et al., 2011;
Andersen et al., 2014). Ascl1 is expressed in all activated NSCs
and some neural progenitors in the mouse SEZ and SGZ.
Conditional loss of function experiments showed that Ascl1-
negative NSCs neither proliferate nor diﬀerentiate (Andersen
et al., 2014). Ascl1 is transcribed in some quiescent NSCs
(Blomﬁeld et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019), but its expression
and activity are repressed during quiescence by Id4 and the
Notch target Hes1, which is expressed at high level with
moderate oscillation amplitude (Sueda et al., 2019). How
high Ascl1 expression levels become induced to drive NSC
activation remains to be uncovered. Lower and oscillating
levels of Hes1 expression preceding NSC activation can lead
to Ascl1 oscillations, themselves driving NSC activation (Sueda
et al., 2019). Then, following NSC division, the ubiquitin
ligase HUWE1 degrades Ascl1 thus enabling the cell to re-
enter quiescence (Urbán et al., 2016). In zebraﬁsh, ascl1a is
expressed in activated NSCs (Than-Trong et al., 2018), but its
function remains to be studied. Further to this transcription
factor, growth factors are also activating factors in NSCs.
In the mouse brain, intracerebroventricular infusions of the
ﬁbroblast growth factor FGF2 lead to increased proliferation
and neurogenesis (Rai et al., 2007). Accordingly, conditional
knock-out of FgfR1 in Nestin-expressing NSCs in the SGZ
impairs proliferation and neurogenesis (Zhao et al., 2007).
In the zebraﬁsh brain, fgfr1-4 are expressed in the dorsal
telencephalon. Whereas heat shock-induced expression of
dominant negative forms of FGFR1 does not alter NSC
activation, the overexpression of FGF8a results in strong
proliferation (Topp et al., 2008; Ganz et al., 2010). fgf8a
expression is restricted to the ventral telencephalon, but fgf8b,
strongly expressed in the pallium (Topp et al., 2008), may
play the same role.
STEMNESS-RELATED NEURAL STEM
CELL FATE CHOICES
Decisions taken by NSCs along their life include whether to
activate (or remain quiescent) but also whether to maintain (or
lose) their stemness (Box 1). We will refer to “stemness-related
NSC fate choices” the checkpoints when a NSC decides to remain
stem or to commit toward expression of the genetic program
reﬂective of another cell type.
NSC Potency: Do NSC Fates Differ
Between Zebraﬁsh and Mouse?
In the SEZ, the diﬀerentiation potential of individual NSCs is
limited to speciﬁc neuronal subtypes based on their regional
localization (Merkle et al., 2007; Merkle et al., 2014; Chaker et al.,
2016; Mizrak et al., 2019). However, fate mapping experiments
conﬁrmed that even if most NSCs produce neurons, few NSCs
produce oligodendrocytes (Menn et al., 2006) or astrocytes
(Sohn et al., 2015). Still, the capacity for a single NSC to
produce the 3 lineages in vivo at adult stage remains unclear
(but see Levison and Goldman, 1993 for the neonate). In vitro,
clonal cultures of primary NSCs are able to generate neurons
and oligodendrocytes (Menn et al., 2006) but continuous live-
imaging of dividing NSCs revealed their commitment toward
oligodendrogenic or neurogenic lineages only (Ortega et al.,
2013). Also, ependymal cells were not described to originate
from NSCs under physiological conditions (Spassky et al.,
2005; Shah et al., 2018). NSCs of the SGZ most probably
possess a heterogenous range of self-renewal and fate potential
(Bonaguidi et al., 2012). Compared to the SEZ, clearer examples
of multipotent NSCs were unraveled by careful analysis of
lineage tracing outputs and notably of clones of 3–4 cells,
showing that an individual NSC can self-renew and give rise
to neurons and astrocytes (Bonaguidi et al., 2011; Encinas
et al., 2011). While they do not give rise to oligodendrocytes
physiologically, they can do so under conditions of demyelination
or following the functional abrogation of inhibitory transcription
factors (Nait-Oumesmar et al., 1999; Xing et al., 2014;
Harris et al., 2018).
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
16
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
The situation in the adult zebraﬁsh pallium is inherently
diﬀerent, as there are no “specialized” NSCs given that, as
mentioned, RG cells also serve the function of parenchymal
astrocytes.
Thus,
stemness
maintenance
includes
the
maintenance of astrocytic function (the reverse not being
true, as stemness can be lost while astroglial characteristics
are maintained; Than-Trong et al., 2018). At present, adult
pallial NSCs are viewed as bipotent, able to self-renew
and to generate neurons (Adolf et al., 2006; Grandel et al.,
2006; Kroehne et al., 2011; Than-Trong et al., 2020). Little
is known about neuronal subtypes in the dorsal pallium
and it remains unexplored if speciﬁc NSC pools give rise
to neuronal subtypes (like in the SEZ). The dorsal pallium
is deprived of ependymal cells, but hosts an Olig2-positive
population of oligodendrocytes. No clear lineage relationship
has been made between oligodendrocytes and NSCs. The
Olig2-positive
population
of
cells
is
heterogeneous
and
located mostly in the parenchyma -although some cells can
be found close to the ventricular surface-, comprising mature
oligodendrocytes, slow proliferating oligodendrocyte progenitors
(OPCs), proliferating OPCs, quiescent OPCs and radial glia-
like cells (März et al., 2010b). These observations suggest
that oligodendrocytes are produced within the parenchyma
from OPCs. A recent publication based on scRNAseq argues
that her4.1-positive NSCs express olig2 at very low level,
suggesting nascent NSC progeny diﬀerentiating toward OPCs
(Lange et al., 2020). Likewise, pseudo-lineages inferred from
scRNAseq in the mouse SEZ reveal a molecular connection
between NSCs and oligodendrocytes (Mizrak et al., 2019).
This hypothesis needs to be carefully tested with a lineage
tracing approach.
These observations together suggest potential diﬀerences
between the panel of fates endogenously taken by SEZ,
SGZ,
and
pallial
NSCs
between
mouse
and
zebraﬁsh.
Hence,
stemness-related
fate
choices
are
complex
and
not limited to remaining or not stem, but may include
the
choice
of
a
particular
fate.
These
diﬀerences
may
reﬂect a diﬀerent potential, or the presence of diﬀerent
contextual cues.
Stemness-Related Fate Choices in
Zebraﬁsh Pallial NSCs Can Be Taken in
the Quiescent or Activated States
Direct Neuronal Differentiation Is a Frequent Adult
NSC Fate in Zebraﬁsh
Both the quiescent and activated NSC states harbor potential
windows where stemness can be maintained or altered.
In the zebraﬁsh adult pallium, the generation of neurons
directly from quiescent NSCs has been suggested based on
intravital imaging methods where NSCs were observed to
diﬀerentiate after over 6–20 days without division (Barbosa
et al., 2015b; Than-Trong et al., 2020). Thus, stemness needs
to be actively promoted even during quiescence. Some eﬀectors
of NSC stemness maintenance have been identiﬁed in mice
(Ars2 and Sox2) (Andreu-Agulló et al., 2009; Baser et al.,
2019) and in zebraﬁsh (Hey1) (Than-Trong et al., 2018).
Interestingly, the depletion of their function in quiescent NSCs
leads to a non-stem RG (GS+; Sox2−) fate suggesting that
direct neuronal diﬀerentiation further requires active neuronal
commitment cues.
The Mechanisms Driving NSC Fate Choices at
Division Remain Poorly Understood
Adult zebraﬁsh pallial NSCs can take several fates at division and
generate two NSCs, one NSC and one aNP, or two aNPs. Models
of clonal dynamics are compatible with stochastic decisions
under physiological conditions (Than-Trong et al., 2020).
Following a mechanical lesion, which leads to enhanced NSC
recruitment for neuronal regeneration, a bias toward neurogenic
consuming divisions (generating two aNPs) was observed
(Barbosa et al., 2015b). In contrast, upon pharmacological Notch
blockade, enhanced NSC recruitment is accompanied by a bias
toward amplifying divisions (generating two aNSCs). It remains
largely unknown how these decisions are taken.
Examples of all three division modes were also directly
observed in mouse in vivo by clonal analysis of small clones
(Bonaguidi et al., 2011; Encinas et al., 2011; Song et al., 2012;
Calzolari et al., 2015; Basak et al., 2018; Obernier et al., 2018) or
by live-imaging (Pilz et al., 2018). In both NSC niches, the choice
for a given division mode seems to vary in part depending on
the driver line used to follow NSCs, and the discrepancies may
reﬂect experimental designs. Still, this observation would argue
for the existence of NSC signatures highlighting speciﬁc modes
of division (Figure 7).
Key studies in embryonic neural progenitors, including
in zebraﬁsh, pointed to several mechanisms controlling or
biasing daughter cell fate at division. These notably include
cell cycle dynamics such as the length of G1 or S phases
(Calegari and Huttner, 2003; Huttner and Kosodo, 2005;
Chen et al., 2015; Turrero García et al., 2016), asymmetrical
inheritance of cellular components at division (Knoblich,
2008; Kressmann et al., 2015; Tozer et al., 2017; Lukaszewicz
et al., 2019; Taverna and Huttner, 2019), and intra-lineage
or niche-mediated bias in Notch signaling (Dong et al.,
2012). Corresponding data in adult NSCs are sparse and
were generally obtained in vitro, in mouse. For example, in
cultured adult SGZ NSCs, G1 lengthening (through CDK4
inhibition) pushes NSCs toward diﬀerentiation (Roccio et al.,
2013). Speculatively, basal process inheritance could be a fate
determinant, as suggested by ex vivo SEZ cultures analyzed
with live imaging (Obernier et al., 2018). Cultures of individual
NSCs from the SEZ also showed asymmetric molecular
segregations
or
activations.
Speciﬁcally,
the
asymmetric
segregation of the Dual-speciﬁcity tyrosine-phosphorylated
and regulated kinase Dyrk1A at NSC division stabilizes
EGFR and Notch signaling, biasing daughter cell fate (Ferron
et al., 2010). Overexpressed Delta1-eGFP fusion protein also
distributes asymmetrically upon NSC division, and marks
the daughter cell fated to neuronal commitment (Kawaguchi
et al., 2013). Finally, PEDF signaling from the niche can
locally activate Notch in one NSC daughter (Ramírez-Castillejo
et al., 2006; Andreu-Agulló et al., 2009). Parallels to these
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
17
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
FIGURE 7 | Schematic summary of division modes directly observed in adult mouse telencephalic neurogenic niches and in the zebraﬁsh adult pallium in vivo. To
evidence with certainty the existence of each division mode, we listed on the left part of the ﬁgure the clonal lineage tracing and live-imaging analyses only. For all the
clonal analysis, we also only focused on 2–3-cell clones data at various time of induction/chase. Arrow depict the path leading individual NSC toward a cell fate
decision (symmetrical self-renewing division, asymmetrical self-renewing division, symmetrical differentiating division or direct differentiation, illustrated on the right
part of the ﬁgure). In the zebraﬁsh pallium (gray NSCs), the mouse SEZ (purple NSCs), and the mouse SGZ (green NSCs), the three modes of division were
evidenced. Direct neuronal differentiation was observed in the zebraﬁsh adult pallium and mouse SEZ. In the SEZ, Gfap+ and Troy+ NSCs are able to symmetrically
self-renew, symmetrically differentiate and asymmetrically divide whereas Glast+ NSCs were only described to asymmetrically divide. In the SGZ, Nestin+ and Ascl1+
NSCs can symmetrically self-renew, symmetrically differentiate and asymmetrically divide although Gli+ NSCs were only observed to asymmetrically divide and
Hopx+ NScs to symmetrically self-renew and asymmetrically divide. Numbers refer to publications (see reference list).
pioneer mechanistic works are currently lacking in vivo,
and in zebraﬁsh.
Stemness-related fate choices are key determinants of NSC
population homeostasis, i.e., to the maintenance of a constant
number of NSCs over time. Two mechanisms can in theory
account for such homeostasis: invariant asymmetric cell fate,
and “population asymmetry” (a combination of individual
stochastic fate choices, balanced at the population level)
(Simons and Clevers, 2011; Blanpain and Simons, 2013).
In the mouse brain, NSC dynamics remains controversial
(Table 4). As mentioned above, the privileged morphology of
the zebraﬁsh pallial germinal zone made it possible to combine
complementary approaches and extract a uniﬁed model of adult
NSC dynamics (Figure 4C). This resolved discrepancies between
works describing an expansion (Rothenaigner et al., 2011) or a
consumption (Barbosa et al., 2015b) of the NSC population.
The current model (Than-Trong et al., 2020) includes both
expansion and consumption but attributes these behaviors
to distinct subpopulations of NSCs, and to stochastic fate
choices.
Further,
it
shows
for
the
ﬁrst
time
that
both
invariant asymmetric stem cell fate and population asymmetry
can co-exist in an assembly of subpopulations hierarchically
organized to account for NSC maintenance and physiological
neuronal output.
This study raises key questions pertaining to stemness-related
fate choices. First, given the relatively uniform generation of
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
18
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
TABLE 4 | NSC population dynamics assessed by long-term lineage tracing and clonal analysis in mouse.
NSC niche
Methods
Chase time
Self-renewal
capacity
Population
dynamics
Population
dynamic
mechanism
References
SGZ
Nestin:CreERT2
lineage tracing +
BrdU labeling
Up to 30 days
Limited
Progressive
consumption of the
NSC pool (the
corresponding
interpretation is
hence referred to
as the “disposable
stem-cell model”)
ND
Balordi and Fishell,
2007; Encinas
et al., 2011
SGZ
Nestin:CreERT2
lineage tracing
Up to 1 year
Substantial
Maintenance of
NSCs in clones
over a year
ND
Balordi and Fishell,
2007; Bonaguidi
et al., 2011
SGZ
Ascl1:CreRT2 +
live-imaging
(chronic imaging
through a window
in the overlying
cortex)
Up to 2 months
Limited
Progressive
consumption of the
NSC pool, no
return to
quiescence upon
activation.
Compatible with
the disposable
stem-cell model
ND
Pilz et al., 2018
SGZ
Hopx:CreERT2
Up to 12 months
substantial
Quiescent NSCs
biased toward
neurogenic fates
once activated
ND
Berg et al., 2019
SEZ
Glast:CreERT2 +
confetti reporter
mice
4–6 months
Limited
Progressive
consumption of the
NSC pool with a
speciﬁc sequence
of divisions: few
rounds of
asymmetric
self-renewing
divisions symmetric
differentiating
division
Population
asymmetry to
maintain neuronal
production at the
expense of the
NSC pool
Calzolari et al.,
2015
SEZ
Replication-
incompetent avian
RCAS-GFP
retrovirus injected
into hGFAP:Tva
mice
Up to 4 weeks
Limited
Progressive
consumption of the
NSC pool: 20% of
symmetric
self-renewing
divisions (with
return to long-term
quiescence), 80%
of symmetric
differentiating
divisions, no
asymmetric
divisions
Population
asymmetry
paradigm to
balance
self-renewal and
differentiation of
NSCs at the
population level
Obernier et al.,
2018
SEZ
Troy: GFPiresCreER
and Ki67:
GFPiresCreER
lineage tracing
Up to 8 months
Substantial
self-renewal
capacity
NSC fates are
chosen
stochastically with
probabilities
inversely correlated
with the number of
surrounding NSCs
Population
asymmetry driven
by sensing niche
occupancy
Basak et al., 2018
neurons across the germinal zone surface and uniform expansion
of the NSC population itself, it suggests that NSCs of the diﬀerent
sub-populations are interspersed, neighboring each other across
the germinal sheet. This would argue against these diﬀerent
behaviors being controlled exclusively by diﬀerent extrinsic
local cues (such as diﬀerent local niches), and rather stress
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
19
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

Labusch et al.
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
the existence of intrinsic control mechanisms encoding one
or the other asymmetry behavior. Second, it now pushes to
search for molecular signatures of these heterogeneities. In the
zebraﬁsh pallium and in the mouse SEZ, it has long been
emphasized that NSCs form a very heterogeneous population
(Kriegstein and Götz, 2003; März et al., 2010a; Chaker et al.,
2016). In the mouse brain and with the recent explosion
of scRNA sequencing data, detailed NSC heterogeneities and
clusters start to be described (Llorens-Bobadilla et al., 2015;
Dulken et al., 2017; Mizrak et al., 2019). The signiﬁcance and
the role of NSC heterogeneities for NSC cell fate choice is
not understood, and it will be important to try and overlap
this information to transcriptionally identify the distinct NSC
pools and directly track their relative contribution to NSC
population homeostasis.
PHYSIOLOGICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL
MODULATIONS OF ZEBRAFISH ADULT
NEUROGENESIS
Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh
Responds to and Relays Environmental
and Systemic Stimuli
Sensory Stimuli, Nutrition, and Stress Exert Parallel
Effects on Adult Neurogenesis in Zebraﬁsh and
Rodents
Environmental and systemic factors play an extensive role in
modulating neurogenesis. For example, odorant stimuli can be
integrated to tune neurogenic output from the SEZ niche in mice.
Indeed, there are more newborn neurons in the OB, but not in the
hippocampus, of mice reared in an odor-enriched environment
(Rochefort et al., 2002), without an increase in proliferation in
the SEZ. This suggests that simple sensory stimulation of adult
neurogenesis is niche-speciﬁc and, in the case of this example,
relies on an increase in newborn neuron survival. In teleosts,
several neurogenic niches are in regions involved in sensory
processing. Among them, the vagal lobe involved in gustation
and the olfactory bulb get new neurons from RG NSCs, whereas
the caudal periventricular gray zone of the optic tectum and the
torus longitudinalis, both involved in visual processing, receive
theirs from NE stem cells (Alunni et al., 2010; Sato et al., 2017).
Presenting ﬁsh with stimuli processed in one of these niches
leads to an increase in newborn neurons only in the respective
niche and this increase is mediated diﬀerently in RG and NE
niches: in NE niches, increased neurogenesis relies on an increase
in proliferation, while in RG niches it involves an increase in
newborn neurons survival (Lindsey et al., 2014), similarly, to OB
neurogenesis in mice (Figure 8A).
Nutritional factors also aﬀect rates of neurogenesis in both
rodents and zebraﬁsh. Because most experiments involving
individual foods were conducted only in mice, we focus here on
experimental schemes investigating the eﬀect of global changes
of diet on neurogenesis. A high-fat diet and hyperglycemia have
generally been linked to decreased hippocampal neurogenesis in
rats and mice (Dorsemans et al., 2017a). Similarly, chronic high
caloric intake and hyperglycemia lead to diminished proliferation
in the forebrain neurogenic niches in zebraﬁsh (Dorsemans
et al., 2017b). On the other hand, caloric restriction through
intermittent fasting increases the number of BrdU-positive cells
after a 4-week chase in the hippocampus. However, equivalent
schemes have not been worked out so far in zebraﬁsh, while
a global caloric restriction is generally assumed to lead to a
decrease in proliferation. An important confounding factor is
that the adult zebraﬁsh body and brain keep on growing (Than-
Trong et al., 2020), that brain growth notably occurs through
the addition of neurons by NSCs, and that this growth is
dependent on the quantity of food they receive. This makes it
much harder in zebraﬁsh than in rodents to ascertain whether
changes in proliferation rates of NSCs are due to a speciﬁc
regulation of NSC behavior or dictated by organism growth
when these changes go in the same direction. Therefore, while
the zebraﬁsh can be used to investigate metabolic control of
neurogenesis due to conservation of physiological responses to
metabolic imbalances (Craig and Moon, 2011), there is still a need
to work out experimental conditions before using it as a model for
interventions that can interfere with its growth.
Finally,
factors
inﬂuencing
emotional
states
also
have
consequences on neurogenesis. In particular, chronic high
stress induced by social isolation decreases proliferation in the
hippocampus of mice (Ibi et al., 2008) and non-human primates
(Cinini et al., 2014) as well as in the forebrain of zebraﬁsh
(Tea et al., 2019).
These results together illustrate that adult neurogenesis in
zebraﬁsh is sensitive to environmental cues. Whether and
how newly generated neurons relay some important measure
of these stimuli, or convey some physiological response,
remains to be shown.
Hormonal Regulation of Zebraﬁsh Adult
Neurogenesis
The environmental cues discussed above can be relayed to NSCs
or adult newborn neurons via the activity of neurons contacting
germinal zones. In many cases, however, they are also mediated
by hormones. Among them, steroid hormones have been the
subject of much focus. Glucocorticoids are elevated in response to
stress as well as under high-fat, high-sugar and hyper caloric diets,
and appear to be the cause of the reduced neurogenesis in these
cases. Of note, in many species including amphibians, rodents
and birds, the main glucocorticoid is corticosterone whereas in
humans and teleost ﬁsh the main glucocorticoid is cortisol (which
diﬀers from corticosterone by the presence of one additional
hydroxyl group), making zebraﬁsh a particularly attractive model
to study the eﬀects of glucocorticoids on adult neurogenesis.
Sex steroids and in particular estrogens have also been
extensively
studied
for
their
role
in
modulating
adult
neurogenesis. In the end, the nature of their involvement
seems to not be conserved between species, even among
rodents (Tanapat et al., 1999, 2005; Ormerod and Galea,
2001; Ormerod et al., 2003; Brock et al., 2010). In zebraﬁsh,
experimentally increasing estradiol levels decreases proliferation
in the subpallium and some pallial subdivisions (Dl but not
Dm) (Diotel et al., 2013; Makantasi and Dermon, 2014). An
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
20
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 525

===== LaManno2020_bioRxiv_MouseBrainAtlas =====
RESOURCE
The brain emerges from the primitive ectoderm as a 
sheet of neuroepithelial cells which folds into the neural 
tube during neurulation1. The developing nervous 
system is unique for the length of the developmental 
window, the extent of the interplay between different 
anatomical regions and lineages, and the diversity of 
cell types generated. Therefore, the ability of single-cell 
RNA-seq to disentangle the molecular heterogeneity of 
a complex cell pool has been particularly useful to study 
nervous system development2–10. Recent studies have 
shed light on the developing telencephalon5,11, the hip­
pocampus9,12,13, the developing ventral midbrain14–16, the 
developing spinal cord and cerebellum17,18, and the hy­
pothalamic arcuate nucleus and diencephalon19,20. Sin­
gle-cell RNA-seq has elucidated the differences between 
embryonic, postnatal and adult neural progenitors9,21,22, 
and compared normal glial progenitors with their 
malignant counterparts23,24. 
To map mouse brain development in detail, we 
collected embryonic brain tissue from 43 pregnant 
CD-1 mice, sampling each day from E7 to E18 (Extended 
Data Figure 1a-b, Table S1). We prepared 105 samples 
by droplet-based single-cell RNA sequencing. After 
removing low-quality cells and doublets (Methods), 
96 samples remained with a mean of 5 766 transcripts 
(unique molecular identifiers, UMIs) and 1 934 genes 
detected per cell (Extended Data Figure 1c-f). The 
total cellular RNA content dropped as a function of 
embryonic age in all lineages, and then increased again 
in the most mature neurons (Extended Data Figure 
1e-f and Extended Data Figure 2c-d). Erythrocytes 
segregated into primitive and definitive erythropoie­
sis and showed exceptionally high UMI counts but low 
gene counts (Extended Data Figure 2a). A transcription­
al signature of cell-cycle activation (Methods) showed a 
clear bimodal pattern where 32% of all cells were cycling 
(>1% cell-cycle gene UMIs; Figure 1 and Extended Data 
Figure 2b). Immature cells from young embryos were 
generally proliferating, whereas more mature cells from 
older embryos had stopped dividing. Postmitotic cells 
expressed a larger proportion of nascent (unspliced) 
RNA relative to mature (spliced) RNA (Extended Data 
Figure 2e), likely due to the induction of lineage-specif­
ic genes when cells began their maturation programs.
A tSNE embedding of the dataset (Figure 1) 
revealed that cells were organized primarily by gesta­
tional age, branching to show the major lineages orig­
inating from the neuroepithelium. A large connected 
component — representing the neural tube and its de­
rivatives — was surrounded by disconnected islets of 
microglia, erythrocytes, and vascular cells, none of 
which are derived from the neuroepithelium. From 
E7 the embryo split into clusters corresponding to the 
three germ layers, then formed the early neural tube. 
By E8-10, the neural crest had formed and from E10 
to E16 differentiated into the VLMC (vascular and lep­
Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
Gioele La Manno1,2,*, Kimberly Siletti1,*, Alessandro Furlan1,3, Daniel Gyllborg4, Elin Vinsland1, Christoffer Mattsson Langseth4, 
Irina Khven2, Anna Johnsson1, Mats Nilsson4, Peter Lönnerberg1 & Sten Linnarsson1.
1Division of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, S-17177 Stockholm, Sweden. 2Brain Mind 
Institute, School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. 3Present address: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, One 
Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA. 4Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Stockholm University, 17165 
Solna, Sweden. *Equal contribution.
The mammalian brain develops through a complex interplay of spatial cues generated 
by diffusible morphogens, cell-cell interactions, and intrinsic genetic programs that 
result in the generation of likely more than a thousand distinct cell types. Therefore, 
a complete understanding of mammalian brain development requires systematic 
mapping of cell states covering the entire relevant spatiotemporal range. Here we 
report a comprehensive single-cell transcriptome atlas of mouse brain development 
spanning from gastrulation to birth. We identified almost a thousand distinct cellular 
states, including the initial emergence of the neuroepithelium, a rich set of region-spe­
cific secondary organizers and a complete developmental program for the functional 
elements of the brain and its enclosing membranes. We used the atlas to directly test 
the hypothesis that human glioblastoma reflects a return to a developmental cell state. 
In agreement, most aneuploid tumor cells matched embryonic rather than adult types, 
while karyotypically normal cells predominantly matched adult immune cell types. 
Correspondence to: 
G.L. ( gioele.lamanno@epfl.ch / 
 @GioeleLaManno / gioelelamanno.com) 
S.L. ( sten.linnarsson@ki.se / 
 @slinnarsson / linnarssonlab.org)
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

2
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
tomeningeal cells25, also known as brain fibroblast-like 
cells26) lineage which proceeded to form the two layers 
of the meninges, pia and arachnoid27. The early neural 
tube then matured into proliferating radial glia, the 
precursors of all neural cells. Two large cohorts of 
neurons branched from the neural tube, one comprising 
forebrain excitatory neurons, and one containing all 
other neuronal types. The clear separation of forebrain 
excitatory neurons agrees with our previous findings 
in the adult mouse brain22, indicating the strong tran­
scriptional and functional specialization of those cell 
types. After about E14, radial glia gradually lost pro­
liferative capacity and switched to a glioblast state that 
eventually gave rise to astrocytes, ependymal cells and 
oligodendrocyte precursor cells. The orderly progres­
sion of successive waves of cell types reveal the coordi­
nated temporal development of the mammalian brain 
(Extended Data Figure 2f).
Focusing first on the late gastrulation and early neuru­
lation stages, we extracted E7-E8 cells from our dataset 
(Figure 2a-b) and divided the population into three 
parts (Figure 2b-c): primitive streak-stage cells (Pou5f1 
Cortic
al pyr
amida
l          
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
          
              
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
      Fo
rebrai
n GAB
Aergic
           
           
           
      Ce
rebell
um     
           
           
       
  Mid-
/hind
brain 
neuro
blasts
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
  Vasc
ular    
           
           
 
 Fibro
blasts
           
           
           
           
  Neu
roepit
heliu
m        
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
          
            M
icrogl
ia       
           
     
OPCs
           
  Sch
wann 
           
           
           
           
  Radi
al glia
     
           
           
           
           
        G
liobla
st        
           
           
           
           
           
     Ep
endy
mal     
           
           
     Per
ipher
al
E7-8
E8-10
E8-10
E10-12
E8-12
E12-16
E16-18
E12-14
E16-18
E14-16
E10-12
E12-14
E12-14
E16-18
E14-16
E14-16
E16-18
E16-18
E14-16
E16-18
N
 
E
 
U
 
R
 
O
 
N 
S
N
e
ur
oepit
h
e
liu
m
R
 
A
 
D
 
I
 
A
 
L  
G
 
L
 i
 A
VLMCs
ERYTHROID
VASCULAR
MICRO-
GLIA
CHOROID
ENDO-
DERM
TROPH-
ECTODERM
EMBRYONIC
STEM
Cells
ECTO-
DERM
NEURAL
CREST
GLIO-
BLAST
MESO-
DERM
Astrocytes
OPCs
Schwann
Ependymal
Forebrain
excitatory
Arachnoid
Pia
Forebrain
GABAergic
Pericyte
Endothelial
Node
VSM
Cajal-
Retzius
Cerebellum
Primitive
Deﬁnitive
942 clusters
292,495 cells
Age
Ε6
Ε10
Ε14
E18
Markers
Cell cycle score
2%
1%
0
Gad2
Alas2
Cldn5
Nanog
Lum
Aif1
Aqp4
Pax6
Foxj1
Foxj1
Foxj1
Sox10
Slc17a6
Slc17a7
Head
Forebrain
Midbrain
Hindbrain
Region
Cluster size
Markers
Region
Age
Cell cycle
Class
Figure 1 | Atlas of the developing mouse nervous system. All 292,495 high-quality cells are shown using a tSNE embedding (center) 
colored by major classes as indicated in brown capital lettering. Dashed curves show approximate regions of gestational pseudoage 
intervals. The four corner insets show the dissected region (upper left), the expression of key marker genes (upper right), the cell-cycle 
score (lower right) and the pseudoage (lower left; defined as the average gestational age of a cell and its 25 nearest neighbors). The sur­
rounding radial dendrogram shows all 942 clusters. The dendrogram was cut for clarity into 25 major categories of cells as indicated 
by gaps. Grey bars indicate cluster size (number of cells), and four colored tracks indicate class (colored as the central tSNE), region, 
pseudoage, cell cycle and marker gene expression (each colored as the corner tSNEs). 
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

3
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
and T, ref. 28); non-neural lineage-restricted progenitor 
cells (Foxa2 and Krt8, refs. 29,30); and early neuroepi­
thelial cells (Pax6 and Hes3, refs. 31,32). Aligning our 
dataset to a previously described single-cell atlas of gas­
trulation (Figure 2d-f, ref. 33) confirmed that our data 
captured a continuous set of cell states from gastrula­
tion and neurulation (Figure 2e) but revealed a greater 
heterogeneity of states than previously reported (Figure 
2f).
Among neural cells we identified fourteen pop­
ulations: twelve neuroepithelial clusters expressing 
Fez1, Sox3, Pax6, and Pdzph134, one neuromesodermal 
progenitor cluster expressing Cdx4, Cdx1 and a set of 
caudal Hox genes35,36 and a population of early neu­
roblasts expressing Nhlh1 and Nhlh237 (Figure 2g-i). 
The twelve neuroepithelial populations comparably 
expressed a set of stem-cell genes but differential­
ly expressed genes linked to spatial patterning (Figure 
2h, refs. 38,39). We recognized anterior populations 
including forebrain, anterior neural ridge and eye 
field progenitors (NEpitA1-3), a population expressing 
midbrain, hindbrain and spinal cord pattering factors 
(NEpitMd, NEpitMH, NEpitH and NEpitC) but 
also populations with a stark mediolateral patterned 
signature corresponding to the progenitors located at 
the midline and the neural fold (NEpitML and NEpitB). 
Finally, the population of early neuroblasts showed het­
erogeneous gene expression and likely represented a 
mixture of cells. Comparing these cells with later neu­
roblasts, revealed an enrichment of a midbrain and 
hindbrain signature with telencephalic-specific genes 
being less represented, suggesting that the first neuro­
blasts appear posteriorly (Figure 2j; Methods).
Next, we examined the neurulation and morphogene­
sis stages, E9-E11. Differently from gastrulation, where 
signals for the establishment of the neural plate anter­
oposterior axis are provided extrinsically, during neu­
rulation specific neural progenitors, called secondary 
organizers, orchestrate the morphogenesis of the 
brain. We examined the distribution of genes encoding 
morphogens including SHH, WNTs, BMPs, FGFs, Neu­
regulins and R-spondins and found them enriched in 
a subset of E9-E11 radial glia-like cells (Figure 3a-b; 
Extended Data Figure 5a-b). We found four ventralizing 
organizers expressing Shh, four dorsalizing organizers 
expressing Wnts and Bmps, three Fgf-expressing 
organizers that characterized cells at the boundaries 
between regions, and two Neuregulin-expressing 
antihem organizers that appeared later in develop­
ment (Figure 3c-d). The localization of these organizers 
clusters was corroborated by querying the Allen De­
velopmental Mouse Brain ISH Atlas using Voxhunt 
(Extended Data Figure 5c; Methods; ref. 40).
Because organizer cells were identified by 
clustering, their transcriptomes were distinct from 
those of other cells and not defined only by the small 
number of genes described in previous literature. A 
large number of transcription factors and secreted 
ligands and surface receptors were expressed specifi­
cally in subtypes of organizers (Extended Data Figure 
5d-e). For example, Wnt7b and Rspo2 distinguished dor­
salizing organizers in the cortical hem, whereas Wnt3 
and Fzd10 were specific to roof plate organizers. Ntf3 
and Sost were expressed by mesencephalic and rhomb­
encephalic roof plate cells, respectively. All dorsalizing 
organizers expressed Wnt9a, Wnt3a, Resp1, Resp3 and 
Bmp6.
Though defined by Shh expression, each of the 
ventralizing organizers were further distinguished by 
region-specific expression of secreted molecules. The 
hypothalamic floor plate was the only ventralizing 
organizer that expressed Dlk1, a Notch ligand, and was 
distinguished by the absence of Spon1 and Ntn1. Further­
more, the Zona limitans intrathalamica (ZLI) and the 
mesencephalic floor plate shared expression of Wnt5a, 
Wnt5b and Lrtm1 but were distinguished by Pappa and 
Dkk2 expression, respectively. These results establish a 
rich repertoire of secondary organizers secreting com­
binations of morphogens that may act region-specifical­
ly to induce locally distinct neuronal fates.
To directly validate these secondary organizers, 
we performed in-situ sequencing41 of 119 genes (Figure 
3c and Extended Data Figure 5d-e) in an E10.5 mouse 
brain (Figure 3e-i). The spatial distributions of Shh, 
Wnt, and Fgf isoforms clearly revealed the secondary 
organizers (Figure 3f). Moreover, the subtypes of floor, 
roof, and boundary organizers identified by scRNA-seq 
were revealed as spatial domains of the more general 
organizers (Figure 3g-i), defining a more complex 
system of spatial regulation of brain development than 
previously recognized. To summarize the complexity of 
the 119 spatial patterns of expression we clustered the 
in-situ sequencing data defining 40 embryonic territo­
ries characterized by a unique repertoire of signaling 
molecules and patterning factors (Extended Data Figure 
6a-b). Overall, the fact that subtypes of organizers were 
both transcriptionally distinct, spatially segregated, and 
expressed distinct sets of ligands and receptors, shows 
that progenitors born in even closely adjacent spatial 
domains are subject to distinct environmental cues.
Box 1 | Resources
The raw sequence data is deposited in the sequence read 
archive under accession PRJNA637987. 
The companion wiki at http://mousebrain.org provides 
the following resources:
• An interactive version of Figure 1.
• Expression matrices.
• Metadata
The analysis software developed for this paper is 
available at https://github.com/linnarsson-lab, in reposi­
tories named cytograph, punchcards and auto-annota­
tion-md. 
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

4
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
A distinct clade of the cluster dendrogram comprised 
late glia (Figure 1; clusters 751 and above) and related 
progenitors (Figure 4a and Extended Data Figure 7a-f, 
Methods). Focusing on these cells revealed two major 
groups of radial glia: those that expressed neurogenic 
markers, like Neurog2 or Dlx2, and those that expressed 
glial markers like Tnc or Egfr (Figure 4b-c). We refer to 
the latter as glioblasts, given their likely commitment 
to gliogenesis. More than 6 000 genes were signif­
icantly enriched in one of the two groups (Figure 4d, 
Extended Data Figure 7c-d). Over 600 of these genes 
were cell-cycle related, 89% of which were enriched 
in neurogenic radial glia. Olig1, Olig2, Aqp4, Stat3, 
and glutamate and GABA receptors were enriched in 
glioblasts. To further distinguish progenitors related to 
astrocytes or oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs), 
we compared with genes enriched in these cell types in 
the adolescent mouse (Extended Data Figure 8j).
We previously defined seven region-specif­
ic astrocyte types of the adolescent mouse brain22, 
dominated by abundant telencephalic and non-tel­
encephalic subtypes. Consistent with this observa­
tion, non-telencephalic glioblasts and oligodendrocyte 
precursors of mixed forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain 
origin were distinct from a cluster of predominant­
ly telencephalic glioblasts biased towards astrocytes 
(Extended Data Figure 7e). In contrast, neurogenic 
radial glia split into separate clusters based on region. 
These observations suggest a loss of regionalization par­
ticularly in the oligodendrocyte lineage, but also among 
astrocytes. To investigate further, we sampled from our 
dataset six groups of cells - early glia, neurogenic radial 
glia, glioblasts, OPCs, neuroblasts, and neurons – and 
trained a classifier to identify a cell’s region of origin 
using transcription-factor expression (Extended Data 
Figure 7g-i). The classifier was trained on each group 
and tested on the five remaining groups. Although 
the results suggest that region-defining genes shift 
throughout development, the classifier still performed 
relatively well when trained on glioblasts and OPCs, 
demonstrating that some region-defining genes were 
still present at low levels (Extended Data Figure 7j).
Pijuan-Sala et al. 2019
d
a
b
c
f
e
g
h
i
j
TS12
TS11
TS10
E18
E17
E16
E15
E14
E13
E12
E11
E10
E9
E8
E7
E7
E8
Utf1
Pax6
Krt8
Pou5f1
Hes3
Foxa2
T
Ednra
Epiblast
Mesoderm
Paraxial Meso.
Somitic Meso.
Ectoderm
Neuroectoderm
Neural Crest
Neuromesoderm
Mesenchyme
Cardiomyocytes
Allantois
Erythroid
Blood
Progenitors
Extraembryonic
Endoderm
Extraembryonic
Ectoderm
Endoderm
Notocord
Endothelium
Primitive Streak
Early lineage progenitors
Neuroepithelial Cells
Primitive Streak
Early lineage progenitors
Neuroepithelial Cells
Mapped on
reference
Caudal Epibl.
NMP
NEpit3
NEpitA3
NEpitC
NEpitH
NEpit1
NEpitA1
NEpitMd
NEpit2
NEpitMH
NEpitA2
NEpitB
NEpitML
ENbl
AEMeso
DVE2
DVE1
Epi5
Epi4
Epi3
Epi1
GermC
Mesod4
Mesod3
Mesod2
Mesod1
CardCr2
CardCr1
Mesn1
HemEndPr
HematProg
Epi2
Ectoderm
NeurCrest1
NeurCrest2
PxMeso1
PxMeso2
MesnPhar
Angiobl2
Angiobl1
MesOst
MesPer
FGut1
TrophEct
ExVE4
ExVE3
ExVE2
ExVE1
VEnd
ParMeso
CardCres
EryProg
Interm. mesoderm
Fore/Mid/Hindbrain
Spinal cord
Neural crest
Notochord
Def. endoderm
Epiblast
Primitive Streak
PGC
Nascent mesoderm
Mixed mesoderm
Mesenchyme
Haematoendothelial
Blood progenitors 1
Rostral neurectoderm
Surface ectoderm
Paraxial mesoderm
Pharyngeal mesoderm
Endothelium
Gut
ExE ectoderm
ExE endoderm
Visceral endoderm
Parietal endoderm
Cardiomyocytes
Erythroid3
Pearson’s R
0.65
0.80
0.95
Sct
Neurog1
Col16a1
Tlx3
Rassf4
Six1
Cldn6
Six6
Epcam
Rab25
Nkx2-9
Calca
Foxa2
Foxd4
Mylk
Pax8
En1
Wnt1
Pax5
Msx3
Car10
Boc
Fst
Hoxa2
Nkx6-2
Fgf17
Cldn10
Fezf1
Irs4
Rax
Hesx1
Six3
Ednra
Ets1
Sox10
Fam212a
Plp1
Hotairm1
Cpn1
Sfrp5
Hoxa1
Cdx4
Cdx1
Hoxb9
Hoxa7
Hoxaas3
ENbl
NEpitA3
NEpitML
NEpitMd
NEpitH
NEpitA1
NEpit2
NEpit3
NEpit1
NEpitMH
NEpitA2
NEpitB
NEpitC
NMP
ENbl
NEpitB
NEpitML
NEpitA2
NEpitA1
NEpitH
NEpit2
NEpit3
NEpitMd
NEpitMH
NEpit4
NEpitC
NMP
NEpitA3
UMAP1
UMAP2
Forebrain
Hindbrain
Midbrain
−1
0
1
Neuroblast Regional Signatures
Z-score
0
Max
Avg. UMI count
Sox3
Pdzph1
Fez1
Pax6
Max
0
Expression
Figure 2 | Emergence of cell type heterogeneity from gastrulation to neurulation. a, Scheme of tissue sampling for early neurulation 
timepoints (E7-E8). b, The three subsets of cells sampled at early time points (E7-E8) overlaid on the global tSNE embedding of Figure 1. 
c, Expression of lineage-specific marker genes overlaid to the global tSNE as in (b). d, tSNE map of the mouse gastrulation single-cell atlas 
from Pijuan-Sala et al. e, Gene expression data from primitive streak cells, non-neural lineage-specific progenitors and neuroepitheli­
al cells projected on the embedding describing mouse gastrulation33. f, Pairwise correlation between neurulation-stage clusters of this 
paper with those of Pijuan-Sala et al. g, UMAP embedding of the neuroepithelial cells obtained from timepoints E7-8. Cells are colored 
by clusters. Dashed boxes indicate that the ENbl cluster was repositioned as it was located further in the embedding space. h, A heatmap 
displaying gene expression of enriched genes in each of the neuroepithelial populations. i, Expression of broad neuroepithelial markers 
overlaid on the UMAP in (g). j, Patterning-related gene signature scores computed for the cells in the earliest neuroblast cluster (ENbl). 
Signatures consisted of genes enriched from all the other neuroblast cluster that were sampled from different regions of the brain.
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

5
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
Isthmus Caudal
Isthmus Rostral
Fgf15
Fgf8
Trh
Shh
Wnt8b
Bmp7
Bmp4
Rspo2
Wnt3a
Wnt9a
Wnt1
Fgf15
Cnpy1
Trh
Fgf8
Fgf17
Nrg3
Nrg1
Antihem
(late)
Antihem
(early)
Anteromedial
Cerebral Pole
Isthmus
Caudal
Isthmus
Rostral
Roof Plate
Hindbrain
Roof Plate
Midbrain
Cortical Hem
(late)
Cortical Hem
(early)
Hypothalamic
Floor Plate
Zona limitans
Intrathalamica
Floor plate
Hindbrain
Floor Plate
Midbrain
Hindbrain
Roof plate
Floor plate
Isthmus
Cortical hem
Anteromedial
Cerebral Pole
Antihem
Zona Limitans
Forebrain
Midbrain
Dorsal For.
Genes
a
d
c
E9
E11
E13
E15
Age
Floor plate
(Hindbrain)
Medial
Floor Plate
Zona limitans
Intrathalamica
Isthmus (MHB)
Caudal
Isthmus (MHB)
Rostral
Anteromedial
Cerebral Pole
Cortical Hem
(early)
Roof Plate
(Midbrain)
Roof Plate
(Hindbrain)
Antihem (late)
Antihem (PSB)
Hypothalamic
ﬂoor plate
Cortical Hem
(late)
b
f
e
i
Cnpy1
Fgf17
Fgf8
Trh
Shh
Rspo2
Wnt1
Wnt3a
Wnt8b
Wnt9a
Dlk1
Lmx1a
Ntn1
Phox2b
Floor Plate
Midbrain
Hypothalamic
Floor Plate
Floor Plate
Hindbrain
Roof plate
Midbrain
Roof plate
 Hindbrain
Cortical hem
Msx3
Sost
Tal2
Wnt8b
mRNA
PLP hyb.
cDNA
RCA
HybISS - 119 Genes
Gene 1, 2, 3, ...., 119
Slice 1, 2, ...., 20
Imaging
Decoding
x
E10.5
h
g
Fb
Mb
Hb
Fb
Mb
Hb
Fb
Mb
Hb
Figure 3 | Characterization of molecular identity and signal-receptor repertoire of neural tube organizers. a, A schematic representa­
tion of the neural tube marking the localization of secondary organizers. Colors group early organizers by ventralizing (yellow), dorsal­
izing (violet) and boundary-inducing (cyan) activity. Late organizers are in fuchsia. b, The cells belonging to organizers-related clusters 
are overlaid on the global tSNE of Figure 1. c, Level of expression of receptors and ligands genes described in the literature as defining 
organizers. Beeswarm plots are showing distribution of expression (log-transformed) for each cluster, each dot is a cell, cells are colored 
by the average expression in that cluster. d, UMAP embedding of radial-glia like cells that we identified as related to specific organizers. 
The miniature displays the same embedding colored by organizer type, as defined in (a). e, A scheme of the in situ sequencing approach 
used to localize the expression of the 119 genes listed in (c) and Extended Figure 5b-c. f, The expression of a selection of organizer-spe­
cific genes E10.5 embryo, as detected by in-situ sequencing. Dots represent the localized transcripts of different genes and are colored 
by organizer type. Miniatures indicate the approximate mediolateral position of the section. Dashed lines demarcate the neural tube. 
Fb, forebrain; Mb, midbrain; Hb, hindbrain. Scale bar 480 μm. g, Expression of selected genes that demarcate the distention between 
different kind of floor plate h, dorsal i, and boundary organizers.
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

6
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
The transition from neurogenic to gliogenic 
occurred between E12 and E16 (Figure 4e and Extended 
Data Figure 7e). The earliest gliogenic cell to appear 
was a cluster unique in its co-expression of Egfr and 
the Notch ligands Dll1, Dll3, and Dll4 (Extended Data 
Figure 7k-l), This cluster, which was closely related to 
OPCs and might represent a pre-OPC state, expressed 
high levels of Olig1 and Olig2, as well as Crlf1, a soluble 
member of the Cntfr pathway implicated in gliogene­
sis42. The appearance of astrocytes at approximately E15 
was revealed by increased levels of Gfap, Agt, and Aqp4 
(Extended Data Figure 7k).
To better resolve lineage-specific versus shared gene 
expression programs, we inferred a pseudolineage tree 
for the whole dataset (Extended Data Figure 8). We ar­
bitrarily designated a single cell in the early neuroep­
ithelium as the root, and computed shortest paths 
(i.e., geodesics on the manifold) to every other cell on 
the radius nearest neighbor graph (RNN). The set of 
all shortest paths from the root forms a pseudoline­
age tree, due to the convergence of paths towards the 
root (Extended Data Figure 8a-b). Plotting individual 
pseudolineage trajectories to a few selected single cells 
(Extended Data Figure 8c-d) on the atlas embedding 
confirmed that pseudolineages agreed with expec­
tations. For example, pia and arachnoid originated 
from the cranial neural crest; astrocytes and OPCs 
were generated from distinct but closely related radial 
glia; and cortical excitatory neurons and forebrain 
GABAergic neurons were derived from distinct radial 
glia precursors.
The pseudolineage tree provides a tool to investi­
gate gene expression along putative lineage trajectories 
leading to specific end states. To do this, we isolated all 
the trajectories that ended in a specific cluster (or set 
of clusters), and projected all the single cells in those 
trajectories onto the embryonal pseudoage (Figure 4f-h 
and Extended Data Figure 8e-i). We then calculated 
average gene expression in pseudoage bins. To validate 
this approach, we first examined the subtree terminat­
ing in cortical excitatory neurons (Figure 4f) whose 
development is well understood. As expected, cells 
along the trajectory predominantly were located in 
the forebrain. Furthermore, a set of known regulators 
of cortical excitatory neurogenesis was expressed in 
an ordered progression from E11 to E18: Emx1, Eomes, 
Tbr1 and Satb211. RNA in situ hybridization (Allen Brain 
Atlas) confirmed the timing of expression of these key 
transcription factors (Extended Data Figure 8k).
Expanding the analysis to additional glial and 
neuronal lineages showed the expected lineage markers 
(Figure 4g and Extended Data Figure 8e-i). We noticed 
that nearly all neuronal — but none of the glial — lineages 
passed through an early neuroblast state expressing all 
or most of Nhlh1, Nhlh2, Ebf1, Ebf2 and Ebf3, extending 
the HPF analysis above with lineage-specificity. The 
expression of Nhlh1 and Nhlh2, especially in combina­
tion, (Figure 4g, Extended Data Figure 8j) identified a 
pan-neuronal state just at or after cell cycle exit (Figure 
1 and Extended Data Figure 2b), which coincided with 
the set of clusters we had manually annotated as neu­
roblasts. Notably, however, the forebrain GABAergic 
lineage appeared to lack Nhlh1 expression, although low 
levels of Nhlh2 were detected.
Human brain cancer is a devastating disease, with a 
median survival of less than two years for glioblasto­
ma. Recent work using single-cell RNA-sequencing 
to determine the cellular composition of glioblastoma 
has suggested that these tumors reflect a reversion to 
an embryonic cell state resembling neural progenitors, 
OPCs and/or immature astrocytes24,43,44. To unambig­
uously test this hypothesis, we compared human brain 
tumor data — comprising five glioblastoma samples 
and one anaplastic astrocytoma45 — with a reference cell 
type catalog constructed by merging the developmen­
tal cell atlas of this paper with our previous adolescent 
brain cell atlas22 (Methods and Extended Data Figure 9).
Each of the tumor samples matched a unique set 
E9
E10
E11
E12
E13
E14
E15
E16
E17
E18
Tnc + Egfr
Neurog2 + Dlx2
OPC
Non-telencephalic
glioblasts and astrocytes
COP
Choroid plexus
Schwann
Roof plate
derivatives
Ependymal
Radial glia
OEC
Floor plate
Telencephalic 
glioblasts
Bergmann
Glia progenitor
Dorsal diencephalon
Cortical excitatory
Forebrain GABAergic
Forebrain
excitatory
Forebrain
inhibitory
Mid- &
hindbrain
Nhlh1
Nhlh2
both
a
b
c
d
e
f
h
g
Astrocyte score
OPC score
Figure 4 | Glioblasts and neuroblasts. a, Clusters 
in the last clade of the dendrogram, representing 
glioblasts and related cell types, were analyzed 
separately (inset shows the cells that were 
included). A new dendrogram was calculated 
and cut to result in 18 clusters, labeled and 
indicated by colors. b, Cells on the tSNE colored 
according to the sum of pro-neural Neurog2 and 
Dlx2 expression. c, Cells on the t-SNE colored 
according to the sum of Tnc and Egfr expression. 
d, Gestational age of cells on the tSNE. e, Pseudo­
lineages of cortical excitatory cells. f, Pseudoline­
age of forebrain GABAergic cells. g, Expression of 
neuroblast markers, transcription factors Nhlh1 
and Nhlh2.
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

7
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
of reference cell types, but in each case aneuploid cells 
predominantly matched embryonic cell types (mainly 
radial glia and neuroblasts) or adult astrocytes (Figure 
5). In contrast, normal (euploid) cells matched adult 
immune cells, oligodendrocytes and vascular cells. 
Euploid vascular cells invariably matched embryonic 
vascular cells, not adult, likely indicating ongoing angi­
ogenesis. The tumors differed in composition, prolifera­
tive status and the nature of the immune response. For 
example, only the anaplastic astrocytoma showed B cell 
and T cell response, and the most highly proliferative 
glioblastoma (SF11215) was almost devoid of immune 
cells. However, every tumor contained proliferating 
progenitors resembling embryonic radial glia or OPCs. 
With one exception (a neural match in tumor SF11159), 
all aneuploid clusters that matched adult cell types 
were astrocyte, OPC or neuroblast-like; all of which are 
cell types that are phenotypically close to embryonic 
progenitor cells. Thus, an unbiased comparison with 
embryonic and adult cell types confirms the essentially 
fetal cellular nature of human glioblastoma.
Our atlas is a step toward dissecting the principles of 
mammalian nervous-system development and provides 
an overview of the prenatal brain’s transcriptomic 
diversity. The wealth of information on time-, lineage-, 
and region-specific gene expression provides powerful 
tools for genetic targeting, and for understanding genes 
involved in neurodevelopmental disorders and human 
brain cancer.
Acknowledgements
We thank Hannah Hochgerner and Amit Zeisel 
(Technion, Israel) for valuable advice, Patrik Ernfors 
(Karolinska Institute) for supporting the work of 
A.F., and the National Genomics Infrastructure for 
sequencing services. This work was supported by grants 
from the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation 
(2015.0041 to S.L. and 2018.0172 to S.L. and M.N.), the 
Erling Persson Family Foundation (HDCA, to S.L. and 
M.N.), the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research 
(RIF 15-0057, SB16-0065) to S.L., Hjärnfonden (PS2018-
0012) to D.G., the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative DAF, an 
advised fund of Silicon Valley Community Foundation 
(2018-191929) to M.N, and the Swiss National Science 
Foundation (CRSK-3_190495) to G.L.
Author contributions
S.L. supervised the project. S.L. and  G.L. conceived the 
study design. G.L., K.S. and S.L. analyzed, annotated 
and interpreted the single-cell data and wrote the 
manuscript. G.L. and A.F. performed the single-cell ex­
periments. A.F. performed the embryo dissociations. 
A.J. prepared sequencing libraries. P.L. and S.L. built the 
companion website. E.V., D.G. and C.M.L. performed in 
situ sequencing experiments. K.S., I.K., G.L. and C.M.L. 
analyzed and interpreted the in situ sequencing data. 
M.N. supervised the in situ sequencing experiments. 
All the authors critically reviewed the manuscript and 
approved the final version.
Code and data availability
Source code is available at https://github.com/linnars­
son-lab. RNA-seq data is available at the Sequence Read 
Archive (SRA; https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra) under 
accession PRJNA637987. HybISS data is available at http://
mousebrain.org/downloads.
Aneuploid Normal
Aneuploid Normal
Adult
Fetal
Macrophage
Vascular
T cell
B cell
Oligo
OPC
Astrocyte
Radial glia
Neuronal
Neuroblast
Other
Aneuploid
Normal
Cycling
Quiescent
GBM / SF11159
GBM / SF11247
GBM / SF11215
GBM / SF11232
AAC / SF11285
GBM / SF11209
# cells
Reference cell type
SZNBL
ACTN2
ACTN2
ACTN1
ACTN1
ACTE1
ACTE1
ACMB
Rgl
Rgl
Nbl
nIPC
nIPC
Rgl
Rgl
OPC
OPC
Astro
Nbl
Figure 5 | Developmental nature of human glioblastoma. Each subpanel shows a tSNE plot of tumor cells, indicating aneuploid (dark 
grey) and cycling (brown) cells, and bubbles indicating the best match for each tumor cluster to a reference cell type (942 types from this 
paper and 265 types from Zeisel et al. 2018), colored by major class. Open circles are developmental reference types; closed circles are 
adolescent reference types; bubbles are positioned arbitrarily. Immune cell types were manually called, as they were not present in the 
reference cell type compendium. GBM, glioblastoma multiforme. AAC, anaplastic astrocytoma.
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

8
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
References
1.	 Sadler, T. W. Embryology of neural tube development. Am. J. Med. 
Genet. Part C Semin. Med. Genet. 135C, 2–8 (2005).
2.	 Camp, J. G. et al. Human cerebral organoids recapitulate gene 
expression programs of fetal neocortex development. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. 112, 15672–15677 (2015).
3.	 Pollen, A. A. et al. Molecular Identity of Human Outer Radial Glia 
during Cortical Development. Cell 163, 55–67 (2015).
4.	 Johnson, M. B. & Walsh, C. A. Cerebral cortical neuron diversity and 
development at single-cell resolution. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 42, 9–16 
(2017).
5.	 Nowakowski, T. J. et al. Spatiotemporal gene expression trajectories 
reveal developmental hierarchies of the human cortex. Science (80-. ). 
358, 1318–1323 (2017).
6.	 Zhong, S. et al. A single-cell RNA-seq survey of the developmental 
landscape of the human prefrontal cortex. Nature 555, 524–528 (2018).
7.	 Polioudakis, D. et al. A Single-Cell Transcriptomic Atlas of Human Ne­
ocortical Development during Mid-gestation. Neuron 103, 785-801.e8 
(2019).
8.	 Yuzwa, S. A. et al. Developmental Emergence of Adult Neural Stem 
Cells as Revealed by Single-Cell Transcriptional Profiling. Cell Rep. 21, 
3970–3986 (2017).
9.	 Hochgerner, H., Zeisel, A., Lönnerberg, P. & Linnarsson, S. Conserved 
properties of dentate gyrus neurogenesis across postnatal development 
revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 290–299 
(2018).
10.	Cao, J. et al. The single-cell transcriptional landscape of mammalian or­
ganogenesis. Nature 566, 496–502 (2019).
11.	Telley, L. et al. Temporal patterning of apical progenitors and their 
daughter neurons in the developing neocortex. Science (80-. ). 364, 
eaav2522 (2019).
12.	Habib, N. et al. Div-Seq: Single-nucleus RNA-Seq reveals dynamics of 
rare adult newborn neurons. Science (80-. ). 353, 925–928 (2016).
13.	Zhong, S. et al. Decoding the development of the human hippocampus. 
Nature 577, 531–536 (2020).
14.	Kee, N. et al. Single-Cell Analysis Reveals a Close Relationship 
between Differentiating Dopamine and Subthalamic Nucleus Neuronal 
Lineages. Cell Stem Cell 20, 29–40 (2017).
15.	La Manno, G. et al. Molecular Diversity of Midbrain Development in 
Mouse, Human, and Stem Cells. Cell 167, 566-580.e19 (2016).
16.	Tiklová, K. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals midbrain 
dopamine neuron diversity emerging during mouse brain development. 
Nat. Commun. 10, 581 (2019).
17.	Rosenberg, A. B. et al. Single-cell profiling of the developing mouse 
brain and spinal cord with split-pool barcoding. Science (80-. ). 360, 
176–182 (2018).
18.	Carter, R. A. et al. A Single-Cell Transcriptional Atlas of the Developing 
Murine Cerebellum. Curr. Biol. 28, 2910-2920.e2 (2018).
19.	Huisman, C. et al. Single cell transcriptome analysis of developing 
arcuate nucleus neurons uncovers their key developmental regulators. 
Nat. Commun. 10, 3696 (2019).
20.	Guo, Q. & Li, J. Y. H. Defining developmental diversification of dien­
cephalon neurons through single cell gene expression profiling. Devel­
opment 146, dev174284 (2019).
21.	Zywitza, V., Misios, A., Bunatyan, L., Willnow, T. E. & Rajewsky, N. Sin­
gle-Cell Transcriptomics Characterizes Cell Types in the Subventricu­
lar Zone and Uncovers Molecular Defects Impairing Adult Neurogene­
sis. Cell Rep. 25, 2457-2469.e8 (2018).
22.	Zeisel, A. et al. Molecular Architecture of the Mouse Nervous System. 
Cell 174, 999-1014.e22 (2018).
23.	Marques, S. et al. Transcriptional Convergence of Oligodendrocyte 
Lineage Progenitors during Development. Dev. Cell 46, 504-517.e7 
(2018).
24.	Weng, Q. et al. Single-Cell Transcriptomics Uncovers Glial Progenitor 
Diversity and Cell Fate Determinants during Development and Gliom­
agenesis. Cell Stem Cell 24, 707-723.e8 (2019).
25.	Marques, S. et al. Oligodendrocyte heterogeneity in the mouse juvenile 
and adult central nervous system. Science (80-. ). 352, (2016).
26.	Vanlandewijck, M. et al. A molecular atlas of cell types and zonation in 
the brain vasculature. Nature 554, 475–480 (2018).
27.	Siegenthaler, J. A. & Pleasure, S. J. Meninges and Vasculature. in 
Patterning and Cell Type Specification in the Developing CNS and PNS 
835–849 (Elsevier, 2013). doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-397265-1.00087-3
28.	Niwa, H., Miyazaki, J. & Smith, A. G. Quantitative expression of Oct-3/4 
defines differentiation, dedifferentiation or self-renewal of ES cells. Nat. 
Genet. 24, 372–376 (2000).
29.	Burtscher, I. & Lickert, H. Foxa2 regulates polarity and epithelialization 
in the endoderm germ layer of the mouse embryo. Development 136, 
1029–1038 (2009).
30.	Li, L. et al. Location of transient ectodermal progenitor potential in 
mouse development. Dev. 140, 4533–4543 (2013).
31.	Zhang, X. et al. Pax6 Is a Human Neuroectoderm Cell Fate Determi­
nant. Cell Stem Cell 7, 90–100 (2010).
32.	Hatakeyama, J. Hes genes regulate size, shape and histogenesis of the 
nervous system by control of the timing of neural stem cell differentia­
tion. Development 131, 5539–5550 (2004).
33.	Pijuan-Sala, B. et al. A single-cell molecular map of mouse gastrulation 
and early organogenesis. Nature (2019). doi:10.1038/s41586-019-0933-9
34.	Tamai, H. et al. Pax6 transcription factor is required for the interkinetic 
nuclear movement of neuroepithelial cells. Genes to Cells 12, 983–996 
(2007).
35.	Javali, A. et al. Co-expression of Tbx6 and Sox2 identifies a novel 
transient neuromesoderm progenitor cell state. Dev. 144, 4522–4529 
(2017).
36.	Tzouanacou, E., Wegener, A., Wymeersch, F. J., Wilson, V. & Nicolas, 
J.-F. Redefining the Progression of Lineage Segregations during 
Mammalian Embryogenesis by Clonal Analysis. Dev. Cell 17, 365–376 
(2009).
37.	Murdoch, J. N., Eddleston, J., Leblond-Bourget, N., Stanier, P. & Copp, 
A. J. Sequence and expression analysis of Nhlh1: A basic helix-loop-he­
lix gene implicated in neurogenesis. Dev. Genet. 24, 165–177 (1999).
38.	Alves dos Santos, M. T. & Smidt, M. P. En1 and Wnt signaling in 
midbrain dopaminergic neuronal development. Neural Dev. 6, 23 
(2011).
39.	Schwarz, M. et al. Pax2/5 and Pax6 subdivide the early neural tube into 
three domains. Mech. Dev. 82, 29–39 (1999).
40.	Fleck, J. S., He, Z., Boyle, M. J., Camp, J. G. & Treutlein, B. Resolving 
brain organoid heterogeneity by mapping single cell genomic data to a 
spatial reference. 2507, 1–9 (2020).
41.	Gyllborg, D. et al. Hybridization-based In Situ Sequencing (HybISS): 
spatial transcriptomic detection in human and mouse brain tissue. 
bioRxiv 2020.02.03.931618 (2020). doi:10.1101/2020.02.03.931618
42.	Miller, F. D. & Gauthier, A. S. Timing Is Everything: Making Neurons 
versus Glia in the Developing Cortex. Neuron 54, 357–369 (2007).
43.	Couturier, C. P. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals that glioblasto­
ma recapitulates normal brain development. bioRxiv 449439 (2018). 
doi:10.1101/449439
44.	Neftel, C. et al. An Integrative Model of Cellular States, Plasticity, and 
Genetics for Glioblastoma. Cell 178, 835-849.e21 (2019).
45.	Bhaduri, A. et al. Outer Radial Glia-like Cancer Stem Cells Contribute 
to Heterogeneity of Glioblastoma. Cell Stem Cell 26, 48-63.e6 (2020).
46.	La Manno, G. et al. RNA velocity of single cells. Nature 560, 494–498 
(2018).
47.	Gopalan, P., Hofman, J. M. & Blei, D. M. Scalable Recommendation 
with Hierarchical Poisson Factorization. in UAI 326–335 (2015).
48.	Kobak, D. & Berens, P. The art of using t-SNE for single-cell transcrip­
tomics. Nat. Commun. 10, (2019).
49.	Satija, R., Farrell, J. a, Gennert, D., Schier, A. F. & Regev, A. Spatial 
reconstruction of single-cell gene expression data. Nat. Biotechnol. 
(2015). doi:10.1038/nbt.3192
50.	Lein, E. S. et al. Genome-wide atlas of gene expression in the adult 
mouse brain. Nature 445, 168–176 (2007).
51.	Chalfoun, J. et al. MIST: Accurate and Scalable Microscopy Image 
Stitching Tool with Stage Modeling and Error Minimization. Sci. Rep. 
7, 1–10 (2017).
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

9
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
Methods
Animals 
CD-1 mice were obtained from Charles River (Germany) and mated 
overnight. The morning that plugs were detected was considered 
E0.5. Mice were housed with regular dark/light cycle and fed 
standard diet and water ad libitum. All animal procedures were 
approved by the Stockholm ethics committee (N68/14; Stockholms 
djurförsöksetiska nämnd) and followed Directive 2010/63/EU of 
the European Parliament and of the Council, the Swedish Animal 
Welfare Act (Djurskyddslagen: SFS 1988:534), the Swedish Animal 
Welfare Ordinance (Djurskyddsförordningen: SFS 1988:539) and 
the provisions regarding the use of animals for scientific purposes: 
DFS 2004:15 and SJVFS 2012:26. 
Dissections
161 embryos between E7 and E18.5 were collected from 36 pregnant 
mothers. Embryos were extracted from the uterine horn and 
dissected in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) on ice within one 
hour. Dissections were performed with microsurgical tools under 
a fluorescent stereomicroscope. The number of embryos dissected 
was adapted to accommodate changes in size and cell numbers in 
the developing brain (see Table S1).
E7 and E8 embryos were cut into two parts to isolate the rostro-ven­
tral neural tube from dorsal tissue including the trophectoderm, 
which was discarded. The developing spinal cord was identified by 
corresponding somite pairs and also discarded. From E9 and E10 
embryos, we isolated the entire cephalic part, including prospec­
tive forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain. From E11 onwards, only 
developing brain tissue was dissected and collected; surround­
ing head tissue was discarded. Meninges was removed whenever 
possible. E9 to E11 brains were divided into forebrain, midbrain 
and hindbrain. Forebrain and midbrain were separated at the di­
encephalon; midbrain and hindbrain at the isthmus. E12 to E15 
forebrains were further divided into dorsal (including the hemi­
spheres) and ventral (including the subcortical territories, cau­
doputamen and the ventral striatum) parts. E16 to E18 forebrains 
were divided into dorsal, ventral, and thalamic parts. 
Cell dissociation 
Dissected tissue was processed as previously described, with minor 
modifications9,22.  Tissue was transferred to a 2 ml Eppendorf tube 
containing preheated digestion solution (37°C). Before E11 Trypsin 
was used for dissociation; after E11 the digestion solution contained 
300 µl TrypLE Express (Life Technologies; cat. no. 12605-010), 
2 000 µl papain solution (Worthington Biochemical; cat. no. 
LK003178; 25 U/ml in cutting solution), 100 µl DNase I (Worthing­
ton Biochemical; cat. no. LK003172; 1 mM in cutting solution) and 
100 µl cutting solution. Enzymatic incubation time was adjusted 
based on developmental stage. The tissue was kept in a 37°C water 
bath and gently pipetted three times every 10 minutes. After 30 min 
at 37°C, another 100 µl of TrypLE solution was added, followed 
by 10 more minutes at 37°C and pipetting. After approximately 
45–50 min, dissociation was complete, and cells became visible at 
the bottom of the Eppendorf tube. The solution was filtered using 
a 20-µm cell strainer (Falcon cat. no. 352340) and collected in a 
15-ml plastic tube. The digestion solution was diluted with 2.4 ml 
of cutting solution and 0.6 ml of Neurobasal-A medium (Gibco; cat. 
no. 10888) and centrifuged at 100g for 4 min at 4°C. The super­
natant was removed and the pellet resuspended in 0.5 ml cutting 
solution and 0.5 ml Neurobasal-A medium. Neurobasal-A medium 
was supplemented with l-glutamine (Gibco; cat. no. 25030- 123), 
B27 (Gibco; cat. no. 17504-044) and penicillin plus streptomy­
cin (Sigma 50x; cat. no. P4458). The cell suspension was carefully 
transferred with a Pasteur pipette onto an Optiprep gradient. 
For the gradient, 85 µl of Optiprep Density Solution (Sigma; cat. 
no. D1556) was mixed with 457.5 µl cutting solution and 457.5 µl 
Neurobasal medium including supplements. The gradient was sub­
sequently centrifuged at 80 g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was 
removed until only 100–200 µl remained. DNase I (10 µl) was added 
to prevent aggregation. The single-cell density was evaluated. Then 
cells were filtered with a 20 µm strainer (Partec CellTrics). Cells 
were pelleted, resuspended in cutting solution with DNaseI, and 
loaded into 10X Genomics Chromium v1 chips.
Single-cell RNA sequencing
Droplet-based single-cell RNA sequencing was performed using 
the 10x Genomics Chromium Single Cell Kit v1. Single-cell sus­
pensions concentrated at 500-700 cells/ml were mixed with master 
mix and nuclease free water according to the Chromium manual, 
targeting 3 500 cells per reaction. 12 PCR cycles were used for 
cDNA synthesis. Each library was sequenced using an Illumina 
HiSeq instrument, one sample per lane, with one 98 bp read 
located near the 3′ end of the mRNA. Illumina runs were demul­
tiplexed and aligned to the genome (mm10-3.0.0), and BAM files 
were obtained from the 10X Genomics cellranger pipeline (version 
3.0.2). Molecule counts were attributed to spliced and unspliced 
transcripts by running velocyto46 (version 0.17.11) with standard 
parameters, resulting in one loom file (http://loompy.org) per 
sample.
In-situ sequencing by HybISS
HybISS41 was performed as published at protocols.io (http://dx.doi.
org/10.17504/protocols.io.xy4fpyw). Padlock probes, bridge probes 
and detection oligo sequences used are listed in Supplementary 
Table 3. Imaging was performed with a Leica DMi8 epifluorescence 
microscope equipped with LED light source (Lumencor® SPECTRA 
X), sCMOS camera (Leica DFC9000GTC), and 20× objective (HC 
PL APO, 0.80). ROIs were imaged with 10% overlap and 24 z-stack 
planes with 0.5 μm spacing and then maximum projected in LASX 
software and then tiles exported as raw TIFF files.
Computational Analysis
Pooling samples and preprocessing for analysis
Loom files from each 10x sample were aggregated by time point 
and brain region, the latter dictated by our dissection strategy. 
In particular we pooled: Cephalic Neural Tube E7-8, Forebrain 
E9-11, Midbrain E9-11, Hindbrain E9-11, Forebrain Dorsal E12-15, 
Forebrain Ventral E12-15, Midbrain E12-15, Hindbrain E12-15, 
Forebrain Dorsal E16-18, Forebrain Ventrothalamic E16-18, 
Forebrain Ventrolateral E16-18, Midbrain E16-18, and Hindbrain 
E16-18. Cells with fewer than 2 000 UMIs were excluded from 
pooling. Genes expressed in fewer than ten cells or greater than 
60% of cells were excluded from analysis.
Cytograph 2.0
The analysis pipeline is available as an update to our Cytograph 
package, Cytograph 2.0 (https://github.com/linnarsson-lab/cy­
tograph-dev). Cytograph is under continuous development, and 
the results in this paper were generated at commit 2e8eb79a5f83b­
d9dda15503d9b2476ebdd8fa0b3. We described Cytograph v1.0 
elsewhere22, including gene enrichment (overexpression), trinaria­
tion and clustering. We detail below only the key improvements: 
changes to dimensionality reduction and graph construction; au­
to-annotation; and punchcards.
In brief, we used Hierarchical Poisson factorization (HPF47) 
to decompose the expression matrix into 96 non-negative and 
modular components, while reducing noise and preserving most 
of the structural information in the original matrix. We then 
computed a radius nearest neighbor graph (RNN) using the in­
formation radius (also called the Jensen-Shannon divergence, a 
measure of the Shannon information difference) to link cells with 
near-identical gene-expression states. Finally, we clustered the 
RNN graph using modularity (Louvain) to define distinct sets of 
cells representing cell types or states along differentiation trajec­
tories. We thus represent the high-dimensional gene expression 
manifold simultaneously as an RNN graph (facilitating analysis 
of continuous processes such as differentiation), a set of clusters 
(facilitating comparison between discrete cell states) and the 
components of the HPF (facilitating analysis of modular processes 
shared between cells). For visualization, we embedded the manifold 
in two dimensions using an optimized tSNE projection from HPF 
space (e.g. Figure 1). Unless otherwise specified, the following 
parameters were used: k=25, k_pooling=10, factorization="HPF”, 
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

10
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
n_factors=96, n_genes=2000, mask=(), doublets_action=None, 
features=”enrichment”.
Cytograph uses the following open-source packages, 
and we are grateful to the authors for making such important 
resources freely available to the community: numpy, scikit-learn, 
scipy, networkx, python-louvain, hdbscan, pyyaml, statsmod­
els, numpy-groupies, tqdm, umap-learn, torch, harmony-pytorch, 
pynndescent, click, leidenalg, unidip and opentsne. 
Distance metric, manifold graph, and pseudo-lineage geodesics
In single-cell analysis, it is typical to construct a nearest-neigh­
bor graph by imposing a distance metric on a reduced-dimension­
al space of gene expression. This graph is a proxy for the manifold 
of allowed gene expression states, and can be used for downstream 
processing such as clustering. However, the standard approach has 
several issues:
•	 Nearest neighbors need not be close to each other in any absolute 
sense. A lone blood cell among neurons will be nearest to some 
neuron, but not close in any useful sense. 
•	 Distances are not biologically meaningful. For example, 
“euclidean distance in PCA space” has no intrinsic meaning that 
can be interpreted as a meaningful distance between cells.
•	 Neighborhood structure on the manifold graph depends 
strongly on sampling density
We address these issues in three ways:
•	 We use Hierarchical Poisson Factorization (HPF) to model 
the gene expression matrix as a linear combination of factors, 
and show that this model captures nearly all structure in the 
expression matrix (Extended Data Figure 3a-d).
•	 We use the Jensen-Shannon Divergence, also known as the 
“information radius” as a principled metric that distinguishes 
“near-identical” cells from “dissimilar cells”  (Extended Data 
Figure 3e-i). 
•	 We define pseudo-lineage trajectories as geodesics along the 
manifold, which therefore correspond to sets of cells that form a 
path connected by pairs of cells within a defined maximal infor­
mation radius (Extended Data Figure 8a-b).
Given a pair of cells i, j and their normalized HPF component 
vectors θi, θj (considered here as probability distributions over the 
components) the Jensen Shannon Divergence (JSD) is defined as 
where H( ∙ ) is the Shannon entropy function. The JSD measures the 
entropy of the average of two cells, compared to the average entropies 
of the individual cells. It is a symmetrized version of relative entropy 
(Kullback-Leibler divergence). For a pair of identical cells, their 
HPF component values are drawn from identical distributions, the 
entropy of the average is equal to the average of entropies, and the 
JSD is zero. For a pair of dissimilar cells, the average of entropies 
is smaller than the entropy of the average, because information is 
lost in averaging. A pleasing property of the JSD is the fact that its 
square root is a true metric (satisfying non-negativity, symmetry, 
identity of discernibles and triangle inequality), which is required 
by some clustering and manifold learning algorithms. The JSD can 
be viewed as defining a small neighborhood around each cell, in 
which neighbors are near-indistinguishable in an information-the­
oretic sense. Exploiting this property, we construct a radius nearest 
neighbor (RNN) graph, by imposing a fixed JSD radius around each 
cell, and connecting only cells that fall within this radius (for com­
putational efficiency, we cap the maximum number of neighbors to 
a fixed number, usually 25). This approach addresses several of the 
deficiencies of the common KNN approach: 
•	 Distances between neighbors have a clear meaning in terms of 
relative entropy, and informally, cells that are connected in the 
RNN can be viewed as “near-identical”
•	 If the manifold is undersampled, the RNN will automatically 
be sparsely connected, or even disconnected, reflecting missing 
neighbors
•	 Regions of the manifold that have been densely sampled will be 
densely connected
•	 Connected paths through the RNN are guaranteed to proceed 
through individual cell neighbors that are near-identical in 
terms of relative entropy; a more meaningful property than 
arbitrary distances in PCA space
Next, for inference of longer trajectories along the manifold, we 
define a pseudo-lineage geodesic as the shortest path between 
two given cells (e.g. a root cell and a terminally differentiated cell) 
on the RNN using the JSD as edge weights. The shortest path is 
therefore a path of small steps, each connecting a pair of near-iden­
tical cells. A pseudo-lineage tree of all cells can be constructed by 
designating a single root cell, and computing the geodesics to all 
other cells. On this tree, many cells will be internal (branches), 
some external (leaves) and the root cell will have no predecessor. 
Cells not connected directly or indirectly to the root cell will not be 
part of the tree. For this paper, we constructed the pseudo-lineage 
tree by picking a single cell (#206,003) in the early neuroepithelium 
arbitrarily as the root.
Auto-annotation
After clustering, Cytograph incorporates a step termed auto-anno­
tation that automatically assigns meaningful labels to the clusters 
(Extended Data Figure 10). Labels are flexible and may denote 
either specific cell types or general properties such as “cell cycle” or 
“GABAergic neurotransmission.” Multiple labels can be assigned 
to the same cluster, and each label can be attributed to multiple 
clusters. Each label is defined as a text document with a short com­
puter-readable section that consists of four mandatory fields: name, 
abbreviation, definition and category: 
name: Cranial Neural Crest Cell
abbreviation: CNC
definition: +Dlx2 +Plp1 +Sox10
categories: Ectodermal NeuralCrest Face
The “abbreviation” and “name” are unique identifiers, whereas 
“categories” can be used to organize the labels into meta-labels. The 
“definition” is the most important field and represents the label-as­
signment rule. It consists of a list of gene names, each prefixed with 
“+” if the gene must be present or “-” if the gene must be absent. 
To determine presence or absence, we use Cytograph’s trinariza­
tion score22. A cluster is assigned a label if and only if the “+” genes 
are present and the “-” genes are absent. Many different definitions 
for the same label are possible. To create robust labels that apply to 
diverse datasets, we favored definitions that comprised short lists of 
genes that are ideally well-studied. The auto-annotation tags were 
used for data exploration and to subset the dataset as described 
below.
Each document additionally contains a free-form section 
that is used to provide context, justification, and references, which 
was refined continuously throughout our study and constructed by 
cross-referencing the literature and our data. As a result, it forms 
a cumulative body of knowledge about mouse brain cell types and 
states that can be automatically applied to future datasets, available 
at https://github.com/linnarsson-lab/auto-annotation-md.
Punchcards
Repeating feature selection and dimensionality reduction on 
a subset of cells often highlights further structure than can be 
revealed by clustering a large, diverse dataset. Although subsetting 
the dataset in a supervised way incorporates biological knowledge 
to expose particularly interesting aspects of the heterogeneity, 
these decisions quickly become verbose, and the approach requires 
manual intervention at each level of analysis.
We addressed this issue by using the auto-annotation 
framework to implement a rule-based splitting procedure. Each 
level of analysis is defined by a .yaml file termed a punchcard. The 
name of the punchcard indicates the parent analysis to use as input 
(e.g. MidbrainE911.yaml). Within the file, each subset to analyze is 
given a name (e.g. Neurons and Glia) and the clusters to include are 
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

11
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
determined by the auto-annotation listed in the include field. A 
conditional expression can optionally be specified in the onlyif field 
to further constrain the subset. Punchcards can therefore define 
a series of biologically meaningful analyses that remain general 
to the input dataset and analysis parameters. Punchcards can be 
applied hierarchically to define increasingly fine-grained analyses.
Post-processing
Removal of doublets and contaminated clusters
Doublets were removed by running a modified version of Dou­
bletFinder available in cytograph on each individual sample in the 
dataset. DoubletFinder scores were then averaged across clusters, 
and clusters with an average doublet score greater than 0.3 were 
removed from further analysis. Approximately 20 additional 
clusters were removed that were manually annotated as blood-con­
taminated, doublets, or contained fewer than five cells.
Merging
A dendrogram was constructed using Cytograph’s Aggregator 
class on the dataset. The dendrogram was cut at a height of 20 to 
generate groups of similar clusters. For each group, differential 
expression testing was performed pairwise between the clusters. 
The package diffxpy was used to run t-tests on the log expression 
values. Genes were considered differentially expressed if 1) q-value 
was less than 0.01, 2) log fold change was greater than 2, and 3) 
at least 30% of cells expressed the gene in one cluster, and the 
percentage of expressing cells in the second cluster was less than 
70% of the percentage of expressing cells in the first cluster. Clusters 
with less than one differentially expressed gene were merged. The 
procedure was repeated until the remaining clusters in each group 
were distinguishable from one another by at least one differential­
ly expressed gene.
tSNE of all cells and dendrogram of all clusters
We computed HPF to 30 components and then used the Art of 
tSNE heuristics48 (but with exaggeration=1.5, perplexity=150) to 
obtain the tSNE layout in Figure 1. The use of a relatively small 
number of HPF components resulted in a globally smoother 
and more connected manifold, at the expense of reduced local 
resolution. This tSNE was used for visualization only; clustering 
and annotation was performed as described above.
The final dendrogram was generated by running Cyto­
graph’s Aggregator class on 942 clusters with parameter mask set 
to ['cellcycle', 'sex', 'ieg', 'mt'], which excludes cell-cycle, sex-related, 
immediate-early, and mitochondrial genes from the analysis. Both 
the cluster dendrogram and the tSNE of all cells were computed 
with a more recent version of cytograph (commit 8a5518e­
81197f5aa9d54565cbce3875738d8dac9).
Glia analysis
Clustering
Cells belonging to clusters 751 and above were pulled from the 
dataset. The mean expression of each gene was calculated for every 
cluster, and a new dendrogram was calculated based on the correla­
tion of gene expression between clusters. The resulting dendrogram 
was cut at a height of 1, resulting in 18 meta-clusters that were sub­
sequently annotated based on gene expression. Independently, a 
new t-SNE was calculated on this subset of cells using cytograph 
with the parameters described above except n_factors: 50 and 
mask: ['cellcycle', 'sex', 'ieg', 'mt', 'ery'] to mask cell-cycle, sex-relat­
ed, immediate-early, mitochondrial, and blood-related genes. 
Differential expression
Differential expression was calculated using the diffxpy 
package. A t-test was calculated on the log gene-expression values 
normalized by total molecules per cell. Independently, the fraction 
of positive cells for each gene was calculated for both neurogenic 
radial glia and glioblasts. Differentially expressed genes were then 
filtered for those with q-values less than 10-5 and expressed in at 
least 10% of either neurogenic radial glia or glioblasts.
Cell type scores
Cell-type scores were based on the top 200 enriched genes for 
astrocytes and OPCs in the adolescent mouse dataset. The score 
was calculated as the percentage of total genes expressed in each 
cell that belonged to the enriched set.
Region classifier
1 200 cells were sampled from each of six subsets of the 
dataset: early glia, neurogenic glia, gliogenic glia, OPCs, neu­
roblasts, and neurons. Equal numbers were sampled from the 
forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain. Each of these subsets was used 
to train a classifier for region that was then tested on the other 
five groups. The sklearn GradientBoostingClassifier was regular­
ized with the parameter max_features, and max_features=50 was 
chosen after testing the performance of the classifier over a range 
of values. Default values were used for other parameters. Precision, 
recall, and F1 scores were calculated separately for forebrain, 
midbrain, and hindbrain cells and averaged.
Gastrulation and neural plate analysis
The dataset from Pijuan-Sala et al. was prefiltered by removing cells 
not classified by the authors. Feature selection using a CV-mean 
was used to restrict the analysis to the most variable 3 500 genes. 
Analogously 5 223 genes were selected for the E7-8 dataset (2 000 for 
the primitive streak-stage; non-neural lineage-restricted, and early 
neuroepithelial). We considered the intersection between these two 
gene sets. The count tables were imputed by k-nearest neighbor 
pooling46 (k=30) and then log-transformed. To place the E7-8 data 
on the t-SNE embedding for Pijuan-Sala et al., we first computed 
the similarity (Pearson’s R) between each of the E7-8 cells and the 
reference cells. Then we assigned to each cell the average of the 
embedding coordinates computed over the 20 most similar cells in 
the reference.
The signature score for neuroblast from different regions was 
obtained considering genes enriched in neuroblasts sampled from 
forebrain, midbrain and hindbrain. In particular, we considered 
the neuroblast clusters sampled between E9 and E13 and computed 
an enrichment score for each of the areas and selected the top 200 
genes. Neuroblast clusters were defined using a rule based on the 
auto-annotations: negative for the cell cycle label and positive for 
one of the neuronal lineage labels (Glut, GABA, Glyc, etc.). Finally 
to compute the signature score for each cell we used the same 
approach adopted by Seurat49. We calculate the Z-scores for each 
of the genes in the set, then average them and normalize the result 
using a reference computed by drawing random gene samples.
Spatial localization of organizer-like clusters
We used the R package Voxunt to determine the developing brain 
regions most likely to host each of the organizer-like cell clusters40. 
The tool constructs a 3D similarity map of the cells using a reference 
spatial expression atlas that can be interpreted as a putative locali­
zation for the cells. Briefly, the tool computes the Spearman corre­
lation between average gene expression of a scRNA-seq cluster and 
each voxel of a gene expression model constructed from the ISH 
experiments of the Allen Brain Developmental Atlas50. To compute 
the similarity map we used the same script for E11 and E13, where 
we call variable_genes with nfeatures=150 and run voxel_map and 
plot_map using default parameters.
In situ sequencing analysis
Channel images were merged into a multichannel tiff image and 
aligned to a reference round. The channel used for tile alignment 
was the DAPI stain. Following alignment, the tiles were stitched 
together using Microscopy Image Stitching Tool (MIST51) and sub­
sequently split into non-overlapping 2000×2000 pixel tiles. Each 
individual tile was then top-hat filtered, the RCPs were segmented 
and the intensity was measured in each channel. The RCP was then 
assigned the base with the highest intensity. The public repository 
for the code used can be found at https://github.com/Moldia/Tools. 
Gene expression was summarized considering a isotropic grid 
which step 16 μm and counting the called dots for each gene. 
The data was smoothed with gaussian filter with a bandwidth of 
24 μm. The grid location with a total of called dots smaller than 
4 were excluded from the clustering analysis. As a preprocessing 
before clustering the counts were transformed with the variance 
stabilizing transform log2(x+1), PCA was computed and the top 40 
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

12
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
principal components retained. Finally, we performed a KMeans 
clustering setting n_cluster=40.
Glioblastoma analysis
To identify aneuploid cells, we calculated the normalized sum 
of expression on each chromosome, and then fit a 5-component 
Bayesian Gaussian mixture model to the 24-dimensional 
chromosome expression data of all cells (Extended Data Figure 
9a-c). We then inferred the maximum a posteriori component label 
for each cell, and the posterior probability. We manually examined 
these labels for all clusters to determine which components cor­
responded to aneuploid cells, and which were euploid. We then 
mapped human to mouse genes and re-clustered and re-annotated 
the tumor data using cytograph to ensure comparable analyses. To 
match tumor clusters with reference cell types, we first computed 
the top 25 enriched genes for each reference cell type (develop­
mental and adolescent). For each reference cluster and each tumor 
cluster, we then computed a matching score as the product of 
gene enrichment in the tumor for the 25 top enriched genes in the 
reference cell type. Thus, a high matching score reflected highly 
specific expression of the set of genes specifically expressed in the 
reference cell type. The top-scoring matching cell type was selected 
for each tumor cluster. For immune cells, we lacked reference data, 
and therefore called those cell types manually based on well-known 
markers of macrophages, B cells and T cells.
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

13
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
Extended Data Figure 1 | Experimental design and data quality. a, Stereo microscope photographs illustrating the tissue dissection 
strategy. b, Samples composing the dataset. The area of each circle is porportional to the number of cells sampled. Color indicates the 
region dissected. c, Histogram showing the distribution of number of UMIs per cell detected accross the entire dataset. d, Histogram 
showing the distribution of number of genes detected per cell accross the entire dataset. e, Distribution of UMIs per cell aggregated per 
age group. f, Distribution of number of genes detected per cell aggregated per age group.
0
25000
0
0.5
1.0
1e3
Age E7
0
25000
0
1
2
1e3
Age E11
0
25000
0
1
2
3
1e3
Age E15
0
25000
0
2
4
6
1e2
Age E8
0
25000
0
2
4
1e3
Age E12
0
25000
0
2
4
1e3
Age E16
0
25000
0.0
0.5
1.0
1e3
Age E9
0
25000
0
2
4
1e3
Age E13
0
25000
0
2
4
1e3
Age E17
0
25000
0
1
2
1e3
Age E10
0
25000
0
1
2
3
1e3
Age E14
0
25000
0
1
2
3
1e3
Age E18
UMI counts
# Cells
# Cells
0
5000
0
2
4
1e2
Age E7
0
5000
0.0
0.5
1.0
1e3
Age E11
0
5000
0
1
2
1e3
Age E15
0
5000
0
2
4
1e2
Age E8
0
5000
0
1
2
1e3
Age E12
0
5000
0
1
2
1e3
Age E16
0
5000
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
1e2
Age E9
0
5000
0
1
2
1e3
Age E13
0
5000
0
1
2
1e3
Age E17
0
5000
0.0
0.5
1.0
1e3
Age E10
0
5000
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
1e3
Age E14
0
5000
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
1e3
Age E18
a
b
c
d
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Expressed genes
0
5
10
15
# Cells
mean (1934)
median (1809)
e
f
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
UMI counts
0
1
2
3
4
# Cells
mean (5766)
median (4235)
1e4
E18
E17
E16
E15
E14
E13
E12
E11
E10
E9
E8
E7
700
3000
5000
Embryo
Head
Forebrain
Dorsal
Ventral
Ventro-lateral
Ventro-thalamic
Midbrain
Dorsal
Ventral
Hindbrain
Forebrain
Midbrain Hindbrain
# Cells
Independent samples
Timepoints
1e3
Expressed genes
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

14
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
c
f
d
e
Number of UMIs
11000
1000
UMIs
Detected Genes
3500
400
Genes
Fraction Unspliced
30%
3%
% Unspliced
a
b
Primitive
erythropoiesis
Cell cycle score
Deﬁnitive
erythropoiesis
Choroid plexus
Fibroblasts
Glioblasts
Microglia
Neuroblasts
Neuronal
OPCs
Vascular
Early neural tube
Ectoderm
Endoderm
Mesoderm
Neural crest
Radial glia
E8
E10
E12
E14
E16
E18
Extended Data Figure 2 | Global properties of gene expression during brain development. a, Erythrocyte clusters expressing Hbb-bh1 
(>500 UMIs/cell; primitive erythropoiesis) or Hbb-bs (>5000 UMIs/cell; definitive erythropoiesis). b, Histogram of cell cycle scores (left) and 
cell cycle scores indicated on the main tSNE (right). c, Distribution of total UMIs per cell. d, Distribution of total number of genes detected 
per cell. e, Distribution of the fraction of unspliced reads detected per cell. f, Distribution of major classes of cells by gestational age.
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

15
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
GABAergic
Axon guidance
Neuroblast
Glutamatergic
Peptidergic
Cortex deep layer
Cortex shared
(all cells)
Cortex superﬁcial layer
Predicted expression 
(expected value θβ)
Observed expression
Hierarchical Poisson factorization
Xc × g ~ Poisson(θc × k βk × g)
a
d
e
i
f
g
h
b
c
Jensen-Shannon distance
Hierarchical Poisson factorization
Xc × g ~ Poisson(θc × k βk × g)
Extended Data Figure 3 | Computational methods. a, Illustration of hierarchical Poisson factorization (HPF) on a small subset of cells 
using 32 components, showing component loadings across cells for components 4 and 2, illustrating the modularity of components. b, 
Loadings of all components for two single cells, illustrating the sparseness of components; each cell is approximated by a small number 
of non-negative components. c, Scatterplot showing observed expression of all genes in all cells, versus predicted expression based 
on 96 HPF components. 93% of datapoints were located inside the 95% confidence intervals of the Poisson distribution, demonstrat­
ing the accuracy of the HPF representation. d, HPF analysis of all neuronal cells from the full dataset using 32 components, showing that 
HPF captures essential features of forebrain neurogenesis. Each subplot shows a tSNE colored by component loading, a list of genes 
with high loading in the component, and bar chart and histogram showing the regional distributions of cells (cf. the distribution of all 
neuronal cells, lower right). Nine selected components are shown, related to forebrain based on the regional distribution of cells with 
high loadings. e, Example of cells (blue) that fall within a Jensen-Shannon distance of 0.36 of a single cell (black circle), corresponding to 
0.5 bits of Shannon entropy. f, The relationship between the Kullback-Leibler divergence and the Jensen-Shannon distance, showing that 
in this case 0.36 JSD corresponds to 0.5 bits. g, Two virtual cells — Poisson samples drawn from a single HPF vector — showing the dis­
tribution of pure Poisson expression noise. h, The effect of switching two HPF components, resulting in a change in expression of many 
genes and a Jensen-Shannon distance of 0.68 bits. i, The curse of dimensionality. As the number of HPF components is increased, the 
difference in Jensen-Shannon distance between nearest-neighbors and far-away cells on the manifold decreases.
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

16
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
Cephalic Other
Cephalic Primitive Streak
HematProg
DVE2
DVE1
AEMeso
Epi3
Epi5
Epi1
GermC
CardCr1
CardCr2
Mesod4
Mesod2
Mesod1
HemEndPr
Mesn1
Mesod3
Epi4
a
b
d
c
Angiobl1
NeurCrest1
NeurCrest2
PxMeso1
PxMeso2
MesnPhar
Angiobl2
Ectoderm
VEnd
FGut1
Epi2
TrophEct
MesPer
MesOst
CardCres
ParMeso
ExVE1
ExVE2
ExVE3
ExVE4
EryProg
HematProg
DVE2
DVE1
AEMeso
Epi3
Epi5
Epi1
GermC
CardCr1
CardCr2
Mesod4
Mesod2
Mesod1
HemEndPr
Mesn1
Mesod3
Epi4
Tal1
Fli1
Gata2
Igf2
Tdo2
Hoxb6
Capn6
Ahnak
Col1a1
Stard8
Cdx4
Dusp2
Crb2
Adrb3
Alx1
Cpa2
Myl1
Tbx6
Cdh20
Kcnh7
Rimbp2
Gpx2
Cpn1
Kitl
Ermn
Six3
Gsc
1110017D15Rik
Tppp3
Noto
Gm26688
Dlx5
Vsx1
Lrp2
Lypd6b
Kif1a
Otx2os1
Jph4
Pcsk2
Pipox
Nkx1-2
Foxb1
Cdkn1a
Angiobl1
NeurCrest1
NeurCrest2
PxMeso1
PxMeso2
MesnPhar
Angiobl2
Ectoderm
VEnd
FGut1
Epi2
TrophEct
MesPer
MesOst
CardCres
ParMeso
ExVE1
ExVE2
ExVE3
ExVE4
RBC
EryProg
Maf
Mbl2
Slc7a8
Abcc2
Abca3
Gjb1
Cldn2
Thnsl2
Tfec
Fcgrt
Hsd17b2
2810459M11Rik
Galm
Actc1
Ttn
Ankrd1
Cdh5
Icam2
Ctla2a
Etv2
Tal1
Lmo2
Meox1
Tcf15
Aldh1a2
Tcf21
Grid2
Igfbpl1
Col3a1
Sparcl1
Lum
Dlx2
Ccl6
Dlx1
Sox10
Plp1
Tfap2b
Tac2
Ager
Vwc2
Tdo2
Hoxb6
Postn
Cer1
Trh
Nptx2
Akr1c12
Nlrp4e
Lhx1
Zic3
Atp9a
Apela
Pyy
9030622O22Rik
Nkx2-3
A830018L16Rik
Gm16136
Extended Data Figure 4 | Neurulation stage. a, tSNE embedding of cells related to the cephalic primitive streak, colored and labelled 
by cluster identity. b, Heatmap showing genes enriched in the clusters shown in a. c, tSNE embedding of cells related to other lineages, 
colored and labelled by cluster identity. d, Heatmap showing genes enriched in the clusters shown in (c).
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

17
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
Dorsalizing
Ventralizing
Antihem
(early)
Antihem 
(late)
FP
Hindbrain
FP
Hypothalamic 
FP
Midbrain
ZLI
Cortical
Hem (late)
Cortical
Hem
RP
Hindbrain
Anteromedial
cerebral pole
Isthmus
Caudal
Isthmus
Rostral
Similarity
0
Max
Tox2
Nkx2-2
Foxa2
Nkx6-1
Foxj1
Lmx1b
Foxa1
Phox2b
Sim1
Pou3f1
Nkx2-1
Six6
Six3
Rax
Maf
Gli3
Lmx1a
Dmrt3
Fezf1
Lmo2
Dmrt1
Msx1
Bnc2
Msx2
Eya4
Mafb
Rxrg
Olig3
Pax5
Hes3
Pax8
Klhl14
Dbx1
Msx3
Irs4
Lhx5
Emx2
Gsx2
Dlx2
Hopx
Ptx3
Fezf2
Pax6
Nr2e1
Nkx6-2
Irx3
Tal2
Irx1
En1
Nkx2-9
En2
Pax7
Pax3
Irx5
Hoxb1
Hoxb2
Tfap2c
Sp8
Ptch1
Igfbp5
Spon1
Ntn1
Metrnl
Wnt5a
Lrtm1
Dkk2
Calca
Apela
Pappa
Dlk1
Fzd5
Rspo3
Wnt9a
Wnt3a
Rspo1
Bmp6
Wnt7b
Rspo2
Wnt4
Ntf3
Ror1
Bambi
Cx3cl1
Wnt3
Fzd10
Stum
Sost
Trhr
Fgf17
Fgf3
Ism1
Cnpy1
Tshr
Veph1
Sema5a
Fzd8
Ptprz1
Ostm1
Ngf
Fgfr3
Bmp7
Folr1
Wnt5b
Efna2
Egfem1
Slit1
Ednrb
Ephb2
Ctgf
Unc5c
Antihem
(late)
Antihem
(early)
Anteromedial
Cerebral Pole
Isthmus
Caudal
Isthmus
Rostral
Roof Plate
Hindbrain
Roof Plate
Midbrain
Cortical Hem
(late)
Cortical Hem
(early)
Hypothalamic
ﬂoor plate
Zona limitans
Intrathalamica
Floor plate
Hindbrain
Floor Plate
Midbrain
c
d
b
e
Antihem
(late)
Antihem
(early)
Anteromedial
Cerebral Pole
Isthmus
Caudal
Isthmus
Rostral
Roof Plate
Hindbrain
Roof Plate
Midbrain
Cortical Hem
(late)
Cortical Hem
(early)
Hypothalamic
ﬂoor plate
Zona limitans
Intrathalamica
Floor plate
Hindbrain
Floor Plate
Midbrain
Transcription factors
Ligands and receptors
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sorted Cell types
0
1
2
3
4
5
Max Z-score accross pathways
Roof Plate Hindbrain
Floor Plate Midbrain
Cortical Hem (late)
Antihem (late)
Anteromedial Cerebral Pole
Isthmus Caudal
Floor plate Hindbrain
Zona limitans Intrathalamica
Roof Plate Midbrain
Antihem (early)
Hipothalamic Floor plate
Isthmus Rhostral
Cortical Hem (early)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sorted Cell types
0
1
2
3
Avg. Z-score
Anteromedial Cerebral Pole
Isthmus Caudal
Isthmus Rhostral
Cortical Hem (early)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sorted Cell types
0
1
2
3
4
Avg. Z-score
Floor Plate Midbrain
Floor plate Hindbrain
Zona limitans Intrathalamica
Hipothalamic Floor plate
Hedgehog
Fgfs
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sorted Cell types
0
1
2
3
4
Avg. Z-score
Cortical Hem (late)
Roof Plate Hindbrain
Cortical Hem (early)
Roof Plate Midbrain
R-Spondins
Pathways Combined
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sorted Cell types
0
1
2
3
4
5
Avg. Z-score
Roof Plate Hindbrain
Roof Plate Midbrain
Cortical Hem (late)
Cortical Hem (early)
Floor Plate Midbrain
Bmps
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sorted Cell types
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Avg. Z-score
Roof Plate Midbrain
Roof Plate Hindbrain
Cortical Hem (late)
Cortical Hem (early)
Zona limitans Intrathalamica
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sorted Cell types
0
1
2
3
4
Avg. Z-score
Antihem (late)
Antihem (early)
Neuregulins
a
Wnts
Radialglia-like cluster
Cluster in Figure 3
Extended Data Figure 5 | Secondary organizers. a, Cell types sorted on the basis the average Z-score of morphogens genes grouped 
in categories on the basis of gene family and the neurulation literature. Hedgehog (Shh and Ptch1), R-spondins (Rspo1, Rspo2, Rspo3 and 
Rspo4), Wnts (Wnt1, Wnt3a, Wnt5a and Wnt8b), Neuregulins (Nrg1, Nrg3 and Fgf7), Fgfs (Fgf8, Fgf15, Fgf17 and Fgf18), Bmps  (Bmp6, Bmp7 
and Gdf7). Cell types displayed in red were localized and analyzed in Figure 3 and in the panels below. b, Summary of the plots in (a) 
showing the maximum average Z-score achieved. c, Putative localization of the cell populations by gene expression matching with the 
Allen Brain ISH Atlas. Images show a 2D projection of a 3D voxel map colored by the Spearman correlation coefficient between the voxel 
expression and the cluster. d, Beeswarm plots showing the expression of a selection of transcription factors that were found enriched in 
the different organizer cell populations. e, Beeswarm plots showing the gene expression of enriched receptors and ligands whose distri­
bution in relation to organizers had not been described. Genes in (d) and (e) were selected for HybISS profiling.
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

18
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
a
Clusters
b
     Cluster1
     Cluster2
     Cluster3
     Cluster4
     Cluster5
     Cluster6
     Cluster7
     Cluster8
     Cluster9
     Cluster10
     Cluster11
     Cluster12
     Cluster13
     Cluster14
     Cluster15
     Cluster16
     Cluster17
     Cluster18
     Cluster19
     Cluster20
     Cluster21
     Cluster22
     Cluster23
     Cluster24
     Cluster25
     Cluster26
     Cluster27
     Cluster28
     Cluster29
     Cluster30
     Cluster31
     Cluster32
     Cluster33
     Cluster34
     Cluster35
     Cluster36
     Cluster37
     Cluster38
     Cluster39
     Cluster40
Foxa1
Slit1
Lmx1b
Lmx1a
Maf
Ptx3
Foxj1
Foxa2
Metrnl
Apela
Nkx2-2
Spon1
Ntn1
Sim1
Lrtm1
Fgf3
Ephb2
Lhx5
Wnt8b
Dbx1
Dlx2
Gsx2
Nkx2-1
Pou3f1
Fzd5
Six3
Six6
Tox2
Shh
Rspo2
Rspo3
Folr1
Hopx
Bmp6
Sp8
Emx2
Tfap2c
Fzd8
Fezf2
Dmrt3
Wnt5b
Gli3
Ptprz1
Wnt7b
Ostm1
Irs4
Nr2e1
Fezf1
Tshr
Eya4
Ntf3
Dlk1
Ptch1
Bnc2
Ccn2
Igfbp5
Bmp7
Pax7
Dkk2
Bmp4
Msx1
Wnt5a
Msx2
Sema5a
Bambi
Wnt4
Dmrt1
Ngf
Stum
Trhr
Calca
Nrg3
Lmo2
Ism1
Veph1
Rxrg
Rax
Nkx2-9
Tal2
Nrg1
Unc5c
Ror1
Irx1
Nkx6-1
Phox2b
Nkx6-2
Hoxb1
Ednrb
Fgfr3
Hoxb2
Irx3
Irx5
Pax6
Pappa
Msx3
Olig3
Pax3
Wnt3a
Cx3cl1
Sost
Mafb
Rspo1
Wnt9a
Wnt1
Wnt3
Egfem1
Fgf15
Fzd10
Efna2
Klhl14
Fgf8
Fgf17
Trh
Hes3
Pax8
Pax5
En1
En2
Cnpy1
Max
0
Expression
(Avg. dot count)
Extended Data Figure 6 | In situ sequencing analysis. a, Twelve sagittal sections of the E10.5 embryo with pixels colored by the clusters 
defined using the 119 genes measured by HybSS. Cluster colors are overlaid onto the DAPI channel plotted in grayscale. The sections span 
the neural tube from lateral (above) to medial position (below). Scale bars, 480 μm. b, Heatmap displaying the gene expression of each 
of the 119 genes measured by HybSS in the embryonic regions defined by clustering. Expression was quantified counting dots on a grid 
with 16 m steps and the dot count was averaged across all the grid points assigned to each cluster.
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

19
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
Early glia
Neurogenic glia
Glioblasts
OPCs
Neuroblasts
Neurons
0.5
1.0
F1 score
Forebrain
Early glia
Neurogenic glia
Glioblasts
OPCs
Neuroblasts
Neurons
0.5
1.0
Midbrain
Early glia
Neurogenic glia
Glioblasts
OPCs
Neuroblasts
Neurons
0.6
0.8
1.0
Hindbrain
Lhx2
Emx2
Otx2
En1
Pax3
Irx3
Meis1
Hoxa2
Hoxb2
Hoxb3
Choroid plexus
Anterior roof plate
Dorsal diencephalon
Ventral forebrain radial glia
Dorsal forebrain radial glia
Telencephalon glioblast
OEC
Schwann
COP
OPC
Glia progenitor
Ependymal
Floor plate
Non-telencephalon glioblast
Bergmann glia
Posterior roof plate
Hindbrain radial glia
Midbrain radial glia
h
Agt
Gfap
Aqp4
Egfr
Dll1
Dll3
Mfng
Egfr+ Dll1+ cells
Choroid plexus
Anterior roof plate
Dorsal diencephalon
Ventral forebrain radial glia
Dorsal forebrain radial glia
Telencephalon glioblast
OEC
Schwann
COP
OPC
Glia progenitor
Ependymal
Floor plate
Non-telencephalon glioblast
Bergmann glia
Posterior roof plate
Hindbrain radial glia
Midbrain radial glia
Fb
Fd
Fv
Fvl
Fvt
Hb
Mb
Mbd
Mbv
9 101112131415161718
Cycling
781
782
783
784
775
779
776
777
778
780
774
773
772
768
769
770
771
873
767
766
765
756
757
762
764
763
758
759
761
760
755
752
753
754
751
916
915
888
889
890
891
892
880
881
882
879
874
876
878
875
877
885
886
887
884
883
893
871
870
869
864
866
865
863
862
861
933
932
931
930
921
922
859
860
929
925
924
928
927
926
914
913
809
810
858
868
867
787
786
785
788
789
790
791
792
793
801
803
802
805
804
806
807
808
800
798
797
799
796
795
794
840
841
842
843
844
832
848
845
847
846
850
851
852
853
854
855
856
857
830
829
828
827
825
824
826
872
837
839
836
820
821
812
811
822
823
831
819
818
813
833
838
817
816
815
814
912
911
910
909
894
918
917
919
849
920
923
895
896
902
901
900
899
835
834
906
907
908
903
905
904
898
897
936
934
935
937
938
939
941
940
a
d
e
g
i
j
k
b
c
f
−10
0
10
log2(fold change)
0
100
200
300
-log10(qval)
Neurog1
Neurog2
Dlx2
Olig1
Olig2
Aqp4
Grm5
Stat3
Early glia
Neurogenic radial glia
Glioblasts
OPCs
Neuroblasts
Neurons
Training set:
5
10
50
100
200
Max features
0.6
0.8
Precision
5
10
50
100
200
Max features
0.6
0.8
Recall
5
10
50
100
200
Max features
0.6
0.8
F1 score
Early glia
Neurogenic radial glia
Glioblasts
OPCs
Neuroblasts
Neurons
Training set:
Extended Data Figure 7 | Glial diversity. a, Cells from clusters 751 and above were pulled from the complete dataset. Data were 
aggregated by cluster, features were selected, and a dendrogram was built using correlation distance. The dendrogram was then cut at a 
height of 1 (dotted line). Colors indicate the 18 resultant meta-clusters. b, A t-SNE embedding was calculated on the same subset of cells. 
Cells are colored by their original cluster (left) and meta-cluster cut from the dendrogram (right). c, Cells are colored by their labels for 
differential gene-expression testing: purple- glioblast; blue-  neurogenic; grey - not included in testing. d, Select genes are annotated on 
a volcano plot illustrating differential expression between neurogenic and gliogenic radial glia. The dotted line denotes the significance 
threshold (q = 10-5). The range of the x-axis was chosen to capture statistically significant genes. Cell-cycle genes are colored orange. e, 
For each meta-cluster the height of the bar indicates the percentage of cells from each tissue (left) or each embryonic stage (middle) or 
that are cycling (right). Abbreviations are Fb - forebrain, Fd - dorsal forebrain, Fv - ventral forebrain, Fvl - ventrolateral forebrain, Fvt - ven­
trothalamic forebrain, Hb - hindbrain, Mb - midbrain, Mbd - dorsal midbrain, Mbv - ventral midbrain. f, Expression dot plots are shown 
for select genes. g, Cells selected for region classification are colored: blue - early glia, orange - neurogenic glia, green - glioblasts, red - 
OPCs, purple - neuroblasts, brown - neurons. Grey cells were not selected. h, For a range of parameter values (max_features), a gradient 
boosting classifier was fit to each training set and tested on the five remaining training sets. Average precision, recall, and F1 scores are 
plotted for each parameter value and training set. i, F1 scores for each gradient boosting classifier (max_features = 50) are shown for 
forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain cells. The color of each line indicates which cells were used to train the classifier (colored as in g). 
j, Feature importances for each gradient boosting classifier were used to rank genes, and the intersection of the 100 most important 
genes for all six classifiers is shown on the x-axis. Expression dot plots are shown for each of these genes. k, Cells are colored by log gene 
expression for the indicated genes. Grey indicates no expression. Cells that are positive for both Egfr and Dll1 are colored blue.
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

20
La Manno, Siletti et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain
100 µm
Emx1
Eomes
Tbr1
Satb2
E11.5
E13.5
E15.5
E18.5
E11.5
E13.5
E15.5
E18.5
E11.5
E13.5
E15.5
E18.5
E11.5
E13.5
E15.5
E18.5
Serotonergic
Midbrain dopaminergic
Head
Forebrain
Midbrain
Hindbrain
Neurons
Glioblasts
OPCs
Radial glia
Fibroblasts
Neural crest
Neuroepithelium
Root cell
Tip cell
Information radius
Shortest path
a
e
f
g
h
k
i
j
E6
E10
E14
E18
Pseudoage
b
c
d
Astrocytes
Oligodendrocyte precursor cells
Fibroblasts (meninges)
Nhlh1, E11.5
Nhlh2, E11.5
Forebrain
Midbrain
Hindbrain
Spinal cord
Extended Data Figure 8 | Pseudolineage analysis and neurogenesis. a, Pseudolineage tree algorithm, computing shortest paths to the 
root cell passing only through neighbors inside the information radius. b, Isolating the pseudolineages terminating in a selected cluster, 
and projecting to the pseudoage axis. c, Ten selected pseudolineages colored by major class, on the tSNE of Figure 1 with greyscale 
showing the geodesic distance to the root from every cell. d, The same ten selected pseudolineages colored by tissue. e-i, Pseudolin­
eages of astrocytes (e), OPCs (f), fibroblasts (g), hindbrain serotonergic neurons (h), and midbrain dopaminergic neurons (i). Each plot 
shows a randomly selected subset of pseduolineages terminating in the indicated clusters, as well as expression of selected genes in 
pseudoage bins along the lineage (calculated for all cells in the lineage). The region and class of each cell is indicated at the bottom. 
Isolation of pseudolineages terminating in a selected cluster, and projection to the pseudoage axis. j, Astrocyte and OPC scores. k, RNA 
in situ hybridization of mouse embryonic brain at the indicated timepoints, showing genes relevant to the cortical lineage (image credit: 
Allen Institute). Each subpanel shows a strip from ventricular zone to pia at four different ages.
.
CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 3, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint

===== Lange2020_CurrOpinGenesDev_VertebrateBrainRegeneration =====
Vertebrate brain regeneration – a community effort of
fate-restricted precursor cell types
Christian Lange and Michael Brand
The process of regeneration describes the full restoration of
tissue after destruction from injury or disease. Most mammals
show very limited ability for regeneration of adult organs, while
vertebrate models of regeneration such as ﬁsh and
salamanders, allow to study regeneration mechanism of the
brain, heart, limbs, retina, and other organs in adults. The
regenerative abilities of teleost ﬁsh are well documented, but
the cellular sources for regeneration, the speciﬁcity of source
cells for restored cell types, as well as the extent and ﬁdelity of
cell replacement are only beginning to be revealed for many
regeneration paradigms. Here, we highlight recent analyses of
adult neurogenesis and regeneration after injury in teleost ﬁsh
that address these issues, and we discuss how such analyses
can help to evaluate the role of different cells in tissues in the
regeneration process.
Address
Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden (CRTD), CMCB, Technische
Universita¨ t Dresden, Fetscherstr. 105, 01307, Dresden, Germany
Corresponding authors:
Lange, Christian (christian.lange3@tu-dresden.de),
Brand, Michael (michael.brand@tu-dresden.de)
Current Opinion in Genetics and Development 2020, 64:101–108
This review comes from a themed issue on Cell reprogramming,
regeneration and repair
Edited by Anto´ nio Jacinto and Pentao Liu
For a complete overview see the Issue and the Editorial
Available online 7th August 2020
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gde.2020.06.014
0959-437X/ã 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an
open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creative-
commons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Introduction
Regeneration, as the replacement of tissue that was lost
due to disease or injury, is widespread throughout the
metazoa, and is ubiquitous in vascular plants [1–4].
Among animal species, the extent of regenerative abili-
ties is differentially distributed. Among vertebrates, ﬁsh
and amphibians characteristically show a high regenera-
tive potential, with the ability to regenerate limbs or ﬁns,
several parts of the central nervous system including the
dorsal forebrain, retina and spinal cord, as well as the
heart and the pancreas. In contrast, mammals, including
humans, have generally much lower regeneration abili-
ties and display appreciable regeneration mainly in
tissues with high endogenous cell turnover and cell
replacement by large dedicated stem cell compartments
in the adult, such as the epidermis of the skin, the
intestine, or the cellular blood components [1,2]. In
addition, parenchymatic liver cells in mammals can
undergo de-differentiation, proliferation and re-differ-
entiate after liver resection to regenerate the organ. Of
note, within each group, species with ‘higher’ or ‘lower’
regeneration ability can exist, such as the Medaka — a
ﬁsh with for example, inability for heart regeneration —
or the African Spiny Mouse (Acomys spec.), as a mammal
capable of full skin regeneration, and deers that season-
ally shed and regenerate their antlers. Thus, regenera-
tion likely represents the ancestral state in vertebrates
that was lost in several species [5,6], but could —
potentially — be re-activated, given sufﬁcient mecha-
nistic knowledge. Thus, ﬁsh and amphibian models of
regeneration can be used to elucidate the mechanisms of
regeneration in competent species, in order to eventually
translate such insights to develop therapeutic strategies
for mammals.
Regeneration – a cell-based process
As tissues are composed of homogenous or heterogeneous
cells, their regeneration requires replacement of the lost
cells from a donor population. In the regenerating verte-
brate brain, the replacing cells are derived from tissue-
speciﬁc stem cell populations, which are activated upon
tissue loss (stem cell-based regeneration, often arising
from de-differentiation) [6,7].
Similar to ﬁsh (see below and Ref. 28), a neurogenic
response from radial glia-like stem cells was reported in
the telencephalon and spinal cord of adult salamanders
upon injury [8]. Interestingly, mature astrocytes in the
adult mammalian brain can be coaxed into neuron gen-
eration by forcing expression of key neurogenic tran-
scription factors from CNS development [9], suggesting
that mammalian mature tissue cells can be experimen-
tally induced to serve as donor cells for lost cell types
after injury. In conclusion, mature tissue cells (or at least
a subset of them) in ﬁsh and salamanders show a high
propensity to re-activate programs of tissue-renewal
upon injury. Several major questions arise from these
observations: 1) What is the contribution of individual
cell types (mature or proliferative precursor) to the
regenerated cells? 2) Is the full diversity of pre-existing
cell types restored? 3) What is the differentiation path
that connects donor cells and newly regenerated mature
cells?
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
www.sciencedirect.com 
Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 2020, 64:101–108

Cell type deﬁnition within and across species
As most mammals and non-mammalian animal models
of regeneration differ in many aspects of their physiol-
ogy, are their cells different, too? Traditionally, cell
types were operationally deﬁned by a combination of
cellular morphology, anatomical localization and expres-
sion of molecular markers. This typology was recently
challenged and signiﬁcantly reﬁned by the use of single
cell RNASeq (scRNASeq), which gathers genome-wide
gene expression information from single cells, thus
allowing to generate highly complex transcriptional
proﬁles to distinguish different cell types within a tissue.
ScRNASeq studies in the murine and human brain
revealed an unexpected diversity of neuronal and glial
cell types in a region-dependent, function-dependent-,
and differentiation-dependent manner, based on the
high resolution of the proﬁles [10,11]. Capitalizing on
this resolution, analysis of scRNASeq data identiﬁes
subtle, but consistent differences among cellular sub-
types, and reveals differentiation patterns connecting
tissue stem cells with their mature progeny along a
pseudo-time 
trajectory 
[11,12]. 
In 
particular, 
this
approach allows identifying previously unknown source
cells of regenerated mature tissue cells [13,14], or the
full diversity of differentiated progeny from known
source cells, without prior knowledge of their lineage
relationship [15]. Similarities and differences between
trajectories and lineages were recently reviewed [12].
Importantly, as scRNASeq uses proﬁles of mRNA abun-
dances as the sole metric, it also allows straightforward
comparisons of cellular expression proﬁles between
species. Although the methodology and standards for
cross species comparisons of cell types are not yet fully
established and under debate [16,17], they can be used
to chart general species differences and species-speciﬁc
reactions to injury between regenerating and non-regen-
erating species in a cell-type speciﬁc manner upon
injury [18].
Diversity of precursor potency in adult
neurogenesis and regeneration
During development, vertebrates possess two funda-
mental classes of neural precursors. Neuroepithelial
(NE) cells appear early, show epithelial hallmarks, such
as tight junctions, interkinetic nuclear migration and
proliferate rapidly, while radial glia are derived from
NE cells, but express typical glial markers such as brain
lipid binding protein (Blbp, encoded by the fabp7a
gene), glutamate synthetase (encoded by the glula
gene), gfap, cx43 and others, they loose tight junctions
and emerge concomitant with neurogenesis [19–21,22
]. In mammals, NE cells disappear during develop-
ment, but non-glial proliferating neural progenitors
with tight junctions (NE cells) are abundant in several
neurogenic 
niches 
in 
the 
adult 
zebraﬁsh 
brain
(Figure 1a) [21].
Telencephalon
In the telencephalon, as a well characterized brain area in
terms of adult neurogenesis and regeneration, radial glia
and NE cells are spatially segregated, with the ﬁrst
residing in the everted ventricular zone (VZ) of the dorsal
telencephalon, while NE cells form a substantial popula-
tion in the anterior ventral telencephalon (Figure 1b), but
also smaller populations in the medial and posterior-
lateral VZ, respectively [21]. Both precursor types are
neurogenic in the telencephalon, but major differences
exist in their proliferative activity, as signiﬁcantly more
NE cells proliferate in steady state compared with radial
glia that are quiescent in their majority [21,23]. How-
ever, both precursor populations continuously add neu-
rons to the adult telencephalon. Beside glial markers,
radial glia in the dorsal, but not NE cells in the ventral
telencephalon show high Notch activity and expression of
Notch target genes, such as her4.1, which promote neural
precursor quiescence and maintenance [21,24]. Con-
versely, NE cells in the ventral and medial telencephalon
express nestin-driven GFP, but not her4.1 or glial markers
[21]. Transcriptome analyses of radial glia at the single
cell level combined with lineage tracing [23] or alone
[25] revealed considerable heterogeneity among these
cells, based on cell cycle status (both studies) and spatial
distribution in the VZ [23]. Quiescent radial glia were
enriched for expression of classical glial markers such as
s100b, fabp7a, cx43 and glula, while proliferating radial glia
preferentially expressed proneural transcription factors
such as sox4a, ascl1a and neuronal genes like stmn1b
and tmsb [23,25], suggesting that radial glia proliferation
is mostly neurogenic. This conclusion is consistent with in
vivo live-imaging studies in the zebraﬁsh telencephalon
that found most RG divisions to generate differentiated,
non-RG progeny, partly identiﬁed as neurons [26]. Inter-
estingly, within the radial glia lineage in the telencepha-
lon, only radial glia were found as proliferating, arguing
against lineage ampliﬁcation by intermediate, non-glial
progenitor cells, as found in adult neurogenesis in the
mammalian brain. Comparison of the transcriptome pro-
ﬁle of zebraﬁsh radial glia with scRNAseq data from the
murine hippocampal neurogenic niche [27] showed the
strongest similarities with murine radial glia-like neural
stem cells and astrocytes, supporting the existence of a
quiescent astrocyte-like subpopulation and a proliferating
neurogenic subpopulation [23]. Importantly, radial glia
react to traumatic brain injury, excitotoxicity or amyloid
peptide injection with increased proliferation and neuro-
genesis to replace the lost neurons [28,29,30], leading to
apparently almost complete repair of the brain paren-
chyma [28]. In contrast, the role of telencephalic NE
cells for the regeneration process is currently undeﬁned.
Taken together, in the telencephalon, NE cells and radial
glia are both neurogenic and constantly generate a high
number of neurons integrating into the tissue in homeo-
stasis, which correlates to almost complete regeneration
after traumatic brain injury.
102 
Cell reprogramming, regeneration and repair
Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 2020, 64:101–108 
www.sciencedirect.com

Single cell brain regeneration Lange and Brand 
103
Figure 1
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Current Opinion in Genetics & Development
Neuronal cell types formed during homeostasis and regeneration in the adult zebrafish brain.
(a) Scheme of parasagittal section of adult zebrafish brain, indicating the rostro-caudal levels of the neurogenic niches shown in panels (b–e). (b)
Neurogenic niches in the dorsal (green frame) and ventral (magenta frame) telencephalon. NE cells (blue) in the ventral telencephalon are highly
proliferative and generate, among other types, GABA-ergic interneurons. Radial glia (green) in the dorsal telencephalon proliferate less and
generatetubb5+ newborn neurons, which mature towards glutamatergic projection neurons and GABA-ergic interneurons, respectively. (c) Radial
www.sciencedirect.com 
Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 2020, 64:101–108

Diencephalon
In the adult diencephalon, most proliferation occurs from
radial glia at the third ventricle in the preoptic and post-
optic area (Figure 1c), the thalamus and the hypothala-
mus [31,32]. These radial glia express CreERT2, driven
by the Notch-responsive her4.3 promotor, and increase
their proliferation upon chemical ablation of neurons in
the 
adjacent 
dopaminergic 
nuclei. 
Lineage 
tracing
showed that integration of radial glia-derived dopaminer-
gic neurons become integrated into the post-optic area
and the thalamus after neuronal ablation [5,31,32], as
they do in homeostasis [4]. Short term lineage tracing by
retention of her4.1-driven GFP showed that neurons of
the ventral entopeduncular nucleus (vENT) are derived
from radial glia, but the localization of the source radial
glia is currently unknown [23]. Precursors with neuroe-
pithelial 
characteristics 
were 
not 
reported 
in 
the
diencephalon.
Mesencephalon
Also the optic tectum of the mesencephalon, as the largest
brain area in zebraﬁsh, contains radial glia and NE cells in
a spatially segregated pattern. Radial glia occupy the VZ
at the apical side of the tectal hemispheres, while NE
cells populate the internal tectal marginal zone (TMZi)
(Figure 1d) and the external tectal marginal zone (TMZe)
at the anterior and posterior medial-most portion of the
hemispheres, 
respectively 
[33,34]. 
Mesencephalic
radial glia, the biggest precursor population in this brain
area, are quiescent in homeostasis and do not generate
neurons [33,35], in contrast to their telencephalic coun-
terparts. Adult tectal neurogenesis in homeostasis was
exclusively fueled by relatively small populations of NE
cells in the TMZi and TMZe that persisted from embry-
onic development to adulthood [33,34]. Stab lesion of
the optic tectum increased proliferation both in radial glia
and NE cells [33,35]. Lineage tracing and proliferation
analysis demonstrated that radial glia entered prolifera-
tion stochastically, arguing against heterogeneity among
radial glia in their reaction to the stab lesion [35]. Radial
glia did mainly amplify their population, similar to mam-
malian astrocytes after injury, and generated only few, if
any, neurons, showing another important biological dif-
ference to telencephalic radial glia. Initial reports showing
substantial neuron generation by radial glia after stab
injury [36] could not be reproduced by other laboratories
[33,35]. ScRNAseq identiﬁed distinct clusters of acti-
vated and cycling radial glia radial glia after stab lesion,
similar to the endogenously proliferating radial glia in the
homeostatic telencephalon [35]. Transcriptome com-
parison of gliogenic mesencephalic radial glia after stab
lesion and neurogenic telencephalic radial glia would be
interesting to identify mechanisms of cell fate control in
these related cell types. In contrast, NE cells of the TMZi
located close to the stab lesion were shown to increase
proliferation and neurogenesis, while NE cells in the
TMZi located farther away from the lesion site only
showed a trend towards more proliferation. Given the
relatively small size of the TMZi, reactive neurogenesis
after stab lesion is limited, correlating with incomplete
regeneration and long persistence of the lesion wound
[34]. Thus, radial glia and NE-cells can react differently
to injury by stab lesion (i) by predominant, if not exclu-
sive, self-ampliﬁcation or (ii) generation of neurons,
respectively. The use of genetic lineage tracing strategies
is imperative to allow to precisely distinguish the progeny
from radial glia, and from NE cells; such studies might be
able to resolve the reported inconsistencies in neuronal
generation ability from mesencephalic radial glia in dif-
ferent studies. Also, subtle differences in the lesion
paradigm may contribute to these differences. Further
studies are needed to elucidate the underlying reasons.
Cerebellum
The zebraﬁsh cerebellum contains two principal neural
precursor populations: i) NE-like progenitors in the upper
rhombic lip, which persist until adulthood and ii) pro-
genitors with radial glia characteristics in the VZ of the
cerebellum. The latter are predominant in the embryo
but strongly reduced during larval and juvenile develop-
ment and they only minorly contribute to adult neuro-
genesis in the cerebellum [37,38] (see Figure 1e). NE-
like progenitors generate granule cells throughout devel-
opment and adulthood, while VZ progenitors generate all
inhibitory neuronal cell types of the cerebellum, includ-
ing Purkinje and Golgi neurons [39]. In addition, Berg-
mann glia strongly induced proliferation after an early
injury. Whether these cells just amplify their population
or give rise to other cell types is currently unknown.
Given the quantitative dominance of the NE-like pro-
genitors in the adult cerebellum, tissue restoration after
trepanation (as the lesion method developed here) was
more pronounced in the granule layer than in the molec-
ular and the Purkinje cell layers, which hardly showed
regeneration at all in the adult. In contrast, cerebellar
regeneration at one month of age, when VZ progenitors
104 
Cell reprogramming, regeneration and repair
(Figure 1 Legend Continued) glia (green) at the third ventricle show low-level proliferation in homeostasis and generate dopaminergic neurons in
the adjacent neuronal nuclei. Proliferation and neurogenesis are amplified upon dopaminergic cell death by chemical ablation. (d) Radial glia
(green) in the tectal hemispheric VZ are quiescent in homeostasis, but induce their proliferation to amplify their population after injury (magenta
frame). NE-cells (blue) in the TMZi persist and generate tectal neurons in the adult and amplify proliferation and neurogenesis upon injury (green
frame). (e) NE-like (blue) and radial glia precursors (green) occupy spatially segregated niches in the cerebellum and generate divergent sets of
neuronal subtypes. Both precursor types are present and active in larval/juvenile fish (top), enabling regeneration of their progeny after injury, but
radial glia-like precursors disappear in the adult brain, leading to failure of regeneration of their progeny (bottom). NE-like precursor are present
throughout to fuel efficient regeneration of cerebellar granule cells.
Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 2020, 64:101–108 
www.sciencedirect.com

were still abundant and active, was much more complete,
compared to regeneration in adults, and newborn regen-
erated Purkinje cells were observed. Thus, also in the
cerebellum, NE-like and VZ progenitors showed diver-
sity in their potency to generate different neuronal cell
types in development, adult homeostasis and regenera-
tion. The extent of cerebellar tissue regeneration corre-
lated with their abundance of NE-like and VZ progenitors
during development, suggesting that their number and
rate of neurogenesis is one limiting factor for successful
tissue regeneration in the cerebellum [39].
Diversity of adult generated neuronal cell
types
While the full diversity of neuronal cell types is generated
from neuroepithelial cells and radial glia during develop-
ment [22,40], it is often unclear which types of neurons
are generated in the adult vertebrate brain. Traditionally,
newborn neurons in the adult brain were identiﬁed by
staining for cell type-speciﬁc markers, either co-staining
for incorporated thymidine analogs that were applied in
adult stages, or alternatively, in combination with lineage
tracing from precursor cells that was activated during
adulthood. Recently, more ﬁne-grained newborn cell
types, independent of marker-detection reagents, partic-
ularly 
in 
models 
of 
regeneration, 
were 
deﬁned
[13,15,23], using single cell sequencing alone or in
combination with lineage tracing. Altogether, such stud-
ies have informed about the neuronal cell types that are
generated in the adult brain in homeostasis, or during
regeneration. Our current understanding of adult-gener-
ated neuronal cell types is summarized in Table 1.
Telencephalon
Radial glia-derived adult-generated neurons account for
about 10% of all telencephalic cells [23] and are well
studied in regeneration, but we just begin to understand
which of the telencephalic neuronal cell types are gener-
ated in adulthood. Initial studies suggested that NE-cells
in 
the ventral telencephalon 
generate 
GABA-ergic
interneurons (Figure 1b) and a few tyrosine-hydroxy-
lase + dopaminergic neurons in adult homeostasis [41].
A recent study combined short-term lineage tracing and
single cell sequencing to analyze the diversity of neuronal
cell types among of radial glia progeny. Newly generated,
radial 
glia-derived 
neurons 
in 
the 
telencephalon
expressed the novel marker tubb5 and co-expressed mar-
kers of glutamatergic projection neuron identity (neurod1,
neurod6a/b, slc17a7 encoding vesicular glutamate recep-
tor) or GABA-ergic interneurons (gad1b, gad2), respec-
tively (Figure 1b). The tubb5-positive adult generated
neurons showed signs of immaturity, for example, lacking
mRNA expression of synaptic proteins [23]. Cross spe-
cies comparison with cells from the postnatal and adult
mouse hippocampus [27] showed their similarity to
neuroblasts and immature neurons, supporting their iden-
tity as early radial glia progeny. Together with the simi-
larity of zebraﬁsh radial glia to murine neural stem cells
and astrocytes, these ﬁndings reveal a remarkable evolu-
tionary conservation of adult neurogenic cell types
between ﬁsh and mammals also on the transcriptome
level [23,27]. Corresponding to cell types generated
in homeostasis, newly generated neurons after stab lesion
in the dorsal telencephalon expressed neurod1, a marker
of glutamatergic projection neurons, or parvalbumin and
prox1 as markers of interneurons, respectively [28].
These data indicate a substantial overlap of cell types
generated in homeostasis and after injury in the telen-
cephalon on the fundamental distinction of projection
neurons and interneurons. However, more studies are
needed with a ﬁner-grained analysis of adult-generated
neurons in the telencephalon that might verify or deﬁ-
nitely exclude regeneration-speciﬁc newborn neuronal
cell types.
Diencephalon
An early study reported low level adult neurogenesis of
dopaminergic neurons in the diencephalic preoptic area,
tectal nuclei and posterior tuberculum, together with a
substantial generation of serotonergic neurons in the
Single cell brain regeneration Lange and Brand 
105
Table 1
Identity of adult-generated neurons in the zebrafish brain in physiological homeostasis and upon injury-induced regeneration
Brain region 
Subregion 
Neuronal cell type 
Condition 
Reference
Telencephalon 
Ventral
telencephalon
GABAergic interneurons
dopaminergic neurons
Homeostasis 
[31,41]
Dorsal telencephalon 
Glutamatergic projection neurons
GABAergic interneurons
Homeostasis and regeneration 
[23,28]
Diencephalon 
Preoptic area (vENT) 
Glutamatergic projection neurons 
Homeostasis 
[23]
Preoptic area, postoptic
area/thalamus
Dopaminergic
neurons
Homeostasis and regeneration 
[31,32]
Hypothalamus 
Serotonergic neurons 
Homeostasis 
[31]
Cerebellum 
Granule layer 
Granule neurons 
Homeostasis and regeneration 
[37,38,39]
Molecular layer 
Inhibitory interneurons
Golgi cells
Homeostasis and regeneration
(1 month of age)
[38,39]
Purkinje layer 
Purkinje neurons, eurydendroid cells 
Homeostasis and regeneration
(1 month of age)
[39]
www.sciencedirect.com 
Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 2020, 64:101–108

adult hypothalamus [31]. Caldwell et al. demonstrated
adult-generated dopaminergic neurons in the post-optic
area and hypothalamus, which were regenerated, also in
other 
diencephalic 
areas, 
after 
chemical 
ablation
(Figure 1c). Interestingly, long-term replacement of
dopaminergic neurons spatially correlated with those
affected areas that also showed endogenous adult neuro-
genesis [32]. Also, adult neurogenesis of vENT neu-
rons, glutamatergic projection neuron that connect the
habenulae with the olfactory bulbs [42], was reported
[23]. These data show that diverse neuronal cell types
are generated in the different areas of the adult dien-
cephalon and that similar cell types are regenerated after
injury.
Cerebellum
In the adult cerebellum, several granule neurons and few
Bergmann glia are newly formed in homeostasis [31,37].
Other cerebellar neuronal cell types, such as interneurons
and Purkinje cells are not or hardly generated in the adult
cerebellum, but are abundantly born at larval/juvenile
stages (Figure 1e), corresponding with the abundance of
their VZ progenitors. Accordingly, a high number of
granule cells were formed after cerebellar injury, but only
very few interneurons and no Purkinje cells were formed
after regeneration in adult cerebellum [38,39].
Altogether, evidence from different brain regions shows a
remarkable complementarity of neuronal cell type gen-
eration after injury and in homeostasis in the regenerating
zebraﬁsh brain. More functional assays for the output are
needed to evaluate whether the natural replacement of
cell types is sufﬁcient for functional rehabilitation. A
recent example of the importance of such methods comes
from the Becker lab, where swimming behavior and
mating success were found to be permanently impaired
after dopaminergic ablation, despite the partial replace-
ment of dopaminergic neurons [32].
Downstream restricted progenitors
Radial glia and NE-cells were identiﬁed as major neuro-
nal precursor types, but whether downstream amplifying
progenitors or neuroblasts exist, like in mammalian adult
neurogenesis, remains debated. Clonal and population
analysis after lineage tracing of radial glia argue against
pronounced 
and 
widespread 
transient 
ampliﬁcation
downstream of radial glia [23,28,43]. On the other hand,
sox2-positive cells were postulated as non-glial progenitor
cells, and in vivo-imaging showed many dividing cells that
were radial glia progeny, but negative for glial markers,
suggesting they might be downstream amplifying pro-
genitors [27,44,45]. More studies are needed to clarify
the identity of these cells. Interestingly, in the fast-
growing brain of the killiﬁsh (Nothobranchus furzeri),
non-glial dividing cells represent the majority of neuro-
genic 
progenitors 
[46], 
suggesting 
that 
different
progenitor types can fuel neurogenesis in a given brain
region in ﬁshes.
Conclusions
Work over the last years has deﬁned many the activated
neural precursor populations that fuel regeneration in the
zebraﬁsh brain, and has begun to deﬁne the cell types that
are replaced after neuronal loss by injury. It will be
important, in future studies, to better understand whether
neural precursors yield the neuronal cell types they
generate according to the cell types that were lost, or
whether their repertoire of neuronal progeny that can be
generated is ﬁxed, that is, lineage restricted. Evidence
presented in this review argues for the latter possibility,
for example, in the cerebellum, but more subtle adaptive
plasticity with one precursor type is possible. A better
deﬁnition of cell types, and the discovery of correspond-
ing markers by scRNASeq in the developing and adult
zebraﬁsh brain, will aid such studies. Also, a surprisingly
high number of newly generated, immature neurons in
the zebraﬁsh telencephalon was recently found [23].
Thus, a further interesting topic will be to assess the
possible role that these immature neurons might play in
the regeneration process.
Author contribution
CL and MB conceptualized and designed this review, and
wrote the manuscript. The authors would also like to
thank other past and present members of the Brand lab
for many interesting discussions on the subjects discussed
here.
Conﬂict of interest statement
Nothing declared.
Funding
This work was supported by grants from the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG FZT 111, BR 1746/11-1),
European Union (European Research Council AdG Zf-
BrainReg) and the German Excellence Initiative (EXC
168) to MB and from the Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft (LA 4121/3-1) to CL.
References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review,
have been highlighted as:
 
of special interest
 of outstanding interest
1. 
Slack JM: Animal regeneration: ancestral character or
evolutionary novelty? EMBO Rep 2017, 18:1497-1508.
2. 
Brockes JP, Kumar A: Comparative aspects of animal
regeneration. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2008, 24:525-549.
3. 
Ikeuchi M, Favero DS, Sakamoto Y, Iwase A, Coleman D,
Rymen B, Sugimoto K: Molecular mechanisms of plant
regeneration. Annu Rev Plant Biol 2019, 70:377-406.
4. 
Grandel H, Brand M: Comparative aspects of adult neural stem
cell activity in vertebrates. Dev Genes Evol. 2013, 223:131-147.
106 
Cell reprogramming, regeneration and repair
Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 2020, 64:101–108 
www.sciencedirect.com

5. 
Fro¨ bisch NB, Bickelmann C, Olori JC, Witzmann F: Deep-time
evolution of regeneration and preaxial polarity in tetrapod limb
development. Nature 2015, 527:231-234.
6. 
Kaslin J, Ganz J, Brand M: Proliferation, neurogenesis and
regeneration in the non-mammalian vertebrate brain. Philos
Trans R Soc 2008, 363:101-122.
7. 
Alunni A, Bally-Cuif L: A comparative view of regenerative
neurogenesis in vertebrates. Development 2016, 143:741-753.
8. 
Joven A, Simon A: Homeostatic and regenerative neurogenesis
in salamanders. Prog Neurobiol 2018, 170:81-98.
9. 
Pe´ ron S, Berninger B: Reawakening the sleeping beauty in the
adult brain: neurogenesis from parenchymal glia. Curr Opin
Genet Dev 2015, 34:46-53.
10.

Zeisel A, Mun˜ oz-Manchado AB, Codeluppi S, Lo¨ nnerberg P, La
Manno G, Jure´ us A, Marques S, Munguba H, He L, Betsholtz C
et al.: Brain structure. Cell types in the mouse cortex and
hippocampus revealed by single-cell RNA-seq. Science 2015,
347:1138-1142
This paper is the ﬁrst to re-evaluate relation and diversity of neurons in the
adult mammalian forebrain by scRNASeq. It deﬁnes several novel sub-
classes of neuronal and glial cell types and reveals transcription factor
codes among related subclasses.
11. Lake BB, Chen S, Sos BC, Fan J, Kaeser GE, Yung YC, Duong TE,
Gao D, Chun J, Kharchenko PV et al.: Integrative single-cell
analysis of transcriptional and epigenetic states in the human
adult brain. Nat Biotechnol 2018, 36:70-80.
12. Baron CS, van Oudenaarden A: Unravelling cellular
relationships during development and regeneration using
genetic lineage tracing. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2019, 20:753-765.
13.

Lush ME, Diaz DC, Koenecke N, Baek S, Boldt H, St Peter MK,
Gaitan-Escudero T, Romero-Carvajal A, Busch-Nentwich EM,
Perera AG et al.: scRNA-Seq reveals distinct stem cell
populations that drive hair cell regeneration after loss of Fgf
and Notch signaling. eLife 2019, 8 pii: e44431
In this report, the authors use scRNASeq to identify previously the elusive
source cells driving hair cell regeneration in the zebraﬁsh lateral line. By
sampling homeostatic and regenerating neuromasts, they deﬁne the
neuromast cell types in the lateral line by transcriptomics, reveal the
neurogenic 
precursors 
and 
clarify 
molecular 
drivers 
of 
hair 
cell
regeneration.
14. Ayyaz A, Kumar S, Sangiorgi B, Ghoshal B, Gosio J, Ouladan S,
Fink M, Barutcu S, Trcka D, Shen J et al.: Single-cell
transcriptomes of the regenerating intestine reveal a revival
stem cell. Nature 2019, 569:121-125.
15.

Gerber T, Murawala P, Knapp D, Masselink W, Schuez M,
Hermann S, Gac-Santel M, Nowoshilow S, Kageyama J, Khattak S
et al.: Single-cell analysis uncovers convergence of cell
identities during axolotl limb regeneration. Science 2018, 362
pii: eaaq0681
The authors combine lineage tracing and scRNASeq to identify connec-
tive tissue as a major source cell population for blastema formation and
limb regeneration in the axolotl. Moreover, they clarify the molecular
regulation of connective tissue-derived cells in the blastema, thereby
identifying a reprogramming of connective tissue derived cells resembling
lim bud cells from development.
16. Sachkova M, Burkhardt P: Exciting times to study the identity
and evolution of cell types. Development 2019, 146 pii:
dev178996.
17. Shafer MER: Cross-species analysis of single-cell
transcriptomic data. Front Cell Dev Biol 2019, 7:175 http://dx.doi.
org/10.3389/fcell.2019.00175.
18. Hoang T, Wang J, Boyd P, Wang F, Santiago C, Jiang L, Lahne M,
Todd LJ, Saez C, Yoo S et al.: Cross-species transcriptomic and
epigenomic analysis reveals key regulators of injury response
and neuronal regeneration in vertebrate retinas. bioRxiv 2020.
717876.
19. Lindsey BW, Hall ZJ, Heuze´ A, Joly JS, Tropepe V, Kaslin J: The
role of neuro-epithelial-like and radial-glial stem and
progenitor cells in development, plasticity, and repair. Prog
Neurobiol 2018, 170:99-114.
20. Ganz J, Kaslin J, Hochmann S, Freudenreich D, Brand M:
Heterogeneity and Fgf dependence of adult neural progenitors
in the zebraﬁsh telencephalon. Glia 2010, 58:1345-1363.
21. Ganz J, Brand M: Adult neurogenesis in ﬁsh. Cold Spring Harb
Perspect Biol 2016, 8 pii: a019018.
22.

Raj B, Farrell JA, McKenna A, Leslie JL, Schier AF: Emergence of
neuronal diversity during vertebrate brain development.
bioRxiv 2019. 839860
This study shows the transcriptome regulation of zebraﬁsh brain cells
from early embryonic brain development to larval stages by scRNASeq,
thus allowing to investigate the transcriptome dynamics during progenitor
proliferation, neuronal differentiation and maturation. The work provides
an important resource to compare transcriptome dynamics of develop-
mental and adult neural precursors and newly generated neurons.
23.

Lange C, Rost F, Machate A, Reinhardt S, Lesche M, Weber A,
Kuscha V, Dahl A, Rulands S, Brand M: Single cell sequencing of
radial glia progeny reveals the diversity of newborn neurons in
the adult zebraﬁsh brain. Development 2020, 147 pii: dev185595
This report deﬁnes the identity of adult generated neurons in the adult
zebraﬁsh forebrain by combining lineage tracing of radial glia and single
cell sequencing. It clariﬁes the existence of different subtypes of adult
generated, radial glia-derived immature neurons in the telencephalon and
lateral diencephalon, and it identiﬁes speciﬁc molecular markers for these
cells. Importantly, transcriptome comparison of neurogenic cells in the
adult ﬁsh and mouse forebrain reveals substantial complementarity of the
identiﬁed cell types across species.
24. Than-Trong E, Ortica-Gatti S, Mella S, Nepal C, Alunni A, Bally-
Cuif L: Neural stem cell quiescence and stemness are
molecularly distinct outputs of the Notch3 signalling cascade
in the vertebrate adult brain. Development 2018, 145 pii:
dev161034.
25. Cosacak MI, Bhattarai P, Reinhardt S, Petzold A, Dahl A, Zhang Y,
Kizil C: Single-cell transcriptomics analyses of neural stem cell
heterogeneity and contextual plasticity in a zebraﬁsh brain
model of amyloid toxicity. Cell Rep 2019, 27:1307-1318.
26. Barbosa JS, Sanchez-Gonzalez R, Di Giaimo R, Baumgart EV,
Theis FJ, Go¨ tz M, Ninkovic J: Neurodevelopment. Live imaging
of adult neural stem cell behavior in the intact and injured
zebraﬁsh brain. Science 2015, 348:789-793.
27.

Hochgerner H, Zeisel A, Lo¨ nnerberg P, Linnarsson S: Conserved
properties of dentate gyrus neurogenesis across postnatal
development revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing. Nat
Neurosci 2018, 21:290-299
This paper clariﬁes the differentiation trajectories and cell identities in
developmental and adult neurogenesis in the mammalian hippocampus.
The authors take a holistic view and investigate all hippocampal cells at
various ontogenetic ages, allowing to comprehend the molecular
changes that underlie the differences in proliferative behavior of precursor
cells and the fate of their progeny across the lifespan. Interestingly, while
radial glia and the newly generated neurons differ in perinatal versus adult
mice, the intermediate committed progenitors are indistinguishable at all
ages, suggesting a ﬁxed committed neuronal progenitor state.
28.

Kroehne V, Freudenreich D, Hans S, Kaslin J, Brand M:
Regeneration of the adult zebraﬁsh brain from neurogenic
radial glia-type progenitors. Development 2011, 138:4831-4841
This is the ﬁrst report showing the replacement of destroyed brain tissue,
including neurons, from endogenous radial glia-type progenitor cells in an
adult vertebrate. Speciﬁc labeling of proliferation and newly generated
neurons showed initially increased radial glia proliferation and increased
long-term neuron integration into the tissue after stab wound injury. Cre-
lox lineage tracing conﬁrmed that radial glia are major contributors to
homeostatic and post-injury neurogenesis in the zebraﬁsh telencephalon.
29. Skaggs K, Goldman D, Parent JM: Excitotoxic brain injury in
adult zebraﬁsh stimulates neurogenesis and long-distance
neuronal integration. Glia 2014, 62:2061-2079.
30. Bhattarai P, Thomas AK, Cosacak MI, Papadimitriou C,
Mashkaryan V, Froc C, Reinhardt S, Kurth T, Dahl A, Zhang Y et al.:
IL4/STAT6 signaling activates neural stem cell proliferation
and neurogenesis upon amyloid-b42 aggregation in adult
zebraﬁsh brain. Cell Rep 2016, 17:941-948.
31. Grandel H, Kaslin J, Ganz J, Wenzel I, Brand M: Neural stem cells
and neurogenesis in the adult zebraﬁsh brain: origin,
proliferation dynamics, migration and cell fate. Dev Biol 2006,
295:263-277.
Single cell brain regeneration Lange and Brand 
107
www.sciencedirect.com 
Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 2020, 64:101–108

32.

Caldwell LJ, Davies NO, Cavone L, Mysiak KS, Semenova SA,
Panula P, Armstrong JD, Becker CG, Becker T: Regeneration of
dopaminergic neurons in adult zebraﬁsh depends on immune
system activation and differs for distinct populations. J
Neurosci 2019, 39:4694-4713
This paper reports the ﬁrst analysis of subtype-speciﬁc neuronal ablation
and its regeneration in the zebraﬁsh brain. A chemical ablation method to
selectively destroy dopaminergic neurons is developed and the partial
reduction and regeneration of dopaminergic neurons in different areas of
the brain is investigated. Interestingly, long-term cell replacement is only
observed in those dopaminergic nuclei that show low-level adult neuro-
genesis also in homeostasis. Corresponding with incomplete regenera-
tion of dopaminergic neurons and spinal cord innervation, ablated ﬁsh
show speciﬁc fertility and behavioural deﬁcits, which represent valuable
assays to study functional recovery from loss of dopaminergic neurons in
ﬁsh.
33. Galant S, Furlan G, Coolen M, Dirian L, Foucher I, Bally-Cuif L:
Embryonic origin and lineage hierarchies of the neural
progenitor subtypes building the zebraﬁsh adult midbrain. Dev
Biol 2016, 420:120-135.
34.

Lindsey BW, Aitken GE, Tang JK, Khabooshan M, Douek AM,
Vandestadt C, Kaslin J: Midbrain tectal stem cells display
diverse regenerative capacities in zebraﬁsh. Sci Rep 2019,
9:4420
This study reports fundamental differences between the progeny fate of
radial glia and neuroepithelial cells in the adult optic tectum of zebraﬁsh
after traumatic injury. While proliferation is commonly increased in the
anatomically separated niches of radial glia and neuroepithelial cells after
injury, only in the latter niche a substantial amount of newly generated
neurons is found. Together with [35] these results argue for the coex-
istence of gliogenic radial glia and neurogenic neuroepithelial progenitors
in the adult midbrain, which become activated after injury.
35.

Yu S, He J: Stochastic cell-cycle entry and cell-state-
dependent fate outputs of injury-reactivated tectal radial glia
in zebraﬁsh. eLife 2019 http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.48660
Together with [34], this paper corroborates a fundamental restriction in
progeny fate between radial glia in the adult optic tectum after traumatic
injury. Interestingly, the authors show that homeostatically quiescent
tectal radial glia become stochastically activated to enter the cell cycle
after injury. Using Cre-lox mediated lineage tracing, substantial genera-
tion of neurons from radial glia after injury is excluded, suggesting that
most newborn neurons in the tectum are generated by neuroepithelial
cells after injury. Single cell sequencing of radial glia after injury identiﬁes
Notch signalling as an important negative regulator of neurogenesis in
tectal radial glia after injury.
36. Shimizu Y, Ueda Y, Ohshima T: Wnt signaling regulates
proliferation and differentiation of radial glia in regenerative
processes after stab injury in the optic tectum of adult
zebraﬁsh. Glia 2018, 66:1382-1394.
37. Kaslin J, Ganz J, Geffarth M, Grandel H, Hans S, Brand M: Stem
cells in the adult zebraﬁsh cerebellum: initiation and
maintenance of a novel stem cell niche. J Neurosci 2009,
29:6142-6153.
38. Kaslin J, Kroehne V, Benato F, Argenton F, Brand M:
Development and speciﬁcation of cerebellar stem and
progenitor cells in zebraﬁsh: from embryo to adult. Neural Dev
2013, 8.
39.

Kaslin J, Kroehne V, Ganz J, Hans S, Brand M: Distinct roles of
neuroepithelial-like and radial glia-like progenitor cells in
cerebellar regeneration. Development 2017, 144:1462-1471
This paper reports the regeneration ability of the zebraﬁsh cerebellum,
and clariﬁes the fundamental fate restriction of neuroepithelial and radial
glia-like progenitors in cerebellar development and regeneration. Using
Cre-lox-mediated lineage tracing, the authors show that most adult
cerebellar cell types can regenerate, while the inability of speciﬁcally
adult zebraﬁsh to efﬁciently regenerate Purkinje cells, interneurons, Golgi
cells is caused by the major reduction of their radial glia like progenitors
from adults to larvae. In contrast, neuroepithelial cells, which are still
abundant in the adult cerebellum efﬁciently generate granule cells, in
homeostasis and after injury, but do not switch fate towards radial glia
progeny after injury.
40.

Raj B, Wagner DE, McKenna A, Pandey S, Klein AM, Shendure J,
Gagnon JA, Schier AF: Simultaneous single-cell proﬁling of
lineages and cell types in the vertebrate brain. Nat Biotechnol
2018, 36:442-450
This report presents the ﬁrst scRNAseq atlas of cell types in the larval
zebraﬁsh brain and deﬁnes several discrete precursor populations and
their differentiation trajectories in different anatomical locations of the
brain. Thus, this work represents a unique resource for cell type deﬁnition
and lineage relationships in the larval ﬁsh brain.
41. Adolf B, Chapouton P, Lam CS, Topp S, Tannhauser B, Strahle U,
Gotz M, Bally-Cuif L: Conserved and acquired features of adult
neurogenesis in the zebraﬁsh telencephalon. Dev Biol 2006,
295:278-293.
42. Turner KJ, Hawkins TA, Yanez J, Anadon R, Wilson SW,
Folgueira M: Afferent Connectivity of the zebraﬁsh habenulae.
Front Neural Circuits 2016, 10:30.
43. Rothenaigner I, Krecsmarik M, Hayes JA, Bahn B, Lepier A,
Fortin G, Gotz M, Jagasia R, Bally-Cuif L: Clonal analysis by
distinct viral vectors identiﬁes bona ﬁde neural stem cells in
the adult zebraﬁsh telencephalon and characterizes their
division properties and fate. Development 2011, 138:1459-1469.
44. März M, Chapouton P, Diotel N, Vaillant C, Hesl B, Takamiya M,
Lam CS, Kah O, Bally-Cuif L, Strahle U: Heterogeneity in
progenitor cell subtypes in the ventricular zone of the
zebraﬁsh adult telencephalon. Glia 2010, 58:870-888.
45. Dray N, Bedu S, Vuillemin N, Alunni A, Coolen M, Krecsmarik M,
Supatto W, Beaurepaire E, Bally-Cuif L: Large-scale live imaging
of adult neural stem cells in their endogenous niche.
Development 2015, 142:3592-3600.
46.

Coolen M, Labusch M, Mannioui A, Bally-Cuif L: Mosaic
heterochrony in neural progenitors sustains accelerated brain
growth and neurogenesis in the juvenile killiﬁsh N. furzeri. Curr
Biol 2020, 30:736-745
This report analyses neural precursor composition in the rapidly growing
killiﬁsh and reveals an interesting interplay of radial glia-like and neuroe-
pithelial progenitor types during brain development. These ﬁndings sig-
niﬁcantly enhance our knowledge on species differences of brain devel-
opment in ﬁsh.
108 
Cell reprogramming, regeneration and repair
Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 2020, 64:101–108 
www.sciencedirect.com

===== Lange2020_Development_scTx+RadialGlia+ZebrafishNeurogenesis =====
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Single cell sequencing of radial glia progeny reveals the diversity
of newborn neurons in the adult zebrafish brain
Christian Lange1,*, Fabian Rost2,3, Anja Machate1, Susanne Reinhardt1,4, Matthias Lesche1,4, Anke Weber1,
Veronika Kuscha1, Andreas Dahl1,4, Steffen Rulands2,3 and Michael Brand1,*
ABSTRACT
Zebrafish display widespread and pronounced adult neurogenesis,
which is fundamental for their regeneration capability after central
nervous system injury. However, the cellular identity and the
biological properties of adult newborn neurons are elusive for most
brain areas. Here, we have used short-term lineage tracing of radial
glia progeny to prospectively isolate newborn neurons from the
her4.1+ radial glia lineage in the homeostatic adult forebrain.
Transcriptome analysis of radial glia, newborn neurons and mature
neurons using single cell sequencing identified distinct transcriptional
profiles, including novel markers for each population. Specifically, we
detected two separate newborn neuron types, which showed diversity
of cell fate commitment and location. Further analyses showed that
these cell types are homologous to neurogenic cells in the
mammalian brain, identified neurogenic commitment in proliferating
radial glia and indicated that glutamatergic projection neurons are
generated
in
the
adult
zebrafish
telencephalon.
Thus,
we
prospectively isolated adult newborn neurons from the adult
zebrafish forebrain, identified markers for newborn and mature
neurons in the adult brain, and revealed intrinsic heterogeneity
among adult newborn neurons and their homology with mammalian
adult neurogenic cell types.
KEY WORDS: Adult neurogenesis, Zebrafish, Radial glia,
Neural stem cell, Telencephalon, Single cell sequencing
INTRODUCTION
Adult neurogenesis, the generation and integration of additional
neurons to the brain circuitry in adulthood, is widespread across
vertebrates, although the extent greatly varies among species
(Kaslin et al., 2008; Grandel and Brand, 2013; Alunni and Bally-
Cuif, 2016). It is thought to support learning and memory (Aimone
et al., 2014; Frisén, 2016), but can also function to replace neurons
that are lost due to disease or injury in some species (Reimer et al.,
2008; Berg et al., 2010; Kroehne et al., 2011; März et al., 2011;
Baumgart et al., 2012; Amamoto et al., 2016; Kaslin et al., 2017).
In most mammals, adult neurogenesis is confined to the major
neurogenic niches in the subgranular zone of the hippocampal
dentate gyrus and the sub-ependymal zone of the lateral ventricles.
Newborn neurons (NBNs) integrate only into the granular zone of
the dentate gyrus, and into the olfactory bulb in rodents or into the
striatum in humans (Aimone et al., 2014; Ernst and Frisén, 2015).
Outside these target zones for adult neurogenesis, integration of
NBNs is essentially absent or minimal, and most brain areas
(including the cerebral cortex) show limited potential for NBN
integration and survival, even after injury-induced neuronal cell
death (Bhardwaj et al., 2006; Ohab et al., 2006; Saha et al., 2013;
Huttner et al., 2014). Thus, a low potential for NBN integration in
most brain areas represents an important roadblock for brain repair
after injury or neurodegeneration. To develop therapeutic strategies
for cell replacement, a better understanding of the mechanisms that
might allow neurogenesis and neuron integration in such brain areas
is needed.
In contrast to mammals, teleost fish display widespread and
pronounced adult neurogenesis (Ekström et al., 2001; Zupanc et al.,
2005; Adolf et al., 2006; Grandel et al., 2006; Alunni et al., 2010;
Ganz and Brand, 2016). In the adult zebrafish brain, we previously
identified 17 different proliferative zones throughout the neuraxis.
These proliferative zones are accompanied by adjacent zones, where
newborn neurons integrate. In the telencephalon, the cell bodies of
radial glia (RG) neural stem cells are localized in the ventricular
zone (VZ), but they span the entire telencephalon with their
processes (Grandel et al., 2006; Adolf et al., 2006; Ganz et al.,
2010).
In
the
dorsal
telencephalon
(pallium),
RG
divide
constitutively in adulthood and give rise to neurons, which
undergo short-distance migration to the adjacent peri-ventricular
zone (PVZ) of the parenchyma, where they are added to the circuitry
(Ganz et al., 2010; Kroehne et al., 2011; Furlan et al., 2017). Cells in
the PVZ express markers of glutamatergic projection neuron
development, such as tbr1, neurod1 and bhlhe22 (Ganz et al.,
2012; Furlan et al., 2017). Similar to the developing mammalian
forebrain, a second population of neural progenitors, expressing
the marker nestin, exists in the VZ of the striatal ventral
telencephalon,
which
expresses
markers
of
GABAergic
interneuron progenitors, e.g. dlx2 and dlx5a (März et al., 2010a;
Ganz et al., 2012). The ventrally generated neurons undergo long-
distance migration into the telencephalic parenchyma, reminiscent
of interneuron tangential migration in mammalian development
(Ganz et al., 2010). These data indicate that, in zebrafish
telencephalon, the dorsal pallium and the ventral striatum –
corresponding to the cognate mammalian brain territories – display
ongoing neurogenesis and NBN integration in an evolutionarily
conserved manner.
Received 12 October 2019; Accepted 11 November 2019
1Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden (CRTD), CMCB, Technische
Universitä t Dresden, Fetscherstrasse 105, 01307 Dresden, Germany. 2Max Planck
Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems, Noethnitzer Strasse 38, 01187
Dresden, Germany. 3Center for Systems Biology Dresden (CSBD), Pfotenhauer
Strasse 108, 01307 Dresden, Germany. 4DRESDEN-concept Genome Center, c/o
Center for Molecular and Cellular Bioengineering (CMCB), Technische Universitä t
Dresden, Fetscherstrasse 105, 01307, Dresden, Germany.
*Authors for correspondence (michael.brand@tu-dresden.de, christian.lange3@tu-
dresden.de)
C.L., 0000-0002-7582-0076; F.R., 0000-0001-6466-2589; A.W., 0000-0003-
2220-658X; A.D., 0000-0002-2668-8371; S.Rulands, 0000-0001-6398-1553; M.B.,
0000-0001-5711-6512
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed.
1
© 2020. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Development (2020) 147, dev185595. doi:10.1242/dev.185595
DEVELOPMENT

In contrast to mammals, zebrafish efficiently repair lesions after
injury to the telencephalon through induction of (1) proliferation of
radial glia, (2) neuron generation and (3) integration of newborn,
differentiated neurons in the parenchyma (Kroehne et al., 2009,
2011; Baumgart et al., 2012; März et al., 2011; Skaggs et al., 2014).
Within weeks and months of the injury, the lesion site is
dramatically reduced in size and neuronal connections in the
lesioned hemisphere, which are initially destroyed, re-appear.
Lineage tracing shows that these regenerated neurons derive from
RG and persist long term (Kroehne et al., 2011). The molecular
mechanisms
that
enable
this
repair
process
are
currently
incompletely understood. In particular, previous research focused
on the regulation of RG as the source of NBNs in homeostasis or
after injury, while the role of immature neuronally committed
progenitor cells and neurons, at various stages of their maturation
and integration into the adult telencephalon, remains poorly
understood.
Recently, cellular differentiation trajectories were reconstructed
using single cell sequencing – alone or in combination with cellular
barcoding – in vertebrate embryos (Alemany et al., 2018; Briggs
et al., 2018; Farrell et al., 2018; Spanjaard et al., 2018; Wagner et al.,
2018) or in the zebrafish juvenile brain (Raj et al., 2018). However,
neurogenesis and NBN differentiation in the adult telencephalon
has not been investigated using these methods. To gain insight into
the role and regulation of NBNs in adult neurogenesis in the
zebrafish forebrain, we devised a strategy to lineage trace RG, RG-
derived NBNs and MNs, allowing their direct, specific isolation
from heterogenous cell populations (i.e. prospective isolation).
Transcriptome
analysis
by
single
cell
sequencing
revealed
pronounced heterogeneity among RG-derived NBNs and allowed
the analysis of differentiation trajectories in the adult zebrafish
forebrain.
RESULTS
Lineage tracing of radial glia-derived newborn neurons in the
adult zebrafish telencephalon
In order to prospectively isolate the neuronal progeny of radial glia
(i.e. NBNs) in the adult zebrafish telencephalon, we developed a
short-term
lineage-tracing
protocol,
based
on
retention
of
fluorescent proteins in cell type-specific, fluorescent reporter
lines. To this end, we combined the neuronal reporter line elavl3:
gfp (Park et al., 2000) with the her4.1:mcherry reporter line that
marks RG (Kroehne et al., 2011). Although the expression of
mcherry mRNA under the control of the her4.1 promotor is
restricted to radial glia and rapidly downregulated in NBN,
fluorescent proteins, which have a half-life of circa 24 h (Li et al.,
1998), are inherited by the neuronal daughters of dividing radial glia
in detectable amounts (Furlan et al., 2017). Using this approach,
newborn neurons could be identified as mCherry/GFP double-
positive cells in the telencephalon of her4.1:mcherry; elavl3:gfp
fish (Fig. 1A). When analyzing dissociated cells from her4.1:
mcherry; elavl3:gfp forebrains, consisting of the telencephalon and
anterior diencephalon (see Fig. 1B and Materials and Methods) with
flow cytometry, we found that cells with high levels of mCherry
were GFP negative. In contrast, cells with low, but detectable levels
of mCherry were clearly positive for the neuronal marker elavl3:
GFP (Fig. 1C). These results confirmed our hypothesis that NBNs
can be identified as mCherry/GFP double-positive cells in the
telencephalon of her4.1:mcherry;elavl3:gfp fish, while bona fide
RG had higher average levels of mCherry, but were GFP negative.
Forebrain cells from single-transgenic her4.1:mcherry or elavl3:gfp
fish contained only few mCherry and GFP double-positive cells,
which are likely autofluorescent cells (Fig. S1A). Quantification
showed that mCherryhigh/GFPneg RG represented 8.7%, whereas
mCherrylow/GFPpos cells (designated as NBNs) accounted for
10.9% of all live forebrain cells. Mature neurons (MN; mCherryneg/
GFPpos) were the dominating cell population in the adult forebrain
with 72.1%, and lineage marker-negative cells accounted for 8.2%
of forebrain cells (Fig. 1D). Direct imaging of dissociated cells by
Image Stream flow cytometry confirmed the presence of single cells
that are simultaneously positive for mCherry and GFP, excluding
the alternative possibility that these cells might have represented
doublets of cells expressing either GFP or mCherry (Fig. 1E).
As her4.1 is a main target gene of the Notch pathway,
mCherrylow/GFPpos cells could also represent mature neurons with
low level activation of this pathway instead of being NBNs that
inherited mCherry protein from their RG precursors. To exclude this
possibility, we combined the elavl3:gfp neuronal reporter line with a
newly generated radial glia specific reporter line: gfap:nls-mcherry,
which expresses nuclear-localized mCherry in telencephalic radial
glia cells (Fig. S1B) under the control of the radial glia-specific gfap
promotor (Bernardos and Raymond, 2006). Flow cytometry of
dissociated forebrain cells from gfap:nls-mcherry; elavl3:gfp fish
also identified a specific population of mCherrylow/GFPpos neurons
(Fig. S1C,D). Quantification confirms similar percentages of
mCherryhigh/GFPneg and mCherrylow/GFPpos cells (Fig. S1E). To
verify that the mCherrylow/GFPpos double-positive population is
enriched with adult generated neurons, an EdU pulse-chase analysis
was performed. Adult her4.1:mcherry; elavl3:gfp fish were injected
three times with EdU in 12 h intervals to label sufficient numbers of
proliferating cells in the adult brain. EdU incorporation was
assessed at 2 h, 7 days or 4 weeks after the last injection to
identify proliferating cells and their immediate progeny, early
progeny and late progeny of the initially proliferating cells,
respectively (Fig. 2A). After 2 h of chase, mCherryhigh/GFPneg
RG were the most intensively proliferating cell type as 7.8±2.1% of
all cells were EdUpos, whereas only 0.8±0.3% of mCherrylow/
GFPpos cells and 0.1±0.01% of mCherryneg/GFPpos mature neurons
were EdUpos (Fig. 2B,C). In contrast, after 7 h of EdU chase, EdU
incorporation in mCherrylow/GFPpos neurons was significantly
increased
to
11.6±2.1%,
whereas
it
remained
similar
in
mCherryhigh/GFPneg RG (10.6±3.5%) and mCherryneg/GFPpos
neurons (1.5±0.8%). After 4 weeks of chase, EdU incorporation
in mCherrylow/GFPpos neurons was reduced to 0.7±0.1% compared
with the 7 days chase, mCherryhigh/GFPneg RG showed a trend
towards
reduced
EdU
incorporation
(3.9±1.6%),
whereas
mCherryneg/GFPpos neurons showed no significant change (0.6±
0.1%) (Fig. 2B,C). These data indicate that mCherrylow/GFPpos
neurons are specifically enriched for adult-generated neurons and
suggest that these cells represent a transient population that retains
her4.1:mCherry at least for 7 days but for no more than 4 weeks
after their generation from mCherryhigh/GFPneg RG.
Together, these data provide substantial evidence that radial glia-
derived NBNs in the adult zebrafish forebrain can be identified by
retention of fluorescent proteins expressed in radial glia with
simultaneous expression of a neuronal marker. Our analyses reveal a
population of NBNs that is equal in number compared with the
her4.1:mCherryhigh/elavl3:GFPneg bona fide RG.
Single cell sequencing identifies transcriptome profiles of
radial glia, newborn neurons and mature neurons in the adult
zebrafish telencephalon
Next, using our lineage tracing protocol, we sorted 171 RG
(mCherryhigh/GFPneg), 169 NBNs (mCherrylow/GFPpos) and 30
2
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185595. doi:10.1242/dev.185595
DEVELOPMENT

mature
neurons
(MNs,
mCherryneg/GFPpos)
from
the
adult
telencephalon of six fish and sequenced them using SMARTSeq2
(Picelli et al., 2014). On average, we detected 1408 expressed
genes and 191,000 transcripts per cell. Of these, 264 cells (71%)
passed our quality control: 76, 162 and 26 cells from the RG, NBN
and MN FACS gates, respectively, were used for downstream
analysis. Consistent with our lineage-tracing paradigm, cells that
were sorted as RG, but not those sorted as neurons, expressed radial
glia markers (her4.1, cx43, id1 and s100b) (Grandel et al., 2006;
Adolf et al., 2006; Kunze et al., 2009; Ganz et al., 2010; Rodriguez
Viales et al., 2015) (Fig. 3A). Cells sorted as NBNs expressed
pan-neuronal markers and early neuronal markers (elavl3, map2
and insm1a) (Ferri and Levitt, 1993; Park et al., 2000; Raj et al.,
2018), but showed minimal expression of mature synaptic
proteins such as synaptic vesicle protein 2a (sv2a), neurogranin a
(nrgna) and calmodulin-dependent kinase 2a (camk2a) (Zhong
and Gerges, 2012), compared with mature neurons (Fig. 3A).
We used Louvain clustering to identify five clusters with distinct
transcriptomic profiles that we visualized by t-stochastic neighbor
embedding (t-SNE) as well as principal component analysis
(Fig. 3B,C; Fig. S2A,B). The cells from the three FACS gates
segregated into five transcriptome clusters: one cluster (RG)
consisted almost exclusively of cells sorted as RG, three clusters
(NBN.1, NBN.2 and OPC) contained mostly cells sorted as NBN,
and one mixed cluster (MN) contained cells from the NBN and MN
gates (Fig. 3B; Fig. S2A). We assigned cell type identity to each
cluster based on known marker genes (Fig. 3B): The radial
glia marker her4.1 was expressed specifically in the RG cluster,
but not in the neuronal clusters NBN.1, NBN.2 and MN, which all
expressed elavl3. sv2a was sparsely expressed in NBN.1 and
NBN.2, but strongly enriched in cluster MN, confirming that
MN contained mature neurons. Cells of the OPC cluster also
expressed
elavl3
and
were
identified
as
oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells by the expression of olig2 (Park et al., 2007)
(Fig. 3B,C). The transcriptome analyses identified several marker
genes for each of the identified clusters, which allowed their
biological characterization (Fig. 2C, Fig. S3, Table 1). The RG
cluster expressed several known RG markers, e.g. fabp7a (also
Fig. 1. A double-reporter line for identification and
quantification of radial glia-derived newborn
neurons in the adult zebrafish brain. (A) Model for the
lineage-trace paradigm. NBNs stop to transcribe
her4.1-driven mcherry, but inherit the protein from their
RG precursors (top). At the same time, NBNs induce
transcription of the neuronal marker elavl3:gfp (bottom),
allowing the identification of NBNs as mCherry/GFP-
double-positive cells in double reporter fish.
(B) Scheme of the analytical workflow. Forebrains are
removed from double reporter fish and dissociated, and
cell types are analyzed by flow cytometry.
(C) Representative FACS plots showing forebrain cells
from wild-type (left) and her4.1:mcherry;elavl3:gfp
double reporter fish (right). There are clearly separated
populations of mCherryhigh/GFPneg RG and
mCherrylow/GFPpos NBNs. (D) Quantification of cells in
the four quadrants shown in C, revealing that NBNs can
be found in a frequency comparable with RG and
represent circa 10% of forebrain cells. n=5. Data are
mean±s.e.m. (E) Representative single cells imaged in
flow cytometry for mCherrypos/GFPpos (first row),
mCherrypos/GFPneg (second row), mCherryneg/GFPpos
(third row) and mCherryneg/GFPneg (fourth row). At least
20 cells were analyzed and no doublets were seen,
excluding the double-positive cells that represent
doublets. Scale bar: 7 µm.
3
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185595. doi:10.1242/dev.185595
DEVELOPMENT

known as blbp), her4.1 and glula (encoding glutamine synthase),
but also novel markers such as si:ch211-251b21.1 (encoding the
glutamate receptor grik-1), fgfbp3, atp1a1b, selenop and mdka.
The major pure NBN cluster (NBN.1) was characterized by
specific expression of tubb5, cd99l2, ppp1r14ba, cnp and
tuba2. The smaller pure NBN cluster (NBN.2) expressed the
transcription factor ebf3a, kcnj19a, tbr1b, msi2b and podxl2. The
mixed NBN and MN cluster (cluster MN) showed specific
expression of sult4a1, sybu, ube2ka, gad1b and sprn2, while the
OPC cluster predominantly expressed the marker genes aplnra,
sema5a, si:ch211-286c4.6 (encoding Cd59), traf4a and cd82a,
which were recently identified as genes expressed in zebrafish
OPCs (Kroehne et al., 2017; Raj et al., 2018). Together, these
data show that radial glia-derived NBNs are a heterogeneous
population, comprising at least three subsets (NBN.1, NBN.2
and a part of the MN cluster) with distinct transcriptional profiles.
They are distinct from their radial glia precursors, but a subset of
NBNs clusters together with mature, synaptically integrated
neurons, suggesting that this population represents a more mature
state of adult-generated neurons. Interestingly, one minor cluster,
comprising NBNs, none of which expressed her4.1, but did
express elavl3, was identified as oligodendrocyte precursors
due to expression of cell-type specific markers (Fig. 3B,C; Fig.
S4A). Retention of mcherry, expressed from a RG-specific
promotor in these OPCs, as well as shared marker expression
(e.g. fabp7a, slc1a2b, atp1a1b, cd82a, cxcl12a and glula; see
Fig. 3C) supports their generation from RG in the adult zebrafish
brain. In addition, flow cytometry of double transgenic fish
that combine the RG-specific her4.1:mCherry reporter with the
OPC-specific reporter olig2:gfp (Shin et al., 2003; Kroehne et al.,
2017; Tsata et al., 2019) [Tg(her4.1:mcherry; olig2:gfp)] revealed
that 28.6±3.9% of all olig2:GFP cells were mCherrylow/GFPhigh
double positive (Fig. S4B,C). We also observed numerous
cells showing high levels of mCherry fluorescence and low levels
of olig2-driven GFP fluorescence, possibly representing nascent
RG progeny differentiating towards OPCs (Fig. S4B). In summary,
these
data
provide
robust
evidence
that
her4.1-expressing
RG generate heterogeneous and diverse progeny comprising
different neuronal and oligodendroglial cell types in the normal
adult telencephalon.
Analysis of gene expression trajectories reveals dichotomic
differentiation patterns of RG progeny
To infer the differentiation trajectories of radial glia-derived NBNs,
we performed pseudotime-based ordering of our single cell gene
expression profiles based on diffusion maps (Fig. 4A). In contrast to
dimensionality reduction by t-SNE, diffusion maps retain the global
structure of the transcriptomes, such that continuous branching
lineages can be visualized (Haghverdi et al., 2015). Using RG as a
root
group,
pseudotemporal
ordering
using
the
diffusion
pseudotime
algorithm
revealed
the
NBN.1
cluster
as
the
differentiation state that is closely related to RG. From the NBN.1
cluster, a trajectory branchpoint was formed, leading to the MN
cluster or the NBN.2 cluster, respectively. Among these two
endpoints, the NBN.2 cluster was the most distant from RG
(Fig. 4A). The OPC cluster was omitted from this analysis for clarity
because it was transcriptionally disconnected from the other cells
(Fig. S5A).
Next, we compared the different cell clusters with neurogenic cell
types in the adult mammalian brain. A recent study generated sc-
transcriptome profiles of radial glia, radial glia-like neural stem
cells, their neuronal progeny and niche cells in the adult
hippocampus and during hippocampal development (Hochgerner
et al., 2018). For a combined cell type homology analysis, we
transformed the transcriptomes of zebrafish and mouse cells into a
transcriptome of all orthologues gene pairs (see Materials and
Methods). Then, we performed hierarchical clustering of the
zebrafish and murine cell types (Fig. 4B). The zebrafish cell
clusters clustered together with different murine neuronal and glial
cell types, indicating a dominance of cell type differences of the
transcriptional profiles over species differences. In line with our
assignment of cell identity, RG clustered together with murine
ependymal cells and young astrocytes, and zebrafish OPCs
clustered with murine OPCs and oligodendrocytes. Interestingly,
NBN.1 cells formed a cluster with murine immature granule cells
and pyramidal neurons, whereas NBN.2 and MN cells clustered
together with mature neurons (Fig. 4B). All cell types showed a
comparable distribution of similarity of zebrafish cells to their most
similar murine counterpart, suggesting that, for each zebrafish cell
Fig. 2. Newborn neurons retain the radial glia-derived reporter signal
transiently. (A) Scheme of experimental design, indicating the timing of EdU
injections (red arrowheads), EdU incorporation (red bar), EdU chase (blue bar) and
analysis timepoints after the last EdU injection. (B) Flow cytometry plots showing
EdU (green) incorporation in sorted her4.1:mCherryhigh/elavl3:GFPneg cells (left),
her4.1:mCherrylow/elavl3:GFPpos cells (middle) and her4.1:mCherryneg/elavl3:
GFPpos cells (right) after 2 h (top), 7 days (middle) or 4 weeks (bottom) of chase.
There is robust EdU labeling in her4.1:mCherrylow/elavl3:GFPpos after 7 days, but
not after 2 h or 4 weeks chase. (C) Quantification of EdU labeling her4.1:
mCherryhigh/elavl3:GFPneg cells (left), her4.1:mCherrylow/elavl3:GFPpos cells
(middle) and her4.1:mCherryneg/elavl3:GFPpos cells (right) after 2 h (magenta),
7 days (blue) or 4 weeks (green). Single data points are shown; n=3; data are
mean±s.e.m. **P<0.01 by one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s post hoc test.
4
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185595. doi:10.1242/dev.185595
DEVELOPMENT

type, corresponding cell populations exist in the mammalian
hippocampus (Fig. S5C). To infer the heterogeneity of cell
identity within the zebrafish cell clusters, we also determined the
cell type of the single corresponding, most similar murine cell for
each zebrafish cell. We omitted cells that show only limited
similarity to mammalian cells, identified by Hochgerner et al.
(2018) (see Fig. S5C and Materials and Methods). The results show
that cells forming the RG cluster in the adult zebrafish brain mainly
correspond to various glial cell types in the murine brain, i.e.
astrocytes and radial glia-like neural stem cells (RGLs) of different
maturation stages, neurogenic intermediate progenitor cells (nIPCs)
with minor proportions corresponding to neuroblasts, OPCs and
microglia. Zebrafish OPCs corresponded only to murine OPCs.
Consistent with the pseudotime analysis, NBN.1 cells corresponded
to neuroblasts and immature neurons of pyramidal, granule cell or
GABAergic
identity,
while
NBN.2
and
MN
cells
mainly
corresponded to mature neurons of GABAergic and pyramidal
identity as well as juvenile granule cell neurons (Fig. 4C,D). In
summary, these analyses reveal transcriptomic similarity of the
neurogenic cell types of the adult zebrafish brain with those in the
neurogenic niche of the developing and adult hippocampus. In
particular, NBN.1 cells display pronounced similarity to neuroblasts
and immature neurons, supporting their positioning as direct RG
progeny in the pseudotime analysis.
As a substantial proportion of NBN.1 cells showed similarity to
neuroblast, which contain proliferating cells in mammalian adult
neurogenic niches, we asked whether different subtypes of
proliferating cells, e.g. radial glia, progenitors or neuroblasts
(März et al., 2010a; Edelmann et al. 2013), are distributed along
the pseudotime trajectory in zebrafish. Using ccnd1, mcm5 and
mki67 as markers for proliferating cells, proliferation was confined
to the RG cluster and no proliferating cells were found elsewhere
within the RG lineage (Fig. 5A), consistent with the pronounced
prevalence of EdU+ cells in RG at early EdU chase timepoints (see
Fig. 2B,C). As mcm5 and mki67 expression is restricted to specific
cell cycle phases (Ohtani et al., 1999; Sobecki et al., 2017), we used
ccnd1 as general proliferation marker to compare the transcriptome
profile of ccnd1+, proliferating RG and ccnd1−quiescent RG. Apart
from the expected enrichment of proliferation genes, such as
snrpd1, actl6a and mcm7 (Hiraiwa et al., 1997; Batra et al., 2012;
Krasteva et al., 2012), neuronal fate determinants, such as ascl1a
and sox4a, and marker genes of the NBN.1 clusters, such as tmsb
and stmn1b, were significantly enriched in proliferating RG
(Figs 3C and 5B; Table 1; Table 2). In contrast, classical RG
markers, such as fabp7a, cx43, glula (encoding glutamine synthase)
and s100b, were enriched in quiescent RG (Figs 3C and 5B;
Table 2). In support of a neurogenic commitment of proliferating
RG, we found that 9% of the top 100 marker genes of NBN.1 cells
Fig. 3. Single cell RNA-seq reveals the diversity of radial glia
progeny in the adult forebrain. (A) Violin plots showing the
expression of known radial glia markers (top), pan-neuronal markers
(middle, elavl3 and map2), an early neurogenic fate marker (middle,
insm1a) and markers of mature synaptically integrated neurons
(bottom). (B) tSNE plot revealing five different clusters from a total of
264 RG, NBN and MN cells (top). The cell number per cluster is:
RG, 76 cells; NBN.1, 80 cells; NBN.2, 54 cells; MN, 44 cells; and
OPC, 10 cells. Smaller panels underneath show expression of
characteristic marker genes that separate the different clusters.
(C) Heat map with the top 15 cluster-specific genes for the five
identified clusters.
5
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185595. doi:10.1242/dev.185595
DEVELOPMENT

were also enriched in proliferating RG, whereas only one of them
was found to be enriched in quiescent RG (Fig. S5B). Strikingly, out
of the four neuronal fate determinants/neuronal genes (ascl1a,
sox4a, tmsb and stmn1b) that were most substantially expressed in
RG (Table 2), 81% of proliferating RG expressed two or more of
them, whereas only 27% of quiescent RG did (Fig. 5C). With the
exception of ascl1a, which was virtually confined to RG, all
neuronal genes were further strongly enriched in NBN.1 cells,
suggesting that RG become committed to neurogenesis (indicated
by consistent expression of neuronal fate determinants) and that
many divisions from proliferating RG are neurogenic. Taken
together, we identify RG as the only proliferating cell type in the
cell trajectory derived from her4.1-positive RG and provide strong
evidence that most proliferating RG are committed to neurogenesis.
Next, we explored the gene expression changes upon the
transition from RG to NBN.1 cells and towards MNs or NBN.2,
respectively. Indeed, we observed waves of gene expression along
the pseudotime ordering, identifying specific gene regulation along
the differentiation trajectories. Consistent with the enrichment of the
Notch target gene her4.2 in proliferating RG (Fig. 5B), her4.1 and
her 4.2 were increasingly expressed in RG that were advanced in the
pseudotime trajectory (Fig. 5D,E). Furthermore, panneuronal
markers such as elavl3 were consistently upregulated in all
neuronal cell types compared with RG, while tubb5 and tmsb, or
ebf3a and msi2b were specifically seen in NBN.1 or NBN.2
clusters, respectively (Fig. 5D,E).
In conclusion, pseudotemporal ordering of RG, NBNs and MNs
identifies a differentiation trajectory from RG to NBN.1 cells, and
reveals separate trajectories from NBN.1 towards NBN.2 cells or
MNs,
respectively.
This
conclusion
is
consistent
with
the
comparison of zebrafish and murine neurogenic cell types, which
reveals that
RG,
NBN.1
or
NBN.2
and
MN
cells
show
transcriptomic similarities to cell types progressing in the known
differentiation trajectory in this well-studied niche. Analysis of
proliferation marker and neurogenic gene expression indicates that
all analyzed proliferative cells in the her4.1-lineage are bona fide
RG, and that a neuronal transcription program is prevalent in
proliferating RG. Finally, differential gene expression analysis
along the trajectory confirms specific marker genes for the NBN.1,
the NBN.2 and the MN population.
The NBN.1 and NBN.2 clusters form spatially defined
populations of newborn neurons in the telencephalon and
diencephalon, respectively
To identify factors that mediate the separation of the NBN.2 and the
MN cluster as the two more differentiated neuronal cell clusters, we
investigated the expression of key cell fate meditators for pan-
neurogenic fate (sox4a, sox11a, insm1a, insm1b and eomesa),
dorsal
telencephalon
glutamatergic
fate
(neurod4,
neurod1,
neurod6a and neurod6b), ventral forebrain GABAergic fate
(dlx1a, dlx2a and dlx5a) and glutamatergic or GABAergic neuron
identity (slc17a6a, slc17a6b, slc17a7a, gad1b and gad2) along the
differentiation trajectory. Pan-neurogenic markers and eomesa were
induced in differentiated RG, were abundantly expressed in the
NBN1 cluster, and continued to be expressed, although in fewer
cells, in both the NBN.2 and the MN cluster (Fig. 6A,B). Similarly,
the glutamatergic or GABAergic neuron markers were also
expressed by NBN.1, NBN.2 and MN cells. In contrast, the
markers of dorsal telencephalon glutamatergic identity (magenta
frame in Fig. 6A) and ventral telencephalon GABAergic identity
(turquoise frame in Fig. 6A) were expressed in the NBN.1 and the
MN cluster, but absent in the NBN.2 cluster, suggesting that the
Table 1. Marker genes for the different clusters
RG
Score
NBN.1
Score
NBN.2
Score
MN
Score
OPC
Score
fabp7a
0.026
tubb5
0.032
ebf3a
0.036
sult4a1
0.015
aplnra
0.013
si:ch211-251b21.1
0.025
cd99l2
0.023
kcnj19a
0.028
sybu
0.014
sema5a
0.011
her4.1
0.024
cnp
0.021
tbr1b
0.027
ube2ka
0.013
si:ch211-286c4.6
0.011
her4.2
0.020
ppp1r14ba
0.019
msi2b
0.026
gad1b
0.013
traf4a
0.011
atp1a1b
0.020
tuba2
0.018
podxl2
0.024
sprn2
0.012
cd82a
0.011
slc1a2b
0.019
tmsb
0.015
rtn4r
0.023
atp6v1h
0.012
si:ch211-132g1.3
0.011
fgfbp3
0.019
tuba1a
0.015
stxbp1b
0.022
aldoaa
0.012
cd9b
0.010
si:ch211-193l2.5
0.019
tuba1c
0.015
etv5a
0.019
pam
0.012
olig2
0.010
si:ch211-193l2.3
0.019
tubb2b
0.014
camk1gb
0.017
gas7a
0.012
aplnrb
0.010
si:ch211-193l2.4
0.019
vat1
0.014
hmp19
0.015
nrgna
0.011
syt9b
0.009
her6
0.019
fscn1a
0.014
cdh8
0.015
CABZ01063757.1
0.011
cxcl12a
0.009
her4.4
0.018
hnrnpa0l
0.014
tp53i11b
0.014
si:ch211-276i12.12
0.011
igsf9ba
0.009
mdka
0.017
mex3b
0.014
atp1b1b
0.014
ngb
0.011
si:busm1-57f23.1
0.009
glula
0.017
marcksb
0.014
c1qtnf4
0.014
nsfa
0.011
tmem178b
0.009
her4.2
0.017
fkbp2
0.014
tmeff2a
0.013
adcyap1b
0.011
Tpm1
0.009
slc1a3b
0.016
hn1b
0.014
khdrbs2
0.013
ppp3cb
0.011
slc1a2b
0.009
s100b
0.016
kdm6bb
0.013
BX957331.1
0.013
serpini1
0.010
lrrn1
0.009
cx43
0.016
mllt11
0.013
pcp4l1
0.013
napgb
0.010
atp1a1b
0.008
her15.2
0.016
gpm6ab
0.013
si:ch211-202a12.4
0.013
pik3ip1
0.010
si:ch211-137a8.4
0.008
her15.1
0.016
rcan1a
0.013
uncx4.1
0.013
sh3gl2
0.010
olig1
0.008
her9
0.015
zfpm2a
0.013
ptprn2
0.012
atp6v0b
0.010
bcan
0.008
selenop
0.015
dpysl5a
0.013
edil3a
0.012
fam107b
0.010
rgcc
0.008
dla
0.014
tubb4b
0.013
snap25b
0.012
gnao1a
0.010
dscamb
0.008
atp1b4
0.014
si:ch211-288g17.3
0.013
zfhx4
0.012
cyfip2
0.010
fabp7a
0.008
fads2
0.014
si:ch73-281n10.2
0.012
elavl4
0.012
pcsk1nl
0.010
cd63
0.008
efhd1
0.013
elavl3
0.012
oxct1a
0.012
si:dkey-35i13.1
0.010
sox10
0.008
cox4i2
0.012
rps6
0.012
uncx
0.012
upf3a
0.010
nptx1l
0.008
lix1
0.012
nme2b.1
0.012
hsp70l
0.011
rnasekb
0.010
taok3a
0.008
ptn
0.012
jun
0.012
hsp70.1
0.011
lrrn3
0.010
scg3
0.008
s1pr1
0.012
cct4
0.012
grm8b
0.011
dnajc5aa
0.010
usp3
0.008
Thetop30markergenesofthefivedistincttranscriptomicclusters(Fig.3B,C).Scoreindicatesthecoefficientofthegeneinthedecisionfunctionofthelogisticregression.
6
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185595. doi:10.1242/dev.185595
DEVELOPMENT

NBN.2 population of newborn neurons does not have telencephalic
identity.
Next, we determined the localization of NBN.1 and NBN.2 cells
in the adult forebrain using in situ hybridization for the specific
markers tubb5 (NBN.1) or ebf3a, msi2b and tbr1b (all NBN.2)
(Figs 3C and 5D,E). tubb5 was expressed in the VZ and PVZ
throughout the dorsal and ventral telencephalon, as well as in the
anterior preoptic part of the diencephalon. Compared with the
expression pattern of mcherry in the telencephalon of her4.1:
mcherry fish, which is restricted to the VZ, the expression domain of
tubb5 was notably extended into the PVZ, which is a known
location for newborn neurons (Grandel et al., 2006; Ganz et al.,
2010; Furlan et al., 2017) (Fig. 6C). These results are consistent with
the pseudotemporal positioning of tubb5-expressing NBN.1 cells as
newborn neurons, which are most closely related to RG. In contrast,
ebf3a expression was absent in the telencephalon, but was found
specifically in the ventral entopeduncular nucleus (vENT) in the
lateral anterior diencephalon (Mueller and Guo, 2009; Turner et al.,
2016). msi2b and tbr1b also showed broader expression in the
dorsal telencephalon, but consistently labeled the vENT (Fig. 6C),
suggesting that the NBN.2 population consists of vENT NBNs. As
adult neurogenesis was not reported in the vENT (Zupanc et al.,
2005; Grandel et al., 2006), we investigated whether NBNs were
located in the vENT. Adult fish were injected with EdU on three
consecutive days and EdU+/HuC/D+ NBNs were analyzed 1 month
after injection. As predicted, we found several EdU/HuC/D double-
labeled neurons in the vENT (Fig. 6D), indicating that NBNs are
added to this nucleus in adult stages. Thus, these results were
consistent with our analysis of telencephalic marker expression
(Fig. 6A) that suggested a location of NBN.2 cells outside of the
telencephalon. Together, our spatial analysis shows that NBN.1 and
NBN.2 cells are anatomically distinct populations of newborn
neurons in the telencephalon and the diencephalon, respectively.
In conclusion, we have prospectively isolated RG, NBNs and
MNs from the adult zebrafish forebrain, analyzed the kinetics of
NBN generation and differentiation, and performed unbiased, single
cell resolution transcriptome analysis of these cells. This analysis
revealed distinct clusters of NBNs (Fig. 6E), which correspond to
NBNs in the telencephalon and diencephalon. In addition, we
identified specific marker genes for NBNs, which may facilitate
further research on this important cell type in the adult vertebrate
brain.
DISCUSSION
The combination of lineage tracing and single cell sequencing is a
powerful tool for dynamic analysis of somatic stem cell progeny and
their role in tissue development, homeostasis and repair (Camp
et al., 2018; Gerber et al., 2018; Kester and van Oudenaarden,
2018). Here, we have performed lineage tracing at the population
level by using the inheritance of a fluorescent protein that is
specifically expressed in RG by their progeny, similar to previous
studies in the developing zebrafish telencephalon and regenerating
adult retina (Fausett and Goldman, 2006; Furlan et al., 2017). We
additionally used a fluorescent neuronal marker to identify NBNs
derived from the RG lineage as cells that are double positive for both
markers. An EdU pulse-chase experiment demonstrated that the
Fig. 4. The differentiation trajectory of zebrafish
radial glia progeny clusters resembles
mammalian adult neurogenesis. (A) Lineage
trajectory analysis of single cell RNAseq data from
RG, NBNs and MNs of the adult zebrafish forebrain.
Color coding corresponds to the different cell clusters
identified in Fig. 2B (left) or indicates the pseudotime
progression (right). (B) Unbiased hierarchical
clustering of transcriptome profile from zebrafish cell
clusters (red) with cell types from the developing and
adult murine hippocampus (black), showing
dispersed co-distribution of zebrafish cell clusters
with related mammalian cell types. (C) Quantification
of distribution of zebrafish cell clusters over the
different corresponding murine cell types for RG
(blue), NBN.1 cells (orange), NBN.2 cells (green),
MNs (red) and OPCs (purple). Bars specify the
number of zebrafish cells (y-axis) corresponding to
the indicated murine cell type (x-axis). (D) Heatmap
depicting the similarity of zebrafish cell clusters with
their corresponding murine cell types based on the
k-nearest neighbor distance. Lower distances
indicate higher similarities.
7
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185595. doi:10.1242/dev.185595
DEVELOPMENT

double-positive cells are specifically enriched for adult-generated
neurons and provides evidence that this population is transient and
dynamic, because they are enriched for EdU-incorporating cells
after a chase of 7 days, but not after 2 h or 4 weeks. The results
suggest that the double positive cells lose their mCherry
fluorescence between 7 days and 4 weeks after their generation by
proliferating precursors (likely RG) and are replaced by newly
generated cells at the latter timepoint, consistent with our lineage-
tracing paradigm. The extent of RG proliferation measured by EdU
incorporation is consistent with the frequency of proliferating RG in
the literature (Dray et al., 2015). In addition, the persistence of
her4.1-driven mCherry in the mCherry/GFP double-positive cells
for up to 7 days is consistent with a previous in vivo imaging study,
which reports inheritance of gfap:GFP in the differentiated daughter
cells of RG for several days after division (Barbosa et al., 2015).
Thus, these data verify our lineage-tracing approach and provide
important insights into the time line and kinetics of neurogenesis
and neuronal differentiation. Finally, we were able to enumerate for
the first time the extent of radial glia-derived newborn neurons in the
adult zebrafish forebrain, independent of thymidine
analog
administration. Using the her4.1 promotor as a RG-specific
driver, we find that circa 10% of sorted, live cells from the
telencephalon are NBNs that still retain detectable levels of the RG-
derived fluorescent marker. Our finding that her4.1:mCherry in the
NBNs is detectable for several days after their generation from
proliferating precursors (Fig. 2B,C) suggests that this NBN
population is an accumulation of cells of different ages generated
over 1 or 2 weeks, but over no more than 4 weeks. Consistently, our
transcriptional analysis reveals a broad spectrum of differentiation
states among NBNs, from NBN.1 cells that share substantial
transcriptional overlap with RG (see Fig. 2C; Fig. S5A) to NBNs
that form a common cluster with mature neurons (Fig. S2A). These
results suggest that, with our lineage-tracing approach, we detect
various differentiation states of NBNs, present at steady state in the
uninjured telencephalon (Fig. 3B,C). The biological role of such a
surprisingly high number of NBNs and the mechanisms of their
integration are currently unknown, but our results pave the way for
better investigation and manipulation of NBNs in the adult zebrafish
brain. A recent report provided single cell transcriptional profiles of
her4.1:GFPpos radial glia and her4.1:GFPneg neurons from the adult
Fig. 5. Proliferation is confined to
radial glia and is associated with
neurogenic commitment.
(A) Expression pattern of the
proliferation markers ccnd1 (left), mki67
(middle) and mcm5 (right) along the
trajectory path of RG differentiation. A
heatmap indicating the co-expression
of these genes in RG is shown at the
bottom. (B) Heatmap showing
differentially expressed genes in
ccnd1−quiescent RG and ccnd1+
proliferating RG. There is enrichment of
classical RG markers in quiescent RG
(left, red gene symbols), and of
neurogenic fate determinants and
NBN.1 marker genes in proliferating RG
(right, red gene symbols). (C) Violin plot
showing cumulative expression of the
four most widely expressed neurogenic
fate determinants and neuronal genes
(left) in quiescent (gray) and
proliferating (red) RG. Dots represent
cells expressing the indicated number
of genes. n=45 (quiescent) or 31
(proliferating). ***P<0.001 using a
Mann-Whitney U-test. (D,E) Heatmaps
showing gene expression dynamics of
differentially expressed genes along
the differentiation trajectory from RG to
MNs (D) or from RG to NBN.2 cells (E).
Genes (rows) are clustered and cells
(columns) are ordered according to the
pseudotime development. There is
specific expression of tubb5 in the
NBN.1 and of ebf3a and msi2b in the
NBN.2 cluster.
8
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185595. doi:10.1242/dev.185595
DEVELOPMENT

zebrafish telencephalon (Cosacak et al., 2019), but NBNs are likely
under-represented in this analysis because her4.1:GFPlow cells were
deliberately omitted from the analysis.
Using our lineage-tracing approach, we determined whether
committed proliferating progenitors are present among the RG
progeny in the adult forebrain. This analysis, at the population level,
showed that RG are the only proliferating cell population within the
sampled cells of the her4.1-lineage (Fig. 5A). Our estimation of the
frequency of proliferating versus quiescent RG matches the values
reported by Dray et al. (2015). We find that 11 out of 76 RG (14.5%)
express
the
S/G2/M-phase-specific
proliferation
marker
mcm5
(Fig. 5A), corresponding to ∼15% of RG expressing the S/G2/M-
marker PCNA or mcm5-driven EGFP at the protein level (Dray et al.,
2015). The data are consistent with our comparison of zebrafish and
murine neurogenic cells, where a subset of RG correspond to
intermediate
neurogenic
progenitors,
the
major
proliferating
population in murine hippocampal adult neurogenesis. They also
align with previous clonal analysis of RG progeny (Kroehne et al.,
2011; Rothenaigner et al., 2011), which also argue against a major role
of non-radial glia cells for amplification of RG progeny in zebrafish.
Such non-glial precursors have been recently proposed as the
quantitatively dominant proliferating cell type in the VZ/PVZ of the
adult zebrafish telencephalon by live imaging in vivo. They were
identified by the absence of destabilized RFP(dRFP) expressed under
the control of the her4.1 promotor, and by the presence of mcm5-driven
EGFP (Dray et al., 2015). As these progenitors are negative for classical
glial markers, their lineage relationship with radial glia is currently
unclear. Importantly, in our study, where mCherry is retained in RG
progeny until 7 days after division (Fig. 2B,C), virtually all proliferating
her4.1:mCherrypos cells showed a transcriptome profile consistent with
RG identity (Fig. 5A,B). Similarly, recent sc-RNAseq studies in the
adult zebrafish brain with higher cell throughput, only identified cells
with transcriptomic profiles of radial glia as proliferating neurogenic
precursors (Cosacak et al., 2019; Yu and He, 2019). Our findings – that
a subset of zebrafish RG corresponds to intermediate neurogenic
progenitors, the major proliferating and amplifying population from the
postnatal and adult murine hippocampus, while a NBN.1 subset
corresponds to neuroblast, their direct progeny – support this view.
Thus, our results argue against a direct lineage relationship between RG
and these non-glial precursors, although we cannot exclude the
possibility that the mCherry protein is diluted to undetectable levels in
fast proliferating precursor progeny in radial glia, while it is still
detectable in postmitotic neuronal progeny. We also find that gene
expression in proliferating RG is linked to neurogenesis, as expression
of neurogenic cell fate determinants (ascl1a, ascl1b and sox4a) and
NBN.1 marker genes (tmsb and marcksb) is enriched in proliferating
RG (Fig. 5B). These data are consistent with in vivo live-imaging
analyses of RG proliferation that found most RG divisions generate
differentiated, non-RG progeny (Barbosa et al., 2015; Drayet al., 2015),
which were in part identified as HuC/Dpos neurons (Barbosa et al.,
2015). Thus, our study complements the in vivo imaging of cellular
behavior of neurogenic cell types in the adult zebrafish telencephalon
with insights into the transcriptional regulation in quiescent and
proliferating RG and their progeny at single cell resolution.
Another currently unresolved issue concerns the type of NBNs
that are found in the adult zebrafish brain. In the telencephalon,
GABAergic interneurons and aminergic neurons were previously
found among NBNs (Adolf et al., 2006; Grandel et al., 2006), but
the identity of a major fraction of NBNs was still unclear. Using
unbiased genome-wide analysis of neuronal cell type markers, we
found that the majority of newborn neurons expressed the
glutamatergic markers slc16a6a or slc16a6b, while a smaller
fraction expressed the GABAergic markers gad1b or gad2. In
particular, in the NBN.1 cluster, but not in the NBN.2 cluster, pallial
fate determinants of the neurod gene family were co-expressed with
glutamatergic
markers
(Fig.
4A,B),
indicating
a
pallial
glutamatergic identity. Thus, this study shows for the first time
that zebrafish constitutively generate pallial glutamatergic neurons
at adult stage, raising the possibility that this neuronal class can also
be efficiently regenerated after brain injury. Interestingly, we found
a minor proportion of RG progeny that showed hallmarks of OPC
identity, such as expression of olig2, olig1, aplnrb and sox10
(Fig. 2B,C; Fig. S5A). OPCs with a very similar marker profile were
also found in the juvenile zebrafish brain (Raj et al., 2018).
Table 2. Genes that are differentially expressed in quiescent and
proliferating RG
Quiescent RG
Proliferating RG
Gene
Score
Gene
Score
fabp7a
4.519
ccnd1
7.302
si:ch211-251b21.1
4.421
si:ch211-222l21.1
4.054
aldocb
4.388
snrpd1
3.391
mt-atp6
4.328
actl6a
3.298
ptn
4.300
ranbp1
3.292
mt-atp8
4.163
h2az2b
3.232
ckbb
4.092
ascl1b
3.183
cx43
4.092
sox4a
3.073
mt-cyb
4.076
si:ch211-193l2.4
2.985
acbd7
4.010
rsl1d1
2.953
glula
3.851
mcm7
2.903
mt2
3.824
si:ch211-288g17.3
2.892
fgfbp3
3.681
si:ch211-193l2.6
2.794
mfge8a
3.659
si:ch211-193l2.3
2.783
slc1a2b
3.654
rps6kb1b
2.766
efhd1
3.637
lfng
2.744
selenop
3.594
ascl1a
2.739
ptgdsb.1
3.583
prrc2b
2.728
mt-co2
3.550
tmsb
2.723
atp1a1b
3.489
tcp1
2.723
luzp2
3.484
hmgb2b
2.712
hipk2
3.478
her4.2
2.706
ptgdsb.2
3.446
si:ch73-46j18.5
2.690
gapdhs
3.435
si:ch211-193l2.5
2.662
s100b
3.418
marcksb
2.657
mt-co3
3.369
hmga1a
2.635
slc4a4a
3.336
cct4
2.618
sdcbp2
3.325
ccnd2a
2.613
slc6a11b
3.309
nap1l1
2.607
zgc:153704
3.237
srsf2a
2.591
tegt
3.205
ddx21
2.531
psap
3.122
si:ch211156b7.4
2.525
s1pr1
3.095
hnrnpabb
2.492
lgals2a
3.040
arrdc3b
2.481
gmnn
3.035
mibp2
2.471
b2ml
2.991
boc
2.460
hepacama
2.964
snrpd3l
2.454
mt-nd1
2.936
her4.4
2.449
mgll
2.925
dla
2.438
atp1b4
2.914
kdm6ba
2.432
anxa11b
2.887
slc6a15
2.405
drg3a
2.887
her15.1
2.399
itm2ba
2.854
stmn1b
2.399
ppap2
2.827
rps23
2.394
mt-nd2
2.777
ran
2.361
cxcl12a
2.772
h3f3a
2.361
grm2b
2.739
rpl22l1
2.350
The top 47 marker genes of ccnd1-negative quiescent RG or ccnd1-positive
proliferating RG (Fig. 5D).
Score indicates the z-score underlying the computation of P using the
Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
9
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185595. doi:10.1242/dev.185595
DEVELOPMENT

Expression of marker genes for this population was also found
prominently in sorted olig2:GFPpos cells from the adult zebrafish
spinal cord (Kroehne et al., 2017), strongly suggesting that these
cells are bona fide OPCs. Moreover, 28.6% of olig2:GFPpos cells
showed low levels of her4.1:mCherry, while numerous cells
showed intermediate levels of mCherry and GFP (Fig. S4B,C).
Given that more than 25% of olig2:GFPpos cells are also positive for
her4.1:mCherry, the double-positive cells are far too numerous to be
accounted for by the small subpopulation of olig2:GFPpos
precursors in the midline of the ventral telencephalon (März et al.,
2010b). The persistence of her4.1-driven mCherry fluorescence in
these cells suggests that they are generated by RG in the adult
zebrafish brain, in addition to the self-renewal capabilities of OPCs.
Thus, we provide the first evidence here for the possible generation
of OPCs from RG in the adult zebrafish brain. Whether specialized
subsets of RG for generation of neurons and OPCs exists is currently
unclear, but future scRNASeq studies in the zebrafish brain with
higher cell throughput will enable better clarification of this issue.
Moreover, in addition to the NBN.1 population, which represents the
nascent RG progeny, according to analysis by pseudotime ordering,
transcriptional overlap and comparison with corresponding mammalian
cell types (Fig. 4A,C,D; Fig. S5A), we also identify two more mature
populations of adult-generated neurons. One of these populations forms
a common cluster with mature neurons that do not retain her4.1-driven
mCherry fluorescence and expresses telencephalic identity markers
such as neurod and dlx genes. The NBNs in this cluster are considered
to be generated from adult RG within the last 4 weeks, based on the
retention of her4.1:mCherry (Fig. 2B,C), but are advanced in their
maturation as many of them already express maturity markers such as
sv2a (compare Fig. 3B and Fig. S2A). Within the MN cluster, cells
expressing glutamatergic or GABAergic markers are found. Likely, the
small numberof analyzed cells in this cluster precludes the separation
of these cell types into separate clusters, as found recently (Cosacak
et al., 2019). The second, matured NBN.2 population lacks
telencephalic markers and consists mostly of glutamatergic
neurons (Fig. 6B). Spatial analysis of marker genes identifies
Fig. 6. The NBN clusters show diversity in cell
fate determinant expression and anatomical
localization in the adult forebrain.
(A,B) Heatmaps showing gene expression
dynamics of proliferation markers, Notch targets,
neurogenic fate determinants, telencephalic identity
markers and neuronal subtype markers along the
differentiation trajectory from RG to MNs (A) or from
RG to NBN.2 cells (B). Genes (rows) are clustered
and cells (columns) are ordered according to the
pseudotime development. Magenta and turquoise
frames mark identity markers for dorsal or ventral
telencephalon, respectively. (C) In situ hybridization
for mcherry in her4.1:mcherry reporter fish (top), the
NBN.1 marker tubb5 (middle), and the NBN.2
markers ebf3a, msi2b and tbr1b (bottom) in wild-
type fish. There is consistent expression of NBN.2
markers in the lateral diencephalon. The
rostrocaudal level of the section is indicated in the
bottom right corner. (D) Optical section of
immunostaining for the neuronal markers HuC/D
(magenta) and EdU labeling (turquoise) in the
vENT, indicating the localization of NBNs
(arrowheads). (E) Schematic representation of the
resulting model from this study. Scale bars: 200 µm
in C; 20 µm in D.
10
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185595. doi:10.1242/dev.185595
DEVELOPMENT

these NBNs as belonging to the vENT in the diencephalon, which is
included in our analysis, because the anterior diencephalon cannot
be surgically separated from the telencephalon at the whole-mount
level. Together with our observation that EdUpos NBNs are added to
this nucleus in adult stages, this argues that these NBNs are likely
derived from diencephalic RG; further direct lineage tracing of
diencephalic RG will be necessary to test this hypothesis.
Overall, we find that transcriptome analysis at single cell
resolution can distinguish functionally and spatially defined
subpopulations of RG progeny in the adult zebrafish brain. The
insights presented here also highlight the heterogeneity of RG
reporter-positive cells in the adult zebrafish brain, and advocate the
use of multiple reporters to clearly define cell types.
Importantly, we identify here marker genes for functional
subpopulations of NBNs, such as tubb5 and ebf3a for the NBN.1
and NBN.2 population, respectively. Another recent study also
suggested a population of tubb5- and neurod-expressing cells as
nascent, telencephalic neurons in the juvenile zebrafish brain (Raj
et al., 2018). Our results are consistent with this conclusion, based
on also using lineage-tracing, pseudotime-ordering and location
analysis in the adult brain. Identification of specific markers for
NBNs – which are currently elusive – will greatly facilitate the study
of their biology, because it enables the generation of transgenic tools
for studying these cells, e.g. through CRISPR-Cas9-mediated
generation of reporters, CreERT2 lines (Auer et al., 2014; Kesavan
et al., 2017, 2018) or effector lines (NTR, dCas9-effectors, etc.).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Zebrafish
Zebrafish were bred and maintained according to standard procedures. All
animal procedures were approved by the Regierungspräsidium Dresden (permit
AZ 24-9165.40-1/2007, 24-9165.40-1/2013-1, TVV 44/2017). Wild-type
experimental fish were in the AB background. Fish were raised at a density of
50-60 fish/12 l tank (Brand et al., 2002). Fish of either sex were used.
Transgenic fish lines
The her4.1:mcherry, the elavl3:gfp and the olig2:gfp lines have been
described previously (Kroehne et al., 2011; Park et al., 2000; Shin et al.,
2003). For the generation of the gfap reporter line Tg(gfap:nls-mcherry),
the gfap promoter (Bernardos and Raymond, 2006) was PCR amplified
(gfap-for,
5′-gggccCACCTTTGGGATGTAGTGGAACGGG;
gfap-rev,
5′-ggccggccAGGAACGCTGGGACTCCATGGTGGA) flanked by ApaI
and FseI restriction sites that allowed substitution of the her4.1 promoter of the
her4.1:mCherry-T2A-CreERT2 plasmid (Kroehne et al., 2011). The lowercase
letters indicate the non-sequence-specific part of the primers that harbours the
restriction sites (ApaI in the forward primer and FseI in the reverse primer).
Correspondingly, the uppercase letters indicate the part of the primer that
corresponds to the sequence of the gfap promotor. The mCherry reporter was
PCR amplified and flanked by unique restriction sites usingthe primers Cherry-
Fse-for (atatGGCCGGCCgccaccatggctccaaagaagaagcgtaaggtaatggccatcatcaa-
ggagttcatc) and Cherry-Asc-rev (cgccGGCGCGCCgaattaaaaaacctcccacacc).
The nuclear localization sequence (nls) was introduced into the sequence by a
5′ overhang of the PCR forward primer. The PCR product was subloned into
the pCR2.1-TOPO vector. Next, the TOPO vector with the reporter and the
pTol(gfap:mcherry-T2A-CreERT2) construct were digested using the enzymes
AscI and FseI, and ligated to replace the mCherry-CreERT2 cassette with the
nls-reporter. For germ-line transformation, linearized plasmid DNA with
transposase mRNA was injected into fertilized eggs (F0), raised to adulthood
and crossed to AB wild-type fish as previously described (Kawakami et al.,
2004). For the identification of transgenic fish, F1 embryos were examined
under a fluorescent microscope and positive embryos were raised.
Tissue dissociation and cell sorting
Wild type or her4.1:mcherry;elavl3:GFP transgenic fish were sacrificed by
an overdose (0.024%) of MS-222 (Sigma) (Brand et al., 2002) until
cessation of opercular movement and transferred to ice-cold HBSS. The
dorsal skull plates were removed using forceps, incisions were made caudal
to the olfactory bulbs and rostral to the midbrain, and the intermittend
telencephalon and anterior diencephalon was transferred to Eppendorf
tubes. Of note, this dissection protocol will yield cells from both the
telencephalon and the anterior diencephalon, as no clear anatomical
separation exists between these two parts at the level of whole-mount brain
tissue. Single cell suspensions were prepared from single telencephali/
anterior diencephali using the Neural Tissue Dissociation Kit (Miltenyi
Bioscience) with enzymatic digestion at 28°C instead of 37°C to prevent
heat stress of the zebrafish cells. Prior to sorting, all samples were passed
through a 20 μm cell strainer to remove cell aggregates and Calcein Blue-
AM (Thermo Bioscience) was added to a final concentration of 10 µM.
Cells expressing mCherry and GFP were detected on a LSR II cell sorter
(BD Biosciences) after 488 nm excitation and a bandpass-filter 564/42 nm
and 530/30 nm, respectively. Calcein Blue was detected after 405 nm
excitation and a bandpass-filter 450/40 nm. Forward and side scatter were
used to select all events that show a characteristic scatter profile of zebrafish
brain cells. From this selection, all events that showed incorporation of the
Calcein Blue were gated as living cells. Living cells were plotted for GFP
and mCherry fluorescence to gate for the respective cell populations.
Detection of all fluorescent samples was controlled against unstained wild-
type cells. Single cells gated as RG (mCherryhigh/GFPneg), NBN
(mCherrylow/GFPpos) and MN (mCherryneg/GFPpos) were sorted into
single cavities of 96-well plates containing 2 µl lysis buffer using index
sort mode and a 100 µm nozzle. The samples were immediately frozen until
preparation of sequencing libraries.
Analysis of EdU incorporation in fluorescent cell populations
For the analysis of EdU incorporation into the different cell types of
forebrains from her4.1:mcherry;elavl3:GFP transgenic fish, 7-10 forebrains
were pooled for one sample. At different times after EdU injection,
forebrains were dissected, dissociated and processed for FACS as described
above. Single cells gated as mCherryhigh/GFPneg, mCherrylow/GFPpos and
mCherryneg/GFPpos were sorted into Eppendorf tubes containing 200 µl
Click-IT fixative (Thermo) using a 100 µm nozzle. For the two mCherrypos
populations, 8000-30,000 cells were sorted; for the mCherryneg/GFPpos
population, sorting was stopped at 100,000 cells. Cells were incubated for
15 min in the dark and EdU was detected using the Click-IT Plus EdU
AlexaFluor 647 Flow Cytometry Assay Kit (Thermo) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. After EdU detection, the cell pellet was
resuspended in 200 µl HBSS (Thermo), including 10 µg/ml (w/v) and
incubated for 10 min at room temperature to stain the DNA in cell nuclei.
Cells that are positive for AlexaFluor 647-labeled EdU and/or Hoechst were
detected on a LSR II cell sorter (BD Biosciences) using 633 nm and 405 nm
excitation, and a bandpass filter (660/20 nm and 530/30 nm, respectively).
Imaging flow cytometry
For imaging flow cytometry, dissected zebrafish forebrains were dissociated
and processed as for conventional flow cytometry (see above). The
dissociated cells were analyzed for reporter fluorescence (GFP and
mCherry) and Calcein Blue as viability marker using an ImageStream X
Mark II imaging flow cytometer (Amnis), after gating forebrain cells for
singlets (aspect ratio versus area). Data were processed offline using IDEAS
software (Amnis). At least 20 individual images of double-positive (GFP+/
mCherry+) cells, mCherry only-positive cells (GFP−/mCherry+), GFP only-
positive cells (GFP+/mCherry−) and negative cells (GFP−/mCherry−) were
analyzed and quantified for the appearance of GFP and DsRED within the
same cell, doublets and cells with attached fluorescent debris.
RNA sequencing
Cells were sorted by FACS into a 96-well plate containing 2 µl of nuclease
free water with 0.2% Triton-X 100 and 4 U murine RNase Inhibitor (NEB),
spun down and frozen at −80°C. After thawing the samples, 2 µl of a primer
mix was added [5 mM dNTP (Invitrogen), 0.5 µM dT-primer* and 4 U
RNase Inhibitor (NEB)]. RNA was denatured for 3 min at 72°C and the
reverse transcription was performed at 42°C for 90 min after filling up to
10 µl with reverse transcription buffer mix for a final concentration of 1×
11
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185595. doi:10.1242/dev.185595
DEVELOPMENT

superscript II buffer (Invitrogen), 1 M betaine, 5 mM DTT, 6 mM MgCl2,
1 µM TSO-primer*, 9 U RNase Inhibitor and 90 U Superscript II. After
synthesis, the reverse transcriptase was inactivated at 70°C for 15 min. The
cDNAwas amplified using Kapa HiFi HotStart Readymix (Peqlab) at a final
1× concentration and 0.1 µM UP-primer under the following cycling
conditions: initial denaturation at 98°C for 3 min; 22 cycles of 98°C for 20 s,
67°C for 15 s and 72°C for 6 min; and final elongation at 72°C for 5 min.
The amplified cDNA was purified using 1× volume of hydrophobic Sera-
Mag SpeedBeads (GE Healthcare) and DNA is eluted in 12 µl nuclease free
water. The concentration of the samples was measured with a Tecan plate
reader Infinite 200 pro in 384 well black flat bottom low-volume plates
(Corning) using AccuBlue Broad range chemistry (Biotium).
For library preparation, 700 pg cDNA in 2 µl were mixed with 0.5 µl
Tagment DNA Enzyme and 2.5 µl Tagment DNA Buffer (Nextera,
Illumina) and tagmented at 55°C for 5 min. Subsequently, Illumina
indices were added during PCR (72°C for 3 min; 98°C for 30 s; 12 cycles
of 98°C for 10 s, 63°C for 20 s and 72°C for 1 min; and 72°C for 5 min)
with 1× concentrated KAPA Hifi HotStart Ready Mix and 0.7 µM dual
indexing primers. After PCR, libraries were quantified with AccuBlue
Broad range chemistry, equimolarly pooled and purified twice with 1×
volume Sera-Mag SpeedBeads. This was followed by Illumina sequencing
on a Nextseq500 aiming at an average sequencing depth of 0.5 million reads
per cell. Primers used were as follows: dT-primer, C6-aminolinker-AAG-
CAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGTCGACTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT-
TTTTTTTTTVN, where N represents a random base and V any base
beside thymidine; TSO-primer, AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGT-
ACATrGrGrG, where rG stands for ribo-guanosine; UP-primer, AAGC-
AGTGGTA-TCAACGCAGAGT.
Computational analysis
Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 system, resulting in
about 250,000 to 900,000 single end reads per cell. FastQC was used to
examine quality of the reads after sequencing. Alignment of the reads to the
GRCz10 reference, inclusive the 92 ERCC Spike-In transcripts, was carried
out with GSNAP (v 2017-08-15), and Ensembl gene annotation version 87
was used to detect exon spanning reads. featureCounts (v1.5.3) was used
with the same Ensembl annotation to count the uniquely aligned reads to the
genes and to create a counts table.
To identify low quality cells, quality control metrics were calculated from
the raw count matrix in R using the package scater (McCarthy et al., 2017).
Only cells that had more 4.5 log10-transformed total reads, between 2.7 and
3.9 log10-transformed features with more than one read, less than 50% of
the reads in the top 50 highest expressed genes, less than 20% reads from
mitochondrial genes, less than 25% reads from spike-ins and for which more
than 20% of the reads were mapped to the genome were used for further
analysis. Using these criteria, from the 370 cells that were sequenced, 264
cells (71%) were used for further analysis. Genes that were detected in fewer
than three cells were not considered for downstream analysis.
Further analysis was performed using the scanpy package (master branch
commit 623f0d4) (Wolf et al., 2018, 2019). Using the scanpy function
highly_variable_genes with max_mean set to 8.0, 5142 highly variable
genes were identified from the log-transformed raw counts. Read counts
were normalized using the deconvolution method implemented in the scran
package (Lun et al., 2016 preprint), log-transformed, and scaled to unit
variance and zero mean. A principal component analysis was performed on
the highly variable genes. t-SNE dimensionality reduction was performed
using the first 10 principal components (Ulyanov, 2018; Amir et al., 2013;
Maaten and Hinton 2008). Based on the first 10 principal components, the
diffusion map was calculated using a Gaussian kernel and sigma was
implicitly determined by the distance to the five nearest neighbors
(Haghverdi et al., 2015, Buettner and Theis 2012; Coifman et al., 2005).
For the clustering, the 10 nearest neighbor graph was computed based on the
first 10 principal components (McInnes and Healy, 2018 preprint). The
neighborhood graph was used to perform Louvain clustering with the
resolution parameter set to 0.5 (Blondel et al., 2008; Levine et al., 2015;
Traag, 2015). Marker genes were detected using logistic regression on the raw
count matrix as implemented in scanpy. The identification of cell identities in
these clusters was based on examining these marker genes. For further
analysis, the OPCs were dropped and a principal component analysis was
performed on the resulting count matrix. A diffusion map was calculated with
the same parameters as above. Diffusion pseudotime was computed with the
dpt function of scanpy using the randomly chosen RG cell ‘RG-5_03_D09’ as
root (Haghverdi et al., 2015; Wolf et al., 2018b preprint). To identify genes
that mark the transitions between clusters, a pairwise differential expression
analysis using a Wilcoxon rank-sum test was performed. For visualization of
gene expression along diffusion pseudotime, a running average with a
window width of 15 cells was computed.
Proliferative RG were defined as those that had one or more reads of
ccnd1. All other RG were classified as non-proliferative. Differential
expression analysis between the two groups was performed using a
Wilcoxon rank-sum test. To examine the statistical significance of the over-
representation of the top 100 marker genes for the NBN.1 cluster in the top
100 genes that are higher expressed in proliferative RG compared with
quiescent RG a hypergeometric test was performed. From the 11 genes that
were present in both, the top 100 marker genes for the NBN.1 cluster and the
top 100 genes that are higher expressed in proliferative RG, four genes
associated with neurogenesis were curated. For each cell, the number of
expressed genes (>0 reads) among those four genes was calculated. To test
the statistical significance of the increase in the number of cells that express
genes associated with neurogenesis in proliferative RG, a one-sided
Wilcoxon rank-sum test was performed.
Comparison with murine cell types
For the combined cell type homology analysis, scanpy version 1.4.4 was
used. Read counts and metadata on cell type identities from the developing
mouse dentate gyrus were acquired from GEO accession number
GSE104323. Read counts from zebrafish and mouse were normalized
using the scanpy function normalize_per_gene and log-transformed using
the log1p function of scanpy. Next, the normalized count matrices for
zebrafish and mouse were transformed into a count matrix for all
orthologues gene pairs in the following way. A list of all pairs of
orthologues genes between mouse (GRCm38.p6) and zebrafish (GRCz11)
was downloaded from www.ensembl.org/biomart/martview/ (database,
Ensembl
Genes
97;
Dataset,
zebrafish
genes
(GRCz11);
filters,
Orthologous Mouse Genes: Only; Attributes, Gene stable ID, Gene name,
Mouse gene stable ID, Mouse gene name). It should be noted, that this is not
a list of only one-to-one matches, i.e. a single species-specific gene can be
contained in multiple pairs of orthologues genes. A cross-species count
matrix was constructed in which each row corresponds to an orthologues
gene pair and the columns correspond to the cells from both species. Let zj
a
denote the normalized expression of zebrafish gene a in zebrafish cell j and
mk
b denote the normalized expression of mouse gene b in mouse cell k. Then,
the elements of this cross-species count matrix were assigned as
ei
a;b ¼
zi
a
if cell i is a zebrafish cell
mi
b
if cell i is a mouse cell

for all mouse and zebrafish cells i, and all orthologues gene pairs a, b. To
align mouse and zebrafish data, batch correction was performed using the
combat function of scanpy with the species as the batch key. Highly variable
orthologous
gene
pairs
were
selected
using
the
scanpy
function
highly_variable_genes with parameter flavor ‘cell_ranger’. A principal
component analysis was performed on these highly variable orthologues
gene pairs. Hierarchical clustering in the space of the first 50 principal
components using a Pearson correlation distance was performed using the
dendrogram function in scanpy. For each zebrafish cell, the Pearson
correlation distance to and the cell type of the nearest mouse cell in the space
of the first 50 principal components were computed. To reduce the number
of false positives, zebrafish cells with distances to mouse cells above the
66% quantile of the distance distribution were disregarded from the analysis.
Tissue preparation
Brains were exposed in situ and fixed at 4°C overnight in 2-4%
paraformaldehyde/0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.5). They were washed
twice
with
phosphate-buffered
saline
(PBS)
and
transferred
for
decalcification and cryoprotection to 20% sucrose/20% EDTA in 0.1 M
12
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185595. doi:10.1242/dev.185595
DEVELOPMENT

phosphate buffer (pH 7.5). Brains were frozen in 7.5% gelatine/20% sucrose
and cut at 14 µm. Sections were stored at −20°C.
In situ hybridization
RNA in situ hybridization on sections and on whole-mount brains and RNA
probe generation was essentially performed as previously described (Ganz
et al., 2012). Briefly, after defrosting at room temperature, sections were
rehydrated for 15 min in PBS with 0.3% TritonX (PBSTx) and incubated
with the probe overnight at 62-65°C. Information on the antisense in situ
riboprobe for tbr1b can be found elsewhere (Ganz et al., 2012). The in situ
probe for tubb5 was obtained from the Zebrafish Gene Collection (cDNA
clone MGC:85895). Probes for ebf3a and msi2b were cloned from zebrafish
embryonic cDNA with the following primers: ebf3a-F, CAGCCAGTGG-
AGATCGAAAGGACAG; ebf3a-R, TGCCGTAGGGAGAGTTCGCAG-
AGGA; msi2b-F, GTTAGCCATGGAGGGAGACG; msi2b-R, GCGTCT-
TGGAAAGGCAACTT). The sections were washed at 60-65°C in washing
solution (1×SSC, 50% deionized formamide) for 1×15 min and 2×30 min
followed by 2×30 min MAB with 0.1% Tween-20 (MABT) washes.
Sections were incubated for 1 h at room temperature in 2% DIG-blocking
reagent (Roche) and incubated with anti-DIG antibody (Roche Diagnostics,
sheep, polyclonal, Fab fragments conjugated to alkaline phosphatase,
11093274910) diluted 1:4000 in 2% DIG-blocking reagent overnight at
4°C. Subsequently, sections were washed for 4×20 min in MABT,
equilibrated with staining buffer and stained with the substrate NBT/
BCIP. The staining was controlled using a stereomicroscope. Finally,
sections were washed for 2×5 min in PBS, postfixed with 4% PFA for
20-30 min, washed again for 2×10 min in PBS and mounted with 70%
glycerol in PBS. All washing steps were performed on a shaker, all
incubation steps in a humid chamber.
Immunohistochemistry and EdU detection
Immunohistochemistry was carried out as previously described (Kroehne
et al., 2011). Briefly, for detection of HuC/D, sections were subjected to
antigen retrieval by 15 min incubation in 10 mM citrate buffer (pH 6.8).
Primary and secondary antibodies were incubated in PBS with 0.3% Triton
X-100 (PBS TX). Tissue sections were incubated with primary antibodies
overnight at 4°C and secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. The
slides were then washed in PBS TX and mounted. We used primary
antibodies to HuC/D (Elavl3) (mouse, Thermo Fisher Scientific, A21271,
1/250). For primary antibody validation, see www.thermofisher.com/
antibody/product/HuC-HuD-Antibody-clone-16A11-Monoclonal/A-21271.
Alexa Fluor 633-conjugated secondary antibodies were used (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, A-21050, A21422; 1/750). EdU was detected with the
EdU Alexafluor 488 Plus Imaging Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, C10337)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
EdU injection
Adult (6-12 months old) fish were anaesthetized with 0.01% MS-222
(Sigma) in fish water (Brand et al., 2002) until sedation and injected
intraperitoneally with 20 µl of 5 mg/ml EdU in PBS either for three times
with 12 h interinjection interval (for analysis of EdU incorporation in
her4.1:mcherry; elavl3:gfp-double transgenic fish) or for three times on
consecutive days (for detection of adult-generated neurons in the
diencephalon). After further survival for up to 1 month, fish were
sacrificed by overdose with 0.024% MS-222 (Sigma) in fish water (Brand
et al., 2002) until cessation of opercular movement. Subsequently, brains
were dissected and processed for FACS (for analysis of EdU incorporation
in her4.1:mcherry; elavl3:gfp-double transgenic fish) or processed for
cryosectioning (detection of adult-generated neurons in the diencephalon).
Image acquisition and processing
Images
of
brain
sections,
stained
using
in
situ
hybridization
or
immunofluorescence
were
imaged
with
a
Zeiss
Axioimager
Z1
microscope with Apotome structured illumination to achieve optical
sections in fluorescent images, using a Zeiss Plan-Apochromat 5×/0.16
and Zeiss Plan-Apochromat 40×0.95 objectives. To minimize crosstalk
between the channels in multicolored specimens, sequential image
acquisition was performed. The images were processed using ImageJ
v.1.44 (rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/) and Adobe Photoshop CC 2015. Figures were
assembled using Adobe Illustrator CC 2015.
Statistics
For statistical analysis, n indicates the number of forebrain cell pools, where
cells from 7-10 telencephali were pooled (EdU incorporation) or the number
of single quiescent od proliferating RG cells (neurogenic commitment in
proliferating RG). Statistical significance was determined using one way
ANOVA with Welch’s correction for heteroskedatic data followed by
Bonferroni’s multiple comparison post hoc test (EdU incorporation) or
using a one-sided Mann and Whitney U-test (neurogenic commitment in
proliferating RG). Statistical tests were performed with Graph Pad Prism
8. No animals or data points were excluded from the analyses. Cells in the
single cell analysis were excluded based on pre-determined technical quality
control parameters. No methods were used to pre-determine sample size or
randomize group assignment.
Acknowledgements
We thank Daniela Zö ller for excellent technical assistance, and Anne Gompf and
Katja Bernhardt from the CMCB Flow Cytometry core facility for cell sorting and flow
cytometry. The excellent work of our fish facility and the BIODIP Imaging Facility is
acknowledged. We also thank Volker Krö hne, Heiner Grandel and Fabrizio Olmeda
for helpful discussions.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: C.L., M.B.; Methodology: C.L., F.R., S. Reinhardt, A.D.,
S. Rulands; Software: F.R., M.L.; Formal analysis: C.L., F.R., M.L., S. Rulands;
Investigation: C.L., F.R., A.M., S. Reinhardt, V.K.; Resources: A.W., A.D., M.B.;
Writing - original draft: C.L., M.B.; Writing - review & editing: C.L., F.R., A.M.,
S. Reinhardt, M.L., A.W., V.K., A.D., S. Rulands, M.B.; Visualization: F.R.;
Supervision: C.L., A.D., S. Rulands, M.B.; Funding acquisition: M.B.
Funding
This work was supported by grants to M.B. from the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG FZT 111), the European Union (European
Research Council AdG Zf-BrainReg) and the German Excellence Initiative
(Wissenschaftsrat and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) (EXC 168). Deposited
in PMC for immediate release.
Data availability
The sequencing data have been deposited in GEO under accession number
GSE137525. The source code for the computational analysis is available under
github.com/fabianrost84/lange_single-cell_2019.
Supplementary information
Supplementary information available online at
http://dev.biologists.org/lookup/doi/10.1242/dev.185595.supplemental
References
Adolf, B., Chapouton, P., Lam, C. S., Topp, S., Tannhä user, B., Strä hle, U., Gö tz,
M. and Bally-Cuif, L. (2006). Conserved and acquired features of adult
neurogenesis in the zebrafish telencephalon. Dev. Biol. 295, 278-293. doi:10.
1016/j.ydbio.2006.03.023
Aimone, J. B., Li, Y., Lee, S. W., Clemenson, G. D., Deng, W. and Gage, F. H.
(2014). Regulation and function of adult neurogenesis: from genes to cognition.
Physiol. Rev. 94, 991-1026. doi:10.1152/physrev.00004.2014
Alemany, A., Florescu, M., Baron, C. S., Peterson-Maduro, J. and van
Oudenaarden, A. (2018). Whole-organism clone tracing using single-cell
sequencing. Nature 556, 108-112. doi:10.1038/nature25969
Alunni, A. and Bally-Cuif, L. (2016). A comparative view of regenerative
neurogenesis in vertebrates. Development 143, 741-753. doi:10.1242/dev.
122796
Alunni, A., Hermel, J.-M., Heuze, A., Bourrat, F., Jamen, F. and Joly, J. S. (2010).
Evidence for neural stem cells in the medaka optic tectum proliferation zones.
Dev. Neurobiol. 70, 693-713. doi:10.1002/dneu.20799
Amamoto, R., Huerta, V. G., Takahashi, E., Dai, G., Grant, A. K., Fu, Z. and
Arlotta, P. (2016). Adult axolotls can regenerate original neuronal diversity in
response to brain injury. Elife 5, e13998. doi:10.7554/eLife.13998.025
13
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185595. doi:10.1242/dev.185595
DEVELOPMENT

Amir, E.-A. D., Davis, K. L., Tadmor, M. D., Simonds, E. F., Levine, J. H., Bendall,
S. C., Shenfeld, D. K., Krishnaswamy, S., Nolan, G. P. and Pe’er, D. (2013).
viSNE enables visualization of high dimensional single-cell data and reveals
phenotypic heterogeneity of leukemia. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 545-552. doi:10.1038/
nbt.2594
Auer, T. O., Duroure, K., De Cian, A., Concordet, J.-P. and Del Bene, F. (2014).
Highly efficient CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knock-in in zebrafish by homology-
independent DNA repair. Genome Res. 24, 142-153. doi:10.1101/gr.161638.113
Barbosa, J. S., Sanchez-Gonzalez, R., Di Giaimo, R., Baumgart, E. V., Theis,
F. J., Gö tz, M. and Ninkovic, J. (2015). Neurodevelopment. Live imaging of adult
neural stem cell behavior in the intact and injured zebrafish brain. Science 348,
789-793. doi:10.1126/science.aaa2729
Batra, R., Harder, N., Gogolin, S., Diessl, N., Soons, Z., Jä ger-Schmidt, C.,
Lawerenz, C., Eils, R., Rohr, K., Westermann, F. et al. (2012). Time-lapse
imaging of neuroblastoma cells to determine cell fate upon gene knockdown.
PLoS ONE 7, e50988. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0050988
Baumgart, E. V., Barbosa, J. S., Bally-Cuif, L., Gö tz, M. and Ninkovic, J. (2012).
Stab wound injury of the zebrafish telencephalon: a model for comparative
analysis of reactive gliosis. Glia 60, 343-357. doi:10.1002/glia.22269
Berg, D. A., Kirkham, M., Beljajeva, A., Knapp, D., Habermann, B., Ryge, J.,
Tanaka, E. M. and Simon, A. (2010). Efficient regeneration by activation of
neurogenesis in homeostatically quiescent regions of the adult vertebrate brain.
Development 137, 4127-4134. doi:10.1242/dev.055541
Bernardos, R. L. and Raymond, P. A. (2006). GFAP transgenic zebrafish. Gene
Expr. Patterns 6, 1007-1013. doi:10.1016/j.modgep.2006.04.006
Bhardwaj, R. D., Curtis, M. A., Spalding, K. L., Buchholz, B. A., Fink, D., Bjork-
Eriksson, T., Nordborg, C., Gage, F. H., Druid, H., Eriksson, P. S. et al. (2006).
Neocortical neurogenesis in humans is restricted to development. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 103, 12564-12568. doi:10.1073/pnas.0605177103
Blondel, V. D., Guillaume, J. L., Lambiotte, R. and Lefebvre, E. (2008). Fast
unfolding of communities in large networks. J. Stat. Mech. Theory Exp. 2008,
10008. doi:10.1088/1742-5468/2008/10/P10008
Brand, M., Granato, M. and Nü sslein-Volhard, C. (2002). Keeping and raising
zebrafish. In Zebrafish (ed. C. Nü sslein-Volhard and R. Dahm), pp. 7-37. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Briggs, J. A., Weinreb, C., Wagner, D. E., Megason, S., Peshkin, L., Kirschner,
M. W. and Klein, A. M. (2018). The dynamics of gene expression in vertebrate
embryogenesis at single-cell resolution. Science 360, eaar5780. doi:10.1126/
science.aar5780
Buettner, F. and Theis, F. J. (2012). A novel approach for resolving differences in
single-cell gene expression patterns from zygote to blastocyst. Bioinformatics 28,
i626-i632. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts385
Camp, J. G., Wollny, D. and Treutlein, B. (2018). Single-cell genomics to guide
human stem cell and tissue engineering. Nat. Methods 15, 661-667. doi:10.1038/
s41592-018-0113-0
Coifman, R. R., Lafon, S., Lee, A. B., Maggioni, M., Nadler, B., Warner, F. and
Zucker, S. W. (2005). Geometric diffusions as a tool for harmonic analysis and
structure definition of data: diffusion maps. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102,
7426-7431. doi:10.1073/pnas.0500334102
Cosacak, M. I., Bhattarai, P., Reinhardt, S., Petzold, A., Dahl, A., Zhang, Y. and
Kizil, C. (2019). Single-cell transcriptomics analyses of neural stem cell
heterogeneity and contextual plasticity in a zebrafish brain model of amyloid
toxicity. Cell Rep 27, 1307-1318.e3. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2019.03.090
Dray, N., Bedu, S., Vuillemin, N., Alunni, A., Coolen, M., Krecsmarik, M.,
Supatto, W., Beaurepaire, E. and Bally-Cuif, L. (2015). Large-scale live imaging
of adult neural stem cells in their endogenous niche. Development 142,
3592-3600. doi:10.1242/dev.123018
Edelmann, K., Glashauser, L., Sprungala, S., Hesl, B., Fritschle, M., Ninkovic,
J., Godinho, L. and Chapouton, P. (2013). Increased radial glia quiescence,
decreased reactivation upon injury and unaltered neuroblast behavior underlie
decreased neurogenesis in the aging zebrafish telencephalon. J. Comp. Neurol.
521, 3099-3115. doi:10.1002/cne.23347
Ekströ m, P., Johnsson, C.-M. and Ohlin, L.-M. (2001). Ventricular proliferation
zones in the brain of an adult teleost fish and their relation to neuromeres and
migration (secondary matrix) zones. J. Comp. Neurol. 436, 92-110. doi:10.1002/
cne.1056
Ernst, A. and Frisén, J. (2015). Adult neurogenesis in humans- common and
unique traits in mammals. PLoS Biol. 13, e1002045. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.
1002045
Farrell, J. A., Wang, Y., Riesenfeld, S. J., Shekhar, K., Regev, A. and Schier,
A. F. (2018). Single-cell reconstruction of developmental trajectories during
zebrafish embryogenesis. Science 360, eaar3131. doi:10.1126/science.aar3131
Fausett, B. V. and Goldman, D. (2006). A role for alpha1 tubulin-expressing Muller
glia in regeneration of the injured zebrafish retina. J. Neurosci. 26, 6303-6313.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0332-06.2006
Ferri, R. T. and Levitt, P. (1993). Cerebral cortical progenitors are fated to produce
region-specific neuronal populations. Cereb. Cortex 3, 187-198. doi:10.1093/
cercor/3.3.187
Frisén, J. (2016). Neurogenesis and gliogenesis in nervous system plasticity and
repair. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 32, 127-141. doi:10.1146/annurev-cellbio-
111315-124953
Furlan, G., Cuccioli, V., Vuillemin, N., Dirian, L., Muntasell, A. J., Coolen, M.,
Dray, N., Bedu, S., Houart, C., Beaurepaire, E. et al. (2017). Life-long
neurogenic activity of individual neural stem cells and continuous growth
establish an outside-in architecture in the teleost pallium. Curr. Biol. 27,
3288-3301.e3283. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2017.09.052
Ganz, J. and Brand, M. (2016). Adult neurogenesis in fish. Cold Spring Harb.
Perspect Biol. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a019018
Ganz, J., Kaslin, J., Hochmann, S., Freudenreich, D. and Brand, M. (2010).
Heterogeneity and Fgf dependence of adult neural progenitors in the zebrafish
telencephalon. Glia 58, 1345-1363. doi:10.1002/glia.21012
Ganz, J., Kaslin, J., Freudenreich, D., Machate, A., Geffarth, M. and Brand, M.
(2012). Subdivisions of the adult zebrafish subpallium by molecular marker
analysis. J. Comp. Neurol. 520, 633-655. doi:10.1002/cne.22757
Gerber, T., Murawala, P., Knapp, D., Masselink, W., Schuez, M., Hermann, S.,
Gac- Santel, M., Nowoshilow, S., Kageyama, J., Khattak, S. et al. (2018).
Single- cell analysis uncovers convergence of cell identities during axolotl limb
regeneration. Science 362, eaaq0681. doi:10.1126/science.aaq0681
Grandel, H. and Brand, M. (2013). Comparative aspects of adult neural stem cell
activity in vertebrates. Dev. Genes Evol. 223, 131-147. doi:10.1007/s00427-012-
0425-5
Grandel, H., Kaslin, J., Ganz, J., Wenzel, I. and Brand, M. (2006). Neural stem
cells and neurogenesis in the adult zebrafish brain: origin, proliferation dynamics,
migration and cell fate. Dev. Biol. 295, 263-277. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.03.040
Haghverdi, L., Buettner, F. and Theis, F. J. (2015). Diffusion maps for high-
dimensional single-cell analysis of differentiation data. Bioinformatics 31,
2989-2998. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btv325
Hiraiwa, A., Fujita, M., Nagasaka, T., Adachi, A., Ohashi, M. and Ishibashi, M.
(1997). Immunolocalization of hCDC47 protein in normal and neoplastic human
tissues and its relation to growth. Int. J. Cancer 74, 180-184. doi:10.1002/
(SICI)1097-0215(19970422)74:2<180::AID-IJC7>3.0.CO;2-V
Hochgerner, H., Zeisel, A., Lö nnerberg, P. and Linnarsson, S. (2018).
Conserved
properties
of
dentate
gyrus
neurogenesis
across
postnatal
development revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing. Nat. Neurosci. 21,
290-299. doi:10.1038/s41593-017-0056-2
Huttner, H. B., Bergmann, O., Salehpour, M., Rácz, A., Tatarishvili, J., Lindgren,
E., Csonka, T., Csiba, L., Hortobágyi, T., Méhes, G. et al. (2014). The age and
genomic integrity of neurons after cortical stroke in humans. Nat. Neurosci. 17,
801-803. doi:10.1038/nn.3706
Kaslin, J., Ganz, J. and Brand, M. (2008). Proliferation, neurogenesis and
regeneration in the non-mammalian vertebrate brain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond.
B Biol. Sci. 363, 101-122. doi:10.1098/rstb.2006.2015
Kaslin, J., Kroehne, V., Ganz, J., Hans, S. and Brand, M. (2017). Distinct roles of
neuroepithelial-like and radial glia-like progenitor cells in cerebellar regeneration.
Development 144, 1462-1471. doi:10.1242/dev.144907
Kawakami, K., Takeda, H., Kawakami, N., Kobayashi, M., Matsuda, N. and
Mishina, M. (2004). A transposon-mediated gene trap approach identifies
developmentally regulated genes in zebrafish. Dev. Cell 7, 133-144. doi:10.
1016/j.devcel.2004.06.005
Kesavan, G., Chekuru, A., Machate, A. and Brand, M. (2017). CRISPR/Cas9-
mediated zebrafish knock-in as a novel strategy to study midbrain-hindbrain
boundary development. Front. Neuroanat. 11, 52. doi:10.3389/fnana.2017.00052
Kesavan, G., Hammer, J., Hans, S. and Brand, M. (2018). Targeted knock-in of
CreER T2 in zebrafish using CRISPR/Cas9. Cell Tissue Res. 372, 41-50. doi:10.
1007/s00441-018-2798-x
Kester, L. and van Oudenaarden, A. (2018). Single-cell transcriptomics meets
lineage tracing. Cell Stem Cell 23, 166-179. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2018.04.014
Krasteva, V., Buscarlet, M., Diaz-Tellez, A., Bernard, M.-A., Crabtree, G. R. and
Lessard, J. A. (2012). The BAF53a subunit of SWI/SNF-like BAF complexes is
essential for hemopoietic stem cell function. Blood 120, 4720-4732. doi:10.1182/
blood-2012-04-427047
Kroehne, V., Kaslin, J. and Brand, M. (2009). 19-P003 Proliferation and cell fates
during regeneration of the adult zebrafish brain. Mech. Dev. 126, 291-292. doi:10.
1016/j.mod.2009.06.791
Kroehne, V., Freudenreich, D., Hans, S., Kaslin, J. and Brand, M. (2011).
Regeneration of the adult zebrafish brain from neurogenic radial glia-type
progenitors. Development 138, 4831-4841. doi:10.1242/dev.072587
Kroehne, V., Tsata, V., Marrone, L., Froeb, C., Reinhardt, S., Gompf, A., Dahl, A.,
Sterneckert, J. and Reimer, M. M. (2017). Primary spinal OPC culture system
from adult zebrafish to study oligodendrocyte differentiation in vitro. Front. Cell
Neurosci. 11, 284. doi:10.3389/fncel.2017.00284
Kunze, A., Congreso, M. R., Hartmann, C., Wallraff-Beck, A., Huttmann, K.,
Bedner, P., Requardt, R., Seifert, G., Redecker, C., Willecke, K. et al. (2009).
Connexin expression by radial glia-like cells is required for neurogenesis in the
adult dentate gyrus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 11336-11341. doi:10.1073/
pnas.0813160106
Levine, J. H., Simonds, E. F., Bendall, S. C., Davis, K. L., Amir, E.-D., Tadmor,
M. D., Litvin, O., Fienberg, H. G., Jager, A., Zunder, E. R. et al. (2015). Data-
14
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185595. doi:10.1242/dev.185595
DEVELOPMENT

driven phenotypic dissection of AML reveals progenitor-like cells that correlate
with prognosis. Cell 162, 184-197. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.047
Li, X., Zhao, X., Fang, Y., Jiang, X., Duong, T., Fan, C., Huang, C.-C. and Kain,
S. R. (1998). Generation of destabilized green fluorescent protein as a
transcription reporter. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 34970-34975. doi:10.1074/jbc.273.
52.34970
Lun, A. T., McCarthy, D. J. and Marioni, J. C. (2016). A step-by-step workflow for
low-level analysis of single-cell RNA-seq data with Bioconductor. F1000Res 5,
2122. doi:10.12688/f1000research.9501.2
Maaten, L. V. d. and Hinton, G. (2008). Visualizing data using t-SNE. J. Mach.
Learn. Res. 9, 2579-2605.
Mä rz, M., Chapouton, P., Diotel, N., Vaillant, C., Hesl, B., Takamiya, M., Lam,
C. S., Kah, O., Bally-Cuif, L. and Strahle, U. (2010a). Heterogeneity in progenitor
cell subtypes in the ventricular zone of the zebrafish adult telencephalon. Glia 58,
870-888. doi:10.1002/glia.20971
Mä rz, M., Schmidt, R., Rastegar, S. and Strahle, U. (2010b). Expression of the
transcription factor Olig2 in proliferating cells in the adult zebrafish telencephalon.
Dev. Dyn. 239, 3336-3349. doi:10.1002/dvdy.22455
Mä rz, M., Schmidt, R., Rastegar, S. and Strahle, U. (2011). Regenerative
response following stab injury in the adult zebrafish telencephalon. Dev. Dyn. 240,
2221-2231. doi:10.1002/dvdy.22710
McCarthy, D. J., Campbell, K. R., Lun, A. T. and Wills, Q. F. (2017). Scater: pre-
processing, quality control, normalization and visualization of single-cell RNA- seq
data in R. Bioinformatics 33, 1179-1186. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btw777
McInnes, L. and Healy, J. (2018). UMAP: uniform manifold approximation and
projection for dimension reduction. arXiv:1802.03426 [stat,ML].
Mueller, T. and Guo, S. (2009). The distribution of GAD67-mRNA in the adult
zebrafish (teleost) forebrain reveals a prosomeric pattern and suggests previously
unidentified homologies to tetrapods. J. Comp. Neurol. 516, 553-568. doi:10.
1002/cne.22122
Ohab, J. J., Fleming, S., Blesch, A. and Carmichael, S. T. (2006). A
neurovascular
niche
for
neurogenesis
after
stroke.
J.
Neurosci.
26,
13007-13016. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4323-06.2006
Ohtani, K., Iwanaga, R., Nakamura, M., Ikeda, Ikeda, Yabuta, N., Tsuruga, H.,
and Nojima, H. (1999). Cell growth-regulated expression of mammalian MCM5
and MCM6 genes mediated by the transcription factor E2F. Oncogene 18,
2299-2309. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1202544
Park, H.-C., Kim, C.-H., Bae, Y.-K., Yeo, S.-Y., Kim, S.-H., Hong, S.-K., Shin, J.,
Yoo, K.-W., Hibi, M., Hirano, T. et al. (2000). Analysis of upstream elements in
the HuC promoter leads to the establishment of transgenic zebrafish with
fluorescent neurons. Dev. Biol. 227, 279-293. doi:10.1006/dbio.2000.9898
Park, H.-C., Shin, J., Roberts, R. K. and Appel, B. (2007). An olig2 reporter gene
marks oligodendrocyte precursors in the postembryonic spinal cord of zebrafish.
Dev. Dyn. 236, 3402-3407. doi:10.1002/dvdy.21365
Picelli, S., Faridani, O. R., Bjö rklund, A. K., Winberg, G., Sagasser, S. and
Sandberg, R. (2014). Full-length RNA-seq from single cells using Smart-seq2.
Nat. Protoc. 9, 171-181. doi:10.1038/nprot.2014.006
Raj, B., Wagner, D. E., McKenna, A., Pandey, S., Klein, A. M., Shendure, J.,
Gagnon, J. A. and Schier, A. F. (2018). Simultaneous single-cell profiling of
lineages and cell types in the vertebrate brain. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 442-450.
doi:10.1038/nbt.4103
Reimer, M. M., Sorensen, I., Kuscha, V., Frank, R. E., Liu, C., Becker, C. G. and
Becker, T. (2008). Motor neuron regeneration in adult zebrafish. J. Neurosci. 28,
8510-8516. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1189-08.2008
Rodriguez Viales, R., Diotel, N., Ferg, M., Armant, O., Eich, J., Alunni, A., Mä rz,
M., Bally-Cuif, L., Rastegar, S. and Strä hle, U. (2015). The helix-loop-helix
protein id1 controls stem cell proliferation during regenerative neurogenesis in the
adult zebrafish telencephalon. Stem Cells 33, 892-903. doi:10.1002/stem.1883
Rothenaigner, I., Krecsmarik, M., Hayes, J. A., Bahn, B., Lepier, A., Fortin, G.,
Gotz, M., Jagasia, R. and Bally-Cuif, L. (2011). Clonal analysis by distinct viral
vectors identifies bona fide neural stem cells in the adult zebrafish telencephalon
and
characterizes their
division
properties
and
fate.
Development
138,
1459-1469. doi:10.1242/dev.058156
Saha, B., Peron, S., Murray, K., Jaber, M. and Gaillard, A. (2013). Cortical lesion
stimulates adult subventricular zone neural progenitor cell proliferation and
migration to the site of injury. Stem Cell Res. 11, 965-977. doi:10.1016/j.scr.2013.
06.006
Shin, J., Park, H.-C., Topczewska, J. M., Mawdsley, D. J. and Appel, B. (2003).
Neural cell fate analysis in zebrafish using olig2 BAC transgenics. Methods Cell
Sci. 25, 7-14. doi:10.1023/B:MICS.0000006847.09037.3a
Skaggs, K., Goldman, D. and Parent, J. M. (2014). Excitotoxic brain injury in adult
zebrafish stimulates neurogenesis and long-distance neuronal integration. Glia
62, 2061-2079. doi:10.1002/glia.22726
Sobecki, M., Mrouj, K., Colinge, J., Gerbe, F., Jay, P., Krasinska, L., Dulic, V.
and Fisher, D. (2017). Cell-cycle regulation accounts for variability in Ki-67
expression levels. Cancer Res. 77, 2722-2734. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-
0707
Spanjaard, B., Hu, B., Mitic, N., Olivares-Chauvet, P., Janjuha, S., Ninov, N. and
Junker, J. P. (2018). Simultaneous lineage tracing and cell-type identification
using CRISPR-Cas9-induced genetic scars. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 469-473. doi:10.
1038/nbt.4124
Traag, V. A. (2015). louvain-igraph: v0.5.3. Zenodo.
Tsata, V., Kroehne, V., Reinhardt, S., El-Armouche, A., Brand, M., Wagner, M.
and Reimer, M. M. (2019). Electrophysiological properties of adult zebrafish
oligodendrocyte progenitor cells. Front. Cell Neurosci. 13, 102. doi:10.3389/fncel.
2019.00102
Turner, K. J., Hawkins, T. A., Yáñez, J., Anadón, R., Wilson, S. W. and Folgueira,
M. (2016). Afferent connectivity of the zebrafish habenulae. Front. Neural Circuits
10, 30. doi:10.3389/fncir.2016.00030
Ulyanov, D. (2018). Multicore-TSNE. https://github.com/DmitryUlyanov/Multicore-
TSNE.
Wagner, D. E., Weinreb, C., Collins, Z. M., Briggs, J. A., Megason, S. G. and
Klein, A. M. (2018). Single-cell mapping of gene expression landscapes and
lineage in the zebrafish embryo. Science 360, 981-987. doi:10.1126/science.
aar4362
Wolf, F. A., Angerer, P. and Theis, F. J. (2018). SCANPY: large-scale single-cell
gene expression data analysis. Genome Biol. 19, 15. doi:10.1186/s13059-017-
1382-0
Wolf, F. A., Hamey, F. K., Plass, M., Solana, J., Dahlin, J. S., Gö ttgens, B.,
Rajewsky, N., Simon, L. and Theis, F. J. (2019). PAGA: graph abstraction
reconciles clustering with trajectory inference through a topology preserving map
of single cells. Genome Biol. 20, 59. doi:10.1186/s13059-019-1663-x
Yu, S. and He, J. (2019). Stochastic cell-cycle entry and cell-state-dependent fate
outputs of injury-reactivated tectal radial glia in zebrafish. eLife 8, e48660. doi:10.
7554/eLife.48660
Zhong, L. and Gerges, N. Z. (2012). Neurogranin targets calmodulin and lowers the
threshold for the induction of long-term potentiation. PLoS ONE 7, e41275. doi:10.
1371/journal.pone.0041275
Zupanc, G. K. H., Hinsch, K. and Gage, F. H. (2005). Proliferation, migration,
neuronal differentiation, and long-term survival of new cells in the adult zebrafish
brain. J. Comp. Neurol. 488, 290-319. doi:10.1002/cne.20571
15
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185595. doi:10.1242/dev.185595
DEVELOPMENT

===== Lao2022_JID_Sox9+DigitTipRegeneration =====
Sox9 Is Required for Nail-Bed Differentiation
and Digit-Tip Regeneration
Miguel Lao1, Alicia Hurtado1,2, Alejandro Chaco´n de Castro1, Miguel Burgos1, Rafael Jime´nez1,3 and
Francisco J. Barrionuevo1,3
The nail organ is a specialized appendage in which several ectodermal tissues coordinately function to sustain
nail growth, a process that is coupled to digit regeneration. In this study, we show that the transcription factor
Sox9 is expressed in several cell populations in the mouse digit tip. We found a SOX9þ cell population in the
nail bed, and genetic lineage tracing showed that this is a transient cell population differentiated from matrix
nail stem cells. In the absence of Sox9, nail matrix stem cells fail to differentiate into epithelial nail-bed cells and
proliferate, thus expanding distally and following the corneocyte fate, which results in outlandishly large ﬁn-
gernails. In addition, the tip of the underlying terminal phalanx undergoes bone regression. Sox9-lineage
tracing also revealed the existence of a continuous cell supply from a Sox9-expressing population residing in
the basal layers to the entire hyponychium epidermis. Furthermore, digit-tip regeneration is compromised in
Sox9-knockout mice, revealing an essential role for the gene during this process. These results will contribute
to understand the cellular and molecular basis of mammalian nail organ homeostasis and disease and digit-tip
regeneration and will help to design new treatment strategies for patients with nail diseases or amputation.
Journal of Investigative Dermatology (2022) 142, 2613e2622; doi:10.1016/j.jid.2022.03.020
INTRODUCTION
Thenailorganisaspecializedappendageattheendofthedigits
in which several ectodermal tissues function coordinately to
sustain the continuous growth of the hard keratin nail plate. The
nail matrix stands at the proximal base of the nail plate and is
followed distally by the nail bed, which is a highly vascularized
epithelium containing specialized ridges that attach the nail
plate to the digit. There are two dedicated epidermal layers
surrounding the nail, the eponychium in the proximal fold and
the hyponychium in the distal one, which provide protection
from injury and infection (Fleckman et al., 2013).
Two pools of nail stem cells responsible for the renewal
and growth of the nail cell types have been described. The
ﬁrst one consists of slow-cycling label-retaining cells orga-
nized in a ring-like formation around the nail root, which
under normal physiological conditions predominantly sup-
port the perinail epidermis, whereas during nail injury, they
mostly contribute to the nail matrix and differentiated nail
plate, showing their ability to adapt to wounding stimuli
(Leung et al., 2014). The second stem cell population resides
in the nail matrix and sustains nail growth. They are highly
proliferative self-renewing nail stem cells that contribute to
both the nail plate and the nail bed. In distal nail matrix cells,
the Wnt signaling pathway is activated, and ablation of
b-catenin, the intracellular mediator of this pathway, in the
nail epithelium resulted in the cessation of stem cell differ-
entiation so that the entire nail epithelium exhibited features
of proximal matrix cells (Takeo et al., 2013).
The digit tips of mice and infant humans are capable of
complete regeneration after amputation (Borgens, 1982;
Illingworth, 1974). This is a multistep complex process in
which both the nail organ and the terminal phalanx resume
their preamputation organization. It starts with wound heal-
ing and re-epithelization of the amputated area. Subse-
quently, the blastema, a mesenchymal cell mass that
differentiates into different cell types of the digit, is formed
under the wound area. The formation and differentiation of
the blastema is a key process in mammalian digit regenera-
tion because failure to form it results in a lack of regeneration
(Pulawska-Czub et al., 2021; Storer and Miller, 2020).
Genetic lineage tracing showed that blastema cells are germ-
layer restricted (Lehoczky et al., 2011; Rinkevich et al.,
2011), and recent single-cell transcriptomic analyses have
addressed the origin and differentiation potential of blastema
progenitor cells (Johnson et al., 2020; Storer et al., 2020). The
nail organ also plays a central role in digit regeneration by
signaling the underlying blastema. Deletion of b-catenin in
the nail epithelium after digit-tip amputation abrogated ter-
minal phalanx regeneration (Takeo et al., 2013). Consistent
with this, LGR6, an agonist of Wnt signaling, which is a
marker for nail matrix stem cells, is also necessary for digit-tip
regeneration (Lehoczky and Tabin, 2015).
The transcription factor SOX9 has multiple functions dur-
ing the development and homeostasis of adult tissues (Jo
et al., 2014). In this study, we have studied the role of Sox9
1Laboratories 127 and a105, Department of Genetics and Biotechnology
Institute, Center for Biomedical Research, University of Granada, Avenida
del Conocimiento S/N, Armilla, Granada, Spain; and 2Epigenetics and Sex
Development Group, The Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology
(BIMSB), Max Delbru¨ck Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany
3These authors contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence: Francisco J. Barrionuevo, Laboratories 127 and a105,
Department of Genetics and Biotechnology Institute, Center for Biomedical
Research, University of Granada, Avenida del Conocimiento S/N, 18016
Armilla, Granada, Spain. E-mail: fjbarrio@go.ugr.es
Abbreviations: DAA, day after amputation; DATX, day after tamoxifen
administration; K5, keratin 5; TCF1, T-cell factor 1
Received 15 December 2021; revised 15 March 2022; accepted 30 March
2022; accepted manuscript published online 7 April 2022; corrected proof
published online 7 May 2022
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
ª 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier, Inc. on behalf of the Society for Investigative Dermatology.
www.jidonline.org
2613

during adult nail organ homeostasis and found that it is
necessary for epithelial nail-bed cell differentiation and for
maintenance of the underneath terminal phalanx. We also
show that Sox9 is essential for digit-tip regeneration.
RESULTS
Sox9 is expressed in various cell populations of the mouse
digit tip
The expression of Sox9 in the murine digit tip was assessed by
immunoﬂuorescence. We found SOX9þ cells in the hair
follicles, in the distal groove, in the proximal nail-fold
epithelium, and in a wide region within the nail epithe-
lium. In addition, we detected a weaker expression of Sox9 in
the basal layers of the hyponychium epidermis (Figure 1a‒d).
To better characterize the expression domain of SOX9þ cells,
we performed double immunoﬂuorescence for SOX9 and
three epidermal differentiation and proliferation markers
(Figure 1e‒k). In the digit tip, keratin 5 (K5), an epithelial
marker (Fuchs, 2018), is expressed in the proximal fold, the
nail
matrix,
the
hyponychium,
and
the
distal
groove
(Fleckman et al., 2013). SOX9 coexpressed with K5 in the
proximal fold, the hyponychium, and the distal groove. In
contrast, the proximal domain of SOX9 expression in the nail
epithelium coincided with the distal K5þ region (Figure 1e, f,
and k). T-cell factor 1 (TCF1), a nuclear mediator of Wnt
signaling, is expressed in the distal matrix within the nail
epithelium (Takeo et al., 2013). We found that the proximal
SOX9þ region overlapped with the distal end of the TCF1-
expression domain (Figure 1g, h, and k). According to Ki-
67 expression in the nail epithelium, three differentiated re-
gions are established: the highly proliferative proximal ma-
trix, the low proliferative distal matrix, and the non-
proliferative nail bed (Takeo et al., 2013). SOX9 expression
was restricted to this latter region (Figure 1i, j, and k).
Lineage tracing of Sox9-expressing cells in the nail
epithelium
The expression pattern of Sox9 in the nail epithelium suggests
that the gene is expressed in the nail bed, a region thought to
be devoid of nail stem cells (Takeo et al., 2013). To test this
hypothesis, we performed tamoxifen-inducible genetic lineage
tracing using mice harboring an IRES-CreERT2 cassette inserted
into the endogenous Sox9 locus, Sox9IRES-CreERT2 (Soeda et al.,
2010), and either an R26R-LacZ (Soriano, 1999) or an R26R-
EYFP (Srinivas et al., 2001) allele. As expected, no LacZ- or
EYFP-positive cells were detected at any of the stages analyzed
in the absence of tamoxifen (not shown). We induced the la-
beling of Sox9-expressing cells and their progeny by tamoxifen
administration to adult mice (aged 2 months) and analyzed the
reporter expression on different days after tamoxifen admin-
istration (DATXs) (Figure 2a). Whole-mount analysis of cross-
sectioned Sox9IRES-CreERT2;R26R-LacZ digit tips 10 DATXs
showed LacZ expression in both the nail-bed epithelium and
the hyponychium (Figure 2b). Time-course analysis showed
that the intensity of LacZ staining in the nail-bed epithelium
increased between 1 and 10 DATXs (Figure 2c). This
increasing number of labeled cells between 1 and 10 DATXs
cannot be explained by cell proliferation because it is well
knownthatnail-bedcellsdonotdivide(Takeoetal.,2013;Zaias,
2014; results shown in this study). Rather, it is due to the fact that
LacZ activity appears progressively in this tissue, occurring
much more rapidly in some cells than in others. From 30 DATXs
onward, LacZ staining was lost starting from the proximal-top
region and proceeding to the distal-bottom region of the nail-
bed epithelium. Forty-ﬁve DATXs, the nail bed showed almost
no LacZ expression, and no staining was observed at later time
points (Figure 2c and Supplementary Figure S1a). Accordingly,
EYFP immunostaining of Sox9IRES‒CreERT2;R26R‒EYFP digit
sections showed that Sox9-expressing cells and their progeny
were present in the entire nail-bed epithelium 10 DATXs but not
40 DATXs (Figure 2e‒h and Supplementary Figure S1b, d, f, h, j,
and l).
Continuous cell supply from Sox9 progenitors to the
hyponychium
As mentioned earlier, we also detected a population of
SOX9þ K5þ cells in the distal groove and in the hyponychium
(Figure 1e). Sox9 lineage tracing between 3 and 10 DATXs
revealed marked cells in the basal layer of the hyponychium.
These cells were more frequently observed in the distal
groove region (Figure 2i and k and Supplementary Figure S1c,
e, g, and i). This latter observation is probably a consequence
of tamoxifen reaching this region before the distal part of the
hyponychium. Forty DATXs, the whole hyponychium showed
strong EYFP staining, with EYFPþ cells located in both the
basal layers and the stratum corneum, indicating that Sox9
progenitors terminally differentiate into skin corneocytes
(Figure 2j and l and Supplementary Figure S1m). LacZ
staining persisted even 1 year after tamoxifen administration
(Supplementary Figure S1a).
Sox9 is required for epithelial nail-bed differentiation
To uncover new roles for Sox9 in digit-tip homeostasis, we
conditionally deleted the gene in adult mouse cells using a
ubiquitous tamoxifen-inducible CAGG-CreERTM recombi-
nase (Hayashi and McMahon, 2002) (Figure 3a). Immuno-
staining revealed that SOX9 was efﬁciently removed from the
nail
epithelium
of
adult
(aged
2
months)
CAGG-
CreERTM;Sox9ﬂox/ﬂox (referred to as Sox9D/D in the remaining
part
of
this
paper)
mice
20
DATXs
(Supplementary
Figure S2a). Gross morphology analysis of the digit tip of
Sox9D/D mice 50 DATXs showed an outlandishly large claw-
shaped ﬁngernail (Figure 3b). Histology of mutant ﬁngertips
revealed that the hyponychium was absent and that the nail
epithelium appeared to extend from the proximal fold
directly to the distal groove. In contrast to that of the control
mice, which presented a relatively thick nail matrix epithe-
lium and a thinner nail bed, the mutant nail epithelium was
very thick along its entire length. The longitudinal axis of the
mutant nail plate was not oriented parallel to the nail
epithelium, as observed in the control mice, but rather
perpendicular to it and was much larger than that of the
controls (Figure 3b and c and Supplementary Table S1). Time-
course histological analysis of the phenotype of mutant digit
tips revealed no apparent difference between them and
controls 20 DATXs (not shown). In contrast, 30 DATXs, the
mutant digit tip exhibited a clearly larger nail plate, and its
nail epithelium experienced a thickening process extending
throughout the former nail-bed domain. Forty DATXs, the
thickened nail epithelium reached the distal groove, and the
nail plate emerged along its entire length (Figure 3d‒f).
Marker analysis of the nail epithelium revealed that 30
M Lao et al.
Sox9 Is Required for Nail-Bed Differentiation
Journal of Investigative Dermatology (2022), Volume 142
2614

DATXs, the expression of K5 was similar to that of controls.
However, 40 DATXs, the expression domain of K5 was
enlarged, and 50 DATXs, the entire nail epithelium was
strongly K5 positive (Figure 3g‒i and p and Supplementary
Figure S2b). Similarly, 30 DATXs and afterward, the expres-
sion of Tcf1 was not restricted to the distal nail matrix and
extended along the entire length of the distal nail epithelium
(Figure 3j‒l and p and Supplementary Figure S2b). In addi-
tion, 30 DATXs and at later time points, the number of Ki-
67þcells was markedly increased in the mutants compared
with that in the controls, and they occupied the entire length
of the nail epithelium (Figure 3m‒o and p). A well-known
event in the process of nail keratinocyte corniﬁcation is the
removal of the nucleus and the degradation of nuclear DNA
(Jaeger et al., 2019). To identify the cells undergoing DNA
fragmentation in the nail region, we performed a TUNEL
assay. In control mice, TUNELþ cells were located in the
keratogenous zone, the region where nail matrix cells un-
dergo terminal keratinocyte differentiation. However, in 40-
DATX‒mutant nails, the number of TUNELþ cells was
much higher and occupied the entire basal domain of the nail
plate (Figure 3q), evidencing intense keratinocyte differenti-
ation. Consistent with this, the expression of AE13, a marker
for keratinized nail plate cells, revealed massive areas of
keratinized nail plate tissue (Figure 3g‒o and Supplementary
Figure S2b). All these results show that in the mutant nail
epithelium, the nail bed is absent, and the entire epithelium
acquires the characteristics of nail matrix stem cells, which
undergo active cell proliferation and follow the corniﬁed nail
plate cell fate.
Sox9 is necessary for the maintenance of the terminal
phalanx
Histology of 50-DATX digit tips showed that the terminal
phalanx of Sox9D/D mice was shorter, having a blunt distal tip
with a pitted, irregular surface instead of the triangular sharp-
pointed tip seen in control mice (Figure 3b). Whole-mount
alizarin red staining revealed no remarkable differences be-
tween control and mutant terminal phalanxes 30 DATXs. In
contrast, 40 DATXs, mutant mice presented terminal pha-
lanxes with fragmented distal tips, and 50 DATXs, mutant
terminal phalanxes were signiﬁcantly shorter and lacked the
whole distal tip (Figure 3r‒t and Supplementary Table S1). To
deepen the mechanisms responsible for this mutant bone
regression, we performed a TUNEL assay and detected
numerous apoptotic cells in the tip of the terminal phalanx.
Contrarily, we found no apoptotic cells in the same region as
that of the control mice (Figure 3u). We also examined the
activity of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase, a marker of
osteoclastogenesis (Minkin, 1982). Control digit tips lacked
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase activity. Contrarily, the
Sox9D/D terminal phalanx 40 DATXs showed a strong
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase signal in the distal tip
area, indicating the presence of active osteoclasts and bone
resorption (Figure 3v).
Figure 1. Sox9 expression in the digit tip of adult mice. (a) Immunoﬂuorescence for SOX9 in digit-tip sections of control mice and (b) high magniﬁcation of the
Prox Fold and (c) Dist Grv and Hypo regions. (d) Schematic illustration of the digit-tip anatomy and Sox9 expression pattern. Dark green circles indicate strong
expression, and light green circles indicate weak expression. (e‒j) Double immunoﬂuorescence for SOX9 and either (e, f) K5 or (g, h) TCF1 or (i, j) Ki-67.
Dashed lines outline the nail epithelium domain. Dashed rectangles in e, g, and i mark the areas shown at higher magniﬁcation in f, h, and j, respectively. (k)
Schematic summary of this immunoﬂuorescence analysis. Asterisks indicate areas of nonspeciﬁc, autoﬂuorescent background. Bars shown in a, c, i, and j ¼ 100
mm for a; 50 mm for b and c; 50 mm for e, g, and i; and 50 mm for f, h, and j, respectively. Dist Grv, distal groove; Dist Mtrx, distal matrix; Hair Fcl, hair follicle;
Hypo, hyponychium; K5, keratin 5; Nail Plt, nail plate; Prox Fold, proximal fold; Prox Mtrx, proximal matrix; TCF1, T-cell factor 1.
M Lao et al.
Sox9 Is Required for Nail-Bed Differentiation
www.jidonline.org
2615

Sox9 is necessary for digit regeneration
Next, we decided to address the role of Sox9 during digit
regeneration. For this, we treated Sox9-conditional mutant
mice with tamoxifen starting immediately after digit-tip
amputation (Figure 4a). Alizarin red staining of digits 50
days after amputation (DAAs) showed that the terminal pha-
lanxes of control mice were triangular in shape with a sharp-
pointed tip, whereas Sox9D/D phalanxes lacked its distal tip
and
were
signiﬁcantly
shorter
(Figure
4b
and
c
and
Supplementary Table S1). At the histological level, control
and mutant amputated digits were indistinguishable 20 DAAs
when the wounded area had already re-epithelialized in both
cases. However, at later time points, the nail plate of the
amputated Sox9D/D digits became larger, and the digit-bone
length became smaller, and 50 DAAs, amputated Sox9D/D
digits looked like nonamputated ones, without hyponychium,
with terminal phalanxes lacking the distal tip, and with a nail
epithelium extending from the proximal fold directly to the
distal groove (Figure 4b and Supplementary Figure S3a).
Similar to that in nonamputated Sox9D/D digits, this pheno-
type could be a consequence of the extended nail matrix
domain. To test this hypothesis, we performed immunoﬂuo-
rescence for TCF1 and observed that the Tcf1-expression
domain in the nail epithelium was extended distally in the
mutants (Figure 4d and e). Consistent with this, the TUNEL
assay showed that the keratogenous zone also extended
distally in the amputated Sox9D/D digits (Figure 4f and g), and
AE13 expression conﬁrmed an increase in differentiated
keratinized nail plate cells (Figure 4d and e). Next, we
assessed osteoblast commitment in the underneath blastema
by means of RUNX2 immunohistochemistry (Figure 4h). The
number of RUNX2þ cells was reduced to a half in the Sox9D/
D mesenchyme compared with that in the controls, indicating
that osteoblast commitment is compromised in the absence
of SOX9 (Figure 4i and Supplementary Table S1). We also
studied apoptosis in the blastema and observed that TUNELþ
Figure 2. Lineage tracing of Sox9-expressing cells in the mouse digit tip. (a) Experimental strategy to trace the fate of Sox9-expressing cells using
Sox9IRES-CreERT2;R26R-LacZ mice. (b) Whole-mount LacZ staining of a cross-sectioned Sox9IRES-CreERT2;R26R-LacZ digit tip 10 DATX and equivalent schematic
illustration of the digit-tip anatomy. (c) Lateral view of whole-mount LacZ staining of Sox9IRES-CreERT2;R26R-LacZ digit tips at the indicated DATXs. Arrows point
to the proximal edge of the expression domain of LacZþ cells in the nail bed. (d) Schematic illustrations of the digit tips shown in c (longitudinal sections),
showing the fate of Sox9-expressing cells. (e‒l) EYFP immunostaining of Sox9IRES-CreERT2;R26R-EYFP digit longitudinal sections. Whole digit tip (e) 10 and (f) 40
DATXs. Dashed rectangles in e and f mark the area shown in i and k and j and l, respectively. (g, h) Higher magniﬁcation of the nail-bed region. Higher
magniﬁcation of the Hypo epidermis showing (i, j) the blue (DAPI) and (k, l) the green (EYFP) channel. Asterisks indicate areas of nonspeciﬁc, autoﬂuorescent
background. Bars shown in f, h, and l ¼ 100 mm for e and f, 50 mm for g and h, and 50 mm for i‒l, respectively. Bas Lay, basal layer of the hyponychium epidermis;
DATX, day after tamoxifen administration; Dist Grv, distal groove; Dist Mtrx, distal matrix; Hypo, hyponychium; Nail Plt, nail plate; Prox Mtrx, proximal matrix;
Str Corn, stratum corneum of the hyponychium epidermis; Term Phlx, terminal phalanx; TX, tamoxifen.
M Lao et al.
Sox9 Is Required for Nail-Bed Differentiation
Journal of Investigative Dermatology (2022), Volume 142
2616

Figure 3. Digit phenotype of Sox9D/D adult mice. (a) Experimental schedule to study adult digit tips from mice with a conditional deletion of Sox9. (b) Gross
morphology and histological sections of Cont and Sox9D/D toes 50 DATX. Arrows point to the Nail Plt. (c) Quantiﬁcation analyses of the nail length at 50 DATX and
schematic illustration of nail length measurement (the length of the red line was measured). (d‒f) Histological sections of Cont and Sox9D/D digit tips at the indicated
DATXs. (g‒o) Double immunoﬂuorescence for AE13 and either (g‒i) K5, (j‒l) TCF1, or (m‒o) Ki-67 in Cont and Sox9D/D digit-tip sections at the same time point as
in d‒f. Arrows mark the extension of the different expression domains along the nail epithelium. (p) Graphical summary of the immunoﬂuorescence analysis shown
in g‒o. (q) TUNEL staining of Cont and Sox9D/D digit tips 40 DATXs. Insets show higher magniﬁcations of dashed areas. (r) Alizarin red staining of Cont and Sox9D/D
digit tips at the indicated DATXs. (s) Schematic illustration of bone length measurement (the length of the red line was measured). (t) Quantiﬁcation analyses of the
bone length at the indicated time points. (u) TUNEL assay of the Term Phlx of Cont and Sox9-Muts digits. Dotted lines outline the section area occupied by the Term
Phlx. (v) TRAP staining of Cont and Sox9D/D digit tips 40 DATXs. The right micrograph is a higher magniﬁcation of the square area outlined in the central micrograph.
**P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001. Bars shown in b, f, o, q, u, and v ¼ 200 mm for b, 200 mm for d‒f, 100 mm for g‒o, 100 mm for q, 50 mm for u, and 100 mm for v,
respectively. Cont, control; DATX, day after tamoxifen administration; Dist Grv, distal groove; Dist Mtrx, distal matrix; Hypo, hyponychium; K5, keratin 5; Krt Zn,
keratogenous zone; Mut, mutant; Nail Mtrx, nail matrix; Nail Plt, nail plate; n.s., not signiﬁcant; Prox Fold, proximal fold; Prox Mtrx, proximal matrix; Term Phlx,
terminal phalanx; TCF1, T-cell factor 1; TRAP, tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase; TX, tamoxifen.
M Lao et al.
Sox9 Is Required for Nail-Bed Differentiation
www.jidonline.org
2617

Figure 4. Role of Sox9 in mouse digit regeneration. (a) Experimental strategy for digit-tip regeneration analysis. (b) Alizarin red staining and histology of
amputated Cont and Sox9D/D digit tips 50 DAAs. Dotted lines outline the section area occupied by the Term Phlx. (c) Quantiﬁcation analyses of the bone length
50 DAAs. (d, e) Double immunoﬂuorescence for AE13 and TCF1 in amputated Cont and Sox9D/D digit tips 30 DAAs. Arrows mark the extension of the TCF1
expression domain. (f, g) TUNEL staining of amputated Cont and Sox9D/D digit tips 30 DAAs. Arrows mark the extension of the area occupied by apoptotic cells.
(h) Immunohistochemistry for RUNX2 in amputated Cont and Sox9D/D digit tips 30 DAAs. (i) Quantiﬁcation of the number of RUNX2þ cells in the blastema.
M Lao et al.
Sox9 Is Required for Nail-Bed Differentiation
Journal of Investigative Dermatology (2022), Volume 142
2618

cells accumulated in the region distal to the terminal phalanx
of Sox9D/D mice but not in the same region as that in the
control mice (Figure 4j).
To trace the fate of Sox9-expressing cells during digit
regeneration, we treated Sox9-IRES-CreERT2;R26R-EYFP
mice with tamoxifen starting on the day of amputation.
Forty DAAs, we observed EYFPþ cells in the nail-bed
epithelium as well as in the basal layers and the stratum
corneum of the hyponychium, as previously shown for
nonamputated digits. However, unlike that in the non-
amputated digits, we also found EYFPþ cells in the
mesenchyme underneath the nail epithelium of amputated
digits (Figure 4k and l). It is unlikely that the progenitors of
these EYFPþ cells reside in either the nail bed or the
hyponychium because it is widely accepted that during digit
regeneration, progenitor cells are fate restricted (Lehoczky
et al., 2011; Rinkevich et al., 2011). Because of this, we
studied the expression of Sox9 during digit-tip regeneration
and found SOX9þ cells in the nail epithelium at all the
stages analyzed. We also observed many SOX9þ cells in the
blastema of amputated digits before 20 DAAs but not 30
DAAs and at posterior stages, when SOX9þ cells were rarely
observed in the mesenchyme underlying the nail epithe-
lium, as observed in nonamputated digits (Figure 4n‒p and
Supplementary Figure S3b). These ﬁndings indicate that
Sox9 may have two roles during digit regeneration: one in
blastema cells and another one in epithelial cells. There-
fore, we used the single-cell RNA-sequencing datasets
recently generated by Storer et al. (2020) during digit
regeneration at different DAAs. Unbiased clustering of 10,
14, and 28 DAAs and nonamputated digit-tip datasets and
subsequent assignation of cell identity (see dot plots in
Supplementary Figure S3c) revealed the cell populations
equivalent to those identiﬁed by Storer et al. (2020)
(Figure 4q and s and Supplementary Figure S3d and f),
although the actual number of clusters may vary depending
on the sensitivity chosen in the clustering algorithm.
Consistent with our immunohistology, cluster marker iden-
tiﬁcation and violin plots revealed that all epithelial clusters
were enriched in Sox9þ cells, as was a mesenchymal cluster
both 10 DAAs (cluster 9) and 14 DAAs (cluster 13) but not
28 DAAs or in the nonamputated digits (Figure 4r and t and
Supplementary
Figure
S3e
and
g
and
Supplementary
Tables S2‒5). To investigate the role of Sox9 during blas-
tema differentiation, we used the transcriptomic signature
of the identiﬁed mesenchymal clusters (clusters 1, 2, 8, and
13) 14 DAAs (Supplementary Table S4) and compared the
resulting enriched biological processes in a Gene Ontology
analysis. We observed that all these clusters showed
enriched terms related to cartilage and bone development.
In addition, one cluster (cluster 8) was also enriched in
categories associated with cell division (Supplementary
Figure S3h and Supplementary Table S6). Gene Ontology
analysis is not effective to distinguish among related cate-
gories because they share many genes. Thus, we looked for
differentially expressed genes between the Sox9þ mesen-
chymal cluster (cluster 13) and the other mesenchymal
clusters (clusters 1, 2, and 8) (Supplementary Table S7), and
Gene Ontology enrichment analysis using the upregulated
genes in cluster 13 revealed the terms associated to extra-
cellular matrix organization and cartilage development
(Supplementary Figure S3i and Supplementary Table S8).
During
endochondral
bone
differentiation,
Sox9
is
expressed in mesenchymal chondroprogenitors, where it is
required for chondrocyte differentiation and for the depo-
sition of extracellular matrix proteins. Subsequently, Sox9 is
downregulated
as
hypertrophic
chondrocytes
undergo
osteoblast differentiation (Akiyama et al., 2002; Bi et al.,
1999; Ng et al., 1997; Zhao et al., 1997). Consistent with
this, we found genes encoding chondrocyte extracellular
matrix proteins that were speciﬁcally or preferentially
expressed in the Sox9þ mesenchymal cluster, including
Col2a1, Col11a2, Col9a1, and Acan, which are known to
be directly regulated by SOX9 (Supplementary Figure S3j
and Supplementary Table S4) (Bell et al., 1997; Bridgewater
et al., 1998; Sekiya et al., 2000; Zhang et al., 2003). We
also looked for key markers of osteoblast differentiation
(Komori, 2018, 2006) and found a set of genes that were
preferentially expressed in the mesenchymal Sox9-negative
clusters (Supplementary Figure S3k and Supplementary
Table S4). These results are consistent with the hypothesis
that Sox9þ mesenchymal cells present in the blastema
initiate
a
chondrogenic-like
process
and
subsequently
undergo
osteoblast
differentiation.
Accordingly,
we
observed Sox9-descendant cells on the surface of the ter-
minal
phalanxes
of
lineage
tracer
mice
40
DAAs
(Figure 4m).
As mentioned, Sox9 was expressed in all the epithelial
clusters identiﬁed in our analysis. Because of this, in this
case, we used the results of the analysis of the combined 11,
12, 14, and 17 DAAs and nonamputated single-cell RNA-
sequencing datasets recently generated by Johnson et al.
(2020). These authors identiﬁed three epithelial clusters,
and in one of them, Sox9 was not present in the tran-
scriptomic signature (see Supplementary Table S3 in the study
by Johnson et al. [2020]). We compared the enriched bio-
logical processes using the transcriptomic signature of these
three clusters and found that only the Sox9-negative cluster
was enriched in terms related to cell proliferation, the others
being signiﬁcantly enriched in categories associated with
=
***P < 0.001. (j) TUNEL staining of amputated Cont and Sox9D/D phalanx tips 30 DAAs. (k‒m) EYFP immunohistochemistry on sections of (k) nonamputated
and (m) amputated Sox9IRES-CreERT2;R26R-EYFP digit tips at the indicated time points. Arrows point to EYFP-positive cells in the mesenchyme. The dotted
rectangle in l marks the area shown at higher magniﬁcation in m. (n‒p) Immunoﬂuorescence for SOX9 in (n, o) amputated and (p) nonamputated Cont digit tips
at the indicated time points. The dotted squares mark the area shown at higher magniﬁcation in the insets. (q, s) UMAP visualization of cell clusters identiﬁed in
the scRNA-seq analysis of (q) nonamputated and (s) amputated digit tips 14 DAAs. (r, t) Violin plot showing Sox9 expression in clusters identiﬁed in (r)
nonamputated and (t) amputated digit tips 14 DAAs. Bars shown in b, g, h, j, l, and p ¼ 200 mm for b, 100 mm for d‒g, 50 mm for h, 50 mm for j, 50 mm for k and
l, and 50 mm for n‒p, respectively. Bas Lay, basal layer; Cont, control; DAA, day after amputation; DATX, day after tamoxifen administration; Dist Grv, distal
groove; Nail Epth, nail epithelium; Nail Plt, nail plate; Prox Fold, proximal fold; scRNA-seq, single-cell RNA sequencing; Str Corn, stratum corneum; TCF1, T-
cell factor 1; Term Phlx, terminal phalanx; TX, tamoxifen; UMAP, Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection.
M Lao et al.
Sox9 Is Required for Nail-Bed Differentiation
www.jidonline.org
2619

ribosome
biogenesis
(Supplementary
Figure
S3l
and
Supplementary Table S9).
DISCUSSION
In this study, we have identiﬁed a population of Sox9-
expressing cells in the basal layer of the distal groove and the
hyponychium, and using lineage tracing experiments, we
have shown that they are involved in the homeostasis of the
hyponychium epidermis. During mouse embryonic and
postnatal skin development, Sox9 is initially expressed in the
hair placodes, and subsequently, its expression persists in the
upper outer root sheath, where it overlaps with quiescent
H2B‒GFP label‒retaining cells that give rise to the adult
bulge (Nowak et al., 2008; Vidal et al., 2005). Consistent
with this, Sox9-lineage tracing during hair follicle develop-
ment showed that under normal physiological conditions,
Sox9-descendant cells contribute to the entire hair follicle but
not to the interfollicular epidermis (Nowak et al., 2008). The
situation in the nail organ seems to be different because in
this study, we report that descendants of Sox9-expressing
cells from the basal layers of the hyponychium contribute to
the entire epidermis. We detected LacZþ cells even 1 year
after tamoxifen administration, indicating that these Sox9-
expressing cells function as self-renewing adult stem cells
that continuously sustain the entire hyponychium epidermis.
Therefore, our results suggest that in contrast to the role
observed in the interfollicular epidermis, Sox9 may have a
role in epidermal stem cell maintenance and/or differentia-
tion in the hyponychium.
We found another Sox9-expressing cell population in the
nail-bed epithelium, as observed in previous expression
studies using human tissue (Krahl and Sellheyer, 2010). We
have shown that Sox9 functions in the nail-bed epithelium as
a master regulatory gene essential for the differentiation of
nail-bed cells. Our results revealed that Sox9 upregulation in
the nail epithelium coincides with (i) the downregulation of
the Wnt signaling pathway; (ii) a decrease in cell prolifera-
tion; and (iii) an increase in ribosome biogenesis, a biological
process that has been associated with stem cell differentiation
(Brombin et al., 2015; Sanchez et al., 2016). Thus, taking into
consideration these results and the fact that SOX9 is a known
antagonist of Wnt signaling (Akiyama et al., 2004; Kim et al.,
2006; Sinha et al., 2021), it is conceivable that during nail-
bed differentiation, SOX9 represses Wnt signaling, leading
to altered biological processes such as reduced cell prolifer-
ation and increased ribosome biogenesis.
Sox9-driven cell lineage tracing showed that mouse
epithelial nail-bed cells are completely replaced in about 30
days and that they do not contribute neither to the nail plate
nor to the underlying mesenchyme under normal physio-
logical conditions, as reported in previous studies (Takeo
et al., 2013; Zaias and Alvarez, 1968). Despite the large
number of studies carried out on the nail organ, the role of
the nail bed during nail homeostasis has remained unclear,
being considered an epithelium whose main function is just
to keep the nail attached to the underlying digit (Zaias, 2014).
Our analysis of Sox9D/D digit tips, in which the nail-bed
epithelium is absent, clearly provides evidence that this cell
population has additional functions. First, we have shown
that the nail bed is necessary to maintain the normal
physiological growth of the nail plate. If nail-bed cells are not
present, the distal nail matrix (K5þ TCF1þ) expands distally,
generating an elongated highly proliferative epithelium that
undergoes keratinocyte differentiation, and as a conse-
quence, a large claw-shaped ﬁngernail arises that grows
perpendicular to the nail epithelium. Second, our results also
indicate that the nail bed is necessary for the maintenance of
the underlying digit bone. In Sox9 mutants, the terminal
phalanx undergoes both bone reabsorption and apoptosis,
and the distal tip is ﬁnally lost. A similar phenotype was
observed when Wnt signaling was deleted from the nail
epithelium (Takeo et al., 2016, 2013). In this case, a lack of
Wnt activation in osteoblast and osteoclast precursors was
reported, leading to the regression of the underneath terminal
phalanx (Takeo et al., 2016). In our Sox9 mutants, Wnt
signaling in the nail epithelium is apparently active, as shown
by Tcf1 expression. However, osteoclast precursors are also
active, indicating that nail-bed cells may act as signaling
centers necessary for the homeostatic maintenance of the
underlying digit-tip bone.
We have also studied the role of Sox9 during digit-bone
regeneration. In the absence of SOX9, the distal tip of the
terminal phalanx does not regenerate after amputation,
leading to a phenotype similar to that of nonamputated
Sox9D/D digit tips. Our results indicate that two events can
contribute to this phenotype. First, as observed in non-
amputated digit tips, epithelial nail-bed cells do not differ-
entiate in amputated digits lacking SOX9, and the nail matrix
expands distally. Takeo et al. (2013) reported that the nail
epithelial function is necessary for digit-tip regeneration.
They inactivated Wnt signaling in the nail epithelium, and as
a consequence, osteoblast commitment in blastema cells was
compromised (Takeo et al., 2013). In this study, we show that
osteoblast commitment is also compromised in the blastema
of Sox9 mutants, indicating that signaling from the nail bed is
also necessary for digit regeneration. Second, we have
observed descendants of Sox9-expressing cells in the blas-
tema of amputated digits, which were not present in non-
amputated digits. A possible explanation for the origin of
these cells is that either nail bed or hyponychium cells un-
dergo an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition during the
course of digit regeneration. However, this is unlikely to
occur because several studies using genetic lineage tracing
(Lehoczky et al., 2011; Rinkevich et al., 2011) and single-cell
transcriptomic proﬁling (Johnson et al., 2020; Storer et al.,
2020) have shown that progenitor cells of the digit blas-
tema are germ-layer restricted. An alternative explanation is
that Sox9 is upregulated in a population of blastema cells
during digit regeneration. We have shown by both immu-
noﬂuorescence and single-cell proﬁling that this indeed is the
case. Our results indicate that SOX9 may control the early
steps of blastema‒mesenchyme cell differentiation into os-
teoblasts, as normally occurs during endochondral bone
differentiation (Akiyama et al., 2002; Bi et al., 1999). This
implies that mesenchymal cells undergo a process of
endochondral-like osteoblast differentiation in amputated
digits, which contrasts with the ﬁndings of previous studies
indicating that bone regeneration after digit-tip amputation
occurs by direct ossiﬁcation (Han et al., 2008; Muller et al.,
1999). Two different situations could explain this apparent
M Lao et al.
Sox9 Is Required for Nail-Bed Differentiation
Journal of Investigative Dermatology (2022), Volume 142
2620

discrepancy. The ﬁrst one is that both mechanisms do operate
in parallel during digit-tip regeneration. The second one is
that the process of osteoblast differentiation only partially
recapitulates the mechanisms known to be active during
development, which is supported by the observation that
blastema cells express mesenchyme developmental genes
but do not acquire an embryonic digit state (Storer et al.,
2020). In conclusion, we have shown that Sox9 is essential
for digit-tip regeneration, and our results indicate that two
Sox9-expressing cell populations exist that can contribute to
this process: one in the nail epithelium and another one in
the differentiating blastema. The conditional deletion of the
gene speciﬁcally in epithelial cells (e.g., using a K14-CreER
mouse line) and in blastema cells (e.g., using a Pdgfra-
CreER mouse line) would help to elucidate the contribution
of both cell populations to this process.
In summary, in this study, we show that SOX9 is necessary
for both nail organ homeostasis and digit regeneration. This
knowledge will provide insights into the genetic basis of nail
diseases, whose etiology remains unknown, and the mech-
anism governing mammalian digit-tip regeneration, which
can contribute to developing new therapies for patients with
nail disease or amputation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Mice and crosses
For genetic lineage tracing, Sox9IRES-CreERT2 (B6.129S7-Sox9tm1(cre/
ERT2)Haak) mice (Soeda et al., 2010) were obtained from the RIKEN
BioResource
Research
Center
(Tsukuba,
Japan).
R26R-LacZ
(B6.129S4-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1Sor/J) (Soriano, 1999) and R26R-EYFP
(B6.129X1-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1(EYFP)Cos/J) (Srinivas et al., 2001) mice
were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). See
Supplementary Materials and Methods for mouse crosses and
tamoxifen administration protocols. Mouse housing and handling as
well as laboratory protocols were approved by The University of
Granada (Granada, Spain) Ethics Committee for Animal Experi-
mentation (reference 12/12/2016/177).
Histological and immunohistological methods
A detailed explanation of the analysis of histology, immunohistology,
digit-tip regeneration assays, morphometric analyses of terminal
phalanxes and nails, alizarin red staining of bones, tartrate-resistant
acid phosphatase staining, and analysis of apoptosis protocols is
provided in Supplementary Materials and Methods.
Single-cell RNA-sequencing data analysis
We used the single-cell RNA-sequencing datasets from uninjured
and amputated digits 10, 14, and 28 DAAs reported by Storer and
Miller, 2020 (Gene Expression Omnibus GSE135985), and they
were analyzed as detailed in Supplementary Materials and Methods.
Data availability statement
Datasets related to this article can be found at https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc¼GSE135985, hosted at the Gene
Expression Omnibus database repository (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/geo/) and in https://docs.google.com/viewer?url¼https%3A%2F
%2Fars.els-cdn.com%2Fcontent%2Fimage%2F1-s2.0-S153458072
0300587-mmc3.xlsx, corresponding to Supplementary Table S3 of
the study by Johnson et al. (2020).
ORCIDs
Miguel Lao: http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6707-6825
Alicia Hurtado: http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6267-704X
Alejandro Chaco´n de Castro: http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0497-469X
Miguel Burgos: http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4446-9313
Rafael Jime´nez: http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4103-8219
Francisco J. Barrionuevo: http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2651-1530
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors state no conﬂict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by grants from the Andalusian Government, Junta de
Andalucı´a, and BIO-109 to RJ and P11-CVI-7291 to MB and grants from the
Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (CGL2011-23368 and CGL2015-
67108-P) to RJ and FJB. The authors would like to thank the Spanish Ministry
of Science and Innovation for the FPI PhD fellowship granted to ML and the
FPU PhD fellowship granted to AH.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization: RJ, FJB; Funding Acquisition: RJ, MB, FJB; Investigation:
ML, AH, ACdC, MB, RJ, FJB; Visualization: FJB; Writing - Original Draft
Preparation: RJ, FJB; Writing - Review and Editing: ML, AH, ACdC, MB, RJ,
FJB
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at www.
jidonline.org, and at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jid.2022.03.020.
REFERENCES
Akiyama H, Chaboissier MC, Martin JF, Schedl A, de Crombrugghe B. The
transcription factor Sox9 has essential roles in successive steps of the
chondrocyte differentiation pathway and is required for expression of Sox5
and Sox6. Genes Dev 2002;16:2813e28.
Akiyama H, Lyons JP, Mori-Akiyama Y, Yang X, Zhang R, Zhang Z, et al. In-
teractions between Sox9 and beta-catenin control chondrocyte differenti-
ation. Genes Dev 2004;18:1072e87.
Bell DM, Leung KK, Wheatley SC, Ng LJ, Zhou S, Ling KW, et al. SOX9
directly regulates the type-II collagen gene. Nat Genet 1997;16:174e8.
Bi W, Deng JM, Zhang Z, Behringer RR, de Crombrugghe B. Sox9 is required
for cartilage formation. Nat Genet 1999;22:85e9.
Borgens RB. Mice regrow the tips of their foretoes. Science 1982;217:
747e50.
Bridgewater LC, Lefebvre V. Crombrugghe B de. Chondrocyte-speciﬁc
enhancer elements in the Col11a2 gene resemble the Col2a1 tissue-
speciﬁc enhancer. J Biol Chem 1998;273:14998e5006.
Brombin A, Joly JS, Jamen F. New tricks for an old dog: ribosome biogenesis
contributes to stem cell homeostasis. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2015;34:
61e70.
Fleckman P, Jaeger K, Silva KA, Sundberg JP. Comparative anatomy of mouse
and human nail units. Anat Rec (Hoboken) 2013;296:521e32.
Fuchs E. Skin stem cells in silence, action, and cancer. Stem Cell Reports
2018;10:1432e8.
Han M, Yang X, Lee J, Allan CH, Muneoka K. Development and regeneration
of the neonatal digit tip in mice. Dev Biol 2008;315:125e35.
Hayashi S, McMahon AP. Efﬁcient recombination in diverse tissues by a
tamoxifen-inducible form of Cre: a tool for temporally regulated gene
activation/inactivation in the mouse. Dev Biol 2002;244:305e18.
Illingworth CM. Trapped ﬁngers and amputated ﬁnger tips in children.
J Pediatr Surg 1974;9:853e8.
Jaeger K, Sukseree S, Zhong S, Phinney BS, Mlitz V, Buchberger M, et al.
Corniﬁcation of nail keratinocytes requires autophagy for bulk degradation
of intracellular proteins while sparing components of the cytoskeleton.
Apoptosis 2019;24:62e73.
Jo A, Denduluri S, Zhang B, Wang Z, Yin L, Yan Z, et al. The versatile func-
tions of Sox9 in development, stem cells, and human diseases. Genes Dis
2014;1:149e61.
Johnson GL, Masias EJ, Lehoczky JA. Cellular heterogeneity and lineage re-
striction during mouse digit tip regeneration at single-cell resolution. Dev
Cell 2020;52:525e40.e5.
Kim Y, Kobayashi A, Sekido R, DiNapoli L, Brennan J, Chaboissier MC, et al.
Fgf9 and Wnt4 act as antagonistic signals to regulate mammalian sex
determination. PLoS Biol 2006;4:e187.
M Lao et al.
Sox9 Is Required for Nail-Bed Differentiation
www.jidonline.org
2621

Komori T. Regulation of osteoblast differentiation by transcription factors.
J Cell Biochem 2006;99:1233e9.
Komori T. Runx2, an inducer of osteoblast and chondrocyte differentiation.
Histochem Cell Biol 2018;149:313e23.
Krahl D, Sellheyer K. Sox9, more than a marker of the outer root sheath:
spatiotemporal expression pattern during human cutaneous embryogen-
esis. J Cutan Pathol 2010;37:350e6.
Lehoczky JA, Robert B, Tabin CJ. Mouse digit tip regeneration is mediated by
fate-restricted progenitor cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011;108:
20609e14.
Lehoczky JA, Tabin CJ. Lgr6 marks nail stem cells and is required for digit tip
regeneration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2015;112:13249e54.
Leung Y, Kandyba E, Chen YB, Rufﬁns S, Chuong CM, Kobielak K. Bifunc-
tional ectodermal stem cells around the nail display dual fate homeostasis
and adaptive wounding response toward nail regeneration. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2014;111:15114e9.
Minkin C. Bone acid phosphatase: tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase as a
marker of osteoclast function. Calcif Tissue Int 1982;34:285e90.
Muller TL, Ngo-Muller V, Reginelli A, Taylor G, Anderson R, Muneoka K.
Regeneration in higher vertebrates: limb buds and digit tips. Semin Cell
Dev Biol 1999;10:405e13.
Ng LJ, Wheatley S, Muscat GEO, Conway-Campbell J, Bowles J, Wright E,
et al. SOX9 binds DNA, activates transcription, and Coexpresses with type
II collagen during chondrogenesis in the mouse. Dev Biol 1997;183:
108e21.
Nowak JA, Polak L, Pasolli HA, Fuchs E. Hair follicle stem cells are speciﬁed
and function in early skin morphogenesis. Cell Stem Cell 2008;3:33e43.
Pulawska-Czub A, Pieczonka TD, Mazurek P, Kobielak K. The potential of
nail mini-organ stem cells in skin, nail and digit tips regeneration. Int J Mol
Sci 2021;22:2864.
Rinkevich Y, Lindau P, Ueno H, Longaker MT, Weissman IL. Germ-layer and
lineage-restricted stem/progenitors regenerate the mouse digit tip. Nature
2011;476:409e13.
Sanchez CG, Teixeira FK, Czech B, Preall JB, Zamparini AL, Seifert JRK, et al.
Regulation of ribosome biogenesis and protein synthesis controls germline
stem cell differentiation. Cell Stem Cell 2016;18:276e90.
Sekiya I, Tsuji K, Koopman P, Watanabe H, Yamada Y, Shinomiya K, et al.
SOX9 enhances aggrecan gene promoter/enhancer activity and is up-
regulated by retinoic acid in a cartilage-derived cell line, TC6. J Biol
Chem 2000;275:10738e44.
Sinha A, Fan VB, Ramakrishnan AB, Engelhardt N, Kennell J, Cadigan KM.
Repression of Wnt/b-catenin signaling by SOX9 and mastermind-like
transcriptional coactivator 2. Sci Adv 2021;7: eabe0849:
Soeda T, Deng JM. Crombrugghe B de, Behringer RR, Nakamura T, Akiyama
H. Sox9-expressing precursors are the cellular origin of the cruciate liga-
ment of the knee joint and the limb tendons. Genesis 2010;48:635e44.
Soriano P. Generalized lacZ expression with the ROSA26 Cre reporter strain.
Nat Genet 1999;21:70e1.
Srinivas S, Watanabe T, Lin CS, William CM, Tanabe Y, Jessell TM, et al. Cre
reporter strains produced by targeted insertion of EYFP and ECFP into the
ROSA26 locus. BMC Dev Biol 2001;1:4.
Storer MA, Mahmud N, Karamboulas K, Borrett MJ, Yuzwa SA, Gont A, et al.
Acquisition of a unique mesenchymal precursor-like blastema state un-
derlies successful adult mammalian digit tip regeneration. Dev Cell
2020;52:509e24.e9.
Storer MA, Miller FD. Cellular and molecular mechanisms that regulate
mammalian digit tip regeneration. Open Biol 2020;10:200194.
Takeo M, Chou WC, Sun Q, Lee W, Rabbani P, Loomis C, et al. Wnt activation
in nail epithelium couples nail growth to digit regeneration. Nature
2013;499:228e32.
Takeo M, Hale CS, Ito M. Epithelium-derived Wnt ligands are essential for
maintenance of underlying digit bone. J Invest Dermatol 2016;136:
1355e63.
Vidal VPI, Chaboissier M-C, Lu¨tzkendorf S, Cotsarelis G, Mill P, Hui C-C,
et al. Sox9 is essential for outer root sheath differentiation and the forma-
tion of the hair stem cell compartment. Curr Biol 2005;15:1340e51.
Zaias N. The nail bed, part I. The normal nail bed matrix, stem cells, distal
motion and anatomy. J Dermatolog Clin Res 2014;2:1008.
Zaias N, Alvarez J. The formation of the primate nail plate. An autoradio-
graphic study in squirrel monkey. J Invest Dermatol 1968;51:120e36.
Zhang P, Jimenez SA, Stokes DG. Regulation of human COL9A1 gene
expression. Activation of the proximal promoter region by SOX9. J Biol
Chem 2003;278:117e23.
Zhao Q, Eberspaecher H, Lefebvre V, de Crombrugghe B. Parallel expression
of Sox9 and Col2a1 in cells undergoing chondrogenesis. Dev Dyn
1997;209:377e86.
M Lao et al.
Sox9 Is Required for Nail-Bed Differentiation
Journal of Investigative Dermatology (2022), Volume 142
2622

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS AND METHODS
Mice and crosses
For genetic lineage tracing, Sox9IRES-CreERT2 (B6.129S7-
Sox9tm1(cre/ERT2)Haak)
(Soeda
et
al.,
2010)
mice
were
obtained from the RIKEN BioResource Research Center
(Tsukuba, Japan). R26R-LacZ (B6.129S4-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1-
Sor/J) (Soriano, 1999) and R26R-EYFP (B6.129X1-Gt(ROSA)
26Sortm1(EYFP)Cos/J) (Srinivas et al., 2001) mice were obtained
from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Sox9IRES-
CreERT2 mice were crossed to either R26R-LacZ or R26R-EYFP
to generate double heterozygotes. To conditionally delete
Sox9, Sox9ﬂox/ﬂox (B6.129S7-Sox9tm2Crm/J) (Akiyama et al.,
2002) and CAGG-CreERTM (Hayashi and McMahon, 2002)
(B6.Cg-Tg(CAG-cre/Esr1*)5Amc) mice were acquired from The
Jackson Laboratory. Both mouse strains were bred, and the
resulting double heterozygous offspring was backcrossed to
Sox9ﬂox/ﬂox mice to obtain CAGG-CreERTM;Sox9ﬂox/ﬂox mice.
Tamoxifen administration
CAGG-CreERTM;Sox9ﬂox/ﬂox mice were fed for 10 days with a
diet (Harlan 2914 diet) supplemented with tamoxifen (40 mg
tamoxifen/100 g diet; T5648, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO).
Sox9 lineage-tracing mice were treated the same way as if
they were to be analyzed 20 days after tamoxifen adminis-
tration or later. For mice to be analyzed 20 days after
tamoxifen administration, tamoxifen was dissolved in corn
oil (C8267, Sigma-Aldrich) at a concentration of 30 mg/ml,
and 0.2 mg of tamoxifen per gram of body weight was
administered by a single intraperitoneal injection.
Histological and immunohistological methods
Digit tips were dissected out, ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde,
decalciﬁed in 10% EDTA in PBS for 30 days, dehydrated,
embedded in parafﬁn, sectioned, and stained with H&E.
Single and double immunoﬂuorescence were performed as
previously described (Dadhich et al., 2013). The three central
rear paw digits were used for all the experiments. We found
no differences either at the histological level or in the
expression pattern of all markers analyzed between control
digits without tamoxifen administration and control digits
treated with tamoxifen at any time point (days after tamoxifen
administration). The following antibodies were used: mouse
anti-SOX9 (1/50; AMAB90795, Sigma-Aldrich), rabbit anti-
SOX9 (1/400; AB5535, MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA),
rabbit anti‒T-cell factor 1 (1/100; C63D9, Cell Signaling
Technology,
Danvers,
MA),
rabbit
anti‒Ki-67
(1/50;
Ab15580, Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom), mouse
anti-AE13 (1/100; Ab16113, Abcam), rabbit anti-GFP (1/100;
NB600-308, Novus Biologicals, Littleton, CO), rabbit anti‒
keratin 5 (1/2,000; Ab52635, Abcam), and rabbit anti-
RUNX2 (1/75; Ab23981, Abcam).
Digit-tip regeneration assays
For digit regeneration assays, mice aged 2 months were
anesthetized by isoﬂurane inhalation, and right foot digit tips
were amputated with microspring scissors, whereas the left
foot digits were used as unamputated controls. The ampu-
tated digit tips were collected and stained with alizarine red
to check the length of the bone section amputated.
Alizarin red staining of bones
Digits were collected, dehydrated in 100% ethanol for 24
hours, immersed in acetone for 24 hours, immersed in 1%
potassium hydroxide for 4 hours, and stained for 48 hours in
alizarin red staining solution (0.02% alizarin red, 1% potas-
sium hydroxide). Tissue was cleared for 24 hours in 1% po-
tassium hydroxide and conserved in glycerol.
Morphometric analyses of terminal phalanxes and nails
Digital images of freshly dissected nails and alizarin red‒
stained terminal phalanxes were taken with an Olympus
DP70 digital camera, and the corresponding lengths (see
Figure 3c and s) were measured using the ImageJ software
(National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD). The number of
individuals and values are described in Supplementary
Table S1. For mean comparison, Student’s t statistical tests
were performed using the R software suite.
Whole-mount LacZ staining
Digits tips were harvested and cut transversely to facilitate
solution
penetration
and
whole-mount b-galactosidase
staining using X-gal as a substrate. Whole-mount LacZ
staining was performed overnight as described (Hogan
et al., 1995). After staining, embryos were ﬁxed in 4%
paraformaldehyde and processed for further histological
studies.
Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase staining
For tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase staining, histological
sections were deparafﬁnized, rehydrated, and incubated in
1% L-(þ) tartaric acid (T-6521, Sigma-Aldrich), 1% naphthol
AS-MX phosphate (N-4875, Sigma-Aldrich) and 1% and
0.06% Fast Red Violet LB Salt (F-3381, Sigma-Aldrich) at pH
5 for 4 hours at 37 oC. Preparations were counterstained with
hematoxylin.
Analysis of apoptosis
Apoptosis was assessed with the TUNEL assay using the
Fluorescent In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit (Roche, Man-
nheim,
Germany)
according
to
the
manufacturer’s
instructions.
Single-cell RNA-sequencing data analysis
We used the single-cell RNA-sequencing datasets from
uninjured and amputated digits 10, 14, and 28 days after
amputation
reported
by
Storer
et
al.
(2020)
(Gene
Expression Omnibus GSE135985). Bioinformatic analyses
were performed with Seurat (version 4) (Hao et al., 2021)
following
the
author
guidelines
(https://satijalab.org/
seurat/). Cells with unusually high and low numbers of
unique feature counts or high mitochondrial counts were
ﬁltered
out.
Data were
normalized
and
subsequently
scaled. RunPCA was used for principal component analysis,
and cells were clustered at a resolution of 0.6. Uniform
manifold
approximation
and
projection
was
used
for
nonlinear dimensional reduction. Cluster-speciﬁc markers
were selected with a minimum average log fold change
threshold of 0.25 among genes that were expressed in a
minimum of 25% of the cells. Cluster identity was assigned
using the following markers: Pdgfra þ Pdgfrb þ Prrx2 for
mesenchymal cells, Pdgfrb þ Rgs5 for vascular smooth
muscle/pericytes, keratin genes K5 þ K14 þ K17 for
epithelial cells, Tie1 þ Pecam1 for endothelial cells,
M Lao et al.
Sox9 Is Required for Nail-Bed Differentiation
www.jidonline.org
2622.e1

Cd14 þ Aif1 for immune cells/macrophages, and Sox10 þ
Plp1 for Schwann cells. Gene Ontology analyses were done
with the enrichGO and the compareCluster functions of the
clusterProﬁler R package (Yu et al., 2012).
SUPPLEMENTARY REFERENCES
Akiyama H, Chaboissier MC, Martin JF, Schedl A, de Crombrugghe B. The
transcription factor Sox9 has essential roles in successive steps of the
chondrocyte differentiation pathway and is required for expression of Sox5
and Sox6. Genes Dev 2002;16:2813e28.
Dadhich RK, Barrionuevo FJ, Real FM, Lupian˜ez DG, Ortega E, Burgos M,
et al. Identiﬁcation of live germ-cell desquamation as a major mechanism
of seasonal testis regression in mammals: a study in the Iberian mole (Talpa
occidentalis)1. Biol Reprod 2013;88:101.
Hao Y, Hao S, Andersen-Nissen E, Mauck WM, Zheng S, Butler A, et al. In-
tegrated analysis of multimodal single-cell data. Cell 2021;184:3573e87.
e29.
Hayashi S, McMahon AP. Efﬁcient recombination in diverse tissues by a
tamoxifen-inducible form of Cre: a tool for temporally regulated gene
activation/inactivation in the mouse. Dev Biol 2002;244:305e18.
Hogan B, Beddington R, Costantini F, Lacy E. Manipulating the mouse em-
bryo. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 1995.
Johnson GL, Masias EJ, Lehoczky JA. Cellular heterogeneity and lineage re-
striction during mouse digit tip regeneration at single-cell resolution. Dev
Cell 2020;52:525e40.e5.
Soeda T, Deng JM. Crombrugghe B de, Behringer RR, Nakamura T,
Akiyama H. Sox9-expressing precursors are the cellular origin of the cru-
ciate ligament of the knee joint and the limb tendons. Genesis 2010;48:
635e44.
Soriano P. Generalized lacZ expression with the ROSA26 Cre reporter strain.
Nat Genet 1999;21:70e1.
Srinivas S, Watanabe T, Lin CS, William CM, Tanabe Y, Jessell TM, et al. Cre
reporter strains produced by targeted insertion of EYFP and ECFP into the
ROSA26 locus. BMC Dev Biol 2001;1:4.
Yu G, Wang LG, Han Y, He QY. clusterProﬁler: an R package for comparing
biological themes among gene clusters. OMICS 2012;16:284e7.
M Lao et al.
Sox9 Is Required for Nail-Bed Differentiation
Journal of Investigative Dermatology (2022), Volume 142
2622.e2

Supplementary Figure S1. Lineage
tracing of Sox9-expressing cells in the
mouse digit tip. (a) Whole-mount LacZ
staining of Sox9IRES-CreERT2;R26R-LacZ
digit tip at various time points (DATX).
The top panels show the lateral view, the
central panels show the sagittal view,
and the bottom panels show the
ventral view of the nails. (b‒m)
EYFP immunohistochemistry of
Sox9IRES-CreERT2;R26R-EYFP digit tips at
the indicated time points. Bar in m ¼ 50
mm for b‒m. DATX, day after tamoxifen
administration; Dist Grv, distal groove.
M Lao et al.
Sox9 Is Required for Nail-Bed Differentiation
www.jidonline.org
2622.e3

Supplementary Figure S2. Digit
phenotype of Sox9D/D adult mice. (a)
SOX9 immunoﬂuorescence of control
and Sox9D/D digit tips at the indicated
time points. The dotted lines outline
the nail epithelium domain and the
hyponychium. (b) Double
immunoﬂuorescence for AE13 and
either K5 or TCF1 in Sox9D/D digit-tip
sections 50 DATXs. Asterisks indicate
areas of nonspeciﬁc, autoﬂuorescent
background. Bars ¼ 50 mm in a and
100 mm in b. DATX, day after
tamoxifen administration; Dist Grv,
distal groove; K5, keratin 5; Prox Fold,
proximal fold; TCF1, T-cell factor 1.
M Lao et al.
Sox9 Is Required for Nail-Bed Differentiation
Journal of Investigative Dermatology (2022), Volume 142
2622.e4

Supplementary Figure S3. Role of Sox9 in mouse digit regeneration. (a) Histology of amputated control and Sox9D/D digit tips at various time points. Dotted
lines outline the Term Phlx. (b) SOX9 immunoﬂuorescence in control-amputated digit-tip sections at the indicated time points. The dotted lines outline the Term
Phlx. (c) Dot plots showing the expression of cell-speciﬁc markers in the identiﬁed clusters of the scRNA-seq analysis at the indicated time points. (d, f) UMAP
visualization of cell clusters identiﬁed in the scRNA-seq analysis of (d) 10 DAAs and (f) 28 DAAs amputated digit tips. The assignment of cell-type identities is
depicted. (e, g) Violin plot showing Sox9 expression in the identiﬁed clusters (e) 10 DAAs and (g) 28 DAAs. (h) Comparison of enriched biological processes
M Lao et al.
Sox9 Is Required for Nail-Bed Differentiation
www.jidonline.org
2622.e5

Supplementary Table S1. Quantiﬁcation of Nail Length, Terminal Phalanx Length, and Percentage of RUNX2D
Cells
Experiment
Measure
Timepoint
Condition
(1)
Mean
(1)
SD
(1)
n
(1)
Condition
(2)
Mean
(2)
SD
(2)
n
(2)
Statistic
P-Value
Nonamputated
Nail length (mm)
50 DATX
Control
1.32
0.24
7
Sox9D/D
2.92
0.33
7
Two-sample t-test
2.6 
10e7
Nonamputated
Terminal phalanx
length (mm)
30 DATX
Control
1.22
0.05
4
Sox9D/D
1.23
0.015
4
Two-sample t-test
0.74
Nonamputated
Terminal phalanx
length (mm)
40 DATX
Control
1.19
0.04
4
Sox9D/D
0.95
0.08
4
Two-sample t-test
0.002
Nonamputated
Terminal phalanx
length (mm)
50 DATX
Control
1.23
0.04
6
Sox9D/D
0.92
0.17
6
Two-sample t-test
0.0017
Amputated
Terminal phalanx
length (mm)
50 DAAs
Control
1.36
0.14
6
Sox9D/D
0.99
0.22
6
Two-sample t-test
0.0075
Amputated
% RUNX2þ cells
30 DAAs
Control
32.14
8.7
4
Sox9D/D
16.4
8.06
4
Two-sample t-test
3.08 
10‒8
Abbreviations: %, Percentage of; DAA, day after amputation; DATX, day after tamoxifen administration.
using the cell signature of identiﬁed mesenchymal clusters (clusters 1, 2, 8, and 13) 14 DAAs. (i) Gene Ontology analysis using the upregulated enriched genes
in cluster 13 versus those in clusters 1, 2, and 8 14 DAAs. (j) Violin plot showing the expression of Sox9 and chondrocyte extracellular matrix proteins in
the mesenchymal clusters 14 DAAs. (k) Violin plot showing the expression of markers of osteoblast differentiation in the mesenchymal clusters 14 DAAs.
(l) Comparison of enriched biological processes using the cell signature of identiﬁed epithelial clusters of the combined 11, 12, 14, and 17 DAAs and
nonamputated scRNA-seq datasets generated by Johnson et al. (2020). Bars ¼ 100 mm in a and 50 mm in b. DAA, day after amputation; Dist Grv, distal groove;
Nail Epth, nail epithelium; Prox Fold, proximal fold; rRNA, ribosomal RNA; scRNA-seq, single-cell RNA sequencing; Term Phlx, terminal phalanx; UMAP,
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection.
=
M Lao et al.
Sox9 Is Required for Nail-Bed Differentiation
Journal of Investigative Dermatology (2022), Volume 142
2622.e6

===== Lee2020_eLife_SC-iMN =====
*For correspondence:
jbkim@unist.ac.kr
Competing interests: The
authors declare that no
competing interests exist.
Funding: See page 20
Received: 20 September 2019
Accepted: 22 May 2020
Published: 23 June 2020
Reviewing editor: Ralf Jauch,
The University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong
Copyright Lee et al. This
article is distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which
permits unrestricted use and
redistribution provided that the
original author and source are
credited.
Sequentially induced motor neurons from
human fibroblasts facilitate locomotor
recovery in a rodent spinal cord injury
model
Hyunah Lee1,2, Hye Yeong Lee3, Byeong Eun Lee2, Daniela Gerovska4,
Soo Yong Park1,2, Holm Zaehres5, Marcos J Arau´ zo-Bravo4,5,6, Jae-Ick Kim2,
Yoon Ha3, Hans R Scho¨ ler5, Jeong Beom Kim1,2*
1Hans Scho¨ ler Stem Cell Research Center (HSSCRC), Ulsan National Institute of
Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, Republic of Korea; 2School of Life Sciences,
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, Republic of
Korea; 3Department of Neurosurgery, Spine and Spinal Cord Institute, Severance
Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea;
4Computational Biology and Systems Biomedicine Group, Computational
Biomedicine Data Analysis Platform, Biodonostia Health Research Institute, San
Sebastia´n, Spain; 5Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Mu¨ nster, Germany; 6IKERBASQUE, Basque
Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain
Abstract Generation of autologous human motor neurons holds great promise for cell
replacement therapy to treat spinal cord injury (SCI). Direct conversion allows generation of target
cells from somatic cells, however, current protocols are not practicable for therapeutic purposes
since converted cells are post-mitotic that are not scalable. Therefore, therapeutic effects of
directly converted neurons have not been elucidated yet. Here, we show that human fibroblasts
can be converted into induced motor neurons (iMNs) by sequentially inducing POU5F1(OCT4) and
LHX3. Our strategy enables scalable production of pure iMNs because of the transient acquisition
of proliferative iMN-intermediate cell stage which is distinct from neural progenitors. iMNs
exhibited hallmarks of spinal motor neurons including transcriptional profiles, electrophysiological
property, synaptic activity, and neuromuscular junction formation. Remarkably, transplantation of
iMNs showed therapeutic effects, promoting locomotor functional recovery in rodent SCI model.
Together, our advanced strategy will provide tools to acquire sufficient human iMNs that may
represent a promising cell source for personalized cell therapy.
Introduction
Spinal cord injury (SCI) causes devastating neurological impairments and disabilities (Singh et al.,
2014). SCI leads to the loss of sensory/motor functions and malfunctions in other organs such as
bladder, kidneys and bowel, provoking an enormous impact on physical, psychological and social
behavior of SCI patients (Bradbury and McMahon, 2006; Vismara et al., 2017). Unfortunately,
there is no fully restorative treatment for SCI yet (Silva et al., 2014). Medications or surgical decom-
pression are the only options for SCI treatment, however, these approaches are controversial due to
the severe side effects and limited clinical efficacy (Cristante et al., 2012; Vismara et al., 2017).
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
1 of 24
RESEARCH ARTICLE

Thus, cell replacement therapy has been proposed as a promising therapeutic intervention to
reconstitute the damaged nervous system and improve functional recovery after SCI (Gold-
man, 2005). A number of studies have shown that transplantation of neural cells derived from plurip-
otent stem cells (PSCs) is effective in functional and histological restoration in SCI animal model
(Lu et al., 2014; Nakamura and Okano, 2013; Tsuji et al., 2010; Vismara et al., 2017). Despite
these encouraging advances, ethical issue of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and tumorigenic potential
of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) have impeded their translations into clinical trials
(Deng et al., 2018; Fong et al., 2010; Miura et al., 2009; Ronaghi et al., 2010). To overcome these
limitations, direct conversion of somatic cells into other cell types has been achieved while bypassing
pluripotent state (Park et al., 2019; Park et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2015). However, application of pre-
vious protocols hindered therapeutic translations due to the heterogeneity and low yields, and
involvement
of
multiple
transcription
factors
which
may
increase
the
genetic
mutagenesis
(Kang et al., 2015). Most importantly, directly converted cells are fully differentiated post-mitotic
cells which limit the acquisition of cell source in large-scale for therapeutic purpose. Hence, there is
a critical need to develop a new method that enables the large-scale production of highly pure and
functional target cells with consistent quality. In terms of treating SCI, it must be capable of generat-
ing motor neuron (MN) subtypes that are relevant to disease rather than producing general neurons.
In this study, we succeeded in generating induced motor neurons (iMNs) by using a minimal num-
ber of transcription factors, POU5F1(OCT4) and LHX3. POU5F1(OCT4) is known to play an impor-
tant role in regulating pluripotent genes (Shi and Jin, 2010; Wang et al., 2007), and downstream
target genes involved in developmental processes (Shi and Jin, 2010). Previously, overexpression of
POU5F1(OCT4) allowed the generation of blood progenitor cells from fibroblasts (Szabo et al.,
2010) by regulating hematopoietic gene, HOXB4, which is one of the POU5F1(OCT4) targets
(Boyer et al., 2005). Furthermore, a number of studies showed that POU5F1(OCT4) can induce vari-
ous cell fate reprogramming such as neural stem cells into iPSCs (Kim et al., 2009a; Kim et al.,
2009b), and fibroblasts into neural progenitor cells (Mitchell et al., 2014b) as well as oligodendro-
cyte progenitor cells (Kim et al., 2015), defining POU5F1(OCT4) as a versatile reprogramming factor
that confers the plasticity in somatic cells (Mitchell et al., 2014a; Mitchell et al., 2014b). Also, it has
been reported that POU5F1(OCT4) binds to homeodomain transcription factor ISL1 (Boyer et al.,
2005; Jung et al., 2010) which is required for specification of spinal cord MNs (Cho et al., 2014;
Liang et al., 2011). So, we hypothesized that activation of POU5F1(OCT4) might have potential to
generate MNs from somatic cells through regulating ISL1 expression. Here, we introduced the key
cell fate regulator POU5F1(OCT4) and subsequently overexpressed additional MN specification fac-
tor LHX3 to induce fibroblasts toward motor neuronal fate. Importantly, we found that iMNs exhib-
ited typical characteristics of MNs on molecular level, electrophysiological activity, synaptic
functionality, in vivo engraftment capacity and therapeutic effects. In conclusion, our strategy ena-
bles large-scale production of pure iMNs and facilitates the feasibility of iMNs for SCI treatment.
Access to high-yield cultures of human MNs will facilitate an in-depth study of MN subtype-specific
properties, disease modeling, and development of cell-based drug screening assays for MN
disorders.
Results
Generation of induced motor neurons (iMNs) from human fibroblasts
by sequential induction of two transcription factors
To generate induced motor neurons (iMNs) from human adult fibroblasts (HF1), we established an
advanced direct conversion strategy by inducing POU5F1(OCT4) and LHX3 sequentially at different
time points as described in the experimental scheme (Figure 1A). To rule out the possibility that
resulting iMNs are derived from contaminating neural cells in parental fibroblasts, we confirmed that
none of the fibroblasts express neural lineage markers by immunostaining with specific antibodies
(Figure 1—figure supplement 1A). Firstly, we transduced fibroblasts with POU5F1(OCT4) regarding
its critical role in cell fate decision during early development (Yamada et al., 2013). POU5F1(OCT4)-
induced plasticity has been shown to activate the lineage genes in response to lineage supporting
culture condition (Mitchell et al., 2014a; Mitchell et al., 2014b). We cultured POU5F1(OCT4)-
infected cells in our defined neural induction medium. The morphological changes were observed as
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
2 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

HF1(Mock)
B
C
D
HF1(POU5F1)
After picking
iMNICs 
E
HB9+TUJ1+ cells 
(% of DAPI)
Day10
Neural induction 
+PAX6
+NKX6.1
+OLIG2
+LIM1
+LHX3
100
80
60
40
20
0
TUJ1+ cells 
(% of DAPI)
+NKX6.1
+LHX3
+PAX6
+LIM1
+OLIG2
H
iMNICs + MN factor 
iMNICs
HB9 TUJ1 DAPI
iMN spheres
F
G
iMNs
G’
MN induction 
A
+HB9:GFP reporter 
+
+
PDL/Laminin
Motor neuron induction
Motor neuron maturation 
iMNs
Fibroblasts
iMN spheres
Self-renewal
DMEM/F12, N2, B27,
bFGF, EGF, Laminin 
DMEM/F12+NB, N2, B27, SHH, 
IGF1, BDNF, GDNF, CNTF, NT3, cAMP
Day-1
Day14
Day0
Day3
Day21
Day28
 DMEM,
10%FBS
Neural induction
HB9:GFP+
CHAT+
SV2+ 
LHX3
POU5F1(OCT4)
iMNICs
iMNICs 
+PAX6
+NKX6.1
+OLIG2
+LIM1
+LHX3
iMNICs
100
80
60
40
20
0
I
J
Adherent culture
Sphere culture
Adherent culture
Sphere culture
Figure 1. Generation of induced motor neurons (iMNs) from human fibroblasts. (A) The experimental scheme for the generation of iMNs by sequential
transduction of two transcription factors. (B–G) The morphological change of human fibroblasts (HF1) during reprogramming. (B) The morphology of
mock-infected HF1 in neural induction medium. (C) The emergence of cell cluster after 10 days of POU5F1(OCT4) infection in neural induction medium.
(D) The morphology of POU5F1(OCT4)-infected cells after picking. (E) The morphology of iMNICs after passage. (F) Appearance of iMN spheres in
motor neuron induction medium. (G) The morphology of iMNs on PDL/Laminin-coated plate. (G’) Zoomed image of the square in (G) shows complex
axonal processes. Scale bars, 125 mm in (B–G’). (H) Immunofluorescence images of iMNs (HF1-iMN2) converted from iMNICs after 14 days of MN factor
transduction under sphere culture condition. Addition of LHX3 to iMNICs but not any other MN factors enhanced conversion efficiency to generate
Figure 1 continued on next page
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
3 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

early as day 3, and spindle-shaped cells then formed compact colonies by day 10 (Figure 1C),
whereas mock-infected fibroblasts did not change under the same condition (Figure 1B). From
0.5  104 seeded fibroblasts, we could observe 7 ~ 12 colonies (Supplementary file 3). We picked
colonies individually and plated them in separate wells for clonal culture. The neural progenitor-like
cells grew out gradually from attached colonies (Figure 1D). We found that the number of cells
increased over time in neural induction medium. These cells were passaged and maintained as a
monolayer cell line which we named iMN-intermediate cells (iMNICs) (Figure 1E). We could establish
six iMNIC clones from HF1; HF1-iMNIC2, HF1-iMNIC5, HF1-iMNIC6, HF1-iMNIC7, HF1-iMNIC11
and HF1-iMNIC12 (Figure 1—figure supplement 2A and Supplementary file 3). In order to deter-
mine whether the fibroblasts acquired motor neuronal identity after POU5F1(OCT4)-mediated neural
induction, we analyzed the relative mRNA level of MN specification genes ISL1, HB9, NKX6.1 and
LHX3 (Davis-Dusenbery et al., 2014) in POU5F1(OCT4)-infected cells at day 7, day 14 and three
iMNIC clones (Figure 1—figure supplement 2B). Notably, quantitative reverse transcription poly-
merase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis revealed that only ISL1 was dramatically upregulated after
POU5F1(OCT4) induction (Figure 1—figure supplement 2B). Consistently, immunocytochemistry
also showed that iMNICs robustly express ISL1, whereas other MN markers (HB9, NKX6.1 and LHX3)
or neuronal markers (TUJ1 and MAP2) were not detected (Figure 1—figure supplement 2C). For
further MN induction and characterization of general features of MNs, we selected HF1-iMNIC2
which expressed ISL1 gene most highly (Figure 1—figure supplement 2B).
To induce iMNICs into mature iMNs, we plated iMNICs on PDL/Laminin-coated plate in MN
induction medium containing spinal ventralizing morphogen, sonic hedgehog (SHH) (Ericson et al.,
1996; Jessell, 2000). Most of the cells showed neuronal morphology expressing TUJ1 (>95%), and
nearly all TUJI+ cells co-expressed ISL1 at day 28 (Figure 1—figure supplement 3A). These cells
also expressed mature neuronal marker MAP2 and presynaptic marker synapsin1 (SYN1) (Figure 1—
figure supplement 3B). However, terminal MN marker HB9 expressing cells were very rare in popu-
lation (Figure 1—figure supplement 3C). These data indicate that POU5F1(OCT4) induction poten-
tially contributes to MN induction, but not sufficient for complete reprogramming toward mature
MNs.
Given that iMNICs express endogenous ISL1 gene, we hypothesized that additional transcription
factor involved in MN specification might facilitate the conversion of iMNICs toward bona fide MNs.
We selected six candidate transcription factors including PAX6, NKX6.1, OLIG2, LIM1 and LHX3
(Davis-Dusenbery et al., 2014; Jessell, 2000) and transduced iMNICs with each gene individually
(Figure 1I). Also, we employed sphere culture to optimize the culture condition for MN induction.
When we plated iMNICs on non-coated dishes for sphere culture, the cells formed clusters and
became free-floating iMN spheres in MN induction medium (Figure 1F). The iMN spheres were sub-
sequently transferred onto PDL/Laminin-coated dishes for neuronal maturation, then MN-like cells
outgrew from the spheres (Figure 1G). We could observe robust axon projections and dendritic
arborizations, suggesting the neuronal maturation (Figure 1G’). Remarkably, the converted neurons
exclusively expressed TUJ1 and HB9 only after LHX3 induction, but no HB9+ cells were observed in
other transcription factor infected cells (Figure 1H). More than 96% of iMNs co-expressed TUJ1 and
Figure 1 continued
HB9+TUJ1+ iMNs. The cells were co-stained with HB9 (red) and TUJ1 (green), and the nuclei were counterstained with DAPI. Scale bars, 125 mm. (I–J)
Conversion efficiency determined by quantification of TUJ1+ cells (I) and HB9+TUJ1+ cells (J) depending on transduced MN factor and culture
condition. Data are presented as mean ± SD (n = 3), and represent triplicate experimental replicates. Related data can be found in Figure 1—figure
supplements 1–6.
The online version of this article includes the following source data and figure supplement(s) for figure 1:
Source data 1. Quantification of TUJ1+/HB9+TUJ1+ iMNs depending on TF, qRT-PCR analysis of MN genes, and qRT-PCT analysis of endogenous
expression of POU5F1, NANOG, and SOX2.
Figure supplement 1. Validation of parental human fibroblasts.
Figure supplement 2. Establishment of iMNIC clones and upregulation of ISL1 expression after POU5F1(OCT4) induction.
Figure supplement 3. Characterization of iMNs converted by POU5F1(OCT4) alone.
Figure supplement 4. Screening transcription factor and optimization of culture condition for generating iMNs from iMNIC clones.
Figure supplement 5. iMNICs possess self-renewal capacity and do not transit neither pluripotent state nor neural progenitor state.
Figure supplement 6. Primary induction of POU5F1(OCT4) outperforms simultaneous induction of POU5F1(OCT4) and LHX3.
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
4 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

HB9 in sphere culture, while the efficiency was considerably lower in adherent culture (Figure 1H–J
and Figure 1—figure supplement 4A). We applied this to other iMNIC clones, and they were con-
verted into HB9+TUJ1+ iMNs with conversion efficiency of 70 ~ 90% (Figure 1—figure supplement
4B and Supplementary file 4). Addition of other transcription factors rather impeded neuronal mor-
phology, especially PAX6 and OLIG2 known to contribute to the early stage of MN specification
even decreased the efficiency of TUJ1+ cells (Figure 1I and Figure 1—figure supplement 4A).
These results demonstrate that POU5F1(OCT4) and LHX3 with our defined culture condition are suf-
ficient to convert cell fate of human fibroblasts into mature iMNs with high purity.
Direct conversion through self-renewing iMN-intermediate cells
(iMNICs) enables large production of iMNs
As described above, iMNICs exhibited neural progenitor-like morphology and proliferative capacity.
It has been reported that POU5F1(OCT4) can directly convert somatic cells into tripotent neural pro-
genitors (Mitchell et al., 2014b). Considering previous report, we evaluated cellular identity of
iMNICs whether the cells are similar to neural progenitors. Immunocytochemistry analysis showed
that none of iMNICs expressed early neuroectoderm markers (SOX1 and PAX6), neural progenitor
markers (SOX2 and NCAM) or MN progenitor marker (OLIG2), and these markers were never
detected during the entire neural induction process (Figure 1—figure supplement 5A). To deter-
mine whether this cell conversion occurred through pluripotent state or neural progenitor state, we
evaluated the activation of endogenous expression of pluripotent genes (POU5F1(OCT4) and
NANOG) and neural progenitor marker (SOX2) after POU5F1(OCT4) induction (Figure 1—figure
supplement 5B). We found that none of these markers were detected in POU5F1(OCT)-induced
cells, iMNICs and iMNs as confirmed by qRT-PCR. This result implies that fibroblasts transit neither
pluripotent state nor neural progenitor state. Although iMNICs were distinct population from neural
progenitors, these cells were highly proliferative cells and capable of being maintained for more
than 13 passages. We examined the self-renewal capacity of iMNICs. We evaluated iMNICs at early
passage (P2) and late passage (P13). Cellular morphology was very similar at both early and late pas-
sages (Figure 1—figure supplement 5C). The cells sustained the proliferation rate presenting the
mean doubling times (mDT) of 28.4 hr at P2 and 29.4 hr at P13, respectively (Figure 1—figure sup-
plement 5D). In addition, we confirmed that >97% of iMNICs expressed proliferative cell marker
KI67 (Figure 1—figure supplement 5E and F). To verify the continuous capacity of iMNICs to con-
vert into iMNs over multiple passages, we conducted iMN induction using iMNICs at P2 and P13.
iMNICs were successfully converted into mature iMNs at both early and late passage (Figure 1—fig-
ure supplement 5G). Furthermore, to determine whether generation of iMNICs by initial induction
of POU5F1(OCT4) prior to LHX3 induction is necessary, we compared the cellular identity of iMNICs
emerged after induction of POU5F1(OCT4) alone and co-induction of POU5F1(OCT4) and LHX3.
When we infected fibroblasts with POU5F1(OCT4) and LHX3 simultaneously, the majority of infected
cells died and iMNIC colonies were not stably maintained for multiple passages after picking (up to
5 passages) (Figure 1—figure supplement 6A). Proliferation rate and ISL1 gene expression were
also decreased in POU5F1(OCT4)/LHX3 induced iMNICs compared to POU5F1(OCT4)-induced
iMNICs (Figure 1—figure supplement 6B and C). In addition, induction of POU5F1(OCT4) alone
showed higher efficiency in the number of iMNIC colonies (Figure 1—figure supplement 6D). These
data indicate that the sequential induction of two transcription factors is essential for generating
self-renewing iMNICs more efficiently. Together, these results demonstrate that iMNICs generated
by POU5F1(OCT4) are expandable through self-renewing intermediate state which is distinct from
neural progenitor state. Therefore, our method can facilitate the generation of iMNs on large-scale.
Characterization of iMNs
To monitor the cell fate conversion process in live culture and further characterization of iMNs, we
employed reporter system using a lentivirus expressing the green fluorescent protein gene (GFP)
under the control of the HB9 promoter (HB9:GFP) (Marchetto et al., 2008; Toli et al., 2015). After
we transfected iMNICs with LHX3 together with HB9:GFP reporter lentivirus, GFP-positive cells
gradually emerged from the cell clusters under SHH stimulation (Figure 2A). HB9:GFP+ iMNs were
capable of extending long projections (Figure 2A). To identify whether these GFP+ iMNs possess
the typical characteristics of MNs, we evaluated MN marker expression. Immunocytochemistry
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
5 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

Relative gene expression 
C
100
1
10
1,000
100,000
10,000
 SV2 HB9:GFP DAPI
 SYN1 HB9:GFP DAPI
LIM1
LHX3
NKX6.1
HB9
ISL1
D
HB9 HB9:GFP
ISLT1 HB9:GFP
MAP2 HB9:GFP
TUJ1 HB9:GFP
CHAT HB9:GFP
NKX6.1 HB9:GFP
HB9:GFP
+ SHH Day3
+ SHH Day5
+ SHH Day7
- SHH 
iMN Spheres
iMN 
A
Phase
B
H9-MNs
iMNs
E
Figure 2. iMNs exhibits typical MN characteristics. (A) The emergence of HB9:GFP+ cells depending on SHH stimulation during the MN induction. The
morphologies of the cells at day 3, 5 and 7 are shown in phase contrast. Scale bars, 125 mm. (B) Immunofluorescence images of HB9:GFP+ iMNs co-
expressing MN specific markers (NKX6.1, TUJ1, MAP2, ISLT1, HB9 and CHAT). Scale bars, 125 mm. (C) MN genes (LIM1, LHX3, NKX6.1, HB9, and ISL1)
are upregulated in iMNs relative to fibroblasts as analyzed by qRT-PCR. MNs derived from H9 ESC (H9-MNs) are used as control. Graphs are presented
Figure 2 continued on next page
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
6 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

analysis showed that HB9:GFP+ iMNs co-expressed MN markers including NKX6.1, ISL1, HB9 and
CHAT as well as neuronal markers, TUJ1 and MAP2 (Figure 2B). In contrast, tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH)-positive dopaminergic neurons were rare in population (<0.6%) (Figure 2—figure supplement
1A), and GFAP-positive astrocytes were not detected (Figure 2—figure supplement 1B), suggest-
ing that our reprogramming method is specific to MN lineage rather than other neuronal subtypes
or neural progenitors. Consistent with the immunocytochemistry results, the endogenous mRNA lev-
els of MN marker genes including LIM1, LHX3, NKX6.1, HB9 and ISL1 were upregulated in iMNs rel-
ative to fibroblasts (Figure 2C). Furthermore, we could observe the synaptic activities of HB9:GFP+
neurites expressing presynaptic markers, SYN1 and synaptic vesicle protein 2 (SV2) (Figure 2D,E
and Figure 1—figure supplement 5H). We next confirmed the transgene silencing in iMNs. Exoge-
nous expression of transgenes POU5F1(OCT4) and LHX3 are dramatically decreased in iMNs, as
examined by qRT-PCR (Figure 2—figure supplement 1C and D). Together, these results demon-
strate that iMNs exhibit the typical characteristics of MNs.
iMNs exhibit electrophysiological properties
To determine whether iMNs are fully mature, we identified electrophysiological properties of iMNs
by conducting whole-cell patch clamp recording. 29 out of 48 tested cells (60.42%) exhibited at least
one action potential (AP) firing, while 19 cells (39.58%) were unresponsive to depolarizing current
injection (Figure 3—figure supplement 1A). Among the cells showing AP (29 cells), about half of
the cells (14 cells) generated a multiple number of AP firings and 8 out of 14 cells also showed spon-
taneous firing at resting membrane potential (Figure 3—figure supplement 1A). Those cells dis-
playing multiple APs were further grouped based on the presence of spontaneous firing (group 1 vs.
group 2). We first tested passive properties of neuronal membrane by injecting hyperpolarizing cur-
rent. Both resting membrane potential and input resistance were comparable between group 1 and
group 2 (Figure 3A–D). Next, we compared the active properties of iMNs between the two groups
by injecting depolarizing current (Figure 3E). Likewise, there were no significant differences in AP
threshold, frequency, amplitude, half-width and neuronal excitability between the two groups
(Figure 3F–J), suggesting that these cells are functionally matured regardless of spontaneous firing
at resting membrane potential. In voltage clamp mode, depolarizing voltage steps also induced fast
inward currents. These currents were completely blocked by the bath-application of tetrodotoxin
(TTX). We confirmed that these inward currents were elicited by TTX-sensitive voltage-gated sodium
channels (Figure 3K–M). Together, these data indicate that iMNs are electrophysiologically mature.
iMNs form neuromuscular junctions with myotubes
To evaluate the in vitro functionality of iMNs, we investigated whether iMNs possess the ability to
form neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) with muscles, which is the key feature of spinal MNs. We differ-
entiated mouse myoblasts C2C12 into multinucleated myotubes and co-cultured with iMNs. Exten-
sive axons of HB9:GFP+ iMNs projected along the myotubes (Figure 4A). Noticeably, SV2-positive
vesicles were seen in HB9:GFP+ iMNs and enriched at NMJs showing puncta-like structures
(Figure 4A). At the sites of contacts with myotubes, clusters of postsynaptic acetylcholine receptors
(AChR) on the surface of myotubes were detected by immunocytochemistry with AChR antibody
(Figure 4B) and a-bungarotoxin conjugated with Alexa 555 (a-BTX) (Figure 4C). The formation of
NMJs was also observed with iMNs generated from iMNICs at late passage (Figure 1—figure sup-
plement 5I). Importantly, we could observe the rhythmic contraction of myotubes when co-cultured
with iMNs. The contractions were blocked by antagonist of nicotinic AChR, curare, indicating that
the myotubes contract depending on the activities of iMNs (Video 1). These data demonstrate that
Figure 2 continued
with fold change after normalization by GAPDH. Data are presented as mean ± SD, and represent experimental replicates (n = 3). (D-E)
Immunofluorescence images of HB9:GFP+ iMNs stained with presynaptic markers, SYN1 (D) and SV2 (E). Zoomed images of the square in the figures
show punctate patterns of synaptic terminals. Scale bars, 125 mm. Related data can be found in Figure 2—figure supplement 1.
The online version of this article includes the following source data and figure supplement(s) for figure 2:
Source data 1. qRT-PCR analysis of MN gene expressions in iMNs.
Figure supplement 1. Characterization of iMNs.
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
7 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

mature iMNs exhibit mature functionality such as the formation of NMJs. To evaluate our iMN direct
conversion method, we generated iMNICs and iMNs from additional human fibroblast line, HF2 (Fig-
ure 4—figure supplement 1A). HF2-derived iMNs (HF2-iMNs) showed typical characteristics of
MNs and functions, such as synaptic activities and NMJ formation (Figure 4—figure supplement
1B–D). We could establish five iMNIC clones from HF2; HF2-iMNIC1, HF2-iMNIC2, HF2-iMNIC4,
HF2-iMNIC6 and HF2-iMNIC8) (Figure 4—figure supplement 1E). These iMNIC clones highly
expressed ISL1gene, and the cells were converted into HB9+iMNs after MN induction (Figure 4—
figure supplement 1F and Figure 4—figure supplement 1G). Taken together, these results confirm
that iMN conversion method is applicable to other lines of human adult fibroblasts.
B
A
D
E
C
F
I
H
G
Spontaneous APs
(Group 1)
No spontaneous APs
(Group 2)
Resting membrane potential (mV)
-125
-100
-75
-50
-25
0
G1
G2
Membrane potential (mV)
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
-150
-100
-50
0
Current injection (pA)
Group 2
Group 1
Input resistance (MΩ)
0
400
800
1200
G1
G2
Group 1
Group 2
AP threshold (mV)
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
G1
G2
AP frequency (Hz)
0
4
8
12
G1
G2
AP amplitude (mV)
0
40
80
120
G1
G2
AP half-width (ms)
0
5
10
15
20
25
G1
G2
J
AP frequency (Hz)
0
5
10
15
0
50
100
150
Current injection (pA)
200
Group 2
Group 1
150 ms
50 mV
25 mV
150 ms
K
L
Current (nA)
-3
-2
-1
0
-60
-40
Membrane potential (mV)
-20
Na+ current
+TTX
M
+TTX
Na+ current
50 ms
2 nA
1 ms
2 nA
Figure 3. Electrophysiological properties of iMNs. (A) Representative recording traces of iMNs by hyperpolarizing current injection under current
clamp-mode. (B) Resting membrane potential (Group1,  73.29 ± 2.65 mV, n = 8; Group2,  61.57 ± 7.04 mV, n = 6; unpaired t-test, t12 = 1.7330,
p=0.1086). (C) Current (I) - voltage (V) relationship in iMNs by hyperpolarizing current step (repeated measures two-way ANOVA, n = 8 for Group1,
n = 6 for Group 2; group effect, F1, 12 = 0.5074, p=0.4899; interaction, F3, 36 = 0.6432, p=0.5923). (D) Input resistance of iMNs (Group1, 692.89 ± 60.60
MW, n = 8; Group2 = 771.43 ± 39.09 MW, n = 6; unpaired t-test, t12 = 1.0050, p=0.3349). (E) Representative recording traces of iMNs by depolarizing
current injection under current clamp-mode. (F) AP threshold (Group1,  46.76 ± 1.58 mV, n = 8; Group2,  47.30 ± 1.94 mV, n = 6; unpaired t-test,
t12 = 0.2187, p=0.8305). (G) AP frequency (Group1, 7.50 ± 0.71 Hz, n = 8; Group2, 5.50 ± 0.99 Hz, n = 6; unpaired t-test, t12 = 1.6920, p=0.1165). (H) AP
amplitude (Group1, 69.81 ± 6.97 mV, n = 8; Group2, 70.55 ± 3.91 mV, n = 6; unpaired t-test, t12 = 0.0840, p=0.9345). (I) AP half-width (Group1,
15.30 ± 1.25 ms, n = 8; Group2 = 11.53 ± 2.09 ms, n = 6; unpaired t-test, t12 = 1.6390, p=0.1271). (J) Neuronal excitability of iMNs (repeated measures
two-way ANOVA, n = 8 for Group1, n = 6 for Group 2; group effect, F1, 12 = 2.9410, p=0.1120; interaction, F4, 48 = 0.0774, p=0.9888). (K–L)
Representative TTX-sensitive sodium currents (K) of iMNs (TTX, 1 mM). (L) Zoomed-in view of TTX-sensitive sodium currents shown in (K). (M) Averaged
current (I)/voltage (V) curve of sodium currents (n = 11). Mean ± SEM is used for all the data described in the figure. Related data can be found in
Figure 3—figure supplement 1.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 3:
Figure supplement 1. Physiological properties of iMNs.
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
8 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

Global transcriptional profiles of
iMNICs and iMNs by RNA-
sequencing
To examine the identity of iMNICs and iMNs, we
performed RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis
to compare global gene expression profiles of
iMNICs and iMNs to that of parental fibroblasts
(HF1 and HF2), fetal NPCs (NPC) (Kim et al.,
2009a),
wild
type
motor
neurons
(wtMNs)
derived
from
human
ESC
(wtMN-
1) (Amoroso et al., 2013) and iPSC (wtMN-2)
(Ng et al., 2015) and fetal spinal cord (Fetal-SC)
(Kumamaru et al., 2018). Heatmap analysis
demonstrated that the global gene expression
patterns of iMNICs and iMNs were similar to
wtMNs, but distinct from fibroblasts and fetal
NPCs (Figure 5A). The hierarchical clustering
and principal component analysis (PCA) showed
that iMNICs, iMNs and wtMNs are tightly corre-
lated, whereas distinct from NSCs (Figure 5B
and C). The 1st principal component (PC1)
α-BTX 
SV2
 AChR
HB9:GFP 
HB9:GFP 
HB9:GFP 
Merge
MHC
MHC
HB9:GFP α-BTX
HB9:GFP SV2 MHC
HB9:GFP AChR MHC
Merge
Merge
A
B
C
iMNs + Myotube
Figure 4. iMNs form neuromuscular junctions with myotubes. (A–C) Representative immunofluorescent analysis of neuromuscular junctions (NMJs)
formed between HB9:GFP+ iMNs and C2C12 myotubes in co-culture. Presynaptic axons and post-synaptic acetylcholine receptor (AChR) are stained
with antibodies against SV2 (A) and AChR (B), and the multinucleated myotubes are stained with myosin heavy chain (MHC). (C) NMJs are labeled with
a-bungarotoxin conjugated with Alexa 555. Zoomed images of the square in (C) show the NMJs, indicated by white arrows. Scale bars, 75 mm. Related
data can be found in Figure 4—figure supplement 1.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 4:
Figure supplement 1. Generation of iMNs from additional human fibroblasts (HF2).
Video 1. Contraction of C2C12 myotubes co-cultured
with iMNs. C2C12 myotubes started rhythmic
contraction after co-culture with iMN for 3 weeks. To
block the acetylcholine receptor on the myotubes
specifically, 100 mM curare (final concentration) was
added to the culture.
https://elifesciences.org/articles/52069#video1
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
9 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

2
4
6
0
10
12
14
8
18
20
16
HF1-iMNs
HF2-iMNs
HF1-iMNICs
HF2-iMNICs
HF1
HF2
 NPCs
wtMN-2
wtMN-1
A
D
HF1-iMNs
HOXD9
HOXA9
HOXC4
HOXC6
HOXC8
HOXC9
SOX2
OLIG2
PAX6
SOX1
HB9
ISL1
HF1-iMNICs
NPCs
HOXD9
NKX6.1
MAP2
HOXA9
HOXC4
HOXC6
HOXC8
HOXC9
HB9
ISL1
CHAT
TUJ1
HF2-iMNs
wtMN-1
HF2-iMNICs
NPCs
HF2-iMNICs
Fetal-SC
HOXD9
HOXA9
HOXC4
HOXC6
HOXC8
HOXC9
HB9
ISL1
HF1-iMNICs
Fetal-SC
wtMN-1
B
HF1-iMNs
HF2-iMNs
HF1-iMNICs
HF2-iMNICs
HF1
HF2
NPCs
wtMN-2
wtMN-1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
2nd Principal component (26%)
1st Principal component (39%)
-20
0
20
40
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
HF1-iMNICs
HF2-iMNICs
HF1-iMNs
HF2-iMNs
HF1
HF2
NPCs
wtMN-1
wtMN-2
C
E
3
5
7
0
11
13
9
17
15
HOXC8
HOXA7
HOXC6
HOXC5
HOXA9
HOXC9
HOXC4
1
10
1,000
HF1-iMNs
HF1-iMNICs
NPCs
H9- MNs
Relative gene expression 
G
HOX genes
HOXC10
HOXC9
HOXC8
HOXC6
HOXC5
HOXA13
HOXA10
HOXD10
HOXD9
HOXD8
HOXC13
HOXD3
HOXD4
HOXD1
HOXC12
HOXC11
HOXD11
HOXA11
HOXA7
HOXA9
HOXC4
HOXD12
HOXD13
4
8
12
16
4
8
12
16
4
8
12
16
4
8
12
16
4
8
12
16
4
8
12
16
4
8
12
16
4
8
12
16
4
8
12
16
4
8
12
16
4
8
12
16
4
8
12
16
HOXD9
HOXA9
HOXC4
HOXC6
HOXC8
HOXC9
HB9
ISL1
HOXD9
HOXA9
HOXC4
HOXC6
HOXC8
HOXC9
SOX2
OLIG2
PAX6
SOX1
ISL1
HB9
HOXD9
HOXA9
HOXC4
HOXC6
HOXC8
HOXC9
MAP2
HB9
ISL1
CHAT
TUJ1
NKX6.1
100
0.1
0.01
Thoracic
Cervical
2
4
6
0
10
12
14
8
18
20
16
Fibroblasts genes
SNAI1
SNAI2
COL1A1
COL5A1
3
17
10
5
14
1
2
2
1
0
3
8
9
8
3
8
7
4
3
5
HF1-iMNs
HF2-iMNs
HF1-iMNICs
HF2-iMNICs
HF1
HF2
 NPCs
wtMN-1
2
9
2
8
19
15
10
5
2
8
5
8
ISL1
NEFM
NEFL
SNAP25
MAP2
NKX6.1
HB9
STMN2
DCX
TUBB3
1
0
0
0
0
2
8
5
6
6
1
0
0
0
0
4
9
4
4
4
0
0
1
9
2
8
9
1
2
10
6
7
3
3
6
7
13
1
4
12
0
9
2
2
5
7
13
1
2
11
4
9
8
12
11
8
13
12
13
12
9
9
4
14
16
11
13
15
16
13
3
9
9
13
12
9
13
13
13
13
MN genes
7
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
1
1
1
4
3
2
3
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
2
3
3
4
2
2
5
2
6
5
4
7
3
3
3
1
4
2
3
1
1
1
2
2
9
7
9
2
3
8
11
8
9
10
2
4
2
2
5
11
10
11
9
7
7
2
3
2
3
2
3
8
6
8
2
4
7
11
11
10
9
6
2
2
2
6
10
11
10
9
6
5
6
5
8
3
2
9
6
11
12
9
6
3
2
3
3
8
8
9
6
5
5
HF1-iMNs
HF1-iMNICs
HF1
 NPCs
wtMN-1
F
PAX6
SOX1
OLIG2
SOX2
ASCL1
EMX2
FABP7
3
0
0
0
0
3
1
14
7
6
16
10
10
9
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
1
0
8
8
6
5
1
7
0
3
0
0
1
6
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
1
0
3
0
0
0
0
1
NPC genes
Figure 5. Global gene expression profiles of iMNICs and iMNs. (A) Heatmap analysis of global gene expression profiles in HF-1, HF-2, NPCs, HF1-
iMNICs, HF2-iMNICs, HF1-iMNs, HF2-iMNs, wtMN-1 and wtMN-2 as determined by RNA-seq. The color bar codifies the gene expression in log2 scale.
Red indicates upregulated genes and blue indicates downregulated genes. (B) Hierarchical clustering of HF2, HF1, NPCs, HF2-iMNICs, HF1-iMNICs,
wtMN-2, wrMN-1, HF2-iMNs and HF1-iMNs. (C) PCA of global gene expression in HF1, HF2, HF1-iMNICs, HF2-iMNICs, HF1-iMNs, HF2-iMNs, NPCs,
Figure 5 continued on next page
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
10 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

captures 39% of the gene expression variability and the 2nd principal component (PC2) captures
26% of the variability. Moreover, pairwise scatter plots showed high similarity between iMNICs vs
fetal spinal cord and iMNs vs wtMNs, especially in HOX genes (HOXC4, HOXC6, HOXC8, HOXC9,
HOXA9 and HOXD9) and MN-enriched genes (HB9, ISL1, NKX6.1, TUJ1, MAP2 and CHAT)
(Figure 5D). In contrast, we could observe low similarity between iMNICs vs NPC and parental fibro-
blasts vs iMNICs/iMNs, especially NPC marker genes (SOX2, OLIG2, PAX6 and SOX1) and fibroblast
genes (COL5A1 and COL1A1) (Figure 5D and Figure 5—figure supplement 1A). Furthermore, we
could observe high level of similarity in HOX gene clusters and MN genes in our iMNICs and iMNs
compared to wtMNs, which were not expressed in NPCs (Figure 5E,F and Figure 5—figure supple-
ment 1B). In addition, iMNICs and iMNs expressed similar level of HOXC clusters and ISL1 with
wtMN-1, but SOX2 expression was not detected in iMNICs and iMNs (Figure 5—figure supplement
1D). In contrast, the expression of NPC genes (SOX2, PAX6, OLIG2, ASCL1, FABP7 and EMX), fibro-
blast-specific genes (COL1A1, COL5A1, SNA1 and SNAI2) and pluripotent genes (NANOG, POU5F1
(OCT4) and TDGF1) were not detectable in iMNICs and iMNs (Figure 5F and Figure 5—figure sup-
plement 1C). To validate the RNA-sequencing data, we conducted qPCR to analyze mRNA expres-
sion of HOX genes in our iMNICs and iMNs. Consistent with RNA-sequencing data, cervical and
thoracic spinal cord specific genes (HOX4-9) were upregulated in iMNICs and iMNs as confirmed by
qRT-PCR (Figure 5G). Together, these results indicate that iMNs generated from two fibroblast lines
acquired motor neuronal identity and showed a high degree of similarity with wtMNs or fetal spinal
cord tissues.
Therapeutic potential of iMNs in spinal cord injury (SCI) model in vivo
In order to examine the in vivo functionality and therapeutic effects of iMNs, we transplanted HB9:
GFP+ iMNs into adult rat SCI models (Figure 6A). We induced compressive damage to thoracic ver-
tebrae 9 (T9) of the spinal cord and injected 1  106 iMNs into the upper (T8) and lower (T10) verte-
brate after 1 week of injury. We could observe the engraftment of transplanted HB9:GFP+ iMNs in
the spinal cord (Figure 6B). To evaluate the cellular features of iMNs in vivo, the spinal cord tissue
was immunostained with neuronal marker (TUJ1) and oligodendrocyte marker (MBP). Most of the
GFP+ cells co-expressed TUJ1 (Figure 6C–E) and were surrounded by host myelinating MBP+ oligo-
dendrocytes (Figure 6F–H). To confirm the tissue recovery of the injury site, we conducted hematox-
ylin and eosin (H and E) staining of sagittal sections of the spinal cord after 8 weeks of
transplantation to detect the cavity size. Transplanted tissue show less cavity of injured site com-
pared to control (Figure 6I and J). Next, we evaluated the motor function recovery of the hind limbs
by measuring Basso–Beattie–Bresnahan (BBB) scores for 8 weeks in rat SCI models that were treated
either with PBS (control) (n = 6) or with iMNs transplantation (n = 10). iMN-transplanted rats were
improved in BBB scores from week 4 that persisted steadily through week showing significant
improvement in locomotor recovery (Figure 6K,L and Video 2). To assess the risk of tumor forma-
tion, iMNICs and iMNs were subcutaneously transplanted into immune-deficient nude mice and no
tumors were observed for 12 months of experiment period (n = 4) (Figure 6—figure supplement
1A). These results showed that iMN transplantation significantly improved functional recovery after
SCI.
Figure 5 continued
wtMN-1 and wtMN-2. (D) Pairwise scatter plots of global gene expression of Fetal-SC vs HF1-iMNICs/HF2-iMNICs, wtMN-1 vs HF1-iMNs/HF2-iMNs and
NPCs vs HF1-iMNICs/HF2-iMNICs. The HOX genes (HOXC4, HOXC6, HOXC8, HOXC9, HOXA9 and HOXD9), MN genes (HB9, ISL1, NKX6.1 MAP2,
TUJ1 and CHAT), fibroblast genes (COL5A1 and COL1A1) and NPC genes (SOX2, OLIG2, PAX6 and SOX1) are highlighted with yellow circles. The
black lines indicate the boundaries of 4-fold changes in log2 scale. (E and F) Heatmap analysis of (E) HOX genes, (F) MN genes, NPC genes and
fibroblast genes in HF1, HF2, NPCs, HF1-iMNICs, HF2-iMNICs, HF1-iMNs, HF2-iMNs and wtMN-1. The color bar codifies the gene expression in log2
scale. Red indicates upregulated genes and blue indicates downregulated genes. (G) qRT-PCR analysis of mRNA expression level for cervical HOX
genes (HOXC4, HOXC5, HOXC6, HOXA7 and HOXC8) and thoracic HOX genes (HOXA9 and HOXC9) in HF1-iMNINs, HF1-iMNs, H9-MNs and NPCs.
Bars represent fold changes relative to fibroblasts after normalization to GAPDH. Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 3). Related data can be found
in Figure 5—figure supplement 1.
The online version of this article includes the following source data and figure supplement(s) for figure 5:
Source data 1. qRT-PCR analysis of cervical and thoracic HOX genes.
Figure supplement 1. RNA-seq analysis of iMNICs and iMNs.
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
11 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

K
Control
iMN
Control
iMN
Weeks after transplantation 
BBB Score
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
*
*
iMN spheres
6
10
13
I
J
Control
iMN
I’
I’’
J’
J’’
I’
I’’
J’
J’’
*
*
SCI
BBB Scoring
iMN Transplantation 
Analysis
A
B
C
D
E
F
HB9:GFP 
G
*
*
*
*
HB9:GFP MBP
HB9:GFP TUJ1
MBP
TUJ1
HB9:GFP 
H
L
HB9:GFP
Week -1
Week 8
Week 0
Week 1
B’
B’
5
9
12
3
8
4
2
7
11
1
0
Figure 6. Therapeutic effects of iMNs in rat spinal cord injury model in vivo. (A) The experimental scheme of in vivo study. (B) Immunofluorescence
image of transplanted iMNs in sagittal section of spinal cord. (B’) Zoomed image presents integration of transplanted cells. Scale bars, 125 mm. (C–E)
Confocal images of iMNs after transplantation. HB9:GFP+ cells co-express neuronal marker, TUJ1 (white arrowheads). (F–H) iMNs are surrounded by
host MBP+ myelinating cells forming ensheathment (white arrowheads). Scale bars, 30 mm. (I-J. H and E staining analysis of spinal cords after 8 weeks of
Figure 6 continued on next page
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
12 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

Discussion
In this study, we established an advanced direct conversion strategy to generate induced motor neu-
rons (iMNs) from human fibroblasts in large-scale with high purity, thereby providing a cell source
for the treatment of spinal cord injury (SCI). Previously, we succeeded in generating oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells (OPCs) from somatic cells by POU5F1(OCT4) (Kim et al., 2015). In line with this, we
hypothesized that combination of POU5F1(OCT4) and defined supplements may convert cell fate
toward motor neurons (MNs) which is developmentally derived from the same origin with OPCs,
pMN progenitors of the ventral spinal cord (Ravanelli and Appel, 2015). POU5F1(OCT4) could effi-
ciently generate TUJ1-positive neuronal cells under MN induction conditions, however, most of the
cells could not reach to HB9 positive mature MNs. Nonetheless, we found that endogenous expres-
sion of ISL1, an important transcription factor for MN specification (Liang et al., 2011), was activated
in fibroblasts after POU5F1(OCT4) induction under our defined culture condition. Based on this
observation, we assumed that an additional transcription factor is required for complete iMN conver-
sion. By screening the MN specification factors, we found that inclusion of LHX3 significantly
increased the reprogramming efficiency of HB9 positive iMNs. This result is consistent with the previ-
ous report that the LIM complex composed of ISL1 and LHX3 specify spinal MNs by inducing MN
gene HB9 in development (Lee et al., 2012). To our knowledge, this is the first time showing that
POU5F1(OCT4) can initiate cellular reprogramming toward MN lineage by activating ISL1. This is
correlated with previous reports that LIM homeodomain transcription factor ISL1 has been detected
as POU5F1(OCT4) targets in human pluripotent cells (Boyer et al., 2005; Jung et al., 2010).
This result has an important implication on how we minimized the transcription factors for gener-
ating iMNs. Previously, iMNs were generated by either eight transcription factors (ASCL1, BRN2,
MYT1L, LHX3, HB9, ISL1, NGN2, and NEUROD1) (Son et al., 2011) or four transcription factors
(NGN2, SOX11, ISL1, and LHX3) (Liu et al., 2016). In ; contrast to previous methods, we identified
the minimal two transcription factors, POU5F1(OCT4) and LHX3, for generating iMNs, so that our
iMNs would be safer than multiple transcription factors-derived iMNs for therapeutic applications in
terms of lower chance of viral integrations (Kim et al., 2009b). Moreover, previous studies have not
verified the in vivo functionality or therapeutic potential of human iMNs.
In addition, RNA-sequencing analysis revealed that our iMNs exhibited transcriptional profiles of
motor neuronal identity similar with wtMNs. Importantly, iMNICs and iMNs expressed spinal cord
specific HOX5-9 gene clusters, whereas NPC genes were not detected in these cells. The ability to
generate autologous iMNs with motor neuronal identity can facilitate disease modeling and cell-
based therapy for MN diseases or spinal cord disorders. A critical prerequisite for achieving these
goals is obtaining the pure population of subtype-specific neurons in high number. However, previ-
ous methods have not been feasible since directly converted neurons are terminally differentiated
cells that are not scalable. This limitation could be overcome by generating expandable neural pro-
genitors; however, neural progenitors could produce a mixture of heterogeneous neurons
(Lujan et al., 2012; Ring et al., 2012; Thier et al., 2012). Herein, sequential introduction of two
transcription factors enabled the large production of pure iMNs. We could obtain self-renewing cell
line iMNICs after POU5F1(OCT4) induction by clonal reprogramming method as we have demon-
strated previously in generating OPCs from fibroblasts (Kim et al., 2015). iMNICs were proliferative,
expandable and retained conversion capacity to mature iMNs for long-term culture (>13 passages);
however, they were distinct from neural progenitors. Therefore, our method is ‘direct conversion’
rather than indirect conversion or redifferentiation through pluripotent state or neural progenitor
state.
Figure 6 continued
transplantation (I; Control, J; iMN-transplanted) (I,J; Scale bars, 400 mm, I’,I’’,J’,J’’; Scale bars, 125 mm). (K) The position of hindlimbs in control rat and
iMN-transplanted rat after 8 weeks of transplantation. (L) BBB score evaluation of hindlimbs during 8 weeks after transplantation. Data are presented as
mean ± SD, and represent experimental replicates (Control; n = 6, iMN sphere; n = 9, iMN; n = 10). *p<0.05, one-way ANOVA. Related data can be
found in Figure 6—figure supplement 1.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 6:
Figure supplement 1. Tumor formation analysis of iMNICs and iMNs in vivo.
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
13 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

Previously, Mitchell et al. generated iNPC
from POU5F1(OCT4)-induced fibroblasts by cul-
turing the cells in reprogramming media (RM) for
8 days before inducing in classical NPC media
(Mitchell et al., 2014a; Mitchell et al., 2014b).
They reported that RM step is essential to induce
SOX2+ NPCs after POU5F1(OCT4) induction. In
contrast, SOX2 was not activated in POU5F1
(OCT4)-infected
cells
and
failed
to
generate
iNPCs when cultured directly in NPC media
(Mitchell et al., 2014a). Consistent with previous
report by Mitchell et al., our iMNICs which were
generated without RM step did not express neu-
ral progenitor marker (Mitchell et al., 2014a;
Mitchell et al., 2014b). This finding indicates
that extracellular environment and timing for
appropriate stimuli are critical for cell identifica-
tion of POU5F1(OCT4)-induced cells.
Several studies have reported that transplanta-
tion of MNs or MN precursors differentiated from
pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) showed functional
benefits to injured spinal cord (Rossi et al., 2010;
Wyatt et al., 2011). However, translation of these cells to the clinic is limited due to the challenges
including differentiation efficiency, scalability, purity, and especially tumorigenecity from undifferen-
tiated cells (Nori et al., 2015). Moreover, transplantation of MN precursors remain poorly defined
because of stem cell heterogeneity (Trawczynski et al., 2019). In this study, we could obtain pure
iMNs in large number and found that hindlimb functional recovery depends on maturity and purity
of iMNs. When we transplanted selected HB9+ mature iMNs, BBB score was higher compared to
transplanting iMN spheres. We also observed that our iMNs exhibited integration properties when
transplanted into injured spinal cord. Transplanted HB9+ iMNs still expressed neuronal markers and
interacted with host neural cells such as oligodendrocytes in vivo. We could observe ensheathment
by myelinating host oligodendrocytes surrounding our iMNs. Notably, transplantation of iMNs con-
tributed histological and functional recovery in SCI model without tumor formation, and this is the
first report demonstrating the therapeutic effects of human iMNs in vivo.
In conclusion, this proof-of-concept study shows that our functional iMNs can be employed to
cell-based therapy as an autologous cell source. iMNs possessed spinal cord motor neuronal identity
and exhibit hallmarks of spinal MNs such as neuromuscular junction formation capacity and electro-
physiological properties in vitro. Importantly, transplantation of iMNs improved locomotor function
in rodent SCI model without tumor formation. Although further investigation on mechanism respon-
sible for cell fate conversion may be needed, our strategy is a safer and simpler methodology that
may provide new insights to develop personalized stem cell therapy and drug screening for MN dis-
eases or spinal cord disorders.
Materials and methods
Key resources table
Reagent type
(species) or
resource
Designation
Source or
reference
Identifiers
Additional
information
Cell line
(Homo sapiens)
H9
WiCell
Cat.# WA09
RRID:CVCL_9773
Control
Cell line
(Homo sapiens)
NPCs
DOI: 10.1038/
nature08436,
Kim et al., 2009a
Control
Continued on next page
Video 2. Functional recovery after iMN transplantation
in rat SCI model. Transplantation of iMNs facilitated
the recovery of hindlimb motor functions after 8 weeks
in rat SCI model. PBS injected control group exhibited
no hindlimb movement.
https://elifesciences.org/articles/52069#video2
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
14 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

Continued
Reagent type
(species) or
resource
Designation
Source or
reference
Identifiers
Additional
information
Cell line
(Homo sapiens)
HF1 (Female)
DOI: 10.4172/2157-
7633.1000336
Singhal et al., 2016
Parental cells
Cell line
(Homo sapiens)
HF2 (Male)
DOI: 10.4172/2157-
7633.1000336.
Singhal et al., 2016
Parental cells
Antibody
Anti-HB9
(Mouse
Monoclonal)
DSHB
Cat.# 81.5C10
RRID:AB_2145209
ICC(1:100)
Antibody
Anti-ISLT1/2
(Mouse
Monoclonal)
DSHB
Cat.# 39.4D5
RRID:AB_2314683
ICC(1:300)
Antibody
Anti-SV2
(Mouse
Monoclonal)
DSHB
Cat.# SV2
RRID:AB_2315387
ICC(1:100)
Antibody
Anti-beta III
Tubulin
(Rabbit
polyclonal)
Millipore
Cat.# ab18207
RRID:AB_444319
ICC(1:500)
Recombinant
DNA reagent
Lenti-HB9:GFP
(plasmid)
Addgene
ID# 37080
RRID:Addgene_37080
Recombinant
DNA reagent
PAX2 (plasmid)
Addgene
ID# 12260
RRID:Addgene_12260
Recombinant
DNA reagent
VSVG (plasmid)
Addgene
ID# 8454
RRID:Addgene_8454
Recombinant
DNA reagent
Lenti-hOCT4
Addgene
ID# 130692
RRID:Addgene_130692
Recombinant
DNA reagent
Lenti-hLHX3
Addgene
ID# 120456
RRID:Addgene_120456
Recombinant
DNA reagent
Lentiviral backbone
Addgene
DOI: 10.1038
Warlich et al., 2011
ID# 12252
RRID:Addgene_12252
Peptide,
recombinant
protein
SHH
Peprotech
Cat.# 100–45
100 ng/ml
Peptide,
recombinant
protein
bFGF
Peprotech
Cat.# 100-18B
20 ng/ml
Peptide,
recombinant
protein
EGF
Peprotech
Cat.# AF-100–15
10 ng/ml
Peptide,
recombinant
protein
IGF-1
Peprotech
Cat.# 100–11
10 ng/ml
Peptide,
recombinant
protein
NT3
Peprotech
Cat.# 450–03
10 ng/ml
Peptide,
recombinant
protein
BDNF
Peprotech
Cat.# 450–02
10 ng/ml
Peptide,
recombinant
protein
GDNF
Peprotech
Cat.# 450–10
10 ng/ml
Peptide,
recombinant
protein
CNTF
Peprotech
Cat.# 450–13
10 ng/ml
Continued on next page
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
15 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

Continued
Reagent type
(species) or
resource
Designation
Source or
reference
Identifiers
Additional
information
Other
a-Bungarotoxin
Invitrogen
Cat.# B35451
1:200
Software,
algorithm
Matlab
RRID:SCR_001622
Study plan and ethics
This study was designed to establish an advanced direct lineage reprogramming strategy to gener-
ate autologous iMNs from human fibroblasts by overexpressing POU5F1(OCT4) and LHX3. We fur-
ther investigated the therapeutic effects of iMNs for treating traumatic spinal cord injury using
rodent spinal cord injury model. The experiments were repeated at least three times, and the repli-
cates are indicated in each figure and legend. N values represent the number of animals in the
experiment. Quantifications are analyzed by randomly imaging the positions of culture dishes to
determine the reprogramming efficiency. Animals used for experiments were assigned randomly to
groups. The behavioral tests were performed by blinded observer. The experiments were carried
out in accordance with documented standards of the Institutional Review Board of Ulsan National
Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) (UNISTIRB-15–17 C) for human cell experiments. All ani-
mal experimental and surgical procedures on animals were performed in accordance with institu-
tional protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Yonsei University
College of Medicine (2015–0327) for rat experiments, and the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee of Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) (UNISTIACUC-17–34) for
mouse experiments.
Cell culture
Human adult fibroblast lines, HF1 and HF2 were obtained from surgical resectates (Singhal et al.,
2016), which have been obtained with the informed consent (Haridass et al., 2009). Parental fibro-
blasts were maintained in fibroblast medium (high-glucose DMEM (GIBCO) containing 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS) (GIBCO), 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 1 mM l-glutamine, 1% non-essential amino
acids (NEAA) (GIBCO), and 0.1 mM b-mercaptoethanol (GIBCO)). Fibroblast information is summa-
rized in Supplementary file 3. 293 T cells used for virus production were maintained in high-glucose
DMEM containing 10% FBS, penicillin/streptomycin, l-glutamine. Human ESCs H9 (WiCell) were
maintained on irradiated CF1 mouse feeder layers in human ESC medium (knockout DMEM (Invitro-
gen) supplemented with 20% knockout serum replacement (GIBCO), 1 mM l-glutamine, 1% non-
essential amino acids, 0.1 mM b-mercaptoethanol, 1% penicillin/streptomycin and 5 ng/ml human
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) (Peprotech). Human fetal NPCs (Kim et al., 2009a) were cul-
tured in DMEM/F12 (GIBCO) supplemented with N2 (GIBCO), penicillin/streptomycin, 20 ng/ml
bFGF (Peprotech) and 8 mg/ml heparin and 10 ng/ml. Cell lines were authenticated using PCR detec-
tion kit. The cells were routinely tested for mycoplasma contaminations, and we used mycoplasma-
free cells for experiments.
Virus construction and production
The cDNAs of candidate MN transcription factors were amplified by PCR, and individually subcloned
into the lenitiviral vector backbone (Addgene ID#12252) (Warlich et al., 2011). Plasmids carrying
human OCT4 and LHX3 cDNAs were purchased from Addgene (OCT4; ID#130692, LHX3;
ID#120456). Also, plasmid carrying the HB9 promoter and GFP protein were purchased from Addg-
ene (ID#37080) (Marchetto et al., 2008).
The viruses were produced and harvested as previously described (Zaehres and Daley, 2006). In
short, 293 T cells were seeded at 40–50% confluency on 10 cm plates prior to transfection. Individual
transfer plasmids, packaging plasmid (PAX2, Addgene ID#12260), and envelope plasmid (VSV-G,
Addgene ID#8454) were transfected into 293 T cells using X-treme GENE9 DNA transfection
reagent (Roche) according to manufacturer’s instructions. After 48 hr of transfection, virus containing
supernatants from two 10 cm plates were collected and filtered through 0.45 mm membrane. Virus
particles were concentrated by ultracentrifugation (1.5 hr at 80,000 g, 4˚C) and resuspended in 200
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
16 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

ml of fresh DMEM (virus soup). For cell conversion, we applied 15 ml of virus soup per well (six-well
plates). Materials and reagents are available upon request.
Generation of iMNs
Human fibroblasts were seeded at 0.3–1  104 cells on gelatin-coated 6-well plates. On the next
day, the fibroblasts were infected with 2 ml of 15 ml virus soup (lentiviral vector carrying human
OCT4) and fibroblast medium mixture containing 6 mg/ml protamine sulfate. The medium was
replaced with fresh fibroblast medium after 24 hr of infection. At 3 days post-infection, the medium
was switched to neural induction medium (DMEM/F12 (GIBCO) supplemented with N2 (GIBCO),
penicillin/streptomycin, 10 ng/ml bFGF (Peprotech), and 10 ng/ml epidermal growth factor (EGF,
Peprotech) and 10 ng/ml laminin). Morphologically changed infected cells (compact colonies of neu-
ral progenitor-like cells) were mechanically isolated by a glass micropipette and transferred into new
wells individually. The cells were expanded in neural induction medium and iMNICs were established
after 1 or 2 passages. For further MN induction, we used two methods, sphere culture and adherent
culture.
[Sphere culture method] iMNICs were seeded at 5  104 cells on gelatin-coated six-well in neural
induction medium. On the next day, seeded iMNICs were infected with 2 ml of 15 ml virus soup (len-
tiviral vector carrying human LHX3) and neural induction medium mixture containing 6 mg/ml prot-
amine sulfate. After 24 hr, the medium was replaced with defined MN induction medium (DMEM/
F12 and neurobasal medium (GIBCO) supplemented with N2 (GIBCO), B27 (GIBCO), penicillin/strep-
tomycin, 50 ng/ml SHH (Peprotech), and 10 ng/ml IGF-1). By 5–7 days, the cells formed clusters and
MN spheres appeared. The floating MN spheres were re-plated on PDL/laminin-coated plate in MN
maturation medium (DMEM/F12 and neurobasal medium (GIBCO) supplemented with N2 (GIBCO),
B27 (GIBCO), penicillin/streptomycin, 50 ng/ml SHH (Peprotech), 10 ng/ml IGF-1, 10 ng/ml BDNF,
10 ng/ml GDNF, 10 ng/ml CNTF and 10 ng/ml NT3). MN-like cells outgrew gradually and further
matured for additional 7–14 days.
[Adherent culture method] iMNICs were seeded at 5  104 cells on PDL/laminin-coated plate in
neural induction medium. On the next day, seeded iMNICs were infected with 2 ml of 15 ml virus
soup (lentiviral vector carrying human LHX3) and neural induction medium mixture containing 6 mg/
ml protamine sulfate. After 24 hr, the medium was switched into MN induction medium for 7 days.
In this process, the MN spheres did not appear. We switched the medium into MN maturation
medium and matured for additional 7–14 days.
Immunocytochemistry (ICC)
Immunostaining was performed as previously described (Kim et al., 2015). The primary antibodies
used for ICC are listed in Supplementary file 1. The secondary antibodies were diluted in PBS and
applied for 1 hr: Alexa Fluor 488/555/568/594 anti-mouse IgG, IgG1, IgM, anti-chicken IgY, anti-rab-
bit IgG, and anti-goat IgG (Invitrogen, 1:1,000). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (Invitrogen).
C2C12 myotube co-culture
C2C12 myoblasts (ATCC) were expanded in DMEM with 10% FBS and penicillin/streptomycin. When
the culture reached 70% confluency, the medium was switched to 2% horse serum containing
medium to induce multinucleated myotubes. iMNs were added to the myotubes in motor neuron
medium to induce formation of neuromuscular junctions and spontaneous contractions. After 3–4
weeks, the myotube contractions were observed under the microscope and were inhibited by add-
ing 100 mM curare (Sigma). Neuromuscular junctions were observed by labeling with a-bungarotoxin
conjugated with Alexa 555 (Invitrogen, 1:200) and immunostaining with myosin heavy chain (MHC,
DSHB), acetylcholine receptor (AChR, DSHB), and synaptic vesicle 2 (SV2, DSHB).
RT–PCR and quantitative RT–PCR
DNA-free total RNA of iMNs was extracted using the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen). Total RNA (500 ng)
was used to synthesize cDNAs using SuperScript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen). RT–PCR was
performed using recombinant Taq DNA polymerase (Invitrogen). qRT–PCR analysis was conducted
on a LightCycler 480 instrument with SYBR Green I Master mix (Roche). The experiments were per-
formed in triplicate, and expression was normalized to the housekeeping gene GAPDH. Gene
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
17 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

expression was measured by calculating Ct values. All of the experiments were conducted according
to
the
manufacturer’s
instructions.
The
sequences
of
the
primers
used
are
listed
in
Supplementary file 2.
Electrophysiology
Motor neurons induced from human fibroblasts were placed in a recording chamber and recognized
visually by IR-DIC optics. Induced motor neurons were continuously perfused with artificial cerebro-
spinal fluid (ACSF) containing 125 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4, 25 mM NaHCO3, 15
mM glucose, 2 mM CaCl2, and 1 mM MgCl2 oxygenated with 95% O2% and 5% CO2 at 30–32˚C.
Borosilicate glass pipettes (2.5–3.5 MW) were pulled (P-1000, Sutter Instrument) and filled with
potassium-based internal solution containing 133 mM KMeSO3, 3 mM KCl, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM
EGTA, 0.1 mM CaCl2, 8 mM Na2-phosphocreatine, 4 mM Mg-ATP, 0.3 mM Na3-GTP (290–300
mOsm, pH 7.3 with KOH) to make whole-cell configuration. Whole-cell patch clamp recording was
performed by using Multiclamp 700B (Molecular Devices) and recording signals were filtered at 2
kHz, digitized at 10 kHz (PCI-6221, National Instruments). Recording data were monitored, acquired
by WinWCP (Strathclyde Electrophysiology Software) and further analyzed offline by Clampfit 10.0
(Molecular Devices) and Prism 7.0 (GraphPad). To evaluate passive membrane properties of iMNs,
hyperpolarizing step current (50 pA increment, 1000 ms duration) was injected in current clamp
mode. To check active membrane properties of iMNs and generate AP, depolarizing step current
(50 pA increment, 1000 ms duration) was injected. Electrophysiological properties of AP (threshold,
frequency, amplitude, half-width) were analyzed from AP firings induced by 50 pA current injection.
To isolate sodium current, whole-cell recording was conducted under voltage clamp mode and volt-
age was stepped from a holding potential of  70 mV to test potentials from  70 to  25 mV in 5
mV increments (200 ms duration). After recording sodium currents, tetrodotoxin (1 mM, Tocris) was
bath-applied and voltage steps were repeated to confirm TTX-sensitivity of sodium currents
measured.
Growth curve and mean doubling time
Motor neuron intermediate cells (1  104 cells) at P2 and P13 were seeded onto 12-well plates and
cultivated for 10 days. The cells were collected from triplicate wells and manually counted every 24
hr using a hemacytometer (Marienfeld). The average cell numbers on each day were plotted, and
the mean doubling time (mDT) was calculated based on the growth curve.
Establish of compression spinal cord injury model
All animal experimental procedures were approved by Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
of Yonsei University College of Medicine (Seoul, Korea). Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats (Orient,
Seongnam, Korea), weighing 200–220 g were used. Rats were housed in individual cages under stan-
dard laboratory conditions of 24–3C and 40–60% humidity, with 12 hr light–12 hr dark cycles, and
enrichment conditions. All animals anesthetized with ketamine (100 mg/kg; Yuhan, Korea), xylazine
(10 mg/kg; Bayer korea, Korea) and isotropy 100 (Troikaa Pharmaceuticals Ltd, India). A laminectomy
was performed to expose the spinal cord, and the spinal cord was compressed at thoracic level 9
using self-closing forceps (Fine Science Tools, Canada) for 40 s. Following the injury, the muscle and
skin were sutured with 3–0 Vicryl (Johnson and Johnson, Peterborough, Canada). Body temperature
was maintained constant at 37C with a heating pad during surgery and the recovery period. After
the procedure, cefazolin (25 mg/kg; Chong Kun Dang, Korea) was injected for 5 days. For immune
suppression, Cyclosporine A (10 mg/kg, Chong Kun Dang, Korea) was administered to all animals
until sacrifice. Also, animals were taken care of bladder system for urination.
Transplantation of iMNs were transplanted at 7 days after SCI. The animals were randomly
divided into 3 groups: (1) control group that injected PBS (5 ml); (2) iMN spheres 1  10^6/5 ml; (3)
HB9:GFP+ iMNs 1  10^6 /5ml. The pervious wound was reopened and cell injected by 27 gauge can-
nula connected to Hamilton syringe.
Behavior test
All animals underwent behavioral analysis every week for 8 weeks after SCI to measure locomotor
recovery. The Basso, Beattie, and Bresnahan (BBB) motor score was used to evaluate the quality of
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
18 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

hind limb movement during open field locomotion. In the first recovery phase, the range of joint
movement and the presence of the foot closure on the floor were checked. In the second phase,
recovery of weighted stepping was observed. In the third phase, gait coordination and tail move-
ment were observed.
Teratoma formation assay
All mice were purchased from Hyochang Science (Daegu, Korea). Animal handling was in accordance
with animal protection guideline of Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (Ulsan,
Korea). Teratoma formation assay was performed by subcutaneously injecting iMNICs (n = 4) and
iMNs (n = 4) respectively on dorsal flank of athymic nude mice (1  106 cells/mouse). After 12
months after injection, mice were sacrificed for analysis of teratoma formation.
Isolation of iMNs
To isolate pure iMNs for analysis, we designed the plasmid containing puromycin resistance gene
under expression of HB9 promoter. After transfection, cells expressing HB9 were selected by cultur-
ing in the presence of 0.5 mg/ml of puromycin for 5 days.
Histology and immunohistochemistry (IHC)
For histological analysis, the rats were deeply anesthetized and perfused with PBS followed by 4%
paraformaldehyde as well. The spinal cords were isolated and post-fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
overnight, and then immersed in 30% sucrose for 3 days. The tissues were embedded in frozen sec-
tion compound (Leica) and sectioned at 16 mm in sagittal plane by a cryostat. IHC was performed as
previously described (Kim et al., 2015). The primary antibodies used for IHC are listed in
Supplementary file 1.
For hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) staining, the spinal cords were embedded in paraffin blocks.
The paraffin blocks were sectioned at 4 mm in sagittal plane. Sections were immersed in Harris hema-
toxylin solution (Sigma) for 2 min to stain nucleus. Slides were then immersed briefly in 1% acid alco-
hol (1% HCl in 70% ethanol) and blued in 0.2% ammonium hydroxide, followed by staining with
eosin Y solution (Sigma) for 30 s. Each step was followed by several washings with distilled water.
The slides were dehydrated with ethanol, cleared with xylene, and mounted with mounting solution
(Leica).
Statistical analysis
All data in this article are presented as the means ± SD (standard deviation). Data from at least three
independent samples were used for statistical analysis. ANOVA with post hoc testing was performed
to compare BBB score. A p-value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statistical
analysis was carried out using EXCEL, and SigmaPlot software.
RNA-seq preparation and data analysis
Total RNAs were extracted from cells using the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) according to manufac-
turer’s instructions. The quality of RNA was examined using Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. RNA integrity
number (RIN) of all samples were higher than 8. Library sequencing was carried out on NovaSeq
6000 instrument. We generated 100 bp paired-end reads, with each library sequenced up to depth
of 40 million fragments. We used HISAT2 (Pertea et al., 2016) to align the RNA-seq reads to the
human reference genome GRCh38, and Cufflinks (Trapnell et al., 2012) to annotate them. We calcu-
lated the counts of aligned reads to each gene with HTSeq (Anders et al., 2015). We equalized the
data and stabilized them through the log2 transform of the data plus one. RNA-seq data sequence
summary
is
provided
in
Supplementary
file
5,
and
related
codes
are
provided
in
Supplementary files 6 and 7.
RNA-seq data integration analysis
To complement the RNA-seq data generated in this work, we collected RNA-seq data from the
Sequence Read Archive (SRA) database for wild-type motor neurons MN, wtMN-2 (SRR2038215)
(Ng et al., 2015), wtMN-1 (SRR606336) (Amoroso et al., 2013) and human ESC H9 (SRR3647179)
(Kumamaru et al., 2018). As with our own samples, we used HISAT2 to align the RNA-seq reads to
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
19 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

the human reference genome GRCh38, Cufflinks to annotate the mapped reads, and HTSeq to cal-
culate the counts. We equalized the data and stabilized them through the log2 transform of the data
plus one. To reduce the batch effect of the data integration, we used ComBat (Johnson et al.,
2007). We used in-house software to merge the expression results into a single text file used in the
downstream analysis in Matlab (MathWorks).
Transcriptomics global analysis
The heatmap of the most highly variable transcripts, the hierarchical clustering dendrograms (calcu-
lated using the unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean and Euclidean distance mea-
sure), and the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) were performed using in-house functions
developed in Matlab (MathWorks).
Gene-coverage count track plots
We sorted the alignment bam files with samtools (Li et al., 2009) and produced the bed files with
bedtools (Quinlan and Hall, 2010). We developed a function in Matlab (MathWorks) that for each
gene of interest takes the exon boundary information from the basic annotation file in gtf format
from Gencode (https://www.gencodegenes.org/human/) version 33, and plots the gene-coverage
count track plots, preserving the same scale for the tracks of the same gene in all the samples.
Data availability
The data discussed in this publication have been deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus
(Edgar et al., 2002) and are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE149664 .
Acknowledgements
This work (S2566811) was supported by Tech Incubator Program for Startup (TIPS) funded Korea
Ministry of SMEs and Startups. J-IK was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT
(2017R1C1B3005476). DG and MJA-B was supported by Grants of Instituto de Salud Carlos III
(AC17/00012).
Additional information
Funding
Funder
Grant reference number
Author
Korea Ministry of SMEs and
Startups
S2566811
Jeong Beom Kim
National Research Foundation
of Korea
2017R1C1B3005476
Jae-Ick Kim
Instituto de Salud Carlos III
AC17/00012
Daniela Gerovska
Marcos J Arau´ zo-Bravo
European Union Eracosysmed/
H2020
643271
Daniela Gerovska
Marcos J Arau´ zo-Bravo
Ministry of Economy and
Competitiveness of Spain
MINECO
BFU2016-77987-P
Daniela Gerovska
Marcos J Arau´ zo-Bravo
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the
decision to submit the work for publication.
Author contributions
Hyunah Lee, Conceptualization, Resources, Data curation, Software, Formal analysis, Validation,
Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Project administration; Hye Yeong Lee, Resources, Valida-
tion, Investigation, Methodology; Byeong Eun Lee, Investigation, Methodology; Daniela Gerovska,
Marcos J Arau´ zo-Bravo, Validation, Investigation; Soo Yong Park, Methodology; Holm Zaehres,
Lee et al. eLife 2020;9:e52069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52069
20 of 24
Research article
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine

===== Leigh2018_NatComm+AxolotlLimbRegen_scRNAseq =====
ARTICLE
Transcriptomic landscape of the blastema niche in
regenerating adult axolotl limbs at single-cell
resolution
Nicholas D. Leigh1,2, Garrett S. Dunlap
1,2, Kimberly Johnson
1,2, Rachelle Mariano1, Rachel Oshiro1,
Alan Y. Wong
1,3, Donald M. Bryant1, Bess M. Miller1,2, Alex Ratner4, Andy Chen1, William W. Ye1,
Brian J. Haas2 & Jessica L. Whited1,2,3
Regeneration of complex multi-tissue structures, such as limbs, requires the coordinated
effort of multiple cell types. In axolotl limb regeneration, the wound epidermis and blastema
have been extensively studied via histology, grafting, and bulk-tissue RNA-sequencing.
However, deﬁning the contributions of these tissues is hindered due to limited information
regarding the molecular identity of the cell types in regenerating limbs. Here we report
unbiased single-cell RNA-sequencing on over 25,000 cells from axolotl limbs and identify a
plethora of cellular diversity within epidermal, mesenchymal, and hematopoietic lineages in
homeostatic and regenerating limbs. We identify regeneration-induced genes, develop
putative trajectories for blastema cell differentiation, and propose the molecular identity of
ﬁbroblast-like blastema progenitor cells. This work will enable application of molecular
techniques to assess the contribution of these populations to limb regeneration. Overall,
these data allow for establishment of a putative framework for adult axolotl limb
regeneration.
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
OPEN
1 Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Harvard Medical School, The Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 60 Fenwood Road, Boston,
MA 02115, USA. 2 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 7 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. 3 Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative
Biology, Harvard University, 7 Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 4 ICCB-L Single Cell Core, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Avenue,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.L.W. (email: jessica_whited@harvard.edu)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:5153 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;

M
any salamanders, such as axolotls, have the remarkable
capacity to regenerate entire multi-tissue structures,
such as limbs, throughout their lives. This is in stark
contrast to mammals, which have extremely limited capacity to
regenerate multi-tissue structures. After amputation of an axolotl
limb, a clotting response occurs, and the wound is quickly cov-
ered by the migration of a specialized wound epidermis (WE)1.
The WE can be broken down morphologically into an outer layer
of apical cells, a thicker intermediate WE, and a columnar basal
layer2. Underneath the WE, progenitor cells aggregate and form
what is called the blastema. The blastema is a combination of
lineage-restricted and multipotent progenitors that gives rise to
the internal structures of the regenerated limb3–6.
The interaction between the WE and blastema is integral, and a
variety of techniques have shown that the WE is required for limb
regeneration7–9. This requirement is dependent on roles in pro-
moting blastema cell proliferation10, stump tissue histolysis11,
and guiding blastema outgrowth12. In addition to contributions
from the WE, macrophages and nerves are required for limb
regeneration13,14, highlighting that a coordinated effort between
multiple cell types is required for blastema formation. Blastema is
a broad label for the collective organization of possibly de-
differentiated dermal ﬁbroblasts and periosteal cells, Pax7+
muscle satellite cells, and hitherto undiscovered populations that
contribute to limb regeneration4–6,15,16. A deeper understanding
of the cell populations present in regenerating limbs, especially
during the early stages, is important for understanding the acti-
vation, recruitment, and differentiation required to create blas-
tema cells. Previous studies have been instrumental in providing
information about gene expression across the course of limb
regeneration (reviewed in ref. 17). However, these studies used
bulk RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) approaches, yielding composite
measurements, and therefore identiﬁcation of pivotal cell type-
speciﬁc transcripts with unique gene expression could be masked.
Recently, with the advent of single-cell RNA-seq an unexpected
diversity of cellular subtypes has been uncovered even within
well-delineated systems18–20. Most work on single-cell RNA-seq
has been dedicated to systems with a wealth of pre-existing
knowledge
about
the
cellular
composition,
aiding
in
the
description of previously described and undescribed cell types. In
contrast, there is a limited understanding of the diversity of cells
and their behaviors during axolotl limb regeneration. Thus, we
undertook an unbiased and comprehensive analysis of the cell
populations that contribute to axolotl limb regeneration by per-
forming single-cell RNA-seq on over 25,000 cells from the limb at
homeostasis and at multiple time points during limb regeneration
(Supplementary Table 1). Here, we focus on the early stages that
are required to build and grow a blastema. We propose differ-
entiation trajectories for both epidermal and mesenchymal cells
during regeneration. Our study provides an important resource
that deﬁnes the molecular identities of the cell populations pre-
sent in the regenerating limb, opening the way for future study of
these cell populations and their roles during axolotl limb
regeneration.
Results
Cellular heterogeneity of the regenerating limb. The regener-
ating limb contains different cell types that can be distinguished
morphologically, including: blastema cells; the basal, inter-
mediate, and apical layers of the WE; and erythrocytes (Fig. 1a,
b). To evaluate the cellular composition of the regenerating limb
at the molecular level, we performed single-cell RNA-seq over a
time course of adult axolotl limb regeneration. We sampled tissue
from homeostatic limbs (to establish a ground state) as well as
three
regenerative
milestones—wound
healing,
early-bud
blastema, and medium-bud blastema stages. The early-bud blas-
tema constitutes a time point when progenitor recruitment and
activation are occurring, and the medium-bud blastema is after
activation and mobilization of progenitor cells from the stump,
but prior to any outward re-differentiation into the regenerated
limb. We collected the entire regenerate, including both the WE
and blastema, to provide comprehensive snapshots of the cell
populations present at each regenerative stage with two to six
biological replicates per time point. We utilized inDrops, a high-
throughput microﬂuidic platform, to capture and subsequently
sequence thousands of single cells21,22 (schematic in Fig. 1c).
We sequenced over 25,000 cells from 13 separate homeostatic
and regenerating forelimb samples, derived from 13 adult
axolotls. Using the Seurat single-cell analysis toolkit23, we
performed dimensionality reduction analysis, unbiased clustering
of cell populations according to similar gene expression patterns
(i.e. no prior knowledge of cell population markers is required to
drive clustering), and visualization of resulting clusters in two
dimensions via t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-
SNE). We recovered between 11 and 19 transcriptionally distinct
populations depending on time point sampled. Based on
transcriptional proﬁles, we hypothesize that these cell clusters
consist of multiple populations of ﬁbroblast-like blastema (FLB)
cells, tenocytes, Pax7+ muscle satellite cell-derived myogenic
blastema cells, endothelial cells, erythrocytes, myeloid cells,
lymphoid cells, and an epidermis composed of a variety of
distinct populations (Fig. 1d, Supplementary Data 1–5). Impor-
tantly, nearly all these populations were present at homeostasis
and during regeneration, including a population of ﬁbroblasts
that shared similarity to putative FLB cells at all regenerative time
points sampled (Supplementary Data 1–5). This transcriptional
proﬁling at single-cell resolution allowed for identiﬁcation of
conserved marker genes that deﬁne cell populations, elucidation
of phenotypic changes in these cell populations that are
associated with regeneration, and exploration of differentiation
trajectories.
The axolotl epidermis is heterogeneous. Initiation of blastema
formation is dependent on the formation of a WE that is
regeneration competent. Of interest are differences in the cellular
composition and changes in gene expression in conserved cell
populations between regenerating versus homeostatic epidermis.
At homeostasis, we found unique populations that we postulate to
be ionocytes expressing forkhead box i1 (foxi1) and atpase h +
transporting v1 subunit b1 (atp6v1b1)24 (Supplementary Fig. 1a,
Supplementary Data 2) and putative epidermal Langerhans cells
deﬁned by high expression of histocompatibility genes, such as
major histocompatibility complex, class II, dr beta 1 (hla-drb1),
with co-expression of epidermal genes (i.e. keratin 12 (krt12))25
(Supplementary Fig. 1b, Supplementary Data 2). In homeostatic
epidermis, we uncovered four other populations of epidermis,
which based on marker gene expression we postulate to be the
basal epidermis (collagen type xvii alpha 1 chain (col17a1))26,
proliferating epidermal cells (high levels of proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (pcna)) (Supplementary Fig. 1c), intermediate
epidermis (krt12)25 (Supplementary Fig. 1b, bottom), and small
secretory cells (SSCs, otogelin (otog) and fc fragment of igg binding
protein
(fcgbp))27
(Supplementary
Fig.
1d,
Supplementary
Data 2). Our data indicate an absence of both ionocytes and
putative Langerhans cells in the WE, while SSCs, basal epidermis,
and populations of intermediate WE are present at all regener-
ating time points (Supplementary Data 1). Notably, during
wound healing, we identiﬁed a cell population we postulate to be
Leydig cells based on expression of chitin synthase 1 (chs1)28 and
anterior gradient protein 2-a (agr2a)29 (closest match to newt
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:5153 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

AGP) that was not obviously present other time points (Sup-
plementary Fig. 1e). At regenerating time points, we ﬁnd multiple
populations of what we deem intermediate WE, due to a lack of
unique transcripts (Supplementary Data 3–5). These populations
likely represent cells along a differentiation trajectory, which we
explore further below.
We observe regeneration-speciﬁc gene expression in popula-
tions such as the basal WE, which has long been thought to play
an essential role in crosstalk between the blastema and WE9
(Supplementary Fig. 1f). We also evaluated the expression of
previously described factors that are expressed in, or near, the WE
and have been reported to inﬂuence regeneration, speciﬁcally
AGP29, dlx330, and nrg131. In accordance with the literature, we
observe expression proﬁles similar to the published reports
(Supplementary Fig. 2a–c). Importantly, we observe very few nrg1
transcripts in our study, which is likely due to our protocol that
would not allow for capture of nerve cells, as only axons project
into the limb, not the cell body.
We next sought to conﬁrm the existence of cell population-
speciﬁc and regeneration-speciﬁc genes as identiﬁed by the single-
cell RNA-seq dataset (Fig. 2a, e). We performed RNA in situ
hybridizations on krt12, a pan-epidermal gene (Fig. 2b, f); otog, a
gene enriched in SSCs, a speciﬁc epidermal population (Fig. 2c,
g); and frem2, a gene with both regeneration- and time point-
speciﬁc expression (Fig. 2d, h). These RNA in situ hybridizations
conﬁrm the expression proﬁles generated from the single-cell
RNA-seq data (Fig. 2a, e).
To begin to understand how the WE is formed, we pursued the
idea that the axolotl epidermis follows an outward differentiation
trajectory as seen in other species32. If axolotl epidermis
recapitulates the differentiation trajectory of mammals, we would
expect to detect an epidermal stem cell reservoir feeding into a
differentiation trajectory culminating in cells residing in the
outermost layer of the epidermis. This could be the case for both
homeostatic epidermis and the WE, and thus we tested these two
ideas separately. To do this, we performed pseudotime analysis
using Monocle33. Construction of a pseudotime trajectory allows
for ordering of cells across a learned trajectory (i.e. determining
where a cell is in the process of differentiation). For both sets of
analyses, we included populations of basal and intermediate
epidermis, as well as SSCs. We chose to omit rare populations
(e.g. ionocytes with 27 total cells) and proliferating epidermal
c
d
Basal WE
Apical WE
Int. WE
Red blood cells
Wound epidermis
Blastema
a
b
RT mix
oil
oil
Cells
DNA barcoding
hydrogels
Remove blastema
and wound epidermis
Dissociate cells
inDrops
inDrops
Amputate
forelimb
Unbiased clustering
RNA in situ hybridization
to identify and
validate populations
RNA-seq
Homeostasis
Wound healing
Early-bud blastema
Medium-bud blastema
25
0
–25
–25
0
25
50
–50
–25
0
25
tSNE_1
tSNE_1
tSNE_1
50
25
0
–25
–50
40
20
0
–20
–40
tSNE_1
25
0
–25
40
20
0
–20
–50
–25
0
25
50
tSNE_2
tSNE_2
tSNE_2
tSNE_2
40
20
0
–20
–40
–25
0
tSNE_1
25
50
tSNE_2
Fig. 1 Single-cell RNA-seq of the adult axolotl limb. a Hematoxylin and eosin staining of medium-bud blastema with overlying wound epidermis. Cell types
labeled in a, b based on morphology/location. Scale bars are 100 μm, n = 4 animals. c Strategy for identifying the cell populations that compose the
regenerating axolotl limb. d t-SNE plot of cells collected from homeostasis (n = 2 animals), wound healing (n = 3 animals), early-bud blastema (n = 2
animals), and medium-bud blastema (n = 6 animals). Each dot is a cell and colors represent individual populations and do not reﬂect the same population
between time points
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:5153 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3

krt12
b
otog
c
frem2
d
frem2
WE
Blastema
h
WE
Blastema
otog
g
frem2
otog
krt12
Homeostasis
Epidermis
Hematopoietic 
Fibroblast
otog
krt12
Medium-bud blastema
Epidermis
Hematopoietic 
Blood vessel,
nerve, muscle
Fibroblast-like
blastema
frem2
krt12
Blastema
WE
a
e
f
Basal epi
Intermediate epi
Proliferating epi
Small secretory cell
Ionocyte
Langerhans
Early B cell
T cell
Myeloid
Erythrocyte
Fibroblast
Basal WE 1
Basal WE 2
Intermediate WE 4
Intermediate WE 5
Small secretory cell
Early B cell
T cell
Macrophage
Neutrophil
Erythrocyte
Pericyte
Endothelial
Schwann
Myogenic blastema
FLB6
FLB7
FLB8
FLB9
6
4
2
0
6
4
2
0
2
1
0
Expression level
Expression level
Expression level
Expression level
Expression level
Expression level
6
4
2
0
5
4
3
2
1
0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Fig. 2 Wound epidermis gene expression dynamics during regeneration. a Violin plots depicting log2 values of normalized expression of krt12, otog, and
frem2 at homeostasis. b–d Representative RNA in situ hybridizations in limbs at homeostasis probing for krt12 (b) (n = 5 animals), otog (c) (n = 3 animals),
and frem2 (d) (n = 3 animals). e Violin plots depicting log2 values of normalized expression of krt12, otog, and frem2 in the medium-bud blastema. f–h
Representative RNA in situ hybridizations in medium-bud blastemas probing for krt12 (f) (n = 5 animals), otog (g) (n = 3 animals), and frem2 (h) (n = 5
animals). In violin plots (a, e), each dot represents an individual cell; epidermal populations of interest are depicted in color, all others are in gray. Yellow
line in f, g denotes boundary between the wound epidermis and blastema. Epi epidermis, WE wound epidermis, FLB ﬁbroblast-like blastema cell.
Magniﬁcation, ×10, scale bars are 100 μm
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:5153 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

cells, which are likely from multiple epidermal populations. For
both the homeostatic and regenerating epidermis, we observe an
outward
differentiation
phenomenon
starting
at
the
basal
epidermis/WE, which Monocle assigned as the earliest point in
pseudotime (Fig. 3a–d). The populations we postulate to be
intermediate
epidermis
served
as
intermediate
populations
connecting the basal epidermis to the outer layer of SSCs (Fig. 3b,
d). Thus, at homeostasis and regeneration it appears that the basal
epidermis likely serves as a progenitor cell reservoir.
Further we identify keratin 17 (krt17) as a gene that was
differentially expressed over pseudotime, with highest expression
in the basal WE populations and expression tapering as cells
entered intermediate and SSC populations (Fig. 3e). To conﬁrm
pseudotime analysis was capable of corroborating in situ gene
expression proﬁles, we probed for krt17 over a time course of
limb regeneration. The expression proﬁle of krt17 over the course
of limb regeneration veriﬁes the correlation between pseudotime
and real-time expression (Fig. 3f–o). Together, these data
highlight the cellular heterogeneity of the epidermis and WE,
and will allow for the pursuit of the function of regeneration-
induced genes.
Adaptive and innate immune cells are present in the blastema.
It has been previously reported that hematopoietic-derived cells,
in particular macrophages, play an important role in axolotl limb
regeneration13. In addition, other myeloid cells are present in the
regenerating limb, with inﬁltration peaking during wound healing
and returning to baseline levels after blastema formation13.
However, markers that are speciﬁcally tailored to identify axolotl
immune cells have not been thoroughly investigated. This has
hampered investigation of the role of immune cells and the fac-
tors they produce in limb regeneration.
Our analysis reveals distinct cell populations of both innate and
adaptive immune cells are abundant throughout blastema
formation. We ﬁnd cells of the adaptive immune system, both
T cells and B cells, are present at all time points sampled,
SSCs
IE
BE
Wound healing
Blastema formation
f
g
h
i
Early-bud blastema
Med-bud blastema
Palette stage
j
k
n
l
m
o
SSCs
BW1
IW
BW2
Component 1
Component 2
a
b
c
e
Medium-bud blastema
Homeostasis
krt17
Pseudotime
Relative
Expression
Component 2
Component 2
d
SSCs
BW1
IW
BW2
Component 1
2
Pseudotime
0
5 10
Pseudotime
0
5
10
1
0
–1
1
0
–1
1
0
–1
–6
–3
0
2
–6
–3
0
2
–6
–3
0
2
–6
–3
0
2
–6
–3
0
2
2
1
0
–1
–6
–3
0
3
–6
–3
0
3
–6
–3
0
3
–6
–3
0
3
100
10
0
3
6
9
1
Fig. 3 The epidermis follows an outward differentiating trajectory. a–d Pseudotime analysis of epidermis populations during homeostasis (a, b) and in the
medium-bud blastema (c, d), shown split by overall pseudotime plots (a, c) and colored by Seurat population determined in Fig. 1 (b, d). Abbreviations used
are small secretory cells (SSCs), intermediate epidermis (IE), basal epidermis (BE), basal wound epidermis #1 (BW1), intermediate wound epidermis (IW),
and basal wound epidermis #2 (BW2). e Expression plot of krt17 in epidermal cells captured at the medium-bud blastema stage over pseudotime, colored
using Seurat populations as in d. f–o Representative RNA in situ hybridization probing for krt17 across a time course of limb regeneration. Magniﬁcation ×10
in f, h, j, l, n, ×20 in g, i, k, m, o. All scale bars are 100μm. n = 4 animals per time point
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:5153 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5

including medium-bud-stage blastemas (Supplementary Data 1–
5). Immunoglobulin lambda like polypeptide 5 (igll5) (Supple-
mentary Fig. 3) and t cell receptor alpha constant (trac) (Fig. 4a)
identiﬁed populations of B cells and T cells, respectively.
Interestingly, igll5 has been shown to be an early B cell marker34,
suggesting these cells may not be fully mature. At wound healing,
we observe two populations of B cells, the second a presumably
mature B cell population negative for igll5, but positive for B cell
receptor
machinery
(Supplementary
Fig.
3,
Supplementary
Data 3). We then identify trac as a gene expressed by T cells at
all time points (Fig. 4a). To test if these adaptive immune cells
were present in the blastema, we performed RNA in situ
hybridization probing for trac to identify their location within
the regenerate. We detect trac+ cells localized within the
blastema (Fig. 4b–c). Previous work has implicated both CD8+
T cells and CD4+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) in murine muscle
regeneration35,36, and more recently, Tregs have been shown to be
required for spinal cord, heart, and retina regeneration in
zebraﬁsh37. However, whether these T cells in the blastema play
a role in axolotl limb regeneration remains to be determined.
In addition to adaptive immune cells, we identify a plethora of
innate immune cells present throughout the course of regenera-
tion. These populations differ dramatically in the composition
captured and molecular phenotype over the course of regenera-
tion (Supplementary Data 1, 3–5). At homeostasis, beyond the
Langerhans cells residing in the epidermis (Supplementary
Fig. 1b), we also observe a population of putative myeloid cells,
as deﬁned by macrophage expressed 1 (mpeg1) and macrophage
receptor
with
collagenous
structure
(marco)
expression38,39
(Supplementary Data 2). We suspect that further investigation
within this mpeg1 and marco positive population may uncover
both neutrophils and macrophages. In line with this, we observe
both neutrophils and macrophages in medium- and early-bud
blastemas (Supplementary Data 4–5).
As expected, we observe a dramatic increase in the myeloid
cells captured and the complexity of the myeloid compartment
during wound healing (Supplementary Data 3). We suspect these
populations
are
a
collection
of
macrophages,
neutrophils,
dendritic cells, and potentially other myeloid cells. Based on top
markers of each population we propose that these cells are
populations of dendritic cells expressing runt-related transcription
factor 3 (runx3) and integrin subunit alpha e (itgae) also known as
CD10340 (Supplementary Fig. 4a), newly recruited circulating
macrophages expressing triggering receptor expressed on myeloid
cells 2 (trem2)41 (Supplementary Fig. 4b), and three populations
of
neutrophils
expressing
cathlecidin
antimicrobial
peptide
(camp)42 (Supplementary Fig. 4c). If indeed the overwhelming
proportions of leukocytes at this stage are neutrophils and
recruited macrophages, our data point to an important role for
myeloid cell recruitment to the amputation plane. However, this
scenario
would not rule out a role for tissue-resident myeloid
cells contributing to limb regeneration.
Regardless of time point, myeloid cells could be identiﬁed by
high expression of apolipoprotein Eb (apoeb) (Fig. 5a). We
performed RNA in situ hybridization for apoeb across a time
course of limb regeneration, which conﬁrms that the presence of
myeloid cells peaks during wound healing, and indicates that
myeloid cells were present at all stages of regeneration sampled
(Fig. 5b–g). Since previous reports in axolotl used α-naphthyl
acetate (NSE) to detect myeloid cells in the blastema13, we
followed up the RNA in situ hybridization with NSE staining. As
predicted by apoeb staining, we found that NSE detects myeloid
cells within the medium-bud-stage blastema (Supplementary
Fig. 5a–b). Many of these cells lack canonical markers used to
identify immune cells in other species. However, cellular
morphology is likely conserved and lymphocytes, neutrophils,
macrophages, eosinophils, and mast cells have previously been
described histologically in the newt blastema43. Together, our
data provide integral information about the identity of axolotl
immune cells, which will allow for further study of their
contribution to limb regeneration.
Cellular sources of nerve-associated cells and blood vessels. Re-
innervation and re-vascularization are essential processes during
limb regeneration, requiring the orchestration of re-growing
nerves and vessels in coordination with supportive cell types.
Within our dataset, we ﬁnd populations of putative Schwann
cells, pericytes, and endothelial cells that may contribute to re-
innervation and re-vascularization of the regenerating limb.
Endothelial cells, as determined by speciﬁc platelet and endothe-
lial cell adhesion molecule 1 (pecam1) expression could be found
at all three regenerating time points (Supplementary Fig. 6a). We
identify pericytes through expression of markers such as cyto-
globin (cygb)44 and atp-binding cassette subfamily c member 9
(abcc9)45 (Supplementary Fig. 6b). We only detect a robust
number of pericytes in the medium-bud blastema, in accordance
with the delayed arrival of pericytes reported in axolotl digit tip
regeneration4. As for nerve-associated cells, we ﬁnd cells during
wound healing and in medium-bud blastemas expressing myelin
protein zero (mpz), a well-described Schwann cell marker46
(Supplementary Fig. 6c). Interestingly, during wound healing,
Schwann cells were mainly negative for sry-box 2 (sox2); however,
in the medium-bud blastema, many of these cells had acquired
sox2 expression, which may serve to prevent myelination and
maintain Schwann cells in a non-differentiated state46 (Supple-
mentary Fig. 6c). In addition, we observe the presence of the
neural crest marker forkhead box d3 (foxd3)47 in the medium-bud
blastema Schwann cells, furthering the notion that these cells
have likely entered a less differentiated state (Supplementary
Fig. 6c).
Single-cell RNA-seq elucidates blastema cell identity. The lit-
erature suggests that Pax7+ muscle satellite cells, dermal ﬁbro-
blasts, and cells residing within the periosteum, likely also
ﬁbroblasts, contribute to the mesenchymal components of the
blastema4–6,15,16. Based on these data we reasoned that there
would be a population of blastema cells derived from Pax7+
progenitors that were responsible for muscle regeneration6,16.
Consistent with this hypothesis, we observe populations of cells in
early- and medium-bud blastemas that speciﬁcally express paired
box 7 (pax7) and myogenic factor 5 (myf5) (Supplementary
Fig. 6d–e). However, the expression of these two markers is
inversely correlated, with presumptive myogenic blastema cells in
the early-bud blastema expressing pax7 without robust myf5, and
the converse in the medium-bud blastema. These data indicate
more consistent/sustained markers for myogenic blastema cells
may be six homeobox 1 (six1) and eya transcriptional coactivator
and phosphatase 1 (eya1), which mark this population at both
time points sampled (Supplementary Fig. 6f–g). In mice, both six1
and
eya1
are
essential
transcription
factors
for
muscle
development48,49. While the converse nature of pax7 and myf5
expression may hint at different states of differentiation, it is also
possible that the low read coverage of microﬂuidic-based single-
cell RNA-seq makes capturing and detecting lowly expressed
transcription factors (i.e., potentially pax7) difﬁcult21. It should be
noted that these presumptive myogenic progenitor cells are not
obviously detected until the early-bud blastema, which is con-
cordant with the apparent delayed arrival of muscle progenitors
into the blastema50.
Next, we looked for populations of cells that appeared to be
similar to ﬁbroblasts. We observe populations of cells at all time
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:5153 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

b
WE
Blastema
trac
c
trac
Medium-bud blastema
Medium-bud blastema
Homeostasis
Epidermis
Hematopoietic 
trac
Fibroblast
a
Wound healing
Epidermis
trac
Hematopoietic 
Fibroblast-
like
blastema 
Blood
vessel
and nerve 
Early-bud blastema
Epidermis
trac
Hematopoietic 
Fibroblast-like
blastema
Blood vessel, muscle,
and tendon
Medium-bud blastema
Epidermis
Hematopoietic 
trac
Fibroblast-like
blastema 
Blood vessel, nerve,
and muscle
4
3
2
1
0
4
3
2
1
0
3
2
1
0
Basal WE
Basal WE 1
Basal WE 2
Intermediate WE 4
Intermediate WE 5
Small secretory cell
Early B cell
T cell
Macrophage
Neutrophil
Erytrocyte
Pericyte
Endothelial
Schwann
Myogenic blastema
FLB6
FLB7
FLB8
FLB9
3
4
2
1
0
Macrophage
Neutrophil
Early B cell
T cell
Erythrocyte 1
Erythrocyte 2
Endothelial
Tenocyte
FLB3
FLB4
FLB5
Myogenic blastema
Basal WE
Intermediate WE 1
Intermediate WE 2
Intermediate WE 3
Small secretory cell
Leydig
Dendrtic cell
Neutrophil 1
Neutrophil 2
Early B cell
B cell
T cell
Erythrocyte
Endothelial
Schwann
FLB1
FLB2
Recruited mac
Phagocytosing neutro
Intermediate Epi
Basal Epi
Proliferating Epi
Small secretory cell
Lonocyte
Langerhans
Early B cell
T cell
Myeloid
Erythrocyte
Fibroblast
Expression level
Expression level
Expression level
Expression level
Fig. 4 The blastema contains T cells. a Violin plots depicting log2 values of normalized expression of the T cell-speciﬁc gene, trac, at homeostasis, wound
healing, early-bud blastema and medium-bud blastema stages. Each dot represents an individual cell. b, c Representative RNA in situ hybridization probing
for trac in a medium-bud-stage regenerate. b Magniﬁcation, ×20 scale bar is 100 μm; c area outlined in b at ×40 magniﬁcation, scale bar is 50 μm. n = 4
animals
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:5153 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7

Palette stage
12hpa
3hpa
24hpa
Wound healing
Medium-bud blastema
Early-bud blastema
b
c
d
e
f
g
apoeb
apoeb
apoeb
apoeb
apoeb
apoeb
Homeostasis
6
4
2
0
4
2
0
6
4
2
0
6
4
2
0
Basal Epi
Basal WE
Basal WE
Basal WE 1
Basal WE 2
Intermediate WE 4
Intermediate WE 5
Small secretory cell
Early B cell
T cell
Macrophage
Neutrophil
Erythrocyte
Endothelial
Schwann
Myogenic blastema
Pericyte
Macrophage
Neutrophil
Early B cell
T cell
Erythrocyte 1
Erythrocyte 2
Endothelial
Myogenic blastema
Tenocyte
lntermediate Epi
lntermediate WE 1
lntermediate WE 2
lntermediate WE 3
Proliferating Epi
Small secretory cell
Small secretory cell
Leydig
Dendrtic cell
Recruited mac
Phagocytosing neutro
Neutrophil 1
Neutrophil 2
Ionocyte
Langerhans
Early B cell
Early B cell
B cell
T cell
T cell
Erythrocyte
Myeloid
Erythrocyte
Endothelial
Schwann
FLB1
FLB2
Fibroblast
Epidermis
Hematopoietic 
apoeb
Fibroblast
a
Wound healing
Epidermis
apoeb
Hematopoietic 
Fibroblast-
like
blastema
Blood
vessel
and nerve
Early-bud blastema
Epidermis
apoeb
Hematopoietic 
Fibroblast-like
blastema
Blood vessel, muscle,
and tendon
Medium-bud blastema
Epidermis
Hematopoietic 
Fibroblast-like
blastema 
Blood vessel, nerve,
and muscle
apoeb
FLB3
FLB4
FLB5
FLB6
FLB7
FLB8
FLB9
Expression level
Expression level
Expression level
Expression level
Fig. 5 Myeloid cells are present throughout the course of regeneration. a Violin plots depicting log2 values of normalized expression of myeloid cell
enriched apoeb. Each dot represents an individual cell; myeloid cell populations are in color, while all other populations are in gray. b–g Representative RNA
in situ hybridizations probing for apoeb across a time course of regeneration. b–g Magniﬁcation ×10 during wound healing, speciﬁcally at b 3 h post
amputation (hpa), c 12hpa, and d 24hpa. e–g Magniﬁcation ×10 of a e early-bud blastema, f medium-bud blastema, and a g palette stage-regenerating limb;
yellow line denotes border of blastema and WE. All scale bars are 100 μm. n = 4 animals per time point
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:5153 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

points, including at homeostasis, that appear to be ﬁbroblast-like
cells. These ﬁbroblast-like cells have high expression of lumican
(lum), dermatopontin (dpt), and periostin (postn), which in mice
are expressed by ﬁbroblasts and periosteal cells51–53 (Fig. 6a,
Supplementary Data 3–5). We note that pericytes also express
lum and dpt at the medium-bud-stage, suggesting that these cells
may acquire some ﬁbroblast-like markers (Fig. 6a). We refer to
these ﬁbroblast-like cells as FLB cells and numbered the
populations by time point to facilitate later identiﬁcation: FLB
cells 1–2 present at wound healing, FLB cells 3–5 present in the
early-bud blastema, and FLB cells 6–9 in the medium-bud
blastema. To conﬁrm the presence of these FLBs, we performed
RNA in situ hybridization on medium-bud blastemas for dpt and
lum and ﬁnd that these markers are expressed in distinct
populations of the medium-bud blastema (Fig. 6b, c).
To begin to understand how the different blastema cell
populations may be contributing to the overall regenerative
landscape, we attempted to delineate the potential differentiation
trajectories of these cells. We focused on cells that would
potentially contribute to the structure of the regenerated limb,
including FLB cells, Schwann cells, myogenic blastema, endothe-
lial cells, and pericytes. To determine potential relationships in
these populations across different points in regeneration we used
URD, an algorithm that was used to reconstruct developmental
trajectories in the developing zebraﬁsh54. We performed unbiased
clustering of the aforementioned blastema-resident cells from the
three regenerating time points. As expected, these cells cluster
based on time point sampled, highlighting the differences in
transcriptional states during regeneration (Fig. 7a). We selected
cells from wound healing as root populations, reasoning that
these cells would give rise to progeny in the blastema at later
stages.
We then calculated pseudotime ordering assuming that the
root populations were at pseudotime zero. We ﬁnd that cells
present in both the early- and medium-bud blastema exhibit
bimodal pseudotimes, suggesting that both time points had cells
at earlier and later stages of differentiation (Fig. 7b). We then
attempted to identify cells in the medium-bud blastema that
could serve as terminal cell populations in the regenerative
trajectory. Since these cells are likely still located along a
trajectory towards a truly terminal cell population, we refer to
these tip populations as trajectories. We identiﬁed 10 popula-
tions within the medium-bud blastema, which based on marker
gene expression could be endothelial cells (pecam1), Schwann
cells (sox10), pericytes (cygb), myogenic blastema (myf5), ﬁbro-
adipogenic progenitors (FAPs) (pdgfra, osr155), a population of
lum
b
Medium-bud blastema
c
dpt
Medium-bud blastema
a
dpt
lum
Homeostasis
Epidermis
Hematopoietic 
Fibroblast
dpt
lum
Wound healing
Epidermis
Hematopoietic 
Fibro.-
like
blastema
Bld vessel
/ nerve
dpt
lum
Early-bud blastema
Epi-
dermis
Hematopoietic 
Fibro.-like
blastema
Bld vessel, muscle,
and tendon 
lum
Medium-bud blastema
dpt
Epidermis
Hematopoietic 
Fibro.-like
blastema
Bld vessel, nerve,
and muscle 
4
3
2
Expression level
Expression level
1
0
4
5
4
3
2
1
0
3
2
Expression level
Expression level
5
4
3
2
1
0
Expression level
Expression level
1
0
3
2
1
0
4
5
3
2
1
0
4
3
2
1
0
4
3
2
1
0
Basal Epi
Basal WE
Macrophage
Neutrophil
Early B cell
T cell
Erythrocyte 1
Erythrocyte 2
Endothelial
Tenocyte
FLB3
FLB4
FLB5
Myogenic blastema
Basal WE
Basal WE 1
Basal WE 2
Intermediate WE 1
Intermediate WE 4
Intermediate WE 5
Intermediate WE 2
Intermediate WE 3
Small secretory cell
Small secretory cell
Leydig
Neutrophil 1
Neutrophil 2
Early B cell
B cell
T cell
T cell
Neutrophil
Erythrocyte
Pericyte
Endothelial
Schwann
Myogenic blastema
Macrophage
Early B cell
Erythrocyte
Endothelial
Schwann
FLB1
FLB6
FLB7
FLB8
FLB9
FLB2
Dendrtic cell
Recruited mac
Phagocytosing neutro
Intermediate Epi
Proliferating Epi
Small secretory cell
Ionocyte
Langerhans
Early B cell
T cell
Myeloid
Erythrocyte
Fibroblast
Expression level
Expression level
Fig. 6 Fibroblasts-like cells are found during homeostasis and regeneration. a Violin plots depicting log2 values of normalized expression of ﬁbroblast and
ﬁbroblast-like blastema (FLB) cell-enriched genes lum and dpt at homeostasis, wound healing, early-bud blastema, and medium-bud blastema stages. Each
dot represents an individual cell; ﬁbroblast/FLB populations of interest are depicted in color, while all other populations are in gray. b Representative RNA
in situ hybridization probing for lum in a medium-bud blastema. c Representative RNA in situ hybridization probing for dpt in a medium-bud blastema.
Magniﬁcation ×4, scale bar is 500 μm. n = 4 animals per probe
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:5153 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9

undifferentiated FLB cells with distal markers (hoxa1356), and
ﬁbroblasts on trajectories towards osteoblast-like cells (bglap57,
odam58), joint-like (gdf559barx160), cartilage (col2a125), and
synovial ﬁbroblasts (cdh1161) (Fig. 7c, Supplementary Data 6–
15).
We
reasoned
that
these
cells,
except
for
FAPs
and
undifferentiated distal blastema cells, were potentially distinct
trajectories. We then determined potential relationships by
plotting a tree using the aforementioned blastema-resident cells
from wound healing, early-bud, and medium-bud blastema
stages. These data suggest that synovial ﬁbroblasts, joint-like
and cartilage trajectories potentially share a common ﬁbroblast-
like progenitor (i.e. distal undifferentiated blastema) (Fig. 7d).
In contrast, pericytes, endothelial cells, Schwann cells, myo-
genic blastema cells, and osteoblast-like ﬁbroblasts have distinct
trajectories (Fig. 7d). In addition, FAPs lie along the joint-like
and synovial ﬁbroblast-like trajectories, suggesting that these
cells
are
potentially
an
intermediate
cell
state
between
undifferentiated blastema cells and these tips (Fig. 7d). Notably,
it appears that putative osteoblast-like ﬁbroblasts are a distinct
lineage compared to the other ﬁbroblasts in this analysis. This
suggests the potential for different cellular origins of FLB cells,
and that tissue-resident ﬁbroblasts at homeostasis may be a
heterogeneous population. However, lineage-tracing experi-
ments would be required to conﬁrm this hypothesis. We plotted
markers that deﬁned the tip populations to conﬁrm the
potential tissue trajectory of each population (Supplementary
Fig. 7). By overlying gene expression on the trajectory tree, it is
clear that some of these marker genes may be expressed at
different stages of differentiation. Further exploration of factors
that deﬁne branch points may lead to information about cell
state transitions and decisions in the multipotent undiffer-
entiated blastema cells.
In the above analysis we did not include a rare population of
cells (11 total) only found in the early-bud blastema. This
population was marked by expression of scleraxis, which is a
deﬁnitive marker for tenocytes62 (Supplementary Data 4).
Interestingly, this putative tenocyte population did not have
expression of ﬁbroblast-associated markers, suggesting either a
non-ﬁbroblast origin of these tenocytes or a complete de-
differentiation process to a progenitor population. Thus, the
main components of the regenerated limb likely derive from a
diverse array of origins, including, but not limited to, rare tissue-
resident progenitor cell populations (i.e. muscle satellite cells and
potentially tenocytes) and de-differentiation and subsequent re-
differentiation of ﬁbroblasts and Schwann cells. Overall, these
data suggest that ﬁbroblasts-like cells can form different types of
tissue and that the other lineages we uncovered appear to be fate-
restricted by their original identity.
Discussion
These data provide an important, detailed molecular resource that
outlines and deﬁnes the cell populations that contribute to axolotl
limb regeneration. In particular, this study provides markers that
separate unique populations during regeneration and at home-
ostasis within the epidermis, blastema progenitors, and hemato-
poietic cells. We highlight the populations that have previously
been described to play integral roles in regeneration, but in
general have lacked more comprehensive molecular descriptions.
This includes the basal WE, macrophages, FLB cells, and Pax7+
muscle satellite cells. However, these data show that a variety of
other cell populations are present during regeneration, and we
suspect that clues to how regeneration occurs may be found in
many of these populations. It will be important to remain open to
the possibility of unexpected or rare cell populations playing
fundamental roles during regeneration.
Wound
healing
Early
blastema 
Medium
blastema
Wound healing
Medium blastema
Early blastema
Distal
Blastema 
Pericyte
Myogenic
Endo.
FAPs
Joint
Cartilage
Osteoblast-like
Syn.
Fibros 
Schwann
Distal blastema
Pericytes
FAPs
Syn. Fibros
Cartilage
Osteoblast-like
Joint
Scwhann
Endothelial
Myogenic
WH/EB
b
c
d
a
tSNE2
Density
tSNE1
tSNE2
tSNE1
Pseudotime
Pseudotime
Synovial fibros
Joint
Cartilage
Myogenic
Osteoblast-like
Schwann
Endothelial
Pericyte
40
5
4
3
2
1
0
20
0
–20
–20
0
20
40
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.4
–40
40
20
0
–20
–20
–20
0
Fig. 7 Putative differentiation trajectories of blastema cells. a t-SNE plot of blastema cells colored by respective time point sampled. b Distribution of
pseudotime of blastema cells colored by time point sampled. c t-SNE plot of blastema cell populations in the medium-bud-stage blastema. d Blastema
differentiation trajectories colored by blastema cell populations identiﬁed in c. Syn. ﬁbros synovial ﬁbroblasts, Endo. endothelial cells, FAPs ﬁbro-adipogenic
progenitors, WH wound healing, EB early-bud blastema
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:5153 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

There are contrasting thoughts on how the axolotl limb is
regenerated, whether all populations are derived from rare pro-
genitors resident in the homeostatic limb or if de-differentiation
of stump-resident cells provides a reservoir of progenitor cells.
Our data give credence to both hypotheses. To support the rare
progenitor hypothesis, we uncovered previously described Pax7+
muscle satellite cells6,16. This hypothesis was further supported by
our discovery of a rare population of putative tenocytes that
appears to not be ﬁbroblast-like (Supplementary Data 4). This
suggests the regenerating tendon may form from a rare tissue-
resident progenitor like that seen in mice63. In support of the de-
differentiation hypothesis, our data suggest that Schwann cells
may return to a precursor-like state, acquiring sox2 expression
(Supplementary Fig. 6c), which is a feature of de-differentiated
Schwann cell precursors observed in mouse digit tip regenera-
tion64. Further investigation as to whether, similar to mice, this
population provides essential growth factors and is thus required
for limb regeneration is warranted.
While our data suggest that FLB cells are capable of multi-
lineage potential (Fig. 7d), it is not clear to what extent the for-
mation of these cells is due to either recruitment of rare
tissue-resident progenitors or de-differentiation of ﬁbroblasts.
Importantly, we did capture a population of ﬁbroblasts within the
homeostatic limb that closely resembled FLB cells (Fig. 6, Sup-
plementary Data 2–5), though the limited number makes it dif-
ﬁcult to draw broad conclusions about this population. These
ﬁbroblasts likely represent dermal ﬁbroblasts and periosteal cells
within the homeostatic limb. Capturing more of these homeo-
static ﬁbroblasts may elucidate rare progenitor populations or
heterogeneity that suggests a bias towards regenerating into a
certain tissue type. Similarly, the osteoblast-like ﬁbroblasts we
detect in the medium-bud blastema may be derived from a
separate cell population even during wound healing (Fig. 7d).
Future experiments with lineage-tracing tools will be required to
elucidate what cells transition from the stump to form the blas-
tema. In general, it appears that ﬁbroblast-like cells, in particular
the population of undifferentiated blastema, have the highest
degree of multipotency (Fig. 7d), which is consistent with pre-
vious work3,4. Therefore, while it appears that cells enter a
blastema-like state via variety of mechanisms, it is now more clear
that ﬁbroblasts are multipotent, likely forming the joints, carti-
lage, and bone of the regenerate. In contrast, blastema cells
contributing to tendon, muscle, blood vessel, and nerve may be
lineage-restricted.
While understanding how the blastema forms is of utmost
importance, regeneration cannot proceed without the contribu-
tions of other cell types. For example, the WE is required for limb
regeneration, yet a detailed understanding of the basal WE, which
directly overlies the blastema mesenchyme, has remained elusive.
These data provide markers for future lineage-tracing experi-
ments, as well as a glimpse at transcripts that are dynamically
regulated along the course of regeneration. We highlight one such
marker, frem2 (Fig. 2), which has an essential role in tissue
morphogenesis during development65. Targeting the function of
genes enriched in the basal WE at different time points will
provide fundamental knowledge about contributions of this
population to regeneration.
These data further highlight the potential inﬂuence of immune
cells on limb regeneration and raise the intriguing and unex-
plored possibility that the adaptive immune system may be a
player in limb regeneration (Fig. 4, Supplementary Fig. 3). This is
reinforced by a recent study in zebraﬁsh showing a fundamental
role for Tregs in the regeneration of a variety of organs37. Since
these data describe the landscape of the blastema niche, and not
blastema progenitors alone, it will be important to investigate
contributions from other cell types (i.e. immune cells, WE) that
may help guide blastema progenitor cells to a pro-regenerative
state.
Pre-existing RNA-seq and microarrays resources built from
different tissues and experimental setups in axolotl limb regen-
eration have aimed to identify genes that have dynamic expres-
sion during limb regeneration17. Teasing out the contribution of
transcripts expressed in the blastema versus WE, as well as the
diversity of cell populations that we have now shown to be pre-
sent in the blastema, is critical. These single-cell RNA-seq data
also provide a new lens to re-evaluate bulk-tissue experiments.
While single-cell RNA-seq has proved to be a revolutionary
technology, it is still a developing technique, and issues of cell
capture efﬁciency (which can vary for different shaped/sized
cells), transcript capture efﬁciency, and read depth may limit
current studies. Notably, we did not uncover some previously
described blastema-enriched genes, such as kazald166, at appre-
ciable levels in our dataset, likely due to one of these technical
limitations or due to still-improving transcriptomic and genomic
assemblies. Further, computational methods to successfully deﬁne
populations and subpopulations are rapidly improving, and
revisiting datasets in the future may provide a more nuanced view
of
current
studies.
With
the
recent
transcriptional17
and
genomic16,67 resources now available for axolotl, continuing to
annotate the genome and generate a consensus transcriptome will
be imperative for unifying studies of this important model
system.
In general, many of the populations for which we present
detailed molecular-level information appear to be entering a
developmental-like state. The reuse of transcription factors such
as six1, eya1, scx, sox2, and foxd3 strongly suggests that limb
regeneration recapitulates development, which would be an efﬁ-
cient strategy even if there are distinct considerations including
inﬂammation, injury site variance, differences in target limb size,
and many others. This adds further intrigue to the question as to
why the ability to re-initiate a developmental-like program to
regenerate a limb is limited to so few species. Since more is
known about limb development than limb regeneration, and
species such as humans already possess the capacity to develop
limbs, more research focused on differences between these two
processes is warranted. Overall, these data provide molecular-
level detail on the cellular composition of the blastema niche,
which enhances our understanding of this complex structure.
Methods
Animal experimentation. All experiments using axolotls were performed in
accordance with the Brigham and Women’s Hospital Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee under protocol #2016N000369. For all amputations, animals
were narcotized in 0.1% tricaine and subsequently kept in 0.5% sulfamerazine
overnight. All single-cell RNA-seq experiments were performed on male and
female axolotls over the age of 1 year with lengths between 17 and 21.5 cm snout to
tail. All animals were never previously amputated and were housed singly their
entire lives to prevent cannibalistic biting of limbs.
Single-cell collection and sequencing. A detailed description of the cell harvest
protocol can be found here (dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.qmmdu46). This
protocol was derived with modiﬁcations from previous publications3,68,69. This
protocol consistently provided both blastema and epidermal cells, but was biased
towards epidermal collection. Therefore, due to small blastema cell quantity in the
early-bud blastemas, the entire WE was removed, and for medium-bud blastemas,
the WE was removed and only half of the WE was put into the collection tube.
Cells were then run on inDrops and libraries of about 3000 cells were
generated21,22 at the Single Cell Core at Harvard Medical School. Sequencing was
performed at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Molecular Biology Core Facility
using the inDrops V3 design, on a NextSeq500 (Illumina) using the following
parameters: read type = paired-end, cycles read1 = 61, cycles read2 = 14,
indexing = DualIndex, cycles index 1 = 8, and cycles index 2 = 8.
InDrops data processing and expression proﬁling. RNA-seq data were de-
multiplexed using the inDrops processing pipeline (https://github.com/indrops/
indrops) which was forked (https://github.com/brianjohnhaas/indrops) and
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:5153 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11

modiﬁed for use with a previously published axolotl transcriptome (http://portals.
broadinstitute.org/axolotlomics/)66. Reads, sample identity, cell barcodes, and
unique molecular identiﬁers (UMIs) were extracted from the Illumina data and
encoded into a single fastq ﬁle. Reads were aligned to the axolotl transcriptome
using bowtie like so: bowtie Axo.Trin.fasta.bowtie -q -p 20 -a --best --strata
--chunkmbs 1000 --sam -m 200 -n 1 -l 15 -e 100 reads.fastq > alignments.sam.
Aligned reads were counted according to targeted transcripts (using script
‘bam_to_count_matrix.pl’), with reads fractionally assigned across multi-mapped
targets, restricted to unique UMIs at target transcripts. Finally, read counts were
aggregated across transcript isoforms to yield a gene count matrix, in which a single
representative isoform was chosen to represent each respective gene.
Unbiased clustering with Seurat. Cell by gene matrices were ﬁltered to retain
only genes that were found in at least eight cells in all samples. Data were imported
into R and analyzed using Seurat 2.3.423. Analysis was conducted as described
(http://satijalab.org/seurat/) with modiﬁcations. Cells with low numbers of genes or
high mitochondrial RNA expression were removed. Variable genes for each time
point were determined, data were scaled, and linear dimensional reduction was
performed. Principal components used for clustering were determined by visual
inspection of a plot of standard deviations of the principal components. To
determine cluster number the data were over-clustered (i.e. a high resolution was
used that separates out populations that share highly similar gene expression
proﬁles). This was followed by examination of cluster distinctiveness using a
random forest classiﬁer, and subsequent merging of populations that scored highly
(i.e. were highly similar). All code used in in this paper can be found at https://
github.com/brianjohnhaas/indrops.
Pseudotime analysis with Monocle. Using Monocle 2.6.4, Seurat objects were
imported and converted directly into Monocle CDS objects. After subsetting the
epidermis populations of interest, the remaining cells were clustered, and differ-
entially expressed genes were determined. Following dimensional reduction using
the DDRTree method, cells were ordered along a trajectory. Analyses were based
on Monocle documentation (http://cole-trapnell-lab.github.io/monocle-release/
docs/). Full R markdown of this analysis can be found at https://github.com/
brianjohnhaas/indrops.
Trajectory analysis with URD. All non-immune cells residing within the blastema
cells (FLB, myogenic blastema, Schwann cells, endothelial cells, and pericytes) were
extracted from wound healing, early-bud blastema and medium-bud blastema time
points. Tenocytes were removed due to the small cell number (11 cells). As per the
URD tutorial (https://github.com/farrellja/URD), transition probabilities and
pseudotime were calculated and potential tip populations were determined and
reﬁned. Biased random walks were then performed to determine potential rela-
tionships between cell populations. Detailed code on URD implementation can be
found at https://github.com/brianjohnhaas/indrops.
Code availability. All code/details used to process raw data to cell by gene matrices
in this manuscript can be accessed at https://github.com/brianjohnhaas/indrops
along with R code which is also available as Supplementary Code.
Statistics. Differentially expressed genes between Seurat determined clusters were
evaluated using the non-parametric Wilcoxon's rank-sum test and adjusted P
values were calculated using Bonferroni correction. For URD clustering an area
under the precision-recall curve was used to determine cluster-enriched genes. All
RNA in situ hybridizations were performed a minimum of three times. Single-cell
RNA-seq was performed in three separate experiments/days. Medium-bud blas-
tema samples were acquired in two sets of three on different days. One set of
medium-bud blastema was processed with two early-bud samples, and the other
with three wound healing samples. The homeostatic limbs were collected in a third
separate experiment.
Specimen harvesting and processing. Regenerating limb tissue was collected and
immediately ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde in diethyl pyrocarbonate-treated 1×
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 1–2 h at room temperature, washed in 1× PBS,
and transferred through a sucrose gradient up to 30%. Tissue was then cryopre-
served into molds using TissueTek Optimal Cutting Temperature compound.
Tissue was sectioned at 16 μm on a Leica cryostat and stored at −80 °C prior to
experimentation.
RNA in situ hybridization. Probes were ampliﬁed from regenerating limb com-
plementary DNA and cloned into pGEM-T-easy and sequenced. The primers used
for generating all probes used in this study can be found in Supplementary Table 2.
Anti-sense probe was generated with either T7 or Sp6 polymerase depending on
orientation in pGEM. Tissue was collected at stages speciﬁed according to Tank
et al.70 from animals that were 18–22 cm in length and processed as described
above. For time-course sections, animals were 9.5–11.5 cm and harvested at stages
indicated. A detailed step-by-step RNA in situ hybridization protocol used in this
paper can be found at protocols.io (dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.p33dqqn)
NSE staining. After harvesting and sectioning as described above, tissue was post-
ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min, rinsed with running dH2O for 2 min,
and then incubated in NSE stain for 10 min at 37 °C. Slides were then rinsed for 2
min in dH2O before coverslipping.
Hematoxylin and eosin staining. After harvesting and sectioning as described
above, tissue was rehydrated in 1× PBS, post-ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 1×
PBS for 10 min, rinsed with 1× PBS, and then water. Hematoxylin and eosin
staining was then performed in buckets as follows: xylene for 5 min (×2), 100%
ethanol for 2 min (×6), water for 2 min, hematoxylin for 3 min, water for 2 min,
acid alcohol for two quick dips, water for 2 min, Scott’s blueing agent for 3 min,
water for 2 min, eosin for 2 min, 100% ethanol for 2 min (×5), and xylene for 2 min
(×2). Coverslips were then applied and slides were left to dry overnight.
Data availability
The authors declare that all data supporting the ﬁndings of this study are available
within the article and its Supplementary information ﬁles or from the corre-
sponding author upon reasonable request. All single-cell RNA-seq data and cell by
gene matrices used to generate all graphs in this manuscript have been deposited in
the Gene Expression Omnibus database under accession code GSE121737. A
reporting summary for this Article is available as a Supplementary Information ﬁle.
Received: 2 February 2018 Accepted: 13 November 2018
References
1.
Chalkley, D. A quantitative histological analysis of forelimb regeneration
Triturus viridescens. J. Morphol. 94, 21–70 (1954).
2.
Christensen, R. N. & Tassava, R. A. Apical epithelial cap morphology and
ﬁbronectin gene expression in regenerating axolotl limbs. Dev. Dyn. 217,
216–224 (2000).
3.
Kragl, M. et al. Cells keep a memory of their tissue origin during axolotl limb
regeneration. Nature 460, 60–65 (2009).
4.
Currie, J. D. et al. Live imaging of Axolotl digit regeneration reveals
spatiotemporal choreography of diverse connective tissue progenitor pools.
Dev. Cell 39, 411–423 (2016).
5.
McCusker, C. D., Diaz-Castillo, C., Sosnik, J., A, Q. P. & Gardiner, D. M.
Cartilage and bone cells do not participate in skeletal regeneration in
Ambystoma mexicanum limbs. Dev. Biol. 416, 26–33 (2016).
6.
Fei, J. F. et al. Efﬁcient gene knockin in axolotl and its use to test the role of
satellite cells in limb regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114,
12501–12506 (2017).
7.
Thornton, C. S. The effect of apical cap removal on limb regeneration in
Amblystoma larvae. J. Exp. Zool. 134, 357–381 (1957).
8.
Mescher, A. L. Effects on adult newt limb regeneration of partial and complete
skin ﬂaps over the amputation surface. J. Exp. Zool. 195, 117–128 (1976).
9.
Stocum, D. L. & Dearlove, G. E. Epidermal–mesodermal interaction during
morphogenesis of the limb regeneration blastema in larval salamanders. J. Exp.
Zool. 181, 49–61 (1972).
10. Boilly, B. & Albert, P. In vitro control of blastema cell proliferation by extracts
from epidermal cap and mesenchyme of regenerating limbs of axolotls. Roux
Arch. Dev. Biol. 198, 443–447 (1990).
11. Scheuing, M. R. & Singer, M. The effects of microquantitles of beryllium ion
on the regenerating forelimb of the adult newt, Triturus. J. Exp. Zool. 136,
301–327 (1957).
12. Thornton, C. S. Inﬂuence of an eccentric epidermal cap on limb regeneration
in Amblystoma larvae. Dev. Biol. 2, 551–569 (1960).
13. Godwin, J. W., Pinto, A. R. & Rosenthal, N. A. Macrophages are required for
adult salamander limb regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110,
9415–9420 (2013).
14. Singer, M. The inﬂuence of the nerve in regeneration of the amphibian
extremity. Q. Rev. Biol. 27, 169–200 (1952).
15. Muneoka, K., Fox, W. F. & Bryant, S. V. Cellular contribution from dermis
and cartilage to the regenerating limb blastema in axolotls. Dev. Biol. 116,
256–260 (1986).
16. Nowoshilow, S. et al. The axolotl genome and the evolution of key tissue
formation regulators. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25458 (2018).
17. Haas, B. J. & Whited, J. L. Advances in decoding axolotl limb regeneration.
Trends Genet. 33, 553–565 (2017).
18. Villani, A. C. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals new types of human blood
dendritic cells, monocytes, and progenitors. Science 356, https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.aah4573 (2017).
19. Macosko, E. Z. et al. Highly parallel genome-wide expression proﬁling
of individual cells using nanoliter droplets. Cell 161, 1202–1214
(2015).
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:5153 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

20. Han, X. et al. Mapping the mouse cell atlas by Microwell-Seq. Cell 173, 1307
(2018).
21. Klein, A. M. et al. Droplet barcoding for single-cell transcriptomics applied to
embryonic stem cells. Cell 161, 1187–1201 (2015).
22. Zilionis, R. et al. Single-cell barcoding and sequencing using droplet
microﬂuidics. Nat. Protoc. 12, 44–73 (2017).
23. Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E. & Satija, R. Integrating single-
cell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and species.
Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 411–420 (2018).
24. Plasschaert, L. W. et al. A single-cell atlas of the airway epithelium reveals the
CFTR-rich pulmonary ionocyte. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-
0394-6 (2018).
25. Khattak, S. et al. Germline transgenic methods for tracking cells and testing
gene function during regeneration in the axolotl. Stem Cell Rep. 1, 90–103
(2013).
26. Marinkovich, M. P., Taylor, T. B., Keene, D. R., Burgeson, R. E. & Zone, J. J.
LAD-1, the linear IgA bullous dermatosis autoantigen, is a novel 120-kDa
anchoring ﬁlament protein synthesized by epidermal cells. J. Invest. Dermatol.
106, 734–738 (1996).
27. Dubaissi, E. et al. A secretory cell type develops alongside multiciliated cells,
ionocytes and goblet cells, and provides a protective, anti-infective function in
the frog embryonic mucociliary epidermis. Development 141, 1514–1525
(2014).
28. Tang, W. J., Fernandez, J., Sohn, J. J. & Amemiya, C. T. Chitin is endogenously
produced in vertebrates. Curr. Biol. 25, 897–900 (2015).
29. Kumar, A., Godwin, J. W., Gates, P. B., Garza-Garcia, A. A. & Brockes, J. P.
Molecular basis for the nerve dependence of limb regeneration in an adult
vertebrate. Science 318, 772–777 (2007).
30. Mullen, L. M., Bryant, S. V., Torok, M. A., Blumberg, B. & Gardiner,
D. M. Nerve dependency of regeneration: the role of Distal-less and FGF
signaling in amphibian limb regeneration. Development 122, 3487–3497
(1996).
31. Farkas, J. E., Freitas, P. D., Bryant, D. M., Whited, J. L. & Monaghan, J. R.
Neuregulin-1 signaling is essential for nerve-dependent axolotl limb
regeneration. Development 143, 2724–2731 (2016).
32. Blanpain, C. & Fuchs, E. Epidermal stem cells of the skin. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev.
Biol. 22, 339–373 (2006).
33. Trapnell, C. et al. The dynamics and regulators of cell fate decisions are
revealed by pseudotemporal ordering of single cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 32,
381–386 (2014).
34. Tian, J., Okabe, T., Miyazaki, T., Takeshita, S. & Kudo, A. Pax-5 is identical to
EBB-1/KLP and binds to the VpreB and lambda5 promoters as well as the KI
and KII sites upstream of the Jkappa genes. Eur. J. Immunol. 27, 750–755
(1997).
35. Zhang, J. et al. CD8 T cells are involved in skeletal muscle regeneration
through facilitating MCP-1 secretion and Gr1(high) macrophage inﬁltration.
J. Immunol. 193, 5149–5160 (2014).
36. Burzyn, D. et al. A special population of regulatory T cells potentiates muscle
repair. Cell 155, 1282–1295 (2013).
37. Hui, S. P. et al. Zebraﬁsh regulatory T cells mediate organ-speciﬁc regenerative
programs. Dev. Cell 43, 659–672 e655 (2017).
38. Ellett, F., Pase, L., Hayman, J. W., Andrianopoulos, A. & Lieschke, G. J. mpeg1
promoter transgenes direct macrophage-lineage expression in zebraﬁsh. Blood
117, e49–e56 (2011).
39. Elomaa, O. et al. Cloning of a novel bacteria-binding receptor structurally
related to scavenger receptors and expressed in a subset of macrophages. Cell
80, 603–609 (1995).
40. Geissmann, F. et al. Development of monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic
cells. Science 327, 656–661 (2010).
41. Turnbull, I. R. et al. Cutting edge: TREM-2 attenuates macrophage activation.
J. Immunol. 177, 3520–3524 (2006).
42. De, Y. et al. LL-37, the neutrophil granule- and epithelial cell-derived
cathelicidin, utilizes formyl peptide receptor-like 1 (FPRL1) as a receptor to
chemoattract human peripheral blood neutrophils, monocytes, and T cells. J.
Exp. Med. 192, 1069–1074 (2000).
43. Liebman, E. The leucocytes in regenerating limbs of Triturus viridescens.
Growth 13, 103–118 (1949).
44. Thuy le, T. T. et al. Absence of cytoglobin promotes multiple organ
abnormalities in aged mice. Sci. Rep. 6, 24990 (2016).
45. Bondjers, C. et al. Microarray analysis of blood microvessels from PDGF-B
and PDGF-Rbeta mutant mice identiﬁes novel markers for brain pericytes.
FASEB J. 20, 1703–1705 (2006).
46. Le, N. et al. Analysis of congenital hypomyelinating Egr2Lo/Lo nerves
identiﬁes Sox2 as an inhibitor of Schwann cell differentiation and myelination.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 2596–2601 (2005).
47. Kos, R., Reedy, M. V., Johnson, R. L. & Erickson, C. A. The winged-helix
transcription factor FoxD3 is important for establishing the neural crest
lineage and repressing melanogenesis in avian embryos. Development 128,
1467–1479 (2001).
48. Laclef, C. et al. Altered myogenesis in Six1-deﬁcient mice. Development 130,
2239–2252 (2003).
49. Grifone, R. et al. Eya1 and Eya2 proteins are required for hypaxial somitic
myogenesis in the mouse embryo. Dev. Biol. 302, 602–616 (2007).
50. Whited, J. L. et al. Pseudotyped retroviruses for infecting axolotl in vivo and
in vitro. Development 140, 1137–1146 (2013).
51. Philippeos, C. et al. Spatial and single-cell transcriptional proﬁling identiﬁes
functionally distinct human dermal ﬁbroblast subpopulations. J. Invest.
Dermatol. 138, 811–825 (2018).
52. Lewandowska, K. et al. Extracellular matrix adhesion-promoting activities of a
dermatan sulfate proteoglycan-associated protein (22K) from bovine fetal
skin. J. Cell Sci. 99(Part 3), 657–668 (1991).
53. Duchamp de Lageneste, O. et al. Periosteum contains skeletal stem cells with
high bone regenerative potential controlled by Periostin. Nat. Commun. 9, 773
(2018).
54. Farrell, J. A. et al. Single-cell reconstruction of developmental trajectories
during zebraﬁsh embryogenesis. Science 360, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
aar3131 (2018).
55. Vallecillo-Garcia, P. et al. Odd skipped-related 1 identiﬁes a population of
embryonic ﬁbro-adipogenic progenitors regulating myogenesis during limb
development. Nat. Commun. 8, 1218 (2017).
56. Gardiner, D. M., Blumberg, B., Komine, Y. & Bryant, S. V. Regulation of
HoxA expression in developing and regenerating axolotl limbs. Development
121, 1731–1741 (1995).
57. Brown, J. P. et al. Serum bone Gla-protein: a speciﬁc marker for bone
formation in postmenopausal osteoporosis. Lancet 1, 1091–1093 (1984).
58. Lee, H. K. et al. Expression pattern, subcellular localization, and functional
implications of ODAM in ameloblasts, odontoblasts, osteoblasts, and various
cancer cells. Gene. Expr. Patterns 12, 102–108 (2012).
59. Storm, E. E. & Kingsley, D. M. GDF5 coordinates bone and joint formation
during digit development. Dev. Biol. 209, 11–27 (1999).
60. Nichols, J. T., Pan, L., Moens, C. B. & Kimmel, C. B. barx1 represses joints and
promotes cartilage in the craniofacial skeleton. Development 140, 2765–2775
(2013).
61. Valencia, X. et al. Cadherin-11 provides speciﬁc cellular adhesion between
ﬁbroblast-like synoviocytes. J. Exp. Med. 200, 1673–1679 (2004).
62. Schweitzer, R. et al. Analysis of the tendon cell fate using Scleraxis, a speciﬁc
marker for tendons and ligaments. Development 128, 3855–3866 (2001).
63. Bi, Y. et al. Identiﬁcation of tendon stem/progenitor cells and the role of the
extracellular matrix in their niche. Nat. Med. 13, 1219–1227 (2007).
64. Johnston, A. P. et al. Dedifferentiated Schwann cell precursors secreting
paracrine factors are required for regeneration of the mammalian digit tip.
Cell Stem Cell 19, 433–448 (2016).
65. Timmer, J. R., Mak, T. W., Manova, K., Anderson, K. V. & Niswander, L.
Tissue morphogenesis and vascular stability require the Frem2 protein,
product of the mouse myelencephalic blebs gene. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
102, 11746–11750 (2005).
66. Bryant, D. M. et al. A tissue-mapped Axolotl de novo transcriptome enables
identiﬁcation of limb regeneration factors. Cell Rep. 18, 762–776 (2017).
67. Keinath, M. C. et al. Initial characterization of the large genome of the
salamander Ambystoma mexicanum using shotgun and laser capture
chromosome sequencing. Sci. Rep. 5, 16413 (2015).
68. Goetz, J. J. & Trimarchi, J. M. Single-cell proﬁling of developing and mature
retinal neurons. J. Vis. Exp. https://doi.org/10.3791/3824 (2012).
69. Briggs, J. A. et al. The dynamics of gene expression in vertebrate
embryogenesis at single-cell resolution. Science 360, https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.aar5780 (2018).
70. Tank, P. W., Carlson, B. M. & Connelly, T. G. A staging system for forelimb
regeneration in the Axolotl, Ambystoma mexicanum. J. Morphol. 150, 117–128
(1976).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child and
Human Development (DP2HD087953 to J.L.W.) and the National Institute of Arthritis
and Musculoskeletal and Skin diseases (R03AR068126 to J.L.W.) of the National Insti-
tutes of Health and the Richard and Susan Smith Family Foundation (J.L.W.). N.D.L.
was supported by Award Number F32HD092120 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child and Human Development of the National Institutes of Health.
D.M.B. was supported by a HHMI Gilliam Fellowship. R.M. was supported by the
National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship (DGE1144152). R.O. was
supported by PRISE (Harvard University) and Herchel-Smith (Harvard University). A.Y.
W. was supported by HCRP (Harvard College) and HIP (Harvard Stem Cell Institute).
We also thank the Harvard Medical School Single Cell Core for inDrops cell collection;
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Molecular Biology Core Facilities for sequencing; Adam
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:5153 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
13

Gramy and Sarah Lemire for help with animal care; Tae J. Lee and Duygu Payzin-Dogru
for discussion and comments.
Author contributions
N.D.L., R.M., and J.L.W. designed experiments; N.D.L., and J.L.W. wrote the paper; N.D.
L, R.M, G.S.D., A.C., and B.J.H. performed computational analyses; N.D.L., A.R., R.M., K.
J., R.O., A.Y.W., D.M.B, W.W.Y., and B.M.M. performed sample preparations and
validations. All the authors contributed to manuscript editing.
Additional information
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
018-07604-0.
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2018
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
14
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:5153 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

===== Lencer2021_eLife_NeuralCrest+scRNAseq =====
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

1 of 20
Single-­cell RNA analysis identifies pre-­
migratory neural crest cells expressing 
markers of differentiated derivatives
Ezra Lencer1,2*, Rytis Prekeris2, Kristin Bruk Artinger1
1Department of Craniofacial Biology, University of Colorado, Denver, United States; 
2Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Denver, 
United States
Abstract The neural crest is a migratory population of stem-­like cells that contribute to multiple 
traits including the bones of the skull, peripheral nervous system, and pigment. How neural crest 
cells differentiate into diverse cell types is a fundamental question in the study of vertebrate biology. 
Here, we use single-­cell RNA sequencing to characterize transcriptional changes associated with 
neural crest cell development in the zebrafish trunk during the early stages of migration. We show 
that neural crest cells are transcriptionally diverse and identify pre-­migratory populations already 
expressing genes associated with differentiated derivatives, specifically in the xanthophore lineage. 
Further, we identify a population of Rohon–Beard neurons in the data. The data presented identify 
novel genetic markers for multiple trunk neural crest cell populations and Rohon–Beard neurons 
providing insight into previously uncharacterized genes critical for vertebrate development.
Introduction
A fundamental question in developmental biology concerns how multipotent cell precursors produce 
diverse cell types (Waddington, 1957). This question is particularly relevant for the study of the verte-
brate neural crest, a transient population of stem-­like cells that contribute to multiple traits and form 
numerous cell types. Neural crest cells (NCCs) make the cartilages and bones of the skull, neurons of 
the peripheral nervous system (PNS), glial cells, and pigment cells among other derivatives (Anderson, 
1989; Theveneau and Mayor, 2012). How and when NCCs acquire these diverse fates are long-­
standing questions in the study of vertebrate development and have direct implications for both our 
understanding of vertebrate evolution as well as the origins of NCC-­derived hereditary diseases such 
as cleft lip and palate.
NCC development is classically conceived as a stepwise series of bifurcating cell fate decisions 
(Anderson, 1989; Klymkowsky et al., 2010; Simoes-­Costa et al., 2014). NCCs are specified at the 
neural plate border, a region of ectoderm in the gastrula stage embryo that also produces cranial 
placodes, and in fishes and frogs, Rohon–Beard sensory neurons. Once specified, NCCs undergo an 
epithelial-­to-­mesenchymal transition, migrate throughout the embryo, and differentiate into multiple 
cell types. When and how NCCs differentiate into these derivative lineages remains unclear. Early 
studies in chick and frog suggested that migratory NCCs are multipotent, requiring cues from the 
migratory environment to initiate differentiation (Bronner-­Fraser and Fraser, 1988; Bronner-­Fraser 
and Fraser, 1989; Collazo et al., 1993). Other studies in zebrafish and quail suggested that NCCs 
are often lineage restricted prior to migration, and thus interactions among NCCs in the neural tube 
must somehow specify cells to different lineages before cells become migratory (Henion and Weston, 
1997; Raible and Eisen, 1994; Raible and Eisen, 1996; Schilling and Kimmel, 1994).
SHORT REPORT
*For correspondence: 
​ezra.​lencer@​cuanschutz.​edu
Competing interest: The authors 
declare that no competing 
interests exist.
Funding: See page 16
Preprinted: 20 December 2020
Received: 29 December 2020
Accepted: 03 August 2021
Published: 16 August 2021
Reviewing Editor: Lilianna 
Solnica-­Krezel, Washington 
University School of Medicine, 
United States
‍ ‍ Copyright Lencer et al. This 
article is distributed under the 
terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License, which 
permits unrestricted use and 
redistribution provided that the 
original author and source are 
credited.

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

2 of 20
Current understanding of the transcriptional changes associated with different stages of NCC devel-
opment has largely been built from analysis of gene expression in whole tissues (Simoes-­Costa et al., 
2014). However, developing tissues are often transcriptionally heterogeneous, a fact highlighted by 
recent developments in single-­cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-­seq) (Briggs et al., 2018; Farnsworth 
et al., 2020; Farrell et al., 2018; Morrison et al., 2020; Morrison et al., 2017; Saunders et al., 
2019; Soldatov et al., 2019; Wagner et al., 2018; Zalc et al., 2021). Furthermore, as cells within 
tissues are often at different stages of fate specification, scRNA-­seq has the potential to expose tran-
scriptional changes associated with differentiation that would have been missed by bulk sequencing 
experiments (Farrell et al., 2018; Soldatov et al., 2019). For instance, in chick, scRNA-­seq studies of 
migrating cranial NCCs identified unique transcriptional signatures associated with a morphologically 
cryptic population of cells at the leading migratory edge (Morrison et al., 2020; Morrison et al., 
2017). Thus, an emerging picture is that NCCs are more transcriptionally heterogeneous than once 
thought, and that a complete understanding of NCC biology must account for this heterogeneity.
Here, we use scRNA-­seq to characterize the transcriptional landscape of trunk neural crest cells 
(tNCCs) during the early stages of migration in zebrafish. We sampled NCCs at a stage in zebrafish 
development when both migratory and pre-­migratory tNCC populations are present in the embryo. 
In the trunk, NCCs migrate along one of two paths that are temporally and spatially separated. 
Early migrating tNCCs move between the neural tube and somitic mesoderm along the medial path 
(Figure 1A). These cells give rise to neurons of the PNS, glia, and pigment cells. Later migrating 
tNCCs follow the dorsolateral path between the skin ectoderm and somitic mesoderm to produce 
pigment cells. Thus, our experiment aims to capture transcriptional changes associated with the onset 
of migration and the splitting of NCCs into a neuronal or pigment lineage. We show that tNCCs are a 
transcriptionally diverse population of cells, and that some pre-­migratory tNCCs are already expressing 
genes associated with a differentiated xanthophore pigment lineage. In addition, we identify a unique 
population of Rohon–Beard neurons (RBs) that expresses sox10 and comment on the developmental 
similarity among RBs and NCCs. Ultimately these data create a foundation for future genetic work 
studying the roles of previously uncharacterized genes during NCC and RB development.
Results
scRNA-seq identifies transcriptionally unique populations of NCCs
We used 10 X Genomics to characterize the transcriptomes of 607 tg(–4.9sox10:eGFP)-­positive cells 
from the dissected trunks of 20–24  hr post fertilization (hpf) zebrafish embryos (25 somite stage; 
hereafter 24 hpf; Figure 1B). At this developmental stage, the sox10:eGFP transgene labels NCCs 
as well as the otic organ and lateral line (Carney et al., 2006). tNCCs in the anterior segments of 
the body are beginning to migrate along the medial path (Figure 1A and B), while most tNCCs that 
populate the posterior segments of the body and dorsolateral pathway are pre-­migratory. Thus our 
sample represents the early stages of tNCC migration and includes a mixed population of migratory 
and pre-­migratory tNCCs.
Our scRNA-­seq analysis identified a transcriptionally heterogeneous population of sox10:eGFP+ 
cells (Figure 1C–F). Most cells were assigned to the NCC lineage based on expression of genes known 
to label NCCs at this stage (crestin, sox10, foxd3, and tfap2a; Figure 1C and D). We also identified 
a cluster of cells (cluster 7, 39 cells, Figure 1C) that belongs to the otic organ or lateral line (epcam, 
cldn7b, f11r.1, otomp, otog). A small cluster of cells (cluster 6, 28 cells), expressing multiple collagen 
genes, were assigned to a ‘mesenchymal’ NCC type found in other datasets (Howard et al., 2021; 
Soldatov et al., 2019), and some cells were assigned as posterior arch cranial NCCs based on the 
expression of genes known to mark these regions of the embryo (prdm1a, grem2b, dlx2a, and fli1a).
These posterior arch cells were split across two clusters (clusters 4 and 5, 116 and 94 cells, respec-
tively), one of which (cluster 5) are proliferating cells expressing genes involved in cell cycle (e.g., 
cdk1, mki67, plk1; Figure 1F). Regressing out cell cycle confirms that most cluster 5 cells are mitotic 
posterior arch cells, though a small number of these mitotic cells are assigned as tNCCs (Figure 1—
figure supplement 1). Importantly, we recover the same biologically relevant groupings of cells and 
marker genes whether regressing out variables such as cell cycle or not indicating that the biological 
signal of cell type in the data is robust to different analysis parameters (Figure 1—figure supplement 

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

3 of 20
Figure 1. Single-­cell RNA analysis identifies transcriptionally heterogeneous sox10:eGFP population. (A) Schematic of zebrafish trunk neural crest 
cell (tNCC) migration. Medial route migrating tNCCs produce peripheral nervous system and pigment cells, while tNCCs migrating along the dorsal-­
lateral path produce pigment cells. (B) Schematic of experimental design. NCCs were sampled by dissecting the trunks of 80 sox10:eGFP+ zebrafish 
at 24 hr post fertilization. GFP+ NCCs were FAC sorted and sequenced using 10 X Genomics. Representative image shows sox10:eGFP transgene in a 
Figure 1 continued on next page

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

4 of 20
1; Materials and methods). Since our main interest is on NCCs in the trunk, we do not further analyze 
the otic, mesenchymal, and posterior arch tissues at length below.
Despite sampling zebrafish embryos during the early stages of tNCC migration, we observed 
multiple transcriptionally unique populations of tNCCs. One cluster of tNCCs (cluster 1, 112 cells) 
expresses genes that mark NCCs (e.g., crestin, sox10, foxd3, sox9a, tfap2a), and multiple Hox genes 
(e.g., hoxb8a, hoxa11b, hoxb7a) that place these cells in the posterior section of the zebrafish trunk 
(Figure 1C, D and F). Cells in cluster 1 express genes associated with tNCC migration (e.g., snai1b, 
prickle1a, wnt11) and genes with unknown function including a predicted cdc42 effector protein 
(zgc:150493) and cytokine-­associated factor crlf1a. As tNCCs in this cluster lack expression of genes 
identifying these cells to a differentiated lineage, we hypothesize cluster 1 as multipotent tNCC 
progenitors.
We found a large number of tNCCs already expressing genes associated with differentiated 
pigment cells spread across two clusters (Figure 1C, D and F). This was surprising as these cells are 
presumably pre-­migratory based on the sampled stage. Cells in cluster 2 (79 cells) express mela-
nophore/pan-­pigment genes including mitfa, gpr143, trpm1b. We hypothesize these cells as pan-­
pigment-­cell progenitors. In contrast to these pigment progenitors, cells in cluster 3 (82 cells) express 
genes enriched in differentiated xanthophores (red/orange pigment cells) including aox5, pax7a/b, 
and gch. We hypothesize cluster 3 as xanthoblast cells (e.g., pre-­xanthophore), and these data identify 
novel markers of the early xanthophore lineage including solute carrier paralogs slc2a15a/b and gap 
junction protein gjp8 (Figure 1—figure supplement 2).
These data suggest that a subset of tNCCs begin expressing gene regulatory networks (GRNs) 
associated with pigment cell lineages prior to migration. This raises the possibility that the sequencing 
data reflect transcriptional profiles of cells at different stages of differentiation. To explore this further, 
we inferred RNA velocity (Velocyto) as a measure of developmental pseudotime (Bergen et al., 2020). 
This method uses estimates of RNA splicing to infer how cells may be transitioning across different 
transcriptional states. RNA velocity showed a strong signal of tNCCs differentiating from NCC progen-
itor cluster 1 into xanthoblast pigment cluster 3 (Figure 1E) consistent with a hypothesis that some 
tNCCs initiate a pigment differentiation program prior to migration.
Identification of neural-like cells and Rohon–Beard neurons
Two clusters (clusters 8 and 9) are distinguished from other cells by expression of genes enriched in 
the developing spinal cord and differentiated neurons (e.g., elavl3, elavl4). Cells in cluster 8 (21 cells) 
express genes associated with the neural plate and neural tube including olig3, olig4, sox3, boc, cdon, 
and multiple zic family transcription factors (zic1, zic2a, zic2b, zic4, zic5, zic6). Intriguingly some of 
these genes (e.g., zic2a/b, zic5) are also expressed by a subset of tNCC progenitors (Figure 1—figure 
supplement 3). Cells assigned to this neural cluster may represent ‘early’ NCCs still enriched in genes 
associated with the neural plate/neural plate border. Alternatively, these cells may be differentiating 
glia or other neuronal subtype precursors.
dissected trunk used for cell dissociation. YE: yolk extension. (C) Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) and clustering of cells reveals 
multiple transcriptionally unique sox10:eGFP+ cell clusters. Numbers and labels correspond to main text. (D) Expression of select genes in UMAP 
space shows variable expression across different clusters. (E) RNA velocity connects cells in developmental pseudotime. Direction and length of arrows 
represent predicted direction of differentiation as calculated by Velocyto (see Materials and methods). Note cells predicted to be differentiating from 
tNCC progenitor cluster one into xanthoblast cluster 3. (F) Heatmap shows expression of top 10 most differentially expressed genes (log2Fold) for each 
cluster.
The online version of this article includes the following source data and figure supplement(s) for figure 1:
Source code 1. Annotated text file of R code used to generate analyses presented in Figures 1 and 2.
Data deposited in NCBI GEO GSE112294.
Figure supplement 1. Analysis of single-­cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-­seq) is robust to different analysis parameters.
Figure supplement 2. Expression of genes that label xanthoblast and Rohon–Beard clusters.
Figure supplement 3. Expression of genes that label neural cluster 8 cells.
Figure supplement 4. Rohon–Beard cells are unlikely to be doublets from incomplete cell dissociation.
Figure 1 continued

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

5 of 20
Cells in cluster 9 (36 cells) were transcriptionally distinct from all other cells in the dataset and 
express genes known to mark RBs including isl1, isl2a/b, scrt2, prdm14, and drgx (Figure 1C, D and 
F; Figure 1—figure supplement 2). RBs are a non-­migratory population of cells in the dorsal neural 
tube that innervate the skin of embryonic and larval zebrafish. Like NCCs, RBs are also specified at 
the neural plate border and genes critical for the proper specification of NCCs are also critical for 
specification of RBs (Artinger et al., 1999; Hernandez-­Lagunas et al., 2005; Hernandez-­Lagunas 
et al., 2011). While we cannot fully rule out that RB neurons are represented in our dataset due to 
the proximity of RBs and NCCs to each other in the neural tube, we find this explanation unlikely. Our 
FACS sorting gated for doublets, and our bioinformatic pipeline further filtered out putative doublets 
based (Figure 1—figure supplement 4). With the exception of three mitfa expressing cells, RBs do 
not express genes associated with other NCC clusters, which would be expected if these cells are due 
to incomplete dissociation from NCC tissue. Instead, our data recovering a putative RB population in 
an experiment targeting tNCCs may reflect a common developmental origin between these two cell 
types.
Cross-dataset integration confirms cell identities and expression of 
marker genes
To further investigate the transcriptional identities of sox10:eGFP+ cells in our dataset, we integrated 
our data with an existing scRNA-­seq atlas of sox10:eGFP tNCCs from 48 to 50 (hereafter 48 hpf) and 
68-70 hpf (hereafter 68 hpf) zebrafish embryos (Howard et al., 2021). These complementary data 
sampled tNCCs using the same transgene allowing us to directly study tNCC identity across develop-
mental time. For these analyses, we used the Seurat integrate datasets function to combine data from 
cells isolated from the trunks of 24 hpf, 48 hpf, and 68 hpf zebrafish.
Our analysis of these combined datasets found tNCCs clustering by cell type across developmental 
time (Figure 2). Cells assigned to the otic organ from 24 hpf embryos cluster with cells independently 
assigned to the otic organ from 48 and 68 hpf embryos. Similarly, mitotic cells from all three datasets 
group together, as do mesenchymal cell types. Cells assigned as tNCC progenitors at 24 hpf (cluster 
1) group proximate to migratory tNCCs from 48 hpf embryos (e.g., ‘Migratory/enteric neural crest’). 
Posterior arch cells from 24 hpf embryos are split across these NCC progenitor groups and mesen-
chymal cell types, perhaps reflecting the early developmental stage sampled. Importantly, NCCs from 
24 hpf embryos do not group with differentiated neural derivatives from 48 and 68 hpf embryos, 
suggesting that tNCCs delay initiating a neural differentiation program until post-­migratory develop-
mental stages.
Concordance across tNCCs sampled at different stages is striking for pigment cells (Figure 2). 
Pigment cell progenitors from 24 hpf embryos group with pigment cell progenitors and melanophores 
from 48 hpf and 68 hpf embryos (Figure 2B and C). Xanthoblasts sampled from 24 hpf embryos form 
a bridge connecting this pigment progenitor/melanophore cluster to differentiated xanthophores 
sampled from 68 hpf embryos. Critically, we find that differentiated xanthophores at 68 hpf and 
xanthoblasts at 24 hpf express the same set of genes including gjb8, rgs2, pax7a/b, aox5, slc2a15a/b 
(Figure 2E; Figure 2—figure supplement 1). These data further indicate that 24 hpf xanthoblasts are 
expressing a differentiated xanthophore GRN.
While 24 hpf pigment cells are expressing markers of differentiated derivatives, some differences 
between early and late pigment cells exist (Figure 2—figure supplement 1). For instance, pigment 
cells at all developmental stages express critical transcription factors such as mitfa, but downstream 
targets such as dct and tyrp1a/b that effect melanin biosynthesis are only expressed in cells isolated 
from 48 hpf and 68 hpf embryos (Figure 2—figure supplement 1). To investigate gene expression 
changes associated with xanthophore maturation, we looked for differentially expressed genes 
between 24 hpf xanthoblasts and 68 hpf xanthophores. This test identified genes upregulated in 
xanthophores at 68 hpf including aqp3a, slc22a7a, cilia-­associated protein ccdc39, and prdx1/2/5/6 
genes associated with redox state (Figure  2D; Figure  2—figure supplement 1). Xanthoblasts in 
contrast express genes associated with EMT and melanophore cell types at higher levels including 
tfap2e and zeb2a (Figure 2—figure supplement 1). Thus, these data suggest that there is biolog-
ical maturation that occurs during this time frame of xanthophore development. Xanthoblasts at 24 
hpf retain a pan-­pigment transcriptional state while also expressing a mostly complete differentiated 
xanthophore GRN.

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

6 of 20
Figure 2. Integrated analysis of sox10:eGFP+ cells from 24, 48, and 68 hr post fertilization (hpf) zebrafish embryos shows pre-­migratory trunk neural 
crest cells (tNCCs) expressing markers of derivative cell types. (A) Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) of integrated datasets 
showing cells colored by age. (B) UMAP of integrated datasets with cells colored and labeled by annotated category. Annotations of 48 and 68 hpf cells 
from Howard et al., 2021 are indicated with regular text. Annotations for 24 hpf cells from the current study are boxed and bolded. Points representing 
Figure 2 continued on next page

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

7 of 20
In these analyses, RBs cluster with neuronal cell types (e.g., enteric neurons and spinal cord neurons) 
sampled from 48 and 68 hpf embryos (Figure 2B). This reflects similar transcriptomes across different 
neurons. While these other neuronal cells co-­express some shared genes with RBs (e.g., elavl3, elavl4, 
vim), RBs express a unique set of genes (Figure 2E). For instance, RBs and enteric neuron cells from 68 
hpf embryos both express fgf13a/b ligands at appreciable levels. RBs, however, also express cxcr4b 
and islet genes that are lacking in enteric neurons. Sensory neuronal progenitor cells (potential dorsal 
root ganglia) sampled at 48 hpf express islet genes, but these same cells lack expression of other RB 
genes such as pou4f4 and express cxcr4b and fgf13a/b at very low levels (Figure 2E).
To further investigate cell types in our dataset, and RB cell identity, we next integrated our data 
with a scRNA-­seq atlas of whole zebrafish embryos sampled at 14 hpf, 18 hpf, and 24 hpf (Wagner 
et  al., 2018). Both NCCs and RBs are annotated in these whole embryo datasets. As expected, 
NCCs from our sox10:eGFP dataset grouped with annotated NCCs sampled from whole embryos at 
these other stages. We again find that cells assigned to the xanthoblast cluster group with annotated 
‘xanthophores’ from these other data. RBs isolated from sox10:eGFP cells cluster with cells annotated 
as RBs in these other datasets (Figure 2—figure supplement 2). Furthermore, we recover a putative 
RB GRN across datasets and time points. RBs in all four datasets predict restricted expression of a 
unique RB set of genes that includes cxcr4b, fgf13a/b, isl1/2a/2b, prdm14, and pou4f4.
In situ hybridization confirms novel genetic markers in xanthoblast and 
RB lineages
Single-­cell transcriptomes identify previously uncharacterized genes that are uniquely expressed in 
pre-­migratory xanthoblast and RB cell populations at 24 hpf. We sought to confirm expression of 
some novel genes predicted to these cell populations using fluorescent quantitative hybridization 
chain reaction (qHCR) in situ hybridization (Choi et al., 2018).
slc2a15b and gjb8 are co-expressed in pre-migratory xanthoblast 
tNCCs
In addition to known markers of the xanthophore lineage, scRNA-­seq identified slc2a15b and gjb8 as 
among the most highly expressed and restricted to the xanthoblast lineage cluster (Figure 1D and 
F). The solute carrier slc2a15b is known to affect leucophore (white pigment cells) development in 
medaka (Fukamachi et al., 2006; Kimura et al., 2014; Lynn Lamoreux et al., 2005), and is expressed 
in the xantholeuocophore cells of adult zebrafish (Lewis et al., 2019). Leucophores and xanthophores 
are thought to be developmentally related (Kimura et al., 2014; Lewis et al., 2019), suggesting 
that slc2a15b is a good candidate for future study. The connexin protein, gjb8 (previously cx30.3), is 
known to be expressed in the skin, otic, and neural tube of zebrafish (Chang-­Chien et al., 2014; Tao 
et al., 2010). To our knowledge, no functional role for gjb8 in NCC development has been proposed, 
but the importance of other gap junction proteins in pigment pattern development in zebrafish (Irion 
et al., 2014) makes this gene a good candidate for future study.
To confirm expression of these novel xanthoblast genes to NCCs, we used aox5 expression to label 
putative xanthoblasts, and the tg(sox10:TagRFP) zebrafish line to mark NCCs. At 24 hpf, we found that 
both slc2a15b and gjb8 were co-­expressed with aox5 in a subset of tNCCs (Figure 3A–G; Pearson’s 
r = 0.91 and 0.95, respectively). We also observed gjb8 expression in the skin as previously reported 
(Tao et al., 2010), and both gjb8 and slc2a15b expression in medial tissue ventral to the neural tube. 
cells from 24hpf embryos are larger and outlined in black for visualization. Note that cells group by cell identity across developmental time. (C) Same 
UMAP as in panel (B) with cells split by age. (D) Representative genes expressed at higher levels in mature xanthophores from 68 hpf embryos than 
xanthoblasts from 24 hpf embryos. Expression is shown in UMAP space and as violin plots for the 24 hpf xanthoblast and 68 hpf xanthophore cluster 
cells. p values are from Wilcoxon rank-­sum tests. (E) Dotplot of select genes that mark NCCs, pigment progenitors, xanthophores, and Rohon–Beard 
neurons. Clusters from 24 hpf sox10:eGFP+ cells are bolded. Note that xanthoblasts and xanthophores express the same marker genes. Rohon–Beard 
neurons express a unique set of genes unlike other neural derivatives from older embryos.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 2:
Figure supplement 1. Expression of genes associated with pigment cells over developmental time.
Figure supplement 2. sox10:eGFP+ cells from 24 hr post fertilization (hpf) embryos cluster by cell type on whole embryo zebrafish atlases.
Figure 2 continued

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

8 of 20
Figure 3. Expression of novel marker gene expression in the pre-­migratory xanthoblast and Rohon–Beard cell 
populations. (A) Both slc2a15b and gjb8 are predicted to be expressed in pre-­migratory xanthoblast cells. (B–G) 
Quantitative single-­molecule in situ hybridization (hybridization chain reaction [HCR]) confirms expression of these 
genes to aox5 expressing xanthoblasts. (B) Schematic of 24 hr post fertilization (hpf) embryos labeling region of 
Figure 3 continued on next page

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

9 of 20
Within the NC, many of these aox5/slc2a15b/gjb8 expressing cells were in the dorsal neural tube. 
We first observe expression of these genes in the NC at the 15–20 somite stage, suggesting that 
these genes are expressed by NCCs as they become migratory (Figure 3—figure supplement 1). 
Furthermore, we observed higher expression of aox5/slc2a15b/gjb8 in anterior NCCs of 20 somite 
stage embryos, suggesting that these genes are expressed in an anterior-­posterior wave associated 
with the onset of NCC migration (Figure 3—figure supplement 1). Thus aox5, slc2a15b, and gjb8 are 
co-­expressed in pre-­migratory and early-­migrating tNCCs supporting a hypothesis that tNCCs initiate 
a xanthoblast GRN prior to migrating from the neural tube.
Rohon–Beard neurons express fgf13a/b and cxcr4b
Our data identify a number of genes not previously known to be expressed by RBs, including non-­
canonical fgf13a/b ligands, the chemokine receptor cxcr4b, and the transcription factor pou4f4 
(Figure 1—figure supplement 1). Our analyses also found these genes co-­expressed in predicted 
RB cell clusters in independent zebrafish scRNA-­seq datasets further supporting these genes as 
putatively novel RB markers (Figure 1—figure supplement 2). While many novel RB genes appear 
intriguing, two stand out in particular. Cxcr4b is a chemokine receptor import for cell-­cell signaling. 
Fgf13a/b were among the most differentially expressed RB genes and are non-­canonical Fgf ligands 
that play roles in neuron function and migration, possibly through binding microtubules or voltage-­
gated sodium channels (Ornitz and Itoh, 2015; Pablo et al., 2016). Thus both genes are candidates 
for future functional studies.
To confirm the expression of predicted novel RB marker genes, we investigated the expression of 
fgf13a and cxcr4b using HCR in situ hybridization. We found that fgf13a and cxcr4b were expressed 
in two rows of cells running along the lateral edges of the dorsal neural tube (elavl3 expression) 
coincident with the known location of RB neurons (Figure 3F–N). We additionally observed strong 
cxcr4b expression in the ventral neural tube (arrowheads in Figure  3L) and diffuse expression of 
embryos shown in subsequent panels. (C) Quantification of RNA expression (corrected total cell fluorescence 
[CTCF]) in neural crest cells (NCCs) from sections shows novel marker genes slc2a15b and gjb8 are strongly 
co-­expressed with aox5. Sections were taken every 15 M and analyses were limited to sections over the yolk 
extension. Each dot represents a cell (slc2a15b = 3 embryos, 9 slides, 49 cells; gjb8 = 3 embryos, 9 slides, 58 cells). 
(D–G) Representative whole mount (D, F) and sections (E, G) show expression of slc2a15b (D, E) and gjb8 (F, 
G) in 24 hpf embryos. DAPI (blue, E, G) labels nuclei. Arrows point to NCCs co-­expressing xanthoblast marker 
genes, while arrowheads point to NCCs that lack expression of these same genes. Note that a number of aox5/
slc2a15b/gjb8 NCCs are pre-­migratory in the dorsal neural tube (NT). (H) Both fgf13a and cxcr4b are predicted to 
be expressed in Rohon–Beard neurons (RBs). (I–P) HCR confirms expression of these genes to RBs. (I) Schematic 
labeling region of trunk shown in subsequent panels. (J) Percent of HNK-1-­positive RBs also expressing cxcr4b and 
fgf13a indicates that these genes are co-­expressed in RB cells. The number of HNK-1, cxcr4b, and fgf13a-­positive 
cells in the dorsal NT was counted. Note almost all fgf13a/cxcr4b expressing cells co-­localize to HNK-1-­positive RB 
cells. Sample size reported above bars (#cells/#embryos). (K, L) Representative confocal images of whole-­mount 
in situ hybridization for elavl3, fgf13a, and cxcr4b show expression of fgf13a and cxcr4b as two rows of cells in 
the dorsal NT (arrows). Elavl3 marks the NT, and DAPI (gray) labels nuclei. Note ventral NT expression of cxcr4b 
(arrowheads in L’). (M, N) Dual immunolabeling for HNK-1 and in situ hybridization for fgf13a (M) or cxcr4b (N) 
shows gene expression overlaps with HNK-1 labeling in RBs in the dorsal NT (arrows). Arrowheads mark ventral 
expression of cxcr4b in panel (N). (O, P) While fgf13a and cxcr4b expression was never observed in NCCs, a subset 
of putative RB cells express the tg(sox10:tagRFP) transgene (gray in panels O and P). Shown are whole-­mount 3D 
projections (O, P) and single slice through z-­stack (O’, P’) showing fgf13a/cxcr4b/elavl3-­positive cells co-­labeled 
with the sox10 transgene. Note that sox10-­positive cells are positioned topologically similar to sox10-­negative RB 
cells. Scale bars for all panels are 20 M. 
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 3:
Source data 1. _Excel file of quantified hybridization chain reaction intensity of aox5/slc2a15b/gjb8 cells used to 
generate plots shown in Figure 3C.
Source data 2. _Excel file of quantified HNK-1/cxcr4b/fgf13a co-­localization used to generate plot in Figure 3J.
Figure supplement 1. Novel pre-­migratory xanthoblast genes and Rohon–Beard (RB) genes are expressed in 
respective populations as cells differentiate during segmentation stages.
Figure supplement 2. Rohon–Beard (RB) cells express low levels of the tg(sox10:eGFP) transgene.
Figure 3 continued

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

10 of 20
fgf13a in the body. We never observed appreciable levels of fgf13a/cxcr4b expression in migrating 
NCCs. To confirm the identity of these fgf13a/cxcr4b expressing cells, we labeled RBs with HNK-1 
immunofluorescence (Olesnicky et al., 2010). In all embryos, dorsal trunk expression of both fgf13a 
and cxcr4b co-­localized to HNK-1 labeled cells (Figure  3J, M and N), confirming these fgf13a/
cxcr4b expressing cells as RBs. We observed expression of these genes in earlier segmentation stage 
embryos, suggesting that both fgf13a and cxcr4b are expressed by RBs as these cells differentiate 
(Figure  3—figure supplement 1). The function of fgf13 ligands or the cxcr4b receptor in RBs is 
unknown and a focus of future research.
These data raise an intriguing question: why are RBs present in a dataset that used FAC sorting 
to enrich for NCCs? The answer may be that during our experimentation we occasionally observed 
RBs labeled with the tg(sox10:TagRFP) transgene (Figure 3O–P). In this zebrafish line, these RFP+ 
RBs were in the same topological position in the neural tube with other RBs, indicating to us that 
these cells are unlikely to be NCCs. We thus hypothesize that RBs may be represented in our dataset 
because a small percentage of these cells express the sox10 transgene similar to NCCs. This hypoth-
esis is supported by low-­level expression of both sox10 and eGFP by RBs in the scRNA-­seq data 
(Figure 3—figure supplement 2). Further, we note that RBs in an independent scRNA-­seq dataset 
(Wagner et al., 2018) also express some NCC genes including crestin at low levels (Figure 2—figure 
supplement 2). These data are intriguing as RBs and NCCs share a developmental origin in the 
neural plate border (Artinger et al., 1999; Cornell and Eisen, 2000; Fritzsch and Northcutt, 1993; 
Hernandez-­Lagunas et al., 2005), and thus our data are consistent with a literature of developmental 
similarity between these two cell types.
Expression of novel xanthophore and RB neuron markers is lost in 
Prdm1a mutants
Both NCCs and RBs are specified in the neural plate border during gastrulation. Fate determination 
for both cell types requires expression of the transcription factor prdm1a (Figure 4A). Loss of prdm1a 
function leads to loss of both RB and NCC identity (Hernandez-­Lagunas et al., 2005; Hernandez-­
Lagunas et al., 2011; Olesnicky et al., 2010; Powell et al., 2013). To confirm expression of slc2a15b/
gjp8 in NCC-­derived xanthoblasts and fgf13a/cxcr4b in RBs, and to place these genes within known 
NCC and RB GRNs, we examined the expression of these genes in the NRD/prdm1a mutant zebrafish 
line. Prior studies have shown that mutant prdm1a-/- fail to specify NCCs and RBs at 24 hpf and 
have a reduction of melanocytes at 48 hpf (Artinger et al., 1999; Hernandez-­Lagunas et al., 2005; 
Olesnicky et al., 2010). We thus reasoned that if expression of these genes is restricted to NCCs 
and RBs respectively then we should see loss of expression of these genes in prdm1a-/- mutants and 
this is exactly what we found. Dorsal neural tube expression of slc2a15b, gjp8, fgf13a, and cxcr4b 
were all lost in prdm1a-/- embryos (Figure 4B–I). Expression of these genes in areas of the embryo 
other than NCCs and RBs was not affected (e.g., cxcr4b expression in ventral neural tube shown in 
Figure 4H,I). These data suggest that loss of expression was due to loss of NCC and RB cell specifi-
cation, confirming expression of these genes to NCCs and RBs and placing these genes downstream 
of the neural plate border specifier Prdm1a.
Discussion and conclusion
We found that tNCCs are a transcriptionally heterogeneous population during the early stages of 
migration and identify a number of previously uncharacterized genes for further study. Our data iden-
tify both presumptive multipotent tNCC progenitor cells and a subset of tNCCs already expressing 
genes associated with differentiated pigment cells prior to migration and at relatively early devel-
opmental stages (see also Ling and Sauka-­Spengler, 2019; Soldatov et al., 2019). Cells specified 
towards the xanthophore lineage, in particular, may be one of the earliest tNCC derivatives to begin 
differentiating.
While we find NCCs expressing markers of differentiated pigment cells, we did not find tNCCs 
beginning to express genes associated with the PNS. This observation was supported in analyses that 
compare tNCCs from 24, 48, and 68 hpf embryos (Figure 2). Cells expressing genes associated with 
PNS are only observed at 48 and 68 hpf when these post-­migratory NCCs are already differentiating/
differentiated. Thus, while genes associated with pigment cell derivatives are expressed at pre-/early 

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

11 of 20
Figure 4. Expression of novel xanthoblast and Rohon–Beard neuron (RB) marker genes is lost in the Prdm1a mutant. (A) Schematic of neural crest cell 
(NCC) and RB specification. Both NCCs and RBs are specified in the neural plate border (NPB) of gastrulating embryos. NCC and RB specification share 
a similar gene regulatory network (GRN) that includes notch/delta and prdm1a expression in the NPB. RBs may transiently express sox10 at low levels 
(gray). (B–H) Whole-­mount confocal images of hybridization chain reaction (HCR) shows expression of xanthoblast (aox5, slc2a15b, gjp8) and RB marker 
Figure 4 continued on next page

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

12 of 20
migratory stages, NCCs delay expression of genes associated with PNS cell types until post-­migratory 
stages.
Identification of pre-­migratory pigment NCCs is consistent with results from some cell labeling 
experiments in zebrafish, suggesting that NCCs are lineage restricted prior to migration (Raible 
and Eisen, 1994; Raible and Eisen, 1996; Schilling and Kimmel, 1994). In these experiments, pre-­
migratory NCCs labeled in the neural tube only make a single NCC derivative. While these classic cell 
labeling experiments could not identify whether pre-­migratory NCCs were beginning to differentiate, 
our data extend these studies by showing that some pre-­migratory NCCs are already expressing a 
pigment cell GRN. Whether presumptive pigment cells identified in our scRNA-­seq data are truly fate 
restricted, however, is unknown and would require additional experimental manipulation.
Some scRNA-­seq studies have observed multipotent cells transiently expressing genes associ-
ated with two or more differentiated fates (Farrell et al., 2018; Soldatov et al., 2019). These data 
challenge a classical bifurcating model of cell specification, suggesting that instead multipotent cells 
begin initiating GRNs characteristic of multiple fates before becoming committed to one lineage 
over others. We do not observe populations of cells expressing multiple fate derivatives in our data, 
though we do note that xanthoblasts have a more pan-­NCC gene expression signature than differen-
tiated xanthophores from 68 hpf embryos. However, we also note that our relatively small sample size 
for scRNA-­seq datasets (607 cells) and lack of multiple sampled developmental stages may prohibit 
identifying multi-­fate expressing cells. Future work sampling earlier stages is likely to provide further 
insight into how NCC early specification occurs in zebrafish and complement other studies in both 
mouse and chick (Ling and Sauka-­Spengler, 2019; Soldatov et al., 2019; Zalc et al., 2021).
Other studies have used scRNA-­seq to identify transcriptionally cryptic populations of cells asso-
ciated with the leading edge of the cranial NCC migratory front in chick (Morrison et  al., 2020; 
Morrison et al., 2017). In zebrafish, cell tracking studies in the trunk similarly suggest that a subset 
of migrating tNCCs act as leader cells forging a path along which follower NCCs migrate (Richardson 
et al., 2016). While we identify multiple transcriptionally unique populations of NCCs in our data, we 
do not identify a cluster of cells associated with this ‘leader’ cell type. Neither do we find any cluster 
in our data characterized by expression of orthologous genes that identify trailblazer NCCs in chick 
(Morrison et al., 2020; Morrison et al., 2017). Thus the identification of zebrafish trunk leader cell 
transcriptome remains open.
Though our experimental design targeted NCCs, we also sequenced a population of RB neurons 
and show that in zebrafish some RBs express sox10 and sox10 transgenes. While these data do not 
directly test for a shared progenitor, it is intriguing to consider these data in the context of other 
studies showing that NCCs and RBs share a similar developmental origin at the neural plate border 
(Artinger et al., 1999; Hernandez-­Lagunas et al., 2005; Olesnicky et al., 2010). Cells at the neural 
plate border are thought to be an equivalence group, able to differentiate into both NCCs and RBs 
(Cornell and Eisen, 2002). Interactions among neural plate border cells, mediated in part by notch 
signaling, bias cells towards one fate over the other (Appel and Eisen, 1998; Cornell and Eisen, 
2000; Cornell and Eisen, 2002). Our data suggesting that RBs express both sox10 and sox10 trans-
genes seems to be in line with this idea of a shared developmental potential.
To what extent NCCs and RBs share a common progenitor and whether the evolution of these 
two tissues is temporally coincident at the root of the vertebrate phylogeny are questions that have 
long captured the imagination of scholars of vertebrate biology (Artinger et al., 1999; Bone, 1960; 
Cornell and Eisen, 2000; Fritzsch and Northcutt, 1993). The neural crest is a novel migratory 
cell population unique to vertebrates with no known homology to tissues in non-­vertebrate chor-
dates (Gans and Northcutt, 1983), though see Jeffery et al., 2008; Jeffery et al., 2004. RBs are 
a non-­migratory neuron with uncertain homology to morphologically similar motor neurons in non-­
vertebrate chordates (Baker and Bronner-­Fraser, 1997; Bone, 1960; Gans and Northcutt, 1983). 
genes (fgf13a, cxcr4b) in wild type (B, D, F, H) and Prdm1a-/- (C, E, G, I) embryos at 24 hr post fertilization (hpf). Hnk-1 staining marks RB cells in all 
images (note loss of HNK-1 in Prdm1a-/- embryos). Expression of all marker genes is lost from the dorsal neural tube (NT) in Prdm1a-/- embryos that show 
NCC and RB specification defects. Arrows point to expression of marker genes in dorsal neural tube NCCs (B, D) and RBs (F, H). Expression of genes in 
regions of the embryo other than the NC and RB is still present. For example, expression of cxcr4b in the ventral neural tube is not altered in the Prdm1a 
mutant (arrowheads). All images are 3D projections of lateral views of the neural tube taken over the yolk extension of 24 hpf embryos. 
Figure 4 continued

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

13 of 20
Here, we identify a zebrafish RB transcriptome providing unique insight into the RB GRN. Future work 
identifying whether orthologous genes are expressed by motor neurons in non-­vertebrate chordates 
could provide further insight into whether these morphologically similar neurons are homologous 
or homoplastic to vertebrate RB neurons (McCune and Schimenti, 2012; Wagner, 2007). Whether 
emerging technologies like scRNA-­seq will help illuminate the evolutionary origins of new tissue types 
such as RBs and NCCs only time will tell.
Ultimately, our data suggest that pre-­migratory tNCCs are transcriptionally heterogenous and 
that some pre-­migratory NCCs express differentiated pigment cell GRNs. Importantly, this finding 
is concordant with results from other recent studies in mouse and chick that similarly find NCCs 
expressing differentiation programs at pre-/early-­migratory stages (Ling and Sauka-­Spengler, 2019; 
Soldatov et al., 2019; Zalc et al., 2021). Taken together, these single-­cell genomic studies are chal-
lenging some classic models of NCC development that emphasize the role of environmental signals 
from the migratory environment in biasing NCCs towards one derivative state over another (Bronner-­
Fraser and Fraser, 1988; Bronner-­Fraser and Fraser, 1989; Collazo et al., 1993; Trainor and Krum-
lauf, 2000). In contrast, this emerging work emphasizes interactions among NCC progenitors in the 
neural tube as critical for specifying at least some NCCs towards different fates prior to migration 
(Raible and Eisen, 1996).
What mechanisms may be driving these data are speculative and an area of active interest in the 
field. Notch signaling plays a role in early NCC specification at the neural plate border (Cornell and 
Eisen, 2000; Cornell and Eisen, 2002), but whether notch signaling continues to play a role in spec-
ifying pre-­migratory NCCs to different fates at later time points is unknown. Furthermore, there is a 
temporal component to NCC development. In most taxa, PNS NCCs migrate first and there is a delay 
before pigment NCC migration occurs. Thus, differences in signals that pre-­migratory NCCs receive 
in the neural tube over time may play a role in biasing cells towards different fates. Ultimately, our and 
others’ data suggest that unknown interactions in the neural tube are critical for understanding NCC 
development, and that this pre-­migratory period represents an area that deserves continued research 
attention.
 Continued on next page
Materials and methods
Key resources table 
Reagent type (species) or 
resource
Designation
Source or reference Identifiers
Additional information
Gene (Danio rerio)
Prdm1a
GenBank
ZFIN:ZDB-GENE-030131-2193, 
Gene ID: 323473
Strain, strain background (D. 
rerio)
AB
ZIRC
ZDB-­GENO-960809-7, RRID:ZIRC_
ZL1
Genetic reagent (D. rerio)
tg(–4.9sox10:eGFP)ba2
Carney et al., 2006
RRID:ZFIN_ZDB-ALT-050913-4
Genetic reagent (D. rerio)
Tg(sox10:TagRFP)co26
Blasky et al., 2014
RRID:ZFIN_ZDB-GENO-150316-2
Genetic reagent (D. rerio)
Prdm1am805
Artinger et al., 1999 RRID:ZFIN_ZDB-ALT-980621-8
Antibody
Anti HNK-1/N-­CAM(mouse, 
monoclonal)
Sigma-­Aldrich
Cat#: C0678, RRID:AB_1078473
IF:(1:20)
Sequence-­based reagent
Aox5 RNA Probe
Molecular 
Instruments
Custom
WM ISH(2 L/500 L)
Sequence-­based reagent
Slc2a15b RNA Probe
Molecular 
Instruments
Custom
WM ISH(2 L/500 L)
Sequence-­based reagent
Gjb8 RNA Probe
Molecular 
Instruments
Custom
WM ISH(2 L/500 L)
Sequence-­based reagent
Elavl3 RNA Probe
Molecular 
Instruments
Custom
WM ISH(2 L/500 L)

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

14 of 20
Reagent type (species) or 
resource
Designation
Source or reference Identifiers
Additional information
Sequence-­based reagent
Fgf13a RNA Probe
Molecular 
Instruments
Custom
WM ISH(2 µL/500 L)
Sequence-­based reagent
Cxcr4b RNA Probe
Molecular 
Instruments
Custom
WM ISH(2 L/500 L)
Chemical compound, drug
Accumax
Innovative Cell 
Technologies
Cat# AM105-500
Software, algorithm
Velocyto.R (v0.6)
Bergen et al., 2020
RRID:SCR_018167
R implementation
Software, algorithm
​Velocyto.​py (v0.17.17)
Bergen et al., 2020
RRID:SCR_018167
Python implementation
Software, algorithm
Seurat (v4.0.1)
Butler et al., 2018
RRID:SCR_007322
R implementation
Software, algorithm
Code for analyses
Current study
Source data file: Figure ​1&​2_​
RCode.​txt
Software, algorithm
R (v4.0.3)
CRAN
RRID:SCR_003005
Software, algorithm
RStudio
http://www.​rstudio.​
com/
RRID:SCR_000432
Software, algorithm
CellRanger (v3.2 & v5.0.1)
10 X Genomics
RRID:SCR_017344
Software, algorithm
Fiji
http://​fiji.​sc
RRID:SCR_002285
Software, algorithm
Napari
https://​napari.​org/
 Continued
Zebrafish lines and husbandry
All zebrafish lines were maintained at the University of Colorado Denver | Anschutz medical school 
under common zebrafish husbandry conditions. Lines have been previously described and include 
the tg(sox10:eGFP)ba2 (Carney et  al., 2006), tg(sox10:TagRFP)co26TG (Blasky et  al., 2014), and 
NRDm805/prdm1a mutant line (Hernandez-­Lagunas et al., 2005).
Single-cell RNA sequencing
Fertilized zebrafish eggs were collected in the morning, stage matched, and reared at 30 °C overnight 
until embryos were at approximately the 25 segment stage corresponding to embryos of ~20–24 hpf 
at 28.5 °C. GFP-­positive embryos were dissected posterior to the otic organ using forceps in cold 1 x 
PBS. Trunks from 80 dissected embryos were pooled for dissociation and FAC sorting.
Dissected trunks were dissociated in Accumax (Innovative Cell Technologies) plus DNaseI 
(1 L/100 L). Cells were triturated every 15 min using decreasing-­sized pipette tips until a homogenous 
solution was observed. Cells were filtered through a 40 M mesh, spun, and resuspended in Sorting 
buffer (1 % FBS/1 mM EDTA/25 mM HEPES in 1  Dullbecco’s PBS; Sigma D8537;). GFP-­positive cells 
were FAC sorted on a MoFlow XDP100 cell sorter into sorting buffer and diluted to approximately 
700–1100 cells/µL.
Cells were captured and prepared for sequencing using the 10 X Genomics platform by the Univer-
sity of Colorado Denver | Anschutz Genomics Core by loading approximately 10,000 cells. Libraries 
were sequenced on two lanes of an Illumina NovaSEQ 6000 to an average depth of 159,520 reads 
per cell and a median of 666 genes per cell. After filtering and quality control, we obtained cells 
expressing a median of 4255 UMI and 32,425 genes.
Single-cell analysis
Reads were mapped to the Ensembl build of the zebrafish genome (GRCz11) and UMI barcodes 
were assigned to unique identifiers using CellRanger (v3.2). Primary analyses were conducted using 
the Seurat package v4.0.1 as implemented in R v4.0.3 (Butler et al., 2018). Cells were filtered for 
quality based on mitochondrial gene expression (≤6 % and ≥0.5%) and number of unique transcripts 
expressed (≥5000 and ≤16,000) in order to remove low-­quality cells as well as any possible doublets. 
Data was normalized using the sctransform function in Seurat (variable features = 3000). Cells were 
clustered (resolution = 0.6) and projected with the Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection 

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

15 of 20
(UMAP) method using the first 15 principal component analysis (PCA) axes as implemented in Seurat. 
To find marker genes associated with cell clusters, we performed differential expression using the 
Wilcoxon rank-­sum test as implemented by the FindAllMarkers command in Seurat (logfc.threshold = 
0.5, ​min.​pct = 0.25). Changing cell filtering, clustering, and UMAP projection parameters had minor 
affects and does not change major results of the study (Figure 1—figure supplement 1).
To further explore mitotic cells in cluster 5, we reanalyzed our data regressing out variation due 
to cell cycle, mitochondrial expression, and ribosomal expression either in combination (Figure 1—
figure supplement 1) or individually (not shown). For these analyses, we first calculated an estimate 
of cell cycle for each cell with the CellCycleScoring function in Seurat using zebrafish orthologs of cell 
cycle genes available from the Seurat website. We then regressed out the effects of these variables 
using the SCTransform function prior to clustering and analysis. The primary difference across different 
analyses is that most mitotic cells in cluster 5 (Figure 1) group with other posterior arch cells from 
cluster 4 when cell cycle is removed (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). A smaller number of mitotic 
cells cluster with tNCC progenitors from cluster 1. Importantly, in all analyses we recover similar clus-
ters of cells and marker genes, indicating that the major conclusions from these data are robust to 
differences in analysis (Figure 1—figure supplement 1).
We used the package Velocyto to infer developmental pseudotime from our data (Bergen et al., 
2020). This method uses estimates of RNA splicing from scRNA-­seq data to infer how cells may be 
transitioning across different transcriptional states; the analysis assumes that the ratio of spliced to 
unspliced transcripts should provide an estimate of the time since a cell has started expressing a new 
set of genes associated with a different transcriptional state. We used the Python implementation of 
Velocyto to infer RNA splicing with default parameters, and the R implementation of Velocyto to infer 
RNA velocity (e.g., pseudo-­time) with default parameters and plot velocities onto UMAP space.
To quantify GFP expression in RB cells, reads were aligned to the Aequorea victoria green fluores-
cence protein sequence (EBI accession #AAA27722.1) using cell ranger (v5.0.1). The same analysis 
parameters as above were used to generate plots.
Dataset integration
We integrated our scRNA-­seq data with complementary scRNA-­seq atlases from Howard et al., 2021 
and Wagner et al., 2018. For Howard et al., 2021, we remapped sequences downloaded from SRA 
(BioProject PRJNA640816) to the Ensembl build of the zebrafish genome (GRCz11) using CellRanger 
v5.0.1. Cell annotations were downloaded from UCSC Cell browser (​cells.​ucsc.​edu). Cells were filtered 
to only include those used in the original Howard et  al., 2021 study. For Wagner et  al., 2018, 
data and annotations were downloaded directly from NCBI GEO (GSE112294). We only analyze data 
obtained from 14, 18, and 24 hpf embryos from Wagner et al., 2018.
Datasets were integrated using Seurat IntegrateData function on anchors identified from 2000 
genes using log normalized data. We present data integrated with Howard et al., 2021 using the 
first 30 PCAs for analyses. We present data integrated with Wagner et al., 2018 using the first 100 
PCAs for analyses. We get similar results with different parameters when integrating and analyzing 
the data (not shown). For all analyses, we annotate cells with the original annotations given in Howard 
et al., 2021 and Wagner et al., 2018, respectively. Differential expression was performed using the 
Wilcoxon rank-­sum test in Seurat on log normalized data.
Code for all analyses is available as source data file: Figure 1—source code 1.
In situ hybridizations and immunofluorescence
To confirm expression of genes, we used fluorescent qHCR in situ hybridization (Choi et al., 2018). 
Custom RNA probes were purchased from Molecular Instruments. Probes were designed using either 
the B2 or B3 hairpin loop sequences with adaptor fluorophores of either Alexa Fluor 488 (B3) or 
Alexa Fluor 647 (B2). In situ hybridizations were conducted following Molecular Instruments protocol 
for whole-­mount zebrafish. Samples from 25 somite (24 hpf), 8 somite, 15 somite, and 20 somite 
embryos were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde and stored in methanol at –20 °C. Samples were rehy-
drated in phosphate buffered solution (PBS) and permeabilized for 5 min in 1 g/mL proteinase K at 
room temperature. Hybridization was conducted using RNA probes diluted to 4 picamols/mL at 37 °C 
overnight. Amplification was performed diluting hairpins to 60 picamols/mL at room temperature 
overnight.

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

16 of 20
Following in situ hybridization, Rohon–Beard cells were identified by HNK-1 immunofluorescence. 
Samples were blocked in IF blocking buffer (2 % normal goat serum, 2 % BSA, 1×  PBS) at room 
temperature for a minimum of 1 hr. Primary mouse anti-­HNK-1 antibody (Sigma) was diluted 1:20 in 
blocking buffer, and samples were incubated in this primary antibody at 4 °C for 24–48 hr (Hernandez-­
Lagunas et al., 2011), and visualized using secondary goat anti-­mouse IgM conjugated to Alexa Fluor 
594.
Samples were imaged on a Leica SP8 confocal microscope. For whole-­mount images, samples 
were mounted in 0.2 % agarose and imaged at either 10× or 40×  magnification. For co-­expression 
of xanthophore genes, samples were cryosectioned every 15 M and imaged at 63×  magnification. 
For both whole-­mount and sectioned samples, we imaged over the yolk extension in order to make 
images comparable.
Unless noted, all images are 3D projections from either whole-­mount or sectioned material 
produced using either ImageJ or Napari. Image quantification was performed using ImageJ. To calcu-
late co-­expression of aox5 with slc2a15b and gjb8, we calculated corrected total cell fluorescence 
(CTCF) from 15 M sections. Briefly, RNA expression by a cell is proportional to relative fluorescence 
intensity of the HCR in situ signal within a cell (Choi et al., 2018). NCCs were manually segmented in 
three dimensions using the segmentation editor in ImageJ based on the expression of the tg(sox10:-
TagRFP) transgene. Average cell fluorescence intensity of aox5/slc2a15b/gjb8, and cell volume, was 
calculated using the ImageJ 3D suite (Ollion et al., 2013). Average background fluorescence intensity 
was estimated using regions of the embryo where no signal was observed. CTCF was calculated as
	﻿‍
CTCF =
(
Avg. Signal Intensity ∗Cell Volume
)
−
(
Avg. background Intensity ∗Cell Volume
)
‍
We noticed that expression of fgf13a and cxcr4b in the dorsal neural tube was more binary than 
quantitative. Thus we simply counted the number of HNK-1-­positive cells in the dorsal neural tube 
that were also fgf13a/cxcr4b positive.
All plots, and the calculation of Pearson’s correlation coefficient, were produced in R (v.4.0.3). A 
minimum of three embryos were quantified for all analyses. Sample sizes are reported in relevant 
figure legends and text. Data is available in source data files: Figure 3—source data 1 and Figure 3—
source data 2.
Acknowledgements
We thank members of the Prekeris and Artinger laboratories for their thoughtful comments on this 
project and help throughout. Special thanks to Dr. Lomeli Shull for help with cell dissociation and Dr. 
Kenneth Jones for help discussing bioinformatics analysis. This work was funded by R01 GM122768 
to RP. EL was supported by National Institutes of Health Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research Service 
Awards (T32CA17468 and F32HD103406). EL, RP, and KA conceived of the study and wrote the manu-
script. EL performed research and analyses.
Additional information
Funding
Funder
Grant reference number
Author
National Institute of 
General Medical Sciences
GM122768
Rytis Prekeris
Eunice Kennedy Shriver 
National Institute of 
Child Health and Human 
Development
F32HD103406
Ezra Lencer
National Cancer Institute
T32CA17468
Ezra Lencer
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the 
decision to submit the work for publication.

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

17 of 20
Author contributions
Ezra Lencer, Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project 
administration, Validation, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing – review and editing; Rytis 
Prekeris, Kristin Bruk Artinger, Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Super-
vision, Writing – review and editing; 
Author ORCIDs
Ezra Lencer ‍ ‍ http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0001-​6795-​0260
Ethics
This study was performed in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care 
and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. All procedures were performed 
according to approved institutional animal care and use committee (IACUC) protocols (#00147) 
of the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, and every effort was made to minimize 
suffering.
Decision letter and Author response
Decision letter https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​66078.​sa1
Author response https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​66078.​sa2
Additional files
Supplementary files
•  Transparent reporting form 
Data availability
Sequencing data have been deposited in GEO under accession code GSE163907.
The following dataset was generated:
Author(s)
Year
Dataset title
Dataset URL
Database and Identifier
Lencer E, Prekeris R, 
Artinger KB
2020
Single cell RNA analysis of 
trunk neural crest cells in 
zebrafish
https://www.​ncbi.​
nlm.​nih.​gov/​geo/​
query/​acc.​cgi?​acc=​
GSE163907
NCBI Gene Expression 
Omnibus, GSE163907
References
Anderson DJ. 1989. The Neural Crest Cell Lineage Problem: Neuropoiesis. Neuron 3: 1–12. DOI: https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/​0896-​6273(​89)​90110-​4, PMID: 2695146
Appel B, Eisen JS. 1998. Regulation of neuronal specification in the zebrafish spinal cord by Delta function. 
Development 125: 371–380.
Artinger KB, Chitnis AB, Mercola M, Driever W. 1999. Zebrafish narrowminded suggests a genetic link between 
formation of neural crest and primary sensory neurons. Development 126: 3969–3979 PMID: 10457007.
Baker CVH, Bronner-­Fraser M. 1997. The origins of the neural crest Part II: an evolutionary perspective. 
Mechanisms of Development 69: 13–29. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​s0925-​4773(​97)​00129-​9, PMID: 9486528
Bergen V, Lange M, Peidli S, Wolf FA, Theis FJ. 2020. Generalizing RNA velocity to transient cell states through 
dynamical modeling. Nature Biotechnology 38: 1408–1414. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41587-​020-​0591-​3, 
PMID: 32747759
Blasky AJ, Pan L, Moens CB, Appel B. 2014. Pard3 regulates contact between neural crest cells and the timing 
of Schwann cell differentiation but is not essential for neural crest migration or myelination. Developmental 
Dynamics 243: 1511–1523. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​dvdy.​24172, PMID: 25130183
Bone Q. 1960. The central nervous system in amphioxus. The Journal of Comparative Neurology 115: 27–51. 
DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​cne.​901150105
Briggs JA, Weinreb C, Wagner DE, Megason S, Peshkin L, Kirschner MW, Klein AM. 2018. The dynamics of gene 
expression in vertebrate embryogenesis at single-­cell resolution. Science 360: eaar5780. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1126/​science.​aar5780, PMID: 29700227
Bronner-­Fraser M, Fraser SE. 1988. Cell lineage analysis reveals multipotency of some avian neural crest cells. 
Nature 335: 161–164. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​335161a0, PMID: 2457813

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

18 of 20
Bronner-­Fraser M, Fraser SE. 1989. Developmental Potential of Avian Trunk Neural Crest Cells In Situ. Neuron 3: 
755–766. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​0896-​6273(​89)​90244-​4, PMID: 2484346
Butler A, Hoffman P, Smibert P, Papalexi E, Satija R. 2018. Integrating single-­cell transcriptomic data across 
different conditions, technologies, and species. Nature Biotechnology 36: 411–420. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1038/​nbt.​4096, PMID: 29608179
Carney TJ, Dutton KA, Greenhill E, Delfino-­Machin M, Dufourcq P, Blader P, Kelsh RN. 2006. A direct role for 
Sox10 in specification of neural crest-­derived sensory neurons. Development 133: 4619–4630. DOI: https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1242/​dev.​02668, PMID: 17065232
Chang-­Chien J, Yen YC, Chien KH, Li SY, Hsu TC, Yang JJ. 2014. The connexin 30.3 of zebrafish homologue of 
human connexin 26 may play similar role in the inner ear. Hearing Research 313: 55–66. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1016/​j.​heares.​2014.​04.​010, PMID: 24811980
Choi HMT, Schwarzkopf M, Fornace ME, Acharya A, Artavanis G, Stegmaier J, Cunha A, Pierce NA. 2018. 
Third-­generation in situ hybridization chain reaction: Multiplexed, quantitative, sensitive, versatile, robust. 
Development 145: dev165753. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1242/​dev.​165753, PMID: 29945988
Collazo A, Bronner-­Fraser M, Fraser SE. 1993. Vital dye labellin of Xenopus laevis trunk neural crest reveals 
multipotency and novel pathways of migration. Development 118: 363–376 PMID: 7693414.
Cornell RA, Eisen JS. 2000. Delta signaling mediates segregation of neural crest and spinal sensory neurons from 
zebrafish lateral neural plate. Development 127: 2873–2882. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1242/​dev.​127.​13.​2873, 
PMID: 10851132
Cornell RA, Eisen JS. 2002. Delta/Notch signaling promotes formation of zebrafish neural crest by repressing 
Neurogenin 1 function. Development 129: 2639–2648. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1242/​dev.​129.​11.​2639, PMID: 
12015292
Farnsworth DR, Saunders LM, Miller AC. 2020. A single-­cell transcriptome atlas for zebrafish development. 
Developmental Biology 459: 100–108. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​ydbio.​2019.​11.​008, PMID: 31782996
Farrell JA, Wang Y, Riesenfeld SJ, Shekhar K, Regev A, Schier AF. 2018. Single-­cell reconstruction of 
developmental trajectories during zebrafish embryogenesis. Science 360: eaar3131. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1126/​science.​aar3131, PMID: 29700225
Fritzsch B, Northcutt RG. 1993. Cranial and spinal nerve organization in amphioxus and lampreys: evidence for 
an ancestral craniate pattern. Acta Anat 148: 96–109. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1159/​000147529, PMID: 
8109201
Fukamachi S, Wakamatsu Y, Mitani H. 2006. Medaka double mutants for color interfere and leucophore free: 
characterization of the xanthophore-­somatolactin relationship using the leucophore free gene. Development 
Genes and Evolution 216: 152–157. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00427-​005-​0040-​9, PMID: 16344968
Gans C, Northcutt RG. 1983. Neural Crest and the Origin of Vertebrates: A New Head. Science 220: 268–274. 
DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​science.​220.​4594.​268, PMID: 17732898
Henion PD, Weston JA. 1997. Timing and pattern of cell fate restrictions in the neural crest lineage. 
Development 124: 4351–4359. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1242/​dev.​124.​21.​4351, PMID: 9334283
Hernandez-­Lagunas L, Choi IF, Kaji T, Simpson P, Hershey C, Zhou Y, Zon L, Mercola M, Artinger KB. 2005. 
Zebrafish narrowminded disrupts the transcription factor prdm1 and is required for neural crest and sensory 
neuron specification. Developmental Biology 278: 347–357. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​ydbio.​2004.​11.​014, 
PMID: 15680355
Hernandez-­Lagunas L, Powell DR, Law J, Grant KA, Artinger KB. 2011. prdm1a and olig4 act downstream of 
Notch signaling to regulate cell fate at the neural plate border. Developmental Biology 356: 496–505. DOI: 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​ydbio.​2011.​06.​005, PMID: 21689645
Howard AG, Baker PA, Ibarra-­García-­Padilla R, Moore JA, Rivas LJ, Tallman JJ, Singleton EW, Westheimer JL, 
Corteguera JA, Uribe RA. 2021. An atlas of neural crest lineages along the posterior developing zebrafish at 
single-­cell resolution. eLife 10: e60005. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​60005, PMID: 33591267
Irion U, Frohnhofer HG, Krauss J, Colak Champollion T, Maischein HM, Geiger-­Rudolph S, Weiler C, 
Nusslein-­Volhard C. 2014. Gap junctions composed of connexins 41.8 and 39.4 are essential for colour pattern 
formation in zebrafish. eLife 3: e05125. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​05125, PMID: 25535837
Jeffery WR, Strickler AG, Yamamoto Y. 2004. Migratory neural crest-­like cells form body pigmentation in a 
urochordate embryo. Nature 431: 696–699. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​nature02975, PMID: 15470430
Jeffery WR, Chiba T, Krajka FR, Deyts C, Satoh N, Joly JS. 2008. Trunk lateral cells are neural crest-­like cells in 
the ascidian Ciona intestinalis: insights into the ancestry and evolution of the neural crest. Developmental 
Biology 324: 152–160. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​ydbio.​2008.​08.​022, PMID: 18801357
Kimura T, Nagao Y, Hashimoto H, Yamamoto-­Shiraishi Y, Yamamoto S, Yabe T, Takada S, Kinoshita M, 
Kuroiwa A, Naruse K. 2014. Leucophores are similar to xanthophores in their specification and differentiation 
processes in medaka. PNAS 111: 7343–7348. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1073/​pnas.​1311254111, PMID: 
24803434
Klymkowsky MW, Rossi CC, Artinger KB. 2010. Mechanisms driving neural crest induction and migration in the 
zebrafish and Xenopus laevis. Cell Adhesion & Migration 4: 595–608. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​4161/​cam.​4.​4.​
12962, PMID: 20962584
Lewis VM, Saunders LM, Larson TA, Bain EJ, Sturiale SL, Gur D, Chowdhury S, Flynn JD, Allen MC, Deheyn DD, 
Lee JC, Simon JA, Lippincott-­Schwartz J, Raible DW, Parichy DM. 2019. Fate plasticity and reprogramming in 
genetically distinct populations of Danio leucophores. PNAS 116: 11806–11811. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1073/​
pnas.​1901021116, PMID: 31138706

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

19 of 20
Ling ITC, Sauka-­Spengler T. 2019. Early chromatin shaping predetermines multipotent vagal neural crest into 
neural, neuronal and mesenchymal lineages. Nature Cell Biology 21: 1504–1517. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​
s41556-​019-​0428-​9, PMID: 31792380
Lynn Lamoreux M, Kelsh RN, Wakamatsu Y, Ozato K. 2005. Pigment pattern formation in the medaka embryo. 
Pigment Cell Research 18: 64–73. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​j.​1600-​0749.​2005.​00216.​x, PMID: 15760335
McCune A, Schimenti J. 2012. Using Genetic Networks and Homology to Understand the Evolution of 
Phenotypic Traits. Current Genomics 13: 74–84. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​2174/​138920212799034785, PMID: 
22942677
Morrison JA, McLennan R, Wolfe LA, Gogol MM, Meier S, McKinney MC, Teddy JM, Holmes L, Semerad CL, 
Box AC, Li H, Hall KE, Perera AG, Kulesa PM. 2017. Single-­cell transcriptome analysis of avian neural crest 
migration reveals signatures of invasion and molecular transitions. eLife 6: e28415. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​
7554/​eLife.​28415, PMID: 29199959
Morrison JA, McLennan R, Teddy JM, Scott AR, Kasemeier-­Kulesa JC, Gogol MM, Kulesa PM. 2020. 
Transcriptome Profiling of the Branchial Arches Reveals Cell Type Composition and a Conserved Signature of 
Neural Crest Cell Invasion. [bioRxiv]. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​2020.​02.​28.​969915
Olesnicky E, Hernandez-­Lagunas L, Artinger KB. 2010. prdm1a Regulates sox10 and islet1 in the development of 
neural crest and Rohon-­Beard sensory neurons. Genesis 48: 656–666. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​dvg.​20673, 
PMID: 20836130
Ollion J, Cochennec J, Loll F, Escude C, Boudier T. 2013. TANGO: A generic tool for high-­throughput 3D image 
analysis for studying nuclear organization. Bioinformatics 29: 1840–1841. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​
bioinformatics/​btt276, PMID: 23681123
Ornitz DM, Itoh N. 2015. The Fibroblast Growth Factor signaling pathway. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews. 
Developmental Biology 4: 215–266. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​wdev.​176, PMID: 25772309
Pablo JL, Wang C, Presby MM, Pitt GS. 2016. Polarized localization of voltage-­gated na+ channels is regulated 
by concerted fgf13 and fgf14 action. PNAS 113: E2665-E2674. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1073/​pnas.​
1521194113, PMID: 27044086
Powell DR, Hernandez-­Lagunas L, LaMonica K, Artinger KB. 2013. Prdm1a directly activates foxd3 and tfap2a 
during zebrafish neural crest specification. Development 140: 3445–3455. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1242/​dev.​
096164, PMID: 23900542
Raible DW, Eisen JS. 1994. Restriction of neural crest cell fate in the trunk of the embryonic zebrafish. 
Development 120: 495–503. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1242/​dev.​120.​3.​495, PMID: 8162850
Raible DW, Eisen JS. 1996. Regulative interactions in zebrafish neural crest. Development 122: 501–507. DOI: 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1242/​dev.​122.​2.​501, PMID: 8625801
Richardson J, Gauert A, Briones Montecinos L, Fanlo L, Alhashem ZM, Assar R, Marti E, Kabla A, Hartel S, 
Linker C. 2016. Leader Cells Define Directionality of Trunk, but Not Cranial, Neural Crest Cell Migration. Cell 
Reports 15: 2076–2088. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​celrep.​2016.​04.​067, PMID: 27210753
Saunders LM, Mishra AK, Aman AJ, Lewis VM, Toomey MB, Packer JS, Qiu X, McFaline-­Figueroa JL, Corbo JC, 
Trapnell C, Parichy DM. 2019. Thyroid hormone regulates distinct paths to maturation in pigment cell lineages. 
eLife 8: e45181. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​45181, PMID: 31140974
Schilling T, Kimmel CB. 1994. Segment and cell type lineage restrictions during pharyngeal arch development in 
the zebrafish embryo. Development 120: 483–494. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1242/​dev.​120.​3.​483, PMID: 
8162849
Simoes-­Costa M, Tan-­Cabugao J, Antoshechkin I, Sauka-­Spengler T, Bronner ME. 2014. Transcriptome analysis 
reveals novel players in the cranial neural crest gene regulatory network. Genome Research 24: 281–290. DOI: 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​gr.​161182.​113, PMID: 24389048
Soldatov R, Kaucka M, Kastriti ME, Petersen J, Chontorotzea T, Englmaier L, Akkuratova N, Yang Y, Häring M, 
Dyachuk V, Bock C, Farlik M, Piacentino ML, Boismoreau F, Hilscher MM, Yokota C, Qian X, Nilsson M, 
Bronner ME, Croci L, et al. 2019. Spatiotemporal structure of cell fate decisions in murine neural crest. Science 
364: eaas9536. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​science.​aas9536, PMID: 31171666
Tao L, DeRosa AM, White TW, Valdimarsson G. 2010. Zebrafish cx30.3: identification and characterization of a 
gap junction gene highly expressed in the skin. Developmental Dynamics 239: 2627–2636. DOI: https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1002/​dvdy.​22399, PMID: 20737512
Theveneau E, Mayor R. 2012. Neural crest delamination and migration: from epithelium-­to-­mesenchyme 
transition to collective cell migration. Developmental Biology 366: 34–54. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​ydbio.​
2011.​12.​041, PMID: 22261150
Trainor P, Krumlauf R. 2000. Plasticity in mouse neural crest cells reveals a new patterning role for cranial 
mesoderm. Nature Cell Biology 2: 96–102. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​35000051, PMID: 10655589
Waddington CH. 1957. The Strategy of the Genes. London: Allen & Unwin.
Wagner GP. 2007. The developmental genetics of homology. Nature Genetics 8: 473–479. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1038/​nrg2099

 Short report﻿
Developmental Biology
Lencer et al. eLife 2021;10:e66078. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​66078

20 of 20
Wagner DE, Weinreb C, Collins ZM, Briggs JA, Megason SG, Klein AM. 2018. Single-­cell mapping of the gene 
expression landscapes and lineage in the zebrafish embryo. Science 360: 981–987. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1126/​science.​aar4362, PMID: 29700229
Zalc A, Sinha R, Gulati GS, Wesche DJ, Daszczuk P, Swigut T, Weissman IL, Wysocka J. 2021. Reactivation of the 
pluripotency program precedes formation of the cranial neural crest. Science 371: eabb4776. DOI: https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1126/​science.​abb4776, PMID: 33542111

===== Lendahl2022_NatComm_Fibroblast+Heterogeneity =====
REVIEW ARTICLE
Identiﬁcation, discrimination and heterogeneity of
ﬁbroblasts
Urban Lendahl
1,2, Lars Muhl
3 & Christer Betsholtz3,4✉
Fibroblasts, the principal cell type of connective tissue, secrete extracellular matrix compo-
nents during tissue development, homeostasis, repair and disease. Despite this crucial role,
the identiﬁcation and distinction of ﬁbroblasts from other cell types are challenging and laden
with caveats. Rapid progress in single-cell transcriptomics now yields detailed molecular
portraits of ﬁbroblasts and other cell types in our bodies, which complement and enrich
classical histological and immunological descriptions, improve cell class deﬁnitions and guide
further studies on the functional heterogeneity of cell subtypes and states, origins and fates in
physiological and pathological processes. In this review, we summarize and discuss recent
advances in the understanding of ﬁbroblast identiﬁcation and heterogeneity and how they
discriminate from other cell types.
F
ibroblasts were ﬁrst described in 1858 by Rudolf Virchow as cells located in connective
tissue1, a term coined already in 1830 by Johannes Peter Müller for the matter that connects
and mechanically supports other tissues2. In 1879, Matthias Duvall distinguished ﬁbroblasts
from epithelial cells within the mesenchyme of chick embryos, thereby adding to their
demarcation3. Progressively, it became clear that ﬁbroblasts reside within all dense and loose
ﬁbrous connective tissues. Dense ﬁbrous connective tissue makes up tendons, ligaments and fasciae
of the musculoskeletal system. Loose ﬁbrous connective tissue is located at many sites, including
visceral organ capsules, beneath the epithelial linings of airways, gastrointestinal and urogenital
tracts (laminae propria) and skin (dermis), in central nervous system meninges, and between
parenchymal cells in muscle and adipose tissue. Fibroblasts are thus a major cellular component of
the diverse ﬁbrous connective tissues that disperse throughout our organs2,4. Alongside endothelial
and blood cells, ﬁbroblasts are one of the most common and widespread cell types in our bodies2.
The term ﬁbroblast, used already more than 100 years ago by Ernst Ziegler5 and Alexander
Maximow6, deserves a comment, as the “-blast” sufﬁx refers to morphological hallmarks of active
protein synthesis. A key research goal of the early 20th century was to identify the cellular source
of extracellular matrix (ECM) during tissue repair4,7–9. In these studies, the quiescent ﬁbroblasts
of uninjured organs were sometimes referred to as ﬁbrocytes, which displayed a small cytoplasm,
few ribosomes and condensed chromatin, together suggesting low levels of protein synthesis10. It
was assumed that ﬁbrocytes give rise to ﬁbroblasts upon wounding, and conversely that ﬁbro-
blasts differentiate into ﬁbrocytes during healing10. Perhaps due to limited interest in the
quiescent cells, the original meaning of ﬁbrocyte was progressively lost and ﬁbroblast adopted as
the common name irrespective of its state of activity. Fibrocyte later reappeared as the name for a
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9
OPEN
1 Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden. 2 Department of Neurobiology, Care sciences and Society,
Karolinska Institutet, SE-14183 Huddinge, Sweden. 3 Department of Medicine, Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Blickagången 16, SE-141 57 Huddinge, Sweden.
4 Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, Dag Hammarskjölds väg 20, SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.
✉email: christer.betsholtz@igp.uu.se
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:3409 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;

circulating monocytes/macrophages-related antigen-presenting
cell involved in tissue repair11,12 (for review see ref. 13).
In the early days of cell culturing, ﬁbroblasts turned out to be
sturdy and easy to propagate on artiﬁcial surfaces such as glass
and plastic. They regularly outgrew other cell types and thus
became popular for basic studies in cell biology. In the 1950s,
Michael Abercrombie and Joan Heaysman established the
important concept of cell contact inhibition using ﬁbroblasts14,
and Leonard Hayﬂick showed in 1965 that ﬁbroblasts stop
dividing and senesce after a ﬁnite number of population dou-
blings in vitro15, thereby disproving the view that cultured cells
could be passaged indeﬁnitely (see ref. 16). Fibroblasts were fur-
ther utilized to identify cellular oncogenes in the 1970s and
1980s17, as well as for the more recent establishment of techni-
ques for induced pluripotency18. Fibroblasts are also commonly
used as feeder cells in co-culture experiments to provide cell
contacts, ECM and growth factors needed for other cells, such as
embryonic stem cells, to thrive19,20.
It is well-established that ﬁbroblasts produce collagens and
numerous other proteins that make up the ECM of ﬁbrous con-
nective tissues. In fact, one of the ﬁbroblasts’ archetypical products,
collagen type 1, is the most abundant protein in our bodies21. The
ECM consists of more than 300 different core proteins and
numerous additional bridging proteins and matrix-modifying
enzymes, together referred to as the matrisome22. Each tissue has
its unique ECM composition, and it was early recognized, based
both on morphological and molecular criteria, including gene
expression proﬁling, that ﬁbroblasts from various anatomical
locations differ23,24. In addition to ECM production, ﬁbroblasts play
a role in wound contraction. In 1971, Giulio Gabbiani and collea-
gues reported that ﬁbroblasts respond to tissue injury by assuming a
contractile, myoﬁbroblast, phenotype25. Similar cells are implicated
in ﬁbrosis, which may be deﬁned as unresolved repair after tissue
damage (for review, see ref. 26). Besides ﬁbrosis, ﬁbroblasts are
important also for other disease processes, including cancer where
they make up a variable proportion of the tumor stroma and
deposit ECM of various molecular compositions and secrete dif-
ferent cocktails of growth factors and cytokines that inﬂuence
tumor growth and metastasis27,28. Secretion of soluble extracellular
signaling molecules is also of profound physiological importance
during development, where ﬁbroblasts provide instructive paracrine
signals during organogenesis and thus take part in reciprocal cell-
cell signaling required for the differentiation of other—often epi-
thelial—cell types, for example during epidermal, oral, intestinal
and kidney development29–34. Finally, ﬁbroblasts are known to hold
positional memory in the body, notably by expression of speciﬁc
sets of Hox transcription factors in various sectors along the cra-
niocaudal axis of the vertebrate embryo35,36.
To better understand the various roles of ﬁbroblasts, it is
important to gain insights into how heterogenous they are, as well
as the functional consequences emanating from ﬁbroblast het-
erogeneity. At least in part, research into ﬁbroblast heterogeneity
has however been hampered by ambiguous and diversiﬁed cell
classiﬁcation with regard to, for example, lineage, morphology,
location or growth characteristics. An important step towards a
deeper and more detailed characterization of ﬁbroblasts can
however now be taken thanks to single-cell transcriptomics,
which complements the detailed anatomical and morphological
knowledge with insights into the molecular proﬁles of ﬁbroblasts
at unprecedented depth and scale.
Evolution from morphological to molecular characterization
of ﬁbroblasts
In normal adult tissues, ﬁbroblasts appear spindle- or stellate-
shaped with an oval nucleus and a distinct endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)3,4 (for review see ref. 27). While these features are helpful to
localize the cells anatomically, they provide few clues to origin,
molecular composition, heterogeneity and relationship to other
cell types. Although not uniquely expressed on ﬁbroblast, certain
proteins, such as vimentin (VIM (protein), Vim (gene/mRNA
mouse)) and ﬁbroblast speciﬁc protein 1 (FSP1, S100a4), have
served as useful markers to identify ﬁbroblasts by immunohis-
tochemical techniques37,38. With the advent of technologies that
allow the gene expression patterns of individual cells to be
resolved at substantial depth, i.e., single-cell RNA-sequencing
(scRNA-seq) (see Box 1 for a detailed description of the tech-
nology and potential caveats and pitfalls), an additional impor-
tant step could be taken in the quest to better characterize
ﬁbroblasts along with all other cell types that make up our organs.
Hence, the traditional morphological classiﬁcation of cell types is
now being complemented by molecular classiﬁcations, foremost
based on gene expression.
Following from the ﬁrst cDNA microarray-based study of
ﬁbroblast heterogeneity24, transcriptional analysis of ﬁbroblast
was conducted using bulk mRNA isolates obtained from multiple
cells39–41. This work provided molecular information at the organ
level and initial insights into inter-organ transcriptional hetero-
geneity of ﬁbroblasts. From these and other studies, certain
molecular markers were proposed to distinguish ﬁbroblasts from
other cell types, including VIM, platelet derived growth factor
receptor-alpha (PDGFRA, Pdgfra), ﬁbroblast activation protein-
alpha (FAP, Fap), FSP1; and CD90 (Thy1). Subsequently, scRNA-
seq datasets have been obtained from ﬁbroblasts from essentially
all major organs in the mouse and human (see Supplementary
data 1 for a compilation of select scRNA-seq studies covering
ﬁbroblasts). When ﬁbroblasts were collected and sequenced as
part of broader atlas projects, they were occasionally called by
other names, such as stromal cells, mesenchymal stem cells,
myoﬁbroblasts42 and unknown mesenchymal cells43, illustrating
the prevailing ambiguities regarding markers and cell nomen-
clature. Some studies have been devoted more speciﬁcally to
ﬁbroblasts and their involvement in cancer, ﬁbrotic diseases44,45
or development46. We have ourselves compared ﬁbroblasts across
healthy adult organs in the mouse47, whereas others have
reported multi-organ comparisons between mice and humans48.
What have we learned from these scRNA-seq studies thus far?
As a brief account (more speciﬁc examples and discussion are
provided below), one lesson is that no single marker appears
capable to discriminate all ﬁbroblasts from all other cell types
across organs; combinations of markers are needed. A second
lesson is that organotypic ﬁbroblast heterogeneity is profound47,
although certain marker combinations may point to ﬁbroblast
subtypes that cross organ boundaries. Examples include peptidase
inhibitor 16 (Pi16) and collagen type 15 alpha-1 (Col15a1)
expression, which deﬁne subtypes present in several organs48, a
Wif1+Comp1+ ﬁbroblast subtype observed in heart valve as well
as skeletal muscle perimysial ﬁbroblasts, and two ﬁbroblast sub-
types present in both colon and bladder, deﬁned by Tnc+Cd34−
and Tnc-Cd34+ expression, respectively47. Thirdly, insights into
the specialized physiological functions of various ﬁbroblast sub-
types are emerging, for example in human skin, where some
ﬁbroblast subtypes appear specialized for ECM production and
others for immunological and antimicrobial activities49, or in
mouse skin, where ﬁbroblast subtypes have been identiﬁed that
participate in ﬁbroblast growth factor (FGF) and Wnt signaling
with hair follicle epithelial stem cells during cycling of the hair
follicle50. In the mouse intestine, speciﬁc intestinal ﬁbroblast
subtypes are involved in Wnt signaling that regulates intestinal
epithelial stem cell differentiation32,47,51,52. Fourthly, insights into
the specialized pathological functions of various ﬁbroblast sub-
types are emerging. For example, a rare intestinal ﬁbroblast
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:3409 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

subtype that converts arachidonic acid into prostaglandin E2
appears to play a role in tumorigenesis in the mouse33. Fibro-
blasts in skeletal muscle express speciﬁc cytokines and proin-
ﬂammatory factors, likely aiding in regeneration of myoﬁbers
following injury53. A ﬁfth lesson relates to species similarities and
differences, including how similar human and mouse ﬁbroblasts
are, which is of relevance for human translation of mouse data.
While the number of studies comparing mouse and human
ﬁbroblasts “side-by-side” are still few48,54–58, analogous ﬁbroblast
subtypes and similar gene activation programs exist in mouse and
human cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts (CAFs)48. There also appears
to be molecular similarities between perivascular brain ﬁbroblasts
in humans and mice59–62, as well as between human and mouse
lung ﬁbrosis-inducing CTHRC1+ ﬁbroblast subtypes63,64. Not-
withstanding these examples, more research will be required to
precisely deﬁne the degree of ﬁbroblast conservation between the
humans and mice.
Given the current pace of acquisition of ﬁbroblast scRNA-seq
data, we will undoubtedly see rapid progress, resulting in more
ﬁne-grained views of ﬁbroblast heterogeneity, as well as reﬁne-
ment of transcriptomic signatures for cell type demarcations,
such as proposed pan-ﬁbroblast signatures deﬁned by Pdgfra, Dpt
combined with Pi16 or Col15a148, or a 90-gene signature that
demarcates ﬁbroblasts from vascular mural cells47. Progress will
also be aided by improvements on the bioinformatics side (see
Box 1 regarding technological considerations for scRNA-seq
studies). Going forward, it is important that novel ﬁbroblast
subtypes are rigorously characterized, not only bioinformatically
through clustering algorithms, which can be somewhat arbitrary
and should be seen as a framework for detailed analysis rather
than ﬁnal conclusions about cell types, but also anatomically
using carefully annotated RNA and protein markers. Ideally,
marker combinations that readily and reliably distinguish ﬁbro-
blasts from other cell types in speciﬁc organs of interest should be
identiﬁed and used.
Fibroblast heterogeneity within and between organs
As mentioned above, scRNA-seq data now allow ﬁbroblast het-
erogeneity and relationship with as well as demarcation to other
cell types to be decoded with unprecedented speed and precision.
When discussing progress in these areas, we were inspired by the
“The Ancestor’s Tale” by Richard Dawkins and Yan Wong, in
which the authors describe our evolutionary history from the
perspective of a human ﬁrst discussing with its closest relatives,
i.e., the extinct hominins, and then proceeding gradually to
evolutionarily more distant relatives, ending with Archaea. In the
same vein, we ﬁrst discuss ﬁbroblast heterogeneity within and
Box 1 | Single-cell RNA sequencing
Technology:
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) is a technology for genome-wide and quantitative analysis of the transcriptome of cells at single-cell
resolution146. Different scRNA-seq techniques provide complementary advantages that can be exploited depending on the biological question148.
Techniques allowing the parallel analysis of many thousands of cells (e.g., Drop-seq) are useful for the identiﬁcation of the cellular diversity within
complex organs or whole individuals, whereas methods aimed at sorting of individual cells, for example by FACS, combined with chemistry for efﬁcient
mRNA capture and ampliﬁcation (e.g., SmartSeq2 and 3149) allow deep transcriptional proﬁling of rare cells. Regardless of technology, scRNA-seq data
has the ability to resolve cellular heterogeneity within an analyzed sample of cells, in marked contrast to traditional RNA sequencing (bulk RNA-seq),
which provides averaged information in which any heterogeneity is masked. ScRNA-seq therefore offers an unprecedented opportunity to deﬁne and
demarcate a cell class, such as ﬁbroblasts, from other cell classes/types and to map heterogeneity in adult homeostasis, development and disease.
Caveats and pitfalls:
There are certain caveats with the current single-cell transcriptomic technologies. Loss of certain cell types during single-cell sample preparation
represents a common problem; fragile cells do not cope well with the dissociation protocols and thus become under-represented or lost. Similarly, cells
ﬁrmly embedded within the ECM, such as pericytes and mesangial cells, are hard to extract as intact individual cells, leading to under-representation or
contamination by transcriptomes from other cell types. Using unbiased collection of “alive-labeled” cells may lead to that rare cell populations are out-
competed by the most abundant cell types. The apparent lack of ﬁbroblasts in some organ cell atlas studies may reﬂect these caveats107. Single-nuclei
RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) is an alternative single-cell transcriptomic strategy, which assesses in part immature mRNA molecules, thus
circumventing some of the challenges with fragile or ﬁrmly embedded cells and can be applied to archived material150. SnRNA-seq is however prone to
cross-contamination by “carry over” of mRNA from genes abundantly expressed by major cell types to the cell type of interest in the analyzed tissue. It
should also be borne in mind that the algorithms for clustering of cells following scRNA-seq or snRNA-seq, such as Uniform Manifold Approximation
and Projection (UMAP) and t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tSNE), are machine learning-based and somewhat arbitrary, and the ﬁnal
clustering is dependent on the cellular composition of the sample at the starting point. This element of arbitrariness is likely to contribute to that
different studies in some cases produce different subtype annotations, as they start from different cellular compositions of the starting samples.
Comparison of transcriptomic datasets generated at different platforms (for example Drop-seq versus SmartSeq2/3) is also not yet straightforward, for
example due to different sequencing depths, different mRNA/cDNA ampliﬁcation rates, and the presence or absence of UMIs (unique molecular
identiﬁers) and can generate erroneous conclusions.
Considerations before initiating a scRNA-seq study:
With the aim to identify a speciﬁc cell (sub)-type by scRNA-seq, it is important to consider whether it will be abundant enough to be captured by for
example Drop-seq, or whether cell enrichment via cell surface marker expression (antibody-panning) or FACS sorting of ﬂuorescence-labelled cells in
transgenic models (see Box 2) will be required. Another consideration is the size of the cells, if FACS sorting is used. Some cells, such as
cardiomyocytes or mature adipocytes151, are large and therefore lost or underrepresented following FACS sorting, and as discussed above some cell
types are also generally more fragile. A third consideration is the choice of cell dissociation protocol, which needs to be “powerful” enough to yield
single cells but should also be “minimal” enough not to impair cell and thus mRNA quality. Such protocols generally need to be ﬁne-tuned for each
organ and cell type. Fourth, in the subsequent bioinformatic analysis, attention needs to be paid not only to cell doublets, but also to cross-
contamination (carry over) from other cell types (see above) as well as a concise appreciation of the lower limit of reliable gene-count signal, i.e., where
does the noise level start. Finally, there may be situations where large-scale scRNA-seq experiments are not feasible for ﬁnancial or other reasons, and if
well-curated transcriptomic annotations have been made for cell types in the organ under study, bulk transcriptomic analysis may be a more affordable
option, and observed expression changes can be related back to the cell type(s) of interest using prior knowledge about transcriptomes in the particular
cell type(s). An informative example of this strategy was provided in a recent analysis of brain ﬁbroblasts in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis61.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:3409 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3

between organs and then proceed to discuss relationships of
ﬁbroblasts to other connective tissue and vasculature cell types
with whom ﬁbroblasts share functional similarities and possible
molecular relationships.
Intra-organ ﬁbroblast heterogeneity. Fibroblast heterogeneity
spans species, organ and developmental stage boundaries. It has
long been recognized that different ﬁbroblast populations reside
simultaneously in the same organ (for review see refs. 65,66). For
example, several studies have advanced our understanding of
ﬁbroblast subtypes in the skin (Fig. 1). In mice, ﬁbroblasts
residing in the upper (papillar) layer express alpha-8 integrin
(Itga8) and dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (CD26, Dpp4), whereas ﬁbro-
blasts in the lower (reticular) layer express podoplanin (Pdpn)
and delta-like non-canonical Notch ligand 1 (Dlk1)67. One study
identiﬁed four ﬁbroblast subtypes in the adult mouse skin (FIB1-
4), which based on marker expression (Dcn, Gpx3, Sparc, and
Plac8, respectively), were found to occupy three distinct anato-
mical localization (dermis, hypodermis and adventitia)50. Two of
the subtypes (FIB1 and 2), likely representing different states of
the same ﬁbroblast subtype, respond transcriptionally to different
cell cycle stages in the hair follicle50. In humans, one study sug-
gests that skin ﬁbroblasts segregate into six transcriptionally
distinct cell clusters, of which one (expressing DPP4) is the main
ECM-producing cell type49. In a meta-analysis of human skin
ﬁbroblast transcriptomes, 10 subtypes formed three major groups
(A-C, marked by MMP2, IGFBP7 and SFRP1 expression,
respectively)68, of which group A appears specialized for ECM
production and group B in immune surveillance68. In the mouse
heart, two major ﬁbroblast subtypes, presumably derived from
endo- and epicardium, were identiﬁed and shown to express
Lamb1 and Dkk3, respectively69. Heart ﬁbroblasts also express
Csf1, Vegfa, Igf1 and Fgf2, indicating active paracrine signaling to
other cell types in the heart69. The human adult heart was found
to contain seven ﬁbroblast subtypes, two of which show enrich-
ment in atria and ventricles and can be distinguished by
expression of SCN7A and CFH, respectively, and two (called FB4
and FB5) which appear specialized in responding to transforming
growth factor-β signaling and in ECM remodeling, respectively70.
In the mouse lung, ﬁbroblast subtypes have been characterized,
one of which (a PDGFRa+Axin2+ subtype) responds by differ-
entiating into myoﬁbroblasts following injury71,72. An analysis of
the human lung revealed ﬁve ﬁbroblast subtypes, one of which
(CTHRC1+) promotes lung ﬁbrosis in COVID-19 patients64.
Interestingly, a similar Cthrc1+ ﬁbroblast subtype drives lung
ﬁbrosis in the mouse63. Two ﬁbroblast subtypes with different
injury-response features were identiﬁed in the synovial tissue of
joints in the mouse: an immune effector subtype expressing
ﬁbroblast activation protein-α (FAPα)+ as well as THY1+ and a
tissue destructive FAPα+THY1−subtype73. Depletion of the
FAPα+ ﬁbroblasts reduced bone erosion and inﬂammation in a
mouse arthritis model73. Another study identiﬁed NOTCH3
activity as a driver of inﬂammation in THY1+ synovial
ﬁbroblasts44. Intra-organ ﬁbroblast heterogeneity is not conﬁned
to mammals but has also been noted in zebraﬁsh where different
pdgfra-positive
ﬁbroblast
subpopulations
take
part
in
lymphangiogenesis46, or in the axolotl where several ﬁbroblast
populations were found amongst blastema-cells during limb
regeneration74,75.
In addition to the distinction between ﬁbroblast entities by the
presence/absence
of
speciﬁc
singular
markers,
intra-organ
ﬁbroblast heterogeneity may also reﬂect cell zonation, which is
deﬁned as gradual cellular phenotypic transitions along an
anatomical
or
functional
axis.
For
example,
zonation
of
hepatocytes and endothelial cells occurs along the porto-central
axis in the liver lobule76,77 and endothelial and mural cell
zonation is observed along the arterial-venous axis in brain
vasculature60. There are anatomical and physiological reasons to
believe
that
ﬁbroblast zonation
(in
addition
to the Hox
transcription code, discussed above) would make sense, for
example along the muscle-tendon axis or along the crypt-villus
and crypt-surface axes of the small and large intestine32,34. By
identifying genes with gradient or nested transcription proﬁles
across adjacent tissue areas/volumes, ﬁbroblast zonation will
potentially be uncovered and shown to be instrumental for
generation and maintenance of proper tissue architecture in
multiple organs.
Inter-organ ﬁbroblast heterogeneity. The ﬁrst genome-wide
transcriptional information on inter-organ ﬁbroblast hetero-
geneity was provided through cDNA microarray analysis of cul-
tures of human skin ﬁbroblasts established from different ages
and anatomical locations24. Interestingly, despite the concern that
in vitro culturing may have inﬂuenced gene expression patterns,
these ﬁbroblasts retained a certain degree of transcriptional
memory
of
their
origin,
including
HOX
gene
expression
patterns24. In a cross-comparison of mouse ﬁbroblasts isolated
directly from different muscular organs and analyzed by scRNA-
seq, it was evident that differential expression of genes related to
the ECM—the matrisome—is a major feature of inter-organ
ﬁbroblast transcriptomic heterogeneity47 (Fig. 2). This informa-
tion is consistent with previous evidence that ﬁbroblasts at dif-
ferent anatomical locations and at different ages tailor a unique
composition of the ECM24. An important topic for further ana-
lysis is to understand the genetic and/or epigenetic underpinnings
of how ﬁbroblasts of different organs regulate their gene
expression in order to achieve spatial/temporal-speciﬁc ECM
proﬁles.
The relationship between ﬁbroblasts and other cell types in
connective tissue and vasculature
Specialized connective tissue cell types. Several connective tis-
sues harbor highly specialized cell types: adipocytes in fat,
chondrocytes in cartilage, and osteocytes/blasts in bone. There are
both in vivo and in vitro data suggesting that these cell types are
lineage-related and share a common mesenchymal and ﬁbroblast-
like origin, and it is therefore of interest to explore how related
the differentiated cells are to each other and to ﬁbroblasts at the
molecular level. Adipocytes are designed to store, release, and
burn lipids at different relative rates depending on their subtype
(white, brown, and beige/brite). Several scRNA-seq studies of
adipocytes have been conducted, although adult white adipocytes
are challenging to handle due to their large size and fragility (for
review see ref. 78). From available data, it is apparent that the
transcriptomes of differentiated ﬁbroblasts and adipocytes are
readily distinguishable by the adipocyte transcripts that encode
proteins involved in lipid handling. The resemblance between the
adipocyte precursor cell (preadipocyte) and ﬁbroblasts is however
close, although relationships between preadipocytes and pericytes,
discussed below, have also been proposed (see ref. 79 and refer-
ences therein). Chondrocytes are morphologically highly similar
to ﬁbroblasts, but express several unique proteins, notably a
number of ECM proteins contained within cartilage, including
collagen type 280 (for review see ref. 81). Beyond the highly spe-
ciﬁc markers of adipocytes, chondrocytes and osteoblasts, further
analyses are needed to deﬁne transcriptional similarities and
differences between these cells, their precursors, and ﬁbroblasts.
Vascular mural cells. Vasculature courses through and is
sometimes even counted as a component of connective tissue.
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:3409 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Blood vessels consist of an inner tubing of endothelial cells sur-
rounded by mural cells. The latter are either vascular smooth
muscle cells (VSMCs), located in larger vessels (arteries, arterioles
and veins), or pericytes, which coat capillaries and some venules
and are transcriptomically related to venous VMSCs60. VSMCs
contain a contractile machinery involving several proteins, among
them alpha-smooth muscle actin (ASMA, Acta2), which is a
highly expressed and often-used smooth muscle cell marker.
Pericytes probably have multiple and organ-speciﬁc functions, for
example in the brain where they are essential for the maturation
and maintenance of the blood-brain barrier82,83. Molecularly,
pericytes can be distinguished from VSMCs by for example
abundant expression of potassium inwardly rectifying channel
subfamily J member 8 (Kcnj8) and absent or very low (relative to
VSMCs) expression of transcripts encoding the smooth muscle
contractile machinery60. Fibroblasts reside on the outside of the
mural coat in many vessel types. In the largest arteries and veins,
ﬁbroblasts form an anatomically discernable vascular layer, the
adventitia. Pericytes have a morphology somewhat resembling
that of ﬁbroblasts, and it has been proposed that pericytes are in
fact specialized perivascular ﬁbroblasts84. Live imaging in zebra-
ﬁsh embryos indeed suggest that mural cells derive from peri-
vascular ﬁbroblast-like cells85. ScRNA-seq analysis of pericytes
from several organs, including brain, lung, skeletal muscle, colon,
bladder
and
heart
has
illustrated
their
relationship
to
ﬁbroblasts47,60. From these studies, it seems clear that a distinct
demarcation between ﬁbroblast and pericyte transcriptomes can
be made, including differences in ECM-related transcription
proﬁles. For example, pericytes express speciﬁc ECM-binding
proteins, such as basal cell adhesion molecule (BCAM, Bcam), but
generally low levels of collagens in comparison to ﬁbroblasts, with
the exception of collagen type 4 (Col4a1, Col4a2), which are
components of the microvascular basement membrane to which
the pericytes contribute47. The molecular demarcation between
VSMCs and ﬁbroblasts also seems distinct, with several genes
uniquely expressed in one or the other cell type. Regarding ECM
production, VSMCs express low amounts of collagens, similar to
pericytes, but high amounts of elastin (Eln), and certain other
ECM proteins of presumed relevance for the resilience of the
arterial wall47. Genes encoding proteins of the smooth muscle
contractile machinery, such as Acta2, myosin heavy chain 11
(Myh11), transgelin (Tagln), calponin 1 (Cnn1), leiomodin 1
(Lmod1) and regulator of calcineurin 2 (Rcan2), are highly
expressed by VSMCs, distinguishing them from hitherto analyzed
quiescent ﬁbroblasts, although these genes may be re-expressed
(albeit at lower levels than in VSMCs) when ﬁbroblasts become
activated into myoﬁbroblasts during pathological conditions or in
normal ﬁbroblasts located in organs with high deformation
capacity, such as the urinary bladder47,57.
Cell types with features of both ﬁbroblasts and pericytes. While
in most cases ﬁbroblasts and pericytes can be readily dis-
tinguished by their distinct gene expression proﬁles, certain cell
Vanlandewijck et al., 2018 (ref. 60)
common: Col1a1, Col3a1, Col5a1, Col6a1, 
 
    Pdgfra, Efemp
FB1: Lama1, Cd55, 
FB2: Tcf21, Emb
Joost et al., 2020 (ref. 50)
FB1-2: Col1a1, Sparc, Dcn, Lum
FB3-4: Cxcl12, Gpx3, Mfap5, Plac8
Tsukui et al., 2020 (ref. 63)
alveolar: Npnt, Cesd1
adventitial: Pi16, Ccl11, Il33, Adh7
peribronchial: Hhip, Fgf18
Travaglini et al., 2020 (ref. 192)
common: COL1A2, BSG, DCN, MFAP4 
AlvFB: GPC3, SPINT2, FGFR4
AdvFB: SERPINF1, SFRP2, PI16
LipFB: APOE, FST, PLIN2
MyoFB: ASPN, WIF1, FGF18, SCX, LGR6
Litvinuková et al., 2020 (ref. 70)
atrial: GSN, FBLN1, ABCA10, SCN7A, ACSM3
ventricular: C7, ABCA10, ADH1B, FN1,
 
       PLXDC2, FBN1
Ascensión et al., 2021 (ref. 68)
FB-A: ELN, MMP2, QPCT, SFRP2
FB-B: APOE, C7, CYGB, IGFBP7
FB-C: DKK3, TNMD, TNN, WFDC1
Skelly et al., 2018 (ref. 69)
FB1: Pdgfra, Lamc1, Pcsk6, Entpd2, Dpep1,
         Adamts5, Medag, Ms4a4d, Lamb1, Tcf21
FB2: Dkk3, Tbx20, Wif1, Frzb, Meox1, Prg4,
         Abi3bp, Pdgfrl, Mdk, Gstm5
Farbehi et al., 2019 (ref. 167)
F-SH: Pi16, Cd248, Efhd1, Gfpt2, Tmem100, Ly6a
F-SL: Hsd11b1, Cxcl14
F-Trans: Fgl2, Inmt, Srpx
F-WntX: Wif1, Cytl1, Dkk3, Postn
Kinchen et al., 2018 (ref. 55)
common: COL1A2, COL3A1, VIM 
stroma 1: ADAMDEC1, DCN, SLIT2, CXCL12
stroma 2: F3, SOX6, VSTM2A, POSTN, FRZB,
 
    WNT5A, WNT5B, BMP2, BMP5
Heart
Skin
Colon
Lung
Heart
Brain
Heart
Skin
Lung
Fig. 1 Schematic depiction of examples of intra-organ ﬁbroblast heterogeneity in humans and mice based on scRNA-seq analysis. Examples of gene
enrichment for speciﬁc ﬁbroblast subtypes that were deﬁned in each study are shown. Ascensión et al.68 summarizes four individual studies. AlvFB alveolar
ﬁbroblasts, AdvFB adventitial ﬁbroblasts, LipFB lipoﬁbroblasts, MyoFB myoﬁbroblasts (sub-class: ﬁbromyocytes), F-SH Sca1-high ﬁbroblasts, F-SL Sca1-low
ﬁbroblasts, F-Trans transitory ﬁbroblasts, F-WntX Wnt expressing ﬁbroblasts. The annotations of ﬁbroblast subtypes as well as their marker genes were
compiled from the respective original works. If marker genes were not explicitly stated in the original paper, they were interpreted and derived from the
available data presented in the ﬁgures. No additional analysis of the raw data was performed.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:3409 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5

types appear to exhibit characteristics of both. In the kidney
glomerulus (Fig. 3A), mesangial cells display intermediate fea-
tures between those of pericytes and ﬁbroblasts, VSMC and
myoﬁbroblasts86. Mesangial cells have indeed been proposed to
be a specialized type of pericytes87,88, a notion supported by their
lineage-dependence on PDGFB-PDGFRB signaling89–91, which is
shared with other mural cell lineages. Other reports however
claim that mesangial cells are distinct from pericytes92. Mesangial
cells lack the typical cellular morphology and vascular basement
membrane embedment of other capillary pericytes, and the fact
that they deposit a rich ECM (called mesangial matrix) may be
more in line with a ﬁbroblastic than pericytic nature. However, no
other pericyte-like cells are present within the glomerulus, and if a
generic pericyte function were needed there, it would have to be
provided by the mesangial cells. Currently, several kidney scRNA-
seq studies have claimed to identify (and hence molecularly
characterize) mesangial cells, but links between cellular hetero-
geneity to precise anatomical location were lacking93–95. How-
ever, one study succeeded in distinguishing between intra- and
extraglomerular mesangial cells through their unique scRNA-seq
proﬁle and in situ analysis of relevant markers58. Notably, the
intraglomerular mesangial cells expressed desmin (Des) and
Acta2, i.e., markers of mural cells, but also Pdgfra and Pi16, which
are ﬁbroblast markers typically absent in mural cells58.
Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) were originally discovered in the
1870s by Karl Wilhelm von Kupffer, who called them Sternzellen
(star cells)96 and portrayed them as a specialized type of pericyte by
virtue of their anatomical position along the sinusoidal capillaries
and in the perisinusoidal space (the space of Disse) between the
endothelial cells and hepatocytes97–100 (Fig. 3B). Like pericytes in
other organs, the HSCs contact capillary endothelial cells, but unlike
both typical pericytes and glomerular mesangial cells, HSCs do not
depend on PDGFB-PDGFRB signaling for their embryonic
development101, possibly suggesting a non-mural identity. HSCs
were recently characterized by scRNA-seq and found to be
heterogeneous across the healthy liver lobule, with distinct
molecular markers expressed at the periportal and central locations,
respectively102. Similar to mesangial cells, HSCs appear to express
markers of both mural cells (Des) and ﬁbroblasts (Pdgfra),
suggesting an identity intermediate between these two cell types.
Annotation of ambiguous cell types. The emerging tran-
scriptomic proﬁles of ﬁbroblasts and the other cell types discussed
above can be useful to shed light on the nature of recently identiﬁed
cell types, for which annotation has been problematic, or remains
controversial. A novel type of pericyte involved in spinal cord repair
has been reported103,104. While these cells share some markers with
brain pericytes and locate in the proximity of blood vessels, other
markers may argue that these cells instead are perivascular
ﬁbroblasts105, a notion receiving support from scRNA-seq data60.
Lineage-tracing studies likewise suggest a ﬁbroblast origin of cells
forming spinal cord ﬁbrotic scars106, but a ﬁnal conclusion will have
to await a more extensive analysis of all cell types present in the
spinal cord vasculature. Kidney ﬁbroblasts were recently annotated
in a kidney scRNA-seq study based on the expression of a singular
Muhl et al., 2020 (ref. 47)
heart: Fibin, Cxcl1, Meox1, Gpm6b
skm: Fmod, Prg4, Myoc, Thbs4, Cpxm2, Cxcl14, Plau 
colon: Adamdec1, Tnc, Lepr, Hpse, Igfbp3
bladder: Dner, Pltp, Kcnn3, Wnt2, Stc2
Buechler et al., 2021 (ref. 48)
pan-tissue: Pi16, Dpp4, Ly6c1, Col15a1, Penk
bone: Cxcl12, Lepr, Sp7
lung: Npnt, Ces1d, Hhip, Aspn 
intestine: Fbln1, Sfrp1, Bmp4 
artery, tendon: Comp, Fmod
spleen, lymph node, liver: Ccl19, Ccl21a, Bst,
 
 
 
        Coch, Wt1
Tabula Muris, 2018 (ref. 42)
common: Col1a1, Pdgfra, Dcn, Lum
bladder, skeletal muscle (diaphragm, 
limb), adipose tissue, heart, lung, 
mammary gland, trachea
Buechler et al., 2021 (ref. 48)
pan-tissue: PDGFRA, PDPN, LUM
lung: PI16, CD34, HAS1, PLIN2, NPNT, CES1,
           ADH1B, FGFR4
colon (colitis): ADAMDEC1, CXCL14, CCL19,
 
 
 GREM1, TNFSF13B
He et al., 2020 (ref. 154)
common: APOD, C7, GSN, MMP2
skin: COCH, CXCL14
bladder: FOXF1, SLC14A1
esophagus: PTGDS, IGFBP6, C1QTNF3
heart: PCOLCE2, PTN
muscle: APOD
rectum: THBS4, SFRP2
liver: IGFBP3
15 organs
3 organs, incl. disease states
15 organs
4 organs
20 organs
Fig. 2 Schematic depiction of examples of inter-organ ﬁbroblast heterogeneity in humans and mice, based on scRNA-seq analysis. Examples of gene
enrichment for speciﬁc ﬁbroblast subtypes that were deﬁned in each study are shown. Studies that speciﬁcally investigate the inter-organ heterogeneity of
ﬁbroblasts were selected. a alveolar, p peribronchial, hi PDGFRα-high, rp red pulp. The annotations of ﬁbroblast subtypes as well as their marker genes
were compiled from the respective original works. If marker genes were not explicitly stated in the original paper, they were interpreted and derived from
the available data presented in the ﬁgures. No additional analysis of the raw data was performed.
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:3409 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

marker, FSP1 (S100a4)107. However, cross-organ comparison pro-
vides little support for these cells being ﬁbroblasts, but there is
instead ample evidence for similarity with macrophages47,108,
which, along with smooth muscle cells, also express FSP1. Another
study instead annotated kidney ﬁbroblasts in both human and
mouse as positive for PDGFRA, PDGFRB, maternally expressed 3
(MEG3), Scavenger Receptor Class A Member 5 (SCARA5) and
numerous collagens109, which are markers found also in ﬁbroblasts
from several other organs47. Further studies are thus needed to
establish the identity and possible heterogeneity of kidney ﬁbro-
blasts. Some of the annotations in the large-scale analysis presented
in Tabula Muris42 may also need to be revised, notably some cell
populations deﬁned as myoﬁbroblasts should rather be referred to
as mural cells (pericytes and/or VSMCs). A novel lung cell type
characterized by high PDGFRB expression and expansion in
response to experimental lung injury was recently identiﬁed110. The
authors posed the question whether these cells were pericytes, a
notion supported by the extensive transcriptomic similarity to cells
independently annotated as lung pericytes60. These examples
illustrate how the improved understanding of ﬁbroblasts, pericytes
and other vascular or connective tissue cell types may assist in ﬁne-
tuning annotations of cell types from various datasets.
Lineage relationships between ﬁbroblasts and other cell
types
The recent advances in transcriptomics can be productively
interfaced with insights from lineage-tracing analysis to better
understand ﬁbroblast lineage relationships. Connective tissue is
largely
derived
from
mesoderm
that
via
epithelial-to-
mesenchymal transition (EMT) of the primitive epithelium gen-
erates embryonic mesenchyme, which in turns forms most con-
nective tissues in the adult organism, including ﬁbroblasts65,111
(Fig. 4). The vascular mural cells of most trunk tissues likewise
have a mesodermal origin, arguing that a common progenitor for
ﬁbroblasts and vascular mural cells can be found somewhere in
the mesodermal lineage65, a view supported by lineage-tracing
analysis112. Fibroblasts and mural cells in the head are however in
part derived from a different origin, the neuroectoderm (neural
crest)84, and it will be interesting to learn to what extent tran-
scriptomic differences between ﬁbroblasts and mural cells in
the head versus organs in the trunk reﬂect these different
cellular origins. To establish ﬁbroblast transcriptomes from dif-
ferent developmental stages will also be important to understand
how different ﬁbroblast subtypes dynamically change during
development.
In a discussion on connective tissue lineage and possible stem/
progenitor populations, it is difﬁcult to avoid touching upon
mesenchymal stem cells (MCS; a.k.a. mesenchymal stromal cells).
MSCs were ﬁrst mentioned in the 1960s in conjunction with bone
marrow transplantation and explant studies113,114, and cells with
the potential of differentiating into multiple connective tissue
phenotypes, including adipose, cartilage and bone, were subse-
quently established in vitro from multiple tissue sources (for
review see ref. 115). There has however been a lack of rigorous
Podocytes
Afferent
arteriole
Efferent
arteriole
Capillary loop
Glomerulus
Loop of Henle
Nephron
Liver lobules
Portal triad
A
B
Bile canaliculus
Space of Disse
Sinusoid
Hepatocytes
Cholangiocytes
Kupffer cells
Hepatic stellate cells
Collecting duct
Bowman’s capsule
Proximal
tubuli
Renal
artery
Renal
vein
Urether
Capillary tuft
Proximal
tubule
Mesangial cells
Mesangial
matrix
Portal vein
Hepatic artery
Gall bladder
Inferior vena cava
Central vein
Bile canaliculus
Portal vein
Hepatic artery
Bile duct
Sinusoid
Hepatic stellate cells
Portal fibroblasts
Fig. 3 Cell types with features of both ﬁbroblasts and pericytes. A Schematic depiction of the kidney with the nephron and glomerulus. In the glomerulus,
the position of the mesangial cells close to a capillary loop is shown. B Schematic depiction of the liver with the lobules and portal triads. The position of the
hepatic stellate cells along the sinusoid is shown.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:3409 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7

criteria to deﬁne MSCs116 and although efforts are made to deﬁne
a set of commonly agreed markers115,117, there is still a somewhat
bewildering literature regarding MSC cell lineage and differ-
entiation capabilities. It should also be considered that most MSC
differentiation experiments have been conducted in vitro, which
makes it difﬁcult to yet establish their true existence in vivo, both
regarding abundance and locations, and to what extent they
contribute to repair and remodeling of connective tissue,
including ﬁbroblasts. Several studies propose that pericytes may
be in vivo equivalents to MSCs based on that MSCs can be
established from explanted vascular fragments and by using a
limited set of markers118–120. A strong similarity between MCSs
and ﬁbroblasts has however also been proposed121. It is
increasingly clear that ﬁbroblasts coat also small caliber vessels
without a discernable adventitia and that ﬁbroblasts and mural
cells share many markers including the ones used for MSCs47,60.
In sum, MCSs have been extracted from various tissues, but their
true in vivo origin, i.e., whether they exist as a bona ﬁde resident
stem/progenitor cell in the tissue or derive through dediffer-
entiation of a tissue-resident ﬁbroblast, pericyte or other cells,
remains to be worked out.
Lineage-tracing in the mouse has shed new light on rela-
tionships between ﬁbroblast subtypes and between ﬁbroblasts
and other cell types, although there are still some technical
caveats and pitfalls with the technology, as discussed in Box 2.
In skin, progenitors for both papillar and reticular ﬁbroblasts, as
well as for the papillar and reticular lineages individually, have
been identiﬁed by the use of Pdgfra-CRE, Blimp1-CRE and
Dlk1-CRE drivers, respectively67 (for review see ref. 122). Skin
ﬁbrosis
has
been
lineage
traced
to
an
En1+
ﬁbroblast
population123. During wound healing, cells descending from a
Hic1+ mesenchymal progenitor population generate extra-
follicular ﬁbroblasts124, and Hic1 marks mesenchymal pro-
genitors with functions in regeneration also in skeletal muscle53
and heart125. Interestingly, these cells express a number of
pericyte markers (e.g., Rgs5, Mcam, Notch3 and Kcnj8), possibly
suggesting a lineage relationship between pericytes and regen-
erating ﬁbroblasts53. In heart, mesenchymal progenitors yield
Pdgfra+Sca1−ﬁbroblasts upon cardiac injury, and the transi-
tion towards the ﬁbroblast state is regulated by Hic1125.
Lineage-tracing of a Pdgfra+Ly6a+(Sca1) mesenchymal stromal
progenitor cell in skeletal muscle indicates that it can give rise
to both ﬁbroblasts and adipocytes126,127 and be diverted
towards an osteogenic fate by bone morphogenetic protein
stimulation128. This may suggest a common mesenchymal
progenitor for ﬁbroblasts, adipocytes and osteoblasts.
Fibroblasts and pathological conditions
Fibroblasts have been strongly implicated as the major ﬁbrogenic
cell type in pathological tissue ﬁbrosis. 50 years ago, it was
demonstrated that ﬁbroblasts convert to myoﬁbroblasts expres-
sing certain smooth muscle cell markers, notably Acta2, when
activated by tissue injury or stress25. While this transition is part
of a normal wound-healing process that resolves over time, it can
also result in persistent ﬁbrosis, a severe medical condition with
impaired function of organs, including the kidney, lung, liver and
heart. A hallmark of ﬁbrosis is the accumulation of myoﬁbro-
blasts and excessive ECM deposition resulting in abnormal
ﬁbrous connective tissue (for review see refs. 27,129). While many
studies point to ﬁbroblasts as the source of the myoﬁbroblast, the
situation may not be that simple. Alternative suggested origins of
myoﬁbroblasts include endothelial cells, macrophages, mesothe-
lial cells (the squamous epithelial lining of body cavities and their
organs), pericytes, HSCs and MCSs. Summarizing the extensive
body of original papers regarding the potential diverse origins of
myoﬁbroblasts goes beyond the scope of this review, and we refer
interested readers to other literature on the topic66,129,130.
Lineage-tracing has identiﬁed a Gli1+ mesenchymal progenitor
population, which generates myoﬁbroblasts and drives ﬁbrosis in
a sonic hedgehog (Shh)-dependent manner in kidney, lung, liver,
heart and bone marrow131–133. The localization of the Gli1+
mesenchymal cells close to endothelial cells in the perivascular
niche and their expression of Cspg4 (NG2) may suggest a rela-
tionship to pericytes131. The partially conﬂicting propositions for
the various cellular origins of myoﬁbroblasts rest on lineage-
tracing experiments in mice and may to some extent reﬂect
methodological pitfalls, including leakiness in inducible CRE/loxP
systems134 or aberrant expression of CRE recombinase (Box 2). It
however remains a possibility that there is a multi-cell type
(including non-ﬁbroblastic) origin generating functionally dis-
tinct subpopulations of myoﬁbroblasts. Heterogeneity of ﬁbro-
blast origin and differentiation during tissue ﬁbrosis is indeed
supported by data from heart, lung and kidney109,135,136. Further
careful assessment of transcriptomic data from resting ﬁbroblasts
and other normal cell types, comparisons with myoﬁbroblast
transcriptomes, and the analysis of transcriptional proﬁle changes
during myoﬁbroblast generation109 should bring clarity to both
origin and heterogeneity amongst pathological myoﬁbroblasts.
In cancer research, it is increasingly realized that it is not only
the properties of the genetically abnormal tumor cells that dic-
tates the cancer’s severity, growth potential and ability to
metastasize; the outcome is also inﬂuenced by the genetically
normal stroma cells that populate all solid tumors at variable
Ectoderm
Mesoderm
Endoderm
neuroectoderm
Neural crest
Osteoblast/cyte
Chondrocyte
Adipocyte
Vascular mural cell
Visceral smooth muscle cell
Skeletal muscle
Cardiac muscle
Kidney and
gonad epithelium
Blood
endothelium
Fibrogenic cell
(fibrosis)
Myofibroblast
(wound healing)
CAF
(cancer)
Fibrous
connective tissue
Gastrulation
MSC
Fibroblasts
Fig. 4 Schematic representation of the ﬁbroblast lineage, with the origin in mesoderm and from ectoderm (via the neural crest) for ﬁbroblasts in the
head. Other cell types originating from the mesoderm are also depicted. MSC are shown as a transitory cell type that yield ﬁbroblasts. In ﬁbrosis, wound
healing and cancer, ﬁbroblasts likely progress further to become ﬁbrogenic cells, myoﬁbroblasts and CAFs, respectively.
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:3409 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Box 2 | Reporter gene-based lineage-tracing and cell sorting strategies using transgenic mice
Technology:
Lineage tracing and sorting of cells from transgenic mice can be achieved by expression of a reporter gene (ﬂuorescent reporter genes such as eGFP
and tdTomato or lacZ (beta-galactosidase)) in a cell type of interest. A reporter gene can be introduced into the mouse genome in two principal ways
(Figure A). The reporter gene can: (1) be linked to a speciﬁc promoter element which should drive expression in a speciﬁc cell type and the combined
promoter-gene construct randomly inserted in a transgenic mouse; or (2) be inserted into a speciﬁc genomic site, where its expression is driven from a
nearby regulatory (promoter/enhancer) element. A third way to express a reporter gene in cells of interest is to insert it into the genome near a
constitutive regulatory element (such as the Rosa26 locus) but preceded by a stop cassette which prohibits expression (Figure B). The stop cassette is
ﬂanked by recognition sequences (loxP sites) for CRE recombinase (or other excising enzymes such as FLP recombinase), and when the mouse carrying
the silenced reporter gene is crossed with a mouse expressing CRE recombinase in the cell type of interest (introduced into the mouse genome by the
same options as described above), reporter gene expression is activated in this cell type (Figure B). This CRE recombinase-based strategy is frequently
used for lineage-tracing, as the reporter gene becomes permanently activated after the removal of the stop cassette, and all cells descending from an
original reporter gene-expressing cell will express the reporter gene (Figure B).
Caveats and pitfalls:
There are however caveats for all reporter-based systems. If the promoter element does not perfectly recapitulate the expression of the endogenous
gene, this leads to a reporter gene expression pattern not fully mimicking the endogenous expression pattern. For example, the endothelial speciﬁcity of
VE-cadherin (Cdh5)-driven CRE recombinase expression might not be as high as anticipated, since scRNA-seq data show that perivascular ﬁbroblasts in
the brain also express Cdh5 mRNA60. Likewise, the use of FSP1 (S100a4) to mark ﬁbroblasts may be compromised by that it is also expressed by certain
macrophages152. When cells are sorted for scRNA-seq experiments, this can lead to inclusion of cells where aberrant reporter gene expression occurs,
or exclusion of cells which do express the endogenous gene but where the promoter element was not functional. Aberrant promoter activity is also a
problem for CRE-based lineage-tracing studies; too extensive or too narrow expression of the CRE recombinase in relation to the cell type intended to
be labelled leads to an incorrect starting point for a lineage-tracing analysis, which can result in too many or too few labelled cells in the original CRE-
activated cell population (Figure C) (for examples, see Supplementary Data 1 and refs. 153–225).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:3409 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9

abundance. Among the latter, CAFs constitute an important cell
population (for a recent consensus statement paper on CAFs, see
ref. 137). Together with their produced matrix, CAFs often make
up a signiﬁcant volume of carcinomas, and they inﬂuence tumor
growth and metastasis27,28. Similar to the situation with myoﬁ-
broblasts and ﬁbrosis, our knowledge about the origin and
molecular characteristics of CAFs is still limited—they are in part
“negatively” characterized by not expressing markers for other
well-annotated cell types and not carrying the chromosomal
abnormalities observed in the neoplastic tumor cells. To gain
insights into the origin of CAFs is complicated, particularly in
humans, and relies on inference from studies of earlier stages of
cancer (hyperplasia and adenomas), and based on such studies,
normal tissue ﬁbroblasts have been implicated as a founding cell
type for CAFs (for review see ref. 138). Lineage-tracing experi-
ments in mice have resulted in different views on the cell type of
origin for CAFs137, but the conclusions may suffer from problems
with CRE expression speciﬁcity (Box 2), as discussed above for
myoﬁbroblasts. Cell transplantation experiments provide an
additional source of information regarding the cellular origin of
CAFs. In such experiments, asking whether a particular trans-
planted cell type ends up as CAFs in the tumor stroma, both
MSCs and adipocytes appear to be able to generate CAFs in
xenograft mouse tumor models139–143. As for myoﬁbroblasts, it is
an emerging view that distinct subpopulations of CAFs can be
identiﬁed in a particular tumor stroma45, possibly indicating a
multi-cell type origin of CAFs.
Conclusions and future outlooks
At present, our understanding of ﬁbroblasts is rapidly improving,
and large-scale transcriptomic analyses at single-cell resolution
allow us to better deﬁne ﬁbroblasts, their heterogeneity and
relationship to other types and classes of cells. While this
undoubtedly is transforming our current understanding, it is
important to also consider that there still is room for improve-
ment regarding the current transcriptomic and transgenic tech-
nologies (see Box 1 and Box 2 for examples). Transcriptomic
technologies indeed rapidly improve and become more afford-
able, which will lead to an acceleration in the accumulation of
gene expression information with increasing granularity. Simi-
larly, novel lineage-tracing methodologies are at the horizon,
which rely less on promoter speciﬁcity but more on clonal evo-
lution based on naturally occurring somatic mutations in
cells144,145 or the introduction of traceable genetic markers146.
Improved bioinformatic algorithms to identify cell state transi-
tions and advances in spatial transcriptomics will likewise help
deciphering lineage relationships and the exact anatomic location
of ﬁbroblast subsets147. Such studies may shed new light on
lineage relationship and provide insights into whether differ-
entiation yields only divergent ﬁbroblast subsets from a founding
cell population or whether there may also be convergence from
different lineages towards a similar molecular phenotype, for
example when ﬁbroblasts of different origins experience similar
physiological conditions and challenges.
Undoubtedly, gene expression signatures that deﬁne and
demarcate ﬁbroblasts will be reﬁned and reveal further intra- and
inter-organ ﬁbroblast heterogeneity, advancing our functional
understanding of ﬁbroblasts and its related cell types. While this
progress in principle is applaudable, it should be remembered
that transcriptomic information, even when available with perfect
ﬁdelity for single cells, is not the sole basis of cellular hetero-
geneity. Cellular protein levels may deviate from the corre-
sponding
mRNA
levels,
and
posttranslational
protein
modiﬁcations provide an additional level of molecular complexity
and heterogeneity. Additionally, lipids, sugars and low molecular
weight metabolites and solutes are likely to contribute to
cellular heterogeneity independent of transcriptional control.
Whereas single-cell analysis of other molecules than DNA and
RNA currently has limited depth, we may expect technological
advances also in these areas, and therefore our view and under-
standing of cellular (including ﬁbroblast) heterogeneity will
continue to evolve. Secondly, while the wealth of single-cell
transcriptomic data can inspire efforts to deﬁne an expanding
number of molecularly distinct ﬁbroblast subpopulations, it must
all the time be asked to what extent the molecular differences are
physiologically meaningful; some of the identiﬁed cell “subtypes”
may reﬂect states on a developmental trajectory or responses to
stress or injury rather than stable functional specializations at
steady state. To tease out speciﬁc physiological functions for
steady state differences in ﬁbroblasts will undoubtedly take
longer, but it remains an important future research avenue and is
increasingly feasible. It is possible that the ﬁbroblast cell class in
due time may be subdivided into functionally meaningful ﬁbro-
blast subtypes, some of which execute organ-speciﬁc physiological
functions, while other subtypes may transcend organ boundaries
and carry out functions that are not organ-speciﬁc, such as the
involvement in immune responses or wound healing. The
latter may lead to a terminology similar to the one established
for T-cells, for which we now recognize a set of functionally
distinct subtypes, including T-regs, CD8+ T-cells, CD4+ T-cells
and double-negative T-cells. It will be interesting to see how
these endeavors will pan out, but it is certainly likely that the
ﬁbroblast will be a well-deﬁned and annotated class of cells for
which heterogeneities across and within organs as well as devel-
opmental and pathological states are understood in a foreseeable
future.
Received: 24 May 2021; Accepted: 4 May 2022;
References
1.
Virchow, R. Die Cellularpathologie in Ihrer Begruendung auf Physiologische
und Pathologische Gewebelehre (Hirschwald A, Berlin, Germany, 1858).
2.
Bloom, W. & Fawcett, DW. A Textbook of Histology. (CRC Press, 1998).
3.
Duvall, M. Atlas d’Embryologiee. (ed. Masson, G) (Libraire de l’académie de
médecine, Paris, France, 1879).
4.
Movat, H. Z. & Fernando, N. V. P. The Fine Structure of Connective Tissue I.
The Fibroblast. Exp. Mol. Pathol. 1, 509–534 (1962).
5.
Ziegler, E. General Pathology. (William Wood and Company, 1896).
6.
Maximow, A. Über die Zellformen des lockeren Bindegewebes. Arch. f.ür.
mikroskopische Anat. 67, 680–757 (1905).
7.
Lewis, M. Development of connective-tissue ﬁbers in tissue cultures of chick
embryos (Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington, 1917).
8.
Stearns, M. L. Studies on the development of connective tissue in transparent
chambers in the rabbit’s ear. I. Am. J. Anat. 66, 133–176 (1940).
9.
Stearns, M. L. Studies on the development of connective tissue in transparent
chambers in the rabbit’s ear. II. Am. J. Anat. 67, 55–97 (1940).
10. Porter, K. R. Cell ﬁne structure and biosynthesis of intracellular
macromolecules. Biophysical J. 4, 167–201 (1964).
11. Chesney, J. & Bucala, R. Peripheral blood ﬁbrocytes: novel ﬁbroblast-like cells
that present antigen and mediate tissue repair. Biochemical Soc. Trans. 25,
520–525 (1997).
12. Bucala, R., Spiegel, L. A., Chesney, J., Hogan, M. & Cerami, A. Circulating
ﬁbrocytes deﬁne a new leukocyte subpopulation that mediates tissue repair.
Mol. Med. 1, 71–81 (1994).
13. Chong, S. G., Sato, S., Kolb, M. & Gauldie, J. Fibrocytes and ﬁbroblasts—
Where are we now. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 116, 105595 (2019).
14. Abercrombie, M. & Heaysman, J. E. M. Observations on the social behaviour
of cells in tissue culture. I. Speed of movement of chick heart ﬁbroblasts in
relation to their mutual contacts. Exp. Cell Res. 5, 111–131 (1953).
15. Hayﬂick, L. The limited in vitro lifetime of human diploid cell strains. Exp.
Cell Res. 37, 614–636 (1965).
16. Shay, J. W. & Wright, W. E. Hayﬂick, his limit, and cellular ageing. Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 1, 72–76 (2000).
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:3409 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

17. Shih, C., Padhy, L. C., Murray, M. & Weinberg, R. A. Transforming genes of
carcinomas and neuroblastomas introduced into mouse ﬁbroblasts. Nature
290, 261–264 (1981).
18. Takahashi, K. & Yamanaka, S. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse
embryonic and adult ﬁbroblast cultures by deﬁned factors. Cell 126, 663–76
(2006).
19. Rheinwald, J. G. & Green, H. Serial cultivation of strains of human epidermal
keratinocytes: the formation keratinizing colonies from single cells. Cell 6,
331–343 (1975).
20. Evans, M. J. & Kaufman, M. H. Establishment in culture of pluripotential cells
from mouse embryos. Nature 292, 154–156 (1981).
21. Karsdal, M. Biochemistry of collagens, laminins and elastin. (Academic Press,
2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/C2018-0-00074-2.
22. Hynes, R. O. & Naba, A. Overview of the matrisome-An inventory of
extracellular matrix constituents and functions. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect.
Biol. 4, 1–16 (2012).
23. Schor, S. L. & Schor, A. M. Clonal heterogeneity in ﬁbroblast phenotype:
Implications for the control of epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. BioEssays
7, 200–204 (1987).
24. Chang, H. Y. et al. Diversity, topographic differentiation, and positional
memory in human ﬁbroblasts. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 12877–12882
(2002).
25. Gabbiani, G., Ryan, G. B. & Majne, G. Presence of modiﬁed ﬁbroblasts in
granulation tissue and their possible role in wound contraction. Experientia
27, 549–550 (1971).
26. Pakshir, P. et al. The myoﬁbroblast at a glance. J. Cell Sci. 133, jcs227900
(2020).
27. Kalluri, R. The biology and function of ﬁbroblasts in cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer
16, 582–598 (2016).
28. Pietras, K. & Östman, A. Hallmarks of cancer: Interactions with the tumor
stroma. Exp. Cell Res. 316, 1324–1331 (2010).
29. el Ghalbzouri, A., Lamme, E. & Ponec, M. Crucial role of ﬁbroblasts in
regulating epidermal morphogenesis. Cell Tissue Res. 310, 189–199 (2002).
30. Costea, D. E., Johannessen, A. C. & Vintermyr, O. K. Fibroblast control on
epithelial differentiation is gradually lost during in vitro tumor progression.
Differentiation 73, 134–141 (2005).
31. Liu, Y. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of renal ﬁbrosis. Nat. Rev. Nephrol.
7, 684–696 (2011).
32. Degirmenci, B., Valenta, T., Dimitrieva, S., Hausmann, G. & Basler, K. GLI1-
expressing mesenchymal cells form the essential Wnt-secreting niche for
colon stem cells. Nature 558, 449–453 (2018).
33. Roulis, M. et al. Paracrine orchestration of intestinal tumorigenesis by a
mesenchymal niche. Nature 580, 524–529 (2020).
34. Shoshkes-Carmel, M. et al. Subepithelial telocytes are an important source of
Wnts that supports intestinal crypts. Nature 557, 242–246 (2018).
35. Alexander, T., Nolte, C. & Krumlauf, R. Hox Genes and Segmentation of the
Hindbrain and Axial Skeleton. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 25, 431–456 (2009).
36. Rinn, J. L., Bondre, C., Gladstone, H. B., Brown, P. O. & Chang, H. Y.
Anatomic demarcation by positional variation in ﬁbroblast gene expression
programs. PLoS Genet. 2, e119 (2006).
37. Dulbecco, R., Allen, R., Okada, S. & Bowman, M. Functional changes of
intermediate ﬁlaments in ﬁbroblastic cells revealed by a monclonal antibody.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 80, 1915–1918 (1983).
38. Strutz, F. et al. Identiﬁcation and characterization of a ﬁbroblast marker: FSP1.
J. Cell Biol. 130, 393–405 (1995).
39. Heruth, D. P., Gibson, M., Grigoryev, D. N., Zhang, L. Q. & Ye, S. Q. RNA-seq
analysis of synovial ﬁbroblasts brings new insights into rheumatoid arthritis.
Cell Biosci. 2, 1–16 (2012).
40. Nota, B. et al. RNA sequencing of creatine transporter (SLC6A8) deﬁcient
ﬁbroblasts reveals impairment of the extracellular matrix. Hum. Mutat. 35,
1128–1135 (2014).
41. Lahiry, P. et al. Transcriptional proﬁling of endocrine cerebro-osteodysplasia
using microarray and next-generation sequencing. PLoS ONE 6, 1–8 (2011).
42. Schaum, N. et al. Single-cell transcriptomics of 20 mouse organs creates a
Tabula Muris. Nature 562, 367–372 (2018).
43. Green, C. D. et al. A Comprehensive Roadmap of Murine Spermatogenesis
Deﬁned by Single-Cell RNA-Seq. Developmental Cell 46, 651–667 (2018).
44. Wei, K. et al. Notch signalling drives synovial ﬁbroblast identity and arthritis
pathology. Nature 582, 259–264 (2020).
45. Bartoschek, M. et al. Spatially and functionally distinct subclasses of breast
cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts revealed by single cell RNA sequencing. Nat.
Commun. 9, 5150 (2018).
46. Wang, G. et al. Speciﬁc ﬁbroblast subpopulations and neuronal structures
provide local sources of Vegfc-processing components during zebraﬁsh
lymphangiogenesis. Nat. Commun. 11, 2724 (2020).
47. Muhl, L. et al. Single-cell analysis uncovers ﬁbroblast heterogeneity and
criteria for ﬁbroblast and mural cell identiﬁcation and discrimination. Nat.
Commun. 11, 3953–3953 (2020).
48. Buechler, M. B. et al. Cross-tissue organization of the ﬁbroblast lineage.
Nature 593, 575–579 (2021).
49. Vorstandlechner, V. et al. Deciphering the functional heterogeneity of
skin ﬁbroblasts using single-cell RNA sequencing. FASEB J. 34, 3677–3692
(2020).
50. Joost, S. et al. The Molecular Anatomy of Mouse Skin during Hair Growth and
Rest. Cell Stem Cell 26, 441–457.e7 (2020).
51. Stzepourginski, I. et al. CD34+ mesenchymal cells are a major component of
the intestinal stem cells niche at homeostasis and after injury. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 114, E506–E513 (2017).
52. Valenta, T. et al. Wnt Ligands Secreted by Subepithelial Mesenchymal Cells
Are Essential for the Survival of Intestinal Stem Cells and Gut Homeostasis.
Cell Rep. 15, 911–918 (2016).
53. Scott, R. W., Arostegui, M., Schweitzer, R., Rossi, F. M. V. & Underhill, T. M.
Hic1 Deﬁnes Quiescent Mesenchymal Progenitor Subpopulations with
Distinct Functions and Fates in Skeletal Muscle Regeneration. Cell Stem Cell
25, 797–813.e9 (2019).
54. Elyada, E. et al. Cross-species single-cell analysis of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma reveals antigen-presenting cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts.
Cancer Discov. 9, 1102–1123 (2019).
55. Kinchen, J. et al. Structural Remodeling of the Human Colonic Mesenchyme
in Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease. Cell 175, 372–386.e17 (2018).
56. Merrick, D. et al. Identiﬁcation of a mesenchymal progenitor cell hierarchy in
adipose tissue. Science 364, eaav2501 (2019).
57. Yu, Z. et al. Single-cell transcriptomic map of the human and mouse bladders.
J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 30, 2159–2176 (2019).
58. He, B. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals the mesangial identity and
species diversity of glomerular cell transcriptomes. Nat. Commun. 12,
2141–2141 (2021).
59. Zeisel, A. et al. Molecular Architecture of the Mouse Nervous System. Cell
174, 999–1014 (2018).
60. Vanlandewijck, M. et al. A molecular atlas of cell types and zonation in the
brain vasculature. Nature 554, 475–480 (2018).
61. Månberg, A. et al. Altered perivascular ﬁbroblast activity precedes ALS disease
onset. Nat. Med. 27, 640–646 (2021).
62. Liu, J. et al. A human cell type similar to murine central nervous system
perivascular ﬁbroblasts. Exp. Cell Res. 402, 112576 (2021).
63. Tsukui, T. et al. Collagen-producing lung cell atlas identiﬁes multiple subsets
with distinct localization and relevance to ﬁbrosis. Nat. Commun. 11, 1920
(2020).
64. Melms, J. C. et al. A molecular single-cell lung atlas of lethal COVID-19.
Nature 595, 114–119 (2021).
65. LeBleu, V. S. & Neilson, E. G. Origin and functional heterogeneity of
ﬁbroblasts. FASEB J. 34, 3519–3536 (2020).
66. Plikus, M. V. et al. Fibroblasts: Origins, deﬁnitions, and functions in health
and disease. Cell 184, 3852–3872 (2021).
67. Driskell, R. R. et al. Distinct ﬁbroblast lineages determine dermal architecture
in skin development and repair. Nature 504, 277–281 (2013).
68. Ascensión, A. M., Fuertes-Álvarez, S., Ibañez-Solé, O., Izeta, A. &
Araúzo-Bravo, M. J. Human Dermal Fibroblast Subpopulations Are
Conserved across Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Studies. J. Investig. Dermatol.
141, 1735–1744.e35 (2021).
69. Skelly, D. A. et al. Single-Cell Transcriptional Proﬁling Reveals Cellular
Diversity and Intercommunication in the Mouse Heart. Cell Rep. 22, 600–610
(2018).
70. Litviňuková, M. et al. Cells of the adult human heart. Nature 588, 466–472
(2020).
71. Rock, J. R. et al. Multiple stromal populations contribute to pulmonary ﬁbrosis
without evidence for epithelial to mesenchymal transition. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 108, E1475–E1483 (2011).
72. Peng, T. et al. Coordination of heart and lung co-development by a
multipotent cardiopulmonary progenitor. Nature 500, 589–592 (2013).
73. Croft, A. P. et al. Distinct ﬁbroblast subsets drive inﬂammation and damage in
arthritis. Nature 570, 246–251 (2019).
74. Leigh, N. D. et al. Transcriptomic landscape of the blastema niche in
regenerating adult axolotl limbs at single-cell resolution. Nat. Commun. 9,
5153 (2018).
75. Gerber, T. et al. Single-cell analysis uncovers convergence of cell identities
during axolotl limb regeneration. Science 362, eaaq0681 (2018).
76. Halpern, K. B. et al. Paired-cell sequencing enables spatial gene expression
mapping of liver endothelial cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 962–970 (2018).
77. Halpern, K. B. et al. Single-cell spatial reconstruction reveals global division of
labour in the mammalian liver. Nature 542, 352–356 (2017).
78. Deutsch, A., Feng, D., Pessin, J. E. & Shinoda, K. The impact of single-cell
genomics on adipose tissue research. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 1–13 (2020).
79. Gupta, R. K. et al. Zfp423 Expression Identiﬁes Committed Preadipocytes and
Localizes to Adipose Endothelial and Perivascular Cells. Cell Metab. 15,
230–239 (2012).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:3409 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11

80. Ferguson, G. B. et al. Mapping molecular landmarks of human skeletal
ontogeny and pluripotent stem cell-derived articular chondrocytes. Nat.
Commun. 9, 3634 (2018).
81. Reynard, L. N. & Barter, M. J. Osteoarthritis year in review 2019: genetics,
genomics and epigenetics. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 28, 275–284 (2020).
82. Vazquez-Liebanas, E. et al. Adult-induced genetic ablation distinguishes
PDGFB roles in blood-brain barrier maintenance and development. J. Cereb.
Blood Flow. Metab. 42, 264–279 (2021).
83. Armulik, A., Genové, G. & Betsholtz, C. Pericytes: developmental,
physiological, and pathological perspectives, problems, and promises. Dev.
Cell 21, 193–215 (2011).
84. Lynch, M. D. & Watt, F. M. Fibroblast heterogeneity: implications for human
disease. J. Clin. Investig. 128, 26–35 (2018).
85. Ando, K. et al. Peri-arterial speciﬁcation of vascular mural cells from naïve
mesenchyme requires Notch signaling. Development 146, dev165589 (2019).
86. Cipleu, C. D., Palant, C. E., Sanders, K. M. & Dick, G. M. Separation of two
Cl– Currents in Cultured Human and Murine Mesangial Cells: Biophysical
and Pharmacological Characteristics of ICl.vol and ICl.Ca. J. Vasc. Res. 39,
426–436 (2002).
87. Schlondorff, D. The glomerular mesangial cell: an expanding role for a
specialized pericyte. FASEB J. 1, 272–281 (1987).
88. Ferland-McCollough, D., Slater, S., Richard, J., Reni, C. & Mangialardi, G.
Pericytes, an overlooked player in vascular pathobiology. Pharmacol.
Therapeutics 171, 30–42 (2017).
89. Leveen, P. et al. Mice deﬁcient for PDGF B show renal, cardiovascular, and
hematological abnormalities. Genes Dev. 8, 1875–1887 (1994).
90. Lindahl, P. et al. Paracrine PDGF-B/PDGF-Rβ signaling controls mesangial
cell development in kidney glomeruli. Development 125, 3313–3322 (1998).
91. Soriano, P. Abnormal kidney development and hematological disorders in
PDGF b-receptor mutant mice. Genes Dev. 8, 1888–1896 (1994).
92. Kida, Y. & Dufﬁeld, J. S. Pivotal role of pericytes in kidney ﬁbrosis. Clin. Exp.
Pharmacol. Physiol. 38, 467–473 (2011).
93. Lu, Y., Ye, Y., Yang, Q. & Shi, S. Single-cell RNA-sequence analysis of mouse
glomerular mesangial cells uncovers mesangial cell essential genes. Kidney Int.
92, 504–513 (2017).
94. Menon, R. et al. Single-cell analysis of progenitor cell dynamics and lineage
speciﬁcation in the human fetal kidney. Development 145, dev 164038 (2018).
95. Karaiskos, N. et al. A single-cell transcriptome atlas of the mouse glomerulus.
J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 29, 2060–2068 (2018).
96. Kupffer, K. Uber Sternzellen der Leber. Brieﬂiche Mitteilung an Professor
Waldeyer. Arch. Mikr Anat. 12, 353–358 (1876).
97. Pinzani, M. Hepatic stellate (ITO) cells: expanding roles for a liver-speciﬁc
pericyte. J. Hepatol. 22, 700–706 (1995).
98. Geerts, A. History, heterogeneity, developmental biology, and functions of
quiescent hepatic stellate cells. Semin. Liver Dis. 21, 311–335 (2001).
99. Mederacke, I. et al. Fate tracing reveals hepatic stellate cells as dominant
contributors to liver ﬁbrosis independent of its aetiology. Nat. Commun. 4,
2823 (2013).
100. Iwakiri, Y., Shah, V. & Rockey, D. C. Vascular pathobiology in chronic liver
disease and cirrhosis—Current status and future directions. J. Hepatol. 61,
912–924 (2014).
101. Hellstrom, M., Kalen, M., Lindahl, P., Abramsson, A. & Betsholtz, C. Role of
PDGF-B and PDGFR-beta in recruitment of vascular smooth muscle cells and
pericytes during embryonic blood vessel formation in the mouse. Development
126, 3047–3055 (1999).
102. Dobie, R. et al. Single-Cell Transcriptomics Uncovers Zonation of Function in
the Mesenchyme during Liver Fibrosis. Cell Rep. 29, 1832–1847 (2019).
103. Göritz, C. et al. A Pericyte Origin of Spinal Cord Scar Tissue. Science 333,
238–243 (2011).
104. Dias, D. O. et al. Reducing Pericyte-Derived Scarring Promotes Recovery after
Spinal Cord Injury. Cell 173, 153–165 (2018).
105. Soderblom, C. et al. Perivascular Fibroblasts Form the Fibrotic Scar after
Contusive Spinal Cord Injury. J. Neurosci. 33, 13882–13887 (2013).
106. Dorrier, C. E. et al. CNS ﬁbroblasts form a ﬁbrotic scar in response to immune
cell inﬁltration. Nat. Neurosci. 24, 234–244 (2021).
107. Park, J. et al. Single-cell transcriptomics of the mouse kidney reveals potential
cellular targets of kidney disease. Science 360, 758–763 (2018).
108. Papalexi, E. & Satija, R. Single-cell RNA sequencing to explore immune cell
heterogeneity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 18, 35–45 (2018).
109. Kuppe, C. et al. Decoding myoﬁbroblast origins in human kidney ﬁbrosis.
Nature 589, 281–286 (2021).
110. Xie, T. et al. Single-Cell Deconvolution of Fibroblast Heterogeneity in Mouse
Pulmonary Fibrosis. Cell Rep. 22, 3625–3640 (2018).
111. Kalluri, R. & Weinberg, R. A. The basics of epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
J. Clin. Investig. 119, 1420–1428 (2009).
112. Zhang, W. et al. Spatial-temporal targeting of lung-speciﬁc mesenchyme by a
Tbx4 enhancer. BMC Biol. 11, 111 (2013).
113. Tavassoli, M. & Crosby, W. H. Transplantation of marrow to extramedullary
sites. Science 161, 54–56 (1968).
114. Friedenstein, A. J., Chailakhjan, R. K. & Lalykina, K. S. The development of
ﬁbroblast colonies in monolayer cultures of guinea-pig bone marrow and
spleen cells. Cell Tissue Kinet. 3, 393–403 (1970).
115. Frenette, P. S., Pinho, S., Lucas, D. & Scheiermann, C. Mesenchymal stem cell:
Keystone of the hematopoietic stem cell niche and a stepping-stone for
regenerative medicine. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 31, 285–316 (2013).
116. Bianco, P. et al. The meaning, the sense and the signiﬁcance: Translating the
science of mesenchymal stem cells into medicine. Nat. Med. 19, 35–42 (2013).
117. Dominici, M. et al. Minimal criteria for deﬁning multipotent mesenchymal
stromal cells. The International Society for Cellular Therapy position
statement. Cytotherapy 8, 315–317 (2006).
118. Crisan, M. et al. A Perivascular Origin for Mesenchymal Stem Cells in
Multiple Human Organs. Cell Stem Cell 3, 301–313 (2008).
119. Thomas, H. M., Cowin, A. J. & Mills, S. J. The importance of pericytes in
healing: Wounds and other pathologies. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 18, 1129 (2017).
120. Corselli, M., Chen, C. W., Crisan, M., Lazzari, L. & Péault, B. Perivascular
ancestors of adult multipotent stem cells. Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, Vasc.
Biol. 30, 1104–1109 (2010).
121. Denu, R. A. et al. Fibroblasts and Mesenchymal Stromal/Stem Cells Are
Phenotypically Indistinguishable. Acta Haematologica 136, 85–97 (2016).
122. Driskell, R. R. & Watt, F. M. Understanding ﬁbroblast heterogeneity in the
skin. Trends Cell Biol. 25, 92–99 (2015).
123. Rinkevich, Y. et al. Identiﬁcation and isolation of a dermal lineage with
intrinsic ﬁbrogenic potential. Science 348, aaa2151 (2015).
124. Abbasi, S. et al. Distinct Regulatory Programs Control the Latent Regenerative
Potential of Dermal Fibroblasts during Wound Healing. Cell Stem Cell 27,
396–412.e6 (2020).
125. Soliman, H. et al. Pathogenic Potential of Hic1-Expressing Cardiac Stromal
Progenitors. Cell Stem Cell 26, 205–220.e8 (2020).
126. Joe, A. W. B. et al. Muscle injury activates resident ﬁbro/adipogenic
progenitors that facilitate myogenesis. Nat. Cell Biol. 12, 153–163 (2010).
127. Uezumi, A., Fukada, S. I., Yamamoto, N., Takeda, S. & Tsuchida, K.
Mesenchymal progenitors distinct from satellite cells contribute to ectopic fat
cell formation in skeletal muscle. Nat. Cell Biol. 12, 143–152 (2010).
128. Pillai, I. C. L. et al. Cardiac Fibroblasts Adopt Osteogenic Fates and Can Be
Targeted to Attenuate Pathological Heart Calciﬁcation. Cell Stem Cell 20,
218–232.e5 (2017).
129. di Carlo, S. E. & Peduto, L. The perivascular origin of pathological ﬁbroblasts.
J. Clin. Investig. 128, 54–63 (2018).
130. el Agha, E. et al. Mesenchymal Stem Cells in Fibrotic Disease. Cell Stem Cell
21, 166–177 (2017).
131. Kramann, R., Wongboonsin, J., Chang-Panesso, M., Machado, F. G. &
Humphreys, B. D. Gli1+ pericyte loss induces capillary rarefaction and
proximal tubular injury. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 28, 776–784 (2017).
132. Kramann, R. et al. Perivascular Gli1+ progenitors are key contributors to
injury-induced organ ﬁbrosis. Cell Stem Cell 16, 51–66 (2015).
133. Schneider, R. K. et al. Gli1+ Mesenchymal Stromal Cells Are a Key Driver of
Bone Marrow Fibrosis and an Important Cellular Therapeutic Target. Cell
Stem Cell 20, 785–800.e8 (2017).
134. Álvarez-Aznar, A. et al. Tamoxifen-independent recombination of reporter
genes limits lineage tracing and mosaic analysis using CreERT2 lines.
Transgen. Res. 29, 53–68 (2020).
135. Adams, T. S. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals ectopic and aberrant lung-
resident cell populations in idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Sci. Adv. 6,
eaba1983 (2020).
136. McLellan, M. A. et al. High-Resolution Transcriptomic Proﬁling of the Heart
during Chronic Stress Reveals Cellular Drivers of Cardiac Fibrosis and
Hypertrophy. Circulation 142, 1448–1463 (2020).
137. Sahai, E. et al. A framework for advancing our understanding of cancer-
associated ﬁbroblasts. Nat. Rev. Cancer 20, 174–186 (2020).
138. Paulsson, J. & Micke, P. Prognostic relevance of cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts
in human cancer. Semin. Cancer Biol. 25, 61–68 (2014).
139. Karnoub, A. E. et al. Mesenchymal stem cells within tumour stroma promote
breast cancer metastasis. Nature 449, 557–563 (2007).
140. Raz, Y. et al. Bone marrow-derived ﬁbroblasts are a functionally distinct
stromal cell population in breast cancer. J. Exp. Med. 215, 3075–3093 (2018).
141. Zhang, Y. et al. White adipose tissue cells are recruited by experimental
tumors and promote cancer progression in mouse models. Cancer Res. 69,
5259–5266 (2009).
142. Dirat, B. et al. Cancer-associated adipocytes exhibit an activated phenotype
and contribute to breast cancer invasion. Cancer Res. 71, 2455–2465 (2011).
143. Nieman, K. M. et al. Adipocytes promote ovarian cancer metastasis and
provide energy for rapid tumor growth. Nat. Med. 17, 1498–1503 (2011).
144. Lodato, M. A. et al. Somatic mutation in single human neurons tracks
developmental and transcriptional history. Science 350, 94–98 (2015).
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:3409 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

145. Leung, M. L. et al. Single-cell DNA sequencing reveals a late-dissemination
model in metastatic colorectal cancer. Genome Res. 27, 1287–1299 (2017).
146. Kester, L. & van Oudenaarden, A. Single-Cell Transcriptomics Meets Lineage
Tracing. Cell Stem Cell 1–14 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2018.04.014 (2018).
147. VanHorn, S. & Morris, S. A. Next-Generation Lineage Tracing and Fate
Mapping to Interrogate Development. Dev. Cell 56, 7–21 (2020).
148. Ziegenhain, C. et al. Comparative Analysis of Single-Cell RNA Sequencing
Methods. Mol. Cell 65, 631–643 (2017).
149. Hagemann-Jensen, M. et al. Single-cell RNA counting at allele and isoform
resolution using Smart-seq3. Nat. Biotechnol. 38, 708–714 (2020).
150. Koenitzer, J. R., Wu, H., Atkinson, J. J., Brody, S. L. & Humphreys, B. D.
Single-nucleus RNA-sequencing proﬁling of mouse lung reduced dissociation
bias and improved rare cell-type detection compared with single-cell RNA
sequencing. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 63, 739–747 (2020).
151. Hagberg, C. E. et al. Flow Cytometry of Mouse and Human Adipocytes for the
Analysis of Browning and Cellular Heterogeneity. Cell Rep. 24, 2746–2756.e5
(2018).
152. Österreicher, C. H. et al. Fibroblast-speciﬁc protein 1 identiﬁes an
inﬂammatory subpopulation of macrophages in the liver. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
108, 308–313 (2011).
153. Delorey, T. M. et al. COVID-19 tissue atlases reveal SARS-CoV-2 pathology
and cellular targets. Nature 595, 107–113 (2021).
154. He, S. et al. Single-cell transcriptome proﬁling an adult human cell atlas of 15
major organs. Genome Biol. 21, 294 (2020).
155. Acosta, J. R. et al. Single cell transcriptomics suggest that human adipocyte
progenitor cells constitute a homogeneous cell population. Stem Cell Res. Ther.
8, 250 (2017).
156. Burl, R. B. et al. Deconstructing Adipogenesis Induced by β3-Adrenergic
Receptor Activation with Single-Cell Expression Proﬁling. Cell Metab. 28,
300–309.e4 (2018).
157. Schwalie, P. C. et al. A stromal cell population that inhibits adipogenesis in
mammalian fat depots. Nature 559, 103–108 (2018).
158. Vijay, J. et al. Single-cell analysis of human adipose tissue identiﬁes depot- and
disease-speciﬁc cell types. Nat. Metab. 2, 97–109 (2020).
159. Zhang, Z. et al. Dermal adipose tissue has high plasticity and undergoes
reversible dedifferentiation in mice. J. Clin. Investig. 129, 5327–5342
(2019).
160. Chen, Z. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing highlights the role of inﬂammatory
cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts in bladder urothelial carcinoma. Nat. Commun.
11, 5077 (2020).
161. Gao, Y. et al. CD63+ Cancer‐Associated Fibroblasts Confer Tamoxifen
Resistance to Breast Cancer Cells through Exosomal miR‐22. Adv. Sci. 7,
2002518 (2020).
162. Wu, S. Z. et al. Stromal cell diversity associated with immune evasion in
human triple‐negative breast cancer. EMBO J. 39, e104063 (2020).
163. Dani, N. et al. A cellular and spatial map of the choroid plexus across brain
ventricles and ages. Cell 184, 3056–3074.e21 (2021).
164. He, L. et al. Data Descriptor: Single-cell RNA sequencing of mouse
brain and lung vascular and vessel-associated cell types. Sci. Data 5, 1180160
(2018).
165. Shi, J. et al. Spatio-temporal landscape of mouse epididymal cells and speciﬁc
mitochondria-rich segments deﬁned by large-scale single-cell RNA-seq. Cell
Discov. 7, 34 (2021).
166. de Bakker, D. E. M. et al. Prrx1b restricts ﬁbrosis and promotes Nrg1-
dependent cardiomyocyte proliferation during zebraﬁsh heart regeneration.
Development 148, dev198937 (2021).
167. Farbehi, N. et al. Single-cell expression proﬁling reveals dynamic ﬂux of
cardiac stromal, vascular and immune cells in health and injury. eLife 8,
e43882 (2019).
168. DeLaughter, D. M. et al. Single-Cell Resolution of Temporal Gene Expression
during Heart Development. Dev. Cell 39, 480–490 (2016).
169. Garvin, A. M. et al. Transient ACE (Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme)
Inhibition Suppresses Future Fibrogenic Capacity and Heterogeneity of
Cardiac Fibroblast Subpopulations. Hypertension 77, 904–918 (2021).
170. Gladka, M. M. et al. Single-Cell Sequencing of the Healthy and Diseased Heart
Reveals Cytoskeleton-Associated Protein 4 as a New Modulator of Fibroblasts
Activation. Circulation 138, 166–180 (2018).
171. Hulin, A. et al. Maturation of heart valve cell populations during postnatal
remodeling. Development 146, dev173047 (2019).
172. Liang, D. et al. Cellular and molecular landscape of mammalian sinoatrial
node revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing. Nat. Commun. 12, 287 (2021).
173. Liu, Z. et al. Single-cell transcriptomics reconstructs fate conversion from
ﬁbroblast to cardiomyocyte. Nature 551, 100–104 (2017).
174. Wang, L. et al. Single-cell dual-omics reveals the transcriptomic and
epigenomic diversity of cardiac non-myocytes. Cardiovasc. Res. 118,
1548–1563 (2021).
175. Bahar Halpern, K. et al. Lgr5+ telocytes are a signaling source at the intestinal
villus tip. Nat. Commun. 11, 1936 (2020).
176. Elmentaite, R. et al. Single-Cell Sequencing of Developing Human Gut Reveals
Transcriptional Links to Childhood Crohn’s Disease. Dev. Cell 55, 771–783.e5
(2020).
177. Fawkner-Corbett, D. et al. Spatiotemporal analysis of human intestinal
development at single-cell resolution. Cell 184, 810–826.e23 (2021).
178. Holloway, E. M. et al. Mapping Development of the Human Intestinal Niche
at Single-Cell Resolution. Cell Stem Cell 28, 568–580.e4 (2021).
179. Hong, S. P. et al. Distinct ﬁbroblast subsets regulate lacteal integrity through
YAP/TAZ-induced VEGF-C in intestinal villi. Nat. Commun. 11, 4102 (2020).
180. Nanus, D. E. et al. Synovial Tissue from Sites of Joint Pain in Knee
Osteoarthritis Patients Exhibits a Differential Phenotype with Distinct
Fibroblast Subsets. eBioMedicine 72, 103618 (2021).
181. Kramann, R. et al. Parabiosis and single-cell RNA sequencing reveal a limited
contribution of monocytes to myoﬁbroblasts in kidney ﬁbrosis. JCI Insight 3,
e99561 (2018).
182. Lake, B. B. et al. A single-nucleus RNA-sequencing pipeline to decipher the
molecular anatomy and pathophysiology of human kidneys. Nat. Commun.
10, 2832 (2019).
183. Affo, S. et al. Promotion of cholangiocarcinoma growth by diverse cancer-
associated ﬁbroblast subpopulations. Cancer Cell 39, 866–882 (2021).
184. Bhattacharjee, S. et al. Tumor restriction by type I collagen opposes tumor-
promoting effects of cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts. J. Clin. Investig. 131,
e146987 (2021).
185. Krenkel, O., Hundertmark, J., Ritz, T., Weiskirchen, R. & Tacke, F. Single Cell
RNA Sequencing Identiﬁes Subsets of Hepatic Stellate Cells and
Myoﬁbroblasts in Liver Fibrosis. Cells 8, 503 (2019).
186. Massalha, H. et al. A single cell atlas of the human liver tumor
microenvironment. Mol. Syst. Biol. 16, e9682 (2020).
187. Habermann, A. C. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals proﬁbrotic roles of
distinct epithelial and mesenchymal lineages in pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Sci. Adv.
6, eaba1972 (2020).
188. Lambrechts, D. et al. Phenotype molding of stromal cells in the lung tumor
microenvironment. Nat. Med. 24, 1277–1289 (2018).
189. Lee, J. H. et al. Anatomically and Functionally Distinct Lung Mesenchymal
Populations Marked by Lgr5 and Lgr6. Cell 170, 1149–1163.e12 (2017).
190. Peyser, R. et al. Deﬁning the activated ﬁbroblast population in lung ﬁbrosis
using single-cell sequencing. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 61, 74–85 (2019).
191. Redente, E. F. et al. Loss of Fas signaling in ﬁbroblasts impairs homeostatic
ﬁbrosis resolution and promotes persistent pulmonary ﬁbrosis. JCI Insight 6,
e141618 (2021).
192. Travaglini, K. J. et al. A molecular cell atlas of the human lung from single-cell
RNA sequencing. Nature 587, 619–625 (2020).
193. Valenzi, E. et al. Single-cell analysis reveals ﬁbroblast heterogeneity and
myoﬁbroblasts in systemic sclerosis-associated interstitial lung disease. Ann.
Rheum. Dis. 78, 1379–1387 (2019).
194. Wang, C. et al. Expansion of hedgehog disrupts mesenchymal identity and
induces emphysema phenotype. J. Clin. Investig. 128, 4343–4358 (2018).
195. Yun, J. H. et al. Hedgehog interacting protein-expressing lung ﬁbroblasts
suppress lymphocytic inﬂammation in mice. JCI Insight 6, e144575 (2021).
196. Zepp, J. A. et al. Distinct Mesenchymal Lineages and Niches Promote
Epithelial Self-Renewal and Myoﬁbrogenesis in the Lung. Cell 170,
1134–1148.e10 (2017).
197. Rodda, L. B. et al. Single-Cell RNA Sequencing of Lymph Node Stromal Cells
Reveals Niche-Associated Heterogeneity. Immunity 48, 1014–1028.e6 (2018).
198. Dominguez, C. X. et al. Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Reveals Stromal
Evolution into LRRC15 + Myoﬁbroblasts as a Determinant of Patient
Response to Cancer Immunotherapy. Cancer Discov. 10, 232–253 (2020).
199. Lee, J. J. et al. Elucidation of Tumor-Stromal Heterogeneity and the Ligand-
Receptor Interactome by Single-Cell Transcriptomics in Real-world Pancreatic
Cancer Biopsies. Clin. Cancer Res. 27, 5912–5921 (2021).
200. Ligorio, M. et al. Stromal Microenvironment Shapes the Intratumoral
Architecture of Pancreatic Cancer. Cell 178, 160–175.e27 (2019).
201. Lin, W. et al. Single-cell transcriptome analysis of tumor and stromal
compartments of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma primary tumors and
metastatic lesions. Genome Med. 12, 80 (2020).
202. Foster, D. S. et al. Elucidating the fundamental ﬁbrotic processes driving
abdominal adhesion formation. Nat. Commun. 11, 4061 (2020).
203. Joseph, D. B. et al. Single-cell analysis of mouse and human prostate reveals
novel ﬁbroblasts with specialized distribution and microenvironment
interactions. J. Pathol. 255, 141–154 (2021).
204. de Micheli, A. J. et al. Single-cell transcriptomic analysis identiﬁes extensive
heterogeneity in the cellular composition of mouse Achilles tendons. Am. J.
Physiol. Cell Physiol. 319, C885–C894 (2020).
205. de Micheli, A. J. et al. Single-Cell Analysis of the Muscle Stem Cell Hierarchy
Identiﬁes Heterotypic Communication Signals Involved in Skeletal Muscle
Regeneration. Cell Rep. 30, 3583–3595.e5 (2020).
206. Giordani, L. et al. High-Dimensional Single-Cell Cartography Reveals Novel
Skeletal Muscle-Resident Cell Populations. Mol. Cell 74, 609–621.e6 (2019).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:3409 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
13

207. Harvey, T., Flamenco, S. & Fan, C. M. A Tppp3 + Pdgfra + tendon stem cell
population contributes to regeneration and reveals a shared role for PDGF
signalling in regeneration and ﬁbrosis. Nat. Cell Biol. 21, 1490–1503 (2019).
208. Johnson, G. L., Masias, E. J. & Lehoczky, J. A. Cellular Heterogeneity and
Lineage Restriction during Mouse Digit Tip Regeneration at Single-Cell
Resolution. Dev. Cell 52, 525–540.e5 (2020).
209. Julien, A. et al. Direct contribution of skeletal muscle mesenchymal
progenitors to bone repair. Nat. Commun. 12, 2860 (2021).
210. Meng, S. et al. Reservoir of ﬁbroblasts promotes recovery from limb ischemia.
Circulation 142, 1647–1662 (2020).
211. Murach, K. A. et al. Early satellite cell communication creates a permissive
environment for long-term muscle growth. iScience 24, 102372 (2021).
212. Xu, Z. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing and lipidomics reveal cell and lipid
dynamics of fat inﬁltration in skeletal muscle. J. Cachexia, Sarcopenia Muscle
12, 109–129 (2021).
213. Deng, C. C. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals ﬁbroblast heterogeneity and
increased mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts in human ﬁbrotic skin diseases. Nat.
Commun. 12, 3709 (2021).
214. Dobie, R. et al. Deciphering mesenchymal drivers of human Dupuytren’s
disease at single-cell level. J. Investig. Dermatol. 142, 114–123 (2021).
215. Guerrero-Juarez, C. F. et al. Single-cell analysis reveals ﬁbroblast heterogeneity
and myeloid-derived adipocyte progenitors in murine skin wounds. Nat.
Commun. 10, 650 (2019).
216. He, H. et al. Single-cell transcriptome analysis of human skin identiﬁes novel
ﬁbroblast subpopulation and enrichment of immune subsets in atopic
dermatitis. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 145, 1615–1628 (2020).
217. Layton, T. B. et al. Cellular census of human ﬁbrosis deﬁnes functionally
distinct stromal cell types and states. Nat. Commun. 11, 2768 (2020).
218. Leavitt, T. et al. Prrx1 Fibroblasts Represent a Pro-ﬁbrotic Lineage in the
Mouse Ventral Dermis. Cell Rep. 33, 108356 (2020).
219. Mahmoudi, S. et al. Heterogeneity in old ﬁbroblasts is linked to variability in
reprogramming and wound healing. Nature 574, 553–558 (2019).
220. Philippeos, C. et al. Spatial and Single-Cell Transcriptional Proﬁling Identiﬁes
Functionally Distinct Human Dermal Fibroblast Subpopulations. J. Investig.
Dermatol. 138, 811–825 (2018).
221. Solé-Boldo, L. et al. Single-cell transcriptomes of the human skin reveal age-
related loss of ﬁbroblast priming. Commun. Biol. 3, 188 (2020).
222. Tabib, T., Morse, C., Wang, T., Chen, W. & Lafyatis, R. SFRP2/DPP4 and
FMO1/LSP1 Deﬁne Major Fibroblast Populations in Human Skin. J. Investig.
Dermatol. 138, 802–810 (2018).
223. Tabib, T. et al. Myoﬁbroblast transcriptome indicates SFRP2hi ﬁbroblast
progenitors in systemic sclerosis skin. Nat. Commun. 12, 4384 (2021).
224. Zou, Z. et al. A Single-Cell Transcriptomic Atlas of Human Skin Aging. Dev.
Cell 56, P383–P397 (2021).
225. Schiebinger, G. et al. Optimal-Transport Analysis of Single-Cell Gene
Expression Identiﬁes Developmental Trajectories in Reprogramming. Cell
176, 928–943.e22 (2019).
Acknowledgements
The authors are indebted to Professor Donald McDonald, Department of Anatomy,
UCSF, for valuable suggestions and constructive critique on the manuscript. Work in the
authors’ laboratories is supported by the Swedish Research Council, the Swedish Cancer
Society, the Swedish Brain Foundation, and the Erling Persson Family Foundation (U.L.,
C.B.), the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation (C.B.) and by Magnus Bergvalls
Stiftelse (L.M.).
Author contributions
U.L., L.M. and C.B. conceived and wrote the review. L.M. made the Figure and Box
drawings.
Competing interests
U.L. holds a research grant from Merck KGaA but no personal remuneration. C.B and
L.M. have no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Christer Betsholtz.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2022
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9
14
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2022) 13:3409 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30633-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

===== Leng2021_NatRevNeurol+ADneuroinflammation =====
Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common cause of 
dementia, accounting for an estimated 60–70% of cases 
worldwide. Around 10% of people aged ≥65 years are 
thought to have AD1; this figure rises to 32% in those 
aged >85 years1, among whom the annual incidence of 
AD is estimated at 6.48%2. Patients with AD present 
with gradual loss of memory and cognitive functions 
involving the language, visuospatial and executive 
domains3. The pathological hallmarks of AD in the brain 
are amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques and abnormal tau tangles4. 
On the basis of the temporal emergence of amyloid and 
tau pathologies and evidence that Aβ overproduction 
leads to AD, the amyloid cascade hypothesis was pro-
posed, which posits that Aβ accumulation is the primary 
event leading to a cascade of effects that ultimately result 
in neuronal damage5. However, accumulating evidence 
suggests that the amyloid cascade alone cannot explain 
much of the pathogenesis of AD, indicating the involve-
ment of other pathological processes6. In particular, fol-
lowing the discovery of elevated levels of inflammatory 
markers in patients with AD as well as of AD risk genes 
associated with innate immune functions, inflammation 
has emerged as a vital player7–11.
In this Review, we discuss the pathological hallmarks 
of AD, the definition of neuroinflammation and its key 
mediators, current measures to evaluate neuroinflamma-
tion in vivo, and evidence regarding the role of microglial 
activation — the key element of neuroinflammation — 
in AD. We also consider the interrelationships between 
microglial activation and amyloid and tau pathologies 
at the microscopic and molecular levels and the effect of 
microglial activation on the pathogenesis and progression 
of AD. We propose a model to explain how microglial 
activation could influence the trajectory of AD, depend-
ing on the disease stage, microglial priming and indi-
vidual susceptibility. In light of the current evidence, we 
highlight potential strategies to treat AD by modulating 
microglial activation.
Classic hallmarks of AD
Aβ accumulation has long been considered to be a central 
and initial event in the pathogenesis of AD. Amyloid pre-
cursor protein (APP) is cleaved to generate Aβ peptides, 
which range from 38 to 43 amino acids12. Aβ monomers 
can bind to one another to form Aβ oligomers, polymers 
and, eventually, insoluble amyloid plaques. Among these 
different forms, Aβ oligomers are thought to have the 
strongest toxicity to neurons13. The well-known amyloid 
cascade hypothesis posits that elevated levels of Aβ lead 
to subsequent pathological events in AD14,15. However, 
numerous clinical trials of treatments that aimed to clear 
various forms of Aβ from the brain in people with AD 
or mild cognitive impairment (MCI) produced disap-
pointing results: although the patients’ amyloid load was 
reduced, their cognitive function did not improve16,17.
The other hallmark of AD is neurofibrillary pathology, 
which includes neuritic plaques, neurofibrillary tangles 
and neuropile threads, formed by the aggregation of tau 
Neuroinflammation and microglial 
activation in Alzheimer disease:  
where do we go from here?
Fangda Leng and Paul Edison    ✉
Abstract | Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common form of neurodegenerative disease, 
estimated to contribute 60–70% of all cases of dementia worldwide. According to the prevailing 
amyloid cascade hypothesis, amyloid-β (Aβ) deposition in the brain is the initiating event in AD, 
although evidence is accumulating that this hypothesis is insufficient to explain many aspects of 
AD pathogenesis. The discovery of increased levels of inflammatory markers in patients with AD 
and the identification of AD risk genes associated with innate immune functions suggest that 
neuroinflammation has a prominent role in the pathogenesis of AD. In this Review, we discuss the 
interrelationships between neuroinflammation and amyloid and tau pathologies as well as the 
effect of neuroinflammation on the disease trajectory in AD. We specifically focus on microglia as 
major players in neuroinflammation and discuss the spatial and temporal variations in microglial 
phenotypes that are observed under different conditions. We also consider how these cells could 
be modulated as a therapeutic strategy for AD.
Department of Brain 
Sciences, Imperial College 
London, Hammersmith 
Hospital Campus,  
London, UK.
✉e-mail: paul.edison@
imperial.ac.uk
https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41582-020-00435-y
Nature ReviewS | Neurology
Reviews
	
 volume 17 | March 2021 | 157

protein4. Under physiological conditions, modified tau 
stabilizes microtubules, regulates axonal transport and 
maintains DNA structure. The pathological modifica-
tion of tau can lead to detachment of tau from microtu-
bules, resulting in synaptic loss, neuronal dysfunction 
and tau aggregation18. Compared with amyloid depo-
sition, tau accumulation in the neocortex is believed to 
occur later but to correlate more closely with cognitive 
decline in patients with AD19–21.
Neuroinflammation and its main players
Neuroinflammation generally refers to an inflammatory 
response within the CNS that can be caused by various 
pathological insults, including infection, trauma, ischae-
mia and toxins. The process is marked by the produc-
tion of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-1β, 
IL-6, IL-18 and tumour necrosis factor (TNF), chemok-
ines such as C-C motif chemokine ligand 1 (CCL1), 
CCL5 and C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 1 (CXCL1), 
small-molecule messengers, including prostaglandins 
and nitric oxide (NO), and reactive oxygen species by 
innate immune cells in the CNS22. The innate immune 
cells involved in this process are primarily microglia and 
astrocytes but capillary endothelial cells and infiltrat-
ing blood cells also contribute to neuroinflammation, 
especially when the blood–brain barrier (BBB) sustains 
biochemical or mechanical damage22,23.
The release of pro-inflammatory molecules can lead 
to synaptic dysfunction, neuronal death and inhibi-
tion of neurogenesis24. IL-1β induces synaptic loss by 
increasing prostaglandin E2 production, which leads 
to presynaptic glutamate release and postsynaptic 
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor activation25, 
and TNF causes neuronal death by activating TNF recep-
tor 1 (TNFR1) and recruiting caspase 8 when the nuclear 
factor-κB (NF-κB) pathway is inhibited26. In addition, 
the complement system can be activated, promoting the 
phagocytic function of microglia, which might result in 
inappropriate pruning of synapses27. Anti-inflammatory 
cytokines, such as IL-1 receptor antagonist, IL-4, IL-10 
and IL-11, are also produced during the neuroinflam-
matory process and could be part of a sophisticated 
mechanism to prevent excessive neuroinflammation7. 
However, in the context of neurodegenerative disease, 
neuroinflammation tends to be a chronic process that 
fails to resolve by itself and is considered a vital driver of 
the disease8 (Fig. 1).
Astrocytes
Astrocytes are specialized glial cells that form the scaf-
fold of the entire CNS and can be found in a protoplas-
mic form (predominantly in grey matter) or in a fibrous 
form (predominantly in white matter)28. The processes 
of astrocytes contribute to the BBB along with endothe-
lial cells and closely enveloped synapses. Consistent 
with their anatomical niche, the functions of astrocytes 
include the regulation of cerebral blood flow, the main-
tenance of fluid and neurotransmitter homeostasis, the 
induction of synapse formation, and metabolic and 
neurotrophic support for synapses29–33. Astrocytes also 
form unique perivascular channels in the CNS, known 
as the glymphatic system, which eliminate potentially 
neurotoxic waste products, including amyloid and tau 
species34,35.
Astrocytes are acknowledged to respond to patho-
logical insults (including mechanical injury, ischaemia 
and abnormal protein aggregates) through reactive gli-
osis, which is part of the neuroinflammatory process36. 
The unified term ‘reactive astrocytes’ has been used 
to describe activated astrocytes that exhibit hyper-
trophic processes and upregulation of glial fibrillary 
acidic protein (GFAP) but diversity has been observed 
in this population. Inflammatory insult has been pro-
posed to induce the A1 astrocyte phenotype through 
the NF-κB pathway, whereas ischaemia induces the 
A2 phenotype via the signal transducers and acti-
vators of transcription 3 (STAT3) pathway, with the 
‘harmful’ A1 cells being characterized by the expres-
sion of inflammatory mediators and the ‘protective’ 
A2 cells being marked by the expression of neurotrophic 
factors37. A1 astrocytes lose their homeostatic func-
tions and are able to induce the apoptosis of neurons 
and oligodendrocytes38. However, whether astrocytes 
adopt multiple distinct activation states rather than 
conforming to this dichotomous scheme is still open to 
debate39. In addition, the phenotypes and functions of 
astrocytes might vary between different neural circuits 
and cortical areas40.
Given their numerous housekeeping functions, astro-
cytes would be expected to try to regain homeostasis in 
the initial stages of AD. Indeed, amyloid-containing 
granules have been observed in astrocytes in the vicin-
ity of amyloid plaques in human brains, suggesting an 
attempt by astrocytes to clear amyloid deposition during 
the disease process41,42. Further experiments have found 
that astrocytes migrate towards amyloid plaques and 
degrade Aβ in vitro and in vivo43. However, A1 astro-
cytes, which are toxic to the CNS, are found in abun-
dance in post-mortem brain tissue from people with AD, 
implying a detrimental role of these cells38. In an animal 
model of AD, reactive astrocytes were found to release 
excessive GABA and glutamate, leading to impaired 
memory and synaptic loss44,45. Moreover, these cells con-
tribute to dysregulated microcirculation and disruption 
of the BBB, which facilitates the accumulation of Aβ 
and progression of the disease46,47. Reactive astrocytes 
might even pave the way for the formation of the earliest 
amyloid plaques48. Of note, astrocytes work closely with 
microglia and could mediate some of the toxic effects 
of microglia in disease states38.
Key points
• Neuroinflammation has demonstrated a key role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer 
disease (AD), the most prevalent form of dementia.
• Neuroinflammation encompasses a variety of inflammatory events in the CNS under 
pathological conditions.
• Among the innate immune cells, microglia are the primary players in neuroinflammation.
• Activated microglia exhibit diverse phenotypes and have multifaceted interactions 
with amyloid-β and tau species as well as with neuronal circuits.
• Activated microglia might have diverse influences on the progression of AD, 
depending on the stage of disease, individual susceptibility and state of microglial 
priming.
• Microglia could potentially be modulated at various points in the AD trajectory to 
either prevent or modify disease progression.
www.nature.com/nrneurol
Reviews
158 | March 2021 | volume 17	

Microglia
Development and functions. Microglia are innate 
immune cells of the myeloid lineage that reside in the 
CNS. Similarities in the morphology and cell surface 
markers of activated microglia and mononuclear phago-
cytes led to the assumption that microglia are derived 
from bone marrow myeloid progenitors and later seed 
to the CNS in a similar way to other tissue-specific 
macrophages49. However, microglial progenitors have 
now been shown to arise from primitive haemato-
poiesis early in embryonic development, which is a 
process independent from definitive haematopoiesis. 
Microglia
a   Physiological conditions
b   Pathological challenge
Astrocyte
Neuron
• Surveillance
• Phagocytosis of debris
• Maintenance of neuronal plasticity
• Trophic support
• Synaptic homeostasis
• Regulation of 
    blood ﬂow
Blood
BBB
Endothelial cells
Blood vessel
Astrocyte
Neuron
• Reactive oxygen species
• Excessive synaptic pruning
• Reduced trophic factors
• Dysfunction
• Apoptosis
• Synaptic loss
• Pro-inﬂammatory cytokines
   (e.g. IL-1β, IL-8, TNF)
Blood
Disrupted BBB
Chemokines
• Axon injury
Activated 
microglia
• Loss of homeostatic
    function
• Release of excessive
    glutamate
Fig. 1 | Physiological function of glial cells. a | Under physiological conditions, ramified microglia survey the brain 
microenvironment with their processes, which sense damage signals and make transient contact with neuronal network 
structures, including synapses and axons. These highly dynamic cells provide immune surveillance and trophic support to the 
CNS, remove pathogens or debris, and are involved in the maintenance of synaptic homeostasis and neuronal plasticity.  
The processes of astrocytes form the outside layer of the blood–brain barrier (BBB) and closely envelop synapses. The 
physiological roles of astrocytes include the regulation of cerebral blood flow, the maintenance of synaptic homeostasis 
and neurotrophic support. b | Under a pathological challenge, activated microglia, astrocytes and macrophages migrating 
through the damaged BBB contribute to neuroinflammation. These activated cells lose homeostatic functions, reduce their 
secretion of neurotrophic factors, and produce increased amounts of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, which 
could aid pathogen or toxin clearance but also lead to neuronal dysfunction and damage. Activated microglia can also 
directly eliminate synaptic structures. TNF, tumour necrosis factor.
Nature ReviewS | Neurology
Reviews
	
 volume 17 | March 2021 | 159

Primitive myeloid precursors arise from the yolk sac — 
an event that requires the expression of runt-related 
transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) and macrophage colony- 
stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R)50. These mye-
loid precursors are then transported to the embryonic 
head with blood flow and later (from embryonic day 8.5 
in mice) migrate to the developing brain using spe-
cific matrix metalloproteinases50,51. Maintenance of the 
microglial population following this migration is mostly 
independent of bone marrow-produced circulating 
monocytes and relies on the self-renewal of microglia. 
A microglial depletion study showed that, similarly to 
other tissue-resident macrophages, microglial popula-
tions are replenished exclusively from brain-resident 
cells through an IL-1α-dependent pathway52. However, 
evidence has shown that circulating monocytes are capa-
ble of entering the brain parenchyma and colonizing the 
microglial niche under pathological conditions in which 
the integrity of the BBB is lost, including cerebral ischae-
mia, autoimmune encephalomyelitis and whole-body 
radiotherapy52–54. These findings raise the possibility that 
circulating monocytes can contribute to AD pathology, 
in which BBB disruption is common55.
Microglial activity is believed to synchronize with the 
development, maturation and senescence of the CNS 
throughout life via the adoption of different regulatory 
networks and has important roles in developmental syn­
aptic pruning, neuronal apoptosis, maintenance of synap­
tic plasticity and immune surveillance56,57. Defective 
synaptic pruning is considered to be associated with 
autism spectrum disorders and a compromised immune 
surveillance function seems to be closely related to neu-
rodegenerative diseases56,58. Ramified microglia have been 
observed to continuously survey the CNS microenviron-
ment with their processes, sensing damage signals, includ-
ing ATP, and mediating a microglial response towards 
the injury site59,60. In the presence of an endogenous or 
exogenous pathological insult, classes of microglial sur-
face receptors, termed damage-associated molecular pat-
terns and pathogen-associated molecular patterns, can 
recognize pathogens, cell debris or abnormal proteins 
(including Aβ species) and induce a microglial response8. 
Activated microglia internalize those pathogenic spe-
cies via pinocytosis, phagocytosis or receptor-mediated 
endocytosis and try to degrade them through various endo­
cytic pathways as well as by activating the expression of 
relevant gene modules, including chemokine receptors and 
interferons, which are major components of the neuro­
inflammatory process61–63. This process usually resolves 
once the immune stimulus is eliminated; however, micro-
glia in aged brains have functional impairments and are 
prone to sustained activation, which might contribute to 
the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases64,65.
Phenotypes. Microglia have a complex role in the tra-
jectory of AD owing to their diverse phenotypes and 
variety of activation pathways. Highly ramified micro-
glia can change to an amoeboid form on pathological 
stimulation59,66. Microglia in ageing brains have reduced 
branching that reduces their area of surveillance, which 
could contribute to the impairment of homeostatic 
functions65,67–69.
Interestingly, microglial morphology in diseased 
brains also varies depending on the spatial loca-
tion and stage of the disease. For instance, amyloid 
plaque-associated microglia undergo dramatic mor-
phological and electrophysiological changes, whereas 
plaque-distant microglia showed only minor changes 
over time70. Furthermore, microglia in Braak stage V–VI 
brains have more profound morphological changes 
than do those from brains at earlier disease stages71. The 
temporal diversity of microglial morphology could be 
attributed to the intensity and duration of the patholog-
ical environment72 but could also be related to the dif-
ferential responses of microglia to different stimuli such 
as Aβ or tau aggregation73. Specifically, the emergence of 
dystrophic microglia, known as ‘dark microglia’, precedes 
the development of tau pathology74,75. Soluble hyper-
phosphorylated tau is posited to drive the phenotypic 
change in microglia, causing loss of immunosurveillance 
function and facilitating disease progression through the 
formation of neurofibrillary tangles71. These findings 
imply that phenotypic changes in microglia, including 
alterations in morphology, proteomic signatures and 
behaviour, are associated with disease progression76,77.
Traditionally, researchers have relied on morphology 
and immunochemical markers, such as CD68, HLA- 
DR and arginase 1, to infer the function of microglia78,79. 
The M1–M2 paradigm of microglial activation, with 
M1 representing a pro-inflammatory phenotype and 
M2 representing an anti-inflammatory phenotype, was 
devised to facilitate the investigation of microglia8,80. 
However, accumulating evidence challenges this simpli-
fied model and suggests that microglia do not conform 
to the M1–M2 dichotomy81. Moreover, the canonical 
immunochemical markers of microglial and macro­
phage phenotypes, such as HLA-DR and CD68, lack 
specificity for the identification of pro-inflammatory 
and anti-inflammatory phenotypes82,83. Nevertheless, 
this classification is still widely in use to convey the idea 
that microglia can be protective (M2) or detrimental 
(M1) under different circumstances.
Transcriptomic studies in mouse models of AD 
have shown that disease progression is paralleled in 
microglia by a gradual transition from a homeostatic 
state to a disease-associated state. The transition to 
disease-associated microglia (DAM) is associated 
with the downregulation of homeostatic genes and 
the upregulation of known genes associated with 
AD, including apolipoprotein E (APOE), trigger-
ing receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) 
and TYRO protein tyrosine kinase-binding protein 
(TYROBP)84. Microglial activation involves a two-step 
process, with a TREM2-independent initial step and 
a TREM2-dependent second step84, highlighting the 
important role of TREM2 in the pathogenesis of neu-
rodegenerative disease85. Transcriptomic studies also 
confirmed the effects of ageing on human microglial 
phenotypes, which include the downregulation of 
genes encoding cytoskeleton-associated proteins, cell 
surface receptors, and adhesion molecules and the 
upregulation of certain genes, including IL15, CXCR4, 
VEGF4 (encoding vascular endothelial growth factor 4) 
and RUNX3 (ref.86). Moreover, temporal tracking of 
www.nature.com/nrneurol
Reviews
160 | March 2021 | volume 17	

microglial activation in a mouse model of AD identified 
distinct early and late disease stage-specific cell clusters, 
with the early response state marked by genes associa­
ted with proliferation and the late state marked by immune 
response-related genes87. Further analysis confirmed 
the heterogeneity of late response microglia identified 
by the expression of co-regulated genes, validating 
previous findings of morphologically and immunolog-
ically diverse microglia in diseased brains87. An analy-
sis published in 2018, which included new data from 
mouse models of tauopathy, revealed even more diverse 
microglial subsets than DAM, which implied a differ-
ent microglial response to amyloid and tau species88. 
These transcriptomic studies have led to the estab-
lishment of reference databases of microglial gene 
expression profiles89,90.
Notably, despite substantial overlap of microglial 
transcription profiles in healthy humans and mice, 
non-negligible differences exist between the two spe-
cies, including immune competence-related genes such 
as CD58, ERAP2, GNLY and S100A12, which are spe-
cifically upregulated in human microglia86. The same 
problem exists in disease models, with studies revealing 
RNA profiles in the brains of people with AD that are 
not replicated in animal models as well as differences 
between individuals with early-onset and late-onset 
AD76,88. Additionally, substantial differences in gene and 
protein profiles are observed between plaque-associated 
and plaque-distant microglia76. These findings call for 
cautious interpretation of results from animal models 
and bulk tissues.
Of note, considerable spatial heterogeneity of micro-
glia has been observed in the brain, not only in terms 
of density and functional markers but also with regard 
to transcriptomic profiles91,92. The spatial heterogene-
ity of microglia phenotypes and regional resilience to 
age-related changes suggest that the spatial pattern of 
neurodegenerative disease — for example, the spread 
of tau pathology according to the Braak staging system — 
might be related to local microglial phenotypes93. 
Indeed, regional diversity of microglial profiles has been 
observed in brain specimens from patients with AD94,95, 
suggesting variations in the local immune environment. 
However, whether these regional differences contribute 
to the spatial and temporal progression sequence of AD 
pathogenesis remains to be elucidated.
Advances in our understanding of phenotypic 
changes in microglia have provided insights into the 
molecular mechanisms involved in microglial activation, 
leading to attempts to modify microglial transcriptomic 
profiles through upstream regulators. However, the 
views and evidence regarding the strategies and effects 
of intervention are conflicting. For example, one study 
found that increased levels of TREM2 expression in 
mouse microglia upregulated phagocytosis-related genes 
and downregulated genes associated with immune cell 
activation in a dose-dependent manner, thereby con-
ferring a neuroprotective effect96. However, another 
study showed that TREM2 activation induced an 
APOE-dependent pathway in microglia, leading to the 
loss of homeostatic function and to the upregulation of 
inflammatory molecules, and that blocking this pathway 
restored microglial homeostatic function and protected 
neurons in various disease models97.
TREM2-knockout experiments have also produced 
conflicting outcomes. For instance, one study showed 
that TREM2 knockout in the 5×FAD mouse model of 
AD resulted in reduced numbers, supressed proliferation 
and phagocytosis of microglia, which led to the expan-
sion of amyloid plaques and neuritic damage98, whereas 
another study found that TREM2 deficiency alleviated 
amyloid and tau deposition in APP/PS1 mice99. These 
findings could be attributable to differences in animal 
models and/or disease stages at the time of observation. 
Distinct gene expression profiles in early and late disease 
stage-specific microglia could result in opposing effects 
along the disease trajectory87. These contradictory results 
emphasize the importance of cautious evaluation before 
translating these findings into applications for humans.
The emergence of single-cell transcriptomic and pro-
teomic analysis has greatly challenged our perception of 
cells in health and disease. An ongoing debate is address-
ing whether we should consider the states of microglia 
as continuous or discontinuous between two extremes, 
which is difficult to determine with a limited set of 
microscopic markers. In summary, although the exact 
role of microglial phenotypic conversion and its role in 
disease progression is still under discussion, researchers 
should be aware of the spatial and temporal diversity 
of microglia that has been uncovered by cross-sectional 
and longitudinal studies (Fig. 2).
Crosstalk between glia and neurons
Neuroinflammation studies have suggested that micro-
glia, astrocytes and neurons act in a synchronized man-
ner to promote neurodegeneration. Aβ was shown to 
activate the NF-κB pathway in astrocytes, resulting in 
the increased release of complement C3, which in turn 
acts on C3a receptors on neurons and microglia, caus-
ing neuronal dysfunction and microglial activation100,101. 
Conversely, activated microglia have been shown to 
induce A1 neurotoxic astrocytes by releasing IL-1α, C1q 
and TNF38. Cellular crosstalk between microglia and 
astrocytes could form a positive feedback loop under the 
inflammatory milieu in AD, resulting in a dysregulated 
and self-amplifying inflammatory response.
Of note, dysregulated neuronal–glial crosstalk 
has also been observed in AD. Under physiological 
conditions, neuronal–microglial crosstalk via CD200– 
CD200R and CX3CL1–CX3CR1 signalling path-
ways is believed to maintain the homeostatic profiles 
of microglia102. However, the expression of CD200, 
CD200R and CX3CR1 is reduced in the brains of people 
with AD, suggesting a loss of physiological constraints 
on microglial behaviours103,104. Given the importance 
of microglial phenotypic changes, countering dysregu-
lated cellular crosstalk might be a viable approach for 
intervention.
Evaluating neuroinflammation in vivo
To decipher the role of neuroinflammation in AD, 
various clinical and preclinical approaches have been 
adopted, including histopathological examination, neu-
roimaging and the evaluation of proteomic and other 
Nature ReviewS | Neurology
Reviews
	
 volume 17 | March 2021 | 161

biomarker signatures in blood and cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF). Histopathology provides direct visualization of 
structures across the brain but it is primarily performed 
on post-mortem specimens as biopsies are rarely per-
formed for the diagnosis of dementia. Neuroimaging 
and fluid biomarkers have the distinct advantage of being 
minimally invasive to patients and could therefore be eas-
ily applied to clinical studies and facilitate longitudinal 
investigation of neuroinflammation in humans.
Blood and CSF biomarkers
Various studies have evaluated several cytokines, 
including IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12, IL-18, 
interferon-γ (IFNγ), TNFγ and transforming growth 
factor-β (TGFβ), in blood and CSF from patients with 
AD. A pooled analysis found overall elevations in IL-1β, 
IL-6, IL-12, IL-18, TNFγ and TGFβ levels in patients 
with AD compared with healthy controls, although 
substantial discrepancies exist between the studies, 
questioning the value of these traditional inflamma-
tory markers105. Furthermore, the concentrations of 
these cytokines is influenced by systemic inflammation, 
underlining the difficulties in interpreting the results.
The most up to date research has focused on novel 
glial activation markers, including chitinase 3-like 
protein 1 (YKL40), monocyte chemotactic protein 1 
(MCP1), visinin-like protein-1 (VILIP1) and GFAP106. 
A meta-analysis confirmed that CSF levels of YKL40 and 
VILIP1 were substantially increased in AD, with a good 
effect size, and that CSF levels of MCP1 were also substan-
tially increased but with a small effect size. The change 
in CSF levels of GFAP was not significant107. YKL40 is a 
Ramiﬁed microglia
Quantitative balance of 
microglia in different states
Qualitative difference: transcriptomic proﬁles
Anti-inﬂammatory
• Phagocytosis
• Network remodelling
• Trophic support
Pro-inﬂammatory
• Excitotoxicity
• Synaptic pruning
• Demyelination
Cytokines
(IL-4, IL-10, TGF β)
Cytokines
(IL-1β, IL-8, TNF)
Detrimental ‘inﬂammatory’ functions
Protective homeostatic functions
Different cell states
Genes
Fig. 2 | Different phenotypes of microglia. The figure demonstrates the multifaceted roles of microglia in neurological 
diseases. Under certain conditions, microglia have a predominately protective role by secreting anti-inflammatory 
cytokines, performing phagocytosis and supporting network remodelling, whereas under other conditions, these cells 
contribute to neuroinflammation and cause damage to neuronal networks. Phenotypic changes in microglia underlie  
this phenomenon and a pro-inflammatory–anti-inflammatory scheme has been proposed to categorize microglial 
phenotypes. However, advances in single-cell transcriptomics have revealed much more sophisticated transcription-level 
regulation that determines microglial cell fate. Nevertheless, a working model of a pro-inflammatory–anti-inflammatory 
spectrum driven by distinct transcriptomes could shed light on how microglia could be harnessed to induce beneficial 
effects in neurodegenerative diseases. Expression heatmap reproduced with permission from Galatro et al.86.  
TGFβ, transforming growth factor β; TNF, tumour necrosis factor.
www.nature.com/nrneurol
Reviews
162 | March 2021 | volume 17	

secreted 40 kDa glycoprotein named after its first three 
N-terminal amino acids. The protein is produced pri-
marily by macrophage-lineage cells and, in the case of 
AD, by activated astrocytes and microglia108. Multicentre 
cross-sectional and longitudinal studies found that the 
concentration of YKL40 was elevated from the preclinical 
stage and correlated well with disease stage, illustrating its 
potential as a biomarker109,110.
Neuroimaging
Most neuroimaging studies have been performed using 
PET with radioactive ligands that target translocator 
protein (TSPO). This protein, previously known as the 
peripheral benzodiazepine receptor (PBR), is located 
on the mitochondrial outer membrane and is expressed 
primarily by activated glial cells in the CNS. TSPO is 
thought to be a component of the mitochondrial per-
meability transition pore and to have roles in steroid 
synthesis, regulation of mitochondrial permeability and 
modulation of the inflammatory response in glial cells111. 
Elevated tracer binding to TSPO in the brain has been 
observed by autoradiography in various CNS diseases, 
including stroke, trauma and AD112,113.
The first generation of TSPO tracers included 
11C-Ro5-4864 and 11C-PK11195 (ref.114). 11C-Ro5-
4864 showed high levels of non-specific binding, but 
11C-PK11195 proved to have acceptable binding spec-
ificity and became the most extensively applied tracer 
in neuroinflammation imaging studies. A second gen-
eration of TSPO tracers was developed with improved 
imaging characteristics, including higher affinity 
and lower lipophilicity, which resulted in a higher 
signal-to-noise ratio. The second-generation tracers 
include 11C-PBR28, 11C-DAA1106, 11C-DPA713 and 
18F-PBR06, whereas 18F-GE180 and 11C-ER176 are being 
tested as third-generation tracers115.
The binding affinity of second-generation trac-
ers to TSPO is influenced by the co-dominant rs6971 
(Ala147Thr) single-nucleotide polymorphism in the TSPO 
gene. Ala/Ala carriers are high-affinity binders (HAB), 
whereas Thr/Thr carriers are low-affinity binders (LAB) 
and Ala/Thr carriers are mixed-affinity binders (MAB). 
The affinity difference between HAB and LAB ranges from 
approximately fourfold for 11C-DAA1106, 11C-DPA713 
and 11C-PBR111 to approximately 50-fold for 11C-PBR28 
(ref.116). Thus, imaging studies might need to account for 
TSPO genotypes, as mixing HAB and MAB populations 
could confound the findings117. Fortunately, the TSPO 
genotype does not seem to influence AD prevalence, amy-
loid loads or rates of cognitive decline, which are similar 
in HAB, MAB and LAB cohorts, suggesting that findings 
from HAB and MAB populations could be applied to the 
entire AD cohort118.
TSPO tracers are not able to distinguish the contri-
butions of different cells or glial phenotypes to the neu-
roinflammatory response. In particular, the extent to 
which astrocytes contribute to the TSPO tracer binding 
signal in vivo is under ongoing debate. The selective acti-
vation of astrocytes induced by lentiviral gene transfer 
was shown to lead to TSPO overexpression that could be 
detected by PET in rats119. TSPO tracer binding to reac-
tive astrocytes has also been reported in various disease 
models, including AD and ischaemia120,121. However, 
a post-mortem study on human brains found correla-
tions between the binding of tracers (11C-PK11195 and 
11C-DAA1106) and activated microglia but not between 
binding of these tracers and reactive astrocytes in var-
ious CNS diseases122. The expression of the TSPO gene 
seems to vary across different phenotypes of activated 
microglia depending on the stimulus, with lipopolysac-
charide being a strong inducer and neurodegeneration 
providing only a mild stimulus88. Even in the context of 
AD, Aβ deposition and hyperphosphorylated tau might 
induce different patterns of TSPO expression120.
Efforts have been made to find novel targets for 
PET tracers, including intracellular enzymes or mol-
ecules such as cyclooxygenases 1 and 2, monoamine 
oxidase B, glycogen synthase kinase 3, arachidonic acid, 
and receptors such as the purinergic receptors (P2X7 and 
P2Y12), CX3CR1, cannabinoid receptor 2 and TREM1 
(refs123,124). Novel tracers targeting these molecules might 
provide additional information about different glial cell 
phenotypes125.
Interactions of Aβ, tau and microglia
Reactive microglia have been established to closely 
colocalize with amyloid plaques in the brains of people 
with AD, indicating an interaction between this impor-
tant pathological hallmark of AD and microglia126,127. 
Associations between pathological tau load and 
microglial cell load have also been described in both 
post-mortem and in vivo neuroimaging studies128,129. 
The sequential emergence of amyloid plaques, micro-
glial activation and neurofibrillary tangles led to the 
amyloid cascade–inflammation hypothesis, which sug-
gests that microglial activation acts as a bridge leading 
to the pathological phosphorylation and aggregation of 
tau128,130,131. The complex interactions between the three 
hallmarks of AD have become an interesting topic of 
research.
Early studies established that different species of Aβ 
aggregates could induce glial activation and the produc-
tion of pro-inflammatory cytokines (including IL-1β, 
IL-6, IL-8 and TNF), the anti-inflammatory cytokine 
TGFβ, chemokines (including MCP1 and macrophage 
inflammatory protein 1), various cell adhesion mol-
ecules, NO, and reactive oxygen species, all of which 
could lead to neuronal dysfunction and death132–134. 
Among all Aβ species, the smaller oligomers of Aβ 
have been found to be far stronger stimuli to induce the 
microglial response and to be more toxic to neurons 
than larger oligomers135.
The receptors by which microglia recognize Aβ spe-
cies are mostly pattern recognition receptors, including 
Toll-like receptors (for example, TLR1, TLR2, TLR4 and 
TLR6), CD14, CD47, α6β1 integrin and scavenger recep-
tors (including CD36). In turn, these receptors activate 
molecular pathways that induce microglial phenotypic 
changes136–140. For instance, the binding of Aβ fibrils to 
TLR2 induces IL-8 and TNF expression137, the activa-
tion of scavenger receptors in the presence of Aβ upreg-
ulates IL-1β and NO production through NF-κB, c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase (JNK) and mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK) pathways138, and the recognition of Aβ 
Nature ReviewS | Neurology
Reviews
	
 volume 17 | March 2021 | 163

by the CD36–CD47–α6β1 integrin complex mediates 
phagocytic changes in microglia141.
One molecule that is of specific interest in the 
Aβ-induced microglial inflammatory response is 
the transient receptor potential melastatin-related 2 
(TRPM2) channel — a calcium-permeable chan-
nel induced by oxidative stress142. Aβ42 is proposed to 
induce oxidative stress through the activation of pro-
tein kinase C and NADPH oxidase, which in turn acti-
vate poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1, ADP-ribose and 
TRPM2. The resulting calcium influx then activates 
cytokine production and the proline-rich tyrosine kinase 
2–MAPK positive feedback pathway139. The recruitment 
of the pyrin domain-containing 3 (NLRP3) inflam-
masome has also been revealed to be a crucial event 
in the pro-inflammatory response of microglia and is 
followed by the expression of caspase 1 and maturation 
of IL-1β143,144. The recruitment of NLRP3 is a two-step 
process, with NF-κB-induced upregulation of NLRP3 as 
the initial step and a further stimulus causing a confor-
mational change in NLRP3 that leads to inflammasome 
assembly145. Although the signals mediating this second 
step are yet to be elucidated, one study suggested that 
TRPM2-mediated calcium influx was capable of induc-
ing NLRP3 assembly139. Other receptors, including com-
plement receptors and Fc receptors on microglia, also 
regulate neuroinflammation by communicating with 
the innate and adaptive immune system without directly 
interacting with Aβ, thereby mediating phagocytosis as 
well as a pro-inflammatory response146.
Another microglial receptor that is of particular inter-
est is TREM2, the Arg47 and His62 variants of which are 
genetic risk factors for AD10,147. The enhanced expression 
of TREM2 has been found on plaque-associated micro-
glia in patients with AD as well as in a mouse model 
of AD99. TREM2 signalling has been suggested to pro-
mote microglial proliferation, phagocytosis and cytokine 
secretion and to regulate microglial metabolism and 
survival85,148. TREM2 is a tempting target for pharmaco-
logical modulation but caution should be exercised as 
TREM2 is a vital upstream mediator of microglial acti-
vation and phenotypic change84,97. Changes in TREM2 
function might have an effect on both beneficial and 
detrimental microglial functions in AD.
The phagocytic function of activated microglia is 
well established, with evidence of internalization of Aβ 
aggregates by cultured microglia. However, the degra-
dation of Aβ species after phagocytosis is fairly slow, 
which raises questions regarding the effectiveness of 
microglia in Aβ clearance149. Autophagy is suggested to 
be one of the vital processes involved in the degrada-
tion of Aβ fibrils150,151. An in vitro study indicated dif-
ferential responses of microglia to different Aβ species 
as these cells were shown to phagocytose fibrils but not 
oligomers, with the latter species preferentially eliciting 
the production of inflammatory cytokines and recip-
rocally suppressing the phagocytosis of fibrillary Aβ152. 
However, whether microglia can efficiently regulate 
Aβ levels in vivo is unclear153,154 as pathological examina-
tions of brain tissue from people with late-stage AD have 
found microglia in a morphologically dystrophic state, 
with decreased branch lengths and areas of coverage 
as well as the fragmentation of processes suggesting a 
loss of surveillance function72,75. Further studies have 
also found limited amounts of microglia expressing 
TREM2 and CD68 in the vicinity of amyloid plaques 
in people with Down syndrome or AD, suggesting that 
plaque-associated microglia have a compromised phago-
cytic function155. Interestingly, such dystrophic change 
is also associated with ageing, the default risk factor for 
AD156, implying a role for dysfunctional microglia in the 
development of AD pathology157. In addition, evidence 
indicates that the cytokines produced by microglia, 
including IL-1β, IL-6, TNF and IFNγ, can upregulate 
the production of β-secretase, an enzyme that cleaves 
APP to generate pathogenic Aβ, putatively through the 
NF-κB pathway158,159. However, an in vivo study demon-
strated that microglia can limit the diffusion and con-
densation of amyloid plaques and that the inhibition of 
these cells increased the toxicity of plaques98.
Intriguingly, microglia might not only indirectly 
facilitate the production of Aβ but may also promote the 
seeding of amyloid plaques. An animal study reported 
that apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing 
a C-terminal caspase recruitment domain (ASC), the 
adaptor protein in NLRP3 inflammasome activation, 
forms particles that serve as a binding core for amy-
loid aggregation and that these particles can spread to 
other myeloid cells160. Considering the toxicity of sol-
uble amyloid species, ASC might have a beneficial role 
by facilitating the deposition of amyloid, although the 
neuroprotective effect of ASC knockout makes this 
scenario unlikely160 (Fig. 3).
In vitro studies have found that tau oligomers and 
fibrils provide sufficient stimulus to induce microglial 
morphological change and expression of interleukins161. 
Further investigation using mouse models of tauop-
athy validated the existence of tau-induced micro-
glial activation in vivo, marked by the upregulation 
of DAM-associated genes, including phagocytic and 
inflammatory modules, with CD68 and TYROBP serv-
ing as major hubs162. The upregulation of phagocytic 
genes is supported by the observation that tau fibrils 
are internalized by microglia both in cell culture and 
in healthy mouse brains163. The activation of the com-
plement system by tau fibrils through classical and 
alternative pathways is suggested to be a vital event in 
tau-mediated microglial activation162. However, evi-
dence from pathological examination of human brains 
has found that microglia associated with tau pathology 
show morphological degeneration, suggesting impaired 
function71,75. These dystrophic changes are proposed to 
result from microglial senescence or chronic amyloid 
poisoning and to chronologically precede the spread 
of tau pathology164. Moreover, analogous to their inter-
action with Aβ, microglia seem to actively spread tau 
through phagocytosis and exosome secretion, provid-
ing an intraneuronal propagation pathway in addition 
to trans-synaptic transmission of tau165, thereby con-
tributing to disease progression. More intriguingly, in 
the context of AD pathology, Aβ can exacerbate tau 
pathology in synergy with microglia166. NLRP3 activa-
tion in microglia is a vital event bridging the two core 
AD pathologies167 and the increased tau load seems to 
www.nature.com/nrneurol
Reviews
164 | March 2021 | volume 17	

facilitate the microglial clearance of Aβ by promoting 
phagocytosis168.
The complexity of the interactions described above 
is probably attributable to different responses of micro-
glia towards different stimuli. For example, a gene 
co-expression network analysis in Drosophila mod-
els found that the TREM2–TYROBP pathway, which 
is predominantly a microglial signalling pathway, 
interacts with both Aβ42 and tau-induced pathways 
at the gene expression level169. Furthermore, over half 
of the pathways induced by Aβ–TREM2–TYROBP 
co-expression coincided with those induced by tau–
TREM2–TYROBP, suggesting that microglia act as 
a common mediator or bridging factor for tau and 
amyloid toxicities. Interestingly, the study found that 
TREM signalling could suppress half of the pathways 
induced by Aβ, implying a defensive role for microglia. 
However, in a tau–TREM2–TYROBP co-expression 
model, microglia acted synergistically to exacerbate 
tau-mediated neurodegeneration, highlighting the dif-
ferent microglial responses to Aβ and tau. In support 
of these findings, a study published in 2017 observed 
that progranulin deficiency led to increased numbers of 
CD68+ microglia and prevented amyloid plaque growth 
while exacerbating neuronal damage and microglia 
tau pathology, which is thought to be mediated by the 
microglial TREM2–TYROBP network170. Similarly, neu-
ronal CX3CL1 or microglial CX3CR membrane protein 
deficiency was reported to have opposing effects on 
amyloid and tau formation via neuronal–microglial 
interactions171,172.
These observations provide a possible explanation for 
the phenomenon, described repeatedly in clinical stud-
ies, that microglial activation seems to protect patients 
with MCI from deterioration but has an opposite role 
at the AD stage when tau pathology predominates173,174. 
Indeed, people with MCI showed a weak correlation 
between tau deposition and microglial activation129,175, 
which became stronger upon progression to AD129.
Neuroinflammation and AD trajectory
Neuroinflammation might be a vital component in 
the initiation of AD pathology. Epidemiological stud-
ies have shown positive associations between demen-
tia and previous reports of infection, smoking and 
diabetes176. A potential protective role of non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) against AD has 
also been proposed177,178, although the efficacy of these 
drugs is still debated. Systemic inflammation induced 
by the aforementioned risk factors can induce CNS neu-
roinflammation through circumventricular organs, the 
vagus nerve, active transport or disruption of the BBB7. 
Post-mortem studies in young patients who had experi-
enced systemic inflammation found morphological and 
immunological changes in microglia that were similar 
to those observed in aged individuals or people with 
dementia74. Traumatic brain injury, which is suspected 
to increase the risk of late-life dementia, has also been 
found to induce persistent neuroinflammation179.
Microglial activation has been observed at the 
pre-plaque stage in animal models of AD180 and a 
human neuroimaging study reported increased micro-
glial activation in people with MCI in the absence of 
amyloid tracer uptake181–186. Both of these findings 
suggest that neuroinflammation is an early event in 
AD. Further studies found that the injection of Aβ 
alone into the brain was insufficient to induce amyloid 
pathology in primate models but that the co-injection 
of lipopolysaccharide and Aβ or that of Aβ into ani-
mal models of chronic systemic inflammation could 
cause amyloid plaque formation187. More-compelling 
evidence came from a human post-mortem study, 
which found no relevant morphological changes in 
microglia in asymptomatic individuals with elevated 
amyloid loads at various ages75, strongly suggesting that 
neuroinflammation, in addition to Aβ deposition, is 
a prerequisite for AD pathogenesis. An initiating role 
for neuroinflammation in AD is also supported by evi-
dence from genome-wide association studies, which 
found that mutations of microglial or innate immune 
genes, such as CD33, TREM2 and complement recep-
tor type 1, are associated with an increased occurrence 
of AD in the population10,188,189. The accumulating evi-
dence suggests that microglial priming occurs in the 
context of AD, referring to a process whereby chronic 
low-level stimuli (including systemic inflammation and 
ageing) cause naive microglia to adopt an altered state 
that results in an exaggerated or inappropriate inflam-
matory response when these microglia are exposed to 
repeated pathological stimuli190.
Phagocytosis and
degradation of Aβ
NLRP3
PRRs
Aβ plaque
Microglia
Activated caspase 1
ASC
NF-κB
Cytokines
(e.g. IL-1β, IL-8, TNF)
• Neuronal damage
• Glial activation
• BACE upregulation
Enhanced Aβ
production
Exocytosis of
ASC specks
Serve as core of Aβ aggregation
Fig. 3 | Microglial response to amyloid-β species. Amyloid-β (Aβ) species can be 
recognized by a range of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) on microglia, which further 
activate phagocytic or inflammatory pathways. The upregulation of their phagocytic 
capacity enables microglia to internalize and degrade Aβ and activation of the nuclear 
factor-κB (NF-κB) pathway leads to the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and 
assembly of the pyrin domain-containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome. NLRP3 inflammasome 
activation can lead to the release of apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a 
C-terminal caspase recruitment domain (ASC) specks, which might serve as binding cores 
for Aβ aggregation. The release of pro-inflammatory cytokines could promote further 
glial activation, neuronal damage and upregulation of β-secretase (BACE), an enzyme 
that is involved in the production of pathogenic Aβ species. TNF, tumour necrosis factor.
Nature ReviewS | Neurology
Reviews
	
 volume 17 | March 2021 | 165

The influence of neuroinflammation on the symp-
tomatic stage of AD has been demonstrated in clinical 
imaging studies that reported negative correlations 
between microglial activation and structural integrity 
or functional activity of the brain in patients with AD as 
evaluated by hippocampal volume and glucose metab-
olism, respectively191,192. Furthermore, imaging studies 
evaluating brain connectivity in people with AD implied 
an association between microglial activation and dis-
ruption of intrinsic functional connectivity193,194 as well 
as white matter microstructural breakdown195. From a 
clinical perspective, an inverse relationship has been 
reported between cognitive performance and microglial 
activation but not with brain amyloid load in individuals 
with AD196–198.
The clinical imaging observations are supported by 
preclinical studies, which found that microglia activated 
by Aβ could produce neurotoxic cytokines and chemok-
ines, including TNF, IL-6, IL-1β and CCL2, which sub-
sequently cause neuronal dysfunction and death154,199–201. 
Moreover, microglia activated through the comple-
ment pathway can inappropriately engulf synapses, 
leading to early synaptic loss and defects in long-term 
potentiation27,202. Consistent with this finding, the knock-
out of complement C3 protected against synaptic degener-
ation in the hippocampus in APP/PS1 mice, which showed 
elevated Aβ deposition but reduced levels of ionized cal-
cium binding adaptor molecule 1 (IBA1), CD68 immuno-
reactivity and pro-inflammatory cytokine production203. 
In accordance with the neuroimaging findings, a study in 
people with AD reported that amyloid plaques exerted 
increasing local toxicity as the disease progressed204. The 
researchers found no significant increase in brain amyloid 
load throughout the clinical stage but discovered increased 
CD68+ microglial activation, suggesting that microglia 
mediate amyloid toxicity. The circuit-specific preference 
of abnormal synaptic pruning might also contribute to the 
phenomenon whereby neurodegeneration and tau distri-
bution follows certain predictable patterns that correlate 
poorly with Aβ deposition205,206.
These promising findings have led to further studies 
on the dynamic changes in neuroinflammation from the 
MCI stage of AD to the late dementia stage. In a mixed 
AD and MCI cohort, a progressive increase in 11C-PBR28 
uptake correlated with the annual rate of cognitive 
decline186. Another longitudinal study that investigated 
the dynamics of microglial activation with 11C-PK11195 
specifically in an AD cohort found an increase in micro-
glial activation in six of eight patients over a 16-month 
period, with adynamic changes in microglial location 
and an accompanying metabolic decline207. Interestingly, 
two patients showed a longitudinal decline in micro-
glial activation207, which could reflect the ‘burnout’ of 
microglia. This hypothesis is supported by the patho-
logical finding of decreased IBA1-positive microglia in a 
subgroup of Braak stage V–IV brains71.
In a cohort of patients with AD, including prodromal 
and dementia stages (Clinical Dementia Rating 0.5 and 
≥1, respectively), higher baseline binding of a microglial 
tracer in the brain was associated with a slower rate of 
disease progression over a 2-year follow-up period, with 
individuals showing fast cognitive decline tending to 
have a lower baseline binding173. This finding suggested 
a protective role of neuroinflammation in the early or 
even preclinical stages of AD, which could be explained 
by the capacity of microglia to degrade and clear Aβ154. 
In a subsequent follow-up study, the same cohort of 
patients underwent a second set of 18F-DPA-714 scans208. 
Comparable increases in microglial activation occurred 
in the prodromal and dementia groups and two dis-
tinctive dynamic patterns of microglial activation were 
observed: a higher initial binding followed by a slower 
increase and a lower initial binding followed by a more 
rapid increase. The former pattern was associated with 
an improved outcome whereas the latter suggested 
accelerated disease progression208. Intriguingly, another 
longitudinal study found distinct patterns of microglial 
activation in people with MCI or AD: the MCI group 
showed decreasing levels of 11C-PK11195 uptake over 
time, whereas the AD group showed a longitudinal 
increase, implying two peaks of microglial activation174.
The discrepant findings of these two longitudinal 
studies174,208 could be partly attributed to different inclu-
sion criteria; the first cohort could represent a narrow 
time span of disease trajectory with strict inclusion and 
exclusion criteria, which could explain why no clear dif-
ference in 18F-DPA-714 binding was seen between the 
prodromal and dementia groups despite the longitudi-
nal increase of 18F-DPA-714 and 11C-PK11195 binding 
in both groups208. The distinct patterns of microglial 
activation observed in these two studies could reflect 
individual variation in the susceptibility to pathological 
processes and neuroinflammation-mediated damage or 
the consequence of prior microglial priming.
Some of the variations in the PET imaging studies 
using different tracers (or even the same tracer) could 
be attributable to differing methodologies but might also 
depend on the extent to which microglial activation can 
be detected in people with MCI or whether microglial 
activation plateaus or fluctuates in the later stages of 
AD209–211. Sample size or tracer properties could account 
for the discrepancies but, more importantly, the methods 
of tracer analysis and other strategies of image analysis 
both have a considerable influence on the results129,212–214.
A meta-analysis of the evidence from various imag-
ing studies has provided helpful insights into the spatial 
and temporal evolution of neuroinflammation in AD215. 
The authors reported more profound neuroinflam-
mation in AD than in MCI, in line with a longitudinal 
increase in microglial activation along the AD trajectory. 
Furthermore, an inverse association between parietal 
neuroinflammation and Mini-Mental State Examination 
scores was found in patients with AD, supporting a detri-
mental role of microglial activation in the later stages of 
the disease. The study also revealed the spatial pattern 
of neuroinflammation in the disease process, with micro-
glial activation starting in the neocortex at the MCI stage 
and spreading ventrally throughout the brain, including 
the cerebellum, with an emphasis on temporal regions 
where tau pathology dominates in the late stage of AD215.
Current evidence generally supports a model of 
neuroinflammation in which the chronic background 
inflammation that occurs with ageing provides an initial 
mild stimulus that results in microglial priming, which 
www.nature.com/nrneurol
Reviews
166 | March 2021 | volume 17	

is followed by a possible protective wave of microglial 
activation in the preclinical stage of AD, along with the 
emergence of Aβ deposition. Ineffective clearance of Aβ 
combined with tau aggregation impair microglial defence 
functions and elicit an ongoing detrimental microglial 
activation process in late-stage AD. The effectiveness and 
persistence of the initial response is influenced by individ-
ual susceptibility and prior baseline inflammation, which 
could prime microglia towards phenotypes that have an 
impaired defence potential and an increased tendency to 
transform to the late-stage harmful state. This process is 
probably driven by phenotypic changes in microglia in 
response to the microenvironment and toxic stimuli (Fig. 4).
Therapeutic implications
Understanding the role of microglia along the AD tra-
jectory enables us to intervene in three different ways: 
first, by suppressing the pro-inflammatory properties 
of microglia to limit the deleterious effect of microglial 
activation; second, by modulating microglial pheno-
typic change to favour anti-inflammatory properties; 
and third, by influencing microglial priming early in 
the disease process.
Suppressing pro-inflammatory properties
Suppression of neuroinflammation with NSAIDs was 
among the earliest approaches to AD treatment; however, 
the general use of NSAIDs in symptomatic individuals 
with AD was found to be ineffective in several clinical 
trials216. One possibility is that non-specific suppression 
of both the pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory 
phenotypes is not an effective strategy. Another com-
pound of interest is minocycline, a widely used tetra-
cycline antibiotic believed to have anti-inflammatory 
effects through the inhibition of inducible NO synthase, 
IL-1β converting enzyme, and matrix metalloprotein-
ases and by suppression of microglial activation217. 
Animal studies showed that minocycline could reverse 
the upregulation of IL-1β, IL-10 and TNF as well as the 
memory impairment caused by Aβ218. However, in a 
clinical trial published in 2019, minocycline at 200 mg 
or 400 mg per day did not preserve cognition in patients 
with mild AD over a 2-year period219.
These results highlight the need for compounds 
that specifically target pro-inflammatory phenotypes. 
Attempts have been made to target the NF-κB, NLPR3– 
caspase 1 and p38MAPK pathways, thereby suppress-
ing the pro-inflammatory microglial phenotype220–222. 
The caspase 1 inhibitor VX-765 showed some potential 
to suppress microglial activation, Aβ deposition and 
neuro­degeneration, and to alleviate cognitive decline in 
a mouse model of AD223, suggesting that this more precise 
approach is more effective than counteracting neuroin-
flammation in general. However, compounds for clinical 
application are still under development and their efficacy 
requires testing in clinical trials.
An even more specific approach targets downstream 
pro-inflammatory cytokines. Preclinical trials showed 
that an anti-TNF antibody could effectively alleviate 
amyloid pathology and tau phosphorylation224,225. A clin-
ical pilot study also showed the potential of etanercept, 
a TNF blocker, to improve language performance in a 
small cohort of patients with AD226. A further phase II 
clinical trial has reported good tolerance of etanercept in 
people with AD, although its therapeutic effects remain 
to be validated in phase III trials227. Intraperitoneal 
administration of an IL-1 receptor-blocking antibody 
has also shown some potential to improve cognition 
and reduce tau pathology in mouse models of AD, but 
further clinical trials are needed to evaluate the safety 
and efficacy of this antibody in humans228.
Modulating microglial phenotypic change
In the very early stages of the AD trajectory, microglia are 
known to maintain neuronal function by clearing toxic 
damage. Microglial activation can be interfered with in 
such a way that these anti-inflammatory properties can 
be maintained for prolonged periods. Several groups 
are developing strategies to modulate microglial activa-
tion towards an anti-inflammatory and/or phagocytic 
phenotype.
Early protective
microglial response
Magnitude of clinical and pathological abnormalities
Alzheimer disease process
Exaggerated late 
detrimental response
Asymptomatic stage
Clinical stage
MCI
Late pro-inﬂammatory
behaviour
Defective
protective
response
Inappropriate microglial 
response
Expected microglial 
response
Amyloid
Tau
Early, rapid cognitive decline
Typical cognitive decline
Driven by microglial
phenotypic changes
Fig. 4 | Dynamic changes in microglial activation affect Alzheimer disease 
progression. This figure explains why patients with defective microglial functioning  
(for example, due to acquired or genetic susceptibility) might develop cognitive decline at 
an earlier pathological stage of Alzheimer disease (AD), as defined by dynamic changes 
in their amyloid and tau loads249, than do those with normal microglial function. Current 
evidence suggests that, at the early, asymptomatic, stage of AD, the initial microglial 
response is protective overall. However, as AD progresses, chronic activation causes 
phenotypic changes in microglia and shifts their behaviour towards a pro-inflammatory 
phenotype, which causes damage to neuronal networks. Inappropriate microglial 
responses can occur in individuals with defective protective functions owing to genetic 
or acquired factors such as microglial priming. Microglia in those individuals might  
have a weak initial protective response, a quicker transition to phenotypes that are 
detrimental overall and an exaggerated late-stage deleterious inflammatory response. 
Individual susceptibility to Alzheimer disease (in terms of more profound clinical 
presentation at a given pathological stage) might therefore be partly determined by 
microglial behaviour. MCI, mild cognitive impairment.
Nature ReviewS | Neurology
Reviews
	
 volume 17 | March 2021 | 167

A preliminary clinical study has investigated whether 
subcutaneous administration of IFNβ1a can modulate 
neuroinflammation in patients with early AD. This treat-
ment was well tolerated and the results showed a trend 
towards slowing of disease progression229. The sirtuin 1 
agonist resveratrol, which activates caloric restriction 
mechanisms, markedly reduced CSF levels of inflamma-
tory molecules, including matrix metallopeptidase 9 and 
IL-4, and showed considerable potential to attenuate cog-
nitive decline in early AD230. These results should encour-
age further clinical study of these medications, in addition 
to approaches aimed at modulating microglial activation.
Various other anti-inflammatory cytokines, includ-
ing IL-2, IL-4 and IL-33, have shown the potential to 
modulate microglial activation and alleviate AD pathol-
ogy in preclinical studies231–233. Although the results are 
not conclusive234, these candidate agents merit further 
exploration, including through evaluation in large-scale 
preclinical studies. The direct delivery of these cytokines 
into humans remains a challenge as most preclini-
cal studies have used viral vectors as a gene expres-
sion system234 and novel strategies to modulate these 
cytokines might be required.
Extensive efforts have been made to modulate other 
targets, including nuclear receptors such as peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPARγ)235. The PPARγ 
agonists pioglitazone and rosiglitazone are able to shift 
microglia from a pro-inflammatory to a phagocytic 
phenotype and facilitate amyloid clearance in animal 
models236,237. However, rosiglitazone failed to show 
substantial efficacy in phase III clinical trials, probably 
owing to its poor BBB permeation and safety concerns238. 
In another study, the inhibition of the NLRP3 inflam-
masome showed protective effects against amyloid 
pathology and, strikingly, against amyloid-induced 
tau hyperphosphorylation and aggregation in animal 
models167,239. However, the efficacy of this approach in 
humans remains to be evaluated.
Influencing microglial priming
Microglial priming is associated not only with age-
ing but also with systemic inflammation in various 
animal models and primed microglia show enhanced 
sensitivity and reactivity to inflammatory stimuli240. 
Thus, a possible therapeutic approach in AD is to sup-
press microglial priming during the pre-disease period. 
In people with AD, midlife obesity, insulin resistance 
and elevated LDL levels have been suggested to induce 
an inflammatory milieu via endothelial cells and statins 
showed protective effects against this mechanism241,242. 
Clinical trials have also suggested a role for dietary 
intervention in the management of neuroinflammation 
as folic acid and omega 3 fatty acid supplementation led 
to a reduction in the levels of inflammatory markers in 
CSF and plasma in people with AD243,244. Therefore, a 
multifaceted approach to counteract microglial prim-
ing might be beneficial. However, a large-scale 3-year 
clinical trial showed no significant long-term effects of 
omega 3 fatty acid supplementation plus an interven-
tion comprising physical activity, cognitive training and 
nutritional advice245. Positive results were reported from 
the Finnish Geriatric Intervention Study to Prevent 
Cognitive Impairment and Disability (FINGER) cohort, 
in which an intervention including diet, exercise and 
vascular risk management helped to maintain cognitive 
function in a population at risk of dementia246. However, 
the complex actions of multidomain interventions in 
real-life settings are still being interrogated in ongoing 
clinical trials247,248.
Conclusions
Current evidence suggests that neuroinflammation has 
a vital role in the pathogenesis and progression of AD. 
In this Review, we have proposed that differential micro-
glial responses to pathological stimuli have a substantial 
influence on AD progression, that this dynamic process 
has variable effects along the disease trajectory, and 
that the microglial response depends on individual sus-
ceptibility and could be influenced by prior microglial 
priming. Interventions to target microglial priming in 
the pre-disease period and to modulate the microglial 
response in the brain once the disease process is under-
way are showing promise as part of a disease-modifying 
strategy.
Published online 14 December 2020
1.	
Alzheimer’s Association. 2018 Alzheimer’s disease 
facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement. 14, 367–429 
(2018).
2.	
Kawas, C., Gray, S., Brookmeyer, R., Fozard, J. & 
Zonderman, A. Age-specific incidence rates of 
Alzheimer’s disease - the Baltimore longitudinal study 
of aging. Neurology 54, 2072–2077 (2000).
3.	
McKhann, G. M. et al. The diagnosis of dementia due 
to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the 
National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association 
workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s 
disease. Alzheimers Dement. 7, 263–269 (2011).
4.	
Braak, H. & Braak, E. Neuropathological stageing of 
Alzheimer-related changes. Acta Neuropathol. 82, 
239–259 (1991).
5.	
Hardy, J. & Selkoe, D. J. Medicine — the amyloid 
hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease: progress and 
problems on the road to therapeutics. Science 297, 
353–356 (2002).
6.	
Herrup, K. The case for rejecting the amyloid  
cascade hypothesis. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 794–799 
(2015).
7.	
Calsolaro, V. & Edison, P. Neuroinflammation in 
Alzheimer’s disease: current evidence and future 
directions. Alzheimers Dement. 12, 719–732  
(2016).
8.	
Heneka, M. T. et al. Neuroinflammation in  
Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet Neurol. 14, 388–405 
(2015).
9.	
Obulesu, M. & Jhansilakshmi, M. Neuroinflammation 
in Alzheimer’s disease: an understanding of physiology 
and pathology. Int. J. Neurosci. 124, 227–235 
(2014).
10.	 Jonsson, T. et al. Variant of TREM2 associated with 
the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 
107–116 (2013).
11.	 Rohn, T. T. The triggering receptor expressed on 
myeloid cells 2: “TREM-ming” the inflammatory 
component associated with Alzheimer’s disease.  
Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2013, 860959 (2013).
12.	 Thinakaran, G. & Koo, E. H. Amyloid precursor protein 
trafficking, processing, and function. J. Biol. Chem. 
283, 29615–29619 (2008).
13.	 Selkoe, D. J. Soluble oligomers of the amyloid 
β-protein impair synaptic plasticity and behavior. 
Behav. Brain Res. 192, 106–113 (2008).
14.	 Hardy, J. & Allsop, D. Amyloid deposition as the 
central event in the etiology of Alzheimers-disease. 
Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 12, 383–388 (1991).
15.	 Hardy, J. A. & Higgins, G. A. Alzheimer’s disease:  
the amyloid cascade hypothesis. Science 256,  
184–185 (1992).
16.	 Lannfelt, L., Relkin, N. R. & Siemers, E. R. Amyloid- 
ss-directed immunotherapy for Alzheimer’s disease.  
J. Intern. Med. 275, 284–295 (2014).
17.	 Small, S. A. & Duff, K. Linking Aβ and tau in late- 
onset Alzheimer’s disease: a dual pathway hypothesis. 
Neuron 60, 534–542 (2008).
18.	 Wang, Y. & Mandelkow, E. Tau in physiology and 
pathology. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17, 5–21 (2016).
19.	 Jack, C. R. et al. Hypothetical model of dynamic 
biomarkers of the Alzheimer’s pathological cascade. 
Lancet Neurol. 9, 119–128 (2010).
20.	 Bischof, G. N., Endepols, H., van Eimeren, T. & 
Drzezga, A. Tau-imaging in neurodegeneration. 
Methods 130, 114–123 (2017).
21.	 Johnson, K. A. et al. Tau positron emission 
tomographic imaging in aging and early Alzheimer 
disease. Ann. Neurol. 79, 110–119 (2016).
22.	 DiSabato, D. J., Quan, N. & Godbout, J. P. 
Neuroinflammation: the devil is in the details.  
J. Neurochem. 139 (Suppl. 2), 136–153 (2016).
23.	 Heneka, M. T., Kummer, M. P. & Latz, E. Innate 
immune activation in neurodegenerative disease.  
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 463–477 (2014).
24.	 Lyman, M., Lloyd, D. G., Ji, X., Vizcaychipi, M. P.  
& Ma, D. Neuroinflammation: the role and 
consequences. Neurosci. Res. 79, 1–12 (2014).
www.nature.com/nrneurol
Reviews
168 | March 2021 | volume 17	

25.	 Mishra, A., Kim, H. J., Shin, A. H. & Thayer, S. A. 
Synapse loss induced by interleukin-1β requires  
pre- and post-synaptic mechanisms. J. Neuroimmune 
Pharmacol. 7, 571–578 (2012).
26.	 Micheau, O. & Tschopp, J. Induction of TNF receptor 
I-mediated apoptosis via two sequential signaling 
complexes. Cell 114, 181–190 (2003).
27.	 Hong, S. et al. Complement and microglia mediate 
early synapse loss in Alzheimer mouse models. 
Science 352, 712–716 (2016).
28.	 Sofroniew, M. V. & Vinters, H. V. Astrocytes: biology 
and pathology. Acta Neuropathol. 119, 7–35 (2010).
29.	 Attwell, D. et al. Glial and neuronal control of brain 
blood flow. Nature 468, 232–243 (2010).
30.	 Simard, M. & Nedergaard, M. The neurobiology of 
glia in the context of water and ion homeostasis. 
Neuroscience 129, 877–896 (2004).
31.	 Pekny, M. et al. Astrocytes: a central element in 
neurological diseases. Acta Neuropathol. 131,  
323–345 (2016).
32.	 Rouach, N., Koulakoff, A., Abudara, V., Willecke, K.  
& Giaume, C. Astroglial metabolic networks sustain 
hippocampal synaptic transmission. Science 322, 
1551–1555 (2008).
33.	 Eroglu, C. & Barres, B. A. Regulation of synaptic 
connectivity by glia. Nature 468, 223–231 (2010).
34.	 Jessen, N. A., Munk, A. S., Lundgaard, I. & 
Nedergaard, M. The glymphatic system: a beginner’s 
guide. Neurochem. Res. 40, 2583–2599 (2015).
35.	 Tarasoff-Conway, J. M. et al. Clearance systems in the 
brain-implications for Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. 
Neurol. 11, 457–470 (2015).
36.	 Pekny, M., Wilhelmsson, U. & Pekna, M. The dual role 
of astrocyte activation and reactive gliosis. Neurosci. 
Lett. 565, 30–38 (2014).
37.	 Liddelow, S. A. & Barres, B. A. Reactive astrocytes: 
production, function, and therapeutic potential. 
Immunity 46, 957–967 (2017).
38.	 Liddelow, S. A. et al. Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes 
are induced by activated microglia. Nature 541,  
481–487 (2017).
39.	 Martinez, F. O. & Gordon, S. The M1 and M2 
paradigm of macrophage activation: time for 
reassessment. F1000Prime Rep. 6, 13 (2014).
40.	 Khakh, B. S. & Sofroniew, M. V. Diversity of astrocyte 
functions and phenotypes in neural circuits. Nat. 
Neurosci. 18, 942–952 (2015).
41.	 Thal, D. R. et al. Amyloid β-protein (Aβ)-containing 
astrocytes are located preferentially near N-terminal-
truncated Aβ deposits in the human entorhinal cortex. 
Acta Neuropathol. 100, 608–617 (2000).
42.	 Funato, H. et al. Astrocytes containing amyloid 
β-protein (Aβ)-positive granules are associated with 
Aβ40-positive diffuse plaques in the aged human 
brain. Am. J. Pathol. 152, 983–992 (1998).
43.	 Wyss-Coray, T. et al. Adult mouse astrocytes degrade 
amyloid-β in vitro and in situ. Nat. Med. 9, 453–457 
(2003).
44.	 Jo, S. et al. GABA from reactive astrocytes impairs 
memory in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease.  
Nat. Med. 20, 886–896 (2014).
45.	 Chang, J. et al. NF-κB inhibits osteogenic 
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells by 
promoting β-catenin degradation. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 110, 9469–9474 (2013).
46.	 Winkler, E. A. et al. GLUT1 reductions exacerbate 
Alzheimer’s disease vasculo-neuronal dysfunction and 
degeneration. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 521–530 (2015).
47.	 Kisler, K., Nelson, A. R., Montagne, A. & Zlokovic, B. V. 
Cerebral blood flow regulation and neurovascular 
dysfunction in Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 
18, 419–434 (2017).
48.	 Heneka, M. T. et al. Focal glial activation coincides 
with increased BACE1 activation and precedes 
amyloid plaque deposition in APP[V717I] transgenic 
mice. J. Neuroinflammation 2, 22 (2005).
49.	 Harry, G. J. Microglia during development and aging. 
Pharmacol. Ther. 139, 313–326 (2013).
50.	 Ginhoux, F. et al. Fate mapping analysis reveals that 
adult microglia derive from primitive macrophages. 
Science 330, 841–845 (2010).
51.	 Kierdorf, K. et al. Microglia emerge from 
erythromyeloid precursors via Pu.1- and Irf8-
dependent pathways. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 273–280 
(2013).
52.	 Bruttger, J. et al. Genetic cell ablation reveals clusters 
of local self-renewing microglia in the mammalian 
central nervous system. Immunity 43, 92–106 (2015).
53.	 Priller, J. et al. Targeting gene-modified hematopoietic 
cells to the central nervous system: use of green 
fluorescent protein uncovers microglial engraftment. 
Nat. Med. 7, 1356–1361 (2001).
54.	 Mildner, A. et al. CCR2+Ly-6Chi monocytes are crucial 
for the effector phase of autoimmunity in the central 
nervous system. Brain 132, 2487–2500 (2009).
55.	 Sweeney, M. D., Sagare, A. P. & Zlokovic, B. V.  
Blood–brain barrier breakdown in Alzheimer disease 
and other neurodegenerative disorders. Nat. Rev. 
Neurol. 14, 133–150 (2018).
56.	 Salter, M. W. & Stevens, B. Microglia emerge as 
central players in brain disease. Nat. Med. 23,  
1018–1027 (2017).
57.	 Ousman, S. S. & Kubes, P. Immune surveillance  
in the central nervous system. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 
1096–1101 (2012).
58.	 Paolicelli, R. C. et al. Synaptic pruning by microglia is 
necessary for normal brain development. Science 
333, 1456–1458 (2011).
59.	 Nimmerjahn, A., Kirchhoff, F. & Helmchen, F. Resting 
microglial cells are highly dynamic surveillants of brain 
parenchyma in vivo. Science 308, 1314–1318 (2005).
60.	 Davalos, D. et al. ATP mediates rapid microglial 
response to local brain injury in vivo. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 
752–758 (2005).
61.	 Sole-Domenech, S., Cruz, D. L., Capetillo-Zarate, E.  
& Maxfield, F. R. The endocytic pathway in microglia 
during health, aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Ageing 
Res. Rev. 32, 89–103 (2016).
62.	 Bajetto, A., Bonavia, R., Barbero, S. & Schettini, G. 
Characterization of chemokines and their receptors  
in the central nervous system: physiopathological 
implications. J. Neurochem. 82, 1311–1329 (2002).
63.	 Owens, T., Khorooshi, R., Wlodarczyk, A. & Asgari, N. 
Interferons in the central nervous system: a few 
instruments play many tunes. Glia 62, 339–355 
(2014).
64.	 Norden, D. M. & Godbout, J. P. Review: Microglia of 
the aged brain: primed to be activated and resistant 
to regulation. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 39, 
19–34 (2013).
65.	 Spittau, B. Aging microglia-phenotypes, functions  
and implications for age-related neurodegenerative 
diseases. Front. Aging Neurosci. 9 (2017).
66.	 Stence, N., Waite, M. & Dailey, M. E. Dynamics of 
microglial activation: a confocal time-lapse analysis in 
hippocampal slices. Glia 33, 256–266 (2001).
67.	 Davies, D. S., Ma, J., Jegathees, T. & Goldsbury, C. 
Microglia show altered morphology and reduced 
arborization in human brain during aging and 
Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Pathol. 27, 795–808 
(2017).
68.	 Rawji, K. S. et al. Immunosenescence of microglia and 
macrophages: impact on the ageing central nervous 
system. Brain 139, 653–661 (2016).
69.	 Bisht, K. et al. Dark microglia: a new phenotype 
predominantly associated with pathological states. 
Glia 64, 826–839 (2016).
70.	 Plescher, M. et al. Plaque-dependent morphological 
and electrophysiological heterogeneity of microglia  
in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Glia 66, 
1464–1480 (2018).
71.	 Sanchez-Mejias, E. et al. Soluble phospho-tau from 
Alzheimer’s disease hippocampus drives microglial 
degeneration. Acta Neuropathol. 132, 897–916 
(2016).
72.	 Navarro, V. et al. Microglia in Alzheimer’s disease: 
activated, dysfunctional or degenerative. Front. Aging 
Neurosci. 10, 140 (2018).
73.	 Doorn, K. J. et al. Increased amoeboid microglial 
density in the olfactory bulb of Parkinson’s and 
Alzheimer’s patients. Brain Pathol. 24, 152–165 
(2014).
74.	 Tischer, J. et al. Inhomogeneous distribution of Iba-1 
characterizes microglial pathology in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Glia 64, 1562–1572 (2016).
75.	 Streit, W. J., Braak, H., Xue, Q. S. & Bechmann, I. 
Dystrophic (senescent) rather than activated 
microglial cells are associated with tau pathology and 
likely precede neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Acta Neuropathol. 118, 475–485 (2009).
76.	 Yin, Z. R. et al. Immune hyperreactivity of Aβ 
plaque-associated microglia in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Neurobiol. Aging 55, 115–122 (2017).
77.	 Nguyen, H. M. et al. Differential Kv1.3, KCa3.1, and 
Kir2.1 expression in “classically” and “alternatively” 
activated microglia. Glia 65, 106–121 (2017).
78.	 Minett, T. et al. Microglial immunophenotype in 
dementia with Alzheimer’s pathology. J. 
Neuroinflammation 13, 135 (2016).
79.	 Hopperton, K. E., Mohammad, D., Trepanier, M. O., 
Giuliano, V. & Bazinet, R. P. Markers of microglia in 
post-mortem brain samples from patients with 
Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review. Mol. Psychiatry 
23, 177–198 (2018).
80.	 Varnum, M. M. & Ikezu, T. The classification of 
microglial activation phenotypes on neurodegeneration 
and regeneration in Alzheimer’s disease brain. Arch. 
Immunol. Ther. Ex. 60, 251–266 (2012).
81.	 Ransohoff, R. M. A polarizing question: do M1 and 
M2 microglia exist? Nat. Neurosci. 19, 987–991 
(2016).
82.	 Walker, D. G. & Lue, L. F. Immune phenotypes of 
microglia in human neurodegenerative disease: 
challenges to detecting microglial polarization in 
human brains. Alzheimers Res. Ther. 7, 56 (2015).
83.	 Kim, C. C., Nakamura, M. C. & Hsieh, C. L. Brain 
trauma elicits non-canonical macrophage activation 
states. J. Neuroinflammation 13, 117 (2016).
84.	 Keren-Shaul, H. et al. A unique microglia type 
associated with restricting development of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Cell 169, 1276–1290.e17 (2017).
85.	 Jay, T. R., von Saucken, V. E. & Landreth, G. E. TREM2 in 
neurodegenerative diseases. Mol. Neurodegeneration 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13024-017-0197-5 (2017).
86.	 Galatro, T. F. et al. Transcriptomic analysis of purified 
human cortical microglia reveals age-associated 
changes. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 1162–1171 (2017).
87.	 Mathys, H. et al. Temporal tracking of microglia 
activation in neurodegeneration at single-cell 
resolution. Cell Rep. 21, 366–380 (2017).
88.	 Friedman, B. A. et al. Diverse brain myeloid 
expression profiles reveal distinct microglial activation 
states and aspects of Alzheimer’s disease not evident 
in mouse models. Cell Rep. 22, 832–847 (2018).
89.	 Zhang, Y. et al. An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and 
splicing database of glia, neurons, and vascular cells 
of the cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci. 34, 11929–11947 
(2014).
90.	 Olah, M. et al. A transcriptomic atlas of aged human 
microglia. Nat. Commun. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-018-02926-5 (2018).
91.	 Tan, Y. L., Yuan, Y. & Tian, L. Microglial regional 
heterogeneity and its role in the brain. Mol. Psychiatry 
25, 351–367 (2020).
92.	 Masuda, T. et al. Spatial and temporal heterogeneity 
of mouse and human microglia at single-cell resolution. 
Nature 566, 388–392 (2019).
93.	 Grabert, K. et al. Microglial brain region-dependent 
diversity and selective regional sensitivities to aging. 
Nat. Neurosci. 19, 504–516 (2016).
94.	 Mastroeni, D. et al. Laser-captured microglia in the 
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s brain reveal unique 
regional expression profiles and suggest a potential 
role for hepatitis B in the Alzheimer’s brain. Neurobiol. 
Aging 63, 12–21 (2018).
95.	 Prokop, S. et al. Impact of TREM2 risk variants on 
brain region-specific immune activation and plaque 
microenvironment in Alzheimer’s disease patient brain 
samples. Acta Neuropathol. 138, 613–630 (2019).
96.	 Lee, C. Y. D. et al. Elevated TREM2 gene dosage 
reprograms microglia responsivity and ameliorates 
pathological phenotypes in Alzheimer’s disease 
models. Neuron 97, 1032 (2018).
97.	 Krasemann, S. et al. The TREM2–APOE pathway 
drives the transcriptional phenotype of dysfunctional 
microglia in neurodegenerative diseases. Immunity 
47, 566 (2017).
98.	 Wang, Y. et al. TREM2-mediated early microglial 
response limits diffusion and toxicity of amyloid 
plaques. J. Exp. Med. 213, 667–675 (2016).
99.	 Jay, T. R. et al. TREM2 deficiency eliminates TREM2+ 
inflammatory macrophages and ameliorates 
pathology in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models.  
J. Exp. Med. 212, 287–295 (2015).
100.	Lian, H. et al. NFκB-activated astroglial release of 
complement C3 compromises neuronal morphology 
and function associated with Alzheimer’s disease. 
Neuron 85, 101–115 (2015).
101.	Lian, H. et al. Astrocyte–microglia cross talk through 
complement activation modulates amyloid pathology 
in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci. 
36, 577–589 (2016).
102.	Simon, E., Obst, J. & Gomez-Nicola, D. The evolving 
dialogue of microglia and neurons in Alzheimer’s 
disease: microglia as necessary transducers of 
pathology. Neuroscience 405, 24–34 (2019).
103.	Walker, D. G., Dalsing-Hernandez, J. E., Campbell, N. A. 
& Lue, L. F. Decreased expression of CD200 and CD200 
receptor in Alzheimer’s disease: a potential mechanism 
leading to chronic inflammation. Exp. Neurol. 215, 5–19 
(2009).
104.	Holtman, I. R. et al. Induction of a common  
microglia gene expression signature by aging and 
neurodegenerative conditions: a co-expression 
meta-analysis. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 3, 31 
(2015).
Nature ReviewS | Neurology
Reviews
	
 volume 17 | March 2021 | 169

105.	Swardfager, W. et al. A meta-analysis of cytokines in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Biol. Psychiatry 68, 930–941 
(2010).
106.	El Kadmiri, N., Said, N., Slassi, I., El Moutawakil, B. & 
Nadifi, S. Biomarkers for Alzheimer disease: classical 
and novel candidates’ review. Neuroscience 370, 
181–190 (2018).
107.	Olsson, B. et al. CSF and blood biomarkers for the 
diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Lancet Neurol. 15, 673–684 
(2016).
108.	Baldacci, F., Lista, S., Cavedo, E., Bonuccelli, U. & 
Hampel, H. Diagnostic function of the neuroinflammatory 
biomarker YKL-40 in Alzheimer’s disease and other 
neurodegenerative diseases. Expert Rev. Proteom. 14, 
285–299 (2017).
109.	Sutphen, C. L. et al. Longitudinal cerebrospinal fluid 
biomarker changes in preclinical Alzheimer disease 
during middle age. JAMA Neurol. 72, 1029–1042 
(2015).
110.	 Alcolea, D. et al. Amyloid precursor protein 
metabolism and inflammation markers in preclinical 
Alzheimer disease. Neurology 85, 626–633 (2015).
111.	 Edison, P. & Brooks, D. J. Role of neuroinflammation 
in the trajectory of Alzheimer’s disease and in vivo 
quantification using PET. J. Alzheimers Dis. 64, 
S339–S351 (2018).
112.	Venneti, S., Lopresti, B. J. & Wiley, C. A. The 
peripheral benzodiazepine receptor (Translocator 
protein 18 kDa) in microglia: from pathology to 
imaging. Prog. Neurobiol. 80, 308–322 (2006).
113.	Diorio, D., Welner, S. A., Butterworth, R. F.,  
Meaney, M. J. & Suranyi-Cadotte, B. E. Peripheral 
benzodiazepine binding sites in Alzheimer’s disease 
frontal and temporal cortex. Neurobiol. Aging 12, 
255–258 (1991).
114.	Junck, L. et al. PET imaging of human gliomas with 
ligands for the peripheral benzodiazepine binding-site. 
Ann. Neurol. 26, 752–758 (1989).
115.	Alam, M. M., Lee, J. & Lee, S. Y. Recent progress  
in the development of TSPO PET Ligands for 
neuroinflammation imaging in neurological diseases. 
Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 51, 283–296 (2017).
116.	Owen, D. R. J. et al. Mixed-affinity binding in humans 
with 18-kDa translocator protein ligands. J. Nucl. 
Med. 52, 24–32 (2011).
117.	Kreisl, W. C. et al. A genetic polymorphism for 
translocator protein 18 kDa affects both in vitro and 
in vivo radioligand binding in human brain to this 
putative biomarker of neuroinflammation. J. Cereb. 
Blood Flow. Metab. 33, 53–58 (2013).
118.	Fan, Z. et al. Can studies of neuroinflammation in a 
TSPO genetic subgroup (HAB or MAB) be applied to 
the entire AD cohort? J. Nucl. Med. 56, 707–713 
(2015).
119.	Lavisse, S. et al. Reactive astrocytes overexpress 
TSPO and are detected by TSPO positron emission 
tomography imaging. J. Neurosci. 32, 10809–10818 
(2012).
120.	Ji, B. et al. Imaging of peripheral benzodiazepine 
receptor expression as biomarkers of detrimental 
versus beneficial glial responses in mouse models of 
Alzheimer’s and other CNS pathologies. J. Neurosci. 
28, 12255–12267 (2008).
121.	Rojas, S. et al. Imaging brain inflammation with 
[11C]PK11195 by PET and induction of the 
peripheral-type benzodiazepine receptor after 
transient focal ischemia in rats. J. Cereb. Blood Flow. 
Metab. 27, 1975–1986 (2007).
122.	Venneti, S., Wang, G., Nguyen, J. & Wiley, C. A. The 
positron emission tomography ligand DAA1106 binds 
with high affinity to activated microglia in human 
neurological disorders. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 
67, 1001–1010 (2008).
123.	Janssen, B., Vugts, D. J., Windhorst, A. D. & Mach, R. H. 
PET imaging of microglial activation-beyond targeting 
TSPO. Molecules https://doi.org/10.3390/
molecules23030607 (2018).
124.	Narayanaswami, V. et al. Emerging PET radiotracers 
and targets for imaging of neuroinflammation  
in neurodegenerative diseases: outlook beyond  
TSPO. Mol. Imaging 17, 1536012118792317 
(2018).
125.	Beaino, W. et al. Purinergic receptors P2Y12R and 
P2X7R: potential targets for PET imaging of microglia 
phenotypes in multiple sclerosis. J. Neuroinflammation 
14, 259 (2017).
126.	Mcgeer, P. L., Itagaki, S., Tago, H. & Mcgeer, E. G. 
Reactive microglia in patients with senile dementia of 
Alzheimer type are positive for the histocompatibility 
glycoprotein HLA-DR. Neurosci. Lett. 79, 195–200 
(1987).
127.	Tooyama, I., Kimura, H., Akiyama, H. & Mcgeer, P. L. 
Reactive microglia express class-I and class-II major 
histocompatibility complex antigens in Alzheimers 
disease. Brain Res. 523, 273–280 (1990).
128.	Hayes, A., Thaker, U., Iwatsubo, T., Pickering-Brown, S. M. 
& Mann, D. M. Pathological relationships between 
microglial cell activity and tau and amyloid β protein in 
patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci. Lett. 331, 
171–174 (2002).
129.	Dani, M. et al. Microglial activation correlates in vivo 
with both tau and amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Brain 141, 2740–2754 (2018).
130.	Kitazawa, M., Yamasaki, T. R. & LaFerla, F. M. 
Microglia as a potential bridge between the amyloid 
β-peptide and tau. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1035, 85–103 
(2004).
131.	McGeer, P. L. & McGeer, E. G. The amyloid 
cascade-inflammatory hypothesis of Alzheimer 
disease: implications for therapy. Acta Neuropathol. 
126, 479–497 (2013).
132.	Delbo, R., Angeretti, N., Lucca, E., Desimoni, M. G.  
& Forloni, G. Reciprocal control of inflammatory 
cytokines, IL-1 and IL-6, and β-amyloid production  
in cultures. Neurosci. Lett. 188, 70–74 (1995).
133.	Akiyama, H. et al. Inflammation and Alzheimer’s 
disease. Neurobiol. Aging 21, 383–421 (2000).
134.	Hanisch, U. K. Microglia as a source and target of 
cytokines. Glia 40, 140–155 (2002).
135.	Yang, T., Li, S. M., Xu, H. X., Walsh, D. M. & Selkoe, D. J. 
Large soluble oligomers of amyloid β-protein from 
Alzheimer brain are far less neuroactive than the 
smaller oligomers to which they dissociate. J. Neurosci. 
37, 152–163 (2017).
136.	Venegas, C. & Heneka, M. T. Danger-associated 
molecular patterns in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Leukoc. 
Biol. 101, 87–98 (2017).
137.	Liu, S. et al. TLR2 is a primary receptor for Alzheimer’s 
amyloid β peptide to trigger neuroinflammatory 
activation. J. Immunol. 188, 1098–1107 (2012).
138.	Murgas, P., Godoy, B. & von Bernhardi, R. Aβ 
potentiates inflammatory activation of glial cells 
induced by scavenger receptor ligands and 
inflammatory mediators in culture. Neurotox. Res. 22, 
69–78 (2012).
139.	Alawieyah Syed Mortadza, S., Sim, J. A., Neubrand, V. E. 
& Jiang, L. H. A critical role of TRPM2 channel in 
Aβ42-induced microglial activation and generation  
of tumor necrosis factor-α. Glia 66, 562–575 (2018).
140.	Husemann, J., Loike, J. D., Kodama, T. &  
Silverstein, S. C. Scavenger receptor class B type I 
(SR-BI) mediates adhesion of neonatal murine 
microglia to fibrillar β-amyloid. J. Neuroimmunol. 114, 
142–150 (2001).
141.	Koenigsknecht, J. & Landreth, G. Microglial 
phagocytosis of fibrillar β-amyloid through a β1 
integrin-dependent mechanism. J. Neurosci. 24, 
9838–9846 (2004).
142.	Malko, P., Syed Mortadza, S. A., McWilliam, J. & 
Jiang, L.-H. TRPM2 channel in microglia as a new 
player in neuroinflammation associated with a 
spectrum of central nervous system pathologies. 
Front. Pharmacol. 10, 239 (2019).
143.	Strowig, T., Henao-Mejia, J., Elinav, E. & Flavell, R. 
Inflammasomes in health and disease. Nature 481, 
278–286 (2012).
144.	Heneka, M. T. et al. NLRP3 is activated in Alzheimer’s 
disease and contributes to pathology in APP/PS1 mice. 
Nature 493, 674 (2013).
145.	White, C. S., Lawrence, C. B., Brough, D. & 
Rivers-Auty, J. Inflammasomes as therapeutic targets 
for Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Pathol. 27, 223–234 
(2017).
146.	Doens, D. & Fernandez, P. L. Microglia receptors  
and their implications in the response to amyloid-β for 
Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis. J. 
Neuroinflammation 11, 48 (2014).
147.	Guerreiro, R. & Hardy, J. Genetics of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Neurotherapeutics 11, 732–737 (2014).
148.	Ulland, T. K. et al. TREM2 maintains microglial 
metabolic fitness in Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 170, 
649–663.e13 (2017).
149.	Paresce, D. M., Chung, H. Y. & Maxfield, F. R. Slow 
degradation of aggregates of the Alzheimer’s disease 
amyloid β-protein by microglial cells. J. Biol. Chem. 
272, 29390–29397 (1997).
150.	Cho, M. H. et al. Autophagy in microglia degrades 
extracellular β-amyloid fibrils and regulates the 
NLRP3 inflammasome. Autophagy 10, 1761–1775 
(2014).
151.	Plaza-Zabala, A., Sierra-Torre, V. & Sierra, A. Autophagy 
and microglia: novel partners in neurodegeneration and 
aging. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 18, 598 (2017).
152.	Pan, X.-D. et al. Microglial phagocytosis induced by 
fibrillar β-amyloid is attenuated by oligomeric 
β-amyloid: implications for Alzheimer’s disease.  
Mol. Neurodegener. 6, 45 (2011).
153.	Hellwig, S. et al. Forebrain microglia from wild-type 
but not adult 5xFAD mice prevent amyloid-β plaque 
formation in organotypic hippocampal slice cultures. 
Sci. Rep. 5, 14624 (2015).
154.	Spangenberg, E. E. & Green, K. N. Inflammation  
in Alzheimer’s disease: lessons learned from 
microglia-depletion models. Brain Behav. Immun. 61, 
1–11 (2017).
155.	Raha-Chowdhury, R. et al. Erythromyeloid-derived 
TREM2: a major determinant of Alzheimer’s disease 
pathology in Down syndrome. J. Alzheimers Dis. 61, 
1143–1162 (2018).
156.	Streit, W. J., Sammons, N. W., Kuhns, A. J. &  
Sparks, D. L. Dystrophic microglia in the aging human 
brain. Glia 45, 208–212 (2004).
157.	Streit, W. J. Microglial senescence: does the brain’s 
immune system have an expiration date? Trends 
Neurosci. 29, 506–510 (2006).
158.	Hawcroft, G., Gardner, S. H. & Hull, M. A. Activation  
of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 
does not explain the antiproliferative activity of the 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug indomethacin on 
human colorectal cancer cells. J. Pharmacol. Exp. 
Ther. 305, 632–637 (2003).
159.	Chen, C. H. et al. Increased NF-κB signalling up-regulates 
BACE1 expression and its therapeutic potential in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol. 15, 
77–90 (2012).
160.	Venegas, C. et al. Microglia-derived ASC specks 
cross-seed amyloid-β in Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 
552, 355–361 (2017).
161.	Morales, I., Jimenez, J. M., Mancilla, M. &  
Maccioni, R. B. Tau oligomers and fibrils induce 
activation of microglial cells. J. Alzheimers Dis. 37, 
849–856 (2013).
162.	Wes, P. D. et al. Tau overexpression impacts a 
neuroinflammation gene expression network 
perturbed in Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS ONE 9, 
e106050 (2014).
163.	Bolos, M. et al. Direct evidence of internalization of 
tau by microglia in vitro and in vivo. J. Alzheimers Dis. 
50, 77–87 (2016).
164.	Streit, W. J. et al. Microglial activation occurs late 
during preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. Glia 66,  
2550–2562 (2018).
165.	Asai, H. et al. Depletion of microglia and inhibition of 
exosome synthesis halt tau propagation. Nat. Neurosci. 
18, 1584–1593 (2015).
166.	Felsky, D. et al. Neuropathological correlates and 
genetic architecture of microglial activation in elderly 
human brain. Nat. Commun. 10, 409 (2019).
167.	Ising, C. et al. NLRP3 inflammasome activation drives 
tau pathology. Nature 575, 669–673 (2019).
168.	Chen, W. et al. Increased tauopathy drives 
microglia-mediated clearance of β-amyloid. Acta 
Neuropathol. Commun. 4, 63 (2016).
169.	Sekiya, M. et al. Integrated biology approach reveals 
molecular and pathological interactions among 
Alzheimer’s Aβ42, Tau, TREM2, and TYROBP in 
Drosophila models. Genome Med. https://doi.
org/10.1186/s13073-018-0530-9 (2018).
170.	Takahashi, H. et al. Opposing effects of progranulin 
deficiency on amyloid and tau pathologies via 
microglial TYROBP network. Acta Neuropathol. 133, 
785–807 (2017).
171.	Lee, S. et al. Opposing effects of membrane-anchored 
CX3CL1 on amyloid and tau pathologies via the  
p38 MAPK pathway. J. Neurosci. 34, 12538–12546 
(2014).
172.	Bolos, M. et al. Absence of CX3CR1 impairs  
the internalization of tau by microglia. Mol. 
Neurodegeneration https://doi.org/10.1186/s13024-
017-0200-1 (2017).
173.	Hamelin, L. et al. Early and protective microglial 
activation in Alzheimer’s disease: a prospective  
study using 18F-DPA-714 PET imaging. Brain 139, 
1252–1264 (2016).
174.	Fan, Z., Brooks, D. J., Okello, A. & Edison, P.  
An early and late peak in microglial activation in 
Alzheimer’s disease trajectory. Brain 140, 792–803 
(2017).
175.	Parbo, P. et al. Does inflammation precede tau 
aggregation in early Alzheimer’s disease? A PET study. 
Neurobiol. Dis. 117, 211–216 (2018).
176.	Dunn, N., Mullee, M., Perry, V. H. & Holmes, C. 
Association between dementia and infectious disease 
— evidence from a case-control study. Alzheimers Dis. 
Assoc. Disord. 19, 91–94 (2005).
www.nature.com/nrneurol
Reviews
170 | March 2021 | volume 17	

177.	t’ Veld, B. A. et al. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
drugs and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl.  
J. Med. 345, 1515–1521 (2001).
178.	Etminan, M., Gill, S. & Samii, A. Effect of non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs on risk of Alzheimer’s 
disease: systematic review and meta-analysis of 
observational studies. Brit. Med. J. 327, 128 (2003).
179.	Johnson, V. E. et al. Inflammation and white matter 
degeneration persist for years after a single traumatic 
brain injury. Brain 136, 28–42 (2013).
180.	Hanzel, C. E. et al. Neuronal driven pre-plaque 
inflammation in a transgenic rat model of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Neurobiol. Aging 35, 2249–2262 (2014).
181.	Okello, A. et al. Microglial activation and amyloid 
deposition in mild cognitive impairment. A PET study. 
Neurology 72, 56–62 (2009).
182.	Femminella, G. D. et al. Microglial activation in  
early Alzheimer trajectory is associated with higher 
gray matter volume. Neurology 92, e1331–e1343 
(2019).
183.	Dani, M. et al. Tau aggregation correlates with 
amyloid deposition in both mild cognitive impairment 
and Alzheimer’s disease subjects. J. Alzheimers Dis. 
70, 455–465 (2019).
184.	Hamelin, L. et al. Early and protective microglial 
activation in Alzheimer’s disease: a prospective  
study using 18F-DPA-714 PET imaging. Brain 139, 
1252–1264 (2016).
185.	Kreisl, W. C., Henter, I. D. & Innis, R. B. Imaging 
translocator protein as a biomarker of 
neuroinflammation in dementia. Adv. Pharmacol. 82, 
163–185 (2018).
186.	Kreisl, W. C. et al. 11C-PBR28 binding to translocator 
protein increases with progression of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Neurobiol. Aging 44, 53–61 (2016).
187.	Philippens, I. H. et al. Acceleration of amyloidosis by 
inflammation in the amyloid-β marmoset monkey 
model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 55, 
101–113 (2017).
188.	Hollingworth, P. et al. Common variants at ABCA7, 
MS4A6A/MS4A4E, EPHA1, CD33 and CD2AP are 
associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet. 43, 
429 (2011).
189.	Lambert, J. C. et al. Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals 
identifies 11 new susceptibility loci for Alzheimer’s 
disease. Nat. Genet. 45, 1452–U1206 (2013).
190.	Perry, V. H. & Holmes, C. Microglial priming in 
neurodegenerative disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 10, 
217–224 (2014).
191.	Femminella, G. D. et al. Does microglial activation 
influence hippocampal volume and neuronal function 
in Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease 
dementia? J. Alzheimers Dis. 51, 1275–1289  
(2016).
192.	Fan, Z. et al. Influence of microglial activation on 
neuronal function in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s 
disease dementia. Alzheimers Dement. 11, 608–621.
e7 (2015).
193.	Yokoi, T. et al. Involvement of the precuneus/posterior 
cingulate cortex is significant for the development of 
Alzheimer’s disease: a PET (THK5351, PiB) and 
resting fMRI study. Front. Aging Neurosci. 10, 304 
(2018).
194.	Passamonti, L. et al. Neuroinflammation and 
functional connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease: 
interactive influences on cognitive performance.  
J. Neurosci. 39, 7218–7226 (2019).
195.	Melah, K. E. et al. Cerebrospinal fluid markers of 
Alzheimer’s disease pathology and microglial 
activation are associated with altered white matter 
microstructure in asymptomatic adults at risk for 
Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 50, 873–886 
(2016).
196.	Edison, P. et al. Microglia, amyloid, and cognition  
in Alzheimer’s disease: an [11C](R)PK11195-PET and 
[11C]PIB-PET study. Neurobiol. Dis. 32, 412–419 
(2008).
197.	Yokokura, M. et al. In vivo changes in microglial 
activation and amyloid deposits in brain regions with 
hypometabolism in Alzheimer’s disease. Eur. J. Nucl. 
Med. Mol. Imaging 38, 343–351 (2011).
198.	Kreisl, W. C. et al. In vivo radioligand binding to 
translocator protein correlates with severity of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 136, 2228–2238  
(2013).
199.	Combs, C. K., Karlo, J. C., Kao, S. C. & Landreth, G. E. 
β-Amyloid stimulation of microglia and monocytes 
results in TNFα-dependent expression of inducible 
nitric oxide synthase and neuronal apoptosis.  
J. Neurosci. 21, 1179–1188 (2001).
200.	Floden, A. M., Li, S. & Combs, C. K. β-amyloid-
stimulated microglia induce neuron death via 
synergistic stimulation of tumor necrosis factor α and 
NMDA receptors. J. Neurosci. 25, 2566–2575 (2005).
201.	Martin, E., Boucher, C., Fontaine, B. & Delarasse, C. 
Distinct inflammatory phenotypes of microglia and 
monocyte-derived macrophages in Alzheimer’s disease 
models: effects of aging and amyloid pathology. Aging 
Cell 16, 27–38 (2017).
202.	Neniskyte, U., Neher, J. J. & Brown, G. C. Neuronal 
death induced by nanomolar amyloid β is mediated  
by primary phagocytosis of neurons by microglia.  
J. Biol. Chem. 286, 39904–39913 (2011).
203.	Shi, Q. Q. et al. Complement C3 deficiency protects 
against neurodegeneration in aged plaque-rich APP/
PS1 mice. Sci. Transl. Med. https://doi.org/10.1126/
scitranslmed.aaf6295 (2017).
204.	Serrano-Pozo, A., Betensky, R. A., Frosch, M. P. & 
Hyman, B. T. Plaque-associated local toxicity increases 
over the clinical course of Alzheimer disease. Am. J. 
Pathol. 186, 375–384 (2016).
205.	Raj, A., Kuceyeski, A. & Weiner, M. A network 
diffusion model of disease progression in dementia. 
Neuron 73, 1204–1215 (2012).
206.	Braak, H. & Del Tredici, K. The preclinical phase of the 
pathological process underlying sporadic Alzheimer’s 
disease. Brain 138, 2814–2833 (2015).
207.	Fan, Z., Okello, A. A., Brooks, D. J. & Edison, P. 
Longitudinal influence of microglial activation and 
amyloid on neuronal function in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Brain 138, 3685–3698 (2015).
208.	Hamelin, L. et al. Distinct dynamic profiles of microglial 
activation are associated with progression of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Brain 141, 1855–1870 (2018).
209.	Cagnin, A. et al. In-vivo measurement of activated 
microglia in dementia. Lancet 358, 461–467  
(2001).
210.	Wiley, C. A. et al. Carbon 11-labeled Pittsburgh 
compound B and carbon 11-labeled (R)-PK11195 
positron emission tomographic imaging in Alzheimer 
disease. Arch. Neurol. 66, 60–67 (2009).
211.	 Lopez-Picon, F. R. et al. Neuroinflammation appears 
early on PET imaging and then plateaus in a mouse 
model of Alzheimer disease. J. Nucl. Med. 59,  
509–515 (2018).
212.	Yokokura, M. et al. Depiction of microglial activation in 
aging and dementia: positron emission tomography 
with [11C]DPA713 versus [11C](R)PK11195. J. Cereb. 
Blood Flow Metab. 37, 877–889 (2017).
213.	Lyoo, C. H. et al. Cerebellum can serve as a 
pseudo-reference region in Alzheimer disease to 
detect neuroinflammation measured with PET 
radioligand binding to translocator protein. J. Nucl. 
Med. 56, 701–706 (2015).
214.	Yaqub, M. et al. Optimization of supervised cluster 
analysis for extracting reference tissue input curves in 
(R)-[11C]PK11195 brain PET studies. J. Cereb. Blood 
Flow Metab. 32, 1600–1608 (2012).
215.	Bradburn, S., Murgatroyd, C. & Ray, N. 
Neuroinflammation in mild cognitive impairment and 
Alzheimer’s disease: a meta-analysis. Ageing Res. Rev. 
50, 1–8 (2019).
216.	Miguel-Alvarez, M. et al. Non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs as a treatment for 
Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis of treatment effect. Drugs Aging 32, 
139–147 (2015).
217.	Elewa, H. F., Hilali, H., Hess, D. C., Machado, L. S. & 
Fagan, S. C. Minocycline for short-term neuroprotection. 
Pharmacotherapy 26, 515–521 (2006).
218.	Garcez, M. L. et al. Minocycline reduces inflammatory 
parameters in the brain structures and serum  
and reverses memory impairment caused by the 
administration of amyloid β (1-42) in mice. Prog. 
Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 77, 23–31 
(2017).
219.	Howard, R. et al. Minocycline at 2 different dosages vs 
placebo for patients with mild Alzheimer disease: a 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Neurol. 77, 164–174 
(2020).
220.	Munoz, L. & Ammit, A. J. Targeting p38 MAPK 
pathway for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Neuropharmacology 58, 561–568 (2010).
221.	Thawkar, B. S. & Kaur, G. Inhibitors of NF-κB and  
P2X7/NLRP3/caspase 1 pathway in microglia: novel 
therapeutic opportunities in neuroinflammation induced 
early-stage Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuroimmunol. 326, 
62–74 (2019).
222.	Mandrekar-Colucci, S., Karlo, J. C. & Landreth, G. E. 
Mechanisms underlying the rapid peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma-mediated 
amyloid clearance and reversal of cognitive deficits in 
a murine model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci. 
32, 10117–10128 (2012).
223.	Flores, J. et al. Caspase-1 inhibition alleviates 
cognitive impairment and neuropathology in an 
Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Nat. Commun. 9, 
3916 (2018).
224.	Steeland, S. et al. Counteracting the effects of  
TNF receptor-1 has therapeutic potential in 
Alzheimer’s disease. EMBO Mol. Med. 10, e8300 
(2018).
225.	Shi, J. Q. et al. Anti-TNF-α reduces amyloid plaques 
and tau phosphorylation and induces CD11c-positive 
dendritic-like cell in the APP/PS1 transgenic mouse 
brains. Brain Res. 1368, 239–247 (2011).
226.	Tobinick, E. L. & Gross, H. Rapid improvement in 
verbal fluency and aphasia following perispinal 
etanercept in Alzheimer’s disease. BMC Neurol. 8, 27 
(2008).
227.	Butchart, J. et al. Etanercept in Alzheimer disease:  
a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind,  
phase 2 trial. Neurology 84, 2161–2168 (2015).
228.	Kitazawa, M. et al. Blocking IL-1 signaling rescues 
cognition, attenuates tau pathology, and restores 
neuronal β-catenin pathway function in an Alzheimer’s 
disease model. J. Immunol. 187, 6539–6549 (2011).
229.	Grimaldi, L. M. et al. A pilot study on the use of 
interferon β1a in early Alzheimer’s disease subjects.  
J. Neuroinflammation 11, 30 (2014).
230.	Moussa, C. et al. Resveratrol regulates 
neuro-inflammation and induces adaptive immunity  
in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuroinflammation 14, 1 
(2017).
231.	Alves, S. et al. Interleukin-2 improves amyloid 
pathology, synaptic failure and memory in Alzheimer’s 
disease mice. Brain 140, 826–842 (2017).
232.	Kiyota, T. et al. CNS expression of anti-inflammatory 
cytokine interleukin-4 attenuates Alzheimer’s 
disease-like pathogenesis in APP+PS1 bigenic mice. 
FASEB J. 24, 3093–3102 (2010).
233.	Fu, A. K. et al. IL-33 ameliorates Alzheimer’s 
disease-like pathology and cognitive decline.  
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, E2705–E2713 
(2016).
234.	Zheng, C., Zhou, X. W. & Wang, J. Z. The dual roles of 
cytokines in Alzheimer’s disease: update on interleukins, 
TNF-α, TGF-β and IFN-γ. Transl. Neurodegener. 5, 7 
(2016).
235.	Mandrekar-Colucci, S. & Landreth, G. E. Nuclear 
receptors as therapeutic targets for Alzheimer’s 
disease. Expert Opin. Ther. Targets 15, 1085–1097 
(2011).
236.	Escribano, L. et al. Rosiglitazone rescues memory 
impairment in Alzheimer’s transgenic mice: 
mechanisms involving a reduced amyloid and  
tau pathology. Neuropsychopharmacology 35, 
1593–1604 (2010).
237.	Yamanaka, M. et al. PPARγ/RXRα-induced and CD36-
mediated microglial amyloid-β phagocytosis results in 
cognitive improvement in amyloid precursor protein/
presenilin 1 mice. J. Neurosci. 32, 17321–17331 
(2012).
238.	Gold, M. et al. Rosiglitazone monotherapy in mild- 
to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease: results from a 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 
III study. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. 30, 131–146 
(2010).
239.	Yin, J. et al. NLRP3 inflammasome inhibitor 
ameliorates amyloid pathology in a mouse model of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurobiol. 55, 1977–1987 
(2018).
240.	Perry, V. H. & Teeling, J. Microglia and macrophages 
of the central nervous system: the contribution of 
microglia priming and systemic inflammation to 
chronic neurodegeneration. Semin. Immunopathol. 
35, 601–612 (2013).
241.	Dias, H. K., Brown, C. L., Polidori, M. C., Lip, G. Y.  
& Griffiths, H. R. LDL-lipids from patients with 
hypercholesterolaemia and Alzheimer’s disease are 
inflammatory to microvascular endothelial cells: 
mitigation by statin intervention. Clin. Sci. 129, 
1195–1206 (2015).
242.	Verdile, G. et al. Inflammation and oxidative stress: 
the molecular connectivity between insulin resistance, 
obesity, and Alzheimer’s disease. Mediators Inflamm. 
2015, 105828 (2015).
243.	Chen, H. et al. Folic acid supplementation mitigates 
Alzheimer’s disease by reducing inflammation:  
a randomized controlled trial. Mediators Inflamm. 
2016, 5912146 (2016).
244.	Vedin, I. et al. Effects of docosahexaenoic acid- 
rich σ-3 fatty acid supplementation on cytokine 
release from blood mononuclear leukocytes: the 
OmegAD study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 87, 1616–1622 
(2008).
Nature ReviewS | Neurology
Reviews
	
 volume 17 | March 2021 | 171

245.	Andrieu, S. et al. Effect of long-term omega 3 
polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation  
with or without multidomain intervention on  
cognitive function in elderly adults with memory 
complaints (MAPT): a randomised, placebo- 
controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 16, 377–389  
(2017).
246.	Ngandu, T. et al. A 2 year multidomain intervention  
of diet, exercise, cognitive training, and vascular  
risk monitoring versus control to prevent cognitive 
decline in at-risk elderly people (FINGER): a 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 385, 2255–2263 
(2015).
247.	Kim, S. et al. Protocol for a pragmatic randomised 
controlled trial of body brain life-general practice  
and a lifestyle modification programme to decrease 
dementia risk exposure in a primary care setting.  
BMJ Open 8, e019329 (2018).
248.	Rosenberg, A., Mangialasche, F., Ngandu, T., 
Solomon, A. & Kivipelto, M. Multidomain 
interventions to prevent cognitive impairment, 
Alzheimer’s disease, and dementia: from FINGER to 
World-Wide FINGERS. J. Prev. Alzheimers Dis. 7, 
29–36 (2020).
249.	Jack, C. R. et al. Tracking pathophysiological processes 
in Alzheimer’s disease: an updated hypothetical model 
of dynamic biomarkers. Lancet Neurol. 12, 207–216 
(2013).
Acknowledgements
F.L. is sponsored by the China Scholarship Council to 
undertake postgraduate research.
Author contributions
F.L. contributed to writing of the manuscript. P.E. made sub-
stantial contributions to discussions of the content and 
revision of the manuscript. Both authors researched data for 
the manuscript.
Competing interests
P.E. declares that he was formerly funded by the Medical 
Research Council and now by the Higher Education Funding 
Council for England (HEFCE), that he has received grants 
from Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation, Alzheimer’s 
Research UK, Alzheimer’s Society UK, GE Healthcare, Novo 
Nordisk and Piramal Life Sciences, and that he has acted as 
a consultant to Novo Nordisk and Pfizer. The other authors 
declare no competing interests.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
 
© Crown 2020
www.nature.com/nrneurol
Reviews
172 | March 2021 | volume 17

===== Leung2019_DevDyn_SpinalCordPatterning+Evolution =====
R E V I E W
Evolution of vertebrate spinal cord patterning
Brigid Leung
|
Sebastian M. Shimeld
Department of Zoology, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK
Correspondence
Sebastian M. Shimeld, Department of
Zoology, University of Oxford, Zoology
Research and Administration Building, 11a
Mansfield Road, Oxford OX1 3SZ, UK.
Email: sebastian.shimeld@zoo.ox.ac.uk
Funding information
Elizabeth Hannah Jenkinson Fund; John Fell
Fund; BBSRC
Abstract
The vertebrate spinal cord is organized across three developmental axes, anterior-
posterior (AP), dorsal-ventral (DV), and medial-lateral (ML). Patterning of these
axes is regulated by canonical intercellular signaling pathways: the AP axis by
Wnt, fibroblast growth factor, and retinoic acid (RA), the DV axis by Hedgehog,
Tgfβ, and Wnt, and the ML axis where proliferation is controlled by Notch. Devel-
opmental time plays an important role in which signal does what and when. Pat-
terning across the three axes is not independent, but linked by interactions between
signaling pathway components and their transcriptional targets. Combined this
builds a sophisticated organ with many different types of cell in specific AP, DV,
and ML positions. Two living lineages share phylum Chordata with vertebrates,
amphioxus, and tunicates, while the jawless fish such as lampreys, survive as the
most basally divergent vertebrate lineage. Genes and mechanisms shared between
lampreys and other vertebrates tell us what predated vertebrates, while those also
shared with other chordates tell us what evolved early in chordate evolution.
Between these lie vertebrate innovations: genetic and developmental changes
linked to evolution of new morphology. These include gene duplications, differ-
ences in how signals are received, and new regulatory connections between signal-
ing pathways and their target genes.
K E Y W O R D S
amphioxus, BMP, delta, FGF, lamprey, morphogen, neural, Notch, RA, Shh, Wnt
1
| THE EVOLUTION OF THE
VERTEBRATE NERVOUS SYSTEM
Vertebrates develop complex nervous systems with a level of
sophistication that far exceeds that of invertebrates. The only
challengers to this claim might be cephalopod molluscs, and
some of the larger arthropods. Many of the complexities shown
by vertebrates are considered innovations,1,2 and evolutionary
biologists have long been interested in when and how verte-
brate neural complexity evolved. Most studies on this topic
have focused on the brain or the neural crest. This is not sur-
prising, since the brain is the center of characteristics such as
upper level neural processing and memory, while the neural
crest has long been recognized as a pivotally important tissue
in vertebrate evolution, giving rise to many structures consid-
ered to be vertebrate innovations.3,4 There is, however, more to
the vertebrate nervous system than the brain and neural crest.
Nervous systems are typically divided into central (CNS) and
peripheral (PNS) components. The vertebrate PNS derives pri-
marily form neural crest cells, with cranial neurogenic placodes
also playing a role. The evolution of neural crest and placodes
has been extensively reviewed elsewhere5-7 and will not be fur-
ther considered here. The CNS is often dichotomized into the
brain and spinal cord. While this makes sense from anatomical
and functional perspectives, whether the separation is justified
on developmental and evolutionary grounds is much more
debatable. Aspects of spinal cord organization and develop-
ment extend into the hindbrain, including patterning by Hox
Received: 29 April 2019
Revised: 14 June 2019
Accepted: 15 June 2019
DOI: 10.1002/dvdy.77
1028
© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Developmental Dynamics. 2019;248:1028–1043.
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/dvdy

genes, suggesting the separation may be better thought of as
into a posterior, Hox-expressing territory (hindbrain and spinal
cord) and anterior Hox-free territory (midbrain and forebrain).
Recent work also shows deep and fundamental differences
may exist in the gene regulatory networks (GRNs) that regulate
the formation of the anterior and posterior neural cells very
early in development,8 and some authors have even speculated
there may be separate evolutionary origins for anterior and pos-
terior CNS components, traceable to separate anterior and pos-
terior nervous systems in an early ancestor of the majority of
extant animals.9
There is clearly still much to learn about the similarities
and differences between anterior and posterior CNS in verte-
brates and other animal groups, but regardless of the out-
come, the spinal cord has received relatively little attention
from evolutionary biologists. This is in stark contrast to
developmental biologists, who have dissected spinal cord
development with impressive detail. This reflects a combina-
tion of its relative simplicity and its experimental tractability
for gene manipulation and imaging. It has resulted in the spi-
nal cord becoming something of a “model organ system” for
understanding core developmental processes such as mor-
phogen patterning and the balance between proliferation and
differentiation.10 This depth of knowledge represents an
opportunity to explore the relationship between genetic
change at the gene and genome level, developmental pro-
cesses, and phenotypic consequences in terms of nervous
system complexity. Key phenotypic changes in this regard
might include increased cell number, new cell types, innova-
tion in cell patterning, and mechanisms for axon navigation.
In this review, we will first summarize how vertebrate spinal
cords develop. We will then relate this to genetic change,
including gene duplication, with comparison to early diverg-
ing vertebrates such as lampreys, and to the vertebrates'
nearest invertebrate relatives, tunicates, and amphioxus
(Figure 1).
2
| SPINAL CORD
DEVELOPMENTAL ANATOMY
The adult spinal cord of vertebrates serves a number of func-
tions. Most obviously, it relays signals between the periph-
ery and the brain. Put simplistically, sensory information is
received via the dorsal nerve roots and passed on to the
brain, while motor instructions are passed from the brain to
the motor neurons which connect to the muscles. The spinal
cord may also manage reflex actions like escape or withdraw
responses, and house central pattern generators managing
rhythmic motor activity. Many different types of cell are
needed to perform these functions, including various inter-
neurons. While there are some important differences in spi-
nal cords between vertebrate groups, for example, in motor
control circuits in limbed vs finned vertebrates, cell types
and their distributions appear fundamentally conserved.12
The developmental origins of these different cell types
have been intensively studied in model systems, especially
in chick and mouse. Across the dorsal-ventral (DV) axis the
embryonic spinal cord is divided into multiple discrete
zones, each giving rise to a defined suite of cell types. Prolif-
erative progenitor cells are sited ventricularly (by the lumen
of the spinal cord) in stem cell zones that produce new cells
through an extended period of development. Cells born from
the same progenitor cell zone at different developmental times
may have different fates, leading to mediolateral (ML) diversity
of cell types at the same DV level. The spinal cord is also pat-
terned along the anterior-posterior (AP) axis. Before considering
the evolution of these axes, we will first summarise the molecu-
lar control of their development as understood from model
vertebrates.
3
| PATTERNING THE
VERTEBRATE SPINAL CORD: THE
AP AXIS
The spinal cord grows from anterior to posterior, in common
with other axial tissues such as the somitic and intermediate
FIGURE 1
Chordate phylogeny and developing spinal cord
anatomy. Amphioxus is a member of the earliest diverging chordate
lineage, and has a relatively simple spinal cord region that is just one
cell thick. Tunicates, such as the sea squirt Ciona, have highly reduced
spinal cord regions with just four cells in cross section and no neurons.
Vertebrates have much more complex spinal cords, with more cells
across the dorsal-ventral axis, and multiple cell layers across the
medial-lateral axis. Lamprey and jawed vertebrate spinal cord diagrams
are schematic, and differences are discussed more below. Diagrams
adapted from Reference 11
LEUNG AND SHIMELD
1029

mesoderm. New cells are born in the posterior growth zone,
the tailbud, and as these cells continue to proliferate the
tailbud grows posteriorly, leaving some cells behind in the
forming spinal cord.13 As developmental time passes, these
cells become progressively distant from the tailbud and may
start to differentiate. AP identity in spinal cord cells is regu-
lated by Hox gene expression. Establishment and mainte-
nance of Hox gene expression in the spinal cord is a complex
affair, involving regulation by multiple external signals, by
interactions between Hox genes, and by change in chromatin
state through developmental time. There is insufficient space
here to detail all of these, and the reader is referred to a recent
review for a detailed exploration of these issues.14 However,
some key generalizations can be extracted (Figure 2).
Wnt signaling plays a role in posterior specification in many
bilaterians,57 and in vertebrates is involved in early regulation of
the Hox complexes.14 It has also long been known from cell cul-
ture, explant and signaling pathway manipulation studies that
Hox genes differ in their sensitivity to signaling molecules like
retinoic acid (RA) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF). RA is
secreted from newly formed somites, while FGF (and other sig-
naling molecules like the Tgfβ family member Gdf11) are pro-
duced by the tailbud.58,59 Since both tailbud and somitogenesis
progress synchronously from anterior to posterior, all spinal cord
cells should in principle move through developmental time from
a high FGF, to a high RA environment. Exactly when and how
these signals regulate Hox expression though has been tricky to
decipher. Under RA treatment in chick embryos, the anterior
boundaries of neural tube expression Hoxb1, Hoxb3, Hoxb4,
and Hoxb5 extend, but their expression is not affected by FGF
treatment; conversely, FGF treatment anteriorises the expression
of Hoxb6, Hoxb7, Hoxb8, and Hoxb9, but these are not sensitive
to RA in the same assay.60 However, others showed that Hoxc6
and Hoxc9 expression in explants respond to both RA and FGF
treatment, with Hoxc6 expression increasing when treated with
RA and reducing when treated with FGF, whereas Hoxc9
expression responded reciprocally.59
Such differences in observation could be explained by stud-
ies using different methods and systems (eg, whole embryo
in vivo vs explants in vitro), but developmental time also plays
a critical role. Tailbud derived FGF regulates proliferation,58,61
but cells that spend more time in the tailbud appear to show
progressive opening of chromatin across Hox clusters.62 How
FIGURE 2
Signal sources in spinal cord patterning. Schematic
diagrams of gnathostome, lamprey, and amphioxus spinal cords
showing relevant expression of signaling molecules. Details and data
sources as follows. Hh in the floor plate in chordates. References:
Gnathostomes; Mouse15; Xenopus16; Chick and zebrafish17; Lizard18;
Skate19; Lamprey20; Amphioxus.21,22 BMP in the roof plate in
gnathostomes, dorsal neural tube, and somites in lamprey, tailbud in
amphioxus. References: Gnathostomes; Mouse, BMP2, BMP6, BMP7,
and Gdf7 are expressed in roof plate,23-26 BMP4 in the whole spinal
cord E9.5 then restricted to dorsal ectoderm by E10.5.27,28 Chick,
BMP4, BMP7, and Gdf7 are in the roof plate,27,29,30 BMP6 expressed
through out spinal cord except roof plate.27 Lizard, BMP4 in the roof
plate.18 Zebrafish, BMP4 and BMP6 in the dorsal epidermis,31-33
BMP7a in the tailbud,34 BMP7b in the pronephric duct, dorsoventral
tail fin.35 Gdf7 in the head cartilage, dorsal aorta, and pronephric
duct.36 Lamprey; BMP2/4 in dorsal neural tube and somites.37
Amphioxus; BMP2/4 in the tailbud.38 Canonical Wnt in the roof plate
in gnathostomes and tailbud in amphioxus, no data on lamprey.
References: Gnathostomes; Mouse, Wnt1, Wnt3, and Wnt3a in the roof
plate39,40; Chick, Wnt1 and Wnt3a41; Zebrafish, Wnt1 and Wnt3 in the
roof plate,42,43 Wnt3a in the tailbud.44 Lamprey; data only on
noncanonical Wnt5 which is expressed across the DV spinal cord.45
Amphioxus; Wnt1 in the tailbud, Wnt3 in the tail fin and distributed
along spinal cord.46 Notch in the ventricular zone in vertebrates and in
the tailbud in amphioxus. References: Gnathostomes; Mouse,47;
Chick,48; Zebrafish, ventricular zone notch and delta49,50;
Lamprey11,45; Amphioxus.51 RA from vertebrate somites and roof plate
in gnathostomes and dorsal neurons in lamprey,52 no data in
amphioxus. FGF in the tailbud of gnathostomes and amphioxus, no
data on lamprey. References: Gnathostomes; Mouse, Fgf3, Fgf4, Fgf8,
and Fgf17 in the tailbud53; Chick, Fgf8 in the posterior neural plate and
presomitic mesoderm54; Xenopus, Fgf8, and Fgf20 in the tailbud55;
Zebrafish, Fgf8 in the tailbud and posterior somites44; Amphioxus;
Fgf9/16/20 patchily expressed in the neural tube, FgfE in a different
patch of the neural tube, FgfC in the tailbud.56 DV, dorsal-ventral;
FGF, fibroblast growth factor; Hh, Hedgehog (Hh); RA, retinoic acid
1030
LEUNG AND SHIMELD

exactly this work needs more study, but it suggests a model in
which developmental time regulates Hox cluster chromatin
state, which is then acted on by other signals. Anterior spinal
cord cells derive from progenitors that have fewer Hox genes
accessible for transcription, while more posterior cells derive
from progenitors that have more Hox genes accessible. Acces-
sible Hox genes might then be regulated by signals like RA
and FGF. The homeobox gene Cdx is a good candidate for
mediating FGF/Gdf11 regulation of Hox,63,64 and RA probably
directly regulates many Hox genes through RA responsive ele-
ments identified in Hox gene enhancers.65 In addition, some
studies suggest the Hox genes may cross regulate, for example,
Hoxc6 and Hoxc9 appear to cross-repress each other and hence
establish the boundary between the thoracic and lumbar regions
of the spinal cord.66
4
| PATTERNING THE
VERTEBRATE SPINAL CORD: THE
DV AXIS
Spinal cord DV patterning has become a model for understand-
ing how morphogen signals may pattern a field of cells, with
experimental approaches and mathematical models integrating
signaling, downstream GRN interactions and developmental
time. For a detailed exploration of this the reader is referred to
recent reviews.10,67 Here, we will draw out the key points,
focusing on aspects that allow comparison to other animals and
hence evolutionary insight (Figure 2).
The spinal cord of amniote embryos is organized into a
series of DV progenitor (or stem cell) zones (Figure 3). Ven-
trally these are named p0-p3 and pMN, with the first four pro-
ducing interneurons and pMN producing motor neurons of
various sorts, plus some other cells. As a generality, these cells
are involved in controlling motor output (reviewed by Refer-
ence 12) Dorsally these are dP1-6, which primarily produce
interneurons involved in managing sensory input from the
PNS. Many of the target subpopulations of interneuron inner-
vation are known, as are the neurotransmitters they express.
The expression of numerous transcription factor genes have
also been mapped across these progenitor zones and the differ-
entiated cells they produce. There is insufficient space to docu-
ment this here: key aspects are shown in Figure 3, and the
reader is referred to recent reviews for more detail.12,68,69
The ventral spinal cord is dependent on the morphogen
Shh secreted from the floorplate and notochord, evidenced
by failure of ventral spinal cord patterning in Shh−/−mice.70
Other factors may also have contributions to ventral pattern-
ing including Eph/Ephrin signaling,71 and Chordin, which is
expressed in the notochord and inhibits Bmp signaling,72 but
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling mediated by Shh has a dominant
role. Pairs of cross-repressive transcription factor genes lie
downstream of the Shh signal. For example, Nkx2.2 and
Olig2 cross-repress to establish the boundary between the p3
and pMN zones; Nkx6.1 and Dbx2 cross-repress to establish
the boundary between p2 and p1; Nkx6.2 and Dbx1 cross-
repress to establish the boundary between p1 and p073,74;
Irx3 and Olig2 cross-repress to form p2/pMN boundary75;
Sp8 and Pax6 class I progenitor zone markers cross-repress
Nkx2.2 class II p3 zone marker to form pMN/p3 boundary.76
While these mechanisms are not fully resolved, it would
appear these transcription factors generally act by interacting
with Groucho/TLE repressors, and that as well as repressing
each other they also repress a broad swathe of other genes that
are normally expressed in other DV compartments.77 Receipt
of Shh signaling is presumed to be quantitative, mediated by a
balance between active and repressive forms of Gli proteins.
To add additional complexity, the three Gli proteins involved
(Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) have different abilities to produce active
and repressive forms, and their genes are also differently regu-
lated by Hh signaling. All this creates a dynamic regulatory
system that mathematical modelling suggests has interesting
properties, including bi-stable outputs and the ability to scale
across differently sized fields of cells.67,78
FIGURE 3
DV patterning of the vertebrate spinal cord. To the
right is a schematic cross section of a spinal cord, with signaling
molecules and sources shown on one side, and the 11 progenitor zones
shown on the other. To the left are the domains of expression of some
of the transcription factor genes involved in DV patterning of the
progenitor zones. Paralogue pairs are a similar shade of gray. Not all
known genes are shown, and it should be noted that many of the
domains of expression are dynamic, particularly in early development
when pattern is being established, and that their strength of expression
may vary within their domain of expression. For a more detailed recent
exploration, see Lai et al68 DV, dorsal-ventral
LEUNG AND SHIMELD
1031

Views on patterning of the dorsal spinal cord are more
controversial. The roof plate produces multiple signaling
molecules including Wnt1 and Wnt3, and Tgfβ members
including Bmp2, Bmp4, Bmp7, and Gdf7 (Figure 2). Tozer
et al79 proposed that the gradient and exposure time of
BMPs from the roof plate is responsible for patterning dorsal
spinal cord cells. However others have argued27 that the
nature of the BMPs (rather than just their concentration) is
responsible for cell type specification. BMP4 upregulates
pSmad1/5/8 more efficiently than BMP7, and ectopic
expression of Bmp4 increase the dl1 and dl2 populations
while ectopic Bmp7 and Gdf7 increases roof plate, dl1 and
dl3 populations. In addition to Tgfβ signals, Wnt signaling is
also involved in dorsal spinal cord patterning. The Wnt1/
Wnt3a double homozygous mutant shows loss of expression
of dI1 and dI2 markers LH2, Islet1, Math1, and Ngn1, and
gain of expression of dI3 markers Pax2, Lim1/2, and Mash1
in the dorsal spinal cord, while having no effect on roof plate
expression of Bmp4, Gdf7, and Msx1.80 This suggests a role
for Wnt signaling in dorsal patterning, though Wnt also
affects cell proliferation (see below). In summary, while
there are clearly roles for both Tgfβ and Wnt signaling in
development of the dorsal spinal cord progenitor cell zones,
exactly which signal does what and how, how they inter-
relate, and how this connects to proliferation, needs much
more study.
To make things even more complex, Wnt signaling also
induces the expression of Gli3, which generally represses
targets of Shh signaling.41,81 Thus, dorsal and ventral signals
are not independent entities, but potentially interact within
receiving cells. Furthermore, AP and DV patterning are also
interlinked. Posterior signals may block DV patterning from
commencing: for example, FGF regulates the expression of
Nkx1.2 in posterior cells, and this prevents cells from
responding to Shh signals until Nkx1.2 levels have dropped
sufficiently.82 RA also upregulates some progenitor cell
zone genes,83 and in vitro study shows that Shh expression
depends on RA concentration.84 These interactions coordinate
the progression from a relatively naïve tailbud progenitor, to
an AP- and DV-specified progenitor, and eventually on to a
differentiated cell.
5
| PATTERNING THE
VERTEBRATE SPINAL CORD: THE
ML AXIS, PROGENITOR CELL
MAINTENANCE, AND
DIFFERENTIATION
As AP and DV patterning progress, the spinal cord develops
in an “inside to outside” manner: undifferentiated prolifera-
tive cells lie ventricularly, forming progenitor cell zones
with DV pattern as discussed above (Figure 3). When these
cells divide, one or both daughter cells may migrate laterally
to differentiate. Cells born later in development migrate
through fields of earlier-differentiated cells to differentiate,
meaning cells born in the same progenitor cell zone but at
different times may migrate into different environments and
hence adopt different fates. In this way, multiple cell types
can form over time from the same progenitor cell population.
The best studied example of this is the pMN zone, where
motor neurons of different types, then later oligodendrocytes
are successively born from the same progenitor cell zone.85
Expression of SoxB1 genes marks neural stem cells, and
the SoxB1 gene Sox2 is sufficient to maintain progenitor cells
at the ventricular zone.86 Foxp2 and Foxp4 are required and
sufficient for neural differentiation, opposing SoxB1 activity,
and with Foxp-expressing cells repressing the expression of
junction protein genes such as N-cadherin, detaching from neu-
roepithelium and migrating laterally.87 Notch signaling controls
which cells undertake this transition, with sustained Notch sig-
naling needed to maintain progenitor cells in the progenitor
zones.49,88 From a cell-to-cell interaction point of view, Isom-
ura et al89 have shown through single-cell bioluminescence
imaging of progenitors that Notch-Dll signaling can entrain an
intracellular Hes1 oscillating negative feedback loop. It would
be interesting to know what breaks the feedback loop to direct
the cell to differentiation.
What regulates Notch signaling, the continued mainte-
nance of progenitor cells, and the balance between rates of
proliferation and differentiation is not well understood but
many factors have been implicated, including several of the
signals that pattern AP and DV axes. As discussed above,
FGF maintains proliferative progenitors in the tailbud,90 pos-
sibly via Notch signaling,13 while RA promotes differentia-
tion.58 Shh signaling in the ventral neural tube is sufficient
and required for Jag2 expression, a Notch ligand. Jag2 activ-
ity prevents premature differentiation of oligodendrocytes
and inhibits differentiation of motor neuron progenitors.91
Notch signaling may also impact on the receipt of Shh sig-
naling, via effects of the localization of the Hh receptor Ptc
in the primary cilium.92
Bmp6 also speeds up cell cycle transition,27,93 indicating
Bmp may also be involved in ML development.27,93 Further-
more, Shh and Wnt signaling control different stages of the
cell cycle through regulation of cyclin D1, E, A, B, with Shh
being epistatic to Tcf3/4 (a Wnt-regulated transcription fac-
tor) when regulating cyclin D1.41 Cell cycle regulation in
neural tube development is more extensively reviewed else-
where.94,95 In addition, another ventral signal, Sema3B, may
also regulate progenitor maintenance.96
While still not fully pieced together, these data suggest
regulation of proliferation is complex, involves inputs from
both AP and DV signaling pathways, and may vary along
both AP and DV axes as well as through developmental time
1032
LEUNG AND SHIMELD

at the same axial location. As a generalization though, jawed
vertebrates use these mechanisms to maintain a population
of ventricular progenitors, which continue to divide and pro-
duce new differentiating cells. This allows embryos to make
more cells and different types of cells, both components of a
complex CNS. It may also allow them to set progenitor cell
populations aside with the potential for these to persist into
the adult and engage in the repair of damaged spinal cords
(reviewed by Reference 97).
6
| OUTGROUPS AND
EVOLUTIONARY ORIGINS: SPINAL
CORDS, CELL TYPES, AND
DEVELOPMENT IN OTHER
CHORDATES
Among living animals, cyclostomes (lampreys and hagfishes)
represent the earliest diverging lineage of vertebrates. Two
other living lineages share phylum Chordata with the verte-
brates: cephalochordates (amphioxus) and tunicates (including
sea squirts). Their evolutionary relationships are shown in
Figure 1, and they offer a window into the timing and genetic
basis of evolutionary change in spinal cord patterning.
Lampreys are moderately well studied and in many respects
similar to jawed vertebrates, but with important differences.
For example, they appear to have a different history of gene
and genome duplication, and lack myelination and hence are
assumed to have differences in glial cell development.98,99 The
hindbrain is segmented into rhombomeres with many similari-
ties to those of jawed vertebrates, including patterns of Hox
expression and neural crest organization.100-102 Adult spinal
cords are quite well studied as a model for understanding reflex
circuitry and regeneration,103,104 and found to have a variety of
identified cell types (Figure 4: discussed more below). The sea
squirt Ciona is very well studied, but like others in its lineage
the spinal cord region of its CNS is secondarily reduced and
without neurons or a tailbud growth zone (Figure 1). This
derived status limits its use in understanding ancestral spinal
cord patterning. Amphioxus has been quite well studied and
offers significant insight into the prevertebrate condition. Limi-
tations are that most studies have focused on embryos with
adult spinal cord cell types not well described, and that most
embryogenesis studies focus on the anterior CNS, and it is
questionable whether this region is comparable to the spinal
cord, or instead homologous to the hindbrain.
6.1 | Nerve cell types in adult lamprey and
amphioxus spinal cords
Traditionally, the function of neurons are inferred from the type
of neurotransmitters they secrete (Table 1), with glutamatergic
rhythm-generating neurons signaling to acetylcholinergic motor
neurons, and to glycinergic commissural neurons to inhibit
motor neurons on the contralateral side.12,118 However, recent
studies have shown co-expression of two neurotransmitters in a
single neuron,119 with a comprehensive zebrafish study117
identifying a small population of neurons with three neurotrans-
mitters, acetylcholine, GABA, and glutamate. Hence, while
neurotransmitter distributions can help illustrate the number of
different cell types, relying on them alone as an indication of
cell homology may be problematic.
Figure 4 shows schematic cross sections of spinal cords of
amphioxus and lamprey, compared to a zebrafish. Lampreys
show similarity to other vertebrates (Figure 4 and references
FIGURE 4
Cross sections of adult spinal cords showing anatomy
and cell types. A simple phylogenetic tree on the left shows the
evolutionary relationships of the taxa. Adult spinal cord cross-section
anatomy and cell type are shown on the right. Each type of neuron is only
marked in one of either hemisegment. The dots only represent the general
distribution and presence of the types of neurons, and not the numbers of
expressing cells. Tunicates are not shown, as their spinal cord regresses
before they reach adulthood. Data sources: Amphioxus; GABAergic
neuron,105 serotonergic neuron,106 dopaminergic neurons not found in
spinal cord,107 no data on other types of neurons. Lamprey; glutamatergic,
glutamate-glycine, glutamate-GABA neurons,108 dopamine-GABA
neurons,109 dopamine neurons,110 dopamine-glutamate neurons,111
aspartate, aspartate-GABA neurons,112 glycine, glycine-GABA
neurons,113 cholinergic neurons.114 Larval data instead of adult for
serotoninergic and GABAergic neurons.115,116 Zebrafish117
LEUNG AND SHIMELD
1033

therein), with a diversity of cell types as assessed by neurotrans-
mitter complements. There are few data on neurotransmitter
distributions in adult amphioxus, limited studies showing
GABAergic,105 dopaminergic, and serotonergic106,107 neuron
distributions. Other studies have characterized amphioxus adult
neurons by their immunoreactivity to a variety of neuropeptides
including arginine vasopressin, oxytocin, angiotensin II, chole-
cystokinin,
urotensin,
natriuretic
peptide,
FMRFamide,
neuropeptide Y, calretinin, and acetylated tubulin.120-124 How-
ever, these are not that informative for comparison across taxa as
similar data from other species are not well developed. There are
more data on embryonic and larval amphioxus,125 showing that
glutamatergic, serotoninergic, GABAergic, glycinergic, and
acetylcholinergic neurons can all be identified in the anterior
CNS. However, none were identified more posteriorly. As con-
sidered more below, it is the posterior region that may be directly
comparable to the spinal cord of vertebrates, with anterior
regions potentially homologous to fore/mid brain and hindbrain.
A possible explanation for the absence of neurotransmitter posi-
tive cells in posterior regions is that posterior cells had yet to dif-
ferentiate and take on an identity. Irrespective, it means caution
is needed in comparison between current understanding of neu-
rotransmitter distributions, and more work is needed on the pos-
terior larval and adult CNS of amphioxus.
6.2 | AP spinal cord patterning in lampreys,
sea squirts, and amphioxus
Mechanisms of AP spinal cord patterning have not been well
studied in lamprey embryos, although what is known is con-
sistent with a general similarity to jawed vertebrates.
Embryos grow from anterior to posterior via a tailbud, for-
ming new somites and spinal cord over more than 2 weeks
of development. RA appears to be synthesized by somite
cells52 and Hox gene expression has been identified in the
hindbrain and spinal cord, though posterior Hox genes have
not been well studied.100,102,126
Some Ciona Hox genes are expressed in the CNS, but
the ascidian Hox cluster is fragmented127,128 and this is not
an ancestral state. Manipulation of RA and FGF signaling in
Ciona can affect AP patterning, including Hox expres-
sion.129,130 Amphioxus Hox genes are expressed in a nested
pattern in the CNS, and in the genome are located in a single
canonical cluster.131,132 There is anteriorization of Hox1,
Hox2, Hox3, Hox4, and Hox6 expression in the neural tube
when embryos are treated with RA. Hox14 is also responsive
to RA even though it is only expressed in the posterior noto-
chord, gut, and cerebral vesicle at larval stage.133,134 Several
Wnt genes show tailbud expression,46,135 though only lim-
ited manipulation of Wnt signaling has been conducted in
amphioxus to date136 and we do not know whether Wnt reg-
ulates Hox. FGF inhibition alone does not seem to have an
effect on Hox1 expression but when coupled with an RA
antagonist there is no Hox1 expression in the neural plate.137
This study also found no evidence for opposing effects of
RA and FGF on AP patterning in amphioxus, since inhibi-
tion of FGF caused loss of expression of typical downstream
genes ER81, Erm, Pea3, and Sprouty, but these remained
unchanged when RA was inhibited. Similarly, RA inhibition
did not affect Cdx and Xlox. In the larval stage of amphi-
oxus, GABA-immunoreactive neurons exist in clusters along
the neural tube posterior to the cerebral vesicle boundary.
Exposure to BMS493, an RA antagonist, has a post-
eriorizing effect on these cells with the gain of an extra clus-
ter, while RA treatment has an anteriorizing effect, with
three GABA clusters lost.138 Tlx and Prdm12 seem to have
anteriorized expression in the neural tube under a high con-
centration of RA. When RA signaling is inhibited, their neu-
ral tube expression is lost or reduced.139
A consideration when comparing the outcomes of these
experiments to studies of vertebrates, including lampreys, is
whether homologous regions of the CNS are being com-
pared, particularly with respect to the hindbrain and spinal
cord. The primary pigment spot of amphioxus develops at
about the level of the boundary between somite 4 and somite
5, and many studies focus on cells anterior to this point.
However, this region is within the domain of Hox1 and
Hox3 expression, with the anterior boundary of Hox4 map-
ping around the level of somite 6.132 If we consider Hox
gene expression boundaries as landmarks between lineages,
this region would be homologous to the vertebrate hindbrain
and not the spinal cord. Spinal cord would be homologous
to regions posterior to about somite 6/7. Hence, some com-
parisons between vertebrate spinal cord and amphioxus CNS
have to be made cautiously, acknowledging the lack of cer-
tainty around what exactly is, and is not, homologous.
6.3 | DV spinal cord patterning in lampreys,
sea squirts, and amphioxus
Lamprey, amphioxus, and sea squirt embryos all show DV
polarization of the spinal cord regions of their CNS. In most
lineages, orthologous signaling molecules are also expressed
in similar positions as in jawed vertebrates. In lamprey, the
spinal cord is exposed to dorsal Bmp and Wnt signaling,37,45
with Hh localized to notochord and floor plate.20,140 Hh is
TABLE 1
Common types of neurotransmitters
Excitatory
Inhibitory
Modulatory
Glutamate
Glycine
Acetylcholine
Aspartate
GABA
Noradrenaline
Nitric Oxide
Serotonin
Dopamine
1034
LEUNG AND SHIMELD

also expressed by notochord cells in Ciona,141 and by noto-
chord and floor plate cells in amphioxus,22 while both Bmp
and Wnt gene expression in amphioxus is consistent with a
role in dorsal patterning.21,38 The spinal cord is thus
bounded across the DV axis by the expression of the same
signals in all chordates.
Lamprey homologues of some spinal cord DV patterning
genes have also been studied. The Hh receptor, Patched is
expressed in the ventral-medial neural tube142 and a Gli gene
that is probably orthologous to Gli3 is expressed in the dor-
sal neural tube.20 These data imply lamprey spinal cord is
patterned by Hh signaling, though this has yet to be vali-
dated experimentally. Hammond et al142 also showed
Engrailed, a V1 neuron marker in jawed vertebrates, is
expressed in the ventral-medial neural tube, consistent with
the presence of a homologous cell population. Pax3/7, a
dl2-6 marker, is expressed in the dorsal neural tube,143 while
OligA is expressed in dorsal and ventral spinal cord,11 para-
lleling jawed vertebrate Olig gene expression in pMN and
dl1-3.69 An insightful recent study confirms that Pax6 and
Nkx2.2 are expressed in the spinal cord, and in addition
showed a specific cell population in the ventral spinal cord
expresses Hb9, a MN marker from the Mnx homeobox gene
family.144 Although the spinal cord region has been over-
looked in many other studies, hindbrain expression of other
neural tube patterning genes has been demonstrated, includ-
ing Msx, Dbx, Wnt5, Dlx, Gsh, and Isl, and these are likely
to extend into the spinal cord.20,45,145,146 These data com-
bined suggest many aspects of DV spinal cord patterning are
conserved between lampreys and jawed vertebrates.
As considered above, amphioxus has a much simpler
CNS than any vertebrate, with fewer cells and probably
also fewer types of cells. ML progenitor zones are lacking
(see section 6.4), with evidence instead suggesting that
individual cell types differentiate in situ across the DV
axis. Nevertheless, studies have shown similarities in gene
expression patterns to vertebrates, the most comprehensive
being a study focused on midneurula stage.147 This
showed that:
• Hh, Nkx2.1, Nkx6, and Gsc are expressed by the floor
plate.
• Six3/6, Lhx2/9b, Zic, Msx, Pax2/5/8, and Pax3/7 are
expressed in the peripheral neural plate, which will
become the dorsal neural tube as the plate folds.
• Pou3f, Sim, FoxD, Meis, Lef, Lhx1/5, Hox3, Hox6, and
FoxB are expressed in the internal neural plate, which will
be the ventral neural tube.
• Otx, Gbx, Fezf, Irx, Pax4/6, Six3/6, Nkx2.2, Meis, Rx,
Hox1, Wnt3, Wnt7, Nova, and Ebf/COE are expressed in
both internal and peripheral neural plate.
Broadly speaking, these patterns correspond to the relative
expression of their orthologues in jawed vertebrates (though
there are also many differences). However, the focus on the
midneurula stage also means the neural plate at this time may be
homologous to the brain only, as discussed above. At later devel-
opmental stages many of these genes mark scattered, isolated
cells in the neural tube including Islet,148 Pax3/7,149 Evx,150
OligA,151 prdm12, engrailed,152 Tlx,153 Msx,154 Mnx/Hb9,155
and Err,134 with the exception of IrxA being expressed along the
whole neural tube at late neurula stage.151
To date there are insufficient functional studies for us to
determine if and how Hh, Bmp, and Wnt signaling might be
involved in DV patterning of the amphioxus spinal cord. Wnt
signaling has yet to be studied at the right developmental
stages. Bmp signaling is known to regulate the patterning of
epidermal neurons, though its impact on the spinal cord is not
clear.156 Hh signaling has been studied with the smoothened
inhibitor cyclopamine and no changes in neural patterning gene
expression were observed.157 However, the study focus was
gill slit formation, and the drug treatment time only a
20-minute window, which might explain this outcome.
Through generation of Hh−/−embryos using TALEN knock-
out, the role of Hh signaling in regulating left-right asymmetry
in amphioxus has also been studied.21 Again, neural patterning
was not the focus of the work so few relevant genes or devel-
opmental stages were analyzed. However, the study did show
that Err expression became symmetrical in the brain and was
lost from more posterior neural tube at the single stage shown.
This hints at a role for Hh signaling in amphioxus neural pat-
terning, though this needs more focused investigation with
appropriate marker genes.
6.4 | ML spinal cord patterning in lampreys,
sea squirts, and amphioxus: Differences in cell
number
As considered in section 5, jawed vertebrate embryos build
complexity into spinal cords via a ventricular progenitor cell
population that produces new cells over a relatively long
period of development. This yields spinal cords with multi-
ple cell layers, and gives the potential for different cell types
to be born at different times. Do other chordates operate in
similar mechanisms? Lamprey embryos do, and resemble
jawed vertebrates with a well-defined progenitor cell zone
visible both by cell morphology and gene expression in
brain and spinal cord.11,45 The mechanism is conserved,
since Notch signaling maintains progenitor cells at the ven-
tricular zone, with inhibition of Notch by DAPT causing loss
of progenitor cell markers PCNA, OligA, and HesB, and pre-
mature differentiation as seen by gain of the differentiation
markers CoeA and CoeB.11
LEUNG AND SHIMELD
1035

With their highly reduced posterior CNS, sea squirt
embryos do not have cells comparable to the ventricular pro-
genitors of jawed vertebrates. Amphioxus also lacks a ven-
tricular progenitor cell zone. Studies of cell proliferation
have failed to identify more than a few scattered dividing
cells,158 while Notch signaling is lost early form the neural
plate51,159 and DAPT inhibition of Notch signaling has no
clear effect on the CNS.156 This does not mean amphioxus
has no proliferation in the CNS. Tailbud cells continue to
produce new cells, scattered dividing cells in more anterior
regions of the CNS show not all these cells are postmitotic,
and the anterior brain does eventually develop more of a lay-
ered structure. However, a ventricular proliferative layer is
missing throughout the embryonic and larval spinal cord,
and this matches the anatomy of the adult spinal cord which,
judging from histological cross sections, remains one to two
cells thick from embryo to adult.125,160-162
6.5 | Conservation and innovation in chordate
spinal patterning
Overall, the picture that emerges from these studies is that
broad organization of the neural plate shows conserved
aspects between amphioxus and vertebrates. This includes
AP patterning by Hox and DV organization, as might be
expected from evidence for more ancient similarities in
basic nervous system development among bilaterally sym-
metrical animals.1 Markers of differentiated vertebrate cell
types also sometimes show expression in subsets of amphi-
oxus neurons. These may reflect conserved cell types, per-
haps also functionally related and expressing similar
neurotransmitters as discussed above, but this has not been
experimentally demonstrated. The role of patterning signals
is much less clear and in need of better experimental vali-
dation,
especially
those
involved
in
the
DV
axis.
Irrespective of the outcome of such work though, it is clear
TABLE 2
Paralogues performing different roles in gnathostomes
Gene family
Types of paralogue divergence
Paralogue expression domain(s)
References
Neurog
Specialization,
Neurog2 dP2-pMN
[164, 165, 166]
Neofunctionalization
Neurog1 dP2
Neurog3 p3
Msx
Specialization
Msx1 roof plate-dP5
Msx2 roof plate-dP1
[164]
Pax3/7
Specialization
Pax3 dP1-dP6
Pax7 dP2-dP6
[167, 168]
Pax2/5/8
Subfunctionalization
Pax2 dI4, dI6-V1
Pax8 dI4, dI6-V1169
[169]
Gata2/3
Specialization
Gata2 p2, V2
Gata3 V2
[170]
Gsx
Specialization
Gsx2 dP3-dP5
Gsx1 dP4-dP5
[166]
Dbx
Specialization
Dbx2 dP5-p1
Dbx1 dP6-p0
[164]
Nkx6
Specialization
Nkx6.2 p1-floorplate
Nkx6.1 p2-floorplate
[73]
Olig
Neofunctionalization
Olig3 dP1-3, p0, p2, p3, V3
Olig2 pMN
[171, 172]
Barhl
Redundancy
Barhl1 dI1
Barhl2 dI1
[173, 174]
Islet1/2
Neofunctionalization
Islet1 dI3,MN
Islet2 MN
[175, 176]
Lhx1/5
Redundancy
Lhx1 dI2, dI4, dI6-V1
Lhx5 dI2, dI4, dI6-V1
[177]
Lhx2/9
Redundancy
Lhx2 dI1
Lhx9 dI1
[178]
Evx1/2
Neofunctionalization
Evx1 dI1, V0
Evx2 V0
[179, 180]
Tlx1/3
Neofunctionalization
Tlx3 dI3, dI5
Tlx1 dI5
[181, 182, 183]
1036
LEUNG AND SHIMELD

is that amphioxus does not develop ventricular progenitor
cell layer as seen in vertebrate. Cells here are not divided
into DV zones, rather cells are patterned at the level of indi-
vidual differentiating cells.
7
| A ROLE FOR GENE
DUPLICATION IN SPINAL CORD
EVOLUTION
It has long been thought that early vertebrate evolution
was marked by extensive gene duplication, with broad com-
parisons of syntenic and paralogous gene organization
between jawed vertebrate and amphioxus genomes seen
by most authors as showing this had occurred through
two rounds of genome duplication, the “2R” hypothesis.163
New genes offer the potential for new function (neo-
functionalization), and can diverge through splitting ances-
tral functions between duplicates (subfunctionalization) or
having duplicates maintaining broad ancestral functions with
at least one becoming restricted to a more distinct function
(specialization; Table 2). How 2R gene duplication relates to
evolutionary change in development and morphology has
been hard to pin down, however, since both happened so
long ago and intermediate lineages have gone extinct,
meaning relating the timings of duplication, potential
neofunctionalization/subfunctionalization/specialization and
morphology is tricky. Recent observation suggests that spe-
cialization occurs mostly in neural tissue, through gain in
regulatory elements producing more complex GRNs.184
Amphioxus and tunicates predate 2R and tend to have
single copies of transcription factor family genes, expect
where secondary loss has occurred.163,185 The position of
lampreys with respect to 2R has also been debated. Lam-
prey genes often fail to resolve well in molecular phyloge-
netic analyses,186 and some have suggested additional
and/or independent duplications in the lamprey lineage
(187,188), though more recently it was concluded that lam-
preys share the 2R duplications with jawed vertebrates
after comparing the lamprey genome with a reconstructed
ancestral Amniota genome.189 Irrespective, it is clear lam-
preys do have more copies in many transcription factor
gene families than amphioxus or sea squirts. Many of the
jawed vertebrate paralogues are expressed by different
cell populations in the spinal cord (Figure 3 and Table 2),
as assessed by in situ hybridization (summarized by Ref-
erence 68,69) and more recently by single-cell sequenc-
ing.190 Some of this could represent subfunctionalization
of original broader expression patterns into subdomains,
however some must also be neofunctionalization and/or
specialization, for example, the paralogues Nkx6.1 and
Nkx6.2, and Dbx1 and Dbx2, overlap but are functionally
distinct, setting up the interneuron progenitor zones p0,
p1, and p2.69 This would not be possible in amphioxus,
with only one copy of each, and the duplication and reso-
lution of Nkx6 and Dbx into interacting pairs may have
allowed the evolution of new interneuron domains.
8
| CONCLUSIONS/FUTURE
PERSPECTIVES: EVOLUTIONARY
CHANGE IN SPINAL CORD
PATTERNING
Comparing spinal cord development across the three chor-
date lineages (Figure 1) reveals both conservation and
change. The general AP and DV polarization of the spinal
cord is conserved, with signaling molecules expressed by
homologous tissues in similar positions (Figure 2). From this
we can infer the common ancestor of vertebrates had tailbud
mediated posterior growth, a DV axis framed by cells
expressing Hh, Bmp, and Wnt signals, and an AP axis
framed by RA and FGF. Downstream from these signals
conservation is less apparent, and differences between line-
ages lead us to hypothesize a set of evolutionary innovations
that underlie vertebrate spinal cord development.
First, considering the AP axis, RA has a role in regulating
Hox in both amphioxus and Ciona, showing this was likely pre-
sent in the chordate common ancestor. Wnt signaling has a more
ancient role in posterior specification and expression of Wnt
ligand genes in amphioxus is consistent with a role in Hox regu-
lation (though this has yet to be experimentally demonstrated).
FGF has a role in posterior regulation in both amphioxus and
Ciona, showing this is also likely ancestral, though it is not yet
clear how much of an influence it had on the Hox genes. In this
context, it may be notable that comparison of vertebrate and
amphioxus Hox cluster regulation suggests an important differ-
ence in the regulatory regions that lie outside the cluster.191 This
suggests aspects of FGF regulation of Hox may be vertebrate-
specific. Understanding whether and how FGF regulates Hox in
lamprey and amphioxus would resolve this.
Second, patterning downstream of DV signals looks to be
more elaborate in vertebrates. This suggests differences in the
GRNs responsible for patterning and differentiation of neural
cells. This might reflect new roles for divergent paralogues fol-
lowing 2R duplication, incorporation of new genes into GRNs,
and/or new regulatory connections between genes already
involved in spinal cord development in the common ances-
tor.184 Understanding the regulatory connections between sig-
nals and targets in lamprey and amphioxus, and between
transcription factors in the DV GRN, would answer this.
Third, progenitor cell maintenance and ML organization
look quite different between vertebrates and other chordates.
Lampreys are similar to jawed vertebrates, with ventricular pro-
genitor cells divided into progenitor zones with proliferation
under Notch regulation, and giving rise to subset populations
of neurons and glia patterned by DV signals. These were there-
fore present in some form in the common ancestor of
LEUNG AND SHIMELD
1037

vertebrates, however Ciona and amphioxus show no ventricu-
lar progenitor cell layer in the spinal cord, and hence no pro-
genitor cell zones. This suggests that a major innovation in
vertebrate spinal cord evolution was the origin of a cohesive
ventricular progenitor cell pool, able to produce cells over a
long period of development. Understanding this third change
means comparing how progenitor cell maintenance and prolif-
eration are controlled in vertebrates and other chordates; chal-
lenging at present since neither is well understood.
Furthermore, as discussed above in section 5, prolifera-
tion and DV patterning are linked in vertebrates. A simple
hypothesis arising form this is that, primitively, DV signals
such as Hh directly regulated differentiation of early neural
plate cells into specific cell types. In vertebrates, this has
evolved by insertion of a progenitor cell stage with new reg-
ulatory connections between patterning and proliferation.
Evolution of the DV GRN would parallel this, incorporating
new paralogues and new connections, and perhaps generat-
ing a system with the feedback and cross-repressive proper-
ties allowing the sudden state changes and scaling necessary
to divide a spinal cord into discrete zones of cells.
While these hypotheses are speculative, they make predic-
tions about ancestral regulatory connections and are hence test-
able by dissecting gene regulation in multiple lineages. With
the recent development of methods for manipulating genes and
regulatory elements in amphioxus and lamprey,100,192-197 plus
application of genome-wide methods to identify regulatory
landscapes,184 this is rapidly becoming tractable.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Study of chordate nervous systems in our laboratory is
funded by the BBSRC, the John Fell Fund, and the Elizabeth
Hannah Jenkinson Fund. We apologize to the many col-
leagues whose work, due to space limitations, has been
referenced via citation of other review articles.
ORCID
Brigid Leung
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8111-0994
Sebastian M. Shimeld
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0195-
7536
REFERENCES
1. Holland LZ, Carvalho JE, Escriva H, et al. Evolution of bilaterian
central nervous systems: a single origin? EvoDevo. 2013;4:27.
2. Shimeld SM, Holland PW. Vertebrate innovations. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2000;97:4449-4452.
3. Gans
C,
Northcutt
RG.
Neural
crest
and
the
origin
of
vertebrates—a new head. Science. 1983;220:268-273.
4. Northcutt RG, Gans C. The genesis of neural crest and epidermal
Placodes—a reinterpretation of vertebrate origins. Q Rev Biol.
1983;58:1-28.
5. Green SA, Simoes-Costa M, Bronner ME. Evolution of verte-
brates as viewed from the crest. Nature. 2015;520:474-482.
6. Patthey C, Schlosser G, Shimeld SM. The evolutionary history of
vertebrate cranial placodes-I: cell type evolution. Dev Biol. 2014;
389:82-97.
7. Schlosser G, Patthey C, Shimeld SM. The evolutionary history of
vertebrate cranial placodes II. Evolution of ectodermal patterning.
Dev Biol. 2014;389:98-119.
8. Metzis V, Steinhauser S, Pakanavicius E, et al. Nervous system
regionalization entails axial allocation before neural differentia-
tion. Cell. 2018;175:1105-1118 e1117.
9. Arendt D, Tosches MA, Marlow H. From nerve net to nerve ring,
nerve cord and brain—evolution of the nervous system. Nat Rev
Neurosci. 2016;17:61-72.
10. Gouti M, Metzis V, Briscoe J. The route to spinal cord cell types:
a tale of signals and switches. Trends Genet. 2015;31:282-289.
11. Lara-Ramirez R, Perez-Gonzalez C, Anselmi C, Patthey C,
Shimeld SM. A Notch-regulated proliferative stem cell zone in
the developing spinal cord is an ancestral vertebrate trait. Devel-
opment. 2019;46:dev166595.
12. Goulding M. Circuits controlling vertebrate locomotion: moving
in a new direction. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2009;10:507-518.
13. Akai J, Halley PA, Storey KG. FGF-dependent Notch signaling
maintains the spinal cord stem zone. Genes Dev. 2005;19:2877-2887.
14. Deschamps J, Duboule D. Embryonic timing, axial stem cells, chro-
matin dynamics, and the Hox clock. Genes Dev. 2017;31:1406-1416.
15. Bai CB, Auerbach W, Lee JS, Stephen D, Joyner AL. Gli2, but
not Gli1, is required for initial Shh signaling and ectopic activa-
tion of the Shh pathway. Development. 2002;129:4753-4761.
16. Koide T, Hayata T, Cho KW. Negative regulation of Hedgehog
signaling by the cholesterogenic enzyme 7-dehydrocholesterol
reductase. Development. 2006;133:2395-2405.
17. Al Oustah A, Danesin C, Khouri-Farah N, et al. Dynamics of
sonic hedgehog signaling in the ventral spinal cord are controlled
by intrinsic changes in source cells requiring sulfatase 1. Devel-
opment. 2014;141:1392-1403.
18. Sun AX, Londono R, Hudnall ML, Tuan RS, Lozito TP. Differ-
ences in neural stem cell identity and differentiation capacity
drive divergent regenerative outcomes in lizards and salamanders.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018;115:E8256-E8265.
19. Gillis JA, Hall BK. A shared role for sonic hedgehog signalling
in patterning chondrichthyan gill arch appendages and tetrapod
limbs. Development. 2016;143:1313-1317.
20. Sugahara F, Aota S, Kuraku S, et al. Involvement of Hedgehog
and FGF signalling in the lamprey telencephalon: evolution of
regionalization and dorsoventral patterning of the vertebrate fore-
brain. Development. 2011;138:1217-1226.
21. Hu G, Li G, Wang H, Wang Y. Hedgehog participates in the
establishment of left-right asymmetry during amphioxus develop-
ment by controlling Cerberus expression. Development. 2017;
144:4694-4703.
22. Shimeld SM. The evolution of the hedgehog gene family in chor-
dates: insights from amphioxus hedgehog. Dev Genes Evol.
1999;209:40-47.
23. Augsburger A, Schuchardt A, Hoskins S, Dodd J, Butler S.
BMPs as mediators of roof plate repulsion of commissural neu-
rons. Neuron. 1999;24:127-141.
24. Butler SJ, Dodd J. A role for BMP heterodimers in roof plate-
mediated repulsion of commissural axons. Neuron. 2003;38:
389-401.
1038
LEUNG AND SHIMELD

25. Duval N, Daubas P, de Carbon CB, et al. Msx1 and Msx2 act as
essential activators of Atoh1 expression in the murine spinal
cord. Development. 2014;141:1726-1736.
26. Namm A, Arend A, Aunapuu M. BMP-2 and BMP-4 signalling
in the developing spinal cord of human and rat embryos. Folia
Morphol. 2015;74:359-364.
27. Andrews MG, Del Castillo LM, Ochoa-Bolton E, Yamauchi K,
Smogorzewski J, Butler SJ. BMPs direct sensory interneuron
identity in the developing spinal cord using signal-specific not
morphogenic activities. Elife. 2017;6:e30647.
28. Hu Q, Ueno N, Behringer RR. Restriction of BMP4 activity
domains in the developing neural tube of the mouse embryo.
EMBO Rep. 2004;5:734-739.
29. Chizhikov VV, Millen KJ. Control of roof plate formation by
Lmx1a in the developing spinal cord. Development. 2004;131:
2693-2705.
30. Nitzan
E,
Avraham
O,
Kahane
N,
Ofek
S,
Kumar
D,
Kalcheim C. Dynamics of BMP and Hes1/Hairy1 signaling in the
dorsal neural tube underlies the transition from neural crest to
definitive roof plate. BMC Biol. 2016;14:23.
31. Dick A, Meier A, Hammerschmidt M. Smad1 and Smad5 have
distinct roles during dorsoventral patterning of the zebrafish
embryo. Dev Dyn. 1999;216:285-298.
32. Merkes C, Turkalo TK, Wilder N, et al. Ewing sarcoma ewsa
protein regulates chondrogenesis of Meckel's cartilage through
modulation of Sox9 in zebrafish. PLoS ONE. 2015;10:e0116627.
33. Thisse B, Thisse C. 2004. Fast release clones: a high throughput
expression analysis. ZFIN Direct Data Submission.
34. Schmid B, Furthauer M, Connors SA, et al. Equivalent genetic
roles for bmp7/snailhouse and bmp2b/swirl in dorsoventral pat-
tern formation. Development. 2000;127:957-967.
35. Shawi M, Serluca FC. Identification of a BMP7 homolog in
zebrafish expressed in developing organ systems. Gene Expr Pat-
terns. 2008;8:369-375.
36. Davidson AJ, Postlethwait JH, Yan Y-L, et al. Isolation of
zebrafish GDF7 and comparative genetic mapping of genes
belonging to the growth/differentiation factor 5, 6, 7 subgroup of
the TGF-β superfamily. Genome Res. 1999;9:121-129.
37. McCauley DW, Bronner-Fraser M. Conservation and divergence
of BMP2/4 genes in the lamprey: expression and phylogenetic
analysis suggest a single ancestral vertebrate gene. Evol Dev.
2004;6:411-422.
38. Panopoulou
GD,
Clark
MD,
Holland
LZ,
Lehrach
H,
Holland ND. AmphiBMP2/4, an amphioxus bone morphogenetic
protein closely related to Drosophila decapentaplegic and verte-
brate BMP2 and BMP4: insights into evolution of dorsoventral
axis specification. Dev Dyn. 1998;213:130-139.
39. Parr BA, Shea MJ, Vassileva G, McMahon AP. Mouse Wnt
genes exhibit discrete domains of expression in the early embry-
onic CNS and limb buds. Development. 1993;119:247-261.
40. Shinozuka T, Takada R, Yoshida S, Yonemura S, Takada S. Wnt
produced by stretched roof-plate cells is required for the promo-
tion of cell proliferation around the central canal of the spinal
cord. Development. 2019;146:dev159343:dev159343.
41. Alvarez-Medina R, Cayuso J, Okubo T, Takada S, Marti E. Wnt
canonical pathway restricts graded Shh/Gli patterning activity
through the regulation of Gli3 expression. Development. 2008;
135:237-247.
42. Duncan RN, Panahi S, Piotrowski T, Dorsky RI. Identification of
Wnt genes expressed in neural progenitor zones during zebrafish
brain development. PLoS ONE. 2015;10:e0145810.
43. Tanaka H, Morimura R, Ohshima T. Dpysl2 (CRMP2) and Dpysl3
(CRMP4) phosphorylation by Cdk5 and DYRK2 is required for
proper positioning of Rohon-Beard neurons and neural crest cells
during neurulation in zebrafish. Dev Biol. 2012;370:223-236.
44. Fior R, Maxwell AA, Ma TP, et al. The differentiation and move-
ment of presomitic mesoderm progenitor cells are controlled by
Mesogenin 1. Development. 2012;139:4656-4665.
45. Guerin A, d'Aubenton-Carafa Y, Marrakchi E, et al. Neuro-
development genes in lampreys reveal trends for forebrain evolu-
tion in craniates. PLoS ONE. 2009;4:e5374.
46. Somorjai IM, Martí-Solans J, Diaz-Gracia M, et al. Wnt evolu-
tion and function shuffling in liberal and conservative chordate
genomes. Genome Biol. 2018;19:98.
47. Machado CB, Kanning KC, Kreis P, et al. Reconstruction of
phrenic neuron identity in embryonic stem cell-derived motor
neurons. Development. 2014;141:784-794.
48. Hämmerle B, Tejedor FJ. A novel function of DELTA-NOTCH
signalling mediates the transition from proliferation to neuro-
genesis in neural progenitor cells. PloS ONE. 2007;2:e1169.
49. Appel B, Givan LA, Eisen JS. Delta-Notch signaling and lateral
inhibition in zebrafish spinal cord development. BMC Dev Biol.
2001;1:13.
50. Kim H, Shin J, Kim S, Poling J, Park HC, Appel B. Notch-
regulated oligodendrocyte specification from radial glia in the
spinal cord of zebrafish embryos. Dev Dyn. 2008;237:2081-2089.
51. Holland LZ, Rached LA, Tamme R, et al. Characterization and
developmental expression of the amphioxus homolog of Notch
(AmphiNotch): evolutionary conservation of multiple expression
domains in amphioxus and vertebrates. Dev Biol. 2001;232:
493-507.
52. Castillo HA, Cravo RM, Azambuja AP, et al. Insights into the
organization of dorsal spinal cord pathways from an evolution-
arily conserved raldh2 intronic enhancer. Development. 2010;
137:507-518.
53. Wahl MB, Deng C, Lewandoski M, Pourquié O. FGF signaling
acts upstream of the NOTCH and WNT signaling pathways to
control segmentation clock oscillations in mouse somitogenesis.
Development. 2007;134:4033-4041.
54. Bertrand N, Médevielle F, Pituello F. FGF signalling controls the
timing of Pax6 activation in the neural tube. Development. 2000;
127:4837-4843.
55. Lin G, Slack JM. Requirement for Wnt and FGF signaling in
Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration. Dev Biol. 2008;316:323-335.
56. Bertrand S, Camasses A, Somorjai I, et al. Amphioxus FGF sig-
naling predicts the acquisition of vertebrate morphological traits.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;108:9160-9165.
57. Niehrs C. On growth and form: a Cartesian coordinate system of
Wnt and BMP signaling specifies bilaterian body axes. Develop-
ment. 2010;137:845-857.
58. Diez del Corral R, Olivera-Martinez I, Goriely A, Gale E,
Maden M, Storey K. Opposing FGF and retinoid pathways con-
trol ventral neural pattern, neuronal differentiation, and segmenta-
tion during body axis extension. Neuron. 2003;40:65-79.
59. Liu JP, Laufer E, Jessell TM. Assigning the positional identity of
spinal motor neurons: rostrocaudal patterning of Hox-c expres-
sion by FGFs, Gdf11, and retinoids. Neuron. 2001;32:997-1012.
LEUNG AND SHIMELD
1039

60. Bel-Vialar S, Itasaki N, Krumlauf R. Initiating Hox gene expres-
sion: in the early chick neural tube differential sensitivity to FGF
and RA signaling subdivides the HoxB genes in two distinct
groups. Development. 2002;129:5103-5115.
61. Diez Del Corral R, Morales AV. The multiple roles of FGF signal-
ing in the developing spinal cord. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2017;5:58.
62. Soshnikova N, Duboule D. Epigenetic temporal control of mouse
Hox genes in vivo. Science. 2009;324:1320-1323.
63. Gaunt SJ. Gdf11/Smad signalling and Cdx proteins cooperate to
activate the Hoxc8 early enhancer in HepG2 cells. Int J Dev Biol.
2017;61:427-432.
64. Neijts R, Amin S, van Rooijen C, Deschamps J. Cdx is crucial
for the timing mechanism driving colinear Hox activation and
defines a trunk segment in the Hox cluster topology. Dev Biol.
2017;422:146-154.
65. Krumlauf R. Hox genes and the hindbrain: a study in segments.
Curr Top Dev Biol. 2016;116:581-596.
66. Dasen JS, Liu JP, Jessell TM. Motor neuron columnar fate
imposed by sequential phases of Hox-c activity. Nature. 2003;
425:926-933.
67. Briscoe J, Small S. Morphogen rules: design principles of
gradient-mediated embryo patterning. Development. 2015;142:
3996-4009.
68. Lai HC, Seal RP, Johnson JE. Making sense out of spinal cord
somatosensory development. Development. 2016;143:3434-3448.
69. Alaynick WA, Jessell TM, Pfaff SL. SnapShot: spinal cord devel-
opment. Cell. 2011;146:178-178 e171.
70. Chiang C, Litingtung Y, Lee E, et al. Cyclopia and defective
axial patterning in mice lacking Sonic hedgehog gene function.
Nature. 1996;383:407-413.
71. Laussu J, Audouard C, Kischel A, et al. Eph/Ephrin signaling
controls progenitor identities in the ventral spinal cord. Neural
Dev. 2017;12:10.
72. Sasai Y, Lu B, Steinbeisser H, Geissert D, Gont LK, De
Robertis EM. Xenopus chordin: a novel dorsalizing factor acti-
vated by organizer-specific homeobox genes. Cell. 1994;79:
779-790.
73. Briscoe J, Pierani A, Jessell TM, Ericson J. A homeodomain pro-
tein code specifies progenitor cell identity and neuronal fate in
the ventral neural tube. Cell. 2000;101:435-445.
74. Sun T, Dong H, Wu L, Kane M, Rowitch DH, Stiles CD. Cross-
repressive interaction of the Olig2 and Nkx2. 2 transcription fac-
tors in developing neural tube associated with formation of a spe-
cific physical complex. J Neurosci. 2003;23:9547-9556.
75. Novitch BG, Chen AI, Jessell TM. Coordinate regulation of
motor neuron subtype identity and pan-neuronal properties by the
bHLH repressor Olig2. Neuron. 2001;31:773-789.
76. Li X, Liu Z, Qiu M, Yang Z. Sp8 plays a supplementary role to
Pax6 in establishing the pMN/p3 domain boundary in the spinal
cord. Development. 2014b;141:2875-2884.
77. Kutejova E, Sasai N, Shah A, Gouti M, Briscoe J. Neural progen-
itors adopt specific identities by directly repressing all alternative
progenitor transcriptional programs. Dev Cell. 2016;36:639-653.
78. Uygur A, Young J, Huycke TR, Koska M, Briscoe J, Tabin CJ.
Scaling pattern to variations in size during development of the
vertebrate neural tube. Dev Cell. 2016;37:127-135.
79. Tozer S, Le Dreau G, Marti E, Briscoe J. Temporal control of
BMP signalling determines neuronal subtype identity in the dor-
sal neural tube. Development. 2013;140:1467-1474.
80. Muroyama Y, Fujihara M, Ikeya M, Kondoh H, Takada S. Wnt
signaling plays an essential role in neuronal specification of the
dorsal spinal cord. Genes Dev. 2002;16:548-553.
81. Yu W, McDonnell K, Taketo MM, Bai CB. Wnt signaling deter-
mines ventral spinal cord cell fates in a time-dependent manner.
Development. 2008;135:3687–3696.
82. Sasai N, Kutejova E, Briscoe J. Integration of signals along orthogo-
nal axes of the vertebrate neural tube controls progenitor compe-
tence and increases cell diversity. PLoS Biol. 2014;12:e1001907.
83. Novitch BG, Wichterle H, Jessell TM, Sockanathan S. A require-
ment for retinoic acid-mediated transcriptional activation in ven-
tral neural patterning and motor neuron specification. Neuron.
2003;40:81-95.
84. Okada Y, Shimazaki T, Sobue G, Okano H. Retinoic-acid-con-
centration-dependent acquisition of neural cell identity during
in vitro differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells. Dev Biol.
2004;275:124-142.
85. Sockanathan S, Perlmann T, Jessell TM. Retinoid receptor signal-
ing in postmitotic motor neurons regulates rostrocaudal positional
identity and axonal projection pattern. Neuron. 2003;40:97-111.
86. Graham V, Khudyakov J, Ellis P, Pevny L. SOX2 functions to
maintain neural progenitor identity. Neuron. 2003;39:749-765.
87. Rousso DL, Pearson CA, Gaber ZB, et al. Foxp-mediated
suppression of N-cadherin regulates neuroepithelial character
and progenitor maintenance in the CNS. Neuron. 2012;74:
314-330.
88. Wettstein DA, Turner DL, Kintner C. The Xenopus homolog of
Drosophila suppressor of hairless mediates Notch signaling dur-
ing primary neurogenesis. Development. 1997;124:693-702.
89. Isomura A, Ogushi F, Kori H, Kageyama R. Optogenetic pertur-
bation and bioluminescence imaging to analyze cell-to-cell trans-
fer of oscillatory information. Genes Dev. 2017;31:524-535.
90. Mathis L, Kulesa PM, Fraser SE. FGF receptor signalling is
required to maintain neural progenitors during Hensen's node
progression. Nat Cell Biol. 2001;3:559-566.
91. Rabadan M, Cayuso J, Le Dreau G, et al. Jagged2 controls
thegeneration of motor neuron and oligodendrocyte progenitors
in the ventralspinal cord. Cell Death Differ. 2012;19:209.
92. Kong JH, Yang L, Dessaud E, et al. Notch activity modulates the
responsiveness of neural progenitors to sonic hedgehog signaling.
Dev Cell. 2015;33:373-387.
93. Le Dreau G, Saade M, Gutierrez-Vallejo I, Marti E. The strength
of SMAD1/5 activity determines the mode of stem cell division
in the developing spinal cord. J Cell Biol. 2014;204:591-605.
94. Molina A, Pituello F. Playing with the cell cycle to build the spi-
nal cord. Dev Biol. 2017;432:14-23.
95. Saade M, Blanco-Ameijeiras J, Gonzalez-Gobartt E, Marti E. A
centrosomal view of CNS growth. Development. 2018;145:
dev170613.
96. Arbeille E, Reynaud F, Sanyas I, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid-
derived Semaphorin3B orients neuroepithelial cell divisions in
the apicobasal axis. Nat Commun. 2015;6:6366.
97. Grandel H, Brand M. Comparative aspects of adult neural stem
cell activity in vertebrates. Dev Genes Evol. 2013;223:131-147.
98. Smith JJ, Kuraku S, Holt C, et al. Sequencing of the sea lamprey
(Petromyzon marinus) genome provides insights into vertebrate
evolution. Nat Genet. 2013;45:415-421.
99. Smith JJ, Timoshevskaya N, Ye C, et al. The sea lamprey
germline genome provides insights into programmed genome
1040
LEUNG AND SHIMELD

rearrangement and vertebrate evolution. Nat Genet. 2018;50:
270-277.
100. Parker HJ, Bronner ME, Krumlauf R. A Hox regulatory network
of hindbrain segmentation is conserved to the base of vertebrates.
Nature. 2014;514:490-493.
101. Parker HJ, Bronner ME, Krumlauf R. The vertebrate Hox gene
regulatory network for hindbrain segmentation: evolution and
diversification: coupling of a Hox gene regulatory network to
hindbrain segmentation is an ancient trait originating at the base
of vertebrates. Bioessays. 2016;38:526-538.
102. Parker HJ, De Kumar B, Green SA, et al. A Hox-TALE regula-
tory circuit for neural crest patterning is conserved across verte-
brates. Nat Commun. 2019;10:1189.
103. Herman PE, Papatheodorou A, Bryant SA, et al. Highly con-
served molecular pathways, including Wnt signaling, promote
functional recovery from spinal cord injury in lampreys. Sci Rep.
2018;8:742.
104. Shifamn MI, Selzer ME. Axon regeneration in the lamprey spinal
cord. In: So K-F, Xu X-M, eds. Neural Regeneration. Beijing:
Academic Press; 2015:57-72.
105. Anadón R, Adrio F, Rodríguez-Moldes I. Distribution of GABA
immunoreactivity in the central and peripheral nervous system of
amphioxus (Branchiostoma lanceolatum Pallas). J Comp Neurol.
1998;401:293-307.
106. Candiani S, Augello A, Oliveri D, et al. Immunocytochemical
localization of serotonin in embryos, larvae and adults of the
lancelet, Branchiostoma floridae. Histochem J. 2001;33:413-420.
107. Moret F, Guilland JC, Coudouel S, Rochette L, Vernier P. Distri-
bution of tyrosine hydroxylase, dopamine, and serotonin in the
central
nervous
system
of
amphioxus
(Branchiostoma
lanceolatum): implications for the evolution of catecholamine
systems in vertebrates. J Comp Neurol. 2004;468:135-150.
108. Fernández-López
B,
Villar-Cerviño
V,
Valle-Maroto
SM,
Barreiro-Iglesias A, Anadón R, Rodicio MC. The glutamatergic
neurons in the spinal cord of the sea lamprey: an in situ hybridi-
zation and immunohistochemical study. PLoS ONE. 2012;7:
e47898.
109. Barreiro-Iglesias A, Villar-Cerviño V, Anadón R, Rodicio MC.
Dopamine and γ-aminobutyric acid are colocalized in restricted
groups of neurons in the sea lamprey brain: insights into the early
evolution
of
neurotransmitter
colocalization
in
vertebrates.
J Anat. 2009b;215:601-610.
110. Fernández-López B, Romaus-Sanjurjo D, Cornide-Petronio ME,
Gómez-Fernández S, Barreiro-Iglesias A, Rodicio MC. Full ana-
tomical recovery of the dopaminergic system after a complete
spinal cord injury in lampreys. Neural Plast. 2015;2015:1-10.
111. Fernández-López B, Sobrido-Cameán D, Anadón R, Rodicio M,
Barreiro-Iglesias A. Restricted co-localization of glutamate and
dopamine in neurons of the adult sea lamprey brain. J Anat.
2017;231:776-784.
112. Villar-Cerviño V, Fernández-López B, Celina Rodicio M,
Anadón R. Aspartate-containing neurons of the brainstem and
rostral spinal cord of the sea lamprey Petromyzon marinus: distri-
bution and comparison with γ-aminobutyric acid. J Comp Neurol.
2014;522:1209-1231.
113. Villar-Cerviño
V,
Holstein
GR,
Martinelli
GP,
Anadón
R,
Rodicio MC. Glycine-immunoreactive neurons in the developing
spinal cord of the sea lamprey: comparison with the γ-aminobutyric
acidergic system. J Comp Neurol. 2008;508:112-130.
114. Quinlan KA, Buchanan JT. Cellular and synaptic actions of ace-
tylcholine in the lamprey spinal cord. J Neurophysiol. 2008;100:
1020-1031.
115. Barreiro-Iglesias A, Cornide-Petronio ME, Anadón R, Rodicio MC.
Serotonin and GABA are colocalized in restricted groups of neurons
in the larval sea lamprey brain: insights into the early evolution of
neurotransmitter colocalization in vertebrates. J Anat. 2009a;215:
435-443.
116. Cornide-Petronio ME, Fernández-López B, Barreiro-Iglesias A,
Rodicio MC. Traumatic injury induces changes in the expression
of the serotonin 1A receptor in the spinal cord of lampreys. Neu-
ropharmacology. 2014;77:369-378.
117. Pedroni A, Ampatzis K. 2019. Large scale analysis of the diver-
sity and complexity of the adult spinal cord neurotransmitter
typology. bioRxiv:518845.
118. Kiehn O. Decoding the organization of spinal circuits that control
locomotion. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2016;17:224-238.
119. Vaaga CE, Borisovska M, Westbrook GL. Dual-transmitter neu-
rons: functional implications of co-release and co-transmission.
Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2014;29:25-32.
120. Castro A, Becerra M, Manso MJ, Anadon R. Somatomotor sys-
tem of the adult amphioxus (Branchiostoma lanceolatum) rev-
ealed by an anticalretinin antiserum: an immunocytochemical
study. J Comp Neurol. 2004;477:161-171.
121. Castro A, Becerra M, Manso MJ, Anadon R. Neuronal organiza-
tion of the brain in the adult amphioxus (Branchiostoma
lanceolatum): a study with acetylated tubulin immunohistochem-
istry. J Comp Neurol. 2015;523:2211-2232.
122. Castro A, Manso MJ, Anadon R. Distribution of neuropeptide Y
immunoreactivity in the central and peripheral nervous systems
of amphioxus (Branchiostoma lanceolatum Pallas). J Comp Neu-
rol. 2003;461:350-361.
123. Pestarino M, Lucaroni B. FMRFamide-like immunoreactivity in
the central nervous system of the lancelet Branchiostoma
lanceolatum. Isr J Zool. 1996;42:S227-S234.
124. Uemura H, Tezuka Y, Hasegawa C, Kobayashi H. Immunohisto-
chemical investigation of neuropeptides in the central-nervous-
system of the amphioxus, Branchiostoma-Belcheri. Cell Tissue
Res. 1994;277:279-287.
125. Candiani S, Moronti L, Ramoino P, Schubert M, Pestarino M. A
neurochemical map of the developing amphioxus nervous sys-
tem. BMC Neurosci. 2012;13:59.
126. Pascual-Anaya J, Sato I, Sugahara F, et al. Hagfish and lamprey
Hox genes reveal conservation of temporal colinearity in verte-
brates. Nat Ecol Evol. 2018;2:859-866.
127. Ikuta T, Yoshida N, Satoh N, Saiga H. Ciona intestinalis Hox
gene cluster: its dispersed structure and residual colinear expres-
sion in development. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101:
15118-15123.
128. Sekigami Y, Kobayashi T, Omi A, et al. Hox gene cluster of the
ascidian, Halocynthia roretzi, reveals multiple ancient steps of
cluster disintegration during ascidian evolution. Zoological Lett.
2017;3:17.
129. Katsuyama Y, Wada S, Yasugi S, Saiga H. Expression of the
labial group Hox gene HrHox-1 and its alteration induced by reti-
noic acid in development of the ascidian Halocynthia roretzi.
Development. 1995;121:3197-3205.
130. Pasini A, Manenti R, Rothbacher U, Lemaire P. Antagonizing
retinoic acid and FGF/MAPK pathways control posterior body
LEUNG AND SHIMELD
1041

patterning in the invertebrate chordate Ciona intestinalis. PLoS
ONE. 2012;7:e46193.
131. Garcia-Fernandez J, Holland PW. Archetypal organization of the
amphioxus Hox gene cluster. Nature. 1994;370:563-566.
132. Wada H, Garcia-Fernandez J, Holland PWH. Colinear and seg-
mental expression of amphioxus Hox genes. Dev Biol. 1999;213:
131-141.
133. Pascual-Anaya J, Adachi N, Alvarez S, Kuratani S, D'Aniello S,
Garcia-Fernandez J. Broken colinearity of the amphioxus Hox
cluster. EvoDevo. 2012;3:28.
134. Schubert M, Holland ND, Laudet V, Holland LZ. A retinoic acid-
Hox hierarchy controls both anterior/posterior patterning and neuro-
nal specification in the developing central nervous system of the
cephalochordate amphioxus. Dev Biol. 2006;296:190-202.
135. Schubert M, Holland LZ, Stokes MD, Holland ND. Three amphi-
oxus Wnt genes (AmphiWnt3, AmphiWnt5, and AmphiWnt6)
associated with the tail bud: the evolution of somitogenesis in
chordates. Dev Biol. 2001;240:262-273.
136. Dailey SC, Kozmikova I, Somorjai IML. Amphioxus Sp5 is a
member of a conserved specificity protein complement and is
modulated by Wnt/beta-catenin signalling. Int J Dev Biol. 2017;
61:723-732.
137. Bertrand S, Aldea D, Oulion S, et al. Evolution of the role of RA
and FGF signals in the control of somitogenesis in chordates.
PLoS ONE. 2015;10:e0136587.
138. Zieger E, Candiani S, Garbarino G, Croce JC, Schubert M. Roles
of retinoic acid signaling in shaping the neuronal architecture of
the developing amphioxus nervous system. Mol Neurobiol. 2018;
55:5210-5229.
139. Carvalho JE, Lahaye F, Croce JC, Schubert M. CYP26 function
is required for the tissue-specific modulation of retinoic acid signal-
ing during amphioxus development. Int J Dev Biol. 2017;61:
733-747.
140. Kano S, Xiao JH, Osorio J, et al. Two lamprey hedgehog genes
share non-coding regulatory sequences and expression patterns
with Gnathostome hedgehogs. PLoS ONE. 2010;5:e13332.
141. Takatori N, Satou Y, Satoh N. Expression of hedgehog genes in
Ciona intestinalis embryos. Mech Dev. 2002;116:235-238.
142. Hammond KL, Baxendale S, McCauley DW, Ingham PW,
Whitfield TT. Expression of patched, prdm1 and engrailed in the
lamprey somite reveals conserved responses to Hedgehog signal-
ing. Evol Dev. 2009;11:27-40.
143. Kusakabe R, Kuratani S. The origin of epaxial/hypaxial distinction
of trunk skeletal muscle: implications from the gene expression pat-
terns in the lamprey embryos. Zoolog Sci. 2005;22:1402-1402.
144. Yuan T, York JR, McCauley DW. Gliogenesis in lampreys shares
gene regulatory interactions with oligodendrocyte development
in jawed vertebrates. Dev Biol. 2018;441:176-190.
145. Cerny R, Cattell M, Sauka-Spengler T, Bronner-Fraser M, Yu F,
Medeiros DM. Evidence for the prepattern/cooption model of
vertebrate jaw evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010;107:
17262-17267.
146. Shigetani Y, Sugahara F, Kawakami Y, Murakami Y, Hirano S,
Kuratani S. Heterotopic shift of epithelial-mesenchymal interac-
tions in vertebrate jaw evolution. Science. 2002;296:1316-1319.
147. Albuixech-Crespo B, Lopez-Blanch L, Burguera D, et al. Molec-
ular regionalization of the developing amphioxus neural tube
challenges major partitions of the vertebrate brain. PLoS Biol.
2017;15:e2001573.
148. Jackman WR, Kimmel CB. Coincident iterated gene expression
in the amphioxus neural tube. Evol Dev. 2002;4:366-374.
149. Holland LZ, Schubert M, Kozmik Z, Holland ND. AmphiPax3/7,
an amphioxus paired box gene: insights into chordate myogenesis,
neurogenesis, and the possible evolutionary precursor of definitive
vertebrate neural crest. Evol Dev. 1999;1:153-165.
150. Ferrier DE, Minguillon C, Cebrián C, Garcia-Fernandez J.
Amphioxus Evx genes: implications for the evolution of the
midbrain-hindbrain boundary and the chordate tailbud. Dev Biol.
2001b;237:270-281.
151. Beaster-Jones L, Kaltenbach SL, Koop D, Yuan S, Chastain R,
Holland LZ. Expression of somite segmentation genes in amphi-
oxus: a clock without a wavefront? Dev Genes Evol. 2008;218:
599-611.
152. Thélie A, Desiderio S, Hanotel J, et al. Prdm12 specifies V1
interneurons through cross-repressive interactions with Dbx1 and
Nkx6 genes in Xenopus. Development. 2015;142:3416-3428.
153. Kaltenbach SL, Yu JK, Holland ND. The origin and migration of
the earliest-developing sensory neurons in the peripheral nervous
system of amphioxus. Evol Dev. 2009;11:142-151.
154. Sharman A, Shimeld SM, Holland P. An amphioxus Msx gene
expressed predominantly in the dorsal neural tube. Dev Genes
Evol. 1999;209:260-263.
155. Ferrier DE, Brooke NM, Panopoulou G, Holland PW. The Mnx
homeobox gene class defined by HB9, MNR2 and amphioxus
AmphiMnx. Dev Genes Evol. 2001a;211:103-107.
156. Lu TM, Luo YJ, Yu JK. BMP and Delta/Notch signaling control
the development of amphioxus epidermal sensory neurons:
insights into the evolution of the peripheral sensory system.
Development. 2012;139:2020-2030.
157. Ono H, Koop D, Holland LZ. Nodal and Hedgehog synergize in
gill slit formation during development of the cephalochordate
Branchiostoma floridae. Development. 2018;145:dev162586.
158. Bertrand S, Escriva H. Evolutionary crossroads in developmental
biology: amphioxus. Development. 2011;138:4819-4830.
159. Rasmussen SL, Holland LZ, Schubert M, Beaster-Jones L,
Holland ND. Amphioxus AmphiDelta: evolution of Delta protein
structure, segmentation, and neurogenesis. Genesis. 2007;45:
113-122.
160. Bocina
I,
Saraga-Babic
M.
The
notochordal
sheath
in
amphioxus—an ultrastructural and histochemical study. Coll
Antropol. 2006;30:361-367.
161. Bone Q. The central nervous system in larval Acraniates. Q J
Microsc Sci. 1959;100:509-527.
162. Bone Q. The central nervous system in amphioxus. J Comp Neu-
rol. 1960;115:27-64.
163. Putnam NH, Butts T, Ferrier DE, et al. The amphioxus genome
and the evolution of the chordate karyotype. Nature. 2008;453:
1064-1071.
164. Timmer JR, Wang C, Niswander L. BMP signaling patterns the
dorsal and intermediate neural tube via regulation of homeobox
and helix-loop-helix transcription factors. Development. 2002;
129:2459-2472.
165. Lee J, Wu Y, Qi Y, et al. Neurogenin3 participates in gliogenesis in
the developing vertebrate spinal cord. Dev Biol. 2003;253:84-98.
166. Kriks S, Lanuza GM, Mizuguchi R, Nakafuku M, Goulding M.
Gsh2 is required for the repression of Ngn1 and specification of
dorsal interneuron fate in the spinal cord. Development. 2005;
132:2991-3002.
1042
LEUNG AND SHIMELD

167. Moore S, Ribes V, Terriente J, Wilkinson D, Relaix F, Briscoe J.
Distinct regulatory mechanisms act to establish and maintain
Pax3 expression in the developing neural tube. PLoS Genet.
2013;9:e1003811.
168. Gard C, Curto GG, Frarma YE-M, et al. Pax3-and Pax7-mediated
Dbx1 regulation orchestrates the patterning of intermediate spinal
interneurons. Dev Biol. 2017;432:24-33.
169. Batista MF, Lewis KE. Pax2/8 act redundantly to specify
glycinergic and GABAergic fates of multiple spinal interneurons.
Dev Biol. 2008;323:88-97.
170. Nardelli J, Thiesson D, Fujiwara Y, Tsai F-Y, Orkin SH. Expres-
sion and genetic interaction of transcription factors GATA-2 and
GATA-3 during development of the mouse central nervous sys-
tem. Dev Biol. 1999;210:305-321.
171. Fu H, Qi Y, Tan M, et al. Dual origin of spinal oligodendrocyte
progenitors and evidence for the cooperative role of Olig2 and
Nkx2. 2 in the control of oligodendrocyte differentiation. Devel-
opment. 2002;129:681-693.
172. Liu Z, Hu X, Huang C, et al. Olig3 is not involved in the ventral
patterning of spinal cord. PLoS ONE. 2014;9:e111076.
173. Bulfone A, Menguzzato E, Broccoli V, et al. Barhl1, a gene
belonging to a new subfamily of mammalian homeobox genes, is
expressed in migrating neurons of the CNS. Hum Mol Genet.
2000;9:1443-1452.
174. Ding Q, Joshi PS, Xie Z-h, Xiang M, Gan L. BARHL2 transcrip-
tion factor regulates the ipsilateral/contralateral subtype diver-
gence in postmitotic dI1 neurons of the developing spinal cord.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;109:1566-1571.
175. Hutchinson SA, Eisen JS. Islet1 and Islet2 have equivalent abili-
ties to promote motoneuron formation and to specify motoneuron
subtype identity. Development. 2006;133:2137-2147.
176. Song M-R, Sun Y, Bryson A, Gill GN, Evans SM, Pfaff SL.
Islet-to-LMO stoichiometries control the function of transcription
complexes that specify motor neuron and V2a interneuron iden-
tity. Development. 2009;136:2923-2932.
177. Pillai A, Mansouri A, Behringer R, Westphal H, Goulding M.
Lhx1 and Lhx5 maintain the inhibitory-neurotransmitter status of
interneurons in the dorsal spinal cord. Development. 2007;134:
357-366.
178. Wilson SI, Shafer B, Lee KJ, Dodd J. A molecular program for
contralateral trajectory: Rig-1 control by LIM homeodomain tran-
scription factors. Neuron. 2008;59:413-424.
179. Moran-Rivard L, Kagawa T, Saueressig H, Gross MK, Burrill J,
Goulding M. Evx1 is a postmitotic determinant of v0 interneuron
identity in the spinal cord. Neuron. 2001;29:385-399.
180. Juárez-Morales JL, Schulte CJ, Pezoa SA, et al. Evx1 and Evx2
specify excitatory neurotransmitter fates and suppress inhibitory
fates through a Pax2-independent mechanism. Neural Dev. 2016;
11:5.
181. Logan C, Wingate RJ, McKay IJ, Lumsden A. Tlx-1 and Tlx-3
homeobox gene expression in cranial sensory ganglia and hind-
brain of the chick embryo: markers of patterned connectivity.
J Neurosci. 1998;18:5389-5402.
182. Qian Y, Shirasawa S, Chen C-L, Cheng L, Ma Q. Proper devel-
opment of relay somatic sensory neurons and D2/D4 interneurons
requires homeobox genes Rnx/Tlx-3 and Tlx-1. Genes Dev.
2002;16:1220-1233.
183. Borromeo MD, Meredith DM, Castro DS, et al. A transcription
factor network specifying inhibitory versus excitatory neurons in
the dorsal spinal cord. Development. 2014;141:2803-2812.
184. Marletaz F, Firbas PN, Maeso I, et al. Amphioxus functional
genomics and the origins of vertebrate gene regulation. Nature.
2018;564:64-70.
185. Paps J, Holland PW, Shimeld SM. A genome-wide view of tran-
scription factor gene diversity in chordate evolution: less gene loss
in amphioxus? Brief Funct Genomics. 2012;11:177-186.
186. Kuraku S, Meyer A, Kuratani S. Timing of genome duplications
relative to the origin of the vertebrates: did cyclostomes diverge
before or after? Mol Biol Evol. 2009;26:47-59.
187. Escriva H, Manzon L, Youson J, Laudet V. Analysis of lamprey and
hagfish genes reveals a complex history of gene duplications during
early vertebrate evolution. Mol Biol Evol. 2002;19:1440-1450.
188. Mehta TK, Ravi V, Yamasaki S, et al. Evidence for at least six
Hox clusters in the Japanese lamprey (Lethenteron japonicum).
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;110:16044-16049.
189. Sacerdot C, Louis A, Bon C, Berthelot C, Roest CH. Chromo-
some evolution at the origin of the ancestral vertebrate genome.
Genome Biol. 2018;19:166.
190. Delile J, Rayon T, Melchionda M, Edwards A, Briscoe J,
Sagner A. Single cell transcriptomics reveals spatial and temporal
dynamics of gene expression in the developing mouse spinal
cord. Development. 2019;146:dev173807.
191. Acemel RD, Tena JJ, Irastorza-Azcarate I, et al. A single three-
dimensional chromatin compartment in amphioxus indicates a
stepwise evolution of vertebrate Hox bimodal regulation. Nat
Genet. 2016;48:336-341.
192. Feng J, Li G, Liu X, Wang J, Wang YQ. Functional analysis of the
promoter region of amphioxus beta-actin gene: a useful tool for
driving gene expression in vivo. Mol Biol Rep. 2014;41:6817-6826.
193. Li G, Feng J, Lei Y, et al. Mutagenesis at specific genomic loci
of amphioxus Branchiostoma belcheri using TALEN method.
J Genet Genomics. 2014a;41:215-219.
194. Liu X, Li G, Feng J, Yang X, Wang YQ. An efficient microinjec-
tion
method
for
unfertilized
eggs
of
Asian
amphioxus
Branchiostoma belcheri. Dev Genes Evol. 2013;223:269-278.
195. Nikitina N, Bronner-Fraser M, Sauka-Spengler T. Microinjection
of RNA and morpholino oligos into lamprey embryos. Cold
Spring Harb Protoc. 2009;2009: pdb prot5123. https://doi.
org/10.1101/pdb.prot5123.
196. Square T, Romasek M, Jandzik D, Cattell MV, Klymkowsky M,
Medeiros DM. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated mutagenesis in the sea
lamprey Petromyzon marinus: a powerful tool for understanding
ancestral gene functions in vertebrates. Development. 2015;142:
4180-4187.
197. Zu Y, Zhang X, Ren J, et al. Biallelic editing of a lamprey genome
using the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Sci Rep. 2016;6:23496.
How to cite this article: Leung B, Shimeld SM.
Evolution of vertebrate spinal cord patterning.
Developmental Dynamics. 2019;248:1028–1043.
https://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.77
LEUNG AND SHIMELD
1043

===== Li2018_ExpCellRes_FoxJ1+SpinalCord =====
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Experimental Cell Research
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yexcr
FoxJ1 regulates spinal cord development and is required for the
maintenance of spinal cord stem cell potential
Xiaofei Lia,1, Elisa M. Floriddiaa,1,2, Konstantinos Toskasa,3, Chaima Chalfouhb,c, Axel Honoreb,c,
Anne Aumontd, Nicolas Vallièrese,f, Steve Lacroixe,f, Karl J.L. Fernandesd, Nicolas Guérouta,b,c,⁎,
Fanie Barnabé-Heidera,⁎⁎
a Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden
b Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, EA3830, GRHV, 76000 Rouen, France
c Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB), 76000 Rouen, France
d Department of Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada H3C3J7
e Centre de recherche du Centre hospitalier universitaire (CHU) de Québec–Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada G1R2J6
f Département de médecine moléculaire, Faculté de médecine, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada G1V0A6
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Neural progenitors
Astrocyte subtypes
Ependymal cells
Self-renewal
Diﬀerentiation
Spinal cord injury
A B S T R A C T
Development of the spinal cord requires dynamic and tightly controlled expression of numerous transcription
factors. Forkhead Box protein J1 (FoxJ1) is a transcription factor involved in ciliogenesis and is speciﬁcally
expressed in ependymal cells (ECs) in the adult central nervous system. However, using FoxJ1 fate-mapping
mouse lines, we observed that FoxJ1 is also transiently expressed by the progenitors of other neural subtypes
during development. Moreover, using a knock-in mouse line, we discovered that FoxJ1 is essential for embryonic
progenitors to follow a normal developmental trajectory. FoxJ1 loss perturbed embryonic progenitor pro-
liferation and cell fate determination, and resulted in formation of adult ECs having impaired stem cell potential
and an inability to respond to spinal cord injury in both male and female animals. Thus, our study uncovers
unexpected developmental functions of FoxJ1 in cell fate determination of subsets of neural cells and suggests
that FoxJ1 is critical for maintaining the stem cell potential of ECs into adulthood.
1. Introduction
The spinal cord comprises the caudal region of the central nervous
system (CNS) and is responsible for conveying motor and sensory in-
formation between the brain and the periphery, as well as for elabor-
ating reﬂexes. During development, spinal cord progenitor cells sur-
rounding the ventricular zone, the nascent central canal, are subjected
to their cell fate determination mainly by gradients of dorsal and ven-
tral morphogens, such as BMPs, Wnt, and Shh [5]. The diﬀusion of
these diﬀerent morphogens activates or represses a number of tran-
scription factor families, giving rise to spatially segregated progenitor
domains along the dorsal-ventral axis, marked by sets of transcription
factors including Olig2, Pax2, Chox10, among others [10]. These pro-
genitor domains will later produce waves of distinct subtypes of neu-
rons and glial cells [11,31], which migrate from their homeodomains of
origin to their ﬁnal locations in the spinal cord and engage in distinct
circuits [1,14,2,28,38,9]. We have a good understanding of neurogen-
esis and the type of neurons that originate from each ventricular do-
main during development, on the other hand our understanding of the
complex developmental origin of glial cells (astrocytes, oligoden-
drocytes, and ependymal cells), their fate speciﬁcation, and consequent
heterogeneity is more limited [12,18,41,8]. Several subtypes of astro-
cytes are generated in a similar spatial manner around the ventricular
zone, and migrate horizontally into the lateral regions [15], however
gliogenesis in the dorsal spinal cord has not been studied in detail yet
[12]. Ependymal cells appear around the ventricular zone at E15.5 in
mice. Their diﬀerentiation is dependent on Shh signaling pathway and
the expression of the transcription factor FoxJ1 [20,38]. In contrast to
newly born astrocytes, ependymal cells that appear around E15.5 do
not migrate away from the central canal, as they are involved in the
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2018.04.017
Received 12 April 2018; Accepted 15 April 2018
⁎ Corresponding author at: Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, EA3830, GRHV, 76000 Rouen, France.
⁎⁎ Corresponding author.
1 Equal contribution.
2 Current address: Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden.
3 Current address: Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden.
E-mail addresses: nicolas.guerout@univ-rouen.fr (N. Guérout), fanie.barnabe-heider@ki.se, faniebh@gmail.com (F. Barnabé-Heider).
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
Available online 22 April 2018
0014-4827/ © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).
T

production and regulation of cerebrospinal ﬂuid, remaining pro-
liferative and continuously expressing FoxJ1 during embryonic devel-
opment and throughout adulthood [20,23]. The heterogeneity of pro-
genitor subtypes during development is reﬂected in the neural cell type
variety generated and present later on in adulthood [19,36,40,4].
Ependymal cells can easily be identiﬁed by FoxJ1 expression, a
transcription factor classically involved in ciliogenesis and expressed by
diverse multi-ciliated cells, including cells in the choroid plexus, lung
epithelium, oviduct and testis [13,25,35,39,7]. Therefore, in the CNS,
FoxJ1 is mostly considered a speciﬁc marker for ependymal cells.
However, FoxJ1 is also expressed by subsets of progenitor cells. Indeed,
some radial glial cells along the brain ventricles express it as well and
its expression is required for proper diﬀerentiation into ependymal cells
and a subset of astrocytes [17]. A subset of progenitors also require
FoxJ1 expression during the embryonic-to-postnatal transition in ol-
factory bulb neurogenesis [16]. These studies suggest that FoxJ1 is
important not only in ciliogenesis, but also in cell fate speciﬁcation of
certain progenitor subtypes during development. However, its role
during neurogenesis and gliogenesis in the developing spinal cord is
still unknown.
Here, using three transgenic models, we report that FoxJ1 is tran-
siently expressed not only by ependymal cells but also by earlier pro-
genitors of other neural cell types during spinal cord development, in-
cluding the progenitors of subsets of V1 and V2 interneurons and by
progenitors of astrocytes of unknown origin. We also observed that
FoxJ1 is involved in the regulation of progenitor cell proliferation
during development, and maintenance of the ependymal cells stem cell
potential from development to adulthood. In addition, we investigated
the role of FoxJ1 in adult ependymal cells activated by spinal cord
injury and found that FoxJ1 is required for their migration towards the
lesion site. In summary, we propose that FoxJ1 has novel roles in the
developing and adult spinal cord, beyond ciliogenesis, paving the way
for further studies on its roles in spinal cord development and repair
following SCI.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Mice
All experiments were conducted in accordance with the guidelines
of the Swedish Board of Agriculture (ethical permit N329/11, N217/
14) and were approved by the Karolinska Institutet Animal Care
Committee.
We used three mice lines in this study, including randomized
grouped male and females (Fig. 2). 1) Non-inducible FOXJ1::EGFP [27]
(where the human FoxJ1 promoter driving EGFP expression were used
for tissue collection at E10.5-E17.5 and P0-P10. 2) Tamoxifen-inducible
FOXJ1-CreERT2 transgenic mice were crossed with Rosa26-YFP mice
[23,27]. 3) FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2:Tomato mouse line for the study of FoxJ1
gene deletion eﬀects, which was generated by crossing a knock-in
mouse line with FoxJ1 deletion [26] with ROSA26-CAG-tdTomato re-
porter mice (The Jackson Laboratory stock #007908) for lineage tra-
cing. The mouse lines were bred with C57Bl6/J so that the same genetic
background allowed us to safely compare the diﬀerent conditions. For
tamoxifen-induced recombination in line 2 and 3, we injected the dams
intraperitoneally with 60 mg/kg of body weight or gavaged mice
50 mg/kg daily for 2 days or 5 days in embryonic and postnatal stage,
respectively. These animals were sacriﬁced one day after the last ta-
moxifen administration, as indicated on the Figures.
2.2. Tissue preparation and sectioning
At the end of the survival period, the adult animals (P60-P120) were
deeply anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (150 mg/kg body
weight) and perfused transcardially with 0.1 M PBS, pH 7.4%, and 4%
PFA in PBS, pH 7.4. Spinal cords from embryonic or early postnatal
stages were dissected quickly on ice cold PBS after dams were sacri-
ﬁced. Pups (P0-P10) were sacriﬁced by cervical dislocation and spinal
cords were dissected on ice cold PBS. Dissected spinal cords were fur-
ther post-ﬁxed in 4% PFA in PBS at 4 °C overnight and cryoprotected in
30% sucrose for at least 48 h. After embedding in Tissue-Tek OCT
compound, the spinal cords were cut to 16 µm-thick sagittal or coronal
sections using a cryostat. Sections were collected 1:12 accordingly to
stereological principles and stored at −20 °C until further use.
2.3. Tissue processing
For experiments involving in situ hybridization (ISH), time-pregnant
dams at embryonic day 11.5, 13.5 and 15.5 were overdosed with a
mixture of ketamine and xylazine and transcardially perfused with a
0.9% saline solution followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA), in borax
buﬀer, pH 9.5. Embryos were collected, post-ﬁxed for 2 days in PFA,
and then placed in a 4% PFA-borax/10% sucrose solution until tissue
processing. For neonatal mice, pups were killed by decapitation under
ice anesthesia at post-natal day 10 (P10). Brains and spinal cords were
dissected out and placed in ﬁxative for 2 days, followed by transfer in a
4% PFA-borax/10% sucrose solution.
Frozen brains were mounted on a microtome and cut into 30-µm
coronal sections from the olfactory bulb to the end of the medulla.
Tissue sections were collected in a cold cryoprotectant solution and
stored at −20 °C. All solutions were treated with diethylpyrocarbonate
(DEPC) and sterilized to prevent RNA degradation. Spinal cords were
embedded in OCT compound and then cut in 7 series of 14-µm-thick
coronal sections using a cryostat (model CM3050S; Leica Biosystems).
All spinal cord sections were collected directly onto X-tra Slides having
a permanent positive charged surface (Leica Biosystems) and stored at
−20 °C until use.
2.4. Surgical procedure and postoperative care
Dorsal funiculus transection was performed to mice at T10 level in
the spinal cord. The surgical procedure and postoperative care was
previously described in detail [20]. Brieﬂy, the skin was incised at
thoracic level and laminectomy performed to expose the spinal cord at
T9–10 level. The spinal cord was transected with a micro knife (Fine
Scientiﬁc Tools) in order to damage the dorsal ﬁniculi. The central
canal is left untouched by the procedure. The mice were checked daily
for signs of distress and to monitor the physiological recovery of
functions after injury.
2.5. Tissue preparation and sectioning
At the end of the survival period, the animals were deeply an-
esthetized with sodium pentobarbital (APL) (150 mg/kg body weight)
and perfused transcardially with 0.1 M PBS, pH 7.4%, and 4% PFA in
PBS, pH 7.4 (Life Technologies). Dissected spinal cords were further
postﬁxed in 4% PFA in PBS at 4 °C overnight and cryoprotected in 30%
sucrose (Life Technologies) for at least 48 h. After embedding in Tissue-
Tek OCT compound (Sakura), the spinal cords were cut sagittally or
coronally to 16–20 µm thickness. Sections were collected 1:10 accord-
ingly to stereological principles and stored at −80 °C until further use.
2.6. Immunohistochemistry
Spinal cord sections were blocked with 10% normal donkey serum,
0.3% Triton X-100 in PBS for 1 h at room temperature. Primary and
secondary antibodies were diluted in 2% BSA, 0.2% Triton X-100 in
PBS. Primary antibodies were incubated at room temperature (RT)
overnight and secondary antibodies were incubated for 1 h at RT.
AlexaFluor conjugated secondary antibodies (Invitrogen) were used.
Counterstaining was performed with DAPI (1:10,000) in PBS and sec-
tions were coverslipped with Vectashield mounting media. Full details
X. Li et al.
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
85

of the primary antibodies used are reported in Table 1.
2.7. Neural stem cell cultures
2.7.1. Culture
Animals were sacriﬁced for control culture or one week after SCI.
Spinal cord cells were dissociated and neurosphere cultures were es-
tablished as described before [20,23]. After counting, cells isolated
from one spinal cord were plated in T25 ﬂasks. Primary neurospheres
were harvested after 12 days in culture then were dissociated into
single cells for passage or diﬀerentiation. Approximately 100,000 cells
per animal were plated in T25 ﬂasks for the next generation of neuro-
spheres, and all the new neurospheres (second and third generation)
were harvested after one week in culture. Dissociated primary neuro-
spheres, approximately 70,000 cells/well, were plated in poly-L-lysine-
coated chamber slides (Sigma) for diﬀerentiation with growth factor-
free medium supplemented with 1% fetal bovine serum.
2.7.2. Immunocytochemistry
In order to assess the recombination rate after 12 days in vitro, ap-
proximately 100–200 recombined primary neurospheres were plated in
poly-L-lysine-coated chamber slides for one day, followed by ﬁxation
with 4% PFA (20 min at room temperature) and immunocytochemistry
for quantiﬁcation of recombined neurospheres with either an anti-GFP
or anti-TdTomato antibody. For diﬀerentiation assay, after 10 days in
growth factor-free diﬀerentiation condition, immunocytochemistry was
performed as described above. Full details of the primary antibodies
used are reported in Table 1.
2.7.3. Cell culture analysis
For the neurosphere proliferation assay, neurospheres were sampled
from one culture dish in quadruplicate (250 ml per time) and the
numbers of neurospheres were counted. The total number of neuro-
spheres was calculated per total volume of media (30–35 ml per dish).
For
the
neurosphere
diﬀerentiation
assay,
we
performed
im-
munocytochemistry and quantiﬁed the marker expression by counting
at least 6 ﬁelds of views selected in a randomized fashion (20× mag-
niﬁcation) per well under ﬂuorescence microscope. At least two wells
for one marker per animal and condition were used for quantiﬁcation of
a minimum of 3 animals per group. The total number of cells was ob-
tained counting DAPI+ nuclei stained.
2.8. Image acquisition and tissue analysis
Confocal representative images of the spinal cords were acquired
using the Zeiss LMS700 microscope set up (Zeiss). Quantiﬁcation of the
number of cells were performed using the Zeiss Apotome2 microscope
set up (Zeiss). For the quantiﬁcation, the regions along the rostral-
caudal axis (cervical, thoracic and lumbar segments) were analyzed
separately. In the same fashion, we quantiﬁed the grey matter, central
canal, lateral white matter, dorsal white matter and ﬂoor plate. The
tissue quantiﬁcation was performed on at least 3 sections per segment
and area. For each experimental group and marker, 3–9 animals were
analyzed.
2.9. Experimental design and statistical analysis
We performed Student's T-test for comparing two groups and
Student's T-test with Bonferroni's correction for more than two groups’
comparisons
by
statistical
analysis
software
Prism
version
6.0.
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. For each experimental group
and marker staining, 3–9 animals were analyzed.
3. Results
3.1. Spatiotemporal distribution of FoxJ1 lineage cells in the developing
spinal cord
FoxJ1 transcription factor is speciﬁcally expressed in cells with
motile cilia, including ependymal cells, which ﬁrst appear at E15.5 in
the developing spinal cord [20,23,3]. Surprisingly, we performed im-
munostaining for FoxJ1 protein, and found that E13 progenitor cells
surrounding the ventricular zone express detectable levels of FoxJ1,
several days prior to the appearance of the ﬁrst ependymal cells at E15
[20]. These early FoxJ1+ cells included neuronal progenitors, as they
are Nkx6.1 positive (Fig. 1B).
To examine the progeny of the unexpected FoxJ1+ progenitors
during development, we ﬁrst used FOXJ1::EGFP transgenic mice
(Fig. 2A), in which the human FoxJ1 promoter drives expression of
enhanced green ﬂuorescence protein that can be used as a short-term
lineage tracing tool due to the relatively longer half-life of EGFP than
FoxJ1 [27]. We conﬁrmed that the progenitors expressing EGFP+ from
the human FoxJ1 promoter do indeed express FoxJ1 protein (Fig. 1C-F).
Subsets of EGFP+ FoxJ1 lineage cells were observed in the grey matter
and ﬂoor plate during early development (E10.5-E14.5) and were found
in the ventricular zone, ﬂoor plate, and ventral-lateral grey matter
between E15.5 and E16.5, when ependymal cells ﬁrst originate in the
spinal cord [20]. EGFP+ cells reached their highest number during late
gestation (E17.5), when they also appeared in the dorsal white matter.
Early postnatally (P2), the number of EGFP+ cells decreased dramati-
cally in all regions except for the central canal, which is then sur-
rounded by mature ependymal cells. By P10, EGFP expression was
strictly limited to central canal ependymal cells (Fig. 3A). Quantiﬁca-
tion of EGFP+ cells conﬁrmed these observations (Fig. 3 B-E), and
further revealed heterogeneity in the distribution of FoxJ1 lineage cells
along the rostral-caudal axis of the spinal cord (cervical, thoracic and
lumbar regions) (Fig. 3B-E). We summarize the spatiotemporal dis-
tribution of EGFP+ cells in the developing spinal cord of the FOX-
J1::EGFP mice in the schematic (Fig. 3F).
3.1.1. FoxJ1+ progenitors give rise to a subset of V1 and V2 interneurons
during neurogenesis in the spinal cord
We next identiﬁed and quantiﬁed the cell types showing FoxJ1
promoter activity by immunoﬂuorescence. During early development
(E10.5-E13.5), EGFP signal was detected in interneurons expressing the
pan-interneuron marker PAX2 (Fig. 4A-C). Interneurons express sub-
type-speciﬁc markers in the medial-lateral homeodomains at the ven-
tricle of the spinal cord during early development [1]. In FOXJ1::EGFP
Table 1
Antibody table. Details of sources and dilutions of antibodies used for histo/
immunochemistry in this study.
Antibody
Species
Dilution
Company (Catalog number)
GFP
Chicken
1:500
Aves (GFP-1020)
FoxJ1
Goat
1:200
R&D Systems (AF3619)
EVX1
Guinea pig
1:200
Gift from Dr. Alessandra
Pierani
Pax2
Rabbit
1:300
Life technologies (71–6000)
Chx10
Sheep
1:300
Millipore (AB9016)
Vimentin
Chicken
1:1000
Millipore (AB5733)
Reelin
Mouse
1:200
Millipore (MAB5364)
Sox9
Goat
1:500
R&D Systems (AF3075)
Ki-67
Rabbit
1:500
ThermoScientiﬁc (RM-9106)
GFAP
Rabbit
1:500
Millipore (AB5804)
Sox10
Goat
1:500
R&D Systems (AF2864)
NG2
Rabbit
1:500
Millipore (AB5320)
CNPase
Mouse
1:200
Millipore (MAB326R)
Tuj1
Mouse
1:500
Covance (MMS435P)
DAPI
1:10000
Sigma (D9542)
Anti-rabbit cy3
secondary antibody
Donkey
1:500
Jackson Immuno Research
(711-166-152)
Anti-mouse cy3
secondary antibody
Donkey
1:500
Jackson Immuno Research
(715-165-140)
Anti-chicken Alexa 488
Donkey
1:500
Jackson Immuno Research
(703-545-155)
secondary antibody
X. Li et al.
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
86

(caption on next page)
X. Li et al.
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
87

mice, we found that EGFP was absent from V0 interneurons (EVX1+),
present in a limited number of V2 interneurons (Chx10+) (Fig. 4D-F),
and absent from the Olig2-expressing motor neuron (pMN) domain
(Fig. 4G). EGFP+ interneurons are already post-mitotic at E10.5 and in
our experimental paradigm we observed that they did not express the
proliferation marker Ki67 (Fig. 4H). Thus, we conclude that most pro-
geny of FoxJ1+ progenitors are V1 interneurons and a small subset are
V2 interneurons.
3.1.2. FoxJ1+ progenitors give rise to subpopulations of dorsal and lateral
astrocytes but not to oligodendrocytes during gliogenesis in the developing
spinal cord
We further characterized the EGFP+ cells in the dorsal and lateral
areas of the spinal cord (Fig. 5A). Immunostaining showed that subsets
of lateral and dorsal EGFP+ cells expressed astrocyte progenitor mar-
kers such as Vimentin, Sox9 and GFAP, (Fig. 5B-E, N-Q, R, U), sug-
gesting that they are derived from FoxJ1+ progenitors during the peak
of the gliogenesis period (E15.5–E17.5). There is little knowledge about
the developmental origin of spinal cord astrocytes, but previous studies
have shown that astrocytes derived from lateral ventricular zone pro-
genitors migrate horizontally towards the lateral white matter [15]. In
agreement, we found a similar pattern of localization of EGFP+ as-
trocytes in the lateral white matter. As early as E13.5, a small subset
(around 20%) of EGFP+ lateral astrocytes expressed Reelin and Pax6,
and this co-expression increased later on (reaching around 40%) (Fig. 5
F-G, J-K, R-S).
Interestingly, we found that another subset of EGFP+ astrocytes
migrates from the dorsal apical domain of the ventricular zone to the
dorsal funiculi of the spinal cord. EGFP+ lateral astrocytes appear at
E13.5, while the EGFP+ dorsal astrocytes appear at E15.5. The dorsal
population is smaller than the lateral astrocyte population (Fig. 5H-I, L-
M, T-U). EGFP+ astrocytes were no longer detectable postnatally
(Fig. 5S-T). EGFP+ cells did not co-stain with oligodendrocyte lineage
markers such as Olig2 and Sox10 at late developmental stages E17.5
(Fig. 5V-Y). Together, our observations indicate that FoxJ1 is expressed
in progenitors that later give rise to astrocytes, suggesting a potential
role in the development and/or migration of speciﬁc astrocyte popu-
lations during embryogenesis.
3.1.3. FoxJ1+ progenitors give rise to ependymal cells and ﬂoor plate
progenitors
EGFP+ cells were observed surrounding the central canal and in the
ﬂoor plate. Consistent with our previous study [20], we found that the
ﬁrst EGFP+ ependymal cells appeared at E15.5 and highly expressed
Vimentin and Sox9. The co-expression of these markers with GFP in-
creased during development and reached almost 100% postnatally
around the central canal (Fig. 6B,C,F,G). On the other hand, EGFP+ at
the ﬂoor plate cells displayed a high expression of progenitor markers,
such
as
Vimentin,
and
an
oscillating
Sox9
expression
pattern
(Fig. 6D,E,H,I). Interestingly, FoxJ1 lineage cells showed diﬀering le-
vels of proliferation in these regions of the developing spinal cord
(Fig. 6J-M).
Together, our data indicate that the FoxJ1+ progenitors give rise to
multiple neural cell types during the neurogenic and gliogenic periods
Fig. 1. Endogenous FoxJ1 is expressed by neural progenitor cells during development. A) Representative confocal images of coronal sections of the developing
spinal cord from WT mice at the indicated embryonic and postnatal developmental stages. Endogenous FoxJ1 is observed by IHC beginning at E13 around the
ventricular zone and gradually restricted to the central canal during development. Dashed lines indicate the ventricular zone/central canal, coupled with the Vmt+
cells in the circled area. B) Representative confocal images of coronal sections of E13 spinal cord from WT mice. All endogenous FoxJ1 expressing cells are co-labeled
with interneuron progenitor marker Nkx6.1 during spinal cord neurogenesis. C-D) Representative confocal images of coronal sections of E17 spinal cord from the
FOXJ1::EGFP (C) and FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP mice (D). E-F) All human FoxJ1 promoter active cells around the ventricular zone are positive for endogenous FoxJ1
staining. Scale bars: 25 µm. E = Embryonic day after coitum. GFP indicates GFP staining for either EGFP+ cell or YFP+ cells in FOXJ1::EGFP (C) and FOXJ1-
CreERT2-YFP mice respectively.
Fig. 2. Schematic summary of transgenic lines used in
this study. Schematic illustration of the three diﬀerent
transgenic mouse models used, including A) non-inducible
FOXJ1::EGFP [27] for short-time lineage tracing, B) ta-
moxifen-inducible FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP [23] for long-term
lineage tracing and C) FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mice.
In the latter model (C), the CreER sequence is knocked into
the FoxJ1 locus resulting in loss of expression of the in-
terrupted FoxJ1 gene (knock in –KI) [26].
X. Li et al.
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
88

of spinal cord development (summarized in Fig. 11), representing a
potentially useful marker and tool for further study of the develop-
mental origin and function of these cell types.
3.2. FoxJ1 is involved in progenitor proliferation in the developing spinal
cord
To shed light on the functional roles of FoxJ1 during spinal cord
development, we took advantage of two additional mouse lines. First,
FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP transgenic mice, in which the same human FOXJ1
promoter is used to drive expression of CreERT2 in these mice, both
alleles of the endogenous mouse FoxJ1 gene are intact. Second, FoxJ1
knock-in (KI) mice, in which an exon of the endogenous mouse FoxJ1
gene has been replaced by CreERT2, eﬀectively knocking out the FoxJ1
allele (FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2, Fig. 2C); upon crossing these FoxJ1-KI-
CreERT2 mice with a ﬂoxed reporter strain (in this case, ROSA26-CAG-
TdTomato reporter mice), the fate of cells in which at least one of the
FoxJ1 alleles has been knocked out can be mapped [26]. Notably, im-
munostaining for the FoxJ1 protein showed that 100% of reporter-ex-
pressing ventricular zone/ central canal cells in all three mouse lines
expressed FoxJ1, indicating that the human FOXJ1 promoter is not
ectopically expressed in this area (Fig. 1C-D, Fig. 7B).
Tamoxifen
was
administered
to
pregnant
FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-
TdTomato mice at either E10.5, E11.5, E13.5 or E15.5 for two days, and
the embryos analyzed one day later. Immunostaining for endogenous
FoxJ1 protein revealed that endogenous FoxJ1+ cells decreased dra-
matically in both the FoxJ1+/- and FoxJ1-/- oﬀspring (Fig. 7B-E), in-
dicating that FoxJ1 protein levels are not compensated in FoxJ1+/-
cells by the remaining allele. Importantly, we observed that the dis-
tribution of the TdTomato+ FoxJ1 lineage cells was markedly altered,
with recombined cells found only surrounding the central canal and
ﬂoor plate, but not within the parenchyma (Fig. 7F-I). In contrast, when
this experiment was repeated using the FOXJ1-CreERT2 transgenic
mouse line crossed with YFP reporter mice (FOXJ1- CreERT2-YFP mice),
in which both of the foxj1 alleles are intact, we found that tamoxifen-
induced recombination closely mirrored what had been seen in FOX-
J1::EGFP mice (Fig. 7F-G). Since the genetic background and the ta-
moxifen treatments are identical between the FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTo-
mato and the FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP mouse lines used in this study, the
more than ﬁve-fold diﬀerence observed in the number of recombined
Fig. 3. Spatiotemporal distribution of FoxJ1 lineage cells in the developing spinal cord. A) Representative confocal images of coronal sections of the devel-
oping spinal cord from the FOXJ1::EGFP mice at the indicated embryonic and postnatal developmental stages. B-E) Quantiﬁcation of GFP+ cells at E10.5 (B), E13.5
(C), E17.5 (D), and P2 (E) by region of interest. F) Summary schematic of the spatio-temporal distribution of GFP+ cells in the embryonic and postnatal developing
spinal cord. GFP indicates GFP staining for either EGFP+ cell or YFP+ cells in FOXJ1::EGFP (C) and FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP mice respectively. Dashed lines indicate the
outline of the spinal cords. Scale bars: 50 µm. Quantiﬁcations are reported as percentage and ratio between the analyzed regions. Quantiﬁcation are reported as
average + SEM. N = 3–4 animals per developmental stage. E = Embryonic day after coitum; P = Postnatal day after birth; FP = Floor Plate; GM = Grey Matter;
V = Ventricle; DWM= Dorsal White Matter; LWM = Lateral White Matter; CC = Central Canal; C = Cervical spinal cord; T = Thoracic spinal cord; L = Lumbar
spinal cord.
X. Li et al.
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
89

cells around the developing central canal appears to be due to diﬀer-
ences in the behavior of the recombined cells (Fig. 7G-H, I).
Comparison
of
Ki67
expression
in
FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP
(i.e.,
FoxJ1+/+)
and
FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato
(i.e.,
FoxJ1+/-
and
FoxJ1-/-) mice further showed a signiﬁcantly reduced proliferation of
reporter+ cells in mice deﬁcient in FoxJ1 expression. Analysis of Ki67
expression during the neurogenic E13.5 period showed that the ratio of
FoxJ1 lineage cells with proliferation capacity is signiﬁcantly lower in
both FoxJ1+/- and FoxJ1-/- embryos. However, by the mid-late em-
bryonic gliogenic period, FoxJ1 lineage cells no longer showed a sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerence in proliferation between groups (Fig. 7M), sug-
gesting that FoxJ1 is more implicated in proliferation of the earlier
progenitor population. Thus, consistent with a previous study showing
the involvement of FoxJ1 in progenitor proliferation and diﬀerentiation
in the developing brain [16,17], we suggest that FoxJ1 is required for
the proliferation and subsequent migration of at least a portion of
FoxJ1+ progenitors during spinal cord development (Figs. 11–12).
3.3. FoxJ1 is required for maintaining the progenitor properties of spinal
cord progenitors
It has been shown that FoxJ1 is required for ependymal cell dif-
ferentiation in the developing brain [16,17]. To further characterize the
role of FoxJ1 during cell fate speciﬁcation in the developing spinal
cord, we quantiﬁed the ratio of various markers expressed by reporter-
positive cells in both FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP and FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-
TdTomato mice. This revealed that FoxJ1 deletion was associated with
a statistically signiﬁcant (more than three-fold) reduction in reporter-
positive cells expressing the progenitor markers Sox9 and Vimentin
around the central canal (Fig. 8 A-C, F-G). These FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-
TdTomato cells showed a signiﬁcant upregulation of the pan-inter-
neuron marker Pax2 (Fig. 8 D and H), but did not express astrocytic or
oligodendrocytic markers (Fig. 8J-L). Interestingly, despite upregu-
lating Pax2, these cells did not co-express other neuronal marker such
as Chx 10 (Fig. 8I) or the mature neuronal marker NeuN (Fig. 8E).
These results suggest that the deletion of FoxJ1 (one or both alleles) in
Fig. 4. Subtypes of interneurons are derived
from FoxJ1+ progenitors in the developing
spinal cord during the neurogenesis period.
A) Schematics of the embryonic developing
spinal cord at the indicated stages. Red squares
highlight the analyzed regions of interest. B, D,
F-H) Representative confocal images of coronal
sections of the developing spinal cord from the
FOXJ1::EGFP mice immunostained for PAX2
(B), Chx10 (D), EVX1 (F), Olig2 (G) or Ki67 (H)
at the indicated embryonic developmental
stages. Scale bars: 25 µm. C, E) Quantiﬁcation
of double positive GFP+ cells in the analyzed
regions of the spinal cord at the developmental
stages indicated in the graphs. Quantiﬁcations
are expressed as average + SEM. N = 3 ani-
mals per analyzed time point and per marker
staining. GFP indicates GFP staining for either
EGFP+cell or YFP+ cells in FOXJ1::EGFP (C)
and FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP mice respectively.
X. Li et al.
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
90

progenitor cells leads these cells to prematurely exit from their pro-
liferating phase, increases their neurogenic lineage speciﬁcation, but is
not suﬃcient to allow them to mature or terminally diﬀerentiate.
Since previous studies indicate that at least a subpopulation of
spinal cord ependymal cells retain stem/progenitor properties during
adulthood ([23]; Barnabe-Heider et al. [3]; [20]), we further studied
whether FoxJ1 gene deletion impacts these properties. Neurospheres
are self-renewing and multipotent colonies that illustrate the presence
Fig. 5. FoxJ1 lineage cells contribute to
heterogeneous populations of astrocytes
during gliogenesis in the developing spinal
cord. A) Schematics of the embryonic and
postnatal developing spinal cord at the in-
dicated stages. Red squares highlight the ana-
lyzed regions of interest. B-Q) Representative
confocal images of coronal sections of the de-
veloping spinal cord from the FOXJ1::EGFP
mice immunostained for Vimentin (B, D),
GFAP (C, E), reelin (F-I), Pax6 (J-M) or Sox9
(N-Q) at the indicated embryonic and post-
natal developmental stages. Scale bar: 25 µm.
R-U) Quantiﬁcation of double positive GFP+
cells in the regions of interested of the spinal
cord at the developmental stages indicated in
the graphs, including Vimentin, reelin, Pax6 or
Sox9. GFP indicates GFP staining for either
EGFP+ cell or YFP+ cells in FOXJ1::EGFP (C)
and FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP mice respectively. V-
Y) Representative confocal images of coronal
sections of the developing spinal cord from the
FOXJ1::EGFP mice immunostained for Olig2
(V, X) and Sox10 (W, Y) in the lateral and
dorsal area at E17. Quantiﬁcations are ex-
pressed as average + SEM. N = 3 animals per
analyzed time point and marker staining.
DA = Dorsal
Astrocytes;
LA = Lateral
Astrocytes; Vmt = Vimentin.
X. Li et al.
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
91

of cells having stem/progenitor potential, and by P10, neurosphere
formation from the spinal cord is restricted to FoxJ1-expressing cells
[20]. After tamoxifen administration to dams of FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-
TdTomato and FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP pups (P5-P9), pups were sacriﬁced
at P10 and their spinal cords dissociated to generate primary neuro-
sphere cultures (Fig. 9A). Since homozygous FoxJ1 knockout leads to
perinatal lethality [26], only FoxJ1+/- P10 pups could be obtained for
this set of experiments. For each animal, we compared the ratio of
neurospheres that were recombined in vitro to the ratio of central canal
ependymal cells that were recombined in vivo. Consistent with our
previous study [20], this ratio was approximately equal in FOXJ1-
CreERT2-YFP mice, indicating that all recombined ependymal cells in
vivo can give rise to recombined neurospheres. In the FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-
TdTomato mice, however, this signiﬁcantly declined (Fig. 9A-B). Per-
forming the same experiment with adult spinal cords, we observed si-
milar results (Fig. 9C). These data suggest that the loss of one copy gene
of FoxJ1 diminishes the stem/progenitor potential of ependymal cells,
but did not promote a new stem cell niche as all the neurospheres that
survived during passages were still derived from FoxJ1 lineage (Fig. 9D-
E). Notably, examination of the total numbers of neurospheres (re-
combined and non-recombined) in WT (FoxJ1+/+), FOXJ1-CreERT2-
YFP
(FoxJ1+/+)
mice,
and
FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato
mice
(FoxJ1+/-) at P10 supports that this diminished potential is unrelated to
diﬀerences in recombination-related factors (Fig. 9F). While WT and
Fig. 6. Ependymal and ﬂoor plate cells but not oligodendrocytes are derived from FoxJ1 progenitors and have varying proliferation levels in the de-
veloping spinal cord. A) Schematics of the embryonic developing spinal cord at the indicated stages. Red squares highlight the analyzed regions of interest. B-E)
Representative confocal images of coronal sections of the developing spinal cord from the FOXJ1::EGFP mice immunostained for Vimentin (B, D), or Sox9 (C, E) at
the indicated embryonic stages. Scale bars: 25 µm. F-I) Quantiﬁcation of double positive GFP+ cells in the regions of interest at the developmental stages indicated in
the graphs. J-L) Representative confocal images of coronal sections of the developing spinal cord from the FOXJ1::EGFP mice immunostained for Ki67 in central
canal, dorsal funiculus white matter and lateral white matter respectively. Scale bars: 25 µm. M) Quantiﬁcation of proliferating GFP+ cells in diﬀerent regions the
spinal cord at the developmental stages indicated in the graphs. GFP indicates GFP staining for either EGFP+ cell or YFP+ cells in FOXJ1::EGFP (C) and FOXJ1-
CreERT2-YFP mice respectively. Quantiﬁcations are expressed as average + SEM. N = 3–4 animals per analyzed time point and immunostaining. E = Embryonic day;
P = Postnatal day after birth; EC = Ependymal cells; FP = Floor Plate.
X. Li et al.
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
92

FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP cultures generated equal numbers of total neuro-
spheres, FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato cultures yielded signiﬁcantly
fewer neurospheres, and this decrease was maintained during passa-
ging.
Diﬀerentiation of the P10 and adult primary neurospheres obtained
in the above experiments also revealed that the FoxJ1+/- neurospheres
generated from FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mice have an altered dif-
ferentiation potential, producing signiﬁcantly more neurons (Tuj1+)
and fewer oligodendrocytes (CNPase+) and astrocytes (Sox9+) com-
pared to both WT and FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP mice. This is consistent with
our in vivo quantiﬁcations that indicated that FoxJ1 deletion promotes
cell fate speciﬁcation towards the neurogenic lineage (Fig. 9 G-I).
3.4. FoxJ1 is required for the recruitment of ependymal cells following
spinal cord injury
Using the FOXJ1-CreERT2 lineage-tracing model, ependymal cells
have been shown to be the source of neurosphere-forming stem cells in
the adult spinal cord, and to respond robustly following spinal cord
injury (SCI) [20,23,3,32]. However, the contribution of ependymal cells
to SCI has been recently challenged in a study using the FoxJ1-KI-
CreERT2-TdTomato lineage tracing model [30]. Since we observed here
that both alleles of the FoxJ1 gene are required for the normal pro-
liferation of progenitor cells, maintenance of stem/progenitor potential,
and cell fate determination under normal physiological conditions
(Figs. 7–9), we performed a side-by-side comparison of the ependymal
Fig. 7. FoxJ1 is required for normal proliferation of FoxJ1 lineage cells in the developing spinal cord. A) Schematics of the FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato
embryos during spinal cord development at the indicated stages. B-D) Representative confocal images of coronal sections of the developing spinal cord from indicated
genotypes of FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato embryos immunostained for FoxJ1 antibody at E17.5. E) Quantiﬁcation of endogenous FoxJ1+ cells around the ven-
tricular zone/central canal in the spinal cord at the developmental stages in WT, heterogeneous and homogenous knock-in mice of FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato line.
F-H) Representative confocal images of coronal sections of FoxJ1 lineage cells in the developing spinal cord from indicated mouse lines at E17.5. I) Quantiﬁcation of
the ratio of the total number of reporter+ cells in FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP compared to FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mice. J-L) Representative confocal images of coronal
sections of embryonic spinal cord stained for Ki67. M) Quantiﬁcation of the ratio of the total number of reporter+Ki67+ cells in FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP compared to
FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mice. Dash lines indicate the coronal sectioned spinal cord. Scale bars: 25 µm. n.s. = no signiﬁcance. Quantiﬁcations are expressed as
average + SEM. N = 3–4 animals per analyzed time point and marker staining.
X. Li et al.
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
93

cell response to spinal cord injury (SCI) in the FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP and
FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mouse models [20,23,30,3,32].
Adult FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP and FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mice
received tamoxifen injections for 5 days to pre-label the central canal
ependymal cells, and after an additional 7-day clearing period, were
subjected to a mild dorsal funiculus lesion (Fig. 10A). One week after
SCI, ependymal cells were found to have migrated to the lesion site in
FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP mice while only few ependymal cells migrated in
FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mice (43% versus 18%, respectively;
Fig. 10 B-C), which is consistent with the divergent ﬁndings of previous
studies
[23,30,3].
Quantiﬁcation
of
the
in
vivo
and
in
vitro
recombination rates in FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP and FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-
TdTomato mice showed that, as in the absence of injury, the FoxJ1-KI-
CreERT2-TdTomato mice had a reduced proportion of recombined
ependymal cells that were capable of neurosphere formation (Fig. 10
D). Moreover, neurospheres from FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mice
exhibited lower oligodendrocytic and higher neurogenic diﬀerentiation
potential compared to WT and FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP cultures (Fig. 10 E-
J). These ﬁndings indicate that FoxJ1 is critical for normal ependymal
self-renewal capacity, glial-neuronal diﬀerentiation potential, and mi-
gration under both physiological conditions and after SCI.
Notably, FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mice showed a striking defect
Fig. 8. FoxJ1 is required for the maintenance and diﬀerentiation of FoxJ1 progenitors in the developing spinal cord. A) Schematics of the FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-
TdTomato embryos during spinal cord development at the indicated stages. B-E) Representative confocal images of FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato ventricular zone of
E17.5 spinal cord immunostained for Sox9 (B), Vimentin (C), Pax2 (D) or NeuN (E). F-H) Quantiﬁcation of marker and reporter double positive progenitor cells
around the central canal or the spinal cord in FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP and FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mice at the developmental stages indicated in the graphs, for the
markers Sox9 (F), Vimentin (G), or Pax2 (H). I-L) Representative confocal images of FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato ventricular zone of spinal cord at indicated
timepoints immunostained but not co-labeled with reporter+ cells for Chx10 (I), Olig2 (J-K), or GFAP (L). CC = central canal. Tom = TdTomato. Vmt = Vimentin.
Quantiﬁcations are expressed as average + SEM. N = 3–4 animals per analyzed time point and marker staining.
X. Li et al.
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
94

(caption on next page)
X. Li et al.
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
95

in injury-induced spinal cord stem/progenitor activity that was in-
dependent of recombination-associated factors. When we quantiﬁed the
total numbers of neurospheres (both recombined and non-recombined)
in these mouse models, WT and FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP mice showed SCI-
induced increases in neurosphere numbers while the FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-
TdTomato mice with one less copy of FoxJ1 had signiﬁcantly fewer
neurospheres under both control and SCI conditions, and failed to ex-
hibit any SCI-induced increase (Fig. 10 K). We conclude that even
though FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mice could be useful to lineage
trace FoxJ1-expressing cells in other organs without causing a pheno-
type [26], both copies of FoxJ1 are required for the full expression of
stem cell properties in the spinal cord after SCI.
4. Discussion
In this study, we discovered several unexpected and unreported
functions of FoxJ1 during spinal cord development and regeneration,
using three transgenic models (Fig. 2A-C). We showed that FoxJ1 is not
only expressed in ependymal cells, but is also transiently expressed in
the progenitors of various cell types, including interneurons and as-
trocytes, which distribute to restricted zones of the developing spinal
cord. FoxJ1 gene deletion revealed novel roles for FoxJ1 in proliferation
and glial-neuronal cell fate determination of progenitor cells in the
developing spinal cord. Furthermore, we found that loss of a single
allele of the FoxJ1 gene was suﬃcient to compromise the maintenance
of the stem cell potential of ependymal cells during spinal cord devel-
opment, throughout adulthood and following SCI.
FoxJ1 has been widely studied for its role in ciliogenesis and has
been regarded as one of the key transcription factors for cilium bio-
genesis [6]. In the adult spinal cord, FoxJ1 is speciﬁcally expressed by
ependymal cells and is used as a speciﬁc marker for this cell population
[23,3]. We have previously reported that the ﬁrst FoxJ1+ ependymal
cells appear at E15.5 in the mouse spinal cord [20].
Here we report that FoxJ1 is also transiently expressed in progeni-
tors of other cell types in the developing spinal cord (summarized in
Fig. 11). In the spinal cord, FoxJ1 progenitors appear earlier than
ependymal cells, and give rise to V1 and a subset of V2 interneurons,
and also subpopulations of astrocytes in the lateral white matter and
the dorsal funiculus, as well as to ependymal cells around the central
canal. Astrocytes constitute one of the most abundant cell populations
in the spinal cord and are functionally heterogeneous [36], however
our current understanding of their developmental origin is quite lim-
ited. A very elegant study reported that astrocyte progenitor cells mi-
grate horizontally from the ventricular zone to the lateral white matter
[15]. In accordance with and complementary to these ﬁndings, we
observed a subset of astrocytes derived from FoxJ1 progenitors that
migrate horizontally from a lateral domain and dorsally from the apical
domain of the ventricular zone to the ventrolateral white matter and
the dorsal funiculus, respectively. We suggest that FoxJ1 might be used
as a novel marker for future study of diﬀerent neural cell subtypes in
the developing spinal cord (Fig. 12).
During development of the brain, FoxJ1 is involved in the migration
and diﬀerentiation of progenitor cells towards the olfactory bulbs [16].
We observed that FoxJ1 might also be involved in migration of pro-
genitor or stem cells in the developing spinal cord. Indeed, when we
deleted only one allele of FoxJ1, we observed a very limited number of
FoxJ1+/- cells that were all restricted to the ventricular zone/central
canal.
After SCI, the progeny of FoxJ1+/- ependymal cells also failed to
migrate to the injury site. Therefore, the absence of FoxJ1 appears to
prevent migration and proliferation of some progenitor cells, without
development of major physiological impairments, such as hydro-
cephalous or dysplasia. Moreover, it has been shown that FoxJ1 is re-
quired for embryonic-to-postnatal transition during olfactory bulb
neurogenesis [16]. As Pax2 has been used as an immature neuron/
neuronal precursor marker [21,29,34], while NeuN is a speciﬁc marker
for mature neurons maturation [22,24,37], we used these markers for
immunostaining and found that deletion of FoxJ1 leads to a higher ratio
of the PAX2+ interneurons from FoxJ1 lineage cells but decreased
expression of the mature neuron marker NeuN. These results suggest
that the deletion of FoxJ1 enhances the neurogenic potential of FoxJ1+
progenitors towards an interneuron fate, with reduced diﬀerentiation
into fully mature neurons. Altogether, we suggest that FoxJ1 is involved
in the regulation of proliferation and diﬀerentiation of diﬀerent types of
progenitor cells in the whole CNS. Interestingly, this is consistent with a
recent study that showed similarly unexpected results after deletion of
the transcription factor Prdm16, which is involved in neural stem cell
maintenance and ciliogenesis. Prdm16 deletion at postnatal develop-
mental stage results in no eﬀect on ciliogenesis, but leads to down-
regulation of FoxJ1 expression and upregulation of genes associated
with neuronal diﬀerentiation that interfere with ependymal cell dif-
ferentiation potential [33].
FoxJ1 has not been considered a pivotal transcription factor in stem
cells, but we observed that FoxJ1 is important to preserve the stem cell
potential of spinal cord ependymal cells. Indeed, we cultured FoxJ1+/+
and FoxJ1+/- cells from P10 and adult mice, and in both ages and
conditions, we observed that the loss of a single copy of the FoxJ1 gene
leads to signiﬁcantly reduced self-renewal of ependymal cells and fewer
neurospheres. Previously, we described that the injury of the spinal
cord enhances the self-renewal potential of spinal cord ependymal cells
[20,23,3]. To test whether the injury could rescue the phenotype of the
FoxJ1+/- neurospheres, we put them in culture from the adult injured
spinal cord, and again observed reduced self-renewal potential and
diminished ability to generate neurospheres in culture, regardless of
recombination, indicating a perturbed phenotype of stem and pro-
genitor cell potential when one copy of FoxJ1 is lost. Thus, FoxJ1 is a
key transcription factor for the maintenance of stem cell potential by
spinal cord ependymal cells. Moreover, this is consistent with our in
vivo data showing that the deletion of one FoxJ1 allele leads to failure of
FoxJ1+ progenitor cell proliferation.
Our ﬁndings also shed light on a recent controversy regarding the
contribution of ependymal cells to the glial response following SCI [30].
In that study, the authors used the FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mouse
model as a lineage-tracing tool for FoxJ1-expressing ependymal cells.
Here, we likewise observed that ependymal cells in the FoxJ1-KI model
are largely unresponsive to SCI, in marked contrast to ependymal cells
in the FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP model used here and in our previous studies
[20,23,30,3,32]. Importantly, here we show that the deletion of even
one allele of the FoxJ1 gene leads to substantial eﬀects on progenitor
cell
speciﬁcation,
maintenance
of
stem
cell
properties,
and
Fig. 9. FoxJ1 is required for maintaining stem cell potential of the spinal cord.
A) Representative confocal images of neurospheres derived from FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato (FoxJ1+/-, upper panel) and FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP P10 spinal cords
(lower panel). B-C) Quantiﬁcation of in vivo recombined FoxJ1+ cells and in vitro recombined neurospheres from FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP and FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-
TdTomato mice generated from P10 (B) and adult mice (C). D-E) Quantiﬁcation of the percentage of recombined neurospheres over passages from FOXJ1-CreERT2-
YFP and FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato from P10 (D) and adult mice (E). F) Quantiﬁcation of the total number of neurospheres derived from 100,000 cells over
passages from WT mice, FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP and FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mice at P10, regardless of recombination. G) Representative confocal images of
diﬀerentiated cells derived from neurospheres from FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato P10 mice. H-I) Quantiﬁcation of diﬀerentiated cells generated from primary
neurospheres of P10 (H) and adult (I) FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP and FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mice. Scale bars: 100 µm. TdTom = TdTomato. CNPase = 2′,3′-Cyclic-
nucleotide 3′-phosphodiesterase. TuJ1 = beta III Tubulin. Quantiﬁcations are expressed as average + SEM. n.s. = no signiﬁcance. N = 3–4 animals per analyzed
time point and marker staining, where at least two batches of independent culture experiments were performed.
X. Li et al.
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
96

(caption on next page)
X. Li et al.
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
97

diﬀerentiation potential of ependymal cells compared to both WT and
FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP neurospheres [20,3]. Given its use of the en-
dogenous FoxJ1 promoter, the FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mouse
model has proven a useful tool to lineage trace FoxJ1-expressing cells in
other organs [26]. Although we did not observe phenotypic changes in
terms of breeding and behavior in the FoxJ1+/- mice, our results
suggest that at least in the spinal cord, this model is sub-optimal for fate
mapping aimed at characterizing the behavior of normal ependymal
cells in physiological or pathological conditions.
In conclusion, we show that FoxJ1 is transiently expressed by pro-
genitors of subsets of interneurons, astrocytes, ependymal, and ﬂoor
plate cells of the developing spinal cord. Moreover, we report that
Fig. 10. FoxJ1 is involved in the regulation of ependymal stem cell potential.
A) Schematics of tamoxifen administration and SCI to mice for analysis. B) Representative confocal images of adult spinal cord 2 weeks after SCI from FOXJ1-
CreERT2-YFP and FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mice. C) Quantiﬁcation of migrating recombined cells in vivo 2 weeks after SCI. D) Quantiﬁcation of in vivo re-
combined reporter+ cells and in vitro recombined neurospheres from FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP and FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato adult injured mice. E-F) Representative
confocal images of primary cultured recombined neurospheres from FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP and FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato adult injured mice. G-H) Representative
confocal images of diﬀerentiated cells derived from recombined neurospheres from FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato adult injured mice. I) Quantiﬁcation of the per-
centage of recombined neurospheres over passages from FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP and FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato adult mice after SCI. J) Quantiﬁcation of diﬀer-
entiated cells generated from primary neurospheres of adult WT mice, recombined FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP mice and recombined FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mice after
SCI. K) Quantiﬁcation of the number of primary neurospheres derived from 100,000 cells from WT mice and FOXJ1-CreERT2-YFP and FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato
adult mice after SCI, regardless of recombination. Scale bars: 200 µm (A) and 100 µm (E-H). Dashed lines indicate the lesion area. n.s. = no signiﬁcance.
TdTom = TdTomato. CNPase = 2′,3′-Cyclic-nucleotide 3′-phosphodiesterase. TuJ1 = beta III Tubulin. Quantiﬁcations are expressed as average + SEM. N = 3–4
animals per analysis including at least two independent culture experiments were performed.
Fig. 11. Summary of distribution of FoxJ1 lineage cells during spinal cord development. Schematics of distribution of FoxJ1 lineage cells from E10.5 to P2
during development. Markers are used to co-label FoxJ1 lineage cells as progenitors (Vimentin and Sox9), a subset of astrocytes (Reelin) and proliferating cells
(Ki67). Green cells = FoxJ1+ cells; red cells = marker+ cells; yellow cells = co-labeled cells.
X. Li et al.
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
98

FoxJ1 is not only involved in ciliogenesis, but also in proliferation and
cell fate determination of distinct progenitor and stem cells and it is
required for the maintenance of stem cell properties in ependymal cells
during development, adulthood and after injury. Thus, our study ex-
pands our understanding of the role of FoxJ1 in the spinal cord. This
paves the way for further studies on developmental and stem cell
biology and the investigation of FoxJ1 as a potential therapeutic target.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Dr. Jonas Frisén for sharing the FOXJ1-CreERT2:-
YFP transgenic mice line, Dr. H. Troy Ghashghaei for sharing the FoxJ1-
KI-CreERT2-TdTomato knock-in mouse line, Dr. Julien Bouvier for in-
tellectual discussion and technical support, Dr. Alessandra Pierani for
EVX1 antibody, Ms. Celia Duclos for technical support, and Dr. David
Vaudry and Dr. Magali Basille for microdissection and qPCR trials and
discussion.
Signiﬁcance statement
Here we report the unexpected discovery that the transcription
factor FoxJ1, the ciliogenesis gene considered speciﬁcally expressed by
ependymal cells in the central nervous system, is also required for the
correct speciﬁcation and migration of other progenitor cell types in the
developing spinal cord. Furthermore, we show that FoxJ1 is required
for maintenance of the stem cell potential of ependymal cells, the only
cell type in the spinal cord retaining stem cell properties during
adulthood and after spinal cord injury.
Funding sources
This research was supported by Swedish Foundation for Strategic
Research (Stiftelsen för Strategisk Forskning), DBRM (Developmental
Biology and Regenerative Medicine) Linnaeus Center, Åke Wibergs
stiftelse,
Jeanssons
Foundation,
Christopher
and
Dana
Reeve
Foundation,
Swedish
Childhood
Cancer
Foundation
(Barncancer
Fonden), Tore Nilsons Foundation and Swedish Research Council
(Vetenskapsrådet) to FBH. KF holds a Canada Research Chair, and KF
and SL were ﬁnanced by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR). XL was supported by a Ph.D. studentship from KID funding
(Karolinska Institutet). CC and NG are supported by European Union
and Normandie Regional Council. Europe gets involved in Normandie
with European Regional Development Funds (ERDF).
Conﬂicts of interest
We declare no conﬂict of interest.
Author contributions
F.B.H. and N.G. conceptualized the project.
X.L., E.M.F., N.G., and F.B.H designed the experiments.
Fig. 12. Summary of distribution of FoxJ1 lineage cells with the deletion eﬀects of FoxJ1 during spinal cord development. Schematics of the distribution of
FoxJ1 lineage cells in FoxJ1-KI-CreERT2-TdTomato mice during development and the FoxJ1 knockout eﬀects in this mouse line that leads to a dramatic reduction of
FoxJ1+ cells and diﬀerent cell fate of progenitors. Markers are used to label FoxJ1 lineage cells as progenitors (Vimentin and Sox9), interneurons (Pax2), and
proliferating cells (Ki67). Red cells = Tomato+ cells; yellow cells = co-labeled cells.
X. Li et al.
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
99

X.L., E.M.F., K.T., A.A, C.C., A.X, N.V., and N.G. performed the ex-
periments.
X.L., E.M.F., N.G. and F.B.H. analyzed the results.
S.L. and K.J.F. provided reagents, techniques and scientiﬁc input.
X.L., E.M.F., K.J.F., N.G. and F.B.H. wrote the article.
References
[1] W.A. Alaynick, T.M. Jessell, S.L. Pfaﬀ, SnapShot: spinal cord development, Cell 146
(2011) (178–178.e1).
[2] M.A. Anderson, Y. Ao, M.V. Sofroniew, Heterogeneity of reactive astrocytes,
Neurosci. Lett. 565 (2014) 23–29.
[3] F. Barnabé-Heider, C. Göritz, H. Sabelström, H. Takebayashi, F.W. Pfrieger,
K. Meletis, J. Frisén, Origin of new glial cells in intact and injured adult spinal cord,
Cell Stem Cell 7 (2010) 470–482.
[4] O.A. Bayraktar, L.C. Fuentealba, A. Alvarez-Buylla, D.H. Rowitch, Astrocyte de-
velopment and heterogeneity, Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 7 (2014) a020362.
[5] F. Charron, M. Tessier-Lavigne, Novel brain wiring functions for classical mor-
phogens: a role as graded positional cues in axon guidance, Dev. Camb. Engl. 132
(2005) 2251–2262.
[6] S.P. Choksi, D. Babu, D. Lau, X. Yu, S. Roy, Systematic discovery of novel ciliary
genes through functional genomics in the zebraﬁsh, Dev. Camb. Engl. 141 (2014)
3410–3419.
[7] D.E. Clevidence, D.G. Overdier, R.S. Peterson, A. Porcella, H. Ye, K.E. Paulson,
R.H. Costa, Members of the HNF-3/forkhead family of transcription factors exhibit
distinct cellular expression patterns in lung and regulate the surfactant protein B
promoter, Dev. Biol. 166 (1994) 195–209.
[8] B. Deneen, R. Ho, A. Lukaszewicz, C.J. Hochstim, R.M. Gronostajski, D.J. Anderson,
The transcription factor NFIA controls the onset of gliogenesis in the developing
spinal cord, Neuron 52 (2006) 953–968.
[9] E. Dessaud, A.P. McMahon, J. Briscoe, Pattern formation in the vertebrate neural
tube: a sonic hedgehog morphogen-regulated transcriptional network, Dev. Camb.
Engl. 135 (2008) 2489–2503.
[10] R. Diez del Corral, K.G. Storey, Markers in vertebrate neurogenesis, Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 2 (2001) 835–839.
[11] M. Goulding, Circuits controlling vertebrate locomotion: moving in a new direction,
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10 (2009) 507–518.
[12] N. Guérout, X. Li, F. Barnabé-Heider, Cell fate control in the developing central
nervous system, Exp. Cell Res. 321 (2014) 77–83.
[13] C.A. Hackett, J.I. Weller, Genetic mapping of quantitative trait loci for traits with
ordinal distributions, Biometrics 51 (1995) 1252–1263.
[14] A.W. Helms, J.E. Johnson, Speciﬁcation of dorsal spinal cord interneurons, Curr.
Opin. Neurobiol. 13 (2003) 42–49.
[15] C. Hochstim, B. Deneen, A. Lukaszewicz, Q. Zhou, D.J. Anderson, Identiﬁcation of
positionally distinct astrocyte subtypes whose identities are speciﬁed by a home-
odomain code, Cell 133 (2008) 510–522.
[16] B.V. Jacquet, N. Muthusamy, L.J. Sommerville, G. Xiao, H. Liang, Y. Zhang,
M.J. Holtzman, H.T. Ghashghaei, Speciﬁcation of a Foxj1-dependent lineage in the
forebrain is required for embryonic-to-postnatal transition of neurogenesis in the
olfactory bulb, J. Neurosci. J. Soc. Neurosci. 31 (2011) 9368–9382.
[17] B.V. Jacquet, R. Salinas-Mondragon, H. Liang, B. Therit, J.D. Buie, M. Dykstra,
K. Campbell, L.E. Ostrowski, S.L. Brody, H.T. Ghashghaei, FoxJ1-dependent gene
expression is required for diﬀerentiation of radial glia into ependymal cells and a
subset of astrocytes in the postnatal brain, Dev. Camb. Engl. 136 (2009)
4021–4031.
[18] G. La Manno, D. Gyllborg, S. Codeluppi, K. Nishimura, C. Salto, A. Zeisel, L.E. Borm,
S.R.W. Stott, E.M. Toledo, J.C. Villaescusa, P. Lönnerberg, J. Ryge, R.A. Barker,
E. Arenas, S. Linnarsson, Molecular diversity of midbrain development in mouse,
human, and stem cells, Cell 167 (2016) 566–580 (e19).
[19] B.B. Lake, et al., Neuronal subtypes and diversity revealed by single-nucleus RNA
sequencing of the human brain, Science 352 (2016) 1586–1590.
[20] X. Li, E.M. Floriddia, K. Toskas, K.J.L. Fernandes, N. Guérout, F. Barnabé-Heider,
Regenerative potential of ependymal cells for spinal cord injuries over time,
EBioMedicine 13 (2016) 55–65.
[21] B. Liu, Z. Liu, T. Chen, H. Li, B. Qiang, J. Yuan, X. Peng, M. Qiu, Selective expression
of Bhlhb5 in subsets of early-born interneurons and late-born association neurons in
the spinal cord, Dev. Dyn. 236 (2007) 829–835.
[22] P. Lu, Y. Wang, L. Graham, K. McHale, M. Gao, D. Wu, J. Brock, A. Blesch,
E.S. Rosenzweig, L.A. Havton, et al., Long-distance growth and connectivity of
neural stem cells after severe spinal cord injury, Cell 150 (2012) 1264–1273.
[23] K. Meletis, F. Barnabé-Heider, M. Carlén, E. Evergren, N. Tomilin, O. Shupliakov,
J. Frisén, Spinal cord injury reveals multilineage diﬀerentiation of ependymal cells,
PLoS Biol. 6 (2008) e182.
[24] R.J. Mullen, C.R. Buck, A.M. Smith, NeuN, a neuronal speciﬁc nuclear protein in
vertebrates, Development 116 (1992) 201–211.
[25] R.W. Murphy, I.S. Darevsky, R.D. MacCulloch, J. Fu, L.A. Kupriyanova, D.E. Upton,
F. Danielyan, Old age, multiple formations or genetic plasticity? Clonal diversity in
the uniparental Caucasian rock lizard, Lacerta dahli, Genetica 101 (1997) 125–130.
[26] N. Muthusamy, A. Vijayakumar, G. Cheng, H.T. Ghashghaei, A knock-in
Foxj1CreERT2::GFP mouse for recombination in epithelial cells with motile cilia,
Genesis 52 (2014) 350–358.
[27] L.E. Ostrowski, J.R. Hutchins, K. Zakel, W.K. O’Neal, Targeting expression of a
transgene to the airway surface epithelium using a ciliated cell-speciﬁc promoter,
Mol. Ther. J. Am. Soc. Gene Ther. 8 (2003) 637–645.
[28] D.M. Panchision, J.M. Pickel, L. Studer, S.H. Lee, P.A. Turner, T.G. Hazel,
R.D. McKay, Sequential actions of BMP receptors control neural precursor cell
production and fate, Genes Dev. 15 (2001) 2094–2110.
[29] A.L. Perrier, V. Tabar, T. Barberi, M.E. Rubio, J. Bruses, N. Topf, N.L. Harrison,
L. Studer, Derivation of midbrain dopamine neurons from human embryonic stem
cells, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101 (2004) 12543–12548.
[30] Y. Ren, Y. Ao, T.M. O’Shea, J.E. Burda, A.M. Bernstein, A.J. Brumm, N. Muthusamy,
H.T. Ghashghaei, S.T. Carmichael, L. Cheng, M.V. Sofroniew, Ependymal cell con-
tribution to scar formation after spinal cord injury is minimal, local and dependent
on direct ependymal injury, Sci. Rep. 7 (2017) 41122.
[31] D.H. Rowitch, A.R. Kriegstein, Developmental genetics of vertebrate glial-cell spe-
ciﬁcation, Nature 468 (2010) 214–222.
[32] H. Sabelström, M. Stenudd, P. Réu, D.O. Dias, M. Elﬁneh, S. Zdunek, P. Damberg,
C. Göritz, J. Frisén, Resident neural stem cells restrict tissue damage and neuronal
loss after spinal cord injury in mice, Science 342 (2013) 637–640.
[33] I.S. Shimada, M. Acar, R.J. Burgess, Z. Zhao, S.J. Morrison, Prdm16 is required for
the maintenance of neural stem cells in the postnatal forebrain and their diﬀer-
entiation into ependymal cells, Genes Dev. 31 (2017) 1134–1146.
[34] M. Simat, L. Ambrosetti, B. Lardi-Studler, J.M. Fritschy, GABAergic synaptogenesis
marks the onset of diﬀerentiation of basket and stellate cells in mouse cerebellum,
Eur. J. Neurosci. 26 (2007) 2239–2256.
[35] J.L. Stubbs, I. Oishi, J.C. Izpisúa Belmonte, C. Kintner, The forkhead protein Foxj1
speciﬁes node-like cilia in Xenopus and zebraﬁsh embryos, Nat. Genet. 40 (2008)
1454–1460.
[36] H.-H. Tsai, H. Li, L.C. Fuentealba, A.V. Molofsky, R. Taveira-Marques, H. Zhuang,
A. Tenney, A.T. Murnen, S.P.J. Fancy, F. Merkle, N. Kessaris, A. Alvarez-Buylla,
W.D. Richardson, D.H. Rowitch, Regional astrocyte allocation regulates CNS sy-
naptogenesis and repair, Science 337 (2012) 358–362.
[37] H. van Praag, A.F. Schinder, B.R. Christie, N. Toni, T.D. Palmer, F.H. Gage,
Functional neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus, Nature 415 (2002) 1030–1034.
[38] K. Yu, S. McGlynn, M.P. Matise, Floor plate-derived sonic hedgehog regulates glial
and ependymal cell fates in the developing spinal cord, Dev. Camb. Engl. 140
(2013) 1594–1604.
[39] X. Yu, C.P. Ng, H. Habacher, S. Roy, Foxj1 transcription factors are master reg-
ulators of the motile ciliogenic program, Nat. Genet. 40 (2008) 1445–1453.
[40] A. Zeisel, A.B. Muñoz-Manchado, S. Codeluppi, P. Lönnerberg, G. La Manno,
A. Juréus, S. Marques, H. Munguba, L. He, C. Betsholtz, C. Rolny, G. Castelo-Branco,
J. Hjerling-Leﬄer, S. Linnarsson, Brain structure. Cell types in the mouse cortex and
hippocampus revealed by single-Cell RNA-seq, Science 347 (2015) 1138–1142.
[41] K. Zheng, H. Li, Y. Zhu, Q. Zhu, M. Qiu, MicroRNAs are essential for the develop-
mental switch from neurogenesis to gliogenesis in the developing spinal cord, J.
Neurosci. J. Soc. Neurosci. 30 (2010) 8245–8250.
X. Li et al.
Experimental Cell Research 368 (2018) 84–100
100

===== Li2018_NatRevImmunol_Microglia+Macrophages =====
It has been just over a century since, in 1913, Santiago 
Ramón y Cajal described oligodendrocytes and micro­
glia together as the ‘third element’ of the central nervous 
system (CNS)1. A couple of years later, Pío Del Río-
Hortega, who once worked with Cajal, phenotypically 
characterized and officially named the only immune 
cells in the brain parenchyma, which are now known 
as microglia. Microglia were initially thought to orig­
inate from the neuroectoderm, but this view was later 
superseded by the idea of a blood monocytic origin, 
a concept that has dominated for the past three dec­
ades2. Only recently has it been convincingly shown 
that microglia arise from embryonic yolk sac (YS) pre­
cursors, which also give rise to macrophages in other 
tissues3–5. Microglia maintain their CNS population by 
self-renewal, with little contribution from blood cells5–8. 
Thus, microglia and most tissue macrophages arise from 
lineages that are developmentally and functionally dis­
tinct from blood-associated myeloid cells, such as mono­
cytes. These advances in our knowledge of microglial 
ontogeny raise interesting new questions about their 
developmental mechanisms, which we are only just 
beginning to answer.
In addition, owing to the misconception that the 
brain is an immune-privileged site, microglia have 
long been erroneously considered to be static bystand­
ers in the healthy CNS that have minimal homeostatic 
functions besides phagocytic scavenging and immune 
surveil­lance. With the advent of modern real-time 
imaging tools, microglia have been found to be more 
active than once thought, constantly monitoring brain 
activity by extending and retracting their highly ramified 
processes9–11. It is now becoming increasingly clear that 
microglia interact with essentially all CNS components 
and have a marked impact on normal brain functioning 
and maintenance of tissue integrity12,13.
During development, the mouse YS myeloid pre­
cursors travel to the brain at approximately embryonic 
day 9.5 (E9.5) before differentiating into immature 
microglia, which display amoeboid morphology and 
have distinct molecular and functional properties5,14. 
This occurs concurrently with the birth of neurons and 
before the generation of astrocytes and oligo­dendrocytes, 
which provides microglia with a unique opportunity to 
‘witness’ and participate in numerous develop­mental 
events in the CNS, such as neuro­genesis15,16, pro­
grammed cell death17–19, synapse elimination20,21 and the 
establishment and remodelling of neural circuits12,16,22–26. 
In addition, microglia quickly adapt to their environ­
ment and modify their functions with a broad spectrum 
of activation states27,28. In light of these discoveries, it is 
perhaps not surprising that microglial activation and 
dysfunction are increasingly implicated in almost all 
diseases and injuries of the CNS29–32.
Adding an extra layer of complexity, there are three 
other types of CNS macrophage — namely, peri­vascular, 
meningeal and choroid plexus macrophages — that are 
localized at the interface between the parenchyma and 
the circulation33. Perivascular and meningeal macro­
phages are also generated from YS precursors, whereas 
choroid plexus macrophages have dual embryonic and 
adult haematopoietic origins33,34. Together with other 
Department of Neurobiology, 
Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, 
California 94305, USA.
tristan.qingyun.li@gmail.com; 
barres@stanford.edu
doi:10.1038/nri.2017.125
Published online 20 Nov 2017
Microglia and macrophages in brain 
homeostasis and disease
Qingyun Li and Ben A. Barres
Abstract | Microglia and non-parenchymal macrophages in the brain are mononuclear 
phagocytes that are increasingly recognized to be essential players in the development, 
homeostasis and diseases of the central nervous system. With the availability of new genetic, 
molecular and pharmacological tools, considerable advances have been made towards our 
understanding of the embryonic origins, developmental programmes and functions of these cells. 
These exciting discoveries, some of which are still controversial, also raise many new questions, 
which makes brain macrophage biology a fast-growing field at the intersection of neuroscience 
and immunology. Here, we review the current knowledge of how and where brain macrophages 
are generated, with a focus on parenchymal microglia. We also discuss their normal functions 
during development and homeostasis, the disturbance of which may lead to various 
neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric diseases.
NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY	
 VOLUME 18 | APRIL 2018 | 225
REVIEWS
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

Blood–brain barrier
(BBB). A physiological barrier 
between blood vessels and 
brain parenchyma. It is formed 
by specialized tight junctions 
between endothelial cells of 
the blood vessel wall, which is 
surrounded by a basement 
membrane and an additional 
membrane formed from 
astrocytic end feet, known as 
the glial basement membrane 
(glia limitans).
Basal ganglia
A group of interconnected 
nuclei (clusters of neurons) that 
lie deep beneath the cerebral 
cortex. They are responsible 
for modulating motor control, 
planning actions and executing 
habitual behaviours, as well as 
influencing cognition and 
emotion.
Parabiosis
An experimental model system 
in which two animals (most 
often mice) are surgically 
joined to establish a common 
circulation.
blood-borne myeloid cells that infiltrate the brain under 
certain conditions, these CNS macrophages constitute 
an intricate network of heterogeneous cell populations, 
the study of which has the potential to lead to novel 
therapies for brain diseases33,35. Here, we review recent 
advances in the research regarding microglial and brain 
macrophage ontogeny, developmental programmes 
and functions in health and disease. We discuss some 
controversial views and remaining questions.
Microglia and brain macrophages
Myeloid cells in the brain. Microglia constitute 5–10% of 
total brain cells and are the only true CNS paren­chymal 
macrophages28. Microglia and perivascular, menin­
geal and choroid plexus macrophages each occupy a 
strategic niche, thereby covering the entire CNS33,34 
(FIG. 1). These macrophages adopt different shapes and 
sizes, and they express a combination of overlapping 
and unique markers33. Their functions are still poorly 
understood. The CNS also contains an extensive vascu­
lature network, in which circulating myeloid cells, such 
as monocytes, granulocytes and dendritic cells, reside. 
There are at least two subtypes of monocytes in mice: 
Ly6Chi classical inflammatory monocytes (CD14hiCD16− 
in humans) and Ly6Clow non-classical patrolling mono­
cytes (CD14+CD16hi in humans)35. Ly6Clow monocytes 
are derived from Ly6Chi monocytes in either the blood 
or the bone marrow (BM)36. During certain diseases or 
injuries involving breach of the blood–brain barrier (BBB), 
Ly6Chi monocytes may infiltrate the brain parenchyma 
and differentiate into microglia-like cells, which are 
intermingled with the resident microglia, to exacerbate 
or alleviate disease progression29,35.
Recent comparative transcriptomic studies have gen­
erated useful resources for identifying the molecular 
signatures of many types of tissue-resident macrophage 
and blood-borne myeloid cell, including microglia30,37–41. 
These studies led to the discovery of specific bona fide 
microglial markers, such as transmembrane protein 119 
(TMEM119)41,42. These new microglia-specific markers 
should allow for the generation of novel and much-
needed tools for observing and manipulating microglial 
functions without affecting other cell types. However, 
an important caveat is that the majority of these studies 
have primarily used bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) 
of cells isolated acutely based on known markers; it is 
possible that some subtypes of microglia were missed, 
in particular those that are present transiently during 
development, when distinguishable markers are more 
limited. For example, recent studies show that micro­
glia and macrophages isolated from different regions 
of the brain have age-dependent and region-­dependent 
differences in transcriptomic profiles43. In addition, 
region-specific cues that establish distinct microglial 
phenotypes may even be restricted to the level of indi­
vidual nuclei in an anatomical structure such as the basal 
ganglia44. It is worth mentioning that such transcriptomic 
heterogeneity has not been documented in single-cell 
RNA-seq analysis45,46. It is unclear whether the current 
single-cell RNA-seq technology is sensitive enough to 
detect subtle differences (if they are present) among 
cells of the same type. Independent confirmation of the 
reported region-dependent microglial heterogeneity 
could also help to reconcile some of these discrepancies.
Microglial and brain macrophage ontogeny. In the 
past few years, a series of lineage-tracing experi­
ments5,7,8,36,47–49, together with parabiosis experiments6,7 
and neonatal BM transplantations5,7, have definitively 
shown the YS ontogeny of microglia3. The current con­
sensus view is that microglia are generated from YS 
erythromyeloid precursors (EMPs), which give rise to 
YS macrophages — the immediate migratory precursors 
that colonize the embryonic brain14,48. However, the pre­
cise nature and time of emergence of these EMPs are still 
under debate3,50,51 (FIG. 2).
In rodents, there are at least three waves of haemato­
poiesis that partially overlap in terms of timing and the 
tissues involved, which is one reason why microglial and 
CNS macrophage ontogeny has always been challeng­
ing to determine52. The first wave starts in the YS blood 
islands (posterior plate mesoderm) at E7.0, and it gen­
erates primitive progenitor cells at approximately E7.5. 
These progenitors differentiate into nucleated erythro­
cytes and YS macrophages without passing through 
monocytic intermediates, hence the name ‘primitive’ 
haematopoiesis3,51. According to one model (Model 1), 
it is proposed that these YS primitive progenitors are by 
nature primary EMPs and that their descendants, the 
YS macrophages, colonize the entire embryo including 
the brain to generate all types of tissue-resident macro­
phage3,49 (FIG. 2). These populations are commonly 
referred to as YS‑derived tissue macrophages, which 
are F4/80hiCD11blow (in contrast to F4/80lowCD11bhi 
monocyte-derived cells; see below)47,49. The primary 
Figure 1 | The microenvironments and genetic signatures 
for brain macrophages. Microglia are the only macrophage 
population in the central nervous system (CNS) parenchyma, 
where they can interact with neurons, astrocytes and 
oligodendrocytes (not shown). They express transmembrane 
protein 119 (TMEM119), P2Y purinoceptor 12 (P2RY12) and 
Sal-like protein 1 (SALL1) as specific markers38,41,77. Microglia 
are also distinguished from non-parenchymal macrophages 
(that is, meningeal, perivascular and choroid plexus 
macrophages) by low levels of expression of CD45 and MHC 
class II molecules, although this means of identification is less 
precise than using specific markers. Non-parenchymal 
macrophages are less well defined, as many markers have 
overlapping expression patterns33,34. Only choroid plexus 
macrophage populations receive input from the circulation, 
and all other brain macrophages, including microglia, 
maintain their populations by self-renewal under normal 
conditions. Each brain macrophage population is localized in 
a specialized niche, which may be instructive for their gene 
expression and functional properties. Tight junctions 
between endothelial cells and choroid plexus epithelial cells 
are primary features of the blood–brain barrier and blood–
cerebrospinal-fluid barrier, respectively. These may have a 
role in confining the territories of different macrophage 
populations. Inflammatory monocytes (Ly6Chi), which give 
rise to patrolling monocytes (Ly6Clow), may enter the brain 
parenchyma upon disease or injury. CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; 
CX3CR1, CX3C-chemokine receptor 1.
◀
REVIEWS
226 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 18	
www.nature.com/nri
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

Microglial 
cell
Pericyte
Astrocytic
end feet
Endothelial 
cell with tight 
junctions
Inﬂammatory 
monocyte
Patrolling
monocyte
Ventricle
Meninges
Expression signature of 
perivascular macrophages
• CX3CR1
• CD11b
• CD45hi
• MERTK
• CD206
• CD163
• MHC class IIhi
Perivascular
macrophage
Brain parenchyma
Parenchyma
Ependymal cell
Choroid plexus stroma
Epithelial
cell
Tight junction
Basal membrane
CSF
Monocyte
Choroid plexus
macrophage
Fenestrated capillary
Expression signature of 
choroid plexus macrophages
• CX3CR1
• CD11b
• CD45hi
• MERTK
• MHC class IIhi
Expression signature 
of microglia
• CX3CR1
• CD11b
• CD45low
• TMEM119
• P2RY12
• SALL1
• MHC class IIlow
Microglial 
cell
Disease 
or injury
Glial 
basement
membrane
Endothelial
basement
membrane
Subarachnoid space
Pia mater
Skull bone
Brain
parenchyma
Dura mater
Arachnoid mater
Glia limitans 
Blood vessel
Meningeal 
macrophage
Expression signature of 
meningeal macrophages
• CX3CR1
• CD11b
• CD45hi
• MERTK
• CD206
• MHC class IIhi
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY	
 VOLUME 18 | APRIL 2018 | 227
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

EMPs express macrophage colony-stimulating factor 1 
receptor (CSF1R) and require signalling through this 
receptor for their survival and differentiation; they are 
independent of the transcriptional activator MYB5,49. At 
E8.25, the second ‘transient definitive’ wave of haemato­
poiesis is initiated in the haemogenic endothelium of 
Primary EMPs
KIT+CD45–
CSF1R+
MYB–
RUNX1+
RUNX1+
Secondary EMPs
KIT+CD41+AA4.1+
CSF1R?
MYB+
Secondary
EMPs
KIT+CD41+
AA4.1+
CSF1R?
MYB+
E7.0
E8.5
E9.5
E10.5
E12.5
E14.5
E17.5
P14
Fetal liver 
myeloid
progenitors
KIT+FLT3–Ly6C–
CSF1R+
MYB+
Fetal liver 
common
monocyte
progenitors
KIT+FLT3–Ly6C+
CSF1R+
MYB+
HSCs
KIT+FLT3+
SCA1+
MYB+
HSCs
Ly6Chi
monocytes
YS macrophages A2 
pre-macrophages
CD45+
CX3CR1+
TNFRSF11a+
Pre-macrophages
CD45+
CX3CR1+
TNFRSF11a+
Tissue 
macrophage
precursors
F4/80hiCD11blow
Various pioneer 
factors+
Tissue 
macrophage
precursors
F4/80hiCD11blow
Some signature
genes+
YS-derived
tissue macrophages
F4/80hiCD11blow
Pre-macrophages 
CD45+
CX3CR1+
TNFRSF11a+
Tissue-
speciﬁc
signals
YS macrophages A1
CD45+KITlow
YS 
macrophages
IRF8
CX3CR1
CX3CR1
TGFβ
IL-34
Fetal liver 
monocytes
KIT–FLT3–
F4/80low
CD11bhi
CSF1R+
Fetal liver 
monocytes
KIT–FLT3–
F4/80low
CD11bhi
CSF1R+
Fetal liver monocyte-
derived tissue 
macrophages
F4/80lowCD11hi
Tissue 
macrophages
CD64+MERTK+
YS 
macrophages
Early microglia
F4/80hiCD11blow
SALL1+SALL3+
MCM5+DAB2+
Pre-microglia
F4/80lowCD11blow
CSF1+CRYBB1+
NRROS
PVM-like cells
CD45hiCD206+
CD74+
Adult microglia
CD14+MAFB+PMEPA1+
TMEM119+P2RY12+SALL1+
Model 2
Model 2
Model 2
Blood–brain barrier
Inﬂammatory
insult
Peripheral 
tissues
Model 1
Tissue-
speciﬁc
signals
Model 1
Yolk sac
Fetal liver
Bone marrow
CNS
AGM
Figure 2 | Ontogeny and development of microglia and tissue 
macrophages. Developmental trajectories of microglia and tissue 
macrophages are shown in the context of three waves of haematopoiesis. The 
cellular identities of each intermediate step are defined by surface marker 
expression and gene signature. A1 and A2 yolk sac (YS) macrophages were 
defined by Kierdorf et al.14. Early microglia, pre-microglia and adult microglia 
were defined by Matcovitch-Natan et al.45. Highlighted are two models that 
differ in terms of the precise origins of microglia and other tissue macrophages, 
as well as the relative contributions of YS macrophages and fetal liver (FL) 
monocytes to peripheral tissue-resident macrophages. Some key proteins 
controlling cell fate progression or cell migration are indicated above the 
arrows. Coloured symbols on some arrows refer to important tissue-specific 
signals for the differentiation and maturation of a given macrophage 
population. The brain-derived signals for microglial development are unknown 
(red star). Between embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5) and E12.5, tissue macrophages 
start to show differential expression of some genes that persist into the adult 
stage82. Because they have not turned on the full gene signature, these cells are 
labelled with gradient colours. Expression of colony-stimulating factor 1 
receptor (CSF1R) by secondary erythromyeloid precursors (EMPs) is 
controversial (indicated by a question mark). Only relevant myeloid lineages 
are shown, and non-parenchymal macrophages are not shown due to the lack 
of knowledge about their origins. The steps that occur before the aorta, gonads 
and mesonephros (AGM) region for definitive haematopoiesis are not shown. 
CNS, central nervous system; CX3CR1, CX3C-chemokine receptor 1; HSC, 
haematopoietic stem cell; IRF8, interferon regulatory factor 8; NRROS, 
negative regulator of reactive oxygen species; P2RY12, P2Y purinoceptor 12; 
PVM, perivascular macrophage; RUNX1, runt-related transcription factor 1; 
SALL1, Sal-like protein 1; TGFβ, transforming growth factor β; TMEM119, 
transmembrane protein 119; TNFRSF11a, tumour necrosis factor receptor 
superfamily member 11a.
REVIEWS
228 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 18	
www.nature.com/nri
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

the YS, which generates ‘late’ or secondary EMPs. The 
secondary EMPs do not express CSF1R but are MYB 
dependent49, which indicates that they have different 
molecular properties and/or differentiation potential 
compared with the primary EMPs. According to this 
model, these secondary EMPs give rise to some macro­
phages that never exit the YS, and, more importantly, 
they migrate to and emerge in the fetal liver (FL) at E9.5, 
where they upregulate CSF1R expression and become 
myeloid progenitors that have restricted develop­mental 
potential3,49. Myeloid progenitors further differen­
tiate into F4/80lowCD11bhi FL monocytes that have 
high proliferative capability at E12.5. At approximately 
E14.5, large numbers of FL monocytes invade all tis­
sues except the brain, where the BBB that has begun to 
form at approximately E13.5 presumably blocks their 
entry49. These FL monocytes develop into tissue macro­
phages, diluting the original YS‑derived macrophages, 
and the two populations cannot be distinguished by 
the adult stage. Overlapping with the second wave 
of haematopoiesis, at E8.5, the third ‘definitive’ wave of 
haematopoiesis starts in the embryo proper, generating 
immature haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from the 
haemogenic endothelium in the para-aortic splanchno­
pleura region. At E10.5, this region develops into the 
aorta, gonads and mesonephros region, from which fetal 
HSCs start to migrate to the liver, where they join the 
production of FL monocytes by the secondary EMPs3,49. 
HSCs also differentiate into FL monocytes, thereby at 
least partially contributing to some tissue macrophage 
populations3,8. Therefore, according to this model, micro­
glia are solely generated from primary EMPs, whereas 
primary EMPs, secondary EMP-derived FL monocytes 
and HSC-derived FL monocytes disproportionally 
contribute to all other tissue macrophages.
In contrast to the proposed sequential generation of 
heterogeneous EMP subsets8,49, a different model (Model 
2) postulates that a single homogeneous population of 
EMPs originates in the YS, which corresponds to the 
secondary EMPs in Model 1 (REFS 48,50) (FIG. 2). These 
EMPs are thought to be KIT+CD41+CD45lowAA4.1+ and 
give rise to essentially all tissue macrophages, includ­
ing microglia48,51. Based on this model, the first wave of 
haema­topoiesis only generates YS‑resident macrophages, 
and FL monocytes derived from either EMPs or HSCs 
only minimally contribute to tissue-resident macro­
phages3. In addition, these EMPs are thought to express 
MYB but do not require it for myeloid differentiation51. 
Both Model 1 and Model 2 are consistent with EMPs 
being the sole origin of microglia and EMP-derived YS 
macrophages being the immediate precursors that pene­
trate the CNS during development, but the models differ 
in the precise nature and timing of EMP emergence in 
the context of the three waves of haematopoiesis. These 
discrepancies could be due to our still-poor understand­
ing of the accurate molecular identities of these early 
haematopoietic precursors. Most fate-mapping studies 
have relied on the use of a few known surface markers, 
which may be promiscuous. Interpretation of these stud­
ies has been further complicated by the variable labelling 
efficiency of each reagent and the extraordinary cellular 
heterogeneity and developmental asynchrony in over­
lapping tissues, as well as unpredictable delays or residual 
effects due to tamoxifen-mediated recombination in the 
face of rapidly changing developmental processes. Future 
studies will probably benefit from unbiased single-cell 
transcriptomic analysis of all relevant cell populations 
to better define their identities and aid in designing 
more-precise tools.
Recent fate-mapping studies of the origin of non-­
parenchymal macrophages also challenged the dogma 
regarding the ontogeny of these cells, which have long 
been thought to be constantly replenished by blood-­
derived monocytes. Using the Cx3cr1–CreER mouse 
line (in which expression of Cre recombinase fused to an 
oestrogen receptor (ER) ligand-binding domain is under 
the control of endogenous Cx3cr1 promoter and enhancer 
elements) for lineage tracing, it was found that peri­
vascular and meningeal macrophages are maintained by 
self-renewal and are predominantly generated by embry­
onic haematopoietic precursor cells34. By contrast, cho­
roid plexus macrophages were shown to have dual origins 
from both embryonic myeloid precursors and adult HSCs. 
This result was confirmed by parabiosis experiments and 
is also consistent with the observation that only choroid 
plexus macrophages depend on CC‑chemokine receptor 2 
for maintenance33,34. However, this work did not address 
the nature of the embryonic precursor cells that generate 
non-parenchymal macrophages. Considering that the 
onset of BBB closure at approximately E13.5 might be a 
mechanism that prevents FL monocytes from entering 
the microglial pool, it would be interesting to see if non-­
parenchymal macrophages also arise from a single origin 
by a similar gating strategy.
Importance of ontogeny. Normally, microglia arise only 
from EMP-derived YS macrophages. However, other 
sources, such as FL monocytes or HSC-derived mono­
cytes, can also contribute to the microglial pool under 
certain conditions, which raises the question of whether 
ontogeny transmits any intrinsic properties of functional 
relevance to the differentiated cells. BBB formation co­
incides with the timing of broad FL monocyte infiltra­
tion53 and it has therefore been speculated to be the main 
mechanism for blocking FL monocyte accessibility to the 
embryonic brain2,49. Direct evidence for this possibility, 
however, is lacking. Intriguingly, in the perinatal stage 
(in particular, at approximately postnatal day 3), myeloid 
cells of FL origin infiltrate the brain parenchyma and 
they coexist with the YS‑derived cells for approximately 
3 days before undergoing complete apoptosis54. The rel­
evance of the brief presence of these cells is unknown. 
Furthermore, when YS macrophages were eliminated 
by a CSF1R‑specific monoclonal antibody at E6.5, a 
new F4/80lowCD11bhi population appeared later in the 
fetal brain, suggesting that FL monocyte colonization is 
possible in the absence of YS‑derived cells49 (a caveat 
is that a toxic effect on the BBB by the CSF1R‑specific 
antibody cannot be ruled out). Similarly, in PU.1‑mutant 
mice that lack microglia and other myeloid-lineage cells, 
BM‑derived cells can infiltrate the CNS and differen­
tiate into ramified cells that are indistinguishable from 
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY	
 VOLUME 18 | APRIL 2018 | 229
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

microglia, but these cells rarely engraft the brain in wild-
type mice even after irradiation5,6,55,56. It is unknown how 
functionally similar these cells are to endogenous micro­
glia. These studies are particularly interesting when we 
compare microglia with non-parenchymal macrophages, 
for which the engraftment rates in the brains of wild-
type mice were as high as 80%34. It is interesting to 
consider whether this is caused by differences in the 
sensitivity of brain macrophages to irradiation-induced 
injuries and what determines the preferences for BM cell 
colonization.
These findings, together with studies of other tissue-­
resident macrophages, suggest a niche model that might 
explain the variations of macrophage ontogeny across 
tissue types in both steady-state and disease settings57,58. 
For a given situation, the final contribution of possible 
microglia and macrophage sources to CNS myeloid cells 
is determined by following a ‘niche accessibility–niche 
availability–precursor competitiveness’ decision tree57. 
Each cell source is intrinsically competent to carry out 
tissue-dependent functions, and phenotypic differences 
are mainly due to the history of the cells and the exist­
ing environmental cues. This model emphasizes the 
develop­mental and functional plasticity of macrophages 
and monocytes, and it trivializes ontogeny as a possible 
deterministic factor for functions. Future work should 
address how shifts in microglial ontogeny affect micro­
glial functions at the transcriptomic and epigenetic levels 
in both the short term and the long term.
Microglial and CNS macrophage development
Microglial precursor migration and CNS coloniza­
tion. Originating in the YS, microglial progenitors (that 
is, EMPs) differentiate into YS macrophages before 
migrating to the embryonic tissues, including to the 
brain. However, it has not been clear how these pre­
cursors disperse throughout the embryo and colonize 
the brain parenchyma during development. As shown 
using Cx3cr1GFP mice (which express green fluorescent 
protein (GFP) under the control of the endogenous 
Cx3cr1 locus), microglial precursors first emerge in 
the cephalic mesenchyme at E9.0 and then penetrate the 
neuroepithelium starting at E9.5 (REFS 5,14). Two indi­
rect observations suggest that the blood circulation is 
responsible for the long-range transport of YS pre­cursors 
to distal tissues such as the brain. First, the appearance 
of YS precursors in the embryo coincides with the estab­
lishment of the vasculature. Second, sodium–­calcium 
exchanger 1 (NCX1)-deficient mice, which lack a nor­
mal heartbeat and blood circulation, have many fewer 
microglia in the embryonic brain5. As loss of blood 
circulation could limit nutrient distribution and affect 
the normal physiology and metabolism of the entire 
embryo, other possible downstream events could lead 
to defects in microglial differentiation and migration. 
Therefore, more-direct evidence is needed to validate 
this model. Indeed, a circulation-independent mecha­
nism for microglial invasion from brain-surrounding 
tissues into the parenchyma has been shown by in vivo 
imaging of larval zebrafish, although it is unclear if this 
migratory behaviour is specific to particular species or 
developmental stages59. Interestingly, CX3C-chemokine 
receptor 1 (CX3CR1) is required for the proper dis­
persion of macrophage precursors throughout mouse 
embryos. In mice that lack CX3CR1 expression, more 
precursor cells are stuck in the YS and FL instead of col­
onizing the brain and other tissues. However, this defect 
is only temporary during embryonic stages, which indi­
cates that there must be other as yet unidentified signals 
that attract precursor infiltration of the CNS. Studies 
in zebrafish suggest that lysophosphatidylcholine60 
or nucleotides61 released by apoptotic neurons might 
function as chemotactic signals to attract microglial 
precursors into the brain.
Once inside the brain parenchyma, microglial pre­
cursors receive instructive signals from the CNS environ­
ment that support their differentiation (see below). They 
initially have amoeboid morphology and become ram­
ified at approximately E14.5 (REFS 14,62), when they 
are still highly proliferative, a state that lasts until the 
first postnatal week41. By postnatal day 14, microglia 
are fully mature and express adult-signature genes38,41. 
This population of cells maintains itself at constant and 
region-­specific densities through tightly coupled local 
proliferation and apoptosis for nearly the entire lifespan 
of the animal54. It has been shown that microglial turn­
over rates vary across brain regions, with the olfactory 
bulb having one of the highest rates (an estimate of 
8 months for full turnover in mice63), although how fast 
cortical microglia renew remains controversial54,63,64. A 
recent in vivo single-cell imaging study, which presum­
ably offers more accurate assessments, suggests that 
microglia in the mouse neocortex are long-lived, with 
a median lifespan of more than 15 months65. Microglial 
self-renewal seems to occur in a stochastic manner with­
out any regional hot spots, but this process shifts towards 
clonal expansion during pathology63.
Early myeloid cell differentiation. Microglial differen­
tiation starts as soon as the precursors emerge in the 
YS. Based on current knowledge of primitive haema­
topoiesis, primary EMPs (microglial pro­genitors 
according to Model 1; discussed above) are generated 
from the posterior plate mesoderm in the YS, which 
is independent from the lineages generated in the 
endothelial haemogenic region that give rise to sec­
ondary EMPs51. Normally, only the endo­thelial-to-
haematopoietic transition during the generation of 
secondary EMPs requires runt-related transcription 
factor 1 (RUNX1), a subunit of the transcription factor 
core binding factor (CBF)51,66. This observation suggests 
that the emergence of primary EMPs does not depend 
on RUNX1. However, to the contrary, fate-mapping 
studies using Runx1‑CreER mice pulsed with tamox­
ifen at E7.0–E7.25, during primary EMP generation, 
demonstrated robust labelling of microglia but not of 
other tissue macrophages, which suggests that micro­
glia do arise from RUNX1‑expressing cells5. These con­
flicting results are one of the reasons why the nature 
of microglial progenitors is still under debate. It is 
unknown whether RUNX1 is functionally required for 
the specification of microglial progenitors.
REVIEWS
230 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 18	
www.nature.com/nri
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

CSF1R signalling is essential for microglial develop­
ment and maintenance67,68. During embryogenesis, 
YS macrophages depend on CSF1R signalling for 
their proliferation, differentiation and survival5. In 
CSF1R‑mutant mice, YS macrophages are absent and 
the subsequent tissue colonization by macrophages 
fails to occur (see TABLE 1 for microglial phenotypes 
in other genetic mutants). Similarly, administration of 
a CSF1R‑specific blocking antibody efficiently elimi­
nates fetal macrophages, including developing micro­
glia49. Consistent with a role for CSF1R ligands in cell 
fate specification, they are major components in all 
protocols for generating induced pluripotent stem cell 
(iPSC)-derived microglia69–73 (BOX 1). CSF1R signalling 
may induce myeloid cell differentiation by activating 
the myeloid lineage-determining transcription factor 
PU.1 (REF. 74), which is broadly expressed by haema­
topoietic cells. PU.1‑deficient mice lack microglia and 
all non-parenchymal macrophages, as well as other tis­
sue macrophages and circulating monocytes34,47 (TABLE 1). 
Interestingly, PU.1‑mutant mice have reduced expres­
sion of CSF1R, CSF2R and CSF3R and consequently do 
not respond to the corresponding cytokines75, which 
suggests that there is a feedback loop between CSF1R 
signalling and PU.1 regulation.
In addition, constant CSF1R signalling is required 
to maintain the microglial population in the adult 
CNS. For example, the CSF1R inhibitor PLX3397 
could eliminate more than 90% of microglia when 
mice were treated for 7 days76. This treatment did 
not cause overt behavioural defects or inflammation, 
thereby offering a valuable tool for studying microglial 
functions. The pro-survival function of CSF1R signal­
ling was also demonstrated by the loss of microglia in 
adult mice when Csf1r was specifically knocked out 
in microglia77, and recently further demonstrated in 
a new serum-free in vitro culture system for purified 
microglia78. Consistently, mice that lack either CSF1 or 
IL‑34, two partially redundant ligands for CSF1R79,80, 
have decreased numbers of adult microglia5 (TABLE 1). 
Table 1 | Variations in the number of brain macrophages in various mutant mice
Protein deficiency
Microglia
Perivascular 
macrophagess
Choroid plexus 
macrophages
Meningeal 
macrophages
Refs
PU.1
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
14,34,47
CSF1
↓
5
IL‑34
↓
79,80
CSF1R
↓
5,156
IRF8
↓
↔
↓
14,34
TGFβ
↓↓
38
SALL1
↑
77
NRROS
↑
87
CX3CR1
↔* ↓‡
14,22,82
DAP12
↔§ ↓↓||
14,157
TREM2
↔
152
MYB
↔
↔
↔
14,34,47
ID2
↔
14
BATF3
↔
↔
↔
↔
14,34
KLF4
↔
14
CCR1
↔¶
14
CCR2
↔
↔
↓
↔
14,34,56
CXCR3
↔¶
14
NR4A1
↔
↔
↔
34
All quantifications were carried out in the adult stage except for those for which specific stage and tissue information is marked. 
*Embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5)–E14. ‡E9.5–E10.5, postnatal day 8 (P8)–P28. §E14, P28. ||10‑month old in basal ganglia and spinal cord. ¶E14. 
Undefined phenotypes are blank. BATF3, basic leucine zipper transcriptional factor ATF-like 3; CCR1, CC-chemokine receptor 1; 
CSF1R, colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor; CX3CR1, CX3C-chemokine receptor 1; CXCR3, CXC-chemokine receptor 3; DAP12, 
DNAX activation protein 12; IRF8, interferon regulatory factor 8; KLF4, Krüppel-like factor 4; NR4A1, nuclear receptor subfamily 4 
group A member 1; NRROS, negative regulator of reactive oxygen species; SALL1, Sal-like protein 1; TGFβ, transforming growth 
factor-β; TREM2, triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2. The ↑, ↔ and ↓ symbols indicate that the size of a cell population is 
increased, unchanged or decreased, respectively. The number of symbols indicates the level of changes. 
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY	
 VOLUME 18 | APRIL 2018 | 231
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

Of note, CSF1 is broadly expressed by neural cell types, 
whereas IL‑34 is specifically produced by neurons, and 
the two cytokines are expressed in non-overlapping 
cortical layers and brain regions67,81. Remarkably, cere­
bellar neurons do not express IL‑34 (REF. 67), and the 
cerebellum and brainstem are the only brain regions 
in which the number of microglia is not changed in 
IL‑34‑mutant animals79,80.
Once the myeloid lineage is determined by expres­
sion of PU.1 and CSF1R, microglial progenitors start to 
Box 1 | Stem cell approaches to studying microglia-mediated human diseases
It is of tremendous interest from a clinical perspective to study human 
microglia in various disease settings. However, research has been limited by 
the availability of human cells and lack of reliable ways to maintain them in 
a state that resembles the expression patterns and functions of endogenous 
microglia. Using human embryonic stem (ES) cells or induced pluripotent 
stem cells (iPSCs) to generate the desired population of differentiated cells 
in vitro has been successful in circumventing certain limitations, and cells 
derived from patients can be used to model human diseases. Previously, 
protocols to generate human ES cell‑derived microglia-like cells relied on 
the isolation of so‑called microglial precursor cells from intermediate 
precursors belonging to the neuroectodermal lineage148. Studies in 
zebrafish and birds show that the extra-embryonic yolk sac (YS) ontogeny 
of microglia is likely to be evolutionarily conserved2. In humans, YS 
haematopoiesis occurs at approximately day 19 after conception, which is 
earlier in relative time than in rodents149. These early precursor cells are 
erythromyeloid precursors (EMPs), which give rise to the YS macrophages 
that start to infiltrate the human brain at approximately 4.5 gestational 
weeks150 (by comparison, mouse YS macrophages enter the brain 
parenchyma at day 9.5 within a 21‑day gestational period). The advances in 
our understanding of microglial ontogeny and embryonic haematopoiesis 
have been informative in helping to design strategies for the in vitro 
differentiation of human ES cells or iPSCs into microglia-like cells via steps 
that mirror the trajectory of endogenous microglial development. At least 
five protocols have recently been published for this purpose69–73 (see the 
table below for comparisons). These in vitro-differentiated cells recapitulate 
many of the functions that are normally carried out by microglia, such as 
phagocytosis, cytokine release and engraftment into the brain. They 
express subsets of microglia-specific genes and are closely related to fetal 
microglia at the transcriptomic level. Future investigations of brain-derived 
signals that instruct microglial maturation during development should help 
to improve the protocols in order to generate and culture patient-derived 
mature microglia for studying human diseases.
Protocol
Starting 
cells
Important 
intermediates
Major 
differentiation 
factors
Feeder 
layer or 
co‑culture
Yield 
(range)*
Time 
(weeks)
Functional 
studies
Disease 
modelled
Advantages
1 
(REF. 69)
Human 
ES cells 
and 
iPSCs
YS embryoid 
bodies 
(VE‑cadherin+KIT+ 
CD41+CD235+)
IL‑34 and 
CSF1
Murine 
embryonic 
fibroblast 
feeder cells 
for human 
ES cell 
and iPSC 
propagation
0.5–4
8
•	Phagocytosis
•	Responsiveness 
to stimuli and 
endotoxin
•	3D culture with 
neurons and 
astrocytes from 
the same iPSCs
Rett 
syndrome
Compatible 
with 3D culture
2 
(REF. 70)
iPSCs
Haematopoietic 
progenitor-like 
cells (CD34+
CD43+)
GM‑CSF, CSF1 
and IL‑3
OP9 murine 
stromal 
feeder layer; 
astrocyte 
co‑culture
2–3
2−4
•	Phagocytosis
•	Production 
of ROS and 
cytokines
Murine 
glioma
Also works for 
iPSCs
3 
(REF. 71)
iPSCs
Haematopoietic 
progenitors 
(CD43+)
CSF1, IL‑34, 
TGFβ, CD200 
and CX3CL1
Rat 
hippocampal 
neurons 
during 
maturation
30–40
5
•	Phagocytosis of 
synaptosomes, 
tau and 
β‑amyloid
•	Responsiveness 
to ADP
•	Cytokine 
release
Acute 
injury 
in 3D 
culture 
with all 
neural cell 
types
High purity; 
high yield; 
commercially 
available 
intermediates; 
graftable to 
mouse brains
4 
(REF. 72)
Human 
ES cells 
and 
iPSCs
Myeloid 
progenitors 
(CD14+
CX3CR1+
CD45+)
IL‑34 and 
GM‑CSF
No
2–3
8.5
•	Phagocytosis
•	Cytokine 
release
•	Responsiveness 
to ADP with 
Ca2+ transients
NA
Highly pure; 
can start with 
fewer iPSCs 
(105)
5 
(REF. 73)
iPSCs
Embryoid bodies 
and MYB-
independent 
macrophages 
(CD14+CD16low 
CD163+CD11b+)
IL‑34 and 
GM‑CSF 
(optional)
iPSC-
derived 
neurons
10–43
4
•	Increased 
motility when 
co‑cultured 
with neurons
•	Responsiveness 
to endotoxin
•	Cytokine 
release
NA
Genetic 
evidence for 
the defined 
intermediates; 
efficient and 
high yield
All protocols with the exception of protocol 2 use serum-free cell culture. CSF1, colony stimulating factor 1; CX3CL1, CX3C-chemokine ligand 1; CX3CR1, 
CX3C-chemokine receptor 1; GM-CSF, granulocyte–macrophage colony-stimulating factor; ROS, reactive oxygen species; TGFβ, transforming growth factor β. 
*Indicates the number of microglia-like cells generated per starting cell.
REVIEWS
232 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 18	
www.nature.com/nri
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

Epigenetic memory
Molecular mechanisms 
modifying DNA or 
chromosomal configuration 
without changing gene 
sequences that lead to stable 
changes in gene expression 
long after the disappearance of 
initial developmental or 
environmental signals.
differentiate into YS macrophages. They first become 
CD45+KITlowCX3CR1− intermediate precursors and 
then become the more mature CD45+KIT−CX3CR1+ 
migratory macrophages14 (FIG. 2). The transcription fac­
tor interferon regulatory factor 8 (IRF8) is required for 
maturation of the migratory macrophage pre­cursors, 
which undergo apoptosis in Irf8−/− mice, resulting in 
markedly reduced numbers of embryonic and adult 
microglia14 (TABLE 1). Among non-parenchymal macro­
phages, IRF8 deficiency specifically reduces the number 
of meningeal macrophages34. The exact molecular func­
tions of IRF8 during brain macrophage development 
remain unknown.
In a recent study, the end products of these early 
differen­tiation steps were referred to as ‘pre-macro­
phages’ in the YS, which are CX3CR1+ and express core 
genes that are common to all macrophages82. They 
disperse throughout the embryo and only acquire 
tissue-specific gene signatures after colonization. 
Remarkably, it was shown that microglia-specific genes 
such as Sall1 and Sall3 start to be expressed by the col­
onized precursor cells as early as E10.25 (REF. 82) (FIG. 2), 
which suggests that a rapid, environment-induced fate 
commitment occurs and that Sal-like protein 1 (SALL1) 
is a tissue-specific microglia-specifying factor (see 
below). A similar transcriptomic study further dissected 
microglial development from E10.5 onwards into three 
discrete steps, with abrupt shifts occurring at approxi­
mately E14 and postnatal day 14 (REFS 41,45). Further 
work should address the molecular mechanisms that 
drive these transitions.
Brain environment-triggered signals for differen­
tiation. Microglial and macrophage tissue-specific 
identities are imprinted by environmental cues39,40,82. 
Transforming growth factor‑β (TGFβ) was suggested 
to be a crucial brain-derived signal for microglial 
specification38,40, although anti-inflammatory 77,83 
and/or pro-survival functions78 for this cytokine 
have also been proposed. Primary microglia cul­
tured with CSF1 and TGFβ have moderate but sig­
nificant increases in the expression of microglial 
signature genes compared with those cultured with 
CSF1 alone38. In addition, culture of peritoneal macro­
phages with TGFβ induces the transcription of some 
microglia-specific genes40. By contrast, microglia in 
Tgfbr2‑conditional knockout mice seem to adopt an 
activated phenotype77. However, in these mice, the 
possibility of non-microglial cell expansion cannot 
be ruled out, and the long-term survival of microglia 
was not assessed in this study. A recent study showed 
that astrocyte-secreted TGFβ, cholesterol and CSF1 
function together to strongly support microglial sur­
vival in vitro78. Consistent with this survival func­
tion, Tgfb1‑mutant mice have normal YS precursors 
but lack endogenous microglia38. These functional 
modes of TGFβ-mediated signalling are not neces­
sarily mutually exclusive. Nonetheless, as these recent 
studies showed, TGFβ is insufficient to reproduce the 
ability of the brain environment to induce full micro­
glial differentiation78,84. One consequence of chronic 
exposure to CNS-derived TGFβ, though, is that com­
pared with peripheral cells, microglia are less prone 
to undergo IRF7‑mediated pro- to anti-inflammatory 
conversion upon injury85. Therefore, TGFβ-mediated 
signalling may intricately modulate microglial 
activation in pathological conditions86.
The microglia-specific transcription factor SALL1 
and the transmembrane protein negative regulator of 
reactive oxygen species (NRROS) were recently found 
to promote quiescent microglial identities in the CNS 
environment77,87. Microglia-specific knockout of Sall1 
leads to rapid loss of microglial signature genes with 
a concomitant upregulation of genes often associ­
ated with other tissue macrophages77. In addition, 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) treatment down­regulates 
SALL1 expression, which indicates that SALL1 may 
be an important master regulator for maintaining 
microglial identity in response to immune challenges. 
Interestingly, microglia in NRROS-mutant animals 
also lose expression of many microglial signature 
genes (such as Tmem119, P2ry12 and Sall1) but express 
higher levels of Cd45, Cd206 (also known as Mrc1) 
and Cd74, which are genes that are characteristically 
expressed by perivascular macrophages87. Cluster ana­
lysis of RNA-seq results also shows the resemblance 
of NRROS-deficient microglia to endogenous peri­
vascular macrophages. This microglia-to‑perivascular 
macrophage conversion, together with the down­
regulation of SALL1 expression, is manifested as early 
as E14.5, which suggests that NRROS controls the 
divergence of brain-resident macrophages around 
the time of BBB closure at least partially through 
SALL1. Remarkably, NRROS function is not required 
in the adult to maintain microglial identity, whereas 
SALL1 is required. This is possibly due to develop­
mental stage-restricted gene regulation or to epigenetic 
memory at microglia-specific enhancers.
Epigenetic mechanisms regulating CNS macrophage 
identity. Transcriptional and epigenetic mechanisms 
form an intricate regulatory network to control micro­
glial and macrophage identities and plasticity88. Not 
only do tissue macrophages express unique genes, but 
they also have tissue-specific chromatin modifications 
and enhancer landscapes, which are shaped by onto­
geny and environmental cues39,40. Lineage-determining 
transcription factors, such as PU.1, establish the 
common myeloid enhancers, whilst incorporating 
incoming brain-derived signals to select subsets of 
microglia-restricted enhancers for activation39,40. 
Hypothetically, some pioneer factors induced by this 
activation cooperate with lineage-determining tran­
scription factors to further generate enhancers that 
are unique to microglia, leading to microglia-specific 
gene expression. By analysing consensus binding sites 
around enhancers that are only active in microglia, 
it was predicted that myocyte-specific enhancer fac­
tor 2C (MEF2C) is a brain environment-triggered 
pioneer factor that may have a role in microglial spec­
ification39. Similar analyses based on the cooperative 
binding between PU.1 and candidate factors around 
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY	
 VOLUME 18 | APRIL 2018 | 233
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

Complement system
A signalling cascade that can 
be activated by any of three 
independent pathways. The 
classical pathway is activated 
by antigen–antibody immune 
complexes. The alternative 
pathway is triggered by direct 
hydrolysis of complement 
component C3. The lectin 
pathway is activated by the 
binding of lectin to mannose 
residues on the surface of 
pathogens.
microglia-specific enhancers predict that SMAD fam­
ily member 3 (SMAD3) is an early master regulator of 
microglial fate40.
Interestingly, enhancer landscapes in myeloid cells 
can be modified by newly introduced environ­mental 
cues, which are accompanied by changes in gene expres­
sion40. For example, microglia quickly lose their gene 
signatures in culture media that are supplemented with 
candidate brain-derived factors, but they can regain 
their typical gene expression profile once transferred 
back to the brain78,84. Identifying the brain-derived sig­
nal that induces full microglial differentiation is a major 
unsolved question in the field.
CNS macrophages in CNS physiology and disease
Synapse modulation. Based on time-lapse recording, it is 
estimated that microglia can scan the entire brain paren­
chyma every few hours, during which they actively con­
tact other neural components, including synaptic clefts, 
with their fine processes9–11. The functional significance 
of such microglia–synapse interactions in the adult brain 
remains largely unknown. In the optic tectum of larval 
zebrafish, it was shown that microglia preferentially con­
tact neurons with higher levels of activity, and that this 
activity was attenuated by the interaction89 (adult stage 
in FIG. 3). ATP released downstream of NMDA receptor-­
mediated neuronal activity may function as a ‘find‑me’ 
signal to direct microglial process outgrowth via purin­
ergic receptor P2RY12 (REF. 90). Mounting evidence has 
shown that, during development, microglia are actively 
involved in synapse remodelling and maturation20,22,25. 
In CX3CR1‑mutant animals, the dendritic spine den­
sity of hippocampal CA1 neurons transiently increases 
at approximately postnatal day 15 (postnatal stage in 
FIG. 3). This phenotype is associated with a temporary 
reduction in microglial cell numbers (TABLE 1) and with an 
accumulation of immature synapses, leading to decreased 
functional connectivity across brain regions and an 
autism-like behavioural phenotype22,91. How CX3CR1 
signalling controls microglial activity to modulate syn­
apse function awaits future investigation. Moreover, it has 
been shown that microglial P2RY12 signalling is required 
for synaptic plasticity during the critical period of visual 
development (postnatal days 21–35 in mice)92. The loss 
of neuronal plasticity in P2RY12‑deficient mice is in line 
with alterations in microglial interactions with synaptic 
elements and their morphological response to monocular 
deprivation92.
Complement and synapse pruning. The classical com­
plement system has a pivotal role in pathogen defence 
and clearance of cellular debris. Microglia are the main, 
if not only, cells that express several key complement 
components in the brain, including complement com­
ponent C1q (C1q), complement receptor 3 (CR3) and 
CR5 (REFS 42,93). Under normal, ‘sterile’ CNS condi­
tions, the function of complement proteins extends 
far beyond their classical roles in the immune sys­
tem in targeting bacteria and other microorganisms. 
They have important roles in developmental synapse 
pruning, disease-associated synapse loss and cognitive 
decline in ageing93. In the first postnatal week, micro­
glia prune retinogeniculate synapses in the visual 
system20,21 (postnatal stage in FIG. 3). C1q and C3 pref­
erentially tag weak synapses, which are then engulfed 
by microglia via CR3. Beyond the visual system, C1q 
tagging of synapses is seen throughout the developing 
CNS, which suggests that it has a widespread role in 
synapse pruning by microglia. Consistent with this 
possibility, C1q‑deficient mice have spontaneous sei­
zures and have excessive excitatory synapses in the 
neocortical circuitry94.
Recently, a series of studies showed that re‑activation 
of complement-mediated developmental synapse prun­
ing by microglia can lead to various neurological and 
psychiatric disorders (FIG. 4a). In a model of Alzheimer 
disease, soluble β‑amyloid can induce C1q tagging 
of hippocampal synapses before plaque formation95. 
Remarkably, the synapse loss phenotype, which is a major 
cause of cognitive decline in Alzheimer disease, can be 
corrected by knocking out the genes encoding C1q, C3 
or CR3. Similarly, in the mouse model for fronto­temporal 
dementia caused by progranulin deficiency96, in acute 
Figure 3 | Microglial functions in development and 
homeostasis. Microglial functions are illustrated based 
on the stages of development. During the prenatal stage, 
microglia induce neuronal cell death, promote neuronal 
fasciculation and limit axon outgrowth. They also 
regulate the laminar positioning of neurons and increase 
the complexity of the vasculature network by fusing 
endothelial cells. During the perinatal stage, microglia 
support neuronal survival and promote phagocytosis-­
induced death of neuronal precursors and neurons. 
During the postnatal stage, microglia promote synapse 
maturation and remodel neural networks by pruning 
immature synapses. They also support the survival and 
differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells 
(OPCs). During the adult stage, microglia maintain the 
OPC pool and phagocytose myelin. In addition, microglia 
control adult neurogenesis and modulate neuronal 
activity. Factors that are required for the proper functions 
of microglia in a given situation are labelled. The precise 
developmental stages and tissues that were originally 
used to demonstrate these functions are indicated. 
Microglial functions under normal homeostatic 
conditions in adults are less well understood: 
phagocytosis of myelin can be a mechanism for myelin 
turnover; phagocytosis of adult neural precursor cells 
(NPCs) presumably uses the same mechanism as shown 
for the perinatal stage, when microglia phagocytose 
embryonic NPCs. Monitoring of neuronal activity by 
microglia was shown in the optic tectum of larval 
zebrafish. In this context, microglia preferentially interact 
with neurons with higher levels of activity and restrict this 
activity. Microglial chemotaxis is proposed to be 
mediated by neuronal ATP. C1q, complement component 
C1q; C3, complement component C3; CX3CR1, CX3C 
chemokine receptor 1; DAP12, DNAX-activation protein 
12; E4, embryonic day 4; GAS6, growth-arrest-specific 
protein 6; IGF, insulin-like growth factor; NGFR, 
nerve growth factor receptor; NRP1, neuropilin 1; 
P3, postnatal day 3; ROS, reactive oxygen species; 
TAM, TYRO3, AXL and MER receptor tyrosine kinases; 
TEK, angiopoietin 1 receptor.
▶
REVIEWS
234 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 18	
www.nature.com/nri
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

Microglial cell
DAP12
Promote cell death
Promote cell death and phagocytosis
Promote synapse maturation and remodelling
Promote OPC survival and diﬀerentiation
Prune synapses
Survival
Monitor neuronal activity
Phagocytose myelin
Phagocytose adult NPCs
Neuronal activity
ATP
Adult NPC or 
neuroblast
E4 Chick
retinal cells
Apoptotic
retinal cells
NGFR
NGF
Prenatal stage
Perinatal stage
Postnatal stage
Adult stage
CX3CR1
DAP12
TAM
P15 Hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons
P9    Thalamocortical synapses in the barrel cortex
C3
C1q
CD11b
CD11b–CD18
(αmβ2 integrin)
Support neuronal survival
Survival
P3 Layer V subcerebral/
callosal projection neurons
IGF 
receptor
IGF
Promote fasciculation
Limit axon outgrowth
Neuron
E17.5 Dorsal corpus callosum
CX3CR1
E14.5 Striatal dopaminergic axons
CX3CR1
DAP12
CX3CR1
E18.5 Neocortical LHX6+ interneurons
E11.5 Endothelial cells in the hindbrain
P5 Retinogeniculate synapses
NRP1
TEK
Myelin
OPC
OPC
OPC
factors
Layer V
Regulate laminar positioning of neurons
Promote vasculature tip cell fusion
ROS
NADPH
oxidase
DAP12
CD11b
TAM
GAS6 or 
protein S
E20 Neuronal precursor cells
P3    Purkinje neurons
P0    Hippocampal neurons
↑ Strength 
and 
plasticity 
of synapses
Promote
survival
Myelinating
oligodendrocyte
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY	
 VOLUME 18 | APRIL 2018 | 235
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

P2RY12
Damaged blood vessel
a
c
d
b
Astrocyte
ATP gradient
ATP
Astrocyte
A1 astrocyte
↑ C3
TNF
IL-1α
C1q
Activated 
microglial cell
Arginase-1-reactive
microglial cell
Activin-A
Activin-A
receptor
Premyelinating
oligodendrocyte
Secretion
Neuronal survival, neuronal 
outgrowth, synaptogenesis 
and phagocytosis
Lysolecithin or 
multiple sclerosis
Remyelination
Demyelination
Demyelinating
oligodendrocyte
Remyelinating
oligodendrocyte
OPC
Toxicity to neurons 
and oligodendrocytes
Neuronal degeneration 
and cognitive decline
Phagocytosis
of synapses
• Alzheimer disease
• Frontotemporal dementia
• Neuroinvasive infection
• Ageing
CR3
↑ C1q
C3
Synapse
Neuron
Microglial 
cell
Figure 4 | Microglial functions during CNS injuries and diseases. a | Microglia-mediated synapse loss in diseases and 
ageing. In these processes, microglia secrete higher levels of complement component C1q (C1q), which tags synapses 
together with complement component C3 (C3). In Alzheimer disease, the upregulation of C1q expression is thought to be 
induced by β‑amyloid oligomers. Microglia then eliminate the tagged synapses via complement receptor 3 (CR3), leading to 
neurodegeneration and behavioural impairment. b | Microglia respond to tissue damage by covering it with rapid process 
extension followed by movement of their cell bodies towards the injury site. The release of damage-associated ATP triggers 
an astrocyte-secreted ATP gradient, which is then sensed by microglial P2Y purinoceptor 12 (P2RY12). This process controls 
microglial chemotaxis to injury. c | The induction of A1 reactive astrocytes by injury- or lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-triggered 
reactive microglia. This classical neuroinflammatory activation of microglia leads to the secretion of IL‑1α, tumour necrosis 
factor (TNF) and C1q, which in turn induce A1 reactive astrocytes. A1 astrocytes, which have higher levels of C3 expression, 
lose the normal functions of astrocytes and gain new functions such as the ability to kill neurons and oligodendrocytes. This 
process may underlie neuronal death in many neurodegenerative diseases. d | Accelerated proliferation and differentiation 
of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) induced by arginase 1‑expressing microglia in demyelinating diseases. During 
remyelination, microglia are activated to different states, at least one of which is beneficial. Such activated microglia express 
arginase 1 and secrete activin A, which binds to activin A receptor on OPCs, promoting their proliferation and differentiation 
into mature oligodendrocytes.
REVIEWS
236 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 18	
www.nature.com/nri
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

infection with West Nile virus97 or in ageing98, there is a 
marked increase in microglial expression of C1q, accom­
panied by C3 synapse tagging and synapse elimination. A 
theme that is common to all of these settings is aberrant 
engulfment of synapses by microglia and complement-­
mediated neurodegeneration, although the brain regions 
that are affected and the behavioural impairments are 
disease specific96,97. Moreover, human genetic studies 
have recently identified C4 gene alleles and copy number 
variation that cause higher levels of C4A expression as 
a risk factor for schizophrenia99. C4‑deficient mice have 
reduced levels of synaptic C3 and have developmental 
pruning defects similar to those of mice deficient in C3 
or C1q, which suggests that complement-mediated syn­
apse remodelling may also underlie disease pathology in 
schizophrenia.
It is worth mentioning that an increase in levels 
of synapse-localized C1q is also implicated in age-­
dependent cognitive dysfunction unrelated to classical 
complement signalling or synapse elimination100. Thus, 
major questions remain, including how different path­
ways and complement components impinge on neural 
circuitry to affect synapse function and plasticity; how 
synapses are selectively tagged by complement; and how 
microglia-mediated synapse remodelling cooperates 
with other pruning and synaptic plasticity mechanisms 
induced by other cell types, such as astrocytes101.
Phagocytosis and neurogenesis. Microglia phago­cytose 
dead, dying and sometimes healthy live cells in the 
developing and adult brain. During cerebellar develop­
ment, microglia actively promote engulfment-mediated 
Purkinje neuron death, by producing reactive oxygen 
species (ROS)18 (perinatal stage in FIG. 3). Similar pro­
cesses occur in the hippocampus, where ROS produc­
tion depends on microglial expression of CD11b and 
DNAX-activation protein 12 (DAP12; also known as 
TYROBP)17. Importantly, microglia control the size 
of the neuronal pool by engulfing neural precursor 
cells (NPCs) during both embryonic and adult neuro­
genesis15,102 (adult stage in FIG. 3). Maternal immune 
challenge or pharmacological repression of microglial 
activation in utero can respectively enhance or inhibit 
microglial phagocytosis of NPCs and hence modify the 
cellular composition of the CNS. This phagocytic pro­
cess is mediated by microglial expression of the TYRO3, 
AXL and MER (TAM) receptor tyrosine kinases and 
their ligands growth-arrest-specific protein 6 (GAS6) 
and vitamin K-dependent protein S103  (perinatal stage 
in FIG. 3). In mice with a microglia-specific deletion 
of MER and AXL, adult NPCs and their progeny are 
spared from phagocytosis and contribute to the adult 
neuronal pool. Interestingly, AXL expression is up­
regulated in several neurodegenerative disease mod­
els103–105, hinting at a possible link between aberrant 
microglial phagocytosis and disease pathology.
Microglia and other neural cell interactions. Microglia 
interact with almost all cell types in the brain to mediate 
developmental programmes, maintain homeostasis, aid 
in tissue repair or contribute to disease pathology12,13. 
In developing chick retina, microglia express nerve 
growth factor (NGF), which can bind neuronal NGF 
receptor (also known as TNFRSF16 and p75NTR) 
to induce retinal ganglion cell death19 (pre­natal stage 
in FIG. 3). By contrast, microglia secrete insulin-like 
growth factor 1 (IGF1) to support the survival of 
developing layer V neurons before they reach their dis­
tant CNS targets in the postnatal mouse brain16 (peri­
natal stage in FIG. 3). In addition, microglia are closely 
associated with white-matter tracts during develop­
ment, where they help to control axon fasciculation in 
the dorsal corpus callosum24 (prenatal stage in FIG. 3). 
This function requires DAP12. Similarly, microglia 
control the outgrowth of dopaminergic neurons and 
laminar positioning of somatosensory inter­neurons in 
the forebrain, thereby contributing to circuitry assem­
bly in a manner dependent on CX3CR1 and DAP12 
(REF. 23). Microglial proliferation and activation have 
also been implicated in spinal neuropathic pain106. 
Cytokines released by damaged neurons can trigger 
the up­regulation of expression of purinergic recep­
tors, such as P2X purinoceptor 4 (P2RX4), P2RX7 and 
P2RY12, in microglia, which become hypersensitive to 
extracellular nucleotides106. CSF1 secreted by injured 
sensory neurons seems to be an essential factor to acti­
vate microglia via the CSF1R–DAP12 signalling axis107. 
Upon activation of microglia, induced brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor interacts with its receptor on neu­
rons, causing a shift in neuronal anion gradients and 
hyperexcitability of pain-engaging neurons108. At the 
same time, the microglial protease cathepsin S cleaves 
CX3CL1 (also known as fractalkine) on the neuronal 
surface, which in turn acts on microglial CX3CR1 to 
maintain pain signalling109.
Microglia also interact with astrocytes, particularly 
during brain injury and inflammation. Injury-associated 
ATP release can induce an astrocyte-derived ATP gra­
dient, which is then sensed by microglia through their 
purinergic receptor P2RY12, leading to rapid conver­
gence of microglial processes and cell migration110,111 
(FIG. 4b). The same series of activation events occurs in 
compression and capillary injuries to help seal breached 
glial limitans or the BBB112,113. Such ATP-driven out­
growth of microglial processes can be converted to 
process retraction during chronic injury, and this con­
version for activated microglia is mediated by the down­
regulation of P2RY12 and concomitant up­regulation of 
the Gs‑coupled adenosine receptor A2A, which binds 
adenosine from the breakdown of extracellular ATP114. 
In addition, injury-activated or LPS-stimulated micro­
glia secrete IL‑1α, tumour necrosis factor and C1q, 
which are necessary and sufficient to induce so-called 
‘A1’ neurotoxic reactive astrocytes115 (FIG. 4c). A1 astro­
cytes, which are prevalent after acute CNS injuries and 
in human neurodegenerative diseases, lose normal syn­
aptogenic and phagocytic functions with a concomitant 
gain of cytotoxic functions, which enables them to kill 
both neurons and oligodendrocytes. As A1 astrocytes 
highly upregulate the expression of C3 and many other 
complement components, it has been suggested that the 
normal function of this microglia–astrocyte interaction 
Layer V neurons
Neurons in layer V of the 
six-layered mammalian 
neocortex. This layer contains 
excitatory neurons that project 
either to the contralateral 
hemisphere or to subcortical 
brain regions, such as the 
thalamus and brainstem.
Axon fasciculation
A neurodevelopmental process 
in which axons that travel in 
the same direction often 
adhere together to form a tight 
bundle.
Corpus callosum
A thick bundle of nerve fibres 
that connect the left and right 
hemispheres of the brain and 
form the most prominent 
white-matter structure.
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY	
 VOLUME 18 | APRIL 2018 | 237
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

may be to protect against bacterial and viral infections 
but that when activated in other contexts, it may help to 
drive neurodegeneration in various diseases including 
Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease and amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS)115.
Through pharmacological and genetic depletion, 
it has been shown that early postnatal microglia are 
required for the development of oligodendrocyte pro­
genitors and the subsequent myelination process116 
(postnatal stage in FIG. 3). Later in life, microglia 
continue to maintain the oligodendrocyte progenitor 
pool under homeostatic conditions116 (adult stage in 
FIG. 3). In the context of lysolecithin-induced injury, 
microglia accelerate remyelination by promoting 
oligo­dendrocyte differentiation117 (FIG. 4d). This effect 
is proposed to involve arginase 1‑expressing microglia 
that secrete activin‑A, which interacts with activin‑A 
receptor on oligodendrocyte progenitor cells in the 
regenerative process. Moreover, microglia phagocytose 
myelin, which later in life can form insoluble protein 
aggregates in microglial lysosomes and compromise 
their functions118 (adult stage in FIG. 3). This might be a 
mechanism for controlling myelin turnover and a cause 
of ageing. Finally, microglia interact with endothelial 
cells, as indicated by the observation that microglia 
mediate blood vessel fusion downstream of vascular 
endothelial growth factor-dependent tip cell sprouting; 
the loss of microglia in PU.1- or CSF1‑mutant mice 
results in reduced complexity of the brain vesicular net­
work early in development119 (prenatal stage in FIG. 3). 
Interestingly, in zebrafish, microglia can also repair 
laser-induced microlesions by physically adhering to 
the broken ends of endothelial cells and pulling them 
together120. This process requires actin polymerization 
and depends on phosphatidylinositide 3‑kinase and 
RAC1 activity.
Microglial activation in development and degenera­
tive diseases. Mature microglia have highly ramified 
processes, whereas during development, they adopt an 
‘amoeboid’ morphology with larger, rounder cell bodies 
and shorter, thicker branches121. These morphological 
features during development are accompanied by higher 
levels of phagocytic activity as well as by distinct gene 
expression and secretory profiles. The cells are therefore 
often viewed as being developmentally activated, which 
is required for normal brain development as discussed 
in the case of IGF1 secretion by microglia16,116. Similarly, 
immature microglia were also shown to induce neu­
ronal and oligodendrocyte differentiation by secreting 
pro-­inflammatory cytokines122. Upon immune challenge 
or in brain diseases, microglia tend to show similar 
morphological changes, sometimes associated with the 
release of cytokines, chemokines and/or trophic factors. 
These polarized cells were traditionally categorized as 
having either ‘toxic’ (M1 type) or ‘protective’ (M2 type) 
states, depending on the expression of a few known 
markers27. However, accumulating evidence suggests 
that microglial polarization is multidimensional, with 
extensive overlap in gene expression, as opposed to 
occurring on a simplified linear spectrum27.
Microglial activation, irrespective of the par­
ticular polarized states, is a salient feature of neuro­
inflammation that is prominent in almost all 
neurodegenerative diseases31,123. In some settings where 
the BBB is compromised, blood-borne monocytes hav­
ing distinct polarization phenotypes could potentially 
infiltrate the brain or spinal cord, although to what 
extent such infiltration is implicated in a given disease 
is a matter of debate. This discrepancy is due to some 
experimental caveats, such as in BM transplantation, 
that inevitably create artificial environments that are 
not normally seen in the course of disease, and a lack 
of reliable tools for distinguishing microglia from infil­
trating myeloid cells. In addition, our knowledge of 
microglial and macrophage functions in CNS disease 
is obtained mainly through studying animal models, 
which may or may not accurately represent human 
conditions. Nonetheless, differential contributions of 
infiltrating versus resident myeloid populations have 
been demonstrated in the pathogenesis of several dis­
ease models124–126. Therefore, it has been increasingly 
recognized that investigating myeloid cell hetero­
geneity with regard to ontogeny and activation status 
across different stages of disease progression is essential 
for a mechanistic understanding of neurodegenerative 
disease pathology. Under this framework, the design of 
myeloid-cell-based therapeutics should work towards 
dampening the detrimental effects of microglial and 
macrophage activation while augmenting the beneficial 
effects elicited by their ‘alternative’ activation.
Although microglial activation can clearly alter 
disease progression, human genetics studies point to a 
causal role for microglial dysfunction in disease initi­
ation. Prime examples lie in the identification of risk 
genes for Alzheimer disease, such as TREM2, CD33 
and CR1, that are exclusively expressed by microglia 
in the CNS parenchyma127–133. These genes are thought 
to affect the microglial phagocytic activity underlying 
amyloi­dosis134,135. In particular, it has been suggested 
that TREM2 and CD33 regulate β‑amyloid phago­
cytosis positively and negatively, respectively. However, 
a conflicting result showed that depletion of microglia 
in amyloid precursor protein-transgenic mouse models 
had little effect on plaque formation or maintenance136. 
Indeed, recent studies of the function of triggering 
receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) suggest 
that activated microglia surrounding β‑amyloid plaques 
mainly function as ‘insulators’ that confine the neuro­
toxicity of β‑amyloid fibrils137 (BOX 2). Interestingly, 
microglia are also implicated in tauopathy, another 
hallmark of Alzheimer disease, in which microglia may 
spread microtubule-associated protein tau via exosomes 
across brain regions138. Microglial activation precedes 
the formation of neurofibrillary tangles in a mouse 
model of tauopathy139,140, which suggests that microglia 
have an active role in driving disease pathology.
Microglial dysfunction also contributes to the onset 
and/or progression of ALS, a degenerative disease char­
acterized by progressive loss of motor neurons35. Genes 
that are commonly mutated in ALS include superoxide 
dismutase 1 (SOD1), C9orf72 and TAR DNA-binding 
Tauopathy
A member of a class of 
neurodegenerative disorders 
that are manifested by 
intracellular accumulation of 
hyperphosphorylated micro­
tubule-associated protein tau. 
These insoluble protein 
aggregates form neurofibrillary 
tangles and often underlie the 
pathological conditions of 
dementia and Parkinson 
disease.
REVIEWS
238 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 18	
www.nature.com/nri
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

protein (TARDBP)141. Early studies using mice that 
overexpress the mutant Sod1 allele showed that genetic 
removal of this protein in myeloid cells alleviated disease 
progression and extended survival142. Similarly, replac­
ing mutant SOD1‑expressing microglia with wild-type 
BM-derived cells also had beneficial effects, which is 
consistent with greater release of neurotoxic factor by 
the mutant microglia55. These studies demonstrated 
non-cell-autonomous pathology of ALS and raised the 
possibility of targeting microglia for treating neuro­
degenerative diseases. Recently, the normal function of 
C9orf72, a hexanucleotide repeat expansion that is asso­
ciated with ALS and frontotemporal dementia, was stud­
ied in a knockout background, in which microglia were 
found to be strongly activated in the mutant143. C9orf72 
regulates microglial phagosome and lysosome path­
ways, and its mutation leads to upregulation of neuro­
inflammatory factors, reminiscent of C9orf72‑mediated 
ALS pathology143. Unexpectedly, TARDBP was also 
found to regulate microglial phagocytosis144. The loss of 
TARDBP in microglia led to increased β‑amyloid clear­
ance and more synapse loss, providing a plausible expla­
nation for the less frequent occurrence of Alzheimer 
disease among patients with ALS.
Multiple sclerosis is a special case among neuro­
degenerative diseases, in which neuronal death may 
occur secondary to myelin loss mediated by auto­
reactive T cells123. Although it remains unclear exactly 
how the adaptive immune system is activated, myeloid 
cells have been considered to be essential compo­
nents driving disease onset and progression145, as 
suggested by the strong genetic association between 
MHC risk loci and multiple sclerosis146. It is widely 
accepted that, compared with microglia, infiltrating 
monocyte-­derived macrophages have a greater role 
in disease pathology, and therefore, strategies limiting 
such infiltrating behaviour could alleviate multiple 
sclerosis symptoms in animal models145. Microglia, by 
contrast, have been suggested to have a beneficial role, 
particularly during the remission phase. Scanning elec­
tron microscopy studies showed that whereas blood-
borne macrophages centred around nodes of Ranvier, 
presumably causing demyelination, microglia seemed 
to clean up myelin debris, aiding in tissue repair125. 
More importantly, microglia may directly promote 
remyelination by inducing the differentiation of 
oligodendrocyte precursor cells117,147 (FIG. 4d).
Concluding remarks
A scientifically curious inquiry about the origin of 
microglia has fundamentally shifted our conceptual 
frameworks in almost every aspect of microglial biol­
ogy. Now that their origin has been separated from 
blood-derived lineages, many questions require imme­
diate re-examination, such as their develop­mental 
programmes, turnover mechanisms and heterogeneity 
among other brain myeloid cells. In parallel, the sur­
prising observation that microglia restlessly survey 
their environment provided perhaps the most obvious 
rationale for studying their physiological functions 
during development and homeostasis. These investi­
gations have led to many exciting and often unexpected 
findings about the non-immune functions of micro­
glia. Such enthusiasm is further fuelled by the newly 
discovered associations between microglia-enriched 
genes and a large number of neurodegenerative and 
neuropsychiatric disorders, which often show signs 
of neuroinflammation. These observations together 
raise an important question of whether microglial 
dysfunction is the primary driving force for the patho­
physiology in these diseases. Furthermore, as microglia 
have extremely diverse functions, it remains unclear 
whether they have beneficial or detrimental roles 
during disease progression. In fact, it is probable that 
they have both such roles, depending on the timing, 
the particular disease setting and the context of other 
neural and immune cells. Compared with microglia, 
our knowledge of the functions of non-parenchymal 
macrophages in health and disease is currently dispro­
portionally limited, and these cells could be the long-
sought missing piece in a puzzle where all components, 
neural and immune, are highly integrated. Future 
investigation in this regard may provide insights for our 
understanding of brain function as a whole. Dissecting 
the complex roles of microglia and brain macrophages 
in each scenario is challenging, but equipped with the 
new tools of unprecedented precision and throughput, 
we are closer than ever to learning the mystery of the 
‘third element’ in the brain universe and targeting it to 
fight devastating diseases.
Box 2 | Microglial TREM2 expression and late-onset Alzheimer disease
Recent genome-wide association studies have shown that many genes that confer 
risk of neurodegenerative disease are highly, and sometimes exclusively, expressed 
by microglia31,84,151. The expression of triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 
(TREM2) is specific to microglia in the central nervous system, and the rare human 
polymorphism R47H has one of the highest odds ratios (that is, 2.9–4.5) for 
susceptibility to late-onset Alzheimer disease127,129. Using various β‑amyloid-based 
mouse models of Alzheimer disease, we have gained a substantial understanding of 
TREM2 functions in microglia-mediated disease pathology, although it is still unclear 
how these pathways are coordinated at the molecular level. TREM2 is a sensor for a 
broad range of lipids and lipoproteins152,153. More microglia are found in the brains of 
mice and patients with Alzheimer disease than in those of healthy controls, and these 
cells tend to surround and phagocytose β‑amyloid plaques137,152. Parabiosis 
experiments show that increased numbers of microglia arise from local clonal 
expansion as opposed to infiltration from the periphery154. In TREM2‑deficient mouse 
models or human samples of Alzheimer disease, microglial clustering around 
β‑amyloid plaques is impaired137,152. At least five non-mutually exclusive modes of 
action for TREM2 in Alzheimer disease have been proposed. First, TREM2 senses 
damage-associated lipids that bind fibrillar β‑amyloid, which recruits microglia and 
facilitates phagocytosis152. Second, TREM2 senses various lipids that attach to 
β‑amyloid fibrils, which are enveloped and compacted by microglia so that their 
neurite toxicity is confined and/or reduced137,154. Third, TREM2 senses 
apolipoprotein E and apolipoprotein J, which bind β‑amyloid and function as 
molecular chaperones for its uptake by microglia153. Fourth, TREM2 signalling 
promotes the survival of microglia so that they can maintain protective activity such 
as phagocytosis152. Fifth, TREM2 signalling induces microglial proliferation and 
polarizes them to an activated state with protective functions46,152. Recently, a 
possible mechanism that integrates these beneficial effects suggests that 
TREM2‑mediated mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signalling negatively 
regulates autophagy, which highlights the importance of maintaining proper 
microglial metabolic states and fitness during their long-term protective function in 
Alzheimer disease155.
Nodes of Ranvier
Periodic axonal segments, rich 
in ion channels, that are not 
covered by myelin sheaths; this 
allows rapid propagation of an 
action potential from one node 
of Ranvier to the next along the 
fibre.
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY	
 VOLUME 18 | APRIL 2018 | 239
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

1.	
Perez-Cerda, F., Sanchez-Gomez, M. V. & Matute, C. 
Pio del Rio Hortega and the discovery of the 
oligodendrocytes. Front. Neuroanat. 9, 92 (2015).
2.	
Ginhoux, F., Lim, S., Hoeffel, G., Low, D. & Huber, T. 
Origin and differentiation of microglia. Front. Cell. 
Neurosci. 7, 45 (2013).
3.	
Ginhoux, F. & Guilliams, M. Tissue-resident 
macrophage ontogeny and homeostasis. Immunity 44, 
439–449 (2016).
4.	
Hoeffel, G. & Ginhoux, F. Ontogeny of tissue-resident 
macrophages. Front. Immunol. 6, 486 (2015).
5.	
Ginhoux, F. et al. Fate mapping analysis reveals that 
adult microglia derive from primitive macrophages. 
Science 330, 841–845 (2010).
This work uses a novel fate-mapping system to 
definitively show that microglia arise from YS 
precursors.
6.	
Ajami, B., Bennett, J. L., Krieger, C., Tetzlaff, W. & 
Rossi, F. M. Local self-renewal can sustain CNS 
microglia maintenance and function throughout 
adult life. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1538–1543 (2007).
7.	
Hashimoto, D. et al. Tissue-resident macrophages self-
maintain locally throughout adult life with minimal 
contribution from circulating monocytes. Immunity 38, 
792–804 (2013).
8.	
Sheng, J., Ruedl, C. & Karjalainen, K. Most tissue-
resident macrophages except microglia are derived from 
fetal hematopoietic stem cells. Immunity 43, 382–393 
(2015).
9.	
Nimmerjahn, A., Kirchhoff, F. & Helmchen, F. Resting 
microglial cells are highly dynamic surveillants of brain 
parenchyma in vivo. Science 308, 1314–1318 (2005).
This in vivo imaging study demonstrates the high 
motility of microglial processes under homeostasis, 
which opens new avenues for studying non-immune 
functions of microglia.
10.	 Tremblay, M. E., Lowery, R. L. & Majewska, A. K. 
Microglial interactions with synapses are modulated 
by visual experience. PLoS Biol. 8, e1000527 
(2010).
11.	 Wake, H., Moorhouse, A. J., Jinno, S., Kohsaka, S. & 
Nabekura, J. Resting microglia directly monitor the 
functional state of synapses in vivo and determine 
the fate of ischemic terminals. J. Neurosci. 29, 
3974–3980 (2009).
12.	 Frost, J. L. & Schafer, D. P. Microglia: architects of the 
developing nervous system. Trends Cell Biol. 26, 
587–597 (2016).
13.	 Schafer, D. P. & Stevens, B. Microglia function in 
central nervous system development and plasticity. 
Cold Spring Harb. Perspect.Biol. 7, a020545 (2015).
14.	 Kierdorf, K. et al. Microglia emerge from 
erythromyeloid precursors via Pu.1- and 
Irf8‑dependent pathways. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 
273–280 (2013).
This study demonstrates the nature of microglial 
precursors and shows molecular and developmental 
mechanisms for microglial specification.
15.	 Cunningham, C. L., Martinez-Cerdeno, V. & 
Noctor, S. C. Microglia regulate the number of neural 
precursor cells in the developing cerebral cortex. 
J. Neurosci. 33, 4216–4233 (2013).
16.	 Ueno, M. et al. Layer V cortical neurons require 
microglial support for survival during postnatal 
development. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 543–551 (2013).
17.	 Wakselman, S. et al. Developmental neuronal death in 
hippocampus requires the microglial CD11b integrin 
and DAP12 immunoreceptor. J. Neurosci. 28, 
8138–8143 (2008).
18.	 Marin-Teva, J. L. et al. Microglia promote the death of 
developing Purkinje cells. Neuron 41, 535–547 (2004).
19.	 Frade, J. M. & Barde, Y. A. Microglia-derived nerve 
growth factor causes cell death in the developing 
retina. Neuron 20, 35–41 (1998).
20.	 Schafer, D. P. et al. Microglia sculpt postnatal neural 
circuits in an activity and complement-dependent 
manner. Neuron 74, 691–705 (2012).
This article illustrates a surprising role of postnatal 
microglia in pruning inactive synapses via the 
classical complement system during development 
of the visual system.
21.	 Stevens, B. et al. The classical complement cascade 
mediates CNS synapse elimination. Cell 131, 
1164–1178 (2007).
22.	 Paolicelli, R. C. et al. Synaptic pruning by microglia is 
necessary for normal brain development. Science 
333, 1456–1458 (2011).
This work shows an unconventional function of 
microglia in promoting hippocampal synapse 
maturation and plasticity, possibly through 
eliminating immature synapses.
23.	 Squarzoni, P. et al. Microglia modulate wiring of the 
embryonic forebrain. Cell Rep. 8, 1271–1279 (2014).
24.	 Pont-Lezica, L. et al. Microglia shape corpus callosum 
axon tract fasciculation: functional impact of prenatal 
inflammation. Eur. J. Neurosci. 39, 1551–1557 
(2014).
25.	 Hoshiko, M., Arnoux, I., Avignone, E., Yamamoto, N. & 
Audinat, E. Deficiency of the microglial receptor 
CX3CR1 impairs postnatal functional development of 
thalamocortical synapses in the barrel cortex. 
J. Neurosci. 32, 15106–15111 (2012).
26.	 Ueno, M. & Yamashita, T. Bidirectional tuning of 
microglia in the developing brain: from neurogenesis 
to neural circuit formation. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 27, 
8–15 (2014).
27.	 Ransohoff, R. M. A polarizing question: do M1 and 
M2 microglia exist? Nat. Neurosci. 19, 987–991 
(2016).
28.	 Aguzzi, A., Barres, B. A. & Bennett, M. L. Microglia: 
scapegoat, saboteur, or something else? Science 339, 
156–161 (2013).
29.	 Prinz, M. & Priller, J. Microglia and brain 
macrophages in the molecular age: from origin to 
neuropsychiatric disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 15, 
300–312 (2014).
30.	 Crotti, A. & Ransohoff, R. M. Microglial physiology and 
pathophysiology: insights from genome-wide 
transcriptional profiling. Immunity 44, 505–515 (2016).
31.	 Colonna, M. & Butovsky, O. Microglia function in the 
central nervous system during health and 
neurodegeneration. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 35, 
441–468 (2017).
32.	 Wolf, S. A., Boddeke, H. W. & Kettenmann, H. 
Microglia in physiology and disease. Annu. Rev. 
Physiol. 79, 619–643 (2017).
33.	 Prinz, M., Erny, D. & Hagemeyer, N. Ontogeny and 
homeostasis of CNS myeloid cells. Nat. Immunol. 18, 
385–392 (2017).
34.	 Goldmann, T. et al. Origin, fate and dynamics of 
macrophages at central nervous system interfaces. 
Nat. Immunol. 17, 797–805 (2016).
This work uses fate mapping and parabiosis 
experiments to demonstrate the ontogeny and 
dynamics of non-parenchymal macrophages.
35.	 Prinz, M., Priller, J., Sisodia, S. S. & Ransohoff, R. M. 
Heterogeneity of CNS myeloid cells and their roles in 
neurodegeneration. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1227–1235 
(2011).
36.	 Yona, S. et al. Fate mapping reveals origins and 
dynamics of monocytes and tissue macrophages under 
homeostasis. Immunity 38, 79–91 (2013).
37.	 Gautier, E. L. et al. Gene-expression profiles and 
transcriptional regulatory pathways that underlie the 
identity and diversity of mouse tissue macrophages. 
Nat. Immunol. 13, 1118–1128 (2012).
38.	 Butovsky, O. et al. Identification of a unique TGF-β-
dependent molecular and functional signature in 
microglia. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 131–143 (2014).
This study uses comparative transcriptomic 
analyses to identify a microglial molecular 
signature, which further suggests that TGFβ is a 
brain-specific signal for microglial specification.
39.	 Lavin, Y. et al. Tissue-resident macrophage enhancer 
landscapes are shaped by the local microenvironment. 
Cell 159, 1312–1326 (2014).
40.	 Gosselin, D. et al. Environment drives selection and 
function of enhancers controlling tissue-specific 
macrophage identities. Cell 159, 1327–1340 (2014).
41.	 Bennett, M. L. et al. New tools for studying microglia 
in the mouse and human CNS. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 113, E1738–E1746 (2016).
This work proves that TMEM119 is a 
microglia-specific marker; antibodies were 
generated that enable the developmental profiling 
of highly pure microglia.
42.	 Zhang, Y. et al. An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and 
splicing database of glia, neurons, and vascular cells of 
the cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci. 34, 11929–11947 
(2014).
43.	 Grabert, K. et al. Microglial brain region-dependent 
diversity and selective regional sensitivities to aging. 
Nat. Neurosci. 19, 504–516 (2016).
44.	 De Biase, L. M. et al. Local cues establish and 
maintain region-specific phenotypes of basal ganglia 
microglia. Neuron 95, 341–356.e6 (2017).
45.	 Matcovitch-Natan, O. et al. Microglia development 
follows a stepwise program to regulate brain 
homeostasis. Science 353, aad8670 (2016).
Using time-course and single-cell RNA-seq 
analyses, this work shows discrete phases in gene 
expression during microglial development.
46.	 Keren-Shaul, H. et al. A unique microglia type 
associated with restricting development of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Cell 169, 1276–1290.e.17 (2017).
47.	 Schulz, C. et al. A lineage of myeloid cells independent 
of Myb and hematopoietic stem cells. Science 336, 
86–90 (2012).
48.	 Gomez Perdiguero, E. et al. Tissue-resident 
macrophages originate from yolk-sac-derived erythro-
myeloid progenitors. Nature 518, 547–551 (2015).
This work uses fate mapping and in vitro culture to 
show that tissue macrophages, including microglia, 
arise from erythro-myeloid progenitors, which 
supports Model 2 of microglial and macrophage 
ontogeny described in this Review.
49.	 Hoeffel, G. et al. C‑Myb+ erythro-myeloid progenitor-
derived fetal monocytes give rise to adult tissue-
resident macrophages. Immunity 42, 665–678 (2015).
This work demonstrates a major contribution of FL 
monocytes to adult tissue macrophages, which 
supports Model 1 of microglial and macrophage 
ontogeny described in this Review.
50.	 Kierdorf, K., Prinz, M., Geissmann, F. & Gomez 
Perdiguero, E. Development and function of tissue 
resident macrophages in mice. Semin. Immunol. 27, 
369–378 (2015).
51.	 Perdiguero, E. G. & Geissmann, F. The development 
and maintenance of resident macrophages. 
Nat. Immunol. 17, 2–8 (2016).
52.	 Palis, J. Hematopoietic stem cell-independent 
hematopoiesis: emergence of erythroid, megakaryocyte, 
and myeloid potential in the mammalian embryo. FEBS 
Lett. 590, 3965–3974 (2016).
53.	 Daneman, R., Zhou, L., Kebede, A. A. & Barres, B. A. 
Pericytes are required for blood-brain barrier integrity 
during embryogenesis. Nature 468, 562–566 (2010).
54.	 Askew, K. et al. Coupled proliferation and apoptosis 
maintain the rapid turnover of microglia in the adult 
brain. Cell Rep. 18, 391–405 (2017).
55.	 Beers, D. R. et al. Wild-type microglia extend survival 
in PU.1 knockout mice with familial amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103, 
16021–16026 (2006).
56.	 Mildner, A. et al. Microglia in the adult brain arise 
from Ly‑6ChiCCR2+ monocytes only under defined 
host conditions. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1544–1553 
(2007).
57.	 Guilliams, M. & Scott, C. L. Does niche competition 
determine the origin of tissue-resident macrophages? 
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 17, 451–460 (2017).
58.	 van de Laar, L. et al. Yolk sac macrophages, fetal liver, 
and adult monocytes can colonize an empty niche and 
develop into functional tissue-resident macrophages. 
Immunity 44, 755–768 (2016).
59.	 Jin, H. et al. Runx1 regulates embryonic myeloid fate 
choice in zebrafish through a negative feedback loop 
inhibiting Pu.1 expression. Blood 119, 5239–5249 
(2012).
60.	 Xu, J., Wang, T., Wu, Y., Jin, W. & Wen, Z. Microglia 
colonization of developing zebrafish midbrain is 
promoted by apoptotic neuron and 
lysophosphatidylcholine. Dev. Cell 38, 214–222 
(2016).
61.	 Casano, A. M., Albert, M. & Peri, F. Developmental 
apoptosis mediates entry and positioning of 
microglia in the zebrafish brain. Cell Rep. 16, 
897–906 (2016).
62.	 Swinnen, N. et al. Complex invasion pattern of the 
cerebral cortex bymicroglial cells during development 
of the mouse embryo. Glia 61, 150–163 (2013).
63.	 Tay, T. L. et al. A new fate mapping system reveals 
context-dependent random or clonal expansion of 
microglia. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 793–803 (2017).
64.	 Lawson, L. J., Perry, V. H. & Gordon, S. Turnover of 
resident microglia in the normal adult mouse brain. 
Neuroscience 48, 405–415 (1992).
65.	 Fuger, P. et al. Microglia turnover with aging and in an 
Alzheimer’s model via long-term in vivo single-cell 
imaging. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 1371–1376 (2017).
66.	 Ueno, H. & Weissman, I. L. Clonal analysis of mouse 
development reveals a polyclonal origin for yolk sac 
blood islands. Dev. Cell 11, 519–533 (2006).
67.	 Chitu, V., Gokhan, S., Nandi, S., Mehler, M. F. & 
Stanley, E. R. Emerging roles for CSF‑1 receptor and 
its ligands in the nervous system. Trends Neurosci. 39, 
378–393 (2016).
68.	 Chitu, V. & Stanley, E. R. Regulation of embryonic and 
postnatal development by the CSF‑1 receptor. 
Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 123, 229–275 (2017).
69.	 Muffat, J. et al. Efficient derivation of microglia-like 
cells from human pluripotent stem cells. Nat. Med. 
22, 1358–1367 (2016).
REVIEWS
240 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 18	
www.nature.com/nri
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

70.	 Pandya, H. et al. Differentiation of human and murine 
induced pluripotent stem cells to microglia-like cells. 
Nat. Neurosci. 20, 753–759 (2017).
71.	 Abud, E. M. et al. iPSC-derived human microglia-like 
cells to study neurological diseases. Neuron 94, 
278–293.e9 (2017).
72.	 Douvaras, P. et al. Directed differentiation of human 
pluripotent stem cells to microglia. Stem Cell Rep. 
8, 1516–1524 (2017).
73.	 Haenseler, W. et al. A highly efficient human 
pluripotent stem cell microglia model displays a 
neuronal-co‑culture-specific expression profile and 
inflammatory response. Stem Cell Rep. 8, 1727–1742 
(2017).
74.	 Mossadegh-Keller, N. et al. M‑CSF instructs myeloid 
lineage fate in single haematopoietic stem cells. 
Nature 497, 239–243 (2013).
75.	 Rosenbauer, F. et al. Acute myeloid leukemia induced 
by graded reduction of a lineage-specific transcription 
factor, PU.1. Nat. Genet. 36, 624–630 (2004).
76.	 Elmore, M. R. et al. Colony-stimulating factor 1 
receptor signaling is necessary for microglia viability, 
unmasking a microglia progenitor cell in the adult 
brain. Neuron 82, 380–397 (2014).
77.	 Buttgereit, A. et al. Sall1 is a transcriptional regulator 
defining microglia identity and function. Nat. Immunol. 
17, 1397–1406 (2016).
78.	 Bohlen, C. J. et al. Diverse requirements for microglial 
survival, specification, and function revealed by 
defined-medium cultures. Neuron 94, 759–773.e8 
(2017).
79.	 Wang, Y. et al. IL‑34 is a tissue-restricted ligand of 
CSF1R required for the development of Langerhans 
cells and microglia. Nat. Immunol. 13, 753–760 
(2012).
80.	 Greter, M. et al. Stroma-derived interleukin‑34 
controls the development and maintenance of 
langerhans cells and the maintenance of microglia. 
Immunity 37, 1050–1060 (2012).
81.	 Nandi, S. et al. The CSF‑1 receptor ligands IL‑34 and 
CSF‑1 exhibit distinct developmental brain expression 
patterns and regulate neural progenitor cell 
maintenance and maturation. Dev. Biol. 367, 
100–113 (2012).
82.	 Mass, E. et al. Specification of tissue-resident 
macrophages during organogenesis. Science 353, 
aaf4238 (2016).
83.	 Abutbul, S. et al. TGF-β signaling through SMAD2/3 
induces the quiescent microglial phenotype within the 
CNS environment. Glia 60, 1160–1171 (2012).
84.	 Gosselin, D. et al. An environment-dependent 
transcriptional network specifies human microglia 
identity. Science 356, eaal3222 (2017).
85.	 Cohen, M. et al. Chronic exposure to TGFβ1 regulates 
myeloid cell inflammatory response in an 
IRF7‑dependent manner. EMBO J. 33, 2906–2921 
(2014).
86.	 Endo, F. et al. Astrocyte-derived TGF‑β1 accelerates 
disease progression in ALS mice by interfering with 
the neuroprotective functions of microglia and T cells. 
Cell Rep. 11, 592–604 (2015).
87.	 Wong, K. et al. Mice deficient in NRROS show 
abnormal microglial development and neurological 
disorders. Nat. Immunol. 18, 633–641 
(2017).
88.	 Amit, I., Winter, D. R. & Jung, S. The role of the local 
environment and epigenetics in shaping macrophage 
identity and their effect on tissue homeostasis. 
Nat. Immunol. 17, 18–25 (2016).
89.	 Li, Y., Du, X. F., Liu, C. S., Wen, Z. L. & Du, J. L. 
Reciprocal regulation between resting microglial 
dynamics and neuronal activity in vivo. Dev. Cell 23, 
1189–1202 (2012).
90.	 Dissing-Olesen, L. et al. Activation of neuronal NMDA 
receptors triggers transient ATP-mediated microglial 
process outgrowth. J. Neurosci. 34, 10511–10527 
(2014).
91.	 Zhan, Y. et al. Deficient neuron-microglia signaling 
results in impaired functional brain connectivity and 
social behavior. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 400–406 
(2014).
92.	 Sipe, G. O. et al. Microglial P2Y12 is necessary for 
synaptic plasticity in mouse visual cortex. Nat. 
Commun. 7, 10905 (2016).
93.	 Stephan, A. H., Barres, B. A. & Stevens, B. The 
complement system: an unexpected role in synaptic 
pruning during development and disease. Annu. Rev. 
Neurosci. 35, 369–389 (2012).
94.	 Chu, Y. et al. Enhanced synaptic connectivity and 
epilepsy in C1q knockout mice. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 107, 7975–7980 (2010).
95.	 Hong, S. et al. Complement and microglia mediate 
early synapse loss in Alzheimer mouse models. 
Science 352, 712–716 (2016).
This study shows that developmental functions of 
microglia can be erroneously re‑activated and that 
this underlies synapse loss in a neurodegenerative 
disease.
96.	 Lui, H. et al. Progranulin deficiency promotes circuit-
specific synaptic pruning by microglia via complement 
activation. Cell 165, 921–935 (2016).
97.	 Vasek, M. J. et al. A complement-microglial axis drives 
synapse loss during virus-induced memory 
impairment. Nature 534, 538–543 (2016).
98.	 Shi, Q. et al. Complement C3‑deficient mice fail to 
display age-related hippocampal decline. J. Neurosci. 
35, 13029–13042 (2015).
99.	 Sekar, A. et al. Schizophrenia risk from complex 
variation of complement component 4. Nature 530, 
177–183 (2016).
100.	Stephan, A. H. et al. A dramatic increase of C1q 
protein in the CNS during normal aging. J. Neurosci. 
33, 13460–13474 (2013).
101.	Chung, W. S. et al. Astrocytes mediate synapse 
elimination through MEGF10 and MERTK pathways. 
Nature 504, 394–400 (2013).
102.	Sierra, A. et al. Microglia shape adult hippocampal 
neurogenesis through apoptosis-coupled phagocytosis. 
Cell Stem Cell 7, 483–495 (2010).
103.	Fourgeaud, L. et al. TAM receptors regulate multiple 
features of microglial physiology. Nature 532, 
240–244 (2016).
104.	Chiu, I. M. et al. A neurodegeneration-specific gene-
expression signature of acutely isolated microglia from 
an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mouse model. 
Cell Rep. 4, 385–401 (2013).
105.	Yin, Z. et al. Immune hyperreactivity of Abeta plaque-
associated microglia in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. 
Aging 55, 115–122 (2017).
106.	Tsuda, M. P2 receptors, microglial cytokines and 
chemokines, and neuropathic pain. J. Neurosci. Res. 
95, 1319–1329 (2017).
107.	Guan, Z. et al. Injured sensory neuron-derived CSF1 
induces microglial proliferation and DAP12‑dependent 
pain. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 94–101 (2016).
108.	Coull, J. A. et al. BDNF from microglia causes the shift 
in neuronal anion gradient underlying neuropathic 
pain. Nature 438, 1017–1021 (2005).
109.	Zhuang, Z. Y. et al. Role of the CX3CR1/p38 MAPK 
pathway in spinal microglia for the development of 
neuropathic pain following nerve injury-induced 
cleavage of fractalkine. Brain Behav. Immun. 21, 
642–651 (2007).
110.	 Davalos, D. et al. ATP mediates rapid microglial 
response to local brain injury in vivo. Nat. Neurosci. 
8, 752–758 (2005).
111.	 Haynes, S. E. et al. The P2Y12 receptor regulates 
microglial activation by extracellular nucleotides. 
Nat. Neurosci. 9, 1512–1519 (2006).
112.	Roth, T. L. et al. Transcranial amelioration of 
inflammation and cell death after brain injury. 
Nature 505, 223–228 (2014).
113.	Lou, N. et al. Purinergic receptor P2RY12‑dependent 
microglial closure of the injured blood-brain barrier. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 1074–1079 (2016).
114.	Orr, A. G., Orr, A. L., Li, X. J., Gross, R. E. & 
Traynelis, S. F. Adenosine A2A receptor mediates 
microglial process retraction. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 
872–878 (2009).
115.	Liddelow, S. A. et al. Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes 
are induced by activated microglia. Nature 541, 
481–487 (2017).
116.	Hagemeyer, N. et al. Microglia contribute to normal 
myelinogenesis and to oligodendrocyte progenitor 
maintenance during adulthood. Acta Neuropathol. 
134, 441–458 (2017).
117.	Miron, V. E. et al. M2 microglia and macrophages 
drive oligodendrocyte differentiation during CNS 
remyelination. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1211–1218 (2013).
118.	Safaiyan, S. et al. Age-related myelin degradation 
burdens the clearance function of microglia during 
aging. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 995–998 (2016).
119.	Fantin, A. et al. Tissue macrophages act as cellular 
chaperones for vascular anastomosis downstream of 
VEGF-mediated endothelial tip cell induction. Blood 
116, 829–840 (2010).
120.	Liu, C. et al. Macrophages mediate the repair of brain 
vascular rupture through direct physical adhesion and 
mechanical traction. Immunity 44, 1162–1176 
(2016).
121.	Zusso, M. et al. Regulation of postnatal forebrain 
amoeboid microglial cell proliferation and 
development by the transcription factor Runx1. 
J. Neurosci. 32, 11285–11298 (2012).
122.	Shigemoto-Mogami, Y., Hoshikawa, K., Goldman, J. E., 
Sekino, Y. & Sato, K. Microglia enhance neurogenesis and 
oligodendrogenesis in the early postnatal subventricular 
zone. J. Neurosci. 34, 2231–2243 (2014).
123.	Ransohoff, R. M. How neuroinflammation contributes 
to neurodegeneration. Science 353, 777–783 
(2016).
124.	Ajami, B., Bennett, J. L., Krieger, C., McNagny, K. M. & 
Rossi, F. M. Infiltrating monocytes trigger EAE 
progression, but do not contribute to the resident 
microglia pool. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1142–1149 (2011).
125.	Yamasaki, R. et al. Differential roles of microglia and 
monocytes in the inflamed central nervous system. 
J. Exp. Med. 211, 1533–1549 (2014).
126.	Ritzel, R. M. et al. Functional differences between 
microglia and monocytes after ischemic stroke. 
J. Neuroinflamm. 12, 106 (2015).
127.	Guerreiro, R. et al. TREM2 variants in Alzheimer’s 
disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 117–127 (2013).
128.	Sims, R. et al. Rare coding variants in PLCG2, ABI3, 
and TREM2 implicate microglial-mediated innate 
immunity in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet. 49, 
1373–1384 (2017).
129.	Jonsson, T. et al. Variant of TREM2 associated with 
the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 
107–116 (2013).
130.	Lambert, J. C. et al. Genome-wide association study 
identifies variants at CLU and CR1 associated with 
Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet. 41, 1094–1099 
(2009).
131.	Hollingworth, P. et al. Common variants at ABCA7, 
MS4A6A/MS4A4E, EPHA1, CD33 and CD2AP are 
associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet. 43, 
429–435 (2011).
132.	Naj, A. C. et al. Common variants at MS4A4/MS4A6E, 
CD2AP, CD33 and EPHA1 are associated with late-
onset Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet. 43, 436–441 
(2011).
133.	Carrasquillo, M. M. et al. Replication of EPHA1 and 
CD33 associations with late-onset Alzheimer’s 
disease: a multi-centre case-control study. 
Mol. Neurodegener. 6, 54 (2011).
134.	Colonna, M. & Wang, Y. TREM2 variants: new keys to 
decipher Alzheimer disease pathogenesis. Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 17, 201–207 (2016).
135.	Griciuc, A. et al. Alzheimer’s disease risk gene CD33 
inhibits microglial uptake of amyloid beta. Neuron 78, 
631–643 (2013).
136.	Grathwohl, S. A. et al. Formation and maintenance of 
Alzheimer’s disease β-amyloid plaques in the absence 
of microglia. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1361–1363 (2009).
137.	Yuan, P. et al. TREM2 haplodeficiency in mice and 
humans impairs the microglia barrier function leading 
to decreased amyloid compaction and severe axonal 
dystrophy. Neuron 90, 724–739 (2016).
138.	Asai, H. et al. Depletion of microglia and inhibition of 
exosome synthesis halt tau propagation. 
Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1584–1593 (2015).
139.	Yoshiyama, Y. et al. Synapse loss and microglial 
activation precede tangles in a P301S tauopathy 
mouse model. Neuron 53, 337–351 (2007).
140.	Maphis, N. et al. Reactive microglia drive tau 
pathology and contribute to the spreading of 
pathological tau in the brain. Brain 138, 1738–1755 
(2015).
141.	Al‑Chalabi, A., van den Berg, L. H. & Veldink, J. Gene 
discovery in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: implications 
for clinical management. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 13, 
96–104 (2017).
142.	Boillee, S. et al. Onset and progression in inherited 
ALS determined by motor neurons and microglia. 
Science 312, 1389–1392 (2006).
143.	O’Rourke, J. G. et al. C9orf72 is required for proper 
macrophage and microglial function in mice. 
Science 351, 1324–1329 (2016).
144.	Paolicelli, R. C. et al. TDP‑43 depletion in microglia 
promotes amyloid clearance but also induces synapse 
loss. Neuron 95, 297–308 (2017).
145.	Mishra, M. K. & Yong, V. W. Myeloid cells — targets of 
medication in multiple sclerosis. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 12, 
539–551 (2016).
146.	International Multiple Sclerosis Genetics, C. et al. 
Genetic risk and a primary role for cell-mediated 
immune mechanisms in multiple sclerosis. 
Nature 476, 214–219 (2011).
147.	Miron, V. E. Microglia-driven regulation of 
oligodendrocyte lineage cells, myelination, and 
remyelination. J. Leukoc. Biol. 101, 1103–1108 
(2017).
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY	
 VOLUME 18 | APRIL 2018 | 241
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

148.	Beutner, C., Roy, K., Linnartz, B., Napoli, I. & 
Neumann, H. Generation of microglial cells from 
mouse embryonic stem cells. Nat. Protoc. 
5, 1481–1494 (2010).
149.	Tavian, M. & Peault, B. Embryonic development of the 
human hematopoietic system. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 49, 
243–250 (2005).
150.	Monier, A. et al. Entry and distribution of microglial 
cells in human embryonic and fetal cerebral cortex. 
J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 66, 372–382 (2007).
151.	Karch, C. M. & Goate, A. M. Alzheimer’s disease risk 
genes and mechanisms of disease pathogenesis. 
Biol Psychiatry 77, 43–51 (2015).
152.	Wang, Y. et al. TREM2 lipid sensing sustains the 
microglial response in an Alzheimer’s disease model. 
Cell 160, 1061–1071 (2015).
This work demonstrates lipid sensing by TREM2, 
which is encoded by one of the strongest risk genes 
for Alzheimer disease, as a possible mechanism 
underlying disease pathophysiology.
153.	Yeh, F. L., Wang, Y., Tom, I., Gonzalez, L. C. & Sheng, M. 
TREM2 Binds to apolipoproteins, including APOE and 
CLU/APOJ, and thereby facilitates uptake of amyloid-β 
by microglia. Neuron 91, 328–340 (2016).
154.	Wang, Y. et al. TREM2‑mediated early microglial 
response limits diffusion and toxicity of amyloid 
plaques. J. Exp. Med. 213, 667–675 (2016).
155.	Ulland, T. K. et al. TREM2 maintains microglial 
metabolic fitness in Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 170, 
649–663.e13 (2017).
156.	Dai, X. M. et al. Targeted disruption of the mouse 
colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor gene results 
in osteopetrosis, mononuclear phagocyte 
deficiency, increased primitive progenitor cell 
frequencies, and reproductive defects. Blood 99, 
111–120 (2002).
157.	Otero, K. et al. Macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
induces the proliferation and survival of macrophages 
via a pathway involving DAP12 and β-catenin. 
Nat. Immunol. 10, 734–743 (2009).
Acknowledgements
The authors thank members of the Barres laboratory for pro­
viding valuable feedback, especially C. J. Bohlen, M.-M. Fu, 
F. C. Bennett, M. L. Bennett and L. Zhou. Q.L. is supported 
by the Jeffry M. and Barbara Picower (JPB) foundation and 
Stanford University School of Medicine Dean’s Postdoctoral 
Fellowship.
Author contributions
Q.L. was responsible for researching, writing and editing the 
manuscript. B.A.B. contributed to reviewing and editing the 
manuscript before submission.
Competing interests statement
The authors declare competing interests. See online for 
details.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
REVIEWS
242 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 18	
www.nature.com/nri
©
 2
0
1
8
 M
a
c
m
i
l
l
a
n
 P
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
r
s
 L
i
m
i
t
e
d
,
 p
a
r
t
 o
f
 S
p
r
i
n
g
e
r
 N
a
t
u
r
e
.
 A
l
l
 r
i
g
h
t
s
 r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.

===== Li2019_Neuron_Brain-Microglia-scTx =====
NeuroResource
Developmental Heterogeneity of Microglia and Brain
Myeloid Cells Revealed by Deep Single-Cell RNA
Sequencing
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Myeloid scRNA-seq atlas across brain regions and
developmental stages
d Limited transcriptomic heterogeneity of homeostatic
microglia in the adult brain
d Phase-speciﬁc gene sets of proliferating microglia along cell
cycle pseudotime
d Phagocytic PAM subset uncovered by scRNA-seq sharing a
DAM gene signature
Authors
Qingyun Li, Zuolin Cheng, Lu Zhou, ...,
Stephen R. Quake, Tony Wyss-Coray,
Ben A. Barres
Correspondence
tristan.qingyun.li@gmail.com
In Brief
Li et al. generate high-resolution single-
cell transcriptomes of microglia and
related myeloid cells across mouse brain
regions and developmental stages. They
show limited heterogeneity of adult
microglia and identify an early postnatal
phagocytic subset of proliferative-region-
associated microglia (PAM).
Li et al., 2019, Neuron 101, 207–223
January 16, 2019 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.12.006

Neuron
NeuroResource
Developmental Heterogeneity of Microglia
and Brain Myeloid Cells Revealed
by Deep Single-Cell RNA Sequencing
Qingyun Li,1,6,8,* Zuolin Cheng,2,6 Lu Zhou,1 Spyros Darmanis,3 Norma F. Neff,3 Jennifer Okamoto,3 Gunsagar Gulati,4
Mariko L. Bennett,1 Lu O. Sun,1 Laura E. Clarke,1 Julia Marschallinger,5 Guoqiang Yu,2,7 Stephen R. Quake,3,7
Tony Wyss-Coray,5,7 and Ben A. Barres1,7
1Department of Neurobiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
2Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Arlington, VA 22203, USA
3Departments of Bioengineering and Applied Physics, Stanford University and Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
4Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
5Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
6These authors contributed equally
7Senior author
8Lead Contact
*Correspondence: tristan.qingyun.li@gmail.com
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.12.006
SUMMARY
Microglia are increasingly recognized for their major
contributions during brain development and neuro-
degenerative
disease.
It
is
currently
unknown
whether these functions are carried out by subsets
of
microglia
during
different
stages
of
devel-
opment and adulthood or within speciﬁc brain re-
gions. Here, we performed deep single-cell RNA
sequencing (scRNA-seq) of microglia and related
myeloid cells sorted from various regions of embry-
onic, early postnatal, and adult mouse brains. We
found that the majority of adult microglia expressing
homeostatic genes are remarkably similar in tran-
scriptomes, regardless of brain region. By contrast,
early postnatal microglia are more heterogeneous.
We discovered a proliferative-region-associated mi-
croglia (PAM) subset, mainly found in developing
white matter, that shares a characteristic gene signa-
ture with degenerative disease-associated microglia
(DAM). Such PAM have amoeboid morphology, are
metabolically active, and phagocytose newly formed
oligodendrocytes. This scRNA-seq atlas will be a
valuable resource for dissecting innate immune func-
tions in health and disease.
INTRODUCTION
Microglia are brain parenchymal macrophages that are impli-
cated in numerous neurological diseases, such as Alzheimer’s
disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, stroke, and brain tumors
(Colonna and Butovsky, 2017; Prinz et al., 2011). In addition to
their classical immune surveillance and scavenging functions,
microglia have recently been found to actively participate in neu-
ral development by modulating neurogenesis and pruning syn-
apses (Cunningham et al., 2013; Li and Barres, 2018; Paolicelli
et al., 2011; Schafer et al., 2012; Ueno et al., 2013). Despite
the importance of these multitasking cells, little is known about
their molecular heterogeneity under physiological conditions
and especially during development, when they perform many
critical non-immune functions. In addition, due to their transcrip-
tomic resemblance to other myeloid cells, which may inﬁltrate
the brain parenchyma in disease (Goldmann et al., 2016; Prinz
et al., 2017), a systematic comparison between microglia and
these related immune cells remains an imperative task.
Microglia and most other tissue macrophages are long-lived,
self-renewing cells that are generated by waves of erythro-
myeloid progenitors in the yolk sac (Gomez Perdiguero et al.,
2015; Hoeffel et al., 2015; Li and Barres, 2018). In mice, microglia
migrate to the brain around embryonic day 9.5 (E9.5) and blood-
brain barrier closure around E13.5 has been proposed as a
mechanism to conﬁne microglia inside the parenchyma (Ginhoux
et al., 2010). Consistent with this convoluted developmental
route, bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data demonstrated
a
roughly
stepwise
differentiation
program
for
microglia
(Matcovitch-Natan et al., 2016). However, the reliance on
general surface markers in these studies could overlook micro-
glial heterogeneity, particularly potential transient populations
during development, thereby underestimating developmental
complexity of microglia. Furthermore, although mature microglia
in different brain regions were shown to have uneven distribution
with distinct morphologies (Lawson et al., 1990), which seems to
correlate with region-speciﬁc expression proﬁles (Ayata et al.,
2018; De Biase et al., 2017; Grabert et al., 2016), it remains un-
clear whether there are molecularly deﬁned subtypes of micro-
glia in the adult brain and, if so, how they are distributed across
brain regions.
Here, we took an unbiased approach to investigate the hetero-
geneity of microglia along with other brain myeloid cells by
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc.
207

performing deep single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) on sorted
cells across mouse brain regions and developmental stages.
scRNA-seq has been proven as a powerful tool for dissecting
cellular diversity from complex organs with minimal prior knowl-
edge (Papalexi and Satija, 2018). We utilized the Smart-seq2
approach on sorted cells, due to its high sensitivity and accuracy
(Svensson et al., 2017; Ziegenhain et al., 2017). In total, we
sequenced 1,922 cells to over 1 million raw reads per cell. Clus-
tering analysis of this complex dataset identiﬁed 15 distinct cell
populations. Two microglia clusters expressed signature genes
for dividing cells, which we used to reconstruct cell cycle phases
and produced phase-speciﬁc gene sets for microglia. We also
found that early postnatal and adult choroid plexus macro-
phages were separated into distinct clusters, suggesting a
developmental phenotypic switch for these particular brain-resi-
dent macrophages.
Surprisingly, we found little population-wise heterogeneity
among adult homeostatic microglia at the whole transcriptomic
level. By contrast, we observed much higher heterogeneity in
early postnatal microglia. We identiﬁed a population of pro-
liferative-region-associated microglia (PAM), which shared a
transcriptional signature with degenerative disease-associated
microglia (DAM) (Keren-Shaul et al., 2017; Krasemann et al.,
2017). PAM mainly appeared in developing corpus callosum
and cerebellar white matter around a transient period of the ﬁrst
postnatal week, when they engulfed newly formed oligodendro-
cytes. Interestingly, unlike DAM (Keren-Shaul et al., 2017; Krase-
mann et al., 2017), appearance of PAM did not depend on a
TREM2-APOE axis, suggesting that different signals may trigger
the emergence of these two microglial populations.
We created a searchable web interface for this high-resolution
single myeloid cell atlas as an integrated component of our
widely used brain RNA-seq website: http://www.brainrnaseq.
org. This study provided a useful resource for dissecting innate
immune cell contributions to normal development and brain
disease.
RESULTS
Clustering of Brain Myeloid Cells across Developmental
Stages by Deep scRNA-Seq
To understand the spatiotemporal heterogeneity of microglia
and other brain myeloid cells in an unbiased manner, we used
a semi-automated Smart-seq2 platform to perform scRNA-seq
on index-sorted innate immune cells from the mouse brain (Fig-
ure 1A). We sequenced a total of 1,922 cells to a depth of at least
1 million raw reads per cell, from embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5),
postnatal day 7 (P7), and adult (P60) brain tissues. We reasoned
that deeper sequencing would allow us to detect more genes
compared with other scRNA-seq technologies, which could
reveal even subtle differences among possible microglial sub-
populations. We also analyzed non-microglia myeloid cells,
due to their resemblance to parenchymal microglia and possible
links to degenerative disease and injury. To uncover microglial
regional heterogeneity, we isolated myeloid cells (for P7 and
P60 stages) from six brain regions: cortex, cerebellum, hippo-
campus, striatum, olfactory bulb, and choroid plexus. We used
a recently developed protocol for cell extraction to minimize mi-
croglial activation (Bennett et al., 2016). For the E14.5 stage, we
gated on c-KitCD45+; for the P7 and P60 stages, we gated
on CD45lowCD11b+ versus CD45hiCD11b+ for microglia and
myeloid cells, respectively (Figures 1B and S1A). Fluorescence
intensities from other relevant markers, such as F4/80 (macro-
phage marker), CD41 (hematopoietic progenitor marker), and
TMEM119 (homeostatic microglia marker), were recorded as
part of the metadata in this multidimensional dataset (Figures
1A and S1A).
Using stringent criteria, 1,816 cells (94.5% of 1,922) passed
quality control for downstream analysis, including 142 E14.5
cells, 978 P7 cells, and 696 P60 cells from various brain regions
(Figures S1B–S1D; see STAR Methods). To assess the sensitivity
and accuracy of the data, we analyzed the sequencing results for
External RNA Controls Consortium (ERCC) Spike-In RNA and
found that our Smart-seq2 platform had nearly single-molecule
detection limit and high precision (R = 0.98; Figures S1E and
S1F; see STAR Methods). When comparing our sequencing
data for adult microglia with two other published scRNA-seq da-
tasets (Keren-Shaul et al., 2017; Matcovitch-Natan et al., 2016),
our study detected about 3 times as many genes per cell and
produced higher detection rates for over 80% of genes (Figures
S1G and S1H). In summary, we generated a high-quality multidi-
mensional scRNA-seq dataset for region-speciﬁc microglia and
brain myeloid cells across developmental stages, and we incor-
porated these data into our widely used brain RNA-seq website
(http://www.brainrnaseq.org).
To study the transcriptomic heterogeneity of brain myeloid
cells, we carried out unsupervised clustering analysis for all
1,816 cells, which gave rise to 15 distinct clusters (Figure 1C).
Through differential gene expression analysis, we discovered a
list of enriched genes for each cluster as potential markers (Table
S1). Expression of these genes uniquely or in combinations rep-
resented individual cluster identities (Figures 1F and 1G). Based
on these gene lists and other metadata, such as the develop-
mental stage and ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
gating information for the cells from each cluster (Figures 1D
and 1E), we annotated the 15 clusters into distinct cell types or
states. This included 7 microglia clusters, 2 choroid plexus
macrophage clusters, 3 monocyte clusters, and 3 other immune
or epithelial cell clusters (Figure 1C). Of note, some clusters had
less than 20 cells (e.g., cluster 14, natural killer cells) but were
robustly identiﬁed as distinct and biologically meaningful clus-
ters, suggesting the reliability of the current technology even
for small numbers of cells.
Interestingly, we observed that different clusters of microglia,
choroid plexus cells, or monocytes tended to be most closely
juxtaposed on the t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding
(tSNE) plot, implicating the overall similarities between clusters
of each cell type (Figure 1C). For example, neighboring clusters
0–6 were deemed ‘‘microglia-like’’ cells (Figures 1C and 1D).
They all expressed microglial signature genes, such as P2ry12
and Slc2a5 (Figure 1G; Bennett et al., 2016; Zhang et al.,
2014), and these cells were largely isolated from the CD45low
gate, whereas cells from other ‘‘non-microglia’’ clusters were
almost exclusively from the CD45hi gate (Figure 1D). We noticed
the presence of many CD45hi cells from the P7 stage in
microglia-like clusters, suggesting the heterogeneity of CD45
208
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019

Figure 1. Clustering of Brain Myeloid Cells across Developmental Stages by Deep scRNA-Seq
(A) Schematic graph showing the experimental design. c-KitCD45+ (bold) was the sorting gate for E14.5 cells, and CD45+CD11b+ (bold) was for P7 and P60 cells.
Other surface markers were recorded as metadata.
(B) Representative FACS plots showing the cells sequenced (red or blue).
(C) tSNE plot showing 15 clusters and population annotations with microglia-like clusters in bold and the number of cells in parentheses.
(D) Overlaying FACS gating information onto the same tSNE plot in (C). The vast majority of P60 microglia are CD45low, and P7 microglia are comprised of both
CD45low and CD45hi cells. Almost all cells from non-microglia clusters are CD45hi.
(E) Overlaying developmental stage information onto the same tSNE plot in (C).
(F) Heatmap showing the top 20 markers (or all markers if less than 20) for each of the 15 clusters.
(G) Bar plots showing gene expression levels of two representative markers for each cluster.
See also Figure S1 and Table S1.
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019
209

immunophenotypes in early postnatal microglia. Furthermore,
according to the developmental stages, these 7 microglia clus-
ters were segregated into unidirectionally shifted domains on
the tSNE plot, consistent with progressive changes in gene
expression during microglial development (Figure 1E; Matco-
vitch-Natan et al., 2016).
Postnatal Transcriptional Alteration of Choroid Plexus
Macrophages
We ﬁrst focused on non-microglia clusters. Consistent with the
bone marrow origin of circulating myeloid cells, we observed
that monocyte and neutrophil clusters (clusters 8, 10, 11, and
12) comprised intermingled P7 and P60 cells within each cluster
(Figures 1C and 1E). On the other hand, choroid plexus macro-
phages (CP MF) as resident macrophages at CNS interfaces
have yolk sac and bone marrow dual origins (Goldmann et al.,
2016). Interestingly, CP MF were separated into two distinct
clusters (cluster 7 and cluster 9) largely conﬁned to their develop-
mental stages (Figure 1E). Only in the adult CP MF cluster (clus-
ter 7) did we detect high levels of major histocompatibility com-
plex II (MHC-II) gene expression (e.g., H2-Ab1, Cd74, H2-Aa,
and H2-Eb1; Figure 2A). Along with these genes involved in an-
tigen presentation, we also found elevated expression of other
immunoregulatory genes, such as Fkbp5, Tsc22d3, Axl, and
Lilra5 in cluster 7. By contrast, postnatal CP MF (cluster 9) ex-
pressed many genes that function in endocytosis and intracel-
lular trafﬁcking of nutrients or signaling molecules (e.g., Snx6,
Snx2, Dab2, Cd36, Ap1b1, and Mrc1; Figure 2A). We identiﬁed
H2-Eb1 and Lilra5 as molecular markers for adult CP MF and
Clec4n for their postnatal counterparts and validated this selec-
tive gene expression by RNA in situ and immunohistochemistry
(Figures 2B–2D). Our lab has previously demonstrated that mi-
croglia turn on homeostatic genes during postnatal development
(Bennett et al., 2016). Here, we show that CP MF are a second
example of brain-resident macrophages that undergo a post-
natal transcriptional alteration.
Limited Transcriptomic Heterogeneity of Adult
Homeostatic Microglia
Within the 7 microglia clusters, adult microglia were almost
exclusively present in cluster 0 and cluster 6 (Figures 1C–1E).
Both clusters expressed similar levels of homeostatic microglial
Figure 2. Postnatal Transcriptional Alteration of CP MF
(A) tSNE plot (left) and heatmap (right) highlighting two stage-speciﬁc CP MF clusters and differentially expressed genes. Genes for validation in (C) and (D) are
underlined and in bold.
(B) Violin plots showing that H2-Eb1 and Lilra5 are highly expressed by adult CP MF (cluster 7) and Clec4n is highly enriched in early postnatal CP MF (cluster 9).
(C) RNA in situ validation of abundant H2-Eb1 and Lilra5 expression in P60 CP MF (H2-Eb1+Lilra5+Cx3cr1+, arrowheads), but not in P7 cells.
H2-Eb1Cx3cr1+Lilra5+ (arrows) cells were occasionally seen in both stages. H2-Eb1+Lilra5Cx3cr1 (asterisks) are non-myeloid cells.
(D) Immunostaining validation of more abundant CLEC4N expression in P7 CP MF (CLEC4N+CX3CR1-GFP+, arrowheads). CLEC4NCX3CR1-GFP+ (arrow) cells
also exist in P7. CP, choroid plexus. Dashed lines demarcate ventricle borders.
Scale bars in (C) and (D) are 50 mm.
210
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019

signature genes (Figure S2A), with the exception of slightly
reduced P2ry12 expression in cluster 6 (Figure 3A). Compared
with cluster 0, only 27 total genes (including P2ry12) were differ-
entially expressed in cluster 6, out of which half were immediate
early genes (IEGs) (Table S2; Figure 3A). Therefore, we anno-
tated cluster 6 as ‘‘IEG+’’ microglia. Because these IEGs can
Figure 3. Limited Transcriptomic Heterogeneity of Adult Homeostatic Microglia across Brain Regions
(A) tSNE plot (left) and violin plots (right) highlighting two P60 microglia clusters and examples of differentially expressed genes.
(B) RNA in situ showing negative expression of Fos and Egr1 in microglia (Tmem119+) and positive signals from surrounding non-microglia cells.
(C) Quantiﬁcation of ﬂuorescence signals in (B). n = 30 cells for each.
(D) Pearson correlation between bulk RNA-seq samples from P60 brain regions.
(E) Dendrogram showing hierarchical clustering of bulk RNA-seq samples, irrelevant of regions.
(F) Numbers of differentially expressed genes between homeostatic microglia from different regions by scRNA-seq and bulk RNA-seq.
Scale bar in (B) is 50 mm. See also Figure S2 and Tables S2 and S3.
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019
211

be rapidly induced in response to environmental stimuli, and the
microglia extraction procedure is likely to trigger such an artiﬁcial
response, we examined the expression of the two most upregu-
lated IEGs, Fos and Egr1, on tissue sections. Indeed, adult mi-
croglia stained negative for Fos/Egr1 transcripts or proteins,
whereas their expression was readily detected in the surround-
ing non-microglial cells (Figures 3B, 3C, S2B, and S2C). This
result is consistent with recent studies showing that IEG expres-
sion by microglia was only found in sorted cells, but not with the
RiboTag technology (Ayata et al., 2018; Haimon et al., 2018).
Taken together, if we consider the contribution of IEGs to the
clustering result as an experimental artifact, the vast majority
of adult microglia from different brain regions appear to show
the classical homeostatic phenotype with high levels of tran-
scriptomic similarity.
Because we collected cells from different areas of the brain,
these analyses imply that adult homeostatic microglia have a
similar expression proﬁle despite varying regions of origin.
Indeed, we found that less than 20 genes were differentially ex-
pressed (false discovery rate [FDR] < 0.05) in typical adult micro-
glia (cluster 0) between regions (Figure 3F; Table S3). To rule out
a sensitivity issue of scRNA-seq, we performed region-speciﬁc
bulk RNA-seq of highly puriﬁed homeostatic microglia sorted
with TMEM119 antibodies, which label over 90% of microglia
in the adult brain (Bennett et al., 2016). Consistent with our
scRNA-seq data, samples from cortex, cerebellum, hippocam-
pus, and striatum were highly correlated (R > 0.99), and individ-
ual samples did not cluster according to tissue origins, suggest-
ing striking similarities between homeostatic microglia from
different brain regions (Figures 3D and 3E). Moreover, we could
not detect any differentially expressed genes (FDR < 0.05) be-
tween regions from the bulk samples (Figure 3F; Table S3).
Conversely, we found that certain genes previously attributed
to microglial regional heterogeneity were largely expressed by
different populations of non-microglial cells from our scRNA-
seq data (Grabert et al., 2016; Figure S2D). These data suggest
that classical adult microglia with homeostatic signatures (e.g.,
Tmem119 and P2ry12), as the most dominant microglial popula-
tion in the healthy brain, have only limited, if any, transcriptomic
heterogeneity across brain regions.
Phase-Speciﬁc Gene Expression of Dividing Microglia
along Cell Cycle Pseudotime
We next characterized early postnatal microglia, which were
distributed among clusters 0–5 (two P7 cells in the IEG+ cluster 6
were excluded from the analysis; Figure 4A, upper left). These
included two clusters corresponding to dividing cells in two
cell cycle phases (clusters 3 and 4), one embryonic-like cluster
(cluster 5), two early postnatal cell-speciﬁc clusters (clusters 1
and 2), and a few cells in the adult homeostatic cluster (cluster 0)
bordering cluster 2.
Microglia in the ﬁrst two postnatal weeks are highly prolifera-
tive (Nikodemova et al., 2015). Previous work showed that,
in scRNA-seq analysis, cell cycle genes can overload the
major principal components that underlie cell-to-cell variations,
thereby masking other, more functionally relevant, differences
between cells (Buettner et al., 2015). Indeed, many cell cycle
genes ranked at the top of the ﬁrst 3 principal components, ex-
plaining variations in P7 microglia, and using conserved cell cy-
cle genes for clustering, these cells were clearly segregated
based on their presumable cell cycle phases (Figures S3A and
S3C). To eliminate this confounding factor and unmask the un-
derlying microglial heterogeneity, we used an established algo-
rithm to regress out cell cycle effects followed by re-clustering
of these P7 microglial cells (Figures S3B and S3C; see STAR
Methods). This approach yielded three clusters: P7-C0, P7-C1,
and P7-C2 (Figure 4A). Interestingly, these three clusters largely
corresponded to the three dominant cell-cycle-independent
clusters (clusters 1, 2, and 5) found in the original analysis, and
the two original cycling clusters (clusters 3 and 4) were simply
re-distributed among P7-C0, P7-C1, and P7-C2 following cell
cycle regression (Figure 4A). These ﬁndings suggested that, irre-
spective of cell cycle states, there were only 3 categories of mi-
croglia at the P7 stage and that the two major clusters (P7-C0
and P7-C1) were each comprised of non-dividing cells and their
corresponding dividing cells in two cell cycle phases (Figure 4A).
It is of great interest to understand the gene regulation of mi-
croglial division because microgliosis is prevalent in disease
and injury. We took advantage of the scRNA-seq data that pre-
sumably included gene expression information of individual
dividing microglia at various phases of the cell cycle and compu-
tationally reconstructed this dividing process (Figures 4B, S4A,
and S4B; see STAR Methods). To obtain cell cycle phase-spe-
ciﬁc gene sets for endogenous microglia, we analyzed the P7 mi-
croglia (P7-C0 and P7-C1 were analyzed separately) due to their
sufﬁcient population sizes, although we could also detect 11
dividing adult microglia in our data (Figure 1E). We used lists of
conserved genes from a well-established dataset for HeLa cell
lines as the ‘‘seeds’’ to reconstruct 5 cell cycle phases along mi-
croglial division pseudotime (Macosko et al., 2015; Whitﬁeld
et al., 2002). Then, the algorithm searched for other genes corre-
lated with phases and reﬁned the ordering of cells based on up-
dated phase-speciﬁc gene expression. Through a number of
repetitions, lists of genes stably assigned to each phase were
obtained (Figures 4B, S4B, and S4D; Table S4). Averaged
expression of these gene sets showed a ‘‘wave-like’’ pattern
along the dividing pseudotime, whereas microglial signature
genes were expressed at a consistent level (Figures 4C
and S4C).
In total, we identiﬁed 315 periodically expressed genes for
P7-C0 cells and 347 genes for P7-C1 cells (some genes were ex-
pressed in more than one phase; Table S4). Excluding the seeds
input, 254 (81% of 315) genes for P7-C0 and 227 (65% of 347)
genes for P7-C1 were identiﬁed by the algorithm and 183 genes
overlapped in both clusters. We compared these machine-re-
ported gene lists with four published datasets for experimentally
characterized cell cycle genes (including the HeLa data we used
as seeds; Grant et al., 2013) and found that the majority of newly
identiﬁed genes appeared in at least one of the four datasets
(Figures 4D and S4E), suggesting the robustness of this analysis.
More importantly, we identiﬁed many genes that have yet to be
described as periodically expressed in dividing cells (‘‘novel’’),
although more than half of these new genes have possible links
to cell proliferation based on gene function annotations (Figures
4E and S4F). For example, we discovered genes that are
involved in DNA damage response and repair (Ankle1, Lig1,
212
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019

Figure 4. Phase-Speciﬁc Gene Expression of Dividing Microglia (P7-C0 Cluster) along Cell Cycle Pseudotime
(A) tSNE plots demonstrating cell cycle regression and re-clustering of P7 microglia. Cells in all tSNE plots are color coded exactly the same way as in Figure 1C.
Numbers of cells in each cluster are given in parentheses. Two tSNE plots in the box (lower left) demonstrate consistency of two analyses (before and after cell
cycle regression) and distribution of the original dividing clusters (clusters 3 and 4) into P7-C0, P7-C1, and P7-C2 following cell cycle regression. (B)–(F) show
analysis for the 264 P7-C0 microglia identiﬁed in (A).
(B) Heatmap (upper panel) showing pseudotime ordering of P7-C0 microglia based on raw phase scores. Each column is a cell, and each row denotes raw scores
for a speciﬁc cell cycle phase. G0 cells have no dominant phase scores for any phase and were not ordered. Heatmap (lower panel) showing expression levels of
identiﬁed phase-speciﬁc genes. Each column is a cell, and each row is a gene. The original identities (bottom bar) are color coded as in (A).
(C) Dot plots showing expression levels of phase-speciﬁc genes along microglia dividing pseudotime. Genes for each phase are plotted in separate graphs, with
each dot representing the level of expression for a given gene in a given cell. Curves show average expression of all genes assigned to a phase along dividing
pseudotime. Expression of microglial signature genes (Butovsky et al., 2014) is shown at the bottom.
(D) The gray pie chart showing overlaps of phase-speciﬁc genes identiﬁed by the algorithm compared with four published cell cycle gene sets (Grant et al., 2013).
Colored pie charts are breakdowns of the genes from each category based on the phase assignment.
(E) Table showing gene names identiﬁed as ‘‘novel’’ in (D). Genes that may play a role in cell division are in bold.
(F) Heatmap (upper panel) showing pseudotime ordering of P7-C0 microglia by normalized phase scores. The bottom panels show Ankle1 as an example for its
expression dynamics along dividing pseudotime. Each dot is a single cell. The smoothened expression is the average expression of Ankle1 computed with a ﬁxed
window size (length of ordered cells/10).
See also Figures S3 and S4 and Table S4.
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019
213

and Rpa1), histone mRNA decay (Eri1), and genes with epige-
netic
functions,
such
as
replication-independent
histones
(H2afz and H3f3b) and chromatin modiﬁers (Hmgn2 and
Dnmt1; Figure 4F).
Heterogeneity of Early Postnatal Microglia Revealed by
scRNA-Seq
To understand early postnatal microglial heterogeneity, we next
examined three P7 clusters (after cell cycle regression). Interest-
ingly, P7-C2 was a small cluster that mainly included cells clus-
tered together with embryonic E14.5 microglia (cluster 5) in the
initial analysis, suggesting the presence of primitive microglia
in the postnatal brain (Figures 1C and 5A). Cells belonging to
P7-C2 expressed microglial signature genes at lower levels
(e.g., Tmem119, Selplg, P2ry12, and Tgfbr1) and displayed upre-
gulation of genes in metal homeostasis (Fth1, Ftl1, and Mt1),
actin cytoskeleton dynamics (Tmsb4x, Pfn1, and Cﬂ1), and
ribosomal components (e.g., Rps14, Rps18, Rpl35, and Rps29;
Figure 5B; Table S5).
The majority of P7 microglia fell into either P7-C0 or P7-C1
cluster. Microglia from both clusters expressed homeostatic
genes, such as Tmem119, P2ry12, Tgfbr1, Siglech, and Sall1,
but P7-C1 cells expressed them at lower levels (Figure 5C; Table
S5). Interestingly, P7-C1 microglia exhibited characteristic
expression of many genes that have recently been shown to
be upregulated in degenerative DAM (Keren-Shaul et al., 2017;
Krasemann et al., 2017). These included Spp1, Gpnmb, Igf1,
Clec7a, Lpl, Cd9, Cd63, Lgals3, Fabp5, Itgax, Apoe, and
Tyrobp (Figure 5C). When we directly compared differentially ex-
pressed genes in P7-C1 (relative to P7-C0) with those mis-regu-
lated in DAM, we found that they were strikingly similar in that up-
regulation
of
the
disease
genes
was
accompanied
by
downregulation of the homeostatic gene cassette (Figure 5D).
To obtain a better understanding of the genes underlying P7 mi-
croglial heterogeneity, we generated a gene network based on
correlation between pairs of genes in all P7 microglia (Figure 5E;
see STAR Methods). We highlighted the nodes with colors corre-
sponding to the signiﬁcance levels in differential gene expression
analysis and cluster signatures they represented. We found
that three interconnected gene modules explained P7 microglia
identities and, more importantly, many DAM signature genes
occupied the ‘‘hub’’ positions in the network.
Validation of Early Postnatal Proliferative-Region-
Associated Microglia
We were fascinated by the resemblance of the P7-C1 microglia
to DAM in gene expression and examined these early postnatal
microglia in greater detail. We noticed that the top ranked marker
genes, Spp1 and Gpnmb, also distinguished this microglial sub-
set from all other myeloid cell populations (Figures 6A and S5A;
Table S5). Surprisingly, RNA in situ labeling demonstrated that
expression of these two genes overlapped almost exclusively
in the corpus callosum and cerebellar white matter (marked by
Mbp+ oligodendrocytes) and that Spp1+Gpnmb+ cells were
positive for the microglia marker Cx3cr1 (Figures 6B and 6D).
scRNA-seq data suggested that this P7-C1 population also
had higher levels of Igf1 and Itgax expression. Indeed, we de-
tected co-expression of both transcripts in Gpnmb-positive cells
(Figures 6C and S5B). Because these microglia mainly appear in
the developing white matter of the early postnatal brain where
gliogenesis is prominent, and they are also present in other
neurogenic regions with cellular proliferation (see below), we
named the P7-C1 population PAM (short for proliferative-re-
gion-associated microglia).
Intriguingly, we discovered that early postnatal PAM and peri-
ventricular myeloid cells speciﬁcally expressed CLEC7A protein
(Figures 6A, 6E, and S5A), which labels microglia surrounding
amyloid plaques in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
and has been described as a marker for DAM (Keren-Shaul
et al., 2017; Krasemann et al., 2017). To further characterize
PAM, we stained P7 microglia with the surface proteins CLEC7A
and GPNMB and sorted the double-positive cells by FACS (Fig-
ure 6F). GPNMB+CLEC7A+ cells also expressed higher levels of
LILRB4 and CD63, which were part of the P7-C1 RNA signature
and further established the identity of this microglial population
(Figures 6A, 6F, and 6G). Additionally, scRNA-seq of microglia
freshly isolated based on GPNMB and CLEC7A co-expression
validated the original gene expression pattern observed with
the initial P7 clustering results; the clustering algorithm also re-
ported another GPNMB+CLEC7A+ concentrated cluster, which
overlapped with a portion of P7-C1 cells (Figures 6H and 6I).
This new double-positive cluster expressed all the markers iden-
tiﬁed in P7-C1, just at higher levels on average and in a much
higher percentage of the cells (Figure 6I; Table S5). This was
possibly due to the enrichment of this postnatal PAM subset at
their most polarized state. Consistent with this interpretation,
Spp1 was detected in close to 100% of the double-positive cells
by scRNA-seq, and SPP1 only labeled a portion of CLEC7A+
cells on tissue sections, presumably representing the most
typical form of postnatal PAM (Figure S5C). Interestingly, PAM
also displayed distinct cytokine or chemokine secretion proﬁles,
including Ccl3 and Ccl4, which have been linked to microglia in
aging and AD models (Kang et al., 2018; Figure S5D).
Because there seemed to be a gradient shift in overall gene
expression from P7-C0 to P7-C1 and to P7-GPNMB+CLEC7A+
cells (Figure 6H), we combined P7 scRNA-seq data with P60-ho-
meostatic microglia data and performed developmental pseudo-
time analysis to computationally reconstruct possible develop-
mental trajectories of postnatal microglia. We discovered that
one trajectory pointed toward the development of early postnatal
PAM, and the other pointed toward homeostatic, mature cells
(Figure 6J). These data suggest that postnatal immature micro-
glia can either turn on genes speciﬁc for classical microglia found
in the adult brain (P60-homeostatic) or assume the PAM pheno-
type (P7-C1 and P7-GPNMB+CLEC7A+), similar to DAM in aging
and neurodegeneration (Figure 6K).
Transient Appearance of PAM in Developing White
Matter, Independent of TREM2 or APOE
To investigate the temporal and spatial appearance of PAM dur-
ing development, we stained brain sections from E17.5 to P60
with CLEC7A antibodies. In general, we discovered that
CLEC7A+ microglia were associated transiently with the devel-
oping white matter and found in regions of neurogenesis. During
the late embryonic (E17.5) stage, CLEC7A+ microglia appeared
almost exclusively in the neurogenic niches near the lateral
214
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019

ventricles (Figure 7A), and CLEC7AIBA1+ cells were present
throughout the brain parenchyma. Starting at P4, CLEC7A+ mi-
croglia populated the corpus callosum and cerebellar white mat-
ter (Figure 7A), and they continued to expand and peaked around
P7 (Figures 6E and 7B). By P14, these white matter PAM were
barely detectable (Figures 7A and 7B). Interestingly, starting at
P14 and becoming more prominent during adulthood, CLEC7A+
microglia were also observed in the hippocampal dentate gyrus
Figure 5. Heterogeneity of Early Postnatal Microglia Revealed by scRNA-Seq
(A) Re-clustering of P7 microglia (as in Figure 4A) to highlight that P7-C2 are mainly embryonic-like cells (cluster 5) in the original clustering result.
(B) Violin plots showing some differentially expressed genes between P7-C2 and the other two clusters.
(C) Heatmap showing top 70 differentially expressed genes between P7-C0 and P7-C1. P7-C0 express higher levels of homeostatic genes and P7-C1 enrich
many disease-associated genes.
(D) Comparison of gene expression changes in DAM (relative to homeostatic microglia) with the changes in P7-C1 (relative to P7-C0) showing similar sets of
up- and downregulated genes in two cases.
(E) Gene network showing correlated gene modules underlying cluster identities of P7 microglia (see STAR Methods). Each gene is colored based on its
differential expression levels among three P7 clusters. Solid lines are for positive correlation and dashed lines are for negative correlation.
See also Table S5.
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019
215

Figure 6. Validation of Early Postnatal Proliferative-Region-Associated Microglia
(A) Violin plots showing some top upregulated genes in P7-C1 (PAM) compared with the other two clusters.
(B) RNA in situ (RNAscope) showing that Spp1 and Gpnmb signals mainly overlap in the corpus callosum (CC) (inset) and white matter region of cerebellum (CB),
and they also overlap with the microglia marker Cx3cr1.
(C) RNA in situ showing that Gpnmb+Cx3cr1+ microglia are positive for Igf1 in CC (inset) and CB white matter. Microglia in the cortex (CTX), hippocampus (HIP),
and striatum (STR) are negative for Gpnmb and Igf1 (arrowheads). Gpnmb+Cx3cr1+Igf1+ cells in the lateral ventricle (LV) (asterisk) and Igf1+Cx3cr1 neural cells
(arrows) are also labeled.
(D) RNA in situ showing that Gpnmb+Cx3cr1+ microglia are intermingled with Mbp+ oligodendrocytes in the developing white matter.
(E) Immunohistochemistry showing CLEC7A expression by P7-C1 (PAM) in the developing white matter and near ventricles. TH, thalamus.
(F) FACS plot showing P7 cerebellar GPNMB+CLEC7A+ cells (orange box) isolated for scRNA-seq.
(G) Histograms showing higher levels of LILRB4 and CD63 surface expression in GPNMB+CLEC7A+ microglia compared with GPNMBCLEC7A cells.
(legend continued on next page)
216
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019

region, the subventricular zone, and along the rostral migratory
stream, where adult neurogenesis and precursor migration
occur (Figures 7A, 7C, and 7D). The presence of CLEC7A+ mi-
croglia in these strategic niches indicated that they might be
involved in embryonic and adult neurogenesis. Morphologically,
CLEC7A+ microglia in the P7 white matter were amoeboid in
shape and had thicker primary branches with larger cell bodies
(Figures 7E–7G). By contrast, CLEC7A microglia in the cortex
were much more ramiﬁed. These CLEC7A+ cells also congre-
gated at a higher density compared with CLEC7A immature
microglia (Figures 7E and 7G). Taken together, these data sug-
gest that PAM in the developing white matter represent a
specialized transient population in the ﬁrst postnatal week rather
than a general immature state for all microglia.
It has been shown that transcriptional changes in degenerative
DAM depend on the TREM2-APOE pathway, and the DAM
signature genes, such as Spp1, Gpnmb, and Clec7a are sup-
pressed in disease models that also lack Trem2 or Apoe
(Keren-Shaul et al., 2017; Krasemann et al., 2017). Surprisingly,
despite their similarity in gene expression to DAM, amoeboid
Gpnmb+Spp1+CLEC7A+ microglia were still densely populated
in the P7 white matter of Trem2 or Apoe knockout mice (Figures
7H and S6A). Consistent with this histology observation, scRNA-
seq results showed that a subset of microglia (labeled by
GPNMB and CLEC7A) in P7 Trem2/ brains expressed PAM
markers, even at slightly higher levels compared with wild-type
microglia (Figures S6B–S6F). These data suggest that, unlike
DAM, early postnatal PAM do not depend on TREM2 or APOE
for their polarization to occur.
Phagocytosis of Newly Formed Oligodendrocytes by
Early Postnatal PAM
To investigate the biological functions of early postnatal PAM,
we followed up on our histological observation that CLEC7A+ mi-
croglia in the developing white matter had amoeboid shapes and
frequently contained pyknotic nuclei (Figures 8A and 8B; Video
S1). Amoeboid morphology has indeed been associated with a
phagocytic state in microglia or macrophages (Bohlen et al.,
2017; Ling and Wong, 1993). To compare the phagocytic capa-
bility between CLEC7A+ and CLEC7A microglia in the postnatal
brain, we exposed acutely sectioned brain slices to pH-sensitive
beads and quantiﬁed percentages of microglia that engulfed
ﬂuorescent beads based on CLEC7A expressivity and brain
regions. We found that only microglia in the corpus callosum
and cerebellum white matter (mostly CLEC7A+) preferentially
phagocytosed beads (Figures 8C, 8D, S7A, and S7B), and this
phenomenon was independent of opsonizing factors or other
components in serum (Figure 8D). These results suggest that
early postnatal PAM are highly phagocytic.
Because the occurrence of early postnatal PAM effectively
correlates with the onset of CNS myelination when newly formed
oligodendrocytes undergo massive cell death (Barres et al.,
1992; Trapp et al., 1997), we hypothesized that early postnatal
PAM might phagocytose some of these oligodendrocytes. La-
beling oligodendrocytes with MBP in the CX3CR1-GFP mouse
showed that microglia extensively interacted with star-shaped
MBP+ cells in the developing white matter (Figure 8E). More
importantly, we observed early postnatal PAM containing
cleaved caspase-3 (cCASP3)-positive inclusions, which were
MBP positive and possessed pyknotic nuclei (Figures 8E, 8F,
and S7E; Video S2). These data suggest that early postnatal
PAM phagocytose dying newly formed oligodendrocytes during
myelination. Interestingly, cCASP3-negative oligodendrocytes
were frequently ‘‘hugged’’ by early postnatal PAM, raising the
possibility of them actively contributing to elimination of cells
(Figure 8G). Moreover, we rarely observed juxtaposition of
PDGFRA+ oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) with early
postnatal PAM (Figures 8H and S7C), suggesting that this
phagocytic activity mainly targets newly formed oligodendro-
cytes, but not their precursors. In addition, we could not ﬁnd
cCASP3+ Aldh1l1-GFP labeled astrocytes, although substantial
interactions between astrocytes and early postnatal PAM ex-
isted (Figures 8H, S7D, and S7F). From the scRNA-seq data,
Mbp and Gfap transcripts were detected in certain percentages
of P7-C1 (32/323 = 9.9% for Mbp; 5/323 = 1.5% for Gfap) and
P7-GPNMB+CLEC7A+ microglia (26/192 = 13.5% for Mbp;
17/192 = 8.9% for Gfap), and Pdgfra counts were zero in all P7
microglia (Figure 8I). Because the detection rates for P7-C0 mi-
croglia (8/274 = 2.9% for Mbp; 2/274 = 0.7% for Gfap) were more
than 2-fold lower for both genes (p < 0.001 for either gene; chi-
square test), these differences were unlikely due to mRNA
contamination during cell isolation. The simplest explanation is
that scRNA-seq sufﬁciently captured transcripts from engulfed
oligodendrocytes (Mbp) or astrocytes (Gfap) in early postnatal
PAM. Taken together, these data suggest that early post-
natal PAM phagocytose newly formed oligodendrocytes and
perhaps, to a lesser extent, astrocytes.
DISCUSSION
Microglia and related brain myeloid cells are now recognized as
functional modulators of developmental processes and neuro-
degeneration (Li and Barres, 2018). It is commonly accepted
that heterogeneous myeloid populations are involved during
the course of disease progression (Prinz et al., 2011). The extent
of microglial heterogeneity and its functional signiﬁcance in the
developing and mature homeostatic brain, however, remain
elusive. In this study, we used deep scRNA-seq to address the
(H) tSNE plot showing clustering result (dashed circles) after combining GPNMB+CLEC7A+ cells with the originally sequenced P7 microglia. The arrow indicates
gradual changes of transcriptomes from postnatal immature state (P7-C0) toward more polarized GPNMB+CLEC7A+ state.
(I) Violin plots showing further up- or downregulation of differentially expressed genes in P7-GPNMB+CLEC7A+ compared with P7-C1 microglia by scRNA-seq.
(J) Pseudotime analysis of P7 microglia together with P7-GPNMB+CLEC7A+ and P60 homeostatic microglia showing developmental trajectories from P7-C0/P7-
C1 mixed starting point to P7-GPNMB+CLEC7A+ early postnatal PAM branch (via P7-C1) and to P60 homeostatic branch (via P7-C0). Each dot is a cell.
(K) Gene expression dynamics for two trajectories in (J) along developmental pseudotime, when the PAM branch gradually turns on disease-associated genes
and downregulates homeostatic genes.
Scale bars: 50 mm in (B)–(D) and 500 mm in (E). See also Figure S5 and Table S5.
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019
217

Figure 7. Transient Appearance of PAM in Developing White Matter, Independent of TREM2-APOE Regulation
(A) Immunohistochemistry showing CLEC7A+ microglia (arrowheads) from different developmental stages. Inset shows CLEC7A+ microglia in hippocampal
dentate gyrus at P14. SVZ, subventricular zone.
(B) Quantiﬁcation of CLEC7A+ microglia across developmental stages. n = 3 sections for each stage.
(C) At P60, CLEC7A+ microglia are present in hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG) (arrowheads). Arrows point to CLEC7A cells. HL, hilus.
(D) At P60, CLEC7A+ microglia are also present in SVZ and rostral migratory stream (RMS). OB, olfactory bulb.
(E) 633 confocal images showing differences in morphology and density between CLEC7A+ (in CC) and CLEC7A (in CTX) microglia at P7.
(F) 3D reconstruction of representative P7 microglia.
(G) Quantiﬁcation showing differences in morphology (n = 10 cells each) and density (n = 3 sections each) between CLEC7A+ and CLEC7A microglia at P7. ***p <
0.001; **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05.
(H) RNA in situ showing the presence of Gpnmb+Spp1+ microglia in Trem2/ or Apoe/ cerebellum at P7.
Scale bars: 500 mm in (A) and left panels in (C), (D), and (H); 50 mm in (E) and the right panels of (C); and 10 mm in (F). Data are represented as mean ± SEM in (B) and
(G). See also Figure S6.
218
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019

Figure 8. Phagocytosis of Newly Formed Oligodendrocytes by Early Postnatal PAM
(A) Single optical section of a confocal image (full stack in Video S1), showing engulfment of nuclei by CLEC7A+ microglia in the P7 cerebellar white matter. Images
from the X-Z and Y-Z axes are shown on the top and sides, respectively.
(legend continued on next page)
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019
219

question of microglial heterogeneity in the broad context of
innate immune cells, and we systematically analyzed transcrip-
tomes of these cells from distinct brain regions and across devel-
opmental time points. In addition, we generated cell cycle
phase-speciﬁc gene sets for microglia, which will not only pro-
vide a fresh perspective on our understanding of microglial pro-
liferation but also serve as a valuable resource for studies of
mammalian cell cycle.
Our deep scRNA-seq and region-speciﬁc bulk RNA-seq data
point to a lack of overt transcriptomic differences among clas-
sical adult microglia (TMEM119+), even across varying brain
regions. These results indicate that the previously observed
regional differences in adult microglia (Ayata et al., 2018) might
mainly arise from genes expressed by small percentages of
TMEM119low/ microglia (e.g., residual CLEC7A+ cells shown
in Figures 7A–7D), which were gated out in our bulk RNA-
seq analysis. Consistent with this interpretation, many genes
(Apoe, Igf1, Lilrb4, Lyz2, Colec12, Msr1, and Map1lc3b) that
were shown to be part of the phagocytic signature in adult cere-
bellar microglia (Ayata et al., 2018) were also upregulated in PAM
(Table S5). Meanwhile, other genes previously attributed to mi-
croglial regional heterogeneity could be due to differential abun-
dance of non-microglial populations in bulk samples with the
CD11b selection (Grabert et al., 2016). Furthermore, additional
brain regions may uncover transcriptomic differences not pre-
sent in the 4 major regions tested here. For example, microglia
in the midbrain have been shown to possess distinct gene
expression proﬁles compared with cortical microglia (De Biase
et al., 2017). Microglial heterogeneity can also be represented
by measurements other than gene transcription, such as electro-
physiological properties, epigenetic features, or functional read-
outs (Ayata et al., 2018; De Biase et al., 2017).
By contrast, early postnatal microglia are much more hetero-
geneous. Particularly, we identiﬁed a subset of microglia,
named PAM, that mimicked gene expression pattern of DAM
(Keren-Shaul et al., 2017; Krasemann et al., 2017). The parallels
between DAM and PAM support the concept that genes ex-
pressed during development are reactivated in aging and
degeneration (Hong et al., 2016). Functional characterization
of PAM may thus provide valuable clues for understand-
ing pathophysiology of neurodegenerative diseases. Indeed,
although early postnatal PAM engulf newly formed oligodendro-
cytes and possibly newborn astrocytes during development,
DAM are also phagocytic and involved in phagocytosis of amy-
loid beta (Ab) plaques in AD models (Keren-Shaul et al., 2017;
Krasemann et al., 2017).
In addition, PAM enrich many metabolic genes, including
almost the entire molecular machineries for oxidative phosphor-
ylation, glycolysis, and beta oxidation (Figure S7G; Tables S6
and S7). We also found upregulation of a large cohort of genes
responsible for lysosomal acidiﬁcation, lipid transport, and
metabolism, as well as lysosomal enzymatic functions (Table
S7). This indicates high levels of energy turnover, particularly
lipid metabolism, in PAM that may be required for phagocytosis
of lipid-rich oligodendrocytes. Alternatively, the act of phagocy-
tosis may drive or reinforce the expression of genes associated
with lipid metabolism, lysosomal functions, and phagocytosis.
Future work should distinguish whether PAM represent a tran-
scriptionally pre-disposed microglia subset favoring phagocy-
tosis or a transient phenotypic conversion of microglia triggered
by the phagocytic behavior.
We showed here that early postnatal PAM are not a general
intermediate step for microglia development but mainly tran-
siently appear in the developing white matter. The timing of
their appearance coincides with the onset of myelination, dur-
ing which large numbers of newly formed oligodendrocytes die
(Barres et al., 1992; Trapp et al., 1997). Overproduction of
cells, balanced by controlled apoptosis, is a common theme
during development of multicellular organisms, although the
biological signiﬁcance behind this is often unknown. Dying or
dead cells need to be cleared away by professional phago-
cytes in order to maintain tissue homeostasis. Alternatively,
these phagocytes may promote cell death to sculpt tissue
structures and create functional circuits (Fuchs and Steller,
2011). It is thus possible that efﬁcient engulfment of newly
formed oligodendrocytes by PAM in the developing white mat-
ter is necessary to generate evenly spaced oligodendrocyte
tiling and to make room for myelination. Besides the phago-
cytic function we presented here, PAM may play other roles
by interacting with neural or immune cells through secreted
molecules. We showed that early postnatal PAM display
unique cytokine or chemokine proﬁles and express many tro-
phic factors, including Igf1, Spp1, Lgals1, and Lgals3 (Fig-
ure S5D). Interestingly, and possibly related to our ﬁnding, a
CD11c (ITGAX)-expressing microglial subset in the postnatal
brain has been suggested to promote CNS myelination via
(B) 3D reconstruction of a CLEC7A+ microglia (asterisk in A) engulﬁng a pyknotic nucleus. Arrow points to the microglia nucleus in transparent rendering of the
CX3CR1-GFP channel.
(C) Phagocytosis on slice culture sections showing that pH-sensitive beads were engulfed by CLEC7A+ microglia in CC (arrowheads) and CB white matter but
rarely in other regions. Arrow points to beads-eaten CLEC7A+ cells near ventricles.
(D) Quantiﬁcation of the phagocytosis assay in (C). n = 5 sections (3 ﬁelds for each section). ***p < 0.001; **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05. WM, white matter.
(E) Immunostaining of P7 CC showing interactions between early postnatal PAM and MBP+ oligodendrocytes (arrows). Asterisks label cCASP3+ oligodendro-
cytes. Arrowhead points to cCASP3+ inclusion in microglia.
(F) Single optical section of a confocal image showing engulfment of cCASP3+ oligodendrocytes (inset) by CLEC7A+ microglia in the P7 CC. Images from the X-Z
and Y-Z axes are shown on the top and left, respectively.
(G) The microglial cell (asterisk) physically contacting an oligodendrocyte is 3D reconstructed.
(H) Quantiﬁcation for percentage of each cell type interacting with CLEC7A+ cells in CC. n = 3 sections each. **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05.
(I) Mbp and Gfap transcripts in different P7 populations by scRNA-seq. tSNE plots (same as in Figure 6H) on the right highlight cells that have detectable Mbp or
Gfap expression.
Scale bars: 50 mm in (A), (E), and (F); 500 mm in (C); and 10 mm in (B) and (G). Data are represented as mean ± SEM in (D) and (H). See also Figure S7, Tables S6 and
S7, and Videos S1 and S2.
220
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019

secreted insulin growth factor 1 (IGF1), which may exert its
effect by supporting OPC survival (Hagemeyer et al., 2017;
Wlodarczyk et al., 2017).
In summary, proﬁling individual mouse microglia during late
embryonic and postnatal development provides a resource
that complements current gene expression datasets of micro-
glia from adult and diseased brains. Deep single-cell sequencing
detected many additional genes expressed in microglia at
different developmental stages and brain regions and led to
the discovery of a unique microglial subset termed PAM. Future
functional studies of the identiﬁed microglial and myeloid
populations will likely provide insights into the pivotal roles
innate immune cells play in brain development, homeostasis,
and disease.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Mouse Models
d METHOD DETAILS
B General considerations for experimental design
B Tissue dissection and cell isolation
B Single cell index sorting
B Single and bulk RNA-seq library preparation
B Processing of scRNA-seq raw data
B Quality control for scRNA-seq data
B scRNA-seq sensitivity and accuracy assessment
B Clustering analysis of scRNA-seq data
B DE gene analysis on regional microglia
B Cell cycle regression on scRNA-seq data
B Pseudotime analysis of dividing microglia
B Gene network construction for P7 microglia
B Developmental pseudotime analysis
B GO term analysis
B RNAscope
B Immunohistochemistry
B Phagocytosis assay by slice culturing system
B 3D reconstruction of confocal images
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
d DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
d ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes seven ﬁgures, seven tables, and two
videos and can be found with this article online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuron.2018.12.006.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Ryosuke Kita for making the Myeloid Single-cell RNA-seq webpage;
Steven Sloan, Christopher Bohlen, Frederick Christian Bennett, and Meng-
meng Fu for their help and insightful feedback on the manuscript; and David
Simon, Tal Iram, John Pluvinage, Jianjin Shi, Wan-Jin Lu, and Charles Kwok
Fai Chan for discussions and generous help. We thank the Stanford Shared
FACS Facility, particularly Brandon Carter and Meredith Weglarz, for their
excellent service; John Mulholland and Kitty Lee from the Stanford Cell Sci-
ences Imaging Facility for help with confocal imaging; and Chi-Li Chiu from
BITPLANE for help with Imaris software. This work is funded by the JPB Foun-
dation (B.A.B.), Adelson Medical Research Foundation (B.A.B.), Vincent J.
Coates Foundation (B.A.B.), NIH (R01 DA015043; B.A.B.), the Veterans Admin-
istration (T.W.-C.), the NOMIS Foundation (T.W.-C.), NIH (R01 MH110504;
G.Y.), the Helen Hay Whitney Foundation (L.O.S.), National Multiple Sclerosis
Society (L.O.S.), and the Life Science Research Foundation (L.E.C.). Q.L. is
supported by a Stanford Medicine Dean’s Fellowship.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, Q.L. and B.A.B.; Methodology, Q.L., Z.C., S.D., and G.Y.;
Software, Q.L., Z.C., and G.Y.; Investigation, Q.L., Z.C., L.Z., S.D., and
N.F.N.; Formal Analysis, Q.L., Z.C., and L.Z.; Writing – Original Draft, Q.L.,
Z.C., and L.Z.; Writing – Review & Editing, Q.L., Z.C., L.Z., M.L.B., L.O.S.,
and T.W.-C.; Funding Acquisition, B.A.B.; Resources, S.D., N.F.N., J.O.,
S.R.Q., G.G., M.L.B., L.O.S., L.E.C., and J.M.; Supervision, B.A.B., G.Y.,
T.W.-C., and S.R.Q.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: August 30, 2018
Revised: November 9, 2018
Accepted: December 4, 2018
Published: December 31, 2018
REFERENCES
Anders, S., Pyl, P.T., and Huber, W. (2015). HTSeq–a Python framework to
work with high-throughput sequencing data. Bioinformatics 31, 166–169.
Ayata, P., Badimon, A., Strasburger, H.J., Duff, M.K., Montgomery, S.E., Loh,
Y.E., Ebert, A., Pimenova, A.A., Ramirez, B.R., Chan, A.T., et al. (2018).
Epigenetic regulation of brain region-speciﬁc microglia clearance activity.
Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1049–1060.
Barres, B.A., Hart, I.K., Coles, H.S., Burne, J.F., Voyvodic, J.T., Richardson,
W.D., and Raff, M.C. (1992). Cell death and control of cell survival in the oligo-
dendrocyte lineage. Cell 70, 31–46.
Bennett, M.L., Bennett, F.C., Liddelow, S.A., Ajami, B., Zamanian, J.L.,
Fernhoff, N.B., Mulinyawe, S.B., Bohlen, C.J., Adil, A., Tucker, A., et al.
(2016). New tools for studying microglia in the mouse and human CNS.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, E1738–E1746.
Bohlen, C.J., Bennett, F.C., Tucker, A.F., Collins, H.Y., Mulinyawe, S.B., and
Barres, B.A. (2017). Diverse requirements for microglial survival, speciﬁcation,
and function revealed by deﬁned-medium cultures. Neuron 94, 759–773.e8.
Buettner, F., Natarajan, K.N., Casale, F.P., Proserpio, V., Scialdone, A., Theis,
F.J., Teichmann, S.A., Marioni, J.C., and Stegle, O. (2015). Computational
analysis of cell-to-cell heterogeneity in single-cell RNA-sequencing data re-
veals hidden subpopulations of cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 155–160.
Butovsky, O., Jedrychowski, M.P., Moore, C.S., Cialic, R., Lanser, A.J.,
Gabriely, G., Koeglsperger, T., Dake, B., Wu, P.M., Doykan, C.E., et al.
(2014). Identiﬁcation of a unique TGF-b-dependent molecular and functional
signature in microglia. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 131–143.
Chung, W.S., Clarke, L.E., Wang, G.X., Stafford, B.K., Sher, A., Chakraborty,
C., Joung, J., Foo, L.C., Thompson, A., Chen, C., et al. (2013). Astrocytes
mediate synapse elimination through MEGF10 and MERTK pathways.
Nature 504, 394–400.
Colonna, M., and Butovsky, O. (2017). Microglia function in the central nervous
system during health and neurodegeneration. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 35,
441–468.
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019
221

Cunningham, C.L., Martı´nez-Cerden˜ o, V., and Noctor, S.C. (2013). Microglia
regulate the number of neural precursor cells in the developing cerebral cortex.
J. Neurosci. 33, 4216–4233.
Darmanis, S., Sloan, S.A., Zhang, Y., Enge, M., Caneda, C., Shuer, L.M.,
Hayden Gephart, M.G., Barres, B.A., and Quake, S.R. (2015). A survey of hu-
man brain transcriptome diversity at the single cell level. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 112, 7285–7290.
De Biase, L.M., Schuebel, K.E., Fusfeld, Z.H., Jair, K., Hawes, I.A., Cimbro, R.,
Zhang, H.Y., Liu, Q.R., Shen, H., Xi, Z.X., et al. (2017). Local cues establish and
maintain region-speciﬁc phenotypes of basal ganglia microglia. Neuron 95,
341–356.e6.
Dobin, A., Davis, C.A., Schlesinger, F., Drenkow, J., Zaleski, C., Jha, S., Batut,
P., Chaisson, M., and Gingeras, T.R. (2013). STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq
aligner. Bioinformatics 29, 15–21.
Friedman, J., Hastie, T., and Tibshirani, R. (2008). Sparse inverse covariance
estimation with the graphical lasso. Biostatistics 9, 432–441.
Fuchs, Y., and Steller, H. (2011). Programmed cell death in animal develop-
ment and disease. Cell 147, 742–758.
Ginhoux, F., Greter, M., Leboeuf, M., Nandi, S., See, P., Gokhan, S., Mehler,
M.F., Conway, S.J., Ng, L.G., Stanley, E.R., et al. (2010). Fate mapping analysis
reveals that adult microglia derive from primitive macrophages. Science 330,
841–845.
Goldmann, T., Wieghofer, P., Jorda˜ o, M.J., Prutek, F., Hagemeyer, N., Frenzel,
K., Amann, L., Staszewski, O., Kierdorf, K., Krueger, M., et al. (2016). Origin,
fate and dynamics of macrophages at central nervous system interfaces.
Nat. Immunol. 17, 797–805.
Gomez Perdiguero, E., Klapproth, K., Schulz, C., Busch, K., Azzoni, E., Crozet,
L., Garner, H., Trouillet, C., de Bruijn, M.F., Geissmann, F., and Rodewald, H.R.
(2015). Tissue-resident macrophages originate from yolk-sac-derived erythro-
myeloid progenitors. Nature 518, 547–551.
Grabert, K., Michoel, T., Karavolos, M.H., Clohisey, S., Baillie, J.K., Stevens,
M.P., Freeman, T.C., Summers, K.M., and McColl, B.W. (2016). Microglial
brain region-dependent diversity and selective regional sensitivities to aging.
Nat. Neurosci. 19, 504–516.
Grant, G.D., Brooks, L., 3rd, Zhang, X., Mahoney, J.M., Martyanov, V., Wood,
T.A., Sherlock, G., Cheng, C., and Whitﬁeld, M.L. (2013). Identiﬁcation of cell
cycle-regulated genes periodically expressed in U2OS cells and their
regulation by FOXM1 and E2F transcription factors. Mol. Biol. Cell 24,
3634–3650.
Hagemeyer, N., Hanft, K.M., Akriditou, M.A., Unger, N., Park, E.S., Stanley,
E.R., Staszewski, O., Dimou, L., and Prinz, M. (2017). Microglia contribute to
normal myelinogenesis and to oligodendrocyte progenitor maintenance during
adulthood. Acta Neuropathol. 134, 441–458.
Haimon, Z., Volaski, A., Orthgiess, J., Boura-Halfon, S., Varol, D., Shemer, A.,
Yona, S., Zuckerman, B., David, E., Chappell-Maor, L., et al. (2018). Re-eval-
uating microglia expression proﬁles using RiboTag and cell isolation strate-
gies. Nat. Immunol. 19, 636–644.
Hoeffel, G., Chen, J., Lavin, Y., Low, D., Almeida, F.F., See, P., Beaudin, A.E.,
Lum, J., Low, I., Forsberg, E.C., et al. (2015). C-Myb(+) erythro-myeloid pro-
genitor-derived fetal monocytes give rise to adult tissue-resident macro-
phages. Immunity 42, 665–678.
Hong, S., Dissing-Olesen, L., and Stevens, B. (2016). New insights on the role
of microglia in synaptic pruning in health and disease. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.
36, 128–134.
Kang, S.S., Ebbert, M.T.W., Baker, K.E., Cook, C., Wang, X., Sens, J.P.,
Kocher, J.P., Petrucelli, L., and Fryer, J.D. (2018). Microglial translational
proﬁling reveals a convergent APOE pathway from aging, amyloid, and tau.
J. Exp. Med. 215, 2235–2245.
Keren-Shaul, H., Spinrad, A., Weiner, A., Matcovitch-Natan, O., Dvir-
Szternfeld, R., Ulland, T.K., David, E., Baruch, K., Lara-Astaiso, D., Toth, B.,
et al. (2017). A unique microglia type associated with restricting development
of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 169, 1276–1290.e17.
Krasemann, S., Madore, C., Cialic, R., Baufeld, C., Calcagno, N., El Fatimy, R.,
Beckers, L., O’Loughlin, E., Xu, Y., Fanek, Z., et al. (2017). The TREM2-APOE
pathway drives the transcriptional phenotype of dysfunctional microglia in
neurodegenerative diseases. Immunity 47, 566–581.e9.
Lawson, L.J., Perry, V.H., Dri, P., and Gordon, S. (1990). Heterogeneity in the
distribution and morphology of microglia in the normal adult mouse brain.
Neuroscience 39, 151–170.
Li, Q., and Barres, B.A. (2018). Microglia and macrophages in brain homeosta-
sis and disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 18, 225–242.
Ling, E.A., and Wong, W.C. (1993). The origin and nature of ramiﬁed and amoe-
boid microglia: a historical review and current concepts. Glia 7, 9–18.
Macosko, E.Z., Basu, A., Satija, R., Nemesh, J., Shekhar, K., Goldman, M.,
Tirosh, I., Bialas, A.R., Kamitaki, N., Martersteck, E.M., et al. (2015). Highly par-
allel genome-wide expression proﬁling of individual cells using nanoliter drop-
lets. Cell 161, 1202–1214.
Matcovitch-Natan, O., Winter, D.R., Giladi, A., Vargas Aguilar, S., Spinrad, A.,
Sarrazin, S., Ben-Yehuda, H., David, E., Zelada Gonza´ lez, F., Perrin, P., et al.
(2016). Microglia development follows a stepwise program to regulate brain
homeostasis. Science 353, aad8670.
Mi, H., Dong, Q., Muruganujan, A., Gaudet, P., Lewis, S., and Thomas, P.D.
(2010). PANTHER version 7: improved phylogenetic trees, orthologs and
collaboration with the Gene Ontology Consortium. Nucleic Acids Res. 38,
D204–D210.
Nikodemova, M., Kimyon, R.S., De, I., Small, A.L., Collier, L.S., and Watters,
J.J. (2015). Microglial numbers attain adult levels after undergoing a rapid
decrease in cell number in the third postnatal week. J. Neuroimmunol. 278,
280–288.
Paolicelli, R.C., Bolasco, G., Pagani, F., Maggi, L., Scianni, M., Panzanelli, P.,
Giustetto, M., Ferreira, T.A., Guiducci, E., Dumas, L., et al. (2011). Synaptic
pruning by microglia is necessary for normal brain development. Science
333, 1456–1458.
Papalexi, E., and Satija, R. (2018). Single-cell RNA sequencing to explore im-
mune cell heterogeneity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 18, 35–45.
Picelli, S., Faridani, O.R., Bjo¨ rklund, A.K., Winberg, G., Sagasser, S., and
Sandberg, R. (2014). Full-length RNA-seq from single cells using Smart-
seq2. Nat. Protoc. 9, 171–181.
Prinz, M., Priller, J., Sisodia, S.S., and Ransohoff, R.M. (2011). Heterogeneity
of CNS myeloid cells and their roles in neurodegeneration. Nat. Neurosci. 14,
1227–1235.
Prinz, M., Erny, D., and Hagemeyer, N. (2017). Ontogeny and homeostasis of
CNS myeloid cells. Nat. Immunol. 18, 385–392.
Robinson, M.D., McCarthy, D.J., and Smyth, G.K. (2010). edgeR: a
Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene
expression data. Bioinformatics 26, 139–140.
Schafer, D.P., Lehrman, E.K., Kautzman, A.G., Koyama, R., Mardinly, A.R.,
Yamasaki, R., Ransohoff, R.M., Greenberg, M.E., Barres, B.A., and Stevens,
B. (2012). Microglia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity and comple-
ment-dependent manner. Neuron 74, 691–705.
Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E., Kaynig, V., Longair, M., Pietzsch,
T., Preibisch, S., Rueden, C., Saalfeld, S., Schmid, B., et al. (2012). Fiji:
an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat. Methods 9,
676–682.
Schmieder, R., and Edwards, R. (2011). Quality control and preprocessing of
metagenomic datasets. Bioinformatics 27, 863–864.
Svensson, V., Natarajan, K.N., Ly, L.H., Miragaia, R.J., Labalette, C.,
Macaulay, I.C., Cvejic, A., and Teichmann, S.A. (2017). Power analysis of sin-
gle-cell RNA-sequencing experiments. Nat. Methods 14, 381–387.
Tabula Muris Consortium; Overall coordination; Logistical coordination;
Organ collection and processing; Library preparation and sequencing;
Computational
data
analysis;
Cell
type
annotation;
Writing
group;
Supplemental text writing group; Principal investigators (2018). Single-cell
transcriptomics of 20 mouse organs creates a Tabula Muris. Nature 562,
367–372.
222
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019

Trapnell, C., Cacchiarelli, D., Grimsby, J., Pokharel, P., Li, S., Morse, M.,
Lennon, N.J., Livak, K.J., Mikkelsen, T.S., and Rinn, J.L. (2014). The dynamics
and regulators of cell fate decisions are revealed by pseudotemporal ordering
of single cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 381–386.
Trapp, B.D., Nishiyama, A., Cheng, D., and Macklin, W. (1997). Differentiation
and death of premyelinating oligodendrocytes in developing rodent brain.
J. Cell Biol. 137, 459–468.
Ueno, M., Fujita, Y., Tanaka, T., Nakamura, Y., Kikuta, J., Ishii, M., and
Yamashita, T. (2013). Layer V cortical neurons require microglial support for
survival during postnatal development. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 543–551.
Whitﬁeld, M.L., Sherlock, G., Saldanha, A.J., Murray, J.I., Ball, C.A., Alexander,
K.E., Matese, J.C., Perou, C.M., Hurt, M.M., Brown, P.O., and Botstein, D.
(2002). Identiﬁcation of genes periodically expressed in the human cell cycle
and their expression in tumors. Mol. Biol. Cell 13, 1977–2000.
Wlodarczyk, A., Holtman, I.R., Krueger, M., Yogev, N., Bruttger, J., Khorooshi,
R., Benmamar-Badel, A., de Boer-Bergsma, J.J., Martin, N.A., Karram, K.,
et al. (2017). A novel microglial subset plays a key role in myelinogenesis in
developing brain. EMBO J. 36, 3292–3308.
Zhang, Y., Chen, K., Sloan, S.A., Bennett, M.L., Scholze, A.R., O’Keeffe, S.,
Phatnani, H.P., Guarnieri, P., Caneda, C., Ruderisch, N., et al. (2014).
An
RNA-sequencing
transcriptome
and
splicing
database
of
glia,
neurons, and vascular cells of the cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci. 34, 11929–
11947.
Ziegenhain, C., Vieth, B., Parekh, S., Reinius, B., Guillaumet-Adkins, A.,
Smets, M., Leonhardt, H., Heyn, H., Hellmann, I., and Enard, W. (2017).
Comparative analysis of single-cell RNA sequencing methods. Mol Cell 65,
631–643.e4.
Neuron 101, 207–223, January 16, 2019
223

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Goat polyclonal anti-IBA1 (1:500)
Abcam
Cat# ab5076; RRID: AB_2224402
Rat monoclonal anti mouse F4/80, PerCP/Cy5.5
(clone BM8) (1:100)
BioLegend
Cat# 123128; RRID: AB_893484
Rat monoclonal anti mouse CD45, PE/Cy7
(clone 30-F11) (1:300)
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 25-0451-82; RRID: AB_469625
Rat monoclonal anti mouse CD117 (c-Kit),
APC (clone 2B8) (1:200)
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 17-1171-82; RRID: AB_469430
Rat anti mouse CD41, PE (clone MWReg30) (1:200)
BioLegend
Cat# 133906; RRID: AB_2129745
Rat monoclonal anti mouse/human CD11b,
Brilliant Violet 421 (clone M1/70) (1:300)
BioLegend
Cat# 101236; RRID: AB_11203704
Rat anti-mouse CD63, PE/Cy7 (clone
NVG-2) (1:100)
BioLegend
Cat# 143910; RRID: AB_2565500
Rat anti-mouse CD369 (DECTIN-1/CLEC7A)
(clone RH1) (1:50)
BioLegend
Cat# 144302; RRID: AB_2561519
Armenian Hamster anti-mouse CD85k
(gp49 Receptor), PE (clone H1.1) (1:100)
BioLegend
Cat# 144904; RRID: AB_2561654
Rat monoclonal anti mouse GPNMB, eFluor
660 (clone CTSREVL) (1:20)
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 50-5708-82; RRID: AB_2574239
Rabbit monoclonal anti-Tmem119
(clone 106-6) (1:400)
Abcam
Cat# ab210405; RRID: AB_2744673
Sheep polyclonal anti c-FOS (1:200)
Abcam
Cat# ab6167; RRID: AB_2106634
Rabbit monoclonal anti EGR1 (clone 15F7) (1:50)
Cell Signaling Technology
Cat# 4153; RRID: AB_2097038
Rabbit polyclonal anti cleaved CASPASE-3
(Asp175) (1:200)
Cell Signaling Technology
Cat# 9661; RRID: AB_2341188
Rat neutralizing monoclonal anti-mDECTIN-1-IgG
(clone R1-4E4) (1:30)
Invivogen
Cat# mabg-mdect; RRID: AB_2753143
Rat monoclonal anti Myelin Basic Protein
(clone 12) (1:100)
Abcam
Cat# ab7349; RRID: AB_305869
Rat monoclonal anti-DECTIN 2 (clone D2.11E4)
(1:100)
Abcam
Cat# ab34724; RRID: AB_2081360
Rabbit monoclonal anti PDGF Receptor a (D1E1E)
XP (1:500)
Cell Signaling Technology
Cat# 3174S; RRID: AB_2162345
Goat polyclonal anti Osteopontin/OPN (1:13)
R&D Systems
Cat# AF808; RRID: AB_2194992
Goat anti-rabbit Alexa 488 (1:300)
Thermal Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 11034; RRID: AB_2576217
Mouse anti-rat IgG1 Antibody, FITC
(clone MRG1-58) (1:200)
BioLegend
Cat# 407406; RRID: AB_492922
Donkey anti-goat IgG (H+L) cross-adsorbed,
Alexa Fluor 488 (1:1000)
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 11055; RRID: AB_2534102
Donkey anti-rabbit IgG (H+L), Alexa Fluor
488 (1:1000)
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 21206; RRID: AB_2535792
Donkey anti-sheep DyLight 594 (1:200)
Jackson Immuno Research
Laboratories
Cat# 713-586-147; RRID: AB_2340749
Donkey anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) Highly cross
adsorbed, Alexa Fluor 594 (1:200)
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 21207; RRID: AB_141637
Donkey anti-rat IgG (H+L) highly cross-adsorbed,
Alexa Fluor 594 (1:200)
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 21209; RRID: AB_2535795
(Continued on next page)
e1
Neuron 101, 207–223.e1–e10, January 16, 2019

Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Donkey anti- rabbit IgG (H+L) highly
cross-adsorbed, Alexa Fluor 647 (1:200)
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 31573; RRID: AB_2536183
Donkey anti-rat IgG (H+L) AfﬁniPure,
Alexa Fluor 647 (1:200)
Jackson Immuno Research
Laboratories
Cat# 712-605-153; RRID: AB_2340694
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
SMARTScribeTM Reverse Transcriptase (100U/ul)
Clontech
Cat# 639538
DTT, Molecular Grade
Promega
Cat# P1171
1M Betaine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# B0300-5VL
Lambda Exonuclease (5U/ul)
New England BioLabs
Cat# M0262S
Recombinant RNase Inhibitor
Takara Bio
Cat# 2313B
ERCC RNA Spike-In Mix
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 4456740
10mM dNTP mix
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# R0192
pHrodo Red Zymosan Bioparticles Conjugate
for Phagocytosis
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# P35364
10 X Hanks’ Balanced Salt Solution
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 14185-052
Heat inactivated horse serum
Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 26-050-070
Minimum Essential Medium Eagle (MEM)
Sigma Aldrich
Cat# M2279
Fetal Bovine Serum
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 10437-028
Myelin removal beads
Miltenyl Biotec
Cat# 130-096-433
Mouse Fc block
BD PharMingen
Cat# 553142
DNase I
Worthington
Cat# DPRFS
RNase-Free DNase Set
QIAGEN
Cat# 79254
Ambion DNase I
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# AM2222
Propidium Iodide
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# P3566
Critical Commercial Assays
RNAscope Fluorescent Multiplex Detection
Reagents
ACD
Cat# 320851
RNAscope Probe - Mm-Igf1-C2
ACD
Cat# 443901-C2
RNAscope Probe - Mm-Mbp-C2
ACD
Cat# 451491-C2
RNAscope Probe - Mm-Gpnmb
ACD
Cat# 489511
RNAscope Probe - Mm-Cx3cr1-C3
ACD
Cat# 314221-C3
RNAscope Probe - Mm-H2-Eb1
ACD
Cat# 509081
RNAscope Probe - Mm-Lilra5-C2
ACD
Cat# 514461-C2
RNAscope Probe - Mm-Spp1-C2
ACD
Cat# 435191-C2
RNAscope Probe - Mm-Tmem119-C3
ACD
Cat# 472901-C3
RNAscope Probe - Mm-Fos
ACD
Cat# 316921
RNAscope Probe - Mm-Egr1-C2
ACD
Cat# 423371-C2
RNAscope Probe - Mm-Itgax-C2
ACD
Cat# 311501-C2
Live/Dead Fixable Dead Cells Stain Sampler kit
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# L34960
r RNeasy Micro Kit
QIAGEN
Cat# 74004
1X KAPA HIFI Hotstart Master Mix
Kapa Biosciences
Cat# KK2602
AATI, High Sensitivity NGS Fragment Analysis Kit
(1 bp – 6,000 bp)
Advanced Analytical
Cat# DNF-474-1000
Smart-Seq v4 ultra low input RNA kit
Clontech
Cat# 634890
PCRClean DX beads
Aline Biosciences
Cat# C-1003-50
Nextera XT DNA Sample Prep Kit
Illumina
Cat# FC-131-1096
Illumina Nextseq sequencing V2 (150 cycles)
Illumina
Cat# FC-404-2002
(Continued on next page)
Neuron 101, 207–223.e1–e10, January 16, 2019
e2

===== Li2020_Nature_SCI+Microglia =====
Nature  |  Vol 587  |  26 November 2020  |  613
Article
Microglia-organized scar-free spinal cord 
repair in neonatal mice
Yi Li1,2,10, Xuelian He1,2,10, Riki Kawaguchi3,4,10, Yu Zhang1,2, Qing Wang3,4, Aboozar Monavarfeshani1,2, 
Zhiyun Yang1,2, Bo Chen1,2, Zhongju Shi1,2, Huyan Meng1,2, Songlin Zhou1,2, Junjie Zhu1,2, Anne Jacobi1,2, 
Vivek Swarup5, Phillip G. Popovich6,7, Daniel H. Geschwind3,4,8 & Zhigang He1,2,9 ✉
Spinal cord injury in mammals is thought to trigger scar formation with little 
regeneration of axons1–4. Here we show that a crush injury to the spinal cord in neonatal 
mice leads to scar-free healing that permits the growth of long projecting axons 
through the lesion. Depletion of microglia in neonatal mice disrupts this healing 
process and stalls the regrowth of axons, suggesting that microglia are critical for 
orchestrating the injury response. Using single-cell RNA sequencing and functional 
analyses, we find that neonatal microglia are transiently activated and have at least two 
key roles in scar-free healing. First, they transiently secrete fibronectin and its binding 
proteins to form bridges of extracellular matrix that ligate the severed ends of 
the spinal cord. Second, neonatal—but not adult—microglia express several 
extracellular and intracellular peptidase inhibitors, as well as other molecules that are 
involved in resolving inflammation. We transplanted either neonatal microglia or adult 
microglia treated with peptidase inhibitors into spinal cord lesions of adult mice, and 
found that both types of microglia significantly improved healing and axon regrowth. 
Together, our results reveal the cellular and molecular basis of the nearly complete 
recovery of neonatal mice after spinal cord injury, and suggest strategies that could be 
used to facilitate scar-free healing in the adult mammalian nervous system.
Spinal cord injury disrupts axonal connections between the brain and 
the spinal cord below the lesion. In fish and amphibians, meningeal 
cells and glia form permissive bridges that allow injured axons to 
regenerate across the lesion5,6. However, this is not the case in adult 
mammals. Instead, a spinal cord injury triggers the formation of a scar 
that consists of several cell types—for example, reactive astrocytes, 
fibroblasts, microglia and macrophages—with no spontaneous axon 
regeneration1–4. Although these different cell types and their associ-
ated molecules have been studied previously1–4,7, how the spinal cord 
responds to an injury and organizes scar-based wound healing is poorly 
understood. Furthermore, the role of reactive glia in the failure to regen-
erate axons remains unclear, because mature neurons also exhibit a 
diminished intrinsic regenerative capacity in the adult8. To address 
these questions, we sought to determine whether spinal cord regenera-
tion occurs in neonatal mice, a developmental stage at which neurons 
of the central nervous system still have a strong capacity for growth.
Axon growth across lesion after neonatal injury
To assess age-dependent differences in axon regrowth, wild-type mice 
were subjected to crush injuries to the spinal cord at different devel-
opmental stages (Fig. 1, Extended Data Fig. 1a). In mice that underwent 
injury at postnatal day 2 (P2), numerous serotonergic axons9 were 
observed in the spinal cord distal to the lesion at two weeks after injury 
(Fig. 1a, b), in contrast to what was seen in mice that underwent injury at 
the P7, P20 or adult stage, in which little or no axon regrowth occurred 
(Fig. 1a, b, Extended Data Fig. 1a). In addition to serotonergic axons, cor-
ticospinal tract (CST) axons also reached the lumbar spinal cord after 
P2 injury (Fig. 1c, d, Extended Data Fig. 1c). Similar to previous studies 
in neonatal opossums10, it is difficult to determine whether these axons 
are regenerating, or are uninjured and late-arriving. Nevertheless, our 
results suggest that a permissive environment for axon growth can be 
established after spinal cord injury only at an early neonatal stage (P2).
Scar-free healing after neonatal injury
We next compared the characteristics of lesion sites in mice after 
P2 injury versus adult injury. Two weeks after adult injury, a typical 
scar structure had formed in the centre of lesions, with a significant 
accumulation of CD68+ cells (activated macrophages or microglia11) 
surrounded by fibroblasts, reactive astrocytes and basal lamina 
components such as collagen I, fibronectin, chondroitin sulfate pro-
teoglycan (CSPG) and laminin (Fig. 1e, f, Extended Data Fig. 1d, e). By 
contrast, two weeks after P2 injury, the injury site showed a minimal 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2795-6
Received: 6 March 2020
Accepted: 10 July 2020
Published online: 7 October 2020
 Check for updates
1F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. 2Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 3Program in Neurogenetics, Department of 
Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 4Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 5Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, School of Biological Sciences, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA. 
6Department of Neuroscience, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. 7Center for Brain and Spinal Cord Repair and the Belford Center for Spinal Cord Injury, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH, USA. 8Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 9Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 10These authors contributed equally: Yi Li, Xuelian He, Riki Kawaguchi. ✉e-mail: zhigang.he@childrens.harvard.edu

614  |  Nature  |  Vol 587  |  26 November 2020
Article
accumulation of CD68+ cells and little deposition of extracellular 
matrix (ECM) components (fibronectin, collagen I, CSPG or laminin), 
but there was a modest accumulation of GFAP+ cells in the lesion centre 
(Fig. 1e, f). Notably, expression of P2Y12—an established marker for 
homeostatic microglia12—was absent in adult lesions, whereas P2Y12+ 
cells were evenly distributed throughout P2 lesion sites (Fig. 1e, f). 
Furthermore, immunostaining with anti-CD31 antibodies revealed 
a continuous vasculature across the P2 lesions, in a pattern indistin-
guishable from that of the intact spinal cord. The characteristics of 
P20 lesions were similar to those observed in adult injuries, whereas P7 
lesions had reduced scar formation (Extended Data Fig. 1b). Together, 
these results show that the neonatal spinal cord is able to mount a 
scar-free wound-healing response that allows descending axons to 
grow across the lesion.
Re-establishing microglia homeostasis
We next examined the lesion site at early time points after P2 injury. 
At one to two days post-injury (dpi), a clear gap was present between 
the two stumps of cut spinal cord, and serotonergic axons stopped 
rostral to the lesion (Fig. 2a). By 3 dpi, fibronectin+ cells appeared in the 
gap (Fig. 2a, Extended Data Fig. 2b), and by 7 dpi the gap was refilled, 
the fibronectin signal had disappeared and serotonergic axons grew 
into and across the lesion. To investigate the source of the fibronectin+ 
cells that populated the gap at 3 dpi, we used Cx3cr1GFP mice, in which 
microglia are labelled with GFP, and found that microglia accumulated 
in the stumps at 2 dpi. At this point, the microglia no longer expressed 
P2Y12 and instead expressed markers of activated microglia, such as 
SPP1 and CD68 (Fig. 2b, Extended Data Fig. 2). In addition, the microglia 
0
20
40
60
80
100
250
0
20
40
250
500 1,000
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000
P2 injury
P7 injury
P20 injury
Adult injury
***
***
***
**
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
P2
Collagen I
P2
CD31
P2Y12
P2
P2
CD68
GFAP
P2
***
***
***
***
Distance from epicentre (μm)
P2 injury
Adult injury
P2 injury
Adult injury
P2 injury
Adult injury
CD68
e
Collagen I 
GFAP
P2Y12
CD31
T11
T12
T13
L1
L2
L3
T10
***
***
c
f
d
a
b
Intensity index
Intensity index
Intensity index
Intensity index
Intensity index
GFAP+ area index
***
***
***
***
Fibronectin
Fibronectin
P2
***
***
0
5
10
15
20
0
5
10
15
0
0.5
1.0
0
5
10
15
20
0
0.5
1.0
0
0.5
1.0
Density of
serotonergic axons
(%)
Density of CST
axons (%)
Fig. 1 | Scar-free wound healing after crush injury to the spinal cord in 
neonatal mice. a, Images of spinal sections stained with anti-serotonin  
(anti-5-HT) antibody taken two weeks after P2 (top) or adult (bottom) injury, 
showing serotonergic axons. Red stars indicate the lesion site. b, Quantification 
of the density of serotonergic axons (normalized to the density proximal to the 
lesion site) in spinal cord distal to the lesion site at two weeks after injury  
(n = 8, 5, 5 and 8 for P2, P7, P20 and adult, respectively). **P = 0.0031, ***P < 0.0001. 
c, Images of spinal sections 10 weeks after injury, showing CST axons labelled 
with AAV-ChR2-mCherry. T, thoracic; L, lumbar. d, Quantification of the density 
of CST axons (normalized to the density proximal to the lesion site) in spinal cord 
distal to the lesion site 10 weeks after injury (n = 5). ***P < 0.0001. e, Images of 
spinal sections two weeks after injury stained with antibodies against the 
indicated proteins. f, Quantification of the indicated immunoreactive intensity 
(normalized to the intact region) in the lesion site two weeks after injury (n = 8). 
***P < 0.0001. Two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by post-hoc 
Bonferroni correction (b, d); Student’s two-tailed unpaired t-test (f). Data are 
mean ± s.e.m. Scale bars, 500 μm (a), 1 mm (c), 250 μm (e).

Nature  |  Vol 587  |  26 November 2020  |  615
transformed from highly ramified to amoeboid morphologies (Fig. 2b, 
Extended Data Fig. 2a), consistent with injury-induced activation of 
the microglia13. Starting from 3 dpi, when fibronectin+ bridges form 
between the two stumps, activated microglia were observed inside 
the lesion in the absence of GFAP+ astrocytes and collagen I+ fibroblasts 
(Extended Data Fig. 3a). Notably, these cells began to regain P2Y12 
expression, but were still positively stained for SPP1 and CD68 (Fig. 2b, 
Extended Data Fig. 2a). Around 7 dpi, most microglia exhibited a rami-
fied morphology and were positive for P2Y12 and negative for SPP1 and 
CD68 (Fig. 2b, Extended Data Fig. 2a). Together with the observations 
of minimal cell death (Extended Data Fig. 3b) and limited time for cell 
division (see below), our results suggest that after P2 injury, microglia 
that are initially activated switch back to a homeostatic state within 
the first week.
A hallmark feature of the injured adult spinal cord is the accumu-
lation and persistence of macrophages derived from blood mono-
cytes in the lesion14. After P2 injury, CCR2–RFP+ monocyte-derived 
macrophages accumulated in the lesion within 3 dpi, but were absent 
by 14 dpi (Extended Data Fig. 4a). By contrast, in adult spinal lesions, 
monocyte-derived macrophages persisted in the lesions, and activated 
microglia continuously expressed CD68 without re-expressing P2Y12 
(Extended Data Figs. 2c, 4b). Thus, our results suggest that there is a 
transient accumulation of blood-derived macrophages in neonatal, 
but not adult, spinal cord injury sites.
250
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
0
10
20
30
Control
+PLX3397
Cx3cr1cre;Csf1rﬂ/ﬂ 
5-HT
GFAP
Merge
e
a
7 dpi
2 dpi
3 dpi
Merge
5-HT
Fibronectin
Sham
c
Control
+PLX3397
CD68
Fibronectin
Cx3cr1cre;Csf1rﬂ/ﬂ 
b
Cx3cr1GFP 
P2Y12
Merge
SPP1
DAPI
Control
+PLX3397
Cx3cr1cre;Csf1rﬂ/ﬂ 
CD68
Fibronectin
GFAP
******
*****
*****
d
f
g
GFAP+ area index
Intensity index
*** ******
*** ******
Distance from epicentre (μm)
0
5
10
15
0
2
4
6
8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
7 dpi
2 dpi
3 dpi
Sham
Control
+PLX3397
Control
+PLX3397
Cx3cr1cre;Csf1rﬂ/ﬂ 
Control
+PLX3397
Cx3cr1cre;Csf1rﬂ/ﬂ 
Intensity index
Density of
serotonergic axons (%)
Cx3cr1cre;Csf1rﬂ/ﬂ 
Merge
Fig. 2 | Microglia are required for bridge formation and rapid healing after 
neonatal injury. a, Images of spinal cord lesions at different time points after P2 
injury, stained with antibodies against 5-HT or fibronectin, or with DAPI (blue).  
b, Images of spinal cord lesions at different time points after P2 injury, stained 
with antibodies against P2Y12 and SPP1, or with DAPI (blue), in Cx3cr1GFP mice.  
c, Images of spinal sections at 3 dpi from different groups of P2-injured mice, 
stained with antibodies against CD68 or fibronectin, or with DAPI (blue).  
d, Quantification of CD68 and fibronectin immunoreactive intensity 
(normalized to the intact region) in the lesion site at 3 dpi (n = 5). **P = 0.0014, 
***P < 0.0001. e, Images of spinal sections at 7 dpi in different groups of 
P2-injured mice, stained with antibodies against 5-HT and GFAP, or with DAPI.  
f, Quantification of GFAP+ area index in the lesion site at 7 dpi (n = 5). **P = 0.0003, 
***P < 0.0001. g, Quantification of the density of serotonergic axons (normalized 
to the density proximal to the lesion site) in spinal cord distal to the lesion site  
at two weeks after P2 injury(n = 5). ***P < 0.0001. One-way ANOVA followed by 
post-hoc Bonferroni correction (d, f); two-way ANOVA followed by post-hoc 
Bonferroni correction (g). Data are mean ± s.e.m. Scale bars, 50 μm (a–c),  
250 μm (e).

616  |  Nature  |  Vol 587  |  26 November 2020
Article
Efficient healing requires microglia
To assess the role of microglia, we first used PLX3397, an inhibitor of 
the colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R)15, to deplete micro-
glia (Extended Data Fig. 5a). Of note, microglia depletion in neonatal 
mice impaired bridge formation between the two stumps at 3 or 7 dpi 
(Fig. 2c–f). At 14 dpi, the gap was closed with GFAP+ astrocytes in the 
epicentre and blood vessels were absent from the astroglial scar (Fig. 2g, 
Extended Data Fig. 5c). However, limited basal lamina components such 
as CSPG and laminin were detected (Extended Data Fig. 5c), reminis-
cent of previous findings that swirls of basal lamina structures formed 
after lesions in the mature—but not the neonatal—cortex16. Most axons 
stalled at the epicentre of the lesion, abutting the GFAP+ cells. However, 
a few axons penetrated into and through the lesion, perhaps owing to 
the lack of additional inhibitory basal lamina components17. Similar 
results (Fig. 2c–g, Extended Data Fig. 5c) were observed after P2 injury 
in mice with conditional knockout of Csf1r, which removed about 70% 
of microglia (Extended Data Fig. 5b). Thus, microglia are essential for 
scar-free wound healing after neonatal injury.
Signature of repair-promoting microglia
To gain molecular insights into the injury responses that are medi-
ated by neonatal microglia, we conducted single-cell RNA sequenc-
ing analysis (scRNA-seq). At different times after P2 injury (0, 3 and 
5 dpi), dissociated cells from the spinal cord tissue around the lesion 
were subjected to fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis 
with CD11b+CD45low gating (Extended Data Fig. 6a), followed by 10X 
scRNA-seq. Unsupervised clustering revealed 14 cell clusters (Extended 
Data Fig. 6b), including non-dividing microglia cells (cluster (C)0, C1, 
C2 and C6), dividing microglia cells (C3, C7 and C8), macrophages (C4), 
monocytes (C5), neutrophils (C9), B cells (C10), T cells (C11), astrocytes 
(C12) and oligodendrocytes (C13) (Extended Data Fig. 6b, e).
Among the microglia analysed, 28.2% were dividing at 0 dpi, and 
this number reduced to 15.1% at 3 dpi and 9.5% at 5 dpi (Extended Data 
Fig. 6d), suggesting that microglial proliferation gradually declines 
in the lesion site after injury. As cell-cycle genes can overload the 
major principal components that underlie cell-to-cell variations18,19, 
we regressed out cell-cycle effects and re-clustered all microglia cells 
into five transcriptionally distinct cell clusters, MG0–MG4 (Fig. 3a–e). 
These clusters are likely to represent different states of the same cell 
type, but some cells could be new ones that have arisen by mitosis or 
migrated from elsewhere. Most microglia (91.9%) from the intact spinal 
cord are in the cluster MG0, the cells of which express genes associated 
with microglial homeostasis (such as P2ry12, Tmem119 and Siglech). At 
3 dpi, most microglia fall into two new states: MG1 (72.6%) and MG3 
(16.1%). Both MG1 and MG3 cells express typical microglial activation 
markers (for example, Spp1 and Igf1)13,19, but MG3 cells express addi-
tional genes such as Ms4a7 (Extended Data Fig. 7), which is known to 
be expressed in embryonic microglia13 and border macrophages20,21. By 
contrast, at 5 dpi microglia are in either the MG2 cluster (64.1%) or the 
homeostatic MG0 cluster (21.9%). MG2 cells express activation genes 
at lower levels and are phenotypically between MG1 and MG0 on the 
uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) plot (Fig. 3d), 
supporting the notion that microglia that are initially activated—both 
MG1 and MG3—transit back to the homeostatic stage at this time point.
Using in situ hybridization to examine the expression patterns of 
several top-ranked markers in each cluster (Fig. 3e), we found that Fn1, 
which encodes fibronectin, is expressed by the cells in and around the 
lesion at 3 dpi, but not at 5 dpi (Fig. 3f, g). Conversely, the expression 
of Ms4a7 and Thbs1—two genes that are uniquely expressed in MG3 
cells—is concentrated in the microglia immediately in the lesion and 
only at 3 dpi in the bridge (Fig. 3f, g). Thus, MG1 and MG3 cells exhibit a 
complementary distribution, with MG3 cells immediately in and around 
the lesion and MG1 cells in the spinal cord around the lesion (Fig. 3h).
The proximity of MG3 cells to the lesion prompted us to exam-
ine their molecular signatures. MG3 cells expressed several genes 
that are enriched in proliferative-region-associated microglia13,19 or 
disease-associated microglia22—such as Spp1, Igf1 and Clec7a19—and 
embryonic microglia13, such as Ms4a7, Ms4a6c and Lgals1 (Extended 
Data Fig. 7), suggesting that neonatal injury converts homeostatic 
microglia into a state with both activation and de-differentiation sig-
natures. However, MG3 cells also exhibited unique patterns of gene 
expression (Extended Data Fig. 8), with a significant enrichment for 
genes that have functions in the ECM, wound healing, phagocytosis, 
angiogenesis, and the negative regulation of immune responses and 
endopeptidases (Fig. 3i, Extended Data Fig. 9a). Consistently, gene 
regulatory network analysis indicated that ECM-related genes (for 
example, Fn1 and thrombospondin 1 (Thbs1)) and anti-inflammatory 
genes (for example, those associated with the activity of serine-type 
and cysteine-type endopeptidase inhibitors and phospholipase A2 
inhibitors) were upregulated in MG3 cells (Fig. 3i). For example, Fn1, 
t-SNE1
t-SNE2
25
0
–25
–50
–25         0         
0
2
1
3
4
MG0                       MG1             MG2   MG3 MG4
Siglech
Tmem119
P2ry12
Spp1
Igf1
Clec7a
Cd9
Serpine2
Ms4a7
Ms4a6c
Fabp5
Fth1
Ftl1
Mif
Lgals1
Thbs1
100
80
60
40
20
0
Percentage
7.1
72.6
91.9
3.3
0.1
16.1
0.8
64.1
5.4
8.2
21.9
0.4
1
5.8
1.3
0 dpi
3 dpi
5 dpi
0
2
1
3
4
0
2
1
3
4
0
2
1
3
4
0 dpi                               3 dpi                                 5 dpi
log(expression)
P2ry12        Ms4a7
Fn1            Thbs1
0    1    
0    1    
a
c
e
h
3 dpi
P2ry12
Fn1
Ms4a7
Thbs1
5 dpi
b
d
f
1
3
1
3
1
3
1
3
P2ry12
Ms4a7
Merge
g
Biological process       
Cellular component      
Molecular function 
0     2     4     6     8    10   12
Wound healing
(Fn1, Thbs1, Anxa1)
Positive regulation of cell adhesion
(Spp1, Lgals1, Fn1, Thbs1, Anxa1)
(Anxa1, Anxa2, Anxa5, Apoc1)
Angiogenesis
(Serpinb6a, Thbs1, Anxa1, Cstb, Stfa1)
(Thbs1, Axl, Anxa1, Arg1)
(Serpinb6a, Serpinb8, Cstb, Stfa1)
Negative regulation of hydrolase activity
Negative regulation of immune system process
Negative regulation of cysteine-type
 endopeptidase activity in apoptotic process
Collagen-containing ECM
ECM (Thbs1, Fn1, Anxa1, Ecm1)
Endopeptidase inhibitor activity
Phospholipase inhibitor activity
Biological 
Cellular co
Molecular f
MG1 (Fn1+ only)
MG3 (Ms4a7+Fn1+)
i
–log10(P)
UMAP1
UMAP2
Microglia cluster (MG)
Fn1
25
MG0
MG1
MG2
MG3
MG4
3    2
3    2
0    1    
0    1    
3    2
3    2
Fig. 3 | scRNA-seq analysis of microglia isolated from lesion sites after P2 
injury. a, t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding (t-SNE) plot showing 
five clusters of microglia isolated at different time points after P2 injury.  
b, Heat map showing the top 15 markers for individual clusters. c, d, Bar plot (c) 
or UMAP plot (d) of different clusters of microglia at different time points after 
injury. e, Violin plots showing high-level expression of Ms4a7 and Thbs1 in MG3 
and Fn1 in both MG1 and MG3. f, RNA in situ hybridization showing enrichment 
of Ms4a7 and Thbs1 in the lesion epicentre and expression of Fn1 in and around 
the lesion site. g, Higher-magnification images from f, showing co-expression 
of Ms4a7 and P2ry12 in microglia in the lesion site. All experiments shown  
in f and g were independently repeated three times with similar results.  
h, Schematic showing the distribution of MG1 and MG3 microglia. i, Selected 
Gene Ontology (GO) terms and associated genes that are enriched in MG3 
microglia. A two-sided statistical test in the function enrichGO was used.  
Scale bars, 200 μm (f), 20 μm (g).

Nature  |  Vol 587  |  26 November 2020  |  617
together with Thbs1, which encodes an ECM molecule that can bind 
to fibronectin23, are highly expressed in MG3 cells and might medi-
ate the role of this cluster in bridge formation. MG3 cells also showed 
enriched expression of genes that encode inhibitors of peptidases and 
endopeptidases, such as Cstb, Stfa1 and Serpinb6a—as well as Anxa1, a 
potent anti-inflammatory protein—which may contribute to the abil-
ity of MG3 cells to mediate rapid inflammation resolution. Notably, 
these genes had markedly different patterns of expression in microglia 
from adult spinal cord injury sites: adult microglia showed persistent 
expression of Fn1 and no significant induction of proteinase inhibi-
tors (Extended Data Fig. 9b, c, Fig. 1e). Together, our results suggest 
that injury-induced neonatal MG3 microglia have specific molecular 
properties that promote scar-free wound healing.
Bridge forming by microglia-derived fibronectin
On the basis of the molecular signatures of MG3 cells, we first assessed 
the role of microglia-derived fibronectin as a component of the bridge 
that is formed between the two severed spinal ends. In addition to a 
microglial origin, fibronectin in the lesion site could also be derived 
from the blood (synthesized in the liver) and/or endothelial cells24. To 
selectively delete fibronectin from different cell types, we crossed Fn1fl/fl 
mice with different Cre drivers (Cx3cr1cre for microglia, Albcre for liver 
and Tie2cre (Tie2 is also known as Tek) for endothelial cells) and then per-
formed spinal crush injury at P2. As shown in Fig. 4, only Cx3cr1cre;Fn1fl/fl 
mice exhibited a defect in bridge formation at 3 dpi and reduced axon 
growth at 14 dpi. These results show that microglia-derived fibronectin 
is crucial for mediating bridge formation as an initial yet key step in 
wound healing after spinal cord injury.
Proteinase inhibitors promote healing
We reasoned that if the proteinase inhibitors that are transiently 
expressed in the neonatal spinal cord have a role in resolving inflam-
mation, preventing scar formation, and thereby facilitating axon 
regrowth, exogenously provided proteinase inhibitors should alter 
injury responses in adult spinal cord lesions. To test this, we used two 
chemical proteinase inhibitors: E64, a membrane-permeable irrevers-
ible inhibitor of a wide range of cysteine peptidases; and serpinA3N, a 
serine protease inhibitor. We isolated microglia from adult Cx3cr1GFP/+ 
transgenic mice (Extended Data Fig. 10a), treated the microglia with 
either vehicle or a combination of E64 and serpinA3N, and then trans-
planted them (with or without the inhibitors) into the spinal cord lesion 
sites of adult mice. We expected that such treatments would mimic 
the transient expression of proteinase inhibitors in MG3. As a control, 
microglia that were isolated from neonatal mice were also transplanted 
into the spinal cord lesion in a separate group of adult mice.
At two days after transplantation, most microglia were negatively 
stained with P2Y12 (Extended Data Fig. 10b), suggesting their acti-
vation in the adult lesion. At two weeks after transplantation, mice 
from both of the groups that were transplanted with adult microglia 
(with or without proteinase inhibitor treatments) exhibited a signifi-
cant reduction in the infiltration of immune cells, as indicated by Ly6G 
immunoreactivity and an increase in the area of GFAP+ cells (Fig. 5b, 
Extended Data Fig. 10c). Notably, the transplanted adult microglia that 
were not treated with proteinase inhibitors remained CD68+ and accu-
mulated in the lesion (Fig. 5a), consistent with the corralling effects of 
adult microglia and perhaps macrophages in the lesion25. By contrast, 
many of the transplanted adult microglia that were treated with pro-
teinase inhibitors expressed less CD68 and re-expressed P2Y12, and 
some of these microglia migrated into the host spinal tissues—similar 
to transplanted neonatal microglia (Fig. 5a, c). Notably, in the mice that 
were transplanted with proteinase-inhibitor-treated microglia, the 
lesions showed significantly less deposition of collagen I and CSPG, but 
had more serotonergic axons crossing the lesion (Fig. 5b–f, Extended 
Data Fig. 10c). However, the number of regenerating axons in these 
mice was lower than that observed in mice with transplantation of 
neonatal microglia (Fig. 5e, f), implying that other factors that have 
yet to be identified also contribute to the beneficial role of neonatal 
microglia. Nonetheless, our results indicate that proteinase inhibitors 
can facilitate the reestablishment of homeostatic microglia and a per-
missive environment for axon regrowth after adult spinal cord injury.
Discussion
Together, our findings suggest that, similar to fish and amphibians, 
neonatal mice are capable of scar-free wound healing and sponta-
neous axon regrowth. Analogous to neonatal injured rats26, these 
mice were able to achieve hind-limb stepping and a certain degree 
of coordination between the limbs. However, the contribution of 
descending axons and/or intraspinal reorganization is unknown. 
Remarkably, microglia appear to be the primary coordinator of this 
reparative injury response in neonatal mice. In the acute phase of 
injury responses, these healing-promoting microglia have multiple 
5-HT
GFAP
P2Y12
Merge
a
c
Merge
CD68
Fibronectin
Cx3cr1cre;Fn1ﬂ/ﬂ
Control
Albcre;Fn1ﬂ/ﬂ
Tie2cre;Fn1ﬂ/ﬂ
Cx3cr1cre;Fn1ﬂ/ﬂ
Control
Albcre;Fn1ﬂ/ﬂ
Tie2cre;Fn1ﬂ/ﬂ
b
**
NS
NS
Control
Cx3cr1cre;Fn1ﬂ/ﬂ
Tie2cre;Fn1ﬂ/ﬂ
Albcre;Fn1ﬂ/ﬂ
0
2
4
6
8
Distance from epicentre (μm)
***
*** ***
Cx3cr1cre;Fn1ﬂ/ﬂ
e
5-HT
GFAP
Merge
250
500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,5003,000
0
20
40
Control
Cx3cr1cre;Fn1ﬂ/ﬂ
Tie2cre;Fn1ﬂ/ﬂ
Albcre;Fn1ﬂ/ﬂ
Fibronectin intensity index
Density of
serotonergic axons (%)
d
Fig. 4 | Loss of fibronectin in microglia impairs wound healing and axon 
regrowth after P2 injury. a, Images of spinal sections from control (Fn1fl/fl) and 
different conditional knockout mice at 3 dpi. b, Quantification of fibronectin 
intensity in the lesion site (3 dpi, P2 injury) in different groups of mice (n = 3). 
**P = 0.0063, NS, not significant. c, Images of spinal sections at 14 dpi in different 
groups of mice, stained with antibodies against 5-HT, GFAP or P2Y12. d, 
Quantification of the density of serotonergic axons (normalized to the density 
proximal to the lesion site) in spinal cord distal to the lesion site at 14 dpi (n = 5). 
***P < 0.0001. e, Higher-magnification images from c, showing 5-HT+ axon terminals 
and GFAP+ astrocytes in the lesion site. One-way ANOVA followed by post-hoc 
Bonferroni correction (b); two-way ANOVA followed by post-hoc Bonferroni 
correction (d). Data are mean ± s.e.m. Scale bars, 250 μm (a, c), 50 μm (e).

618  |  Nature  |  Vol 587  |  26 November 2020
Article
roles—not only orchestrating efficient bridging between the cut ends, 
but also exhibiting powerful inflammation-resolution properties. In 
contrast to the permanent activation of microglia in adult lesions, the 
initially activated neonatal microglia undergo a rapid and spontane-
ous state conversion back to a homeostatic state. Our results suggest 
that this temporal control of microglial activation is crucial for the 
scar-free wound-healing process. For example, transient expression 
of fibronectin and other related molecules is required for forming a 
bridge across the lesion site, but preventing scar formation. This is remi-
niscent of connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), which when tran-
siently expressed in zebrafish mediates bridge forming and scar-free 
wound healing5, but when persistently expressed in the spinal lesions of 
adult rats contributes to fibrotic scar formation27. Our results suggest 
that proteinase inhibitors have a role in re-establishing homeostatic 
microglia in both neonatal and adult lesions. Future studies should 
identify other molecular components that are involved in restoring 
homeostatic microglia and test their functions in models of spinal 
cord injury. Finally, in light of the relationship between chronically 
activated and dysfunctional microglia and neurodegeneration28,29, it 
will be interesting to explore the potential applications of proteinase 
inhibitors and other molecules that are unique to neonatal microglia 
in these disease conditions.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting sum-
maries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, 
acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author con-
tributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code 
availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2795-6.
1.	
O’Shea, T. M., Burda, J. E. & Sofroniew, M. V. Cell biology of spinal cord injury and repair.  
J. Clin. Invest. 127, 3259–3270 (2017).
2.	
Tran, A. P., Warren, P. M. & Silver, J. The biology of regeneration failure and success after 
spinal cord injury. Physiol. Rev. 98, 881–917 (2018).
3.	
Hilton, B. J. & Bradke, F. Can injured adult CNS axons regenerate by recapitulating 
development? Development 144, 3417–3429 (2017).
4.	
Stenudd, M., Sabelström, H. & Frisén, J. Role of endogenous neural stem cells in spinal 
cord injury and repair. JAMA Neurol. 72, 235–237 (2015).
5.	
Mokalled, M. H. et al. Injury-induced ctgfa directs glial bridging and spinal cord 
regeneration in zebrafish. Science 354, 630–634 (2016).
6.	
Zukor, K. A., Kent, D. T. & Odelberg, S. J. Meningeal cells and glia establish a permissive 
environment for axon regeneration after spinal cord injury in newts. Neural Dev. 6, 1 (2011).
7.	
Jin, Y. & Zheng, B. Multitasking: dual leucine zipper-bearing kinases in neuronal 
development and stress management. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 35, 501–521 (2019).
8.	
He, Z. & Jin, Y. Intrinsic control of axon regeneration. Neuron 90, 437–451 (2016).
9.	
Bregman, B. S. Spinal cord transplants permit the growth of serotonergic axons across 
the site of neonatal spinal cord transection. Brain Res. 34, 265–279 (1987).
10.	
Fry, E. J., Stolp, H. B., Lane, M. A., Dziegielewska, K. M. & Saunders, N. R. Regeneration of 
supraspinal axons after complete transection of the thoracic spinal cord in neonatal 
opossums (Monodelphis domestica). J. Comp. Neurol. 466, 422–444 (2003).
11.	
Schafer, D. P. et al. Microglia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity and 
complement-dependent manner. Neuron 74, 691–705 (2012).
12.	
Butovsky, O. et al. Identification of a unique TGF-β-dependent molecular and functional 
signature in microglia. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 131–143 (2014).
13.	
Hammond, T. R. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing of microglia throughout the mouse 
lifespan and in the injured brain reveals complex cell-state changes. Immunity 50,  
253–271 (2019).
14.	
Popovich, P. G. & Hickey, W. F. Bone marrow chimeric rats reveal the unique distribution of 
resident and recruited macrophages in the contused rat spinal cord. J. Neuropathol. Exp. 
Neurol. 60, 676–685 (2001).
15.	
Elmore, M. R. et al. Colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor signaling is necessary for 
microglia viability, unmasking a microglia progenitor cell in the adult brain. Neuron 82, 
380–397 (2014).
16.	
Rudge, J. S. & Silver, J. Inhibition of neurite outgrowth on astroglial scars in vitro. J. 
Neurosci. 10, 3594–3603 (1990).
17.	
McKeon, R. J., Schreiber, R. C., Rudge, J. S. & Silver, J. Reduction of neurite outgrowth in a 
model of glial scarring following CNS injury is correlated with the expression of inhibitory 
molecules on reactive astrocytes. J. Neurosci. 11, 3398–3411 (1991).
18.	
Buettner, F. et al. Computational analysis of cell-to-cell heterogeneity in single-cell 
RNA-sequencing data reveals hidden subpopulations of cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 33,  
155–160 (2015).
19.	
Li, Q. et al. Developmental heterogeneity of microglia and brain myeloid cells revealed by 
deep single-cell RNA sequencing. Neuron 101, 207–223.e10 (2019).
20.	 Mrdjen, D. et al. High-dimensional single-cell mapping of central nervous system  
immune cells reveals distinct myeloid subsets in health, aging, and disease. Immunity 48, 
380–395 (2018).
21.	
Jordão, M. J. C. et al. Single-cell profiling identifies myeloid cell subsets with distinct fates 
during neuroinflammation. Science 363, eaat7554 (2019).
22.	 Keren-Shaul, H. et al. A unique microglia type associated with restricting development of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 169, 1276–1290 (2017).
23.	 Tan, K. & Lawler, J. The interaction of thrombospondins with extracellular matrix proteins. 
J. Cell Commun. Signal. 3, 177–187 (2009).
24.	 Jaffe, E. A. & Mosher, D. F. Synthesis of fibronectin by cultured human endothelial cells. J. 
Exp. Med. 147, 1779–1791 (1978).
25.	 Zhou, X. et al. Microglia and macrophages promote corralling, wound compaction and 
recovery after spinal cord injury via Plexin-B2. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 337–350 (2020).
26.	 Miya, D. et al. Fetal transplants alter the development of function after spinal cord 
transection in newborn rats. J. Neurosci. 17, 4856–4872 (1997).
27.	
Conrad, S., Schluesener, H. J., Adibzahdeh, M. & Schwab, J. M. Spinal cord injury induction 
of lesional expression of profibrotic and angiogenic connective tissue growth factor 
confined to reactive astrocytes, invading fibroblasts and endothelial cells. J. Neurosurg. 
Spine 2, 319–326 (2005).
28.	 Stevens, B. & Schafer, D. P. Roles of microglia in nervous system development, plasticity, 
and disease. Dev. Neurobiol. 78, 559–560 (2018).
29.	 Pluvinage, J. V. et al. CD22 blockade restores homeostatic microglial phagocytosis in 
ageing brains. Nature 568, 187–192 (2019).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
0
4
8
12
Control
Vehicle
Combination
P1 microglia
c
P1 microglia
Cx3cr1GFP
Combination
Vehicle
Combination
Vehicle
P1 microglia
CD68
Merge
Cx3cr1GFP
a
b
e
*
*
*
Density of
serotonergic axons (%)
Distance from epicentre (μm)
d
Vehicle
Combination
P1 microglia
Control
Collagen I
Ly6G
Control
Control
*
******
***
******
P2Y12
CD68
NS******
NS******
NS
***
**
Collagen I
Ly6G
******
Intensity index
GFAP
CSPG
GFAP+ area index
*******
NS****
250
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
5
10
15
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
***
*
f
P2Y12
P1 microglia
Combination
Vehicle
Control
P1 microglia
Combination
Vehicle
Control
P1 microglia
Combination
Vehicle
Control
P1 microglia
Combination
Vehicle
Control
0
5
10
15
20
Intensity index
Intensity index
0
5
10
15
20
P1 microglia
Combination
Vehicle
Control
P1 microglia
Combination
Vehicle
Control
0
5
10
15
Fig. 5 | Transplanted neonatal microglia or proteinase-inhibitor-treated 
adult microglia improve wound healing and axon regeneration in adult 
mice. a, b, Images of spinal cord sections two weeks after adult injury in mice 
with or without transplantation of adult microglia treated with vehicle; adult 
microglia treated with a combination of E64 and serpinA3N; or neonatal (P1) 
microglia. Images were stained with antibodies against P2Y12 and CD68 (a) or 
collagen I and Ly6G (b). c, d, Quantification of the immunoreactive intensity of 
P2Y12, CD68, collagen I and Ly6G (c), and CSPG and GFAP (d) for the images 
shown in a, b and Extended Data Fig. 10c (n = 6). *P = 0.03 (CSPG), 0.0156 (GFAP), 
**P = 0.0077, ***P < 0.001. e, Images of anti-5-HT-stained spinal sections from 
different groups of mice at four weeks after adult injury, showing serotonergic 
axons. Red stars indicate the lesion site. f, Quantification of the density of 
serotonergic axons (normalized to the density proximal to the lesion site) in 
spinal cord distal to the lesion site at four weeks after injury (n = 7). *P = 0.0192; 
***P < 0.0001. One-way ANOVA followed by post-hoc Bonferroni correction  
(c, d); two-way ANOVA followed by post-hoc Bonferroni correction (f). Data are 
mean ± s.e.m. Scale bars, 250 μm (a, b, e).

Methods
Data reporting
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The 
experiments were not randomized and the investigators were not 
blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.
Mice
All experimental procedures were performed in compliance with animal 
protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Commit-
tee at Boston Children’s Hospital. Wild-type C57BL/6 mice, Cx3cr1cre 
(JAX 025524)30, Tie2cre(JAX 008863)31, Albcre (JAX 003574)32, Fn1fl (JAX 
029624)33, Csf1rfl (JAX 021212)34, Ccr2RFP/RFP (JAX 017586)35 and Cx3cr1GFP/GFP 
mice (JAX 005582)36 were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory. 
Ccr2RFP/RFP and Cx3cr1GFP/GFP mice were bred to the C57BL/6 background, 
and only heterozygous mice were used.
Surgeries
Neonatal crush injury. Newborn pups (P2/P7) were anaesthetized 
using isoflurane. A laminectomy was performed at thoracic level (T10) 
until the spinal cord was exposed completely from side-to-side. The 
spinal cord was then fully crushed for 2 s with forceps with a width of 
0.1 mm in the last 5 mm of tips. The muscles and skin were sutured in 
layers with 6-0 sutures. EMLA topical cream was used for analgesia 
after surgery. Mice were then warmed up and kept in a box containing 
the bedding from the original cage for at least 30 min. After that, the 
closed surgical site was rubbed with the faeces from the mother us-
ing a Q-tip and then the mouse was returned to the mother. Feeding 
was closely monitored in the first week after surgery. Nutra-Gel diets 
(Bio-Serv) or breeder chow diets were provided to avoid cannibalism. 
Pups were killed when they showed weight loss (more than 10%). In case 
of bladder dysfunction, bladder emptying was performed once a day 
until bladder function was restored.
Adult surgeries. Adult (and young adult) T10 crush injury was per-
formed at T10, similarly to as described before37,38. In brief, a midline 
incision was made over the thoracic vertebrae, followed by a T9–T11 
laminectomy. Tips of forceps were carefully inserted on either side of 
the cord to include the full width of the cord and then gently scraped 
across the bone on the ventral side to not spare any tissue ventrally 
or laterally. The spinal cord was fully crushed for 2 s with 0.1-mm for-
ceps. The muscles were sutured, and the skin was closed with wound 
clips. Mice were placed on a warming pad after surgery until fully awake 
and given buprenorphine for pain relief (twice a day for three days 
after spinal cord injury surgery, twice a day for two days after brain 
injection). Their bladders were manually emptied twice a day for the 
duration of the experiments. To label CST axons, AAV-ChR2-mCherry 
was injected into the mouse sensorimotor cortex as described previ-
ously39,40. Adenovirus-associated viruses (AAVs) were generated at 
the viral core of the Boston Children’s Hospital and their titres were 
adjusted to 5 × 1012 copies per ml for injection.
Perfusion and immunohistochemistry
Mice were given a lethal dose of anaesthesia and transcardially perfused 
with PBS followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA). PFA-fixed tissues 
were incubated in 30% sucrose in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 
3 days at 4 °C, embedded in optimal cutting temperature compound 
(OCT) (Tissue-Tek), frozen in a dry ice and ethanol bath and stored at 
−80 °C. Transverse and sagittal sections were cut on a cryostat at 30-μm 
thickness and stored at −20 °C until processed. Before staining, sections 
were warmed to room temperature and dried on a 37 °C slide warmer 
for 2 h. Sections then were treated with a blocking solution containing 
10% normal donkey serum and 0.5% Triton-100 for 2 h at room tempera-
ture. The primary antibodies used were: rabbit/goat anti-5-HT (Immu-
nostar (20080/20079), 1: 5,000); rabbit anti-GFAP (DAKO (Z0334), 
1:600); rat anti-GFAP (Thermo Fisher Scientific (13-0300), 1:600); rab-
bit anti-P2Y12 (AnaSpec (AS-55043A), 1:200); rat anti-CD68 (Bio-Rad 
(MCA1957), 1:600); rabbit anti-fibronectin (Millipore (AB2033), 1:200); 
rabbit anti-collagen I (Abcam (ab21286), 1:200); goat anti-CD31 (R&D 
Systems (AF3628), 1: 200); chicken anti-GFP (Abcam (ab13970), 1:400); 
goat anti-SPP1 (R&D (AF808), 1:400); mouse anti-Ly6G/Ly6C (R&D 
(MAB1037), 1:200); mouse anti-CSPG (Sigma-Aldrich (C8035), 1:200); 
rabbit anti-laminin (Sigma-Aldrich (L9393), 1:500); rabbit anti-RFP 
(Abcam (ab34771), 1:400). Secondary antibodies (all from Invitrogen) 
included: Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated donkey anti chicken/rabbit (SA1-
72000/A-21206); Alexa Fluor 555-conjugated donkey anti goat/rabbit/
mouse (A-21432/A-31572/A-31570) and Dylight 650-conjugated donkey 
anti rat (SA5-10029). Spinal cord transverse and sagittal sections were 
imaged with a confocal laser-scanning microscope (Zeiss 700 or Zeiss 
710). Figures showing large longitudinal spinal cord sections were pro-
duced using a Zeiss 710 microscope with image stitching and/or stack 
software.
Lesion analysis and quantification
Mice were euthanized and perfused at 3, 7 or 14 days after spinal cord 
crush injury. The lesion site was defined and traced using collagen I, 
fibronectin, GFAP, P2Y12, CD68, CD31, CSPG, laminin or Ly6G/Ly6C 
staining. Cell nuclei were stained by incubation with DAPI for 30 s. 
Immunostaining intensity in the lesion site (100-μm-width region in 
the epicentre) was measured using ImageJ software and normalized 
to the intact (proximal) region of the spinal cord.
Axon counting and quantification
To quantify the regenerating or late-arriving serotonergic or CST axons 
after spinal cord crush, sagittal sections through the lesion were stained 
with antibodies against 5-HT or RFP. Images of 5–6 sections for each 
mouse were taken under a 10× objective and used for quantification. 
A series of rectangular segments of 100 μm width and 400 μm length 
covering the dorsal–ventral aspect of the cord were superimposed onto 
the sagittal sections, starting from the lesion centre up to a defined 
distance caudal. After subtracting the background, the pixel value of 
each segment was normalized by dividing with the rostral segment 
(1 mm rostral). The results were presented as a ratio at different dis-
tances (axon density index).
Microglia depletion
To deplete microglia in vivo, adult mice were given the CSF1R inhibi-
tor PLX3397 mixed into AIN-76A standard chow (Research Diets). The 
dose of PLX3397 was 290 mg/kg and respective controls received 
AIN-76A standard chow. For neonatal microglia depletion, pregnant 
mice were given the PLX3397 chow from E14 and newborn pups 
continued to receive subcutaneous injections of PLX3397 (50 mg/kg/
day) on a daily basis. To accomplish microglia depletion by genetic 
means, Cx3cr1cre mice were crossed with Csf1rfl/fl mice to generate 
Cx3cr1cre; Csf1rfl/fl mice.
RNA isolation and bulk RNA-seq analysis
After a quick PBS perfusion, spinal cords of adult mice were rapidly dis-
sected out before (intact), three days after or five days after the crush 
injury. The central 1 mm of the lower thoracic lesion including the core 
of the lesion and 0.5 mm rostral and caudal were then rapidly removed 
after PBS perfusion. Tissues were dissociated using the Neural Tissue 
Dissociation Kit (P) (Miltenyi Biotec) and stained with CD45 and CD11b 
for 10 min at 4 °C. Microglia were then FACS-purified using the markers 
CD45 and CD11b. RNAs of CD45lowCD11bhigh cells were extracted using 
the RNeasy Micro Kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA 
quality was verified with an Agilent BioAnalyzer 2100. All experimental 
steps throughout RNA extraction were performed in triplicate for the 
control and experimental groups, with each replicate performed on 
a different day. The samples within a replicate were prepared on the 

Article
same day, in a different order for each replicate, to avoid any systemic 
errors from differences in timing.
RNA-seq was carried out by the UCLA Neuroscience Genomics Core 
(UNGC). In brief, RNA samples were sequenced by the UNGC. Samples 
were pooled and barcoded. The library was prepared using Nugen Ova-
tion RNA Ultra Low Input (500 pg) + Kapa Hyper. Preparation included 
75-bp paired-end reads and the sequencing run was carried out over 5 
lanes. On average, 55 million reads were obtained. Reads were aligned to 
the mouse GRCm38 reference genome using STAR (v.2.4.0) and an aver-
age uniquely aligned rate of 80.9 ± 1.1% (mean ± s.e.m.) was obtained. 
Read counts for RefSeq genes (mm10) were generated by HTSeq v.0.6.1. 
Low-count genes were filtered and fragments per kilobase per million 
mapped reads (FPKM) values were generated. Differentially expressed 
genes were identified using the Limma package.
scRNA-seq analysis
Single-cell suspension from FACS-sorted microglia cells was prepared 
using the 10X Genomics Chromium Single Cell 3′ Reagent Kit v3 (10X 
Genomics) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The quantity 
and quality of cDNA were assessed using an Agilent 2100 Expert High 
Sensitivity DNA Assay. cDNA samples were sequenced on one lane of 
a NovaSeq 6000 S2 flowcell at UCLA Technology Center for Genomics 
and Bioinformatics. Reads were mapped to the mouse GrCm38 genome 
using Cell Ranger v.3.0.2. More than 380 million reads were obtained 
for each sample. The average number of genes detected was 3,571 ± 255 
(mean ± s.e.m.). Confident read-mapping rates were 91.7–93.4% with 
over 86.8% of reads in cells. For filtering genes and cells, the Seurat 
package (v.3.1.1) was used for analysis. For each condition (0 dpi, 3 dpi, 
5 dpi), genes expressed in fewer than five cells were removed. Cells with 
mitochondrial expression level lower than 5%, ribosomal expression 
level lower than 30%, and a number of features larger than 2,000 were 
used.
Removal of doublets. The package DoubletFinder was used to remove 
doublets. SCTransform was applied in each condition. Principal com-
ponents 1 to 30 were used for peak identification. A doublet formation 
rate of 7.5% was considered as the threshold. Cells identified as doublets 
were removed.
Clustering and cell-type classification. After removing doublets, all 
Seurat objects were merged together. Cells with a number of features 
larger than 500, RNA count lower than 80,000 and mitochondrial ex-
pression level lower than 15% were used. The LogNormalize method 
with a scale factor of 10,000 was used for normalization. The Find-
VariableFeatures function was used to extract the top 5,000 variable 
features. Data were scaled according to mitochondrial percent using the 
ScaleData function. Clustering results were visualized using t-SNE and 
UMAP plots. The function FindAllMarkers was used to find significant 
genes in each cluster. Cell types were identified by using several marker 
genes from the literature.
Subset and cell-cycle regression. Clusters identified as microglia-like 
cells were used for further analysis. Cell-cycle-related genes were re-
gressed out to remove cell-cycle effects according to cell-cycle phase 
scores, as instructed in Seurat vignettes (https://satijalab.org/seurat/
v3.1/cell_cycle_vignette.html). The same method was used to cluster 
and identify subtypes of microglia cells.
GO enrichment analysis. The package DOSE 3.8.2 and database org.
Mm.eg.db 3.7.0 were used for GO enrichment analysis. Genes with an 
adjusted P value less than 0.05 and log-transformed fold change larger 
than 0.25 were selected. The top 300 genes ranked by log-transformed 
fold change in cluster 3 (compare with cluster 0) were used as input. 
All three ontologies (biological process (BP), cellular component (CC) 
and molecular function (MF)) were exported.
In situ hybridization
To assess the expression pattern of Fn1, Ms4a7, P2ry12 and Thbs1, 
we performed in situ hybridization by hybridization chain reac-
tion (HCR). Commercial in situ kits were purchased from Molecular 
Instruments (https://www.moleculartechnologies.org/). Each kit 
containd a DNA probe set, a DNA HCR amplifier (comprising a pair of 
fluorophore-labelled DNA hairpins), and hybridization, wash and ampli-
fication buffers. The designed probes were synthesized by Integrated 
DNA Technologies. Each probe was designed for 20 or 40 probe sets, 
and the size of each probe set was based on the expression level of the 
target. Mice at multiple stages after crush were anaesthetized with keta-
mine and xylazine and perfused with diethyl pyrocarbonate (DEPC)-PBS 
followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA). Spinal cord was dissected and 
fixed in 4% PFA overnight, dehydrated in 30% sucrose–DEPC-PBS at 4 °C, 
embedded in OCT and cryosectioned at 30 μm, and slices were kept at 
−20 °C. Tissues were permeabilized in 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) 
for 30 min at room temperature and pre-hybridized in hybridization 
buffer for 3 h at 37 °C. Then the slides were incubated in pre-warmed 
hybridization buffer including probes (2.5 nM for each) at 37 °C over-
night. After hybridization, slices were washed for 1 h at 37 °C with wash 
buffer followed by 2× saline-sodium citrate (SSC) for 15 min at room 
temperature. The amplification step was performed with HCR ampli-
fiers (B1, B2, B3 or B4) overnight at room temperature.
Isolation and transplantation of neonatal and adult microglia
Neonatal and adult microglia were isolated from the brain of Cx3cr1GFP/+ 
mice. Mice were anaesthetized with ketamine and xylazine (100 mg/kg 
and 10 mg/kg, respectively) and perfused with cold PBS. Cerebral corti-
ces from P1 or two-month-old mice brain were dissected without dura. 
Enzymatic digestion with the Neural Tissue Dissociation Kit (P) (Miltenyi 
Biotec) was performed, and dissociated cells were resuspended in PBS 
buffer with 0.5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) and then passed through a 
70-μm cell strainer (Falcon). Myelin was removed using myelin removal 
beads II and the MACS system (Miltenyi Biotec). After myelin depletion, 
microglial cells were positively selected from cell suspensions using 
CD11b MicroBeads and the MACS system (Miltenyi Biotec). Neonatal 
microglial were purified directly without the myelin removal step.
To assess the role of proteinase inhibitors, we used two chemical 
compounds: E64, a membrane-permeable irreversible inhibitor of a 
wide range of cysteine peptidases, and serpinA3N, a serine protease 
inhibitor41–43. For the combination treatment group, adult microglial 
cells (106 per ml) were incubated with 10 μΜ E64 and 100 ng/ml serpi-
nA3N for 30 min, centrifuged at 300g for 10 min and resuspended to 
around 2 × 105 cells per μl. E64 (30 μΜ) and serpinA3N (500 ng/ml) were 
added to the cells again during transplantation. Microglia transplanta-
tions were performed one hour after spinal cord injury. One microlitre 
containing CD11b+ purified mouse microglia in PBS (around 2 × 105/μl) 
was slowly injected into the crushed sites by a Nanolitre injector (WPI) 
with a pulled glass microcapillary tube (WPI).
Statistical analysis
The normality of distributions and the equality of variances were 
tested by SAS before we applied any parametric analyses. A two-tailed 
Student’s t-test was used for the pairwise comparison between two 
groups. The rest of the data were analysed using a one-way or two-way 
ANOVA as appropriate. Multiple comparison procedures were carried 
out to identify specific between-group differences using Bonferroni’s 
post-hoc test. Error bars in all figures represent mean ± s.e.m. Differ-
ences were considered statistically significant at a P value of less than 
0.05. All data were analysed using GraphPad Prism and SAS.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature 
Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.

Data availability
RNA-seq data have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus 
(GEO) (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo) under the accession number 
GSE150871. Source data are provided with this paper.
 
30.	 Yona, S. et al. Fate mapping reveals origins and dynamics of monocytes and tissue 
macrophages under homeostasis. Immunity 38, 79–91 (2013).
31.	
Kisanuki, Y. Y. et al. Tie2-Cre transgenic mice: a new model for endothelial cell-lineage 
analysis in vivo. Dev. Biol. 230, 230–242 (2001).
32.	 Postic, C. et al. Dual roles for glucokinase in glucose homeostasis as determined by liver 
and pancreatic beta cell-specific gene knock-outs using Cre recombinase. J. Biol. Chem. 
274, 305–315 (1999).
33.	 Sakai, T. et al. Plasma fibronectin supports neuronal survival and reduces brain injury 
following transient focal cerebral ischemia but is not essential for skin-wound healing 
and hemostasis. Nat. Med. 7, 324–330 (2001).
34.	 Li, J., Chen, K., Zhu, L. & Pollard, J. W. Conditional deletion of the colony stimulating 
factor-1 receptor (c-fms proto-oncogene) in mice. Genesis 44, 328–335 (2006).
35.	 Saederup, N. et al. Selective chemokine receptor usage by central nervous system 
myeloid cells in CCR2-red fluorescent protein knock-in mice. PLoS One 5, e13693 (2010).
36.	 Jung, S. et al. Analysis of fractalkine receptor CX3CR1 function by targeted deletion and 
green fluorescent protein reporter gene insertion. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20, 4106–4114 (2000).
37.	
Liu, K. et al. PTEN deletion enhances the regenerative ability of adult corticospinal 
neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 1075–1081 (2010).
38.	 Zukor, K. et al. Short hairpin RNA against PTEN enhances regenerative growth of 
corticospinal tract axons after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 33, 15350–15361 (2013).
39.	 Chen, B. et al. Reactivation of dormant relay pathways in injured spinal cord by KCC2 
manipulations. Cell 174, 521–535 (2018).
40.	 Liu, Y. et al. A sensitized IGF1 treatment restores corticospinal axon-dependent functions. 
Neuron 95, 817–833 (2017).
41.	
Hanada, K. et al. Isolation and characterization of E-64, a new thiol protease inhibitor. 
Agric. Biol. Chem. 42, 523–528 (1978).
42.	 Vicuña, L. et al. The serine protease inhibitor serpinA3N attenuates neuropathic pain by 
inhibiting T cell-derived leukocyte elastase. Nat. Med. 21, 518–523 (2015).
43.	 Ou, J. et al. iPSCs from a hibernator provide a platform for studying cold adaptation and 
its potential medical applications. Cell 173, 851–863 (2018).
Acknowledgements We thank J. Sanes and I. Benhar for discussion and S. Hegarty, J. Sanes,  
B. Stevens, F. Wang, K. H. Wang, C. Winter and C. Woolf for critically reading the manuscript. 
This study was supported by NIH R01 grants NS096294 and NS110850 (to Z.H.); NIH-NINDS 
R35NS111582 and a Ray W. Poppleton endowment (to P.G.P.); grants from the Dr. Miriam and 
Sheldon G. Adelson Medical Research Foundation (to Z.H., R.K., V.S. and D.H.G.); the Craig  
H. Neilsen Foundation (to Y.L.); and a NIH training grant T32NS007473 (to A.M.).The Intellectual 
and Developmental Disabilities Research Center (IDDRC) and viral cores supported by the 
grants NIH HD018655 and P30EY012196 were used for this study.
Author contributions Y.L., X.H., P.G.P. and Z.H. conceived the project; Y.L., X.H., Q.W., A.M., 
B.C., Z.S., H.M., S.Z., J.Z. and A.J. performed the experiments and discussed the results; R.K., 
Y.Z., Z.Y., V.S. and D.H.G. participated in data analysis; Y.L., X.H. and Z.H. prepared the 
manuscript with inputs from all authors.
Competing interests Z.H. is an advisor of SpineX. The remaining authors declare no 
competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-
2795-6.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Z.H.
Peer review information Nature thanks Elizabeth Bradbury, Jerry Silver and Binhai Zheng for 
their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.

Article
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Age-dependent decline in serotonergic axon 
regrowth and wound healing. a, Representative images of spinal cord sagittal 
sections showing 5HT-labelled axons from sham, P7 or P20 mice at two weeks 
after inury. Scale bar, 500 μm. b, Representative images of spinal cord sections 
from sham, P7 or P20 mice at two weeks after injury, stained with antibodies 
against collagen I, CD68, P2Y12 or CD31. Scale bar, 250 μm. c, Representative 
images of spinal sagittal sections at four weeks after sham control or P2 injury, 
with CST axons labelled with AAV-ChR2-mCherry. Red stars indicate the lesion 
site. Scale bar, 500 μm. d, Representative images of sagittal spinal cord 
sections at two weeks after injury, stained with antibodies against laminin, 
CSPG and GFAP. Scale bar, 250 μm. e, Representative images of sagittal spinal 
cord sections at two weeks after P20 injury, stained with antibodies against 
laminin, GFAP and 5-HT. Scale bar, 250 μm. All experiments shown were 
independently repeated three times with similar results.

Extended Data Fig. 2 | Distinct microglia and macrophage responses after 
crush injury to neonatal or adult spinal cord. a, Images of spinal cord sections 
stained with antibodies against CD68 and P2Y12 from mice at 3 dpi, 7 dpi or 14 
dpi. Higher-magnification images showing P2Y12+ cells were co-labelled with 
CD68 at 3 dpi. Cells with highly ramified morphology at 7 dpi and 14 dpi can be 
seen around lesion sites. Scale bar, 100 μm. b, Higher-magnification images from 
Fig. 2a showing that CD68+ cells and fibronectin matrix form bridges between 
gaps at 3 dpi. Scale bar, 50 μm. c, Immunolabelling for CD68 and P2Y12 in adult 
mice at 3 dpi, 7 dpi or 14 dpi, showing CD68+ cells that lack P2Y12 expression. 
Scale bar, 200 μm. All experiments shown were independently repeated three 
times with similar results.

Article
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Histological assessments of bridges formed after 
neonatal spinal cord injury. a, Higher-magnification images of sections of the 
spinal cord bridge area stained with antibodies against fibronectin, GFAP, 
P2Y12 and collagen I, or with DAPI (blue), at 3 dpi in P2 injury. Scale bar, 50 μm. 
b, Representative images of spinal sections of Cx3cr1GFP mice immunolabelled 
with caspase-3 showing cells around the lesion sites at 3 dpi in P2 injury. Scale 
bar, 200 μm. All experiments shown were independently repeated three times 
with similar results.

Extended Data Fig. 4 | Infiltrated CCR2+ monocytes and macrophages  
were eliminated after neonatal but not adult spinal cord injury. a, b, 
Representative images of sagittal sections of injured spinal cord of Ccr2RFP mice  
at 3 or 14 dpi in P2 injury (a) or adult injury (b). Sections were immunostained for 
CD68 and RFP (for Ccr2RFP). Scale bar, 250 μm. All experiments shown were 
independently repeated three times with similar results.

Article
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Microglia depletion impairs wound healing and  
axon regrowth after neonatal spinal cord injury. a, Left, representative 
P2Y12-stained spinal cord images showing PLX3397-mediated depletion of 
microglia cells. Right, quantification of microglia depletion in spinal cord 
treated with PLX3397 or vehicle at 0, 7 or 14 dpi (n = 3, 5 and 5 for 0, 7 and 14 dpi, 
respectively). Student’s t-test (two-tailed, unpaired), ***P < 0.0001. Data are 
mean ± s.e.m. Scale bar, 250 μm. b, Representative images of P2Y12-stained 
spinal cord sections from control (Csf1rlfl/fl) and Csf1r-knockout (Cx3crcre;Csf1rfl/fl) 
mice showing an approximately 70% reduction of microglia throughout  
the spinal cord in the mutant mice (n = 5 per group). Student’s t-test (two- 
tailed, unpaired), ***P = 0.0004. Data are mean ± s.e.m. Scale bar, 250 μm. c, 
Representative images of sagittal spinal sections taken at 14 days after P2 injury 
and immunostained with antibodies against 5-HT, GFAP, laminin, CSPG or 
CD31. Scale bar, 200 μm. d, Higher-magnification images from c, showing 5-HT+ 
axons and GFAP+ astrocytes in the lesion site. Scale bar, 50 μm.

Extended Data Fig. 6 | Isolation and scRNA-seq results for immune cells 
after neonatal spinal cord injury. a, FACS plots showing selection of CD11b+ 
and CD45+ cells from dissociated cells from neonatal spinal cord. b, t-SNE plot 
showing 14 clusters and population annotations. c, d, Relative proportions of 
microglia among total cells (c) and dividing microglia among microglia cells 
(d). e, Left, table showing the percentage of each cluster and their signature 
genes. Right, heat map depicting the top 30 differentially expressed genes for 
each of the 14 clusters.

Article
Extended Data Fig. 7 | Feature plots showing examples of differentially expressed genes in different clusters. Gene expression of P2ry12, Tmem119, Siglech, 
Fn1, Igf1, Spp1, Ms4a7, Thbs1, Anxa1, Cstb, Serpinb6a and Stfa1 in different microglia clusters.

Extended Data Fig. 8 | Comparison of changes in gene expression in 
proliferative-region-associated microglia, disease-associated microglia  
and MG3. Dot plots of gene expression correlation between proliferative-region- 
associated microglia (PAM) and disease-associated microglia (DAM) (normalized 
to homeostatic microglia) and MG3 (normalized to MG0), showing different sets 
of upregulated and downregulated genes (n = 13,755 and 14,423 genes for PAM and 
DAM, respectively).

Article
Extended Data Fig. 9 | Network analysis and further characterization of 
MG3 differentially expressed genes. a, Diagram depicting correlated gene 
modules that underlie cluster identities of MG3 microglia. b, c, Expression of 
genes associated with endopeptidase inhibitor activity (b) and the ECM (c), in 
adult microglia at 0, 3 and 5 dpi, using bulk RNA-seq (n = 3 per group). One-way 
ANOVA followed by post-hoc Bonferroni correction. *P = 0.03 (Lgals3), 0.04 
(Lgals1), 0.01 (Ecm1), 0.01(Pf4); **P = 0.003 (Fn1), 0.0013 (Pf4). Data are 
mean ± s.e.m.

Extended Data Fig. 10 | Microglia isolation and transplantation. 
 a, Representative images (left) and quantification (right) of isolated microglia 
(P2Y12+) from neonatal or adult Cx3cr1GFP mice (3 h after isolation, n = 400 cells 
examined over three independent experiments). Data are mean ± s.e.m. Scale 
bar, 50 μm. b, Representative images of spinal cord sections showing the 
activation of transplanted microglia in the adult lesion at two days after 
grafting. Scale bar, 250 μm. All experiments shown in b were independently 
repeated three times with similar results. c, Representative images of spinal 
cord sections showing the GFAP and CSPG staining in the adult lesion at 14 days 
after grafting. Quantification results are shown in Fig. 5d. Scale bar, 250 μm.

1
nature research  |  reporting summary
October 2018
Corresponding author(s):
Zhigang He
Last updated by author(s): Jul 6, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency 
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided 
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient) 
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted 
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection
Imaging data was collected using Zeiss 700 or Zeiss 710. 
ScRNA-seq data was collected by Novaseq 6000 Sequencing System. 
FACS data was collected using Summit (v5.4)
Data analysis
Immunostaining intensity in the lesion site was measured using ImageJ (v.2.0.0) software.  
SAS (v9.4), Prism 7 and R (v.3.6.1) was used for generation of graphs.   
FCSexpress 7.01.0018 was used for making plots. 
STAR (ver 2.4.0), Seurat package (v3.1.1),DoubletFinder(2.0.2),DOSE(3.8.2) and Limma( 3.44.3) were used for bio-informatic analysis. 
Please see Methods section in manuscript for further detail. Custom code which will be available upon request.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers. 
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable: 
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets 
- A list of figures that have associated raw data 
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The raw and processed scRNA-Seq data are deposited on GEO (GSE150871). The data supporting the findings of this study are available within the paper and its 
supplementary information files.  Datasets generated and/or analyzed in the current study are provided as separate Source Data for Fig.1b,1d, Fig.2g, Fig.3, Fig.4d, 
Fig.5f, Extended Data Fig.5a, 5b, Extended Data Fig.6, Extended Data Fig.9b, 9c, and  Extended Data Fig.10a. Other data generated during and/or analyzed during 
the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

===== Li2021_FrontCellNeurosci+FibroticScar+SCI =====
REVIEW
published: 26 August 2021
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2021.720938
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
1
August 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 720938
Edited by:
Ya-Zhou Wang,
Fourth Military Medical
University, China
Reviewed by:
Byung Gon Kim,
Ajou University, South Korea
Walace Gomes-Leal,
Federal University of Western
Pará, Brazil
*Correspondence:
Juehua Jing
jjhhu@sina.com
Meige Zheng
zhengmg113@126.com
Li Cheng
chengli7788@163.com
†These authors have contributed
equally to this work
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Non-Neuronal Cells,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience
Received: 05 June 2021
Accepted: 28 July 2021
Published: 26 August 2021
Citation:
Li Z, Yu S, Hu X, Li Y, You X, Tian D,
Cheng L, Zheng M and Jing J (2021)
Fibrotic Scar After Spinal Cord Injury:
Crosstalk With Other Cells, Cellular
Origin, Function, and Mechanism.
Front. Cell. Neurosci. 15:720938.
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2021.720938
Fibrotic Scar After Spinal Cord Injury:
Crosstalk With Other Cells, Cellular
Origin, Function, and Mechanism
Ziyu Li †, Shuisheng Yu †, Xuyang Hu, Yiteng Li, Xingyu You, Dasheng Tian, Li Cheng*,
Meige Zheng* and Juehua Jing*
Department of Orthopaedics, The Second Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China
The failure of axonal regeneration after spinal cord injury (SCI) results in permanent loss
of sensorimotor function. The persistent presence of scar tissue, mainly ﬁbrotic scar and
astrocytic scar, is a critical cause of axonal regeneration failure and is widely accepted as
a treatment target for SCI. Astrocytic scar has been widely investigated, while ﬁbrotic scar
has received less attention. Here, we review recent advances in ﬁbrotic scar formation
and its crosstalk with other main cellular components in the injured core after SCI, as
well as its cellular origin, function, and mechanism. This study is expected to provide an
important basis and novel insights into ﬁbrotic scar as a treatment target for SCI.
Keywords: spinal cord injury, ﬁbrotic scar, crosstalk, cellular origin, treatment strategy
INTRODUCTION
Fibrosis, which is deﬁned as ﬁbroblasts excessively depositing extracellular matrix (ECM) mainly
composed of collagen (COL), ﬁbronectin (FN), and laminin (LN), is a common reaction to
injury and inﬂammation in the central nervous system (CNS) and peripheral organs (Bataller and
Brenner, 2005; Lee and Kalluri, 2010; Travers et al., 2016; Lederer and Martinez, 2018; Mack, 2018;
Dorrier et al., 2021). In the early phase of tissue injury, a ﬁbrotic scar provides the necessary support
structure for the injured area and maintains tissue integrity. Due to the persistent presence of
ﬁbrotic scar, the normal tissue structure is disordered, and organ function is aﬀected to varying
degrees (Rockey et al., 2015; Pardali et al., 2017; Dorrier et al., 2021). Therefore, interventions
targeting ﬁbrotic scar formation are expected to be a potential targeted treatment.
Spinal cord injury (SCI) results in a series of intricate pathological changes (Sofroniew, 2018;
Tran et al., 2018). Generally, direct physical trauma leads to apoptosis and necrosis of various cells,
which, in turn, triggers inﬂammatory and immune responses. Finally, the persistence of scar tissue
and inﬂammatory cells hinders axonal regeneration and impairs functional recovery (Hara et al.,
2017; Dias et al., 2018; Kobayakawa et al., 2019). The scar tissue that forms after SCI mainly includes
astrocytic scar, ﬁbrotic scar, and microglial scar (Bellver-Landete et al., 2019). After SCI, activated
astrocytes gradually aggregate, overlap, and surround the edge of the injured core, forming an
astrocytic scar that contributes to limiting inﬂammation and promoting tissue retention, ultimately
inhibiting axonal regeneration and resulting in permanent functional deﬁcits (Wanner et al., 2013;
Lang et al., 2015; Anderson et al., 2016; Hara et al., 2017; Tran et al., 2018). Contemporaneously,
ﬁbroblasts gradually proliferate, migrate, and corral a large number of macrophages in the injured
core, forming a ﬁbrotic scar adjacent to the medial side of the astrocytic scar (Göritz et al., 2011;
Soderblom et al., 2013; Zhu et al., 2015a). The ﬁbrotic scar is thought to maintain tissue integrity,
limit inﬂammation, and inhibit axonal regeneration after SCI (Klapka et al., 2005; Dias et al., 2018;
Wang et al., 2018a,b). The microglial scar located between the astrocytic scar and ﬁbrotic scar is

Li et al.
Fibrotic Scar Formation After SCI
another glial scar component that was recently proposed
and contributes to limiting inﬂammation, promoting wound
healing, and enhancing functional recovery (Bellver-Landete
et al., 2019). In the injured core after SCI, the area occupied
by ﬁbroblasts is larger than that occupied by the microglia,
and the number of ﬁbroblasts is approximately twice that of
astrocytes (Göritz et al., 2011; Bellver-Landete et al., 2019).
The ablation of astrocytic scar or microglial scar exerts adverse
rather than beneﬁcial eﬀects on inﬂammation resolution and
wound contraction, while moderately attenuating ﬁbrotic scar
may dramatically facilitate axonal regeneration and functional
recovery after SCI (Herrmann et al., 2008; Renault-Mihara
et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018a,b; Bellver-Landete et al., 2019).
However, most studies on scar tissue have focused on ﬁbrotic
scar in neurodegenerative disease or on astrocytic scar in SCI,
and ﬁbrotic scar after SCI has received little attention (Zhang
et al., 2005; Kostyk et al., 2008; D’Ambrosi and Apolloni,
2020). Recently, Corey R. Fehlberg et al. and David Oliveira
Dias et al. reviewed the formation, origin, and function of
ﬁbrotic scar in the CNS, providing new perspectives for the
treatment of SCI (Dias and Göritz, 2018; Fehlberg and Lee,
2021). However, the spatiotemporal distribution of astrocytes,
ﬁbroblasts, macrophages, and microglia is closely related after
SCI, suggesting a complex crosstalk between the main cellular
components and ﬁbrotic scar in the injured core, which has not
been reviewed.
Therefore, the present review aims to summarize novel and
diﬀerent perspectives for an understanding of the formation
of ﬁbrotic scar and its crosstalk with other main cellular
components, as well as its cellular origin, function, and
mechanism. This study is expected to provide an important basis
and novel insights into the ﬁbrotic scar as a treatment target
for SCI.
FIBROTIC SCAR FORMATION AFTER
SPINAL CORD INJURY
After SCI, ﬁbrotic scar is mainly composed of ﬁbroblasts and
excess ECM, mainly including COL, FN, and LN (Camand et al.,
2004; Okada et al., 2007; Schiwy et al., 2009; Soderblom et al.,
2013; Zhu et al., 2015a; Yokota et al., 2017). However, the
formation and distribution characteristics of ﬁbrotic scar vary
slightly among species or SCI models.
Due to high clinical similarity and high reproducibility, the
mouse spinal cord hemisection model and contusion model are
commonly used as the disease models of SCI (Soderblom et al.,
2013; Dias et al., 2018; Bellver-Landete et al., 2019; Kobayakawa
et al., 2019). In the spinal cord hemisection injury model,
ﬁbroblasts begin to proliferate, migrate, and aggregate in the
injured area at 3 days postinjury (dpi) (Göritz et al., 2011).
The number of ﬁbroblasts increases more than 25-fold at 9 dpi
and peaks at 14 dpi (Göritz et al., 2011). Meanwhile, ﬁbroblasts
aggregating in the injured area deposit a large amount of ﬁbrous
ECM and form a ﬁbrotic scar adjacent to the medial side of
the astrocytic scar, thus, ﬁlling the entire injured core, and the
distributions of FN and LN overlap with ﬁbroblasts (Göritz et al.,
2011; Soderblom et al., 2013; Dias et al., 2018). As the ﬁbrotic
scar contracts, the number of ﬁbroblasts begins to decrease at
4 months and then is maintained for at least 7 months after
SCI (Göritz et al., 2011). In the spinal cord contusion model,
similar to the spinal cord hemisection model at 3 dpi, ﬁbroblasts
begin to proliferate, migrate, and aggregate in the injured area
(Göritz et al., 2011; Soderblom et al., 2013). The cell density
increases signiﬁcantly at 5 dpi and peaks at 7 dpi (Soderblom
et al., 2013). In addition, as ﬁbroblasts proliferate and aggregate,
FN secreted by ﬁbroblasts initially exists in a soluble form and
begins to assemble into ECM at 7 dpi (Zhu et al., 2015b). At
14 dpi, ﬁbroblasts deposit a large amount of ﬁbrous ECM, such
as FN, which becomes much more organized into a ﬁbrillar
network, forming a dense ﬁbrotic scar adjacent to the medial
side of astrocytic scar (Soderblom et al., 2013; Zhu et al., 2015b).
However, unlike the ﬁbrotic scar, which ﬁlls the entire injured
core and is mixed with macrophages after hemisection injury,
the ﬁbrotic scar that forms after contusion injury exhibits a
dense and contiguous scar structure at the edge of the injured
core ﬁlled with a large number of macrophages (Figure 1; Göritz
et al., 2011; Soderblom et al., 2013). In addition, the distribution
of FN overlaps with ﬁbroblasts, while the distribution of LN
is mainly located around the peripheral rim of the injured
core (Göritz et al., 2011; Soderblom et al., 2013; Zhu et al.,
2015a; Dias et al., 2018; Li et al., 2021). In both injury models,
ﬁbroblasts begin to proliferate and migrate at 3 dpi and form
mature and stable ﬁbrotic scar structures at 14 dpi. Although
diﬀerences in the spatial distribution of ﬁbrotic scars in the two
injury models have been identiﬁed, the similarity in the temporal
distribution provides an important basis for subsequent research
on ﬁbrotic scar.
Consistent with the mouse spinal cord contusion model, the
ﬁbrotic scar also forms in a rat spinal cord contusion model, but
the ﬁbrotic scar distribution in the two species is slightly diﬀerent
(Ruschel et al., 2015; Zhu et al., 2015b). In contrast to mice, spinal
cord contusion in rats leads to cavity formation in the injured
core, which is considered to resemble the pathological changes
observed in patients with SCI in the clinic (Metz et al., 2000;
Norenberg et al., 2004; Buss et al., 2007). The existence of cavities
after SCI in rats results in the ﬁbrotic scars occupying a smaller
area of the injured core than in mice, and the ﬁbrotic scars are
distributed along the edge of the cavity and partially overlap with
astrocytic scars, indicating that astrocytes may be involved in the
formation of ﬁbrotic scars in rats and that diﬀerences may exist in
the mechanism of scar formation between the two species (Zhu
et al., 2015b). Considering the genetic homology with humans
and the use of transgenic technology, a mouse model is still
most commonly used to study SCI. However, advances in the
treatment of SCI in mouse models should be further validated
in rat models due to the cavity formation after SCI in rats, which
is presumed to resemble patients with SCI in the clinic.
Overall, ﬁbroblast proliferation and migration, and ECM
deposition are important steps in ﬁbrotic scar formation, and
the temporal and spatial characteristics of ﬁbrotic scar formation
are of guiding signiﬁcance for the formulation of subsequent
research protocols. Studies aiming to further investigate the
diﬀerences and commonalities of ﬁbrotic scar among diﬀerent
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
2
August 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 720938

Li et al.
Fibrotic Scar Formation After SCI
FIGURE 1 | Differences in the locations of ﬁbrotic scar between the spinal
cord hemisection model and contusion model in mice. After spinal cord injury
(SCI), ﬁbroblasts form a ﬁbrotic scar adjacent to the medial side of the
astrocytic scar formed by astrocytes. The ﬁbrotic scar after spinal cord
hemisection injury ﬁlls the entire injured core and is mixed with macrophages,
while the ﬁbrotic scar formed after spinal cord contusion injury exhibits a dense
and contiguous scar structure at the edge of the injured core that is ﬁlled with
a large number of macrophages.
species and injury models after SCI are very important to
further understand the cellular origin, function, and mechanism
of ﬁbrotic scar, providing important bases for their use as a
treatment target for SCI.
CROSSTALK BETWEEN THE FIBROTIC
SCAR AND OTHER CELLS AFTER SPINAL
CORD INJURY
The main cells in the injured area, including astrocytes, microglia,
ﬁbroblasts, and macrophages, work together to form complex,
mature, and stable structures that ﬁll the entire injured core and
are maintained in the chronic phase of SCI (Soderblom et al.,
2013; Zhu et al., 2015a; Anderson et al., 2016; Bellver-Landete
et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020). The ﬁbrotic scar is adjacent to the
medial side of the astrocytic scar and corrals the macrophages
in the injured core, while microglia are located between the
astrocytic scar and ﬁbrotic scar (Figure 2; Bellver-Landete et al.,
2019). Studies focused on the closely related spatiotemporal
distribution indicate a functional crosstalk between the main
cellular components in the injured core (Dias et al., 2018; Bellver-
Landete et al., 2019; Kobayakawa et al., 2019).
FIGURE 2 | The spatiotemporal distribution of scars after spinal cord injury.
After SCI, astrocytes, microglia, ﬁbroblasts, and macrophages
contemporaneously proliferate, migrate, and aggregate at the injured core.
Finally, the cells work together to form complex, mature, and stable structures
that ﬁll the entire injured core, which is maintained in the chronic phase of SCI.
(A) At 3 dpi, ﬁbroblasts leave the blood vessels and are dispersed in the
injured area together with astrocytes, microglia, and macrophages. (B) At 7
dpi, the numbers of ﬁbroblasts, astrocytes, microglia, and macrophages are
signiﬁcantly increased, and these cells aggregate at the injured core. (C) At 14
dpi, astrocytes form the astrocytic scar that are distributed in the outer layer
and surrounding the entire injured core. Fibroblasts form a ﬁbrotic scar
adjacent to the medial side of the astrocytic scar and corral the macrophages
in the injured core. Microglia are located between the astrocytic scar and
ﬁbrotic scar, while macrophages are located at the most central site of the
injured core. The axon tips form retraction bulbs after contacting ﬁbroblasts
and fail to penetrate the dense barrier formed by the ﬁbrotic scar at the edge
of the injured core, resulting in the failure of axonal regeneration.
Crosstalk Between the Fibrotic Scar and
Astrocytes
Activated astrocytes deposit the ECM component chondroitin
sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs), forming an astrocytic scar that
surrounds and limits the ﬁbrotic scar and macrophages in the
injured core after SCI (Wanner et al., 2013; Anderson et al.,
2016). In particular, ﬁbroblasts and astrocytes are adjacent to
each other, suggesting that astrocytes may play an important
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
3
August 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 720938

Li et al.
Fibrotic Scar Formation After SCI
role in the formation and function of a ﬁbrotic scar. Signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is a critical
regulator of astrocytes, the formation of astrocytic scar, and
corralling ﬁbroblasts and macrophages after SCI (Herrmann
et al., 2008; Wanner et al., 2013). GFAP–STAT3–CKO mice in
which STAT3 is conditionally knocked out in astrocytes exhibit
a loss of astrocyte hypertrophy and astrocytic scar disruption
after SCI. Astrocytes at the edge of the injured core are dispersed
and no longer overlap, resulting in the loss of the contiguous
boundary of the ﬁbrotic scar and the diﬀusion of macrophages
(Herrmann et al., 2008; Wanner et al., 2013; Renault-Mihara
et al., 2017). After the disruption of the astrocytic scar, the
ﬁbrotic scar alone does not completely limit the macrophages
in the injured core after SCI, suggesting that studies based on
limiting inﬂammation after SCI should consider the combined
functions of the astrocytic scar and ﬁbrotic scar. Moreover, Glast–
Rasless transgenic mice in which the proliferation of ﬁbroblasts
is inhibited to attenuate ﬁbrotic scarring after SCI exhibit
a reduction in astrogliosis and disruption of the contiguous
boundary of astrocytic scar (Dias et al., 2018). These results
suggest a crosstalk between the astrocytic scar and ﬁbrotic scar
to maintain the structural stability of each scar type after SCI.
The ligand Ephrin-B2 and its cell membrane receptor EphB2
promote cell–cell contact and are bidirectionally activated via
phosphorylation (Bundesen et al., 2003). Liza Q. Bundesen
et al. reported that Ephrin-B2 expressed on astrocytes binds
to EphB2 expressed on ﬁbroblasts, triggering the formation
of the boundary between astrocytic scar and ﬁbrotic scar
after SCI (Bundesen et al., 2003). Ephrin-B2−/−mice in
which the Ephrin B2 gene was deleted under the GFAP
promoter exhibit a reduction in astrogliosis, facilitation of axonal
regeneration, and improvement in motor function (Ren et al.,
2013). Furthermore, after using RNAi to inhibit the expression
of EphB2, the formation of astrocytic scar and ﬁbrotic scar
is inhibited, promoting axonal regeneration and myelination
(Wu et al., 2021). These results indicate that the crosstalk
between ﬁbroblasts and astrocytes mediated by Ephrin-B2 and
EphB2 is a therapeutic target after SCI, but speciﬁc intracellular
signaling pathways require further exploration. In addition, Yona
Goldshmit et al. reported that EphA4-deﬁcient mice exhibit
reduced astrocytic scarring, improved axonal regeneration, and
better motor function after SCI (Goldshmit et al., 2004), in
contrast to the report that mice lacking EphA4 do not exhibit
a reduction in astrocytic scar or disruption of the boundary
between astrocytic scar and ﬁbrotic scar after SCI (Herrmann
et al., 2010). The role of EphA4 in the crosstalk between astrocytes
and ﬁbroblasts requires further investigation.
Crosstalk Between the Fibrotic Scar and
Macrophages
Macrophages and ﬁbroblasts are widely distributed in peripheral
organs and the CNS, and crosstalk between macrophages and
ﬁbroblasts is involved in the maintenance of homeostasis under
healthy conditions and in disease progression, especially the
process of ﬁbrosis (Cai et al., 2020; Buechler et al., 2021).
However, the role and mechanism of macrophages in regulating
ﬁbrotic scar formation after SCI still remain to be explored. After
SCI, blood-derived macrophages inﬁltrate the injured area and
share many markers and behaviors with microglia, increasing the
diﬃculty of distinguishing between macrophages and microglia
(Wang et al., 2015). Recently, genetic fate mapping and
conditional gene targeting technologies have allowed researchers
to conclude that macrophages inﬁltrating from the circulatory
system after SCI are mainly distributed in the injured core
and limited by the ﬁbrotic scar, while resident microglia are
mainly localized at the lesion border and distributed between the
astrocytic scar and ﬁbrotic scar (Wang et al., 2015; Zhu et al.,
2015a).
Macrophages and ﬁbroblasts simultaneously proliferate,
migrate, and aggregate at the injured core after SCI, and
ﬁnally, a large number of macrophages ﬁll in and are limited
inside the mature ﬁbrotic scar at 14 dpi (Zhu et al., 2015a,b).
After the elimination of blood-derived macrophages in the
injured core, the density of ﬁbrotic scar is signiﬁcantly reduced,
and the contiguous boundary formed by the ﬁbrotic scar
is disrupted, suggesting that macrophages are involved in
ﬁbrotic scar formation by regulating ﬁbroblast migration
(Zhu et al., 2015a; Zhou et al., 2020). Further investigations
of the cytokine expression proﬁle after the elimination of
blood-derived
macrophages
showed
that
the
expression
of a proﬁbrotic molecule, a proliferation-inducing ligand
(APRIL), was signiﬁcantly decreased, while the expression
of antiﬁbrotic molecules and bone morphogenetic proteins
(BMPs) was signiﬁcantly increased (Zhu et al., 2015a). APRIL
KO mice exhibit a reduction in the ﬁbrotic scar area and an
improvement in axonal regeneration after SCI, which may
result from the reduced inﬁltration of B cells and macrophages
(Funk et al., 2016). Therefore, the direct role of APRIL in
the crosstalk between macrophages and ﬁbroblasts requires
further investigation, and BMPs and other potential molecular
mechanisms should also be explored. In addition, integrin α5β1,
which is mainly expressed on ﬁbroblasts and macrophages,
may be involved in the assembly of FN into the ﬁbrotic scar by
functioning as a receptor of FN after SCI, and the speciﬁc role of
α5β1 requires further study to provide evidence for the crosstalk
between macrophages and ﬁbroblasts (Zhu et al., 2015b).
Similar to macrophages, neutrophils and T cells, which
are inﬂammatory cells, are also involved in the inﬂammatory
response after SCI, and their role in ﬁbrotic scar formation should
be considered in future studies (Li et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019;
Zivkovic et al., 2021). In a mouse multiple sclerosis (MS) model,
with the inﬁltration of T cells, ﬁbroblasts proliferate, aggregate,
and deposit COL1 to form a ﬁbrotic scar (Dorrier et al., 2021).
The use of FTY720, which inhibits the exit of immune cells from
lymph nodes and has been used to treat MS in the clinic, to
inhibit the inﬁltration of immune cells, signiﬁcantly results in the
inhibition of ﬁbroblast proliferation and COL1 deposition after
MS (Dorrier et al., 2021). Therefore, the role of inﬂammatory cells
other than macrophages in SCI, especially in ﬁbrotic scarring,
requires further attention. The eﬀects of treatment strategies
designed to suppress inﬂammation after SCI on the ﬁbrotic
scar should be considered, and further studies are needed to
determine whether FTY720 and other CNS anti-inﬂammatory
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
4
August 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 720938

Li et al.
Fibrotic Scar Formation After SCI
drugs that have been used in the clinic exert a therapeutic eﬀect
on SCI.
Crosstalk Between the Fibrotic Scar and
Microglia
During the period of ﬁbrotic scar formation after SCI, microglia
gradually distributed between the astrocytic scar and ﬁbrotic
scar, forming a microglial scar (Wang et al., 2015; Bellver-
Landete et al., 2019). The special spatial distribution indicates
that microglia may play a critical role in the formation of
astrocytic scar and ﬁbrotic scar. The use of PLX5622, a highly
selective inhibitor of the colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor,
to deplete the microglia disrupts the density and contiguous
boundary of the astrocytic scar and ﬁbrotic scar, resulting in the
spread of macrophages in the injured core and the impairment
of locomotor recovery after SCI (Bellver-Landete et al., 2019).
Based on these results, the microglia are essential for maintaining
the stability of scars. The migration of the microglia to the
edge of the injured core to form scars is mediated by IGF-
1, a microglia-derived factor, and the eﬀect of IGF-dependent
microglial migration on ﬁbrotic scar formation after SCI and its
mechanism require further exploration (Bellver-Landete et al.,
2019).
Recently, Yi Li et al. reported that the microglia organize scar-
free repair after SCI in neonatal mice, in signiﬁcant contrast
to persistent scars and failure of axonal regeneration in adult
mice (Li et al., 2020). After SCI in neonatal mice, the microglia
are the MG3 type, referred to as repair-promoting microglia
that expressed proteinase inhibitors at high levels and transiently
secreted FN to form eﬀective bridges that connected the injured
ends of the spinal cord. Finally, the nearly complete recovery
of neonatal mice after SCI was observed, while macrophages,
ﬁbrotic scar, and astrocytic scar were absent (Li et al., 2020).
After treatment with the chemical proteinase inhibitors E64 and
serpinA3N and transplantation into the injured core of adult
mice, adult mouse-isolated microglia exhibited a similar function
to repair-promoting microglia, including less inﬁltration of
macrophages, less deposition of COL, and more regenerated
axons after SCI (Li et al., 2020). Therefore, repair-promoting
microglia expressed higher levels of proteinase inhibitors, which
have a critical role in resolving inﬂammation and inhibiting scar
formation, thereby facilitating axonal regeneration. The role and
mechanism of proteinase inhibitors in scar-free repair organized
by microglia remain to be explored in both neonatal and adult
mice, which may provide novel treatment strategies for SCI.
CELLULAR ORIGIN OF THE FIBROTIC
SCAR AFTER SPINAL CORD INJURY
Previous electron microscopy studies have identiﬁed the presence
of ﬁbroblast-like cells in the contused spinal cord, and ﬁbrotic
scars have consistently been shown to form after SCI (Zhang
et al., 2005; Kostyk et al., 2008). In the past, due to the limitation
of a lack of speciﬁc markers for ﬁbroblasts, the spatiotemporal
distribution and origin of ﬁbrotic scar-forming ﬁbroblasts were
unclear after SCI (Rudge and Silver, 1990; Shearer and Fawcett,
2001; Zeisberg and Kalluri, 2004; Darby and Hewitson, 2007;
Krenning et al., 2010; Soderblom et al., 2013). Recently, using
transgenic mice, Jonas Frisén et al. and Jae K. Lee et al. revealed
the origin, phenotype, and distribution of ﬁbrotic scar-forming
ﬁbroblasts after SCI (Göritz et al., 2011; Soderblom et al., 2013;
Dias et al., 2018).
Pericytes,
the
perivascular
cells
associated
with
the
microvascular system and wrapped around vascular endothelial
cells may diﬀerentiate into ﬁbroblasts and form a ﬁbrotic scar
in dermal scar and in kidney ﬁbrosis (Sundberg et al., 1996; Lin
et al., 2008; Humphreys et al., 2010). Jonas Frisén et al. used
GLAST-CreERT2 transgenic mice to identify GLAST+ pericytes
as type A pericytes and investigate their role in ﬁbrotic scar
formation after SCI (Srinivas et al., 2001; Slezak et al., 2007;
Göritz et al., 2011). Blocking the proliferation of type A pericytes
results in a signiﬁcant reduction in, or even the disappearance
of, ﬁbrotic scar after SCI, suggesting that ﬁbrotic scar-forming
ﬁbroblasts are derived from type A pericytes (Göritz et al., 2011).
In the CNS, most or all pericytes are labeled with CD13, platelet-
derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) α and PDGFRβ, while
some pericytes express desmin and α-SMA (Bondjers et al., 2006;
Armulik et al., 2010; Daneman et al., 2010; Göritz et al., 2011). In
the uninjured spinal cord, type A pericytes, which are enfolded
by the plasma membrane of astrocytes and basal lamina, are
distributed away from the blood vessel wall compared with type
B pericytes and express CD13, PDGFRα, and PDGFRβ (Göritz
et al., 2011). Type B pericytes express α-SMA or desmin (Göritz
et al., 2011). After SCI, type A pericytes leave blood vessels,
proliferate, and migrate to the injured area, depositing ECM to
form a ﬁbrotic scar. At this time, these cells no longer express
CD13 and PDGFRα but express PDGFRβ and the ﬁbroblast
marker FN and transiently express α-SMA (Göritz et al., 2011).
These results indicate that type A pericytes are the main source
of ﬁbrotic scar-forming ﬁbroblasts that are speciﬁcally labeled
with PDGFRβ after SCI.
Commonly used markers of ﬁbroblasts, such as FN and COL,
are components of the ECM and do not speciﬁcally label the
cell body (Kalluri and Zeisberg, 2006). Jae K. Lee et al. used
Col1α1-GFP transgenic mice to speciﬁcally label ﬁbroblasts in the
spinal cord and revealed that PDGFRβ+ perivascular ﬁbroblasts
are the main ﬁbrotic scar-forming ﬁbroblasts after SCI (Yata
et al., 2003; Soderblom et al., 2013). In the uninjured spinal
cord, Col1α1+ cells are mainly located around large-diameter
blood vessels, and most of them surround smooth muscle cells
in the arterioles, while 78.7% of Col1α1+ cells express CD13
and 95.7% of Col1α1+ cells express PDGFRβ but not desmin
and α-SMA (Soderblom et al., 2013). After SCI, Col1α1+ cells
leaving blood vessels proliferate, migrate, and aggregate at the
edge of the injured core, depositing ECM to form a ﬁbrotic
scar around the injured core, where 26.9% of Col1α1+ cells
express α-SMA, 26.9% of Col1α1+ cells express CD13, and 100%
of Col1α1+ cells express PDGFRβ (Soderblom et al., 2013). As
before injury, Col1α1+ cells still do not express desmin, α-SMA,
or other markers of perivascular cells, including NG2, Olig2,
and GFAP (Soderblom et al., 2013). Thus, Col1α1+ cells are
perivascular ﬁbroblasts forming a ﬁbrotic scar that speciﬁcally
express PDGFRβ after SCI (Zhu et al., 2015b; Funk et al., 2016).
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
5
August 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 720938

Li et al.
Fibrotic Scar Formation After SCI
Michael
Vanlandewijck
et
al.
performed
a
single-cell
sequencing study that provided molecular deﬁnitions of blood
vessels and blood vessel-related cells in the CNS of mice and
revealed a population of PDGFRα+ ﬁbroblast-like cells; many
of the ﬁbroblast-speciﬁc transcripts encode collagens, collagen-
modifying enzymes, and proteins involved in collagen ﬁbril
assembly, indicating the ﬁbrosis-promoting characteristic of
ﬁbroblasts (Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). PDGFRα+ ﬁbroblasts
are distributed around the large-diameter blood vessels in the
meninges, parenchyma, and choroidal plexus (Vanlandewijck
et al., 2018), consistent with the distribution of Glast+ or
Col1α1+ ﬁbroblasts reported by Jonas Frisén et al. and Jae K.
Lee et al. (Göritz et al., 2011; Soderblom et al., 2013). However,
PDGFRα+ ﬁbroblasts are located between the vascular wall and
astrocyte end-feet (Vanlandewijck et al., 2018), which is diﬀerent
from the study by Jonas Frisén et al., who reported that Glast+
ﬁbroblasts are enfolded by the plasma membrane of astrocytes
and the basal lamina (Göritz et al., 2011). Indeed, both Glast and
PDGFRβ are expressed at high levels in ﬁbroblasts and pericytes,
suggesting that Glast+ ﬁbroblasts and Col1α1+ ﬁbroblasts are
essentially perivascular ﬁbroblasts, as reported by Vanlandewijck
et al. (2018) and Dorrier et al. (2021). Recently, Cayce E. Dorrier
et al. examined an MS model and reported that ﬁbrotic scar is
formed by Col1α1+ ﬁbroblasts, which are initially distributed
around large-diameter blood vessels and express PDGFRα and
PDGFRβ (Dorrier et al., 2021). Although the localization of
ﬁbroblasts remains controversial, the ﬁbrotic scar is formed
from large-diameter perivascular ﬁbroblasts that are labeled with
CD13, PDGFRβ, and PDGFRα before injury and speciﬁcally
labeled with PDGFRβ after SCI. Further study is needed to
conﬁrm this hypothesis.
FUNCTION OF THE FIBROTIC SCAR
AFTER SPINAL CORD INJURY
Scars, mainly astrocytic scar, ﬁbrotic scar, and microglial scar,
are important pathological changes in the chronic stage after SCI
(Soderblom et al., 2013; Anderson et al., 2016; Bellver-Landete
et al., 2019). The astrocytic scar has been widely studied and is
considered to inhibit inﬂammation, maintain tissue integrity, and
inhibit axonal regeneration (Anderson et al., 2016; Sofroniew,
2018; Xie et al., 2020). Indeed, the ﬁbrotic scar also plays a dual
function after SCI and should receive more attention (Hermanns
et al., 2001; Göritz et al., 2011; Dias et al., 2018).
In the chronic phase of SCI, axon tips form retraction bulbs
after contacting ﬁbroblasts and fail to penetrate the dense barrier
formed by the ﬁbrotic scar at the edge of the injured core,
resulting in the failure of axonal regeneration (Figure 2C; Dias
et al., 2018). Nicole Klapka et al. reported that inhibiting TGFβ1
leads to delayed ﬁbrotic scar formation after SCI, and regenerated
CST axons pass through the damaged core, resulting in improved
axonal regeneration and motor function (Klapka et al., 2005).
Subsequent studies further conﬁrmed that the reduction or
disruption of ﬁbrotic scar after SCI increases the density of
regenerated axons in the damaged core, promoting the recovery
of motor function (Hellal et al., 2011; Ruschel et al., 2015; Yokota
et al., 2017; Cooper et al., 2018). Recently, Jonas Frisén et al.
used Glast–Rasless transgenic mice to inhibit the proliferation of
type A pericytes and speciﬁcally block pericyte-derived ﬁbrotic
scar after SCI; the results showed that attenuating ﬁbrotic scar
formation led to a reduction in astrogliosis, diminished astrocyte
reactivity, disruption of the contiguous boundary of astrocytic
scar, regeneration of 5-HT, and CST axons were enhanced,
and the recovery of sensorimotor function was improved in
the chronic phase of SCI (Dias et al., 2018). Therefore, the
ﬁbrotic scar signiﬁcantly inhibits axonal regeneration in the
chronic phase of SCI, and preventing ﬁbrotic scar formation is
an important direction for the treatment of SCI.
However, the inhibition of ﬁbrotic scar formation did not
signiﬁcantly improve motor function despite the promotion
of axonal regeneration in other studies (Zhu et al., 2015a).
Jonas Frisén et al. showed that completely blocking the ﬁbrotic
scar results in the failure of wound closure and the spread
of macrophages in the injured core at 14 dpi (Göritz et al.,
2011; Dias et al., 2018). Therefore, in addition to inhibiting
axonal regeneration in the chronic phase of SCI, ﬁbrotic scarring
also exerts beneﬁcial eﬀects on maintaining tissue integrity and
limiting inﬂammation in the early phase of SCI. Treatment
targeting the ﬁbrotic scar should be based on the dual function
of ﬁbrotic scar in diﬀerent phases of SCI, and interventions
promoting the formation of a ﬁbrotic scar in the early phase while
inhibiting the formation of the ﬁbrotic scar in the chronic phase
may exert a better therapeutic eﬀect.
MECHANISM OF FIBROTIC SCAR
FORMATION AFTER SPINAL CORD
INJURY AND TREATMENT STRATEGIES
The ﬁbrotic scar is recognized as a treatment target in many
diseases, including SCI (Pardali et al., 2017; Dias et al., 2018;
Dorrier et al., 2021). Therefore, a review of the mechanisms
of the ﬁbrotic scar formation may provide novel insights
into the role of the ﬁbrotic scar as a treatment target after
SCI. Migration, proliferation, and ECM deposition are the key
processes ﬁbroblasts use to form ﬁbrotic scar (Göritz et al.,
2011; Soderblom et al., 2013; Dias et al., 2018), of which the
mechanisms should receive more attention and be well-reviewed.
Transforming Growth Factor Beta 1
Transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-β1) is a proﬁbrotic
factor that regulates ﬁbroblast proliferation and ECM deposition
in the CNS (Kawano et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2018a).
The expression levels of microRNA-21-5p and TGF-β1 are
signiﬁcantly increased after SCI (Wang et al., 2018a). TGF-
β1 promotes the expression of microRNA-21-5p and ﬁbrosis-
associated genes such as FN and COL in ﬁbroblasts, while
the upregulation of microRNA-21-5p enhances the proﬁbrotic
activity of TGF-β1 toward ﬁbroblasts in vitro (Wang et al.,
2018a,b). Based on these results, microRNA-21-5p enhances
TGF-β1 activity in an amplifying circuit, promoting ﬁbroblast-
mediated formation of ﬁbrotic scar after SCI. In addition,
intrathecal injection of antagomir-21 was used to establish
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
6
August 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 720938

Li et al.
Fibrotic Scar Formation After SCI
a microRNA-21-5p knockdown mouse model, resulting in
improved functional recovery after SCI (Wang et al., 2018a,b).
However, animal studies are needed to further conﬁrm that
microRNA-21-5p targets TGF-β1 to regulate the formation of a
ﬁbrotic scar after SCI.
Bradke et al. reported that SCI mice treated with the
microtubule-stabilizing agents Taxol and epothilone B (epoB)
exhibit enhanced axonal regeneration and the inhibition of
ﬁbrotic scar formation partially through dampening of the
TGFβ1/Smad2 pathway, which is conducive to functional
recovery after SCI (Hellal et al., 2011; Ruschel et al., 2015).
Nicole Klapka et al. treated SCI rats with 8-Br-cAMP to inhibit
the ﬁbrotic eﬀect of TGF-β1 and the iron chelator BPY-DCA
to inhibit prolyl 4-hydroxylase, resulting in delayed COL IV
expression and ﬁbrotic scar formation (Hermanns et al., 2001;
Klapka et al., 2005). The treatment improved axonal regeneration
and motor function recovery (Hermanns et al., 2001; Klapka
et al., 2005). In summary, TGF-β1 plays critical roles in ﬁbrotic
scar formation after SCI and can be used as a treatment
target. Further studies examining the source of TGF-β1 and
the molecular mechanism of the TGF-β1 pathway may be very
important to reveal novel treatment targets for SCI.
Periostin
Periostin (POSTN), an ECM protein, is a member of the fasciclin
family that plays critical roles in the development of the heart,
tooth, and bone tissue (Hakuno et al., 2010). POSTN also
regulates ﬁbrosis in many organs, such as the lungs, liver, and
FIGURE 3 | Molecular mechanisms of ﬁbrotic scar formation after spinal cord injury. After SCI, ﬁbroblasts leave blood vessels and then proliferate, migrate, and
aggregate at the injured area, depositing extracellular matrix (ECM) to form ﬁbrotic scar that corrals the injured core. Migration, proliferation, and ECM deposition are
the key processes by which ﬁbroblasts form the ﬁbrotic scar, and the mechanisms can be used as treatment targets for SCI.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
7
August 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 720938

Li et al.
Fibrotic Scar Formation After SCI
skin (Yamaguchi, 2014; Izuhara et al., 2016; Sugiyama et al.,
2016). In particular, POSTN is speciﬁcally overexpressed in
PDGFRβ+ cells referred to as ﬁbroblasts after SCI, indicating
that POSTN may regulate ﬁbrotic scar formation after SCI
(Yokota et al., 2017). In POSTN KO mice, the proliferation
of ﬁbroblasts is signiﬁcantly inhibited after SCI, resulting in
reduced ﬁbrotic scarring, increased axonal regeneration, and
improved functional recovery (Yokota et al., 2017). Further
studies revealed that POSTN promotes macrophage inﬁltration
to recruit ﬁbroblasts to the injured area after SCI and increases
the secretion of TNFα by macrophages to promote ﬁbroblast
proliferation (Yokota et al., 2017). Strikingly, mice receiving an
injection of a POSTN-neutralizing antibody after SCI shows
reduced ﬁbrotic scarring and better functional recovery (Yokota
et al., 2017). Thus, POSTN, speciﬁcally expressed in ﬁbroblasts,
is a potential proﬁbrotic molecule that may promote ﬁbroblast
proliferation and migration, leading to ﬁbrotic scar formation.
Further studies investigating the role and molecular mechanism
of POSTN in SCI may provide more evidence for targeted therapy
for SCI.
A Proliferation-Inducing Ligand
APRIL is well-known as a regulator of B-cell maturation and
survival that is expressed in macrophages, B cells, and activated T
cells (Chan et al., 2021). APRIL plays important roles in various
diseases of peripheral organs and the CNS, such as rheumatoid
arthritis and multiple sclerosis (Wang et al., 2012; Weldon et al.,
2015; Funk et al., 2016). The depletion of macrophages in the
injured core after SCI results in a reduction in the ﬁbrotic
scar density and the disruption of the contiguous boundary of
ﬁbrotic scar, promoting axonal regeneration (Zhu et al., 2015a).
Therefore, treatment strategies that suppress inﬂammation may
play additional roles in SCI by inhibiting ﬁbrotic scar formation.
In addition, after the depletion of macrophages, the reduction
in ﬁbrotic scarring is associated with the downregulation of
APRIL, and the expression of APRIL and its receptor, B-cell
maturation antigen (BCMA), is dramatically upregulated after
SCI, suggesting that APRIL may be involved in ﬁbrotic scar
formation (Zhu et al., 2015a; Funk et al., 2016). In APRIL KO
mice, the inﬁltration of B cells and macrophages is substantially
reduced after SCI, resulting in a reduction in ﬁbrotic scar area
but no eﬀect on ﬁbroblast proliferation, and the eﬀect of APRIL
on macrophage and B-cell inﬁltration may be mediated by the
upregulation of the expression of TNF-α and CCL2 (Funk et al.,
2016). These results suggest that APRIL is a proﬁbrotic molecule
that is involved in the recruitment of ﬁbroblasts by regulating the
inﬁltration of macrophages and B cells after SCI.
Fibronectin Including the Extra Domain A
The assembly of the FN matrix, a component of ﬁbrotic scar, is
an important step in the formation of a ﬁbrotic scar after SCI,
while the isoform of FN including the extra domain A domain
(FnEDA) is involved in the pathogenesis of ﬁbrotic scar in various
diseases (Bhattacharyya et al., 2013; Zhu et al., 2015b; Cooper
et al., 2018). The expression of FnEDA is signiﬁcantly increased
and that protein is chronically deposited in the injured core after
SCI (Cooper et al., 2018). In FnEDA-null mice, the expression
level of insoluble FN and the area of ﬁbrotic scar are decreased
signiﬁcantly at 90 days after SCI, leading to improved axonal
regeneration and functional recovery (Cooper et al., 2018). These
results suggested a critical role for FnEDA in the assembly of
ﬁbrotic scar in the chronic phase after SCI and its potential use
as a treatment target for SCI.
Wnt
The Wnt pathway plays an indispensable role in disease processes
in the CNS (Lie et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2011). The activity
of Wnt signaling after SCI can be detected by performing X-
gal staining in Wnt signaling reporter TOPgal transgenic mice
(DasGupta and Fuchs, 1999; Yamagami et al., 2018). The Wnt/β-
catenin pathway is transiently activated in FN+ ﬁbroblasts in the
injured core after SCI (Yamagami et al., 2018). Thus, the Wnt/β-
catenin pathway may be involved in the formation of a ﬁbrotic
scar after SCI, which should be further investigated to provide a
novel treatment target for SCI.
In addition, strategies such as neural stem cell (NSC)
transplantation
for
SCI
signiﬁcantly
promote
axonal
regeneration and functional recovery, suggesting that NSCs
may be able to overcome the eﬀects of adverse factors, including
the ﬁbrotic scar. The interaction between the two is worth further
TABLE 1 | Treatments targeting the formation of ﬁbrotic scar after spinal cord injury (SCI).
Treatment strategy
Target
Effect on ﬁbroblasts
References
Antagomir-21
TGF-β1
Depositing ECM ↓
Wang et al., 2018a,b
EpoB
TGF-β1/Smad2
Migration and depositing ECM ↓
Ruschel et al., 2015
Taxol
TGF-β1/Smad2
Migration and depositing ECM ↓
Hellal et al., 2011
8-Br-cAMP
TGF-β1
Depositing ECM ↓
Klapka et al., 2005
POSTN-neutralizing antibody
POSTN
Proliferation and migration ↓
Yokota et al., 2017
APRIL KO mice
APRIL/BCMA
Migration ↓
Funk et al., 2016
FnEDA-null mice
FnEDA
Depositing ECM ↓
Cooper et al., 2018
Clodronate liposomes
Macrophage
Migration ↓
Zhu et al., 2015a
Glast-Rasless transgenic mice
Ras
Proliferation ↓
Dias et al., 2018
EpoB, epothilone B; TGF-B1, transforming growth factor beta 1; ECM, extracellular matrix; POSTN, periostin; APRIL, a proliferation inducing ligand; BCMA, B cell maturation antigen;
FnEDA, ﬁbronectin including the extra domain A.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
8
August 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 720938

Li et al.
Fibrotic Scar Formation After SCI
study. Mark H. Tuszynski et al. transplanted NSCs into rats or
a primate model of SCI and showed that NSC-diﬀerentiated
neurons extended axons through the injured core and ﬁlled the
entire spinal cord segment, thus, forming new neuronal relay
circuits and improving neural electrophysiological function
and motor function (Lu et al., 2012; Rosenzweig et al., 2018;
Kumamaru et al., 2019; Ceto et al., 2020). Although changes
in the ﬁbrotic scar have not been directly evaluated after NSC
grafting, the regenerated axons passing through the injured core
and ﬁlling the entire spinal cord segment suggest that NSCs
may be able to overcome the inhibitory eﬀect of the ﬁbrotic scar
(Lu et al., 2012; Rosenzweig et al., 2018). Nevertheless, Paul Lu
et al. reported that human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-
derived NSC grafts transplanted into the injured site diﬀerentiate
into neurons that are distributed through most of the injured
site, while a rift forms at the middle of the graft and is ﬁlled
with collagen, thus, impairing axonal regeneration (Lu et al.,
2014). This process results in the disconnection of neuronal
relay circuits formed by the graft, and improved functional
recovery is not achieved (Lu et al., 2014). These results indicate
the need for additional studies of the changes in the ﬁbrotic
scar after NSC graft and its mechanism to provide the basis for
the treatment of SCI by combining NSC grafts with inhibition
of ﬁbrotic scarring. Furthermore, Ephron S. Rosenzweig et al.
reported that an injection of chondroitinase below the lesion
to degrade CSPGs promotes axonal regeneration and improves
motor function after SCI in primates, while the changes in the
ﬁbrotic scar are unknown (Rosenzweig et al., 2019). Studies
targeting extracellular matrix molecules to treat SCI may focus
on the eﬀect on ﬁbrotic scar, which is expected to provide a basis
for the treatment of SCI.
Overall, ﬁbrotic scar formation after SCI is a complex
process that includes the migration, proliferation, and ECM
deposition of ﬁbroblasts (Figure 3). The application of drugs and
transgenic treatment strategies in an animal model of SCI has
provided positive results that appropriately attenuating ﬁbrotic
scars contribute to axonal regeneration and the recovery of
sensorimotor function (Table 1; Klapka et al., 2005; Zhu et al.,
2015a; Yokota et al., 2017; Dias et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018a,b).
In addition, recent research advances in the identiﬁcation and
spatiotemporal distribution of ﬁbrotic scar-forming ﬁbroblasts
after SCI have provided more evidence for the ﬁbrotic scar as
a treatment target after SCI. Further explorations of the cellular
and molecular mechanisms underlying the formation of ﬁbrotic
scar after SCI are very important, which is expected to accelerate
translation from the laboratory to the clinic.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
JJ, MZ, and LC contributed to the design and revision of the
review. ZL and SY edited and revised the manuscript. DT, XY,
XH, and YL prepared the ﬁgures and table. All authors read and
approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
FUNDING
This study was supported by the Key Research and Development
Projects of Anhui Province (Grant number 202004j07020042),
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant
numbers 81801220 and 81671204), and the Provincial Natural
Science Research Key Project of Colleges and Universities of
Anhui Province (Grant number KJ2019A0257).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the experimental platform provided by the
Scientiﬁc Research and Experiment Center of the Second
Hospital of Anhui Medical University.
REFERENCES
Anderson, M., Burda, J., Ren, Y., Ao, Y., O’Shea, T., Kawaguchi, R., et al. (2016).
Astrocyte scar formation aids central nervous system axon regeneration. Nature
532, 195–200. doi: 10.1038/nature17623
Armulik, A., Genové, G., Mäe, M., Nisancioglu, M., Wallgard, E., Niaudet, C.,
et al. (2010). Pericytes regulate the blood-brain barrier. Nature 468, 557–561.
doi: 10.1038/nature09522
Bataller, R., and Brenner, D. (2005). Liver ﬁbrosis. J. Clin. Invest. 115, 209–218.
doi: 10.1172/JCI24282
Bellver-Landete, V., Bretheau, F., Mailhot, B., Vallières, N., Lessard, M.,
Janelle, M., et al. (2019). Microglia are an essential component of the
neuroprotective scar that forms after spinal cord injury. Nat. Commun. 10:518.
doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-08446-0
Bhattacharyya, S., Kelley, K., Melichian, D., Tamaki, Z., Fang, F., Su, Y., et al.
(2013). Toll-like receptor 4 signaling augments transforming growth factor-
β responses: a novel mechanism for maintaining and amplifying ﬁbrosis
in scleroderma. Am. J. Pathol. 182, 192–205. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.
09.007
Bondjers, C., He, L., Takemoto, M., Norlin, J., Asker, N., Hellström, M., et al.
(2006). Microarray analysis of blood microvessels from PDGF-B and PDGF-
Rbeta mutant mice identiﬁes novel markers for brain pericytes. FASEB J. 20,
1703–1705. doi: 10.1096/fj.05-4944fje
Buechler, M., Fu, W., and Turley, S. (2021). Fibroblast-macrophage reciprocal
interactions
in
health,
ﬁbrosis,
and
cancer.
Immunity
54,
903–915.
doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2021.04.021
Bundesen, L., Scheel, T., Bregman, B., and Kromer, L. (2003). Ephrin-B2
and EphB2 regulation of astrocyte-meningeal ﬁbroblast interactions in
response to spinal cord lesions in adult rats. J. Neurosci. 23, 7789–7800.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-21-07789.2003
Buss, A., Pech, K., Kakulas, B., Martin, D., Schoenen, J., Noth, J., et al. (2007).
Growth-modulating molecules are associated with invading Schwann cells and
not astrocytes in human traumatic spinal cord injury. Brain 130, 940–953.
doi: 10.1093/brain/awl374
Cai, B., Dongiovanni, P., Corey, K., Wang, X., Shmarakov, I., Zheng, Z.,
et al. (2020). Macrophage MerTK promotes liver ﬁbrosis in nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis. Cell Metab. 31, 406–421.e407. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2019.
11.013
Camand, E., Morel, M., Faissner, A., Sotelo, C., and Dusart, I. (2004). Long-term
changes in the molecular composition of the glial scar and progressive increase
of serotoninergic ﬁbre sprouting after hemisection of the mouse spinal cord.
Eur. J. Neurosci. 20, 1161–1176. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2004.03558.x
Ceto, S., Sekiguchi, K., Takashima, Y., Nimmerjahn, A., and Tuszynski, M.
(2020). Neural stem cell grafts form extensive synaptic networks that integrate
with host circuits after spinal cord injury. Cell Stem Cell 27, 430–440.e435.
doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2020.07.007
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
9
August 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 720938

Li et al.
Fibrotic Scar Formation After SCI
Chan, C., Harley, I., Pﬂuger, P., Trompette, A., Stankiewicz, T., Allen, J., et al.
(2021). A BAFF/APRIL axis regulates obesogenic diet-driven weight gain. Nat.
Commun. 12:2911. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-23084-1
Cooper, J., Jeong, S., McGuire, T., Sharma, S., Wang, W., Bhattacharyya, S.,
et al. (2018). Fibronectin EDA forms the chronic ﬁbrotic scar after contusive
spinal cord injury. Neurobiol. Dis. 116, 60–68. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2018.
04.014
D’Ambrosi, N., and Apolloni, S. (2020). Fibrotic scar in neurodegenerative
diseases.
Front.
Immunol.
11:1394.
doi:
10.3389/ﬁmmu.2020.
01394
Daneman, R., Zhou, L., Kebede, A., and Barres, B. (2010). Pericytes are required
for blood-brain barrier integrity during embryogenesis. Nature 468, 562–566.
doi: 10.1038/nature09513
Darby, I., and Hewitson, T. (2007). Fibroblast diﬀerentiation in wound healing
and ﬁbrosis. Int. Rev. Cytol. 257, 143–179. doi: 10.1016/S0074-7696(07)
57004-X
DasGupta,
R.,
and
Fuchs,
E.
(1999).
Multiple
roles
for
activated
LEF/TCF
transcription
complexes
during
hair
follicle
development
and diﬀerentiation. Development 126, 4557–4568. doi: 10.1242/dev.126.
20.4557
Dias, D., and Göritz, C. (2018). Fibrotic scarring following lesions to the
central nervous system. Matrix. Biol. 561–570. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2018.
02.009
Dias, D., Kim, H., Holl, D., Werne Solnestam, B., Lundeberg, J., Carlén,
M., et al. (2018). Reducing pericyte-derived scarring promotes recovery
after spinal cord injury. Cell 173, 153–165.e122. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.
02.004
Dorrier, C., Aran, D., Haenelt, E., Sheehy, R., Hoi, K., Pintari´c, L., et al.
(2021). CNS ﬁbroblasts form a ﬁbrotic scar in response to immune
cell inﬁltration. Nat. Neurosci. 24, 234–244. doi: 10.1038/s41593-020-
00770-9
Fehlberg, C., and Lee, J. (2021). Fibrosis in the central nervous system: from
the meninges to the vasculature. Cell Tissue Res. doi: 10.1007/s00441-021-
03491-y. [Epub ahead of print].
Funk, L., Hackett, A., Bunge, M., and Lee, J. (2016). Tumor necrosis factor
superfamily member APRIL contributes to ﬁbrotic scar formation after
spinal cord injury. J. Neuroinﬂammation 13:87. doi: 10.1186/s12974-016-
0552-4
Goldshmit, Y., Galea, M., Wise, G., Bartlett, P., and Turnley, A. (2004). Axonal
regeneration and lack of astrocytic gliosis in EphA4-deﬁcient mice. J. Neurosci.
24, 10064–10073. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2981-04.2004
Göritz, C., Dias, D., Tomilin, N., Barbacid, M., Shupliakov, O., and Frisén, J.
(2011). A pericyte origin of spinal cord scar tissue. Science 333, 238–242.
doi: 10.1126/science.1203165
Hakuno, D., Kimura, N., Yoshioka, M., Mukai, M., Kimura, T., Okada, Y.,
et al. (2010). Periostin advances atherosclerotic and rheumatic cardiac valve
degeneration by inducing angiogenesis and MMP production in humans and
rodents. J. Clin. Invest. 120, 2292–2306. doi: 10.1172/JCI40973
Hara, M., Kobayakawa, K., Ohkawa, Y., Kumamaru, H., Yokota, K., Saito, T.,
et al. (2017). Interaction of reactive astrocytes with type I collagen induces
astrocytic scar formation through the integrin-N-cadherin pathway after spinal
cord injury. Nat. Med. 23, 818–828. doi: 10.1038/nm.4354
Hellal, F., Hurtado, A., Ruschel, J., Flynn, K., Laskowski, C., Umlauf, M.,
et
al.
(2011).
Microtubule
stabilization
reduces
scarring
and
causes
axon
regeneration
after
spinal
cord
injury.
Science
331,
928–931.
doi: 10.1126/science.1201148
Hermanns, S., Klapka, N., and Müller, H. (2001). The collagenous lesion scar–
an obstacle for axonal regeneration in brain and spinal cord injury. Restor.
Neurol. Neurosci. 19, 139–148. Available online at: https://content.iospress.
com/articles/restorative-neurology-and-neuroscience/rnn00172
Herrmann, J., Imura, T., Song, B., Qi, J., Ao, Y., Nguyen, T., et al. (2008). STAT3 is
a critical regulator of astrogliosis and scar formation after spinal cord injury. J.
Neurosci. 28, 7231–7243. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1709-08.2008
Herrmann, J., Shah, R., Chan, A., and Zheng, B. (2010). EphA4 deﬁcient mice
maintain astroglial-ﬁbrotic scar formation after spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol.
223, 582–598. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2010.02.005
Humphreys, B., Lin, S., Kobayashi, A., Hudson, T., Nowlin, B., Bonventre,
J., et al. (2010). Fate tracing reveals the pericyte and not epithelial
origin of myoﬁbroblasts in kidney ﬁbrosis. Am. J. Pathol. 176, 85–97.
doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090517
Izuhara, K., Conway, S., Moore, B., Matsumoto, H., Holweg, C., Matthews, J., et al.
(2016). Roles of periostin in respiratory disorders. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med.
193, 949–956. doi: 10.1164/rccm.201510-2032PP
Kalluri, R., and Zeisberg, M. (2006). Fibroblasts in cancer. Nature Rev. Canc. 6,
392–401. doi: 10.1038/nrc1877
Kawano, H., Kimura-Kuroda, J., Komuta, Y., Yoshioka, N., Li, H., Kawamura,
K., et al. (2012). Role of the lesion scar in the response to damage
and repair of the central nervous system. Cell Tissue Res. 349, 169–180.
doi: 10.1007/s00441-012-1336-5
Klapka, N., Hermanns, S., Straten, G., Masanneck, C., Duis, S., Hamers, F.,
et al. (2005). Suppression of ﬁbrous scarring in spinal cord injury of rat
promotes long-distance regeneration of corticospinal tract axons, rescue of
primary motoneurons in somatosensory cortex and signiﬁcant functional
recovery. Eur. J. Neurosci. 22, 3047–3058. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.
04495.x
Kobayakawa, K., Ohkawa, Y., Yoshizaki, S., Tamaru, T., Saito, T., Kijima, K.,
et al. (2019). Macrophage centripetal migration drives spontaneous healing
process after spinal cord injury. Sci. Adv. 5:eaav5086. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.
aav5086
Kostyk, S., Popovich, P., Stokes, B., Wei, P., and Jakeman, L. (2008). Robust
axonal growth and a blunted macrophage response are associated with
impaired functional recovery after spinal cord injury in the MRL/MpJ
mouse.
Neuroscience
156,
498–514.
doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.
08.013
Krenning, G., Zeisberg, E., and Kalluri, R. (2010). The origin of ﬁbroblasts
and
mechanism
of
cardiac
ﬁbrosis.
J.
Cell.
Physiol.
225,
631–637.
doi: 10.1002/jcp.22322
Kumamaru, H., Lu, P., Rosenzweig, E., Kadoya, K., and Tuszynski, M.
(2019). Regenerating corticospinal axons innervate phenotypically appropriate
neurons within neural stem cell grafts. Cell Rep. 26, 2329–2339.e2324.
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.01.099
Lang, B., Cregg, J., DePaul, M., Tran, A., Xu, K., Dyck, S., et al. (2015). Modulation
of the proteoglycan receptor PTPσ promotes recovery after spinal cord injury.
Nature 518, 404–408. doi: 10.1038/nature13974
Lederer, D., and Martinez, F. (2018). Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis. N. Engl. J. Med.
378, 1811–1823. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra1705751
Lee, S., and Kalluri, R. (2010). Mechanistic connection between inﬂammation and
ﬁbrosis. Kidney Int. Suppl. 78:S22–S26. doi: 10.1038/ki.2010.418
Li, H., Kong, W., Chambers, C., Yu, D., Ganea, D., Tuma, R., et al.
(2018).
The
non-psychoactive
phytocannabinoid
cannabidiol
(CBD)
attenuates pro-inﬂammatory mediators, T cell inﬁltration, and thermal
sensitivity following spinal cord injury in mice. Cell. Immunol. 329, 1–9.
doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2018.02.016
Li, Y., He, X., Kawaguchi, R., Zhang, Y., Wang, Q., Monavarfeshani,
A.,
et
al.
(2020).
Microglia-organized
scar-free
spinal
cord
repair
in
neonatal
mice.
Nature
587,
613–618.
doi:
10.1038/s41586-020-
2795-6
Li,
Z.,
Zheng,
M.,
Yu,
S.,
Yao,
F.,
Luo,
Y.,
Liu,
Y.,
et
al.
(2021).
M2
macrophages
promote
PDGFRβ+
pericytes
migration
after
spinal
cord
injury
in
mice
via
PDGFB/PDGFRβ
pathway.
Front.
Pharmacol.
12:670813.
doi:
10.3389/fphar.2021.
670813
Lie, D., Colamarino, S., Song, H., Désiré, L., Mira, H., Consiglio, A., et al.
(2005). Wnt signalling regulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Nature 437,
1370–1375. doi: 10.1038/nature04108
Lin, S., Kisseleva, T., Brenner, D., and Duﬃeld, J. (2008). Pericytes and
perivascular ﬁbroblasts are the primary source of collagen-producing cells
in obstructive ﬁbrosis of the kidney. Am. J. Pathol. 173, 1617–1627.
doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.080433
Liu, Z., Zhang, H., Xia, H., Wang, B., Zhang, R., Zeng, Q., et al. (2019). CD8 T cell-
derived perforin aggravates secondary spinal cord injury through destroying
the blood-spinal cord barrier. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 512, 367–372.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.03.002
Lu, P., Wang, Y., Graham, L., McHale, K., Gao, M., Wu, D., et al. (2012). Long-
distance growth and connectivity of neural stem cells after severe spinal cord
injury. Cell 150, 1264–1273. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.08.020
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
10
August 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 720938

Li et al.
Fibrotic Scar Formation After SCI
Lu, P., Woodruﬀ, G., Wang, Y., Graham, L., Hunt, M., Wu, D., et al. (2014). Long-
distance axonal growth from human induced pluripotent stem cells after spinal
cord injury. Neuron 83, 789–796. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.07.014
Mack,
M.
(2018).
Inﬂammation
and
ﬁbrosis.
Matrix.
Biol.
106–121.
doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2017.11.010
Metz, G., Curt, A., van de Meent, H., Klusman, I., Schwab, M., and Dietz, V. (2000).
Validation of the weight-drop contusion model in rats: a comparative study of
human spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 17, 1–17. doi: 10.1089/neu.2000.17.1
Norenberg, M., Smith, J., and Marcillo, A. (2004). The pathology of human
spinal cord injury: deﬁning the problems. J. Neurotrauma 21, 429–440.
doi: 10.1089/089771504323004575
Okada, M., Miyamoto, O., Shibuya, S., Zhang, X., Yamamoto, T., and Itano, T.
(2007). Expression and role of type I collagen in a rat spinal cord contusion
injury model. Neurosci. Res. 58, 371–377. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2007.04.009
Pardali, E., Sanchez-Duﬀhues, G., Gomez-Puerto, M., and Ten Dijke, P. (2017).
TGF-β-induced endothelial-mesenchymal transition in ﬁbrotic diseases. Int. J.
Mol. Sci. 18:2157. doi: 10.3390/ijms18102157
Ren, Z., Chen, X., Yang, J., Kress, B., Tong, J., Liu, H., et al. (2013). Improved
axonal regeneration after spinal cord injury in mice with conditional
deletion of ephrin B2 under the GFAP promoter. Neuroscience 241, 89–99.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.03.010
Renault-Mihara, F., Mukaino, M., Shinozaki, M., Kumamaru, H., Kawase, S.,
Baudoux, M., et al. (2017). Regulation of RhoA by STAT3 coordinates glial scar
formation. J. Cell. Biol. 216, 2533–2550. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201610102
Rockey, D., Bell, P., and Hill, J. (2015). Fibrosis–a common pathway to organ injury
and failure. N. Engl. J. Med. 372, 1138–1149. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra1300575
Rosenzweig, E., Brock, J., Lu, P., Kumamaru, H., Salegio, E., Kadoya, K., et al.
(2018). Restorative eﬀects of human neural stem cell grafts on the primate
spinal cord. Nat. Med. 24, 484–490. doi: 10.1038/nm.4502
Rosenzweig, E., Salegio, E., Liang, J., Weber, J., Weinholtz, C., Brock,
J., et al. (2019). Chondroitinase improves anatomical and functional
outcomes after primate spinal cord injury. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 1269–1275.
doi: 10.1038/s41593-019-0424-1
Rudge, J., and Silver, J. (1990). Inhibition of neurite outgrowth on astroglial scars in
vitro. J. Neurosci. 10, 3594–3603. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.10-11-03594.1990
Ruschel, J., Hellal, F., Flynn, K., Dupraz, S., Elliott, D., Tedeschi, A., et al.
(2015). Axonal regeneration. Systemic administration of epothilone B
promotes axon regeneration after spinal cord injury. Science 348, 347–352.
doi: 10.1126/science.aaa2958
Schiwy, N., Brazda, N., and Müller, H. (2009). Enhanced regenerative axon
growth of multiple ﬁbre populations in traumatic spinal cord injury
following scar-suppressing treatment. Eur. J. Neurosci. 30, 1544–1553.
doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2009.06929.x
Shearer, M., and Fawcett, J. (2001). The astrocyte/meningeal cell interface–
a barrier to successful nerve regeneration? Cell Tissue Res. 305, 267–273.
doi: 10.1007/s004410100384
Slezak, M., Göritz, C., Niemiec, A., Frisén, J., Chambon, P., Metzger, D., et al.
(2007). Transgenic mice for conditional gene manipulation in astroglial cells.
Glia 55, 1565–1576. doi: 10.1002/glia.20570
Soderblom, C., Luo, X., Blumenthal, E., Bray, E., Lyapichev, K., Ramos, J., et al.
(2013). Perivascular ﬁbroblasts form the ﬁbrotic scar after contusive spinal
cord injury. J. Neurosci. 33, 13882–13887. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2524-
13.2013
Sofroniew, M. (2018). Dissecting spinal cord regeneration. Nature 557, 343–350.
doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0068-4
Srinivas, S., Watanabe, T., Lin, C., William, C., Tanabe, Y., Jessell, T., et al.
(2001). Cre reporter strains produced by targeted insertion of EYFP and
ECFP into the ROSA26 locus. BMC Dev. Biol. 1:4. doi: 10.1186/1471-
213X-1-4
Sugiyama, A., Kanno, K., Nishimichi, N., Ohta, S., Ono, J., Conway, S., et al.
(2016). Periostin promotes hepatic ﬁbrosis in mice by modulating hepatic
stellate cell activation via α integrin interaction. J. Gastroenterol. 51, 1161–1174.
doi: 10.1007/s00535-016-1206-0
Sundberg, C., Ivarsson, M., Gerdin, B., and Rubin, K. (1996). Pericytes as collagen-
producing cells in excessive dermal scarring. Lab. Invest. 74, 452–466.
Tran, A., Warren, P., and Silver, J. (2018). The Biology of Regeneration
Failure and Success After Spinal Cord Injury. Physiol. Rev. 98, 881–917.
doi: 10.1152/physrev.00017.2017
Travers, J., Kamal, F., Robbins, J., Yutzey, K., and Blaxall, B. (2016).
Cardiac
ﬁbrosis:
the
ﬁbroblast
awakens.
Circ.
Res.
118,
1021–1040.
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.306565
Vanlandewijck, M., He, L., Mäe, M., Andrae, J., Ando, K., Del Gaudio, F., et al.
(2018). A molecular atlas of cell types and zonation in the brain vasculature.
Nature 554, 475–480. doi: 10.1038/nature25739
Wang, H., Wang, K., Zhong, X., Qiu, W., Dai, Y., Wu, A., et al. (2012).
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid BAFF and APRIL levels in neuromyelitis optica and
multiple sclerosis patients during relapse. J. Clin. Immunol. 32, 1007–1011.
doi: 10.1007/s10875-012-9709-9
Wang, W., Liu, R., Su, Y., Li, H., Xie, W., and Ning, B. (2018a). MicroRNA-21-
5p mediates TGF-β-regulated ﬁbrogenic activation of spinal ﬁbroblasts and the
formation of ﬁbrotic scars after spinal cord injury. Int. J. Biol. Sci. 14, 178–188.
doi: 10.7150/ijbs.24074
Wang, W., Tang, S., Li, H., Liu, R., Su, Y., Shen, L., et al. (2018b). MicroRNA-21a-
5p promotes ﬁbrosis in spinal ﬁbroblasts after mechanical trauma. Exp. Cell Res.
370, 24–30. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2018.06.002
Wang, X., Cao, K., Sun, X., Chen, Y., Duan, Z., Sun, L., et al. (2015).
Macrophages in spinal cord injury: phenotypic and functional change
from exposure to myelin debris. Glia 63, 635–651. doi: 10.1002/glia.
22774
Wang, Y., Plane, J., Jiang, P., Zhou, C., and Deng, W. (2011). Concise review:
quiescent and active states of endogenous adult neural stem cells: identiﬁcation
and characterization. Stem Cells 29, 907–912. doi: 10.1002/stem.644
Wanner, I., Anderson, M., Song, B., Levine, J., Fernandez, A., Gray-Thompson,
Z., et al. (2013). Glial scar borders are formed by newly proliferated, elongated
astrocytes that interact to corral inﬂammatory and ﬁbrotic cells via STAT3-
dependent mechanisms after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 33, 12870–12886.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2121-13.2013
Weldon, A., Moldovan, I., Cabling, M., Hernandez, E., Hsu, S., Gonzalez, J., et al.
(2015). Surface APRIL is elevated on myeloid cells and is associated with
disease activity in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. J. Rheumatol. 42, 749–759.
doi: 10.3899/jrheum.140630
Wu, J., Lu, B., Yang, R., Chen, Y., Chen, X., and Li, Y. (2021). EphB2
knockdown decreases the formation of astroglial-ﬁbrotic scars to promote
nerve regeneration after spinal cord injury in rats. CNS Neurosci. Ther. 27,
714–724. doi: 10.1111/cns.13641
Xie, C., Shen, X., Xu, X., Liu, H., Li, F., Lu, S., et al. (2020). Astrocytic
YAP promotes the formation of glia scars and neural regeneration after
spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 40, 2644–2662. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2229-
19.2020
Yamagami, T., Pleasure, D., Lam, K., and Zhou, C. (2018). Transient activation of
Wnt/β-catenin signaling reporter in ﬁbrotic scar formation after compression
spinal cord injury in adult mice. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 496,
1302–1307. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.02.004
Yamaguchi, Y. (2014). Periostin in skin tissue skin-related diseases. Allergol. Int.
63, 161–170. doi: 10.2332/allergolint.13-RAI-0685
Yata, Y., Scanga, A., Gillan, A., Yang, L., Reif, S., Breindl, M., et al. (2003).
DNase I-hypersensitive sites enhance alpha1(I) collagen gene expression
in hepatic stellate cells. Hepatology 37, 267–276. doi: 10.1053/jhep.2003.
50067
Yokota, K., Kobayakawa, K., Saito, T., Hara, M., Kijima, K., Ohkawa, Y.,
et al. (2017). Periostin promotes scar formation through the interaction
between pericytes and inﬁltrating monocytes/macrophages after spinal
cord injury. Am.
J.
Pathol. 187, 639–653. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2016.
11.010
Zeisberg, M., and Kalluri, R. (2004). The role of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition
in
renal
ﬁbrosis.
J.
Mol.
Med.
(Berl.)
82,
175–181.
doi: 10.1007/s00109-003-0517-9
Zhang, S., Geddes, J., Owens, J., and Holmberg, E. (2005). X-irradiation reduces
lesion scarring at the contusion site of adult rat spinal cord. Histol. Histopathol.
20, 519–530. doi: 10.14670/HH-20.519
Zhou, X., Wahane, S., Friedl, M., Kluge, M., Friedel, C., Avrampou, K., et al.
(2020). Microglia and macrophages promote corralling, wound compaction
and recovery after spinal cord injury via Plexin-B2. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 337–350.
doi: 10.1038/s41593-020-0597-7
Zhu, Y., Soderblom, C., Krishnan, V., Ashbaugh, J., Bethea, J., and Lee, J.
(2015a). Hematogenous macrophage depletion reduces the ﬁbrotic scar and
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
11
August 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 720938

Li et al.
Fibrotic Scar Formation After SCI
increases axonal growth after spinal cord injury. Neurobiol. Dis. 74, 114–125.
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.10.024
Zhu, Y., Soderblom, C., Trojanowsky, M., Lee, D., and Lee, J. (2015b). Fibronectin
matrix assembly after spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 32, 1158–1167.
doi: 10.1089/neu.2014.3703
Zivkovic, S., Ayazi, M., Hammel, G., and Ren, Y. (2021). For better
or
for
worse:
a
look
into
neutrophils
in
traumatic
spinal
cord
injury.
Front.
Cell.
Neurosci.
15:648076.
doi:
10.3389/fncel.2021.
648076
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2021 Li, Yu, Hu, Li, You, Tian, Cheng, Zheng and Jing. This is an
open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,
provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply
with these terms.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
12
August 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 720938

===== Liddelow2020_TrendsImmunol_MicrogliaAstrocytes =====
Special Issue: Microglia and Astrocytes
Review
Microglia and Astrocytes in Disease: Dynamic
Duo or Partners in Crime?
Shane A. Liddelow
,1,2,3,* Samuel E. Marsh
,4,5,6,* and Beth Stevens
,4,5,6,7,*
Microglia–astrocyte interactions represent a delicate balance affecting neural
cell functions in health and disease. Tightly controlled to maintain homeostasis
during physiological conditions, rapid and prolonged departures during disease,
infection, and following trauma drive multiple outcomes: both beneﬁcial and
detrimental. Recent sequencing studies at the bulk and single-cell level in
humans and rodents provide new insight into microglia–astrocyte communica-
tion in homeostasis and disease. However, the complex changing ways these
two cell types functionally interact has been a barrier to understanding disease
initiation, progression, and disease mechanisms. Single cell sequencing is
providing new insights; however, many questions remain. Here, we discuss
how to bridge transcriptional states to speciﬁc functions so we can develop
therapies to mediate negative effects of altered microglia–astrocyte interactions.
Changes in Microglia and Astrocyte Function in Health and Disease
Microglia (see Glossary), the resident myeloid cells of the mammalian central nervous system
(CNS), colonize the CNS early in embryonic development. They are highly motile cells that interact
with all cells in the CNS to mediate normal development, homeostasis, and general brain physi-
ology. Comprising between 5% and 10% of the total number of CNS cells in humans and
mice, they are integral to many physiological processes [1]. By contrast, astrocytes comprise
at least 50% of the brain and spinal cord cells by number in humans and mice. Moreover, astro-
cytes are fundamental to normal CNS health and functioning [2]. They are required for synapse
formation, maturation, and maintenance (reviewed in [3]) and once they begin providing trophic
support to neurons, they cannot be removed without disastrous consequences [4]. Although
locked in place and unable to move, astrocytes tile the parenchyma with largely non-
overlapping domains and are connected by gap junctions between their inﬁnitesimally ﬁne-
branched processes, rapidly signaling from cell to cell via calcium-mediated information waves
(see [2] for review). Both microglia and astrocytes have robust and profound responses to
changes in the normal physiology of the CNS via a response termed ‘reactivity’ or ‘activation’
(Box 1). Changes in glial morphology have been observed by pathologists and neurobiologists
in ﬁxed brain tissue for decades. Recent analyses of human brain samples reveal striking changes
in microglia and astrocyte transcriptomes in response to a wide range of diseases, infection,
and trauma; however, precisely how microglia and astrocytes contribute to speciﬁc aspects of
disease pathogenesis remains a crucial question. How heterogeneous are microglia and astro-
cytes in health and disease? How do astrocytes and microglia communicate? How dynamic
and reversible are these disease-associated states?
An explosion of new ‘omic’ approaches and tools to proﬁle and spatially map glial states reveal
many different subsets of reactive glia that are present in individual diseases, or across several
diseases, and have expanded our understanding of their phenotypes and insights into potential
functions. During disease, infection, and following trauma, microglia and astrocytes exhibit altered
gene expression proﬁles that are predicted to affect their function and, in turn, the health of
Highlights
Microglia are resident immune cells of the
brain, which derive from a different cell
lineage to all other cells in the brain.
They are highly motile cells, constantly
patrolling the brain parenchyma.
Astrocytes are the largest cell compo-
nent of the brain and develop from a
common progenitor along with neurons
and oligodendrocytes. They tile the entire
brain and do not migrate during normal
physiology. These two cell types are
important for normal mammalian brain
development and respond rapidly to
disease, infection, and trauma.
Microglia and astrocytes interact via
contact-dependent and secreted factors
to modulate their function during normal
health and in disease. Microglia can
drive reactivity in astrocytes via the re-
lease of speciﬁc cytokines, while astro-
cytes can drive dysfunction in microglia
by withholding cholesterol.
Many tools exist to manipulate both
microglia and astrocytes, however, com-
plete removal of astrocytes is currently
impossible as this results in death.
scRNASeq experiments must be both
adequately powered and take into
account possible artifacts as a result of
subsampling when disseminating re-
sults. Ideally, cluster-speciﬁc differentially
expressed genes should be validated
using visualization methods (in situ
hybridization or spatial transcriptomic
approaches) and functional assays.
Caution should be taken in the nomen-
clature of different ‘activation’ states of
both microglia and astrocytes. While no
method is perfect, the ﬁeld needs to
clearly state what constitutes a subset
of cells: biologically relevant and function-
ally characterized descriptions will be the
most beneﬁcial.
820
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.it.2020.07.006
© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Trends in Immunology

neurons and other CNS cells; however, there is still a large gap between speciﬁc transcriptional
states and function. Ultimately, we must move towards a ‘functional’ understanding of
these cells: cataloguing what they can or cannot do under different biological settings (Figure 1,
Key Figure). Improved methods to study these functions in culture, in organoids, and using
stem cells, in combination with new tools to image, isolate, and target both microglia and astro-
cytes in vivo, have provided a wealth of new information about how these two integral CNS glial
cells contribute to brain health and development, interact with one another, and mediate injury
and disease. Here we highlight several recent exciting discoveries and potential translational
paths forward.
Microglia and Astrocyte Trophic Support
The complex interplay between microglia and astrocytes is established during development and
changes dramatically in the context of disease, infection, injury, and normal aging. Much of our
understanding of both microglia and astrocyte function, as well as their interactions, has largely
come from using isolated cell culture systems to study their gene expression, protein amounts,
and cellular functions. The earliest of these methods relied on enzymatic digestion and
supplementing media with serum components [5,6]. These methods (and variations), while in
hindsight not ideal, have provided a wealth of important information about these cells. Methods
for the isolation of microglia [7,8] and astrocytes [5] have been improved to enable faster isolation
without artifacts induced by enzyme digestion [7] and serum-free culture systems [9,10]. These
methods have highlighted non-serum trophic support molecules such as colony stimulating
factor 1 (CSF-1), interleukin 34 (IL-34), transforming growth factor beta 2 (TGF-β2), and choles-
terol for microglia [10]; and Heparin-Binding EGF-like growth factor (HBEGF) for astrocytes [9].
Microglial trophic support largely comes from ﬁbroblasts (IL-34), endothelial cells (TGF-β2), and
astrocytes (cholesterol), and adult Csf1r–/– mice that lack the CSF-1 receptor or IL-34 have low
numbers of microglia compared with wild type (WT) mice [11,12]. While ﬁbroblasts and endo-
thelial cells likely produce the majority of these microglia trophic factors in the adult brain, de-
velopmentally, astrocytes also produce sufﬁcient amounts of all three factors to maintain
microglia in mice and in humans [13–16]. In astrocytes, the trophic molecule HBEGF is pro-
vided by endothelial cells (with which astrocyte endfeet have a close association) [9,17,18].
Although astrocytes can generally maintain gene expression proﬁles and function at a physio-
logical level without microglia-derived signals, microglia appear to have ‘normal’ physiological
proﬁles tethered to astrocyte-derived trophic support [10]. This, however, does not mean
that this interaction occurs in only one direction. It is also apparent that signaling between microglia
and astrocytes is often mediated by secreted signals interacting with cell-speciﬁc receptors
(see later). But how do interactions between microglia and astrocytes change in response to
disease, infection, and injury?
Bi-directional Astrocyte–Microglia Communication
The microglial receptor TREM2 (triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2) has diverse
functions, including mediating the uptake of cholesterol bound in apolipoprotein lipoparticles
[both APOE and Clusterin (CLU/APOJ)] [19,20]. Lack of TREM2, or disease-associated TREM2
mutations, can inhibit recognition and uptake of cholesterol-containing lipoparticles [21]. For
normal physiological function and trophic support, the interaction of TREM2 with lipoparticles is
therefore integral for the transfer of cholesterol from astrocytes to microglia [10]. Multiple muta-
tions in human TREM2 increase Alzheimer’s disease (AD) risk [22–26]. Along with APOE
[27,28] and CLU [29–33], these three genes represent some of the strongest disease-causing
genes associated with AD. While APOE and CLU are largely expressed by astrocytes during
homeostasis [17], Apoe is dramatically upregulated by microglia during response to injury or
disease [8,34,35].
1Neuroscience Institute, NYU School of
Medicine, New York, NY, USA
2Department of Neuroscience and
Physiology, NYU School of Medicine,
New York, NY, USA
3Department of Ophthalmology, NYU
School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA
4F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston
Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
5Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA
6Stanley Center for Psychiatric
Research, Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA
7Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA.,
USA
*Correspondence:
shane.liddelow@nyulangone.org
(S.A. Liddelow),
samuel.marsh@childrens.harvard.edu
(S.E. Marsh), and
beth.stevens@childrens.harvard.edu
(B. Stevens).
Trends in Immunology
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9
821

Recent work highlights the fact that astrocytes derived from human induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) taken from AD patients with different isoforms of APOE have varying capacities in
producing and delivering cholesterol to microglia [36]. These iPSC-derived astrocytes expressing
the AD risk variant APOE4 have increased lysosomal cholesterol amounts and decreased choles-
terol efﬂux relative to astrocytes derived from APOE2 and APOE3 iPSCs; this, in turn, causes
increased secretion of proinﬂammatory chemokines and cytokines such as CXCL10, RANTES,
and IL6. In this study, it remained unclear if these factors were derived from microglia or astro-
cytes, as these were measured using a mixed culture system [36]. Given that microglia require
cholesterol to maintain a physiological state [10], a lack of astrocyte-derived cholesterol is likely
responsible for driving this microglial phenotype. Thus, future investigations should be under-
taken to test the effects of different isoforms of APOE (2/3/4), as well as mutations in the APOE
gene on each cell type determining the signals and mechanisms driving bi-directional microglia–
astrocyte communication in different contexts. Of note, recent work also demonstrated that
microglial TREM2 mediates developmental synaptic pruning and function in mice [37,38]. This
raises questions about the potential involvement and underlying mechanisms of microglia and
astrocytes in these same processes beyond synapse pruning.
In addition to its role in lipid metabolism, APOE is present within amyloid plaques in the CNS in
patients with AD and in amyloid precursor protein (APP) transgenic mice (a model for AD)
[39,40]. Until recently, the cellular source of this APOE was unknown; based on expression
studies during homeostasis, astrocytes initially seemed the likely culprit. However, recent studies
using combinations of bulk and single cell sequencing (scRNASeq) found that microglia
Box 1. What Is in a Name?
The ﬁeld of immunology has long beneﬁted from distinct cell-surface markers to characterize individual cell types. For
instance, T helper 17 cells (Th17) are proinﬂammatory T cells, so-named because they produce IL-17 [139]. The discovery
of a marker to distinguish these cells from other immune cells enabled the identiﬁcation of mediators that drive their
production (IL-6 and TGFβ in the case of Th17 cells), contributing to an understanding of their function.
Neuroscience has been less successful in providing similarly comprehensive descriptions of cell subtypes. This has been
partly due to a lack of cell-surface antigens, making isolation and sequencing difﬁcult. There has also been considerable
trouble in maintaining these cells in culture systems to recapitulate the speciﬁc milieu of the brain, resulting in the functional
understanding of subsets of microglia and astrocytes lagging behind a growing number of new naming conventions. Early
attempts at naming activation states of microglia using the now obsolete M0/M1/M2 terminology was based on in vitro
studies, but became problematic as complexity and dynamic states of microglia were revealed. Similarly, in astrocytes,
an A1/A2 nomenclature gained some traction, but is likewise overly simplistic. More recent naming schemes along disease
(disease-associated microglia [34]) or around pathology (plaque-induced genes [140]) have also been met with some
resistance based solely, in some instances, on a dislike for any one particular naming convention. Recent investigation
shows a lack of correlation between rodent and human studies [141] and suggests that care needs to be taken in asso-
ciating subtypes based on models of disease rather than on the disease itself.
In astrocytes, while naming conventions are less expansive than in microglia, some additional ﬁdelity is required: reactive astro-
cytes that form rapidly following acute injury are called ‘scar-forming’, ‘STAT3-dependent’, and ‘A2’, among other names
[69,100,142], albeit with what appears to be similar changes in gene expression. Similarly, ‘A1’, ‘proinﬂammatory’, ‘aging-
associated’, ‘neurodegenerative’, or ‘neurotoxic’ reactive astrocytes are also used interchangeably [58,97,98,100,143,144].
Problems also arise when original comprehensive transcriptomic and functional characterization of speciﬁc subsets
in one study or context are less well studied in follow-up studies, leading some to incorrectly attribute new functions,
or to generate new nomenclature unnecessarily. Both outcomes are problematic for newcomers and residents of the
ﬁeld alike.
We must combine efforts to consolidate already present (and functionally validated) nomenclature and work collaboratively
to generate new comprehensive naming conventions. Though far more difﬁcult, we must also work to connect the dots
between transcriptional states and speciﬁc functional states. Combined approaches are needed to describe subclasses
of microglia and astrocytes on the basis of transcriptomic, proteomic, and functional changes, as well as on the basis of
localization to particular CNS regions or to association with pathology (see Figure 1 in main text).
Glossary
5xFAD: mouse model of Alzheimer’s
disease based on amyloid deposition.
The mouse contains ﬁve familial
Alzheimer’s disease mutations [three in
amyloid precursor protein (APP) and two
in presenilin-1 (PSEN1) under the control
of neuronal-speciﬁc Thy1 promoter]
driving amyloid production and
deposition.
APP/PS1 (Thy1): mouse model of AD
based on amyloid deposition, similar to
5xFAD. APP/PS1 (Thy1) mice express
single familial APP and single PSEN1
mutations under the control of neuronal-
speciﬁc Thy1 promoter.
Astrocyte: large, postmitotic macroglia
comprising ~50% of cells in the CNS in
mammals.
Astrocyte endfeet: terminal processes
of astrocytes that interact with blood
vessels. They have a high concentration
of water channels.
C1q: (complement component 1q)
complex glycoprotein complement
component protein that associates with
C1r and C1s to form the C1 complex.
The C1 complex triggers the classical
complement pathway. In the CNS, C1q
also labels synapses for removal by
microglia.
Complement: selection of proteins (the
complement system) in the innate
immune system; incorporates
antibodies and phagocytic cells to clear
cell debris, pathogens, and promotes
inﬂammation. In the CNS, complement
is also used for promoting synapse
pruning by microglia during
development and in neurodegenerative
disease.
CSF1R: protein encoded by Csf1r: type
III receptor tyrosine kinase binding CSF1
and IL-34. Essential for the survival and
proliferation of many myeloid cells,
including microglia.
Droplet transcriptomic approaches:
single cell transcriptomic methods
using microﬂuidics to partition single
cells or nuclei into nanoliter droplets
(e.g., Drop-seq; 10X Genomics).
Frontotemporal dementia: umbrella
term referring to a number of
neurodegenerative diseases
characterized by degeneration of the
frontal and temporal lobes of the brain.
GFAP: protein encoded by Gfap;
intermediate ﬁlament protein present in
astrocytes in the CNS, but also in
ependymal and radial glial cells during
development.
Trends in Immunology
822
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9

signiﬁcantly upregulate Apoe in a variety of mouse models of injury or disease [8,34,35]. In
particular, studies in several AD mouse models [5xFAD, APP/PS1 (Thy1), and variations,
including Trem2–/– among others] highlight that plaque-associated microglia exhibit the highest
upregulation of Apoe, raising many questions about the mechanisms of induction and the
Key Figure
Microglia and Astrocyte Interactions in Health and Disease Are Context-
Dependent
Trends
Trends in
in Immunology
Immunology
Figure 1. (A) Microglia and astrocytes both have complex morphology that alters in response to changes in normal
physiology. They also tile the entire central nervous system (CNS) with non-overlapping domains. Shown here are
representative confocal micrographs of mouse cortex microglia; these have been stained with IBA1, and astrocytes;
stained with GFAP (in vitro) or visualized by green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) driven by an Aldh1l1 promoter. (B) The
interaction between microglia and astrocytes may change dramatically depending on context. For instance, physiological
contexts may present different interactions between microglia and astrocytes and other CNS cells than during states of
altered physiology (e.g., development or aging), acute insult (e.g., trauma or infection), or in chronic pathological conditions
(e.g., neurodegenerative diseases). These functional interactions may be sustained or transient. This context is important
when inferring changes in gene or protein amounts and how they might affect one another. Ultimately, these changes in
the context of development, aging, infection, trauma, or disease should be used to characterize functional changes in
microglia and astrocyte subtypes. This ﬁgure was created using BioRender (https://biorender.com/). Microglia images
courtesy of Dr Daniel Wilton. Astrocyte images courtesy of Rachel Kim.
Glutamate excitotoxicity:
pathological process in which excess
glutamate is not cleared from the
synaptic cleft, causing damage and
death of neurons.
Ionized calcium binding adaptor
molecule 1 (IBA1): protein encoded by
Aif1; calcium binding protein present in
microglia and macrophages, commonly
used for visualization of microglia.
Microglia: small, motile, resident innate
immune cell comprising around 5–10%
of the CNS in humans and mice.
Multiplex smFISH: (single molecule
ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization)
method enabling visualization of single
RNA molecules using targeted probes.
Used to provide important validation and
spatial context for scRNASeq data.
Oligodendroglioma: tumor of the
brain or spinal cord; formed by
oligodendrocytes.
Organoids: miniaturized version of an
organ, made from differentiated stem
cells and maintained in a culture dish.
Organoids of nervous tissue can include
combinations of neurons and glia.
Prion infection: prions are small
misfolded proteins that can propagate
their misfolded shape. Prion infection
refers to infection of an organ or tissue
with a misfolded prion protein.
Reactivity: response of microglia or
astrocytes to an external stimulus,
normally noxious in nature (e.g., bacterial
or viral infection, acute trauma, or
pathology associated with disease).
scRNASeq: method that allows
measurement of expression of genes in
individual cells or nuclei (snRNASeq).
Synaptic pruning: removal of excess
synapses by microglia and astrocytes.
Most evident during development or
disease.
Trends in Immunology
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9
823

functional consequences [34,35,41–43]. Additionally, Trem2–/– mice, that carry a loss-of-
function variant (T66M) common to frontotemporal dementia, exhibit signiﬁcantly de-
creased plaque-associated APOE relative to WT mice and similar ﬁndings were observed
in human AD patient postmortem brain samples bearing TREM2 risk variants [43]. This
plaque-associated APOE may be central to both the microglial response and the accumu-
lation of amyloid, such that targeting APOE may be a viable putative therapeutic mechanism
(see Clinician’s Corner). Using the APP/PS1 (Thy1) amyloid mouse model of AD crossed to the
human APOE4 mouse, intracerebral infusion with a novel antibody that preferentially targets the
nonlipidated aggregates of APOE found in amyloid plaques, was sufﬁcient to reduce amyloid
deposition as pathology progressed [44].
Uncertainty remains regarding the role of APOE from both microglia and astrocytes, likely
stemming from the fact that these cells have usually been investigated in isolation with minimal
understanding of their functional interactions in the context of disease. It is also unclear how
well each mouse model of AD recapitulates these functions across species. Nevertheless,
there is agreement that in the presence of APOE4 in both rodent models and in human patients
with AD, there is higher microglia and astrocyte reactivity, as well as increased CNS pathology
[45–49]. In addition, clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-Cas9-
edited human iPSC-derived APOE4 astrocytes harbor decreased cholesterol amounts and
impaired uptake of amyloid relative to APOE2 and APOE3 expressing astrocytes; furthermore,
APOE4 microglia in the same system also exhibit decreased phagocytic capacity compared
with APOE2 and APOE3 expressing microglia [49]. How the timing and extent of these phago-
cytic dysfunctions may individually contribute to disease progression and pathology remains
unknown. More robust work is needed to understand the complexity of the interactions between
microglia and astrocyte-secreted APOE, but the shared nature of the response across multiple
disease/injury conditions suggests there may be common pathways that reﬂect a general
program of glial responses to dyshomeostasis.
Similar interactions between microglia and astrocytes in the context of disease have also been
reported in mice models of a wide range of pathologies, including inﬂammation [50], AD
[45,50–52], other neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson’s and Huntington’s dis-
eases [53–55], in cancer [56,57], and in prion infection [58] or infection with
neuropathogenic ﬂaviviruses such as Zika virus and West Nile virus [59–62]. In each instance,
microglial cytokine release is paired with some form of astrocyte reactivity, measured by either
glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP) increase, or, in more recent studies, by whole
transcriptomic sequencing [55] and functional investigation [45,50,54]. And, while most de-
scriptions of cytokine release and signaling position microglia as a driving force, there is evidence
that astrocytes can also act as a major source of immune cell chemoattractants such as
CXCL10 and RANTES [63–65].
These responses are often described only in a correlative sense in both animals models and in
human patients [i.e., by leading to changes in cell morphology, or in the upregulation of the quin-
tessential markers of reactivity: Ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule 1 (IBA1) for microglia
and GFAP for astrocytes]. It should be noted, however, that these markers are also present in
homeostatic microglia and astrocytes and, as such, their use as markers of ‘reactivity’ should
not be used as a gold standard [66]. This is particularly important given our current understanding
of heterogeneity as IBA1 and GFAP are present across several substates of microglia and astro-
cytes. However, these markers, combined with measurements of changes in cytokine release
(from both microglia and astrocytes), as well as measurements of proliferation, changes in protein
complement, and in some cases, ablation of cells, have been used to determine the functional
Trends in Immunology
824
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9

role of these cells. Removal of microglia is most often achieved by taking advantage of Cx3cr1CreER
mice [67] to drive microglia-speciﬁc expression of a tamoxifen-inducible diphtheria toxin recep-
tor (DTR), or inhibitors of CSF1R to induce large-scale microglial apoptosis [68]. Astrocyte
ablation has been less fruitful, likely due to their neuron trophic support role, although this
possibility remains to be tested; however, ablation of speciﬁc subtypes of reactive astrocytes,
using Gfap-targeted Stat3-depended DTR expression, has proven useful in deﬁning their roles
following spinal cord injury in mouse models [69]. These approaches report important roles
of microglia and astrocytes in mediating both ‘positive’ and ‘negative’ responses to damage,
but also suggest that responses to injury or pathology are complex and heterogeneous. For
instance, depletion of microglia using a CSF1R inhibitor show no change [70], as well as de-
creases [71] in plaque pathology in the hippocampi of 5xFAD mice, both with improved
neuronal survival depending on the age and length of administration of inhibitor. This im-
provement in neuronal viability and cognitive ability is also reported in microglia depletion
with aging [72], following stroke [73], and in numerous other mouse models of neurodegeneration.
In mice that lack Stat3-dependent reactive astrocytes (generated by crossing GfapCre and Stat3ﬂ/ﬂ
lines), there is extensive axonal dieback, suggesting that these reactive astrocytes are beneﬁ-
cial in promoting recovery from injury in the spinal cord [69]. By contrast, removal of these same
astrocytes had no effect on pathology in the 3xTg mouse model of AD [74] (though it remains
unclear if this model of AD recapitulates the astrocyte phenotype found in human AD patients,
or if the STAT3-mediated reactive astrocyte phenotype is present in patients). Similarly, block
of neurotoxic reactive astrocytes appeared to be beneﬁcial in a model of Parkinson’s disease
(in which preformed ﬁbrils of alpha synuclein are used to seed pathology in mouse brain) [54]
and in axotomy to the optic nerve in mice and rats [75]; however, another study also highlighted
that these reactive astrocytes were likely to be important in slowing the progression of prion in-
fection in the mouse brain [58].
Accordingly, signaling between microglia and astrocytes in the context of chronic neurodegen-
erative disease drives many different transcriptomic, proteomic, and functional responses. One
form of reactive astrocytes is directly mediated by C1q complement, as well as IL1α and TNFα
cytokine release by microglia; it appears to drive neuronal death and synapse density loss in
mice [50,51,76,77]. These studies, while describing a number of key functional changes
in vitro with some validation in vivo, still require additional investigation to determine the exact
pathways driving each functional change. It should also be noted that while an astrocyte-
derived neurotoxin mediates this neurodegeneration, the identity of a speciﬁc neurotoxin/s
has yet to be found. Alternate hypotheses for neuron death include glutamate excitotoxicity,
or loss of astrocyte-trophic support due to ion dyshomeostasis. It is possible that all three
mechanisms exist at different stages of the disease response and this would suggest multiple
potential targetable pathway(s) to treat certain neurodegenerative conditions. It is most likely
that each of these mechanisms has speciﬁc context-dependent drivers and this will be an
exciting avenue for ongoing research.
Of particular interest are microglia–astrocyte responses in certain cancers, where interactions
with the immunosuppressive chemotherapeutic drug methotrexate can kill childhood
oligodendroglioma cells. Due to advances in isolation and culture of microglia and astrocytes
in serum-free conditions, the mechanism of action of this drug is now known: methotrexate drives
expression of many cytokine genes by microglia (e.g., ILs, TNF, among others) in mice both in vivo
and in culture. These cytokines are capable of driving formation of reactive astrocytes (perhaps in
a neurotoxic state), which in turn causes apoptosis of oligodendroglioma cancer cells [57].
Whether this effect also relies on susceptibility by the cancer cells remains unknown (as has
been recently shown for neurons in axotomy and bead-occlusion glaucoma models in mice
Trends in Immunology
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9
825

and rats [75]); however, there is likely some off-target neurotoxicity, given that children treated
with methotrexate often have learning and memory deﬁcits that could be attributed to death of
neurons or destruction of synapses, other known functions of proinﬂammatory microglia [51]
and astrocytes [50]. As another example, susceptibility may likely drive neuronal death in prion
infection in the brain, where reactive astrocytes are associated with prion-infected neurons in
mice [58]: astrocytes respond to prion infection by upregulation of many genes associated with
inﬂammatory reactive astrocytes and using Il1a–/–Tnf–/–C1qa–/– mice that lack the cytokines
required to activate this subset of reactive astrocytes led to a signiﬁcant acceleration of prion
disease course relative to WT mice. Moreover, while other reactive transcripts in both microglia
and astrocytes remained largely unchanged in these animals, several homeostatic markers
in microglia (e.g., Tmem119, P2ry12) were lost early during the disease course when astrocyte
reactivity was blocked [58]. These homeostatic markers were also lost during isolation and culture
of microglia [1,7,8,10,78], but the consequences of this loss of ‘microglia’ signature remains to
be determined.
An important question for future studies is whether subsets of reactive astrocytes drive this loss of
microglia homeostasis, or if reactive astrocytes that drive neuron death simultaneously maintain
microglia function, suggesting they play an important (beneﬁcial) role in the resolution of disease
and injury. Many tools that were previously developed to address these questions may no longer
be effective, given the heterogeneity of microglia and astrocyte responses. Our original hypothe-
ses based on bulk tissue or cell sequencing must now be reﬁned in light of complex (and possibly
alternate) responses to stimuli by cell subsets. As such, some knockout or transgenic mouse
lines, or culture systems, will require retooling as they are unable to maintain this complex
heterogeneity.
Microglia–Astrocyte Integration within the Peripheral Immune System
While research into intra-CNS interactions between astrocytes and microglia has received
considerable attention, relatively little has focused on the potential impact of peripheral immune
cells on astrocytes and microglia. Immune cells residing in the brain borders and brain lymphatics
[79,80] as well as circulating immune cells, provide alternate avenues for peripheral signals to
affect microglia and astrocytes in either a direct or indirect fashion.
For example, amyloid pathology is enhanced in a mouse model of familial AD (5xFAD mouse) by
genetically preventing the development of adaptive immune cells (B and T lymphocytes and
natural killer cells; Rag2–/–::Il2rγ–/–) relative to immune-competent 5xFAD mice [81]. This lack of
adaptive immunity dramatically affects microglial number, morphology, gene expression, and
function. The study found that microglia in immune-competent 5xFAD mice were prominently
bound to endogenous mouse antibodies (IgG), which the immunodeﬁcient mice lacked, lacking
antibody production. Moreover, the increased amyloid phenotype of the immunodeﬁcient
5xFAD mice could be rescued by nonspeciﬁc antibody (IgG) injection or repletion of peripheral im-
mune cells, which then led to IgG binding to microglia. Taken together, these results suggest that
many of these phenotypes appear to be mediated by peripheral signaling (antibody, IgG) across
the blood–brain barrier, which did not require direct inﬁltration of peripheral adaptive anti-
body-producing cells (B cells or plasma cells) [81]. Moreover, a number of other studies have
also found that adaptive immune populations may play key roles in CNS injuries (such as stroke)
and neurodegenerative disease [such as Parkinson’s disease, AD, and multiple sclerosis (MS)]
based on a combination of human genetic and functional studies in mouse models [82–89];
however, a more thorough understanding of how these cells interact with and modulate microglia
and astrocyte biology is required.
Trends in Immunology
826
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9

Emerging research also suggests that the gut microbiome contributes to the function of both
microglia and astrocytes in disease. For example, the microbiome of patients with MS varies
drastically from nonsymptomatic patients. Speciﬁcally, relative to healthy subjects, MS patient
bacterial load in the gut is dominated by a decline in Butyricimonas spp., but increases in
Methanobrevibacter spp. and Akkermansia spp., ultimately driving IFN and TREM signaling path-
ways in peripheral CD4+ T cells and CD14+ monocytes, as measured by NanoString and path-
way analysis [90]. While it is unknown if these changes in gut microbial populations are drivers
of, or a response to MS disease pathology, some evidence in rodent studies suggests the former.
For instance, investigation into the role of CNS inﬁltrating T cells in mouse models of demyelination
(experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis) and dopaminergic cell death [modeled by injection
of the toxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) in brain] suggests increased
microglia and astrocyte ‘reactivity’ relative to controls (as measured by IBA1 and GFAP immuno-
histochemistry) [88,91,92]. In addition, speciﬁc metabolites such as short chain fatty acids, type I
IFNs, and tryptophan metabolites produced by gut microbes can alter the activity of both microglia
[93] and astrocytes [94], including the astrocyte chemotactic ability to promote migration of
CD11b+LY6C1hi monocytes [94]. Combined, these studies suggest that CD4+, CD8+, CD25+
T cells, and perhaps other peripheral immune cells, might act as integral peripheral mediators
between the gut microbiome and CNS-resident microglia and astrocytes. However, the role of
the microbiome in driving disease pathology remains controversial, as several studies have been
poorly controlled or conclusions drawn prematurely [95]. More work on the putative mechanism
(s) of this crosstalk is evidently required. Changes in the gut microbiome and the peripheral immune
system can affect microglia and astrocyte responses in the CNS; however, precisely how one
compartment interacts with the other is still largely unknown. Moreover, going forward, instead
of relying on bulk sequencing or unpuriﬁed cell culture experiments to determine such
interactions, robustly characterizing disease-associated individual subpopulations in both
peripheral and central immune and glial cells is needed.
Does Heterogeneity Matter and How Should We Study It?
Proﬁling microglia and astrocytes using bulk sequencing methods to describe similarities or
differences among different brain regions [96–98], across development, aging [7,8,98,99], and
in response to injury and disease [7,8,69,100] suggests ways that these cells may interact with
each other and with other CNS cells. We have learned about the development and maturation of
synapses by astrocytes (reviewed in [3]). We have also learned how excess production of
synapses can be developmentally regulated by microglia- [48,86,87] and astrocyte-mediated
pruning [51,101–104]; if such a process remains unchecked, aberrant pruning can have deleteri-
ous effects in the context of diseases such as AD, as synapse density loss is associated with
decreases in memory function [51]. In addition, reactive astrocytes formed following ischemic
stroke (middle cerebral artery occlusion) can become more proﬁcient phagocytes: clearing more
synaptic debris and possibly pruning excess synapses above normal levels, as visualized using
electron microscopy and immunoﬂuorescence for engulfment of ﬂuoro-jade-labeled neuronal
debris [105]. This suggests that like many other functional changes achieved in reactive states of
microglia and astrocytes, increased phagocytosis can have both positive and negative outcomes
for the CNS as a whole, depending on the context of the initiating pathology.
While originally limited to describing a small number of gene expression changes using in situ
hybridization, or extrapolating microglia- and astrocyte-speciﬁc changes from bulk tissue
microarrays and RNA sequencing experiments, the advent of transgenic reporter mice has
enabled highly speciﬁc transcriptomic analyses. From high throughput approaches sequencing
whole cells and single nuclei [106,107], to methods that allow detection of chromatin structure
[108–110], copy number variation [111,112], and joint proﬁling of gene expression and chromatin
Trends in Immunology
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9
827

in the same cells [113,114], options abound for developing powerful datasets on individual cells.
We highlight some of these exciting ﬁndings, but also common mistakes and caveats, along with
suggestions for moving the ﬁeld forward.
Single Cell RNA Sequencing of Microglia and Astrocytes
Several recent studies have begun to provide a better understanding of mouse and human mi-
croglia using scRNASeq technology [8,115,116]. In mice, the most comprehensive study proﬁled
greater than 75 000 microglia across embryonic, early postnatal, adult, aging, and acute injury
conditions [8]. Of note, while microglia exhibit heterogeneity in embryonic and early-postnatal de-
velopment, that heterogeneity is largely lost by adulthood. Multiplex smFISH spatially localized
several of these unique populations and/or microglial states during development and in injury
models; these populations exhibited speciﬁc spatial localization patterns [8]. This study also op-
timized a previously reported tissue dissociation protocol to extract microglia, using mechanical
dissociation with cold temperatures to minimize transcriptional changes that might be associated
with common enzymatic dissociation protocols [7,8]. In another report, these results were simul-
taneously conﬁrmed using an alternative method [115].
Previous work has shown that microglia rapidly alter their transcriptional proﬁle during isolation and
in vitro cultures [10,117]; thus, care needs to be used when isolating microglia. It is crucial that pro-
tocols are similarly optimized and standardized for isolating and proﬁling microglia nuclei from
human brain tissue. Perhaps unsurprisingly, there have been fewer commonalities identiﬁed across
recent human single cell studies than those performed in mice [116,118–121]. Given their low
abundance overall in the brain (~5–10% of total brain cells) one of the greatest challenges in ana-
lyzing microglia at single cell resolution is both accruing enough cells from each given patient and
obtaining a sufﬁcient number of patients to enable proper sample-level analyses across diagnoses
or other clinical stratiﬁcations (Table 1). It is the combination of these two factors that will be key in
the future for identifying rare microglial subtypes and validating their relevance across large num-
bers of patients.
The use of scRNASeq in the study of astrocytes is also growing; however, there are additional
technical concerns. There is an apparent capture problem: astrocytes are excluded from droplet
transcriptomic approaches such as Drop-seq and 10X Genomics. This is evidenced when
calculating capture rates for astrocytes in whole brain/brain region transcriptomics, as astrocytes
appear to account for less than 20% of total cell numbers from a whole brain homogenate
[18,114,116,118,119,122–126], when they should account for closer to 50% based on
ground-truth evidence and visualization studies [127–129] (Table 1). This raises a key question
that should be of concern to all in the ﬁeld: does this low sampling equate to subsampling of a
particular cohort of astrocytes that are overly enriched during sorting or in droplet production?
This might skew our interpretation of astrocyte heterogeneity and responses due to the potential
artifact of sample preparation. It should be noted that while capture rates for microglia are similarly
low, they represent more appropriately the percentage of CNS cells one would expect to be mi-
croglia (as detected by other methods; see earlier). While this is not deﬁnitive proof that
subsampling of microglia does not occur, it appears to be less of a problem. Methods that do
not rely on generation of reaction droplets, but instead provide sequencing of cells isolated by
ﬂuorescent activated cell sorting into individual wells, are still plagued by low numbers of cells in
ﬁnal sequencing due to the low throughput of such methods (despite being able to provide greater
capture rates of astrocytes than droplet methods) [130]. However, whether these low capture rates
substantially matter remains unclear (Box 2), but analysis of new large datasets suggests novel
populations of microglia and astrocytes are likely lost in smaller underpowered datasets (Figure 2).
Trends in Immunology
828
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9

Table 1. Microglia and Astrocyte Capture Rates in Recent Human Single Nuclei Transcriptomic Studiesa
Seq type
Patients (n)
Category
Total
nuclei
Microglia
(n)
Microglia capture (%)
Average number of
microglia/individual
Astrocytes
(n)
Astrocytecapture
(%)
Average number of
astrocytes/individual
Refs
Physiological samples
10X 3′ V3
5
Control
37 226
1273
3.3
255
4178
11.4
836
[148]b
10X 3′ V2
24
No pathology
35 166
892
2.5
37
1679
4.8
70
[118]b
10X 5′ V1
11
Control
32 625
1547
4.7
141
2955
9.1
269
[116]
10X 3′ V2
20
Control
52 556
1822
3.1
91
4644
8.8
290
[149]
10X 3′ V2
9
Control
17 043
136
0.8
15
1571
9.2
175
[150]
Pathological samples
10X 3′ V2
24
High pathology
34 785
939
2.7
39
1936
5.6
81
[118]a
10X 5′ V1
11
ADc
16 279
919
5.6
84
2641
16.2
240
[116]
10X 5′ V1
10
AD TREM2 R62H
52 003
1509
2.9
101
7573
14.6
505
[116]
10X 3′ V2
15
ASDc
16 594
1520
9.2
152
3423
20.6
342
[149]
10X 3′ V2
8
Epilepsy
6684
42
5.3
5.25
851
12.7
106
[149]
10X 3′ V2
12
MSc
31 516
1289
4.1
107
3810
12.1
318
[150]
aFor illustrative purposes this table shows human microglia and astrocyte capture rates from single nuclei transcriptomic studies using the 10X Chromium controller; these rates are substantially low. Microglia
capture averages from 2.9 ± 0.6% capture and 112 ± 43 cells/donor (physiological) to 5.0 ± 1.0% capture and 81 ± 21 cells/donor (pathological); these values are well below the predicted 10% density of
microglia in the CNS [127–129,151,152]. Astrocyte capture averages from 8.5 ± 1.1% capture and 328 ± 133 cells/donor (physiological) to 13.6 ± 2.0% capture and 265 ± 65 cells/donor (pathological); these
values are well below the predicted 50% density of astrocytes in the CNS [127–129]. These low capture rates (between 10% and 20% of all microglia or astrocytes) lead to an underpowered sample size, bias in
substate capture, and artifacts in analysis (Box 2).
bCell-type capture data were obtained from supplementary material in each reference, except for [118,148], where data were reanalyzed from raw data available from the Synapse databaseiii under accession
number syn18485175 and syn18915937, respectively. Links to raw code used for reanalysis can be found in the Acknowledgments.
cAbbreviations: AD, Alzheimer’s disease; ASD, autism spectrum disorder; MS, multiple sclerosis.
Trends in Immunology
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9
829

We have a unique opportunity to take advantage of powerful sequencing technologies
to determine transcriptomic changes in microglia, astrocytes, and a wide array of other
interconnected cells. Future studies will need to determine how cell types change across
time/disease progression with respect to each other (as they do not exist in isolation). It
also remains to be seen how well our current animal models, while often suitable for re-
capitulating speciﬁc aspects of disease pathology, actually do recapitulate the cellular
heterogeneity of CNS subpopulations, including disease-responsive cells such as
Box 2. Artifacts of Low Capture Rates in Single Cell/Nuclear RNASeq
Studying cell heterogeneity, particularly the interaction between individual subsets of cells, has important implications for
normal brain development and physiology as well as during disease and infection. The explosion and variety of scRNASeq
methods in recent years has enabled expansion of our understanding of the heterogeneous subsets of microglia and
astrocytes in both rodents and human patients with a wide range of neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative dis-
eases. But there are concerns that these sequencing experiments are making mistakes in experimental planning and ex-
ecution, which further lead to problems in data analysis and interpretation. These two problems fall under two main
categories: (i) not enough cells are sequenced (power), and (ii) a select subset of cells are being sequenced (bias).
(i)
Power: scRNASeq relies heavily on making up for a lack of depth in sequencing individual cells by pulling from the power
of sequencing a wide breadth of samples (cells). Therefore, lowly captured cells, and hence small sample size used in
sequencing, may have insufﬁcient power to properly delineate subsamples of cells with differentially expressed genes and
important biological functions (see Figure 2 and Table 1 in main text; also see [145] for review). Similarly, an undersampled
sequencing dataset may produce clustering that is less biologically accurate than one that is properly powered.
(ii)
Bias: are all subsets of cells equally collected using a given isolation protocol? As it is likely impossible to know what genes are
expressed by cells not captured, problems that arise when isolation methods select only a few of many substates of a
particular cell could greatly bias our understanding of responses to disease, or even differences that are observed in different
regions of the CNS. For example, if hippocampal microglia are preferentially excluded over cortical microglia, this could sway
the interpretation of sequencing analysis. Similarly, if astrocyte scRNASeq clusters are driven by patient-speciﬁc clusters, this
suggests a strong subsampling artifact, meaning that researchers could be missing important information about disease
responses, or more problematically might be basing future research on biased datasets.
Two systematic experimental overview and comparison studies of several scRNASeq methods have recently been
published [146,147] that further describe pros and cons of scRNASeq methods.
For these reasons, well-designed statistically powered experiments with samples collected from several biological
replicates (rather than simply a large number of cells from a single sample) to mediate some of these problems is
needed. Quality control metrics should conﬁrm that clustering is not due to artifacts (postmortem interval, enzymatic
digestion, individual patient variability, sex, technical variation, among other metrics).
1000 cells
tSNE_1
tSNE_2
10 000 cells
tSNE_1
tSNE_2
80 000 cells
tSNE_1
tSNE_2
High
Low
Expression
Trends
Trends in
in Immunology
Immunology
Figure 2. Subsampling Artifacts in Single Cell Sequencing. For illustrative purposes, a feature plot is shown depicting the expression of a single gene in small
(1000 cells, left), medium (10 000 cells, center), and large (80 000 cells, right) subsampled datasets taken from a larger single cell RNA sequencing 10×
experiment. The red color depicts the expression level of the gene (red is high). While there is strong clustering of the gene in the large dataset, this clustering may
be lost with smaller cell numbers. See also [145]. Abbreviation: tSNE, t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (a method of visualizing complex
multidimensional analyses in a reduced two-dimensional space). Data for tSNE feature plots analyzed by Dr Philip Hasel.
Trends in Immunology
830
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9

microglia and astrocytes. Only through incorporation and comparison of large volumes of
scRNASeq data from interacting cells, across species, will we be able to properly under-
stand disease initiation and progression, a requirement for the development of future
candidate therapies.
Integration Is the Key
While these single cell and nuclei sequencing efforts have generated large amounts of data, a
large discrepancy remains in what constitutes appropriate and ‘normal’ data quality control
and analysis. Several analysis pipelines are widely used, including Seurat [131], SCANPY
[132], and a suite of packages on BioConductor [133]. These pipelines are further enhanced
by additional speciﬁc analysis tools for dataset integration (e.g., LIGER [125]), trajectory anal-
yses such as pseudotime (e.g., Monocle [113]), and RNA velocity (e.g., Velocyto [134]). Finally,
big data such as these provide ample opportunity to study multiple cell types in the same
model with substantially high resolution. Many studies of astrocyte or microglia function
focus on each speciﬁc cell type in isolation, when in reality, the actions of these cells are part
of complicated intracellular signaling that involves many cell types. New analysis tools that
model intercellular communication by linking ligands to target genes across cell types and tis-
sues have recently been created that allow to dissect cell-to-cell communication using single
cell data to uncover novel cell interactions in health and disease [135,136].
Unfortunately, there is often ambiguity in describing analysis methods within publications.
Often authors state the pipeline used, without describing the speciﬁc parameters used or
providing details about data correction, integration, regression out of biological and technical
effects (e.g., removal of doublets or contaminating cells not of interest, or reporting of mito-
chondrial DNA contamination), as well as dealing with batch effects, and sharing analysis
code. By far, however, the most common error appears to be data integration, where re-
searchers fail to complete batch correction, highlighting speciﬁc clusters that are not based
on biological differences, but instead, are artifacts of data collection. It will be essential for
the ﬁeld to come together to adhere to common standards when reporting these data, such
as those produced for qPCR [minimum information for publication of quantitative real-time
PCR experiments (MIQE) guidelines] [137], microarray [minimum information about a micro-
array experiment (MIAME) guidelines] [138], and next-generation RNA sequencing [minimum
information about a high-throughput sequencing experiment (MINSEQE)i], when those tech-
nologies were still young. A similar minimum requirement for study design, quality control,
analysis, and validation for modern scRNASeq and single nuclei sequencing experiments
should ensure biological reproducibility, ample sample sizes to account for undersampling
errors, and ensure that the appropriate analytical pipelines are used to prepare data accurately
describing real biological variation.
One simple solution that might solve many of these issues is to require the sharing of raw
analytical code similar to the requirement that is in place to share all raw sequencing data.
This open science approach has already been embraced by many in the single cell ﬁeld, but
such an additional requirement would be highly beneﬁcial to the ﬁeld at large. Sharing raw
code would allow for others to both easily replicate the ﬁgures and analyses performed, but
also easily determine what additional analyses or ﬁltering might be relevant. Services such as
GitHubii make this process simple and free. Methods sections should still contain many of
these details but could do so in a more descriptive, readable language, while raw code could
be examined and followed by those wishing for more detail. With agreement and adoption of
such guidelines in place, reanalysis of published data and integration with newly prepared
samples may be more seamless and help accelerate new discoveries.
Clinician’s Corner
Microglia and astrocytes in humans
and
mice
integrate
function
and
trophic support for each other and for
neurons during normal physiology;
however, alterations in this support
during early stages of disease involves
combinatorial activation of both cells,
driving the death of neurons.
Microglia and astrocyte responses
to disease are highly heterogeneous
and likely change throughout disease
progression. Known dysfunctional
pathways provide key targets for
future intervention and therapy.
There is evidence that removal of
neurotoxic reactive astrocytes (driven
by microglia-derived cytokine release)
in chronic neurodegenerative disease
models and acute trauma is beneﬁcial
in maintaining neuron numbers and
function [50,54,75]. Meanwhile, other
evidence suggests that with prion in-
fection, a block in astrocyte neurotoxic
function leads to faster infection rates
and quicker death relative to brains
containing these reactive astrocytes
[58]. It is clear that the complex interac-
tions between astrocytes and microglia
with other CNS cells represents a difﬁ-
cult ‘moving target’ in therapeutic
discovery.
It remains unclear at what stage targeting
microglia and astrocytes will be beneﬁcial
for chronic neurodegenerative disease.
However, healthcare providers might
be able to treat their patients more
effectively if we understood what effect
pro- and anti-inﬂammatory drugs have
on microglia and astrocytes.
In the future, it might be possible to
manipulate individual subsets of reactive
microglia and astrocytes to stop disease
initiation, slow progression, or reverse
the effects of neurodegeneration. This
might be potentially accomplished in the
clinical setting by silencing/blocking
cytokine release (microglia target),
enhancing trophic support (astrocyte
target), blocking neurotoxic capacity
(microglia/astrocyte
target),
or
by
intervening with specialized diets and
changing bacterial load in the gut
(microbiome target). Robust studies
are evidently warranted to test these
possibilities.
Trends in Immunology
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9
831

Concluding Remarks
The study of microglia and astrocytes has seen a renaissance in recent years. This is partly due
to an increase in the availability of new tools to enable rapid and cost effective sequencing of
individual cells, but also due to new methods to isolate, culture, and target these cells in vivo.
As discussed earlier, these new tools have provided valuable insights into the functions of
microglia and astrocytes during normal development as well as during the early initiation and
progressive stages of many chronic neurodegenerative diseases. Most interesting has been
the increase in resources and models that integrate both cell types, highlighting how they com-
municate and integrate functions throughout the brain. Part of this effort will require a deeper
understanding of microglia and astrocyte surface proteomes and secretomes and integrating
these data with other multi-omics datasets (transcriptomics, epigenetic, proteomic); this will
facilitate identifying mechanisms of astrocyte–microglia crosstalk in different genetic and envi-
ronmental contexts.
It is clear that one of the roles of microglia and astrocytes in many aspects of brain health is to co-
ordinate responses to disease, infection, and injury. We now need to focus our research efforts on
functional studies, as these will enable us to move beyond our current shallow understandings
and to exploit novel dysfunctional pathways that may enable us to ameliorate a wide range of dis-
eases (see Outstanding Questions). The future looks bright and now we have the tools to address
our exciting research questions.
Acknowledgments
The results published in Table 1 are in whole or in part based on data obtained from the AMP-AD Knowledge Portaliii and the
Religious Orders Study and Memory and Aging Project (ROSMAP), data from which is gathered by the Rush Alzheimer’s
Disease Center at Rush Universityiv. Samples for this study were provided by the Rush Alzheimer’s Disease Center, Rush
University Medical Center, Chicago. Data collection was supported through funding by National Institute on Aging grants
P30AG10161, R01AG15819, R01AG17917, R01AG30146, R01AG36836, U01AG32984, U01AG46152, the Illinois De-
partment of Public Health, and the Translational Genomics Research Institute. Speciﬁc datasets in which additional analyses
were performed are available from the Synapse database under accession number syn18485175. The results in Table 1 for
[148] are based on reanalysis of study data (syn18915937) provided by Dr Vivek Swarup, Institute for Memory Impairments
and Neurological Disorders, University of California, Irvine. Data collection was supported through funding University of Cal-
ifornia, Irvine Startup funds and American Federation of Aging Research. Analysis of the above snRNASeq datasets [118,148]
was completed by Samuel Marsh, Jessica Sadick, and Taitea Dykstra as part of other ongoing projects. We thank them for
sharing their data. Code for their reanalysis can be obtained via the following Github Repositories: https://github.com/
samuel-marsh/Marsh_et-al_2020_scRNAseq_Dissociation_Artifacts, https://github.com/liddelowlab/TrendsImmunology-
Review-2020. We also acknowledge extensive literature beyond the scope of what we could include in this article. This
does not discount the quality of these other prior works. We thank Dr Daniel Wilton and Rachel Kim for microglia and
astrocyte micrographs included in Figure 1. We thank Dr Philip Hasel for representative tSNE feature plots included in
Figure 2. We thank the Cure Alzheimer's Fund for their generous support (S.A.L., B.S.).
Disclaimer Statement
B.S. is a member of the Scientiﬁc Advisory Board and minor shareholder in Annexon Biosciences. B.S. is an inventor on
multiple patents ‘Modulation of Synaptic Maintenance’ (US8148330B2, US9149444B2) and is inventor on pending patent
‘Biomarkers for Dementia and Dementia Related Neurological Disorders’ (WO2015103594A1/US20160327572A1). S.A.L.
is an academic founder of AstronauTx Ltd. S.A.L. is an inventor on a pending patent ‘Neuronal and Oligodendrocyte Survival
Modulation’ (US20190248885A1). S.E.M. has no interests to declare.
Resources
ihttp://fged.org/projects/minseqe/
iihttps://github.com/
iiihttps://adknowledgeportal.synapse.org/
ivwww.radc.rush.edu
Outstanding Questions
How
do
microglia
and
astrocyte
responses change in the context of
disease and genetic background? For
instance, do mutations in disease-
causing genes change the way that
cells would respond to secondary in-
sults such as inﬂammation and can
these altered response mechanisms
shed light on the initiation and progres-
sion of chronic neurodegenerative
diseases?
How do transcriptomic signatures relate
to protein proﬁles? The journey from
gene to protein is complex and consists
of two major steps: transcription and
translation. While we have been able to
measure translation using TRAP mouse
lines for some years, we still have pre-
cious little information regarding actual
protein amounts and post-translational
modiﬁcations in these cells during health
and in disease. Do protein modiﬁcations
differ across different regions of the
CNS? Do they change throughout devel-
opment and in aging? And how are they
altered in the acute and chronic setting of
disease and infection? All of these ques-
tions are ready to be addressed in the
near future.
Is functional heterogeneity as common
as transcriptomic diversity? Recent
advances in scRNASeq suggest the
existence of distinct subtypes of
microglia and astrocytes in different
contexts, as well as new markers that
may be used to label and manipulate
glia for functional investigation. The
future will no doubt provide numerous
studies that expand on these studies.
Are functionally distinct microglia and
astrocytes present across a given
disease, or is each subtype distinct to
the multiple contextual cues driving
their formation (e.g., sex, age, brain
region, disease state, etc.)?
Trends in Immunology
832
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9

References
1.
Li, Q. and Barres, B.A. (2018) Microglia and macrophages in
brain homeostasis and disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 18,
225–242
2.
Sofroniew, M.V. and Vinters, H.V. (2010) Astrocytes: biology
and pathology. Acta Neuropathol. 119, 7–35
3.
Allen, N.J. and Eroglu, C. (2017) Cell biology of astrocyte-
synapse interactions. Neuron 96, 697–708
4.
Bush, T.G. et al. (1999) Leukocyte inﬁltration, neuronal degen-
eration, and neurite outgrowth after ablation of scar-forming,
reactive astrocytes in adult transgenic mice. Neuron 23,
297–308
5.
McCarthy, K.D. and de Vellis, J. (1980) Preparation of separate
astroglial and oligodendroglial cell cultures from rat cerebral tis-
sue. J. Cell Biol. 85, 890–902
6.
Ford, A.L. et al. (1995) Normal adult ramiﬁed microglia sepa-
rated from other central nervous system macrophages by
ﬂow cytometric sorting. Phenotypic differences deﬁned and di-
rect ex vivo antigen presentation to myelin basic protein-
reactive CD4+ T cells compared. J. Immunol. 154, 4309–4321
7.
Bennett, M.L. et al. (2016) New tools for studying microglia in
the mouse and human CNS. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
113, E1738–E1746
8.
Hammond, T.R. et al. (2019) Single-cell RNA sequencing of
microglia throughout the mouse lifespan and in the injured
brain reveals complex cell-state changes. Immunity 50,
253–271
9.
Foo, L.C. et al. (2011) Development of a method for the puriﬁ-
cation and culture of rodent astrocytes. Neuron 71, 799–811
10.
Bohlen, C.J. et al. (2017) Diverse requirements for microglial
survival, speciﬁcation, and function revealed by deﬁned-
medium cultures. Neuron 94, 759–773
11.
Wang, Y. et al. (2012) IL-34 is a tissue-restricted ligand of
CSF1R required for the development of Langerhans cells and
microglia. Nat. Immunol. 13, 753–760
12.
Greter, M. et al. (2012) Stroma-derived interleukin-34 controls
the development and maintenance of Langerhans cells and
the maintenance of microglia. Immunity 37, 1050–1060
13.
Butovsky, O. et al. (2014) Identiﬁcation of a unique TGF-beta-
dependent molecular and functional signature in microglia.
Nat. Neurosci. 17, 131–143
14.
Liu, W. et al. (1994) Macrophage colony-stimulating factor me-
diates astrocyte-induced microglial ramiﬁcation in human fetal
central nervous system culture. Am. J. Pathol. 145, 48–53
15.
Salimi, K. et al. (2003) GDNF and TGF-beta1 promote cell sur-
vival in serum-free cultures of primary rat microglia. Cell Tissue
Res. 312, 135–139
16.
Schilling, T. et al. (2001) Astrocyte-released cytokines induce
ramiﬁcation and outward K+ channel expression in microglia
via distinct signalling pathways. Eur. J. Neurosci. 14, 463–473
17.
Zhang, Y. et al. (2014) An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and
splicing database of glia, neurons, and vascular cells of the ce-
rebral cortex. J. Neurosci. 34, 11929–11947
18.
Saunders, A. et al. (2018) Molecular diversity and specializa-
tions among the cells of the adult mouse brain. Cell 174,
1015–1030
19.
LaDu, M.J. et al. (1998) Nascent astrocyte particles differ from
lipoproteins in CSF. J. Neurochem. 70, 2070–2081
20.
Pfrieger, F.W. and Ungerer, N. (2011) Cholesterol
metabolism in neurons and astrocytes. Prog. Lipid Res.
50, 357–371
21.
Yeh, F.L. et al. (2016) TREM2 binds to apolipoproteins, includ-
ing APOE and CLU/APOJ, and thereby facilitates uptake of
amyloid-beta by microglia. Neuron 91, 328–340
22.
Kunkle, B.W. et al. (2019) Genetic meta-analysis of diagnosed
Alzheimer's disease identiﬁes new risk loci and implicates
Abeta, tau, immunity and lipid processing. Nat. Genet. 51,
414–430
23.
Cruchaga, C. et al. (2013) GWAS of cerebrospinal ﬂuid tau
levels identiﬁes risk variants for Alzheimer's disease. Neuron
78, 256–268
24.
Guerreiro, R. et al. (2013) TREM2 variants in Alzheimer's dis-
ease. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 117–127
25.
Jonsson, T. et al. (2013) Variant of TREM2 associated with the
risk of Alzheimer's disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 107–116
26.
Sims, R. et al. (2017) Rare coding variants in PLCG2, ABI3,
and TREM2 implicate microglial-mediated innate immunity in
Alzheimer's disease. Nat. Genet. 49, 1373–1384
27.
Strittmatter, W.J. et al. (1993) Apolipoprotein E: high-avidity
binding to beta-amyloid and increased frequency of type 4
allele in late-onset familial Alzheimer disease. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 90, 1977–1981
28.
Corder, E.H. et al. (1993) Gene dose of apolipoprotein E type 4
allele and the risk of Alzheimer's disease in late onset families.
Science 261, 921–923
29.
Han, Z. et al. (2018) Analyzing 74,248 samples conﬁrms the
association between CLU rs11136000 polymorphism and
Alzheimer's disease in Caucasian but not Chinese population.
Sci. Rep. 8, 11062
30.
Harold, D. et al. (2009) Genome-wide association study iden-
tiﬁes variants at CLU and PICALM associated with Alzheimer's
disease. Nat. Genet. 41, 1088–1093
31.
Lambert, J.C. et al. (2009) Genome-wide association study
identiﬁes variants at CLU and CR1 associated with Alzheimer's
disease. Nat. Genet. 41, 1094–1099
32.
Hollingworth, P. et al. (2011) Common variants at ABCA7,
MS4A6A/MS4A4E, EPHA1, CD33 and CD2AP are associated
with Alzheimer's disease. Nat. Genet. 43, 429–435
33.
Naj, A.C. et al. (2011) Common variants at MS4A4/MS4A6E,
CD2AP, CD33 and EPHA1 are associated with late-onset
Alzheimer's disease. Nat. Genet. 43, 436–441
34.
Keren-Shaul, H. et al. (2017) A unique microglia type associ-
ated with restricting development of Alzheimer's disease. Cell
169, 1276–1290
35.
Krasemann, S. et al. (2017) The TREM2-APOE pathway drives
the transcriptional phenotype of dysfunctional microglia in
neurodegenerative diseases. Immunity 47, 566–581
36.
TCW, J. et al. (2019) Cholesterol and matrisome pathways
dysregulated in human APOE ε4 glia. bioRxiv Published online
July 25, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1101/713362
37.
Filipello, F. et al. (2018) The microglial innate immune receptor
TREM2 is required for synapse elimination and normal brain
connectivity. Immunity 48, 979–991
38.
Scott-Hewitt, N. et al. (2020) Local externalization of
phosphatidylserine mediates developmental synaptic pruning
by microglia. EMBO J., e105380 Published online July 13,
2020. https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.2020105380
39.
Holtzman, D.M. (2004) In vivo effects of ApoE and clusterin on
amyloid-beta metabolism and neuropathology. J. Mol.
Neurosci. 23, 247–254
40.
Namba, Y. et al. (1991) Apolipoprotein E immunoreactivity in
cerebral amyloid deposits and neuroﬁbrillary tangles in
Alzheimer's disease and kuru plaque amyloid in Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease. Brain Res. 541, 163–166
41.
Kamphuis, W. et al. (2016) Transcriptional proﬁling of CD11c-
positive microglia accumulating around amyloid plaques in a
mouse model for Alzheimer's disease. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1862, 1847–1860
42.
Orre, M. et al. (2014) Isolation of glia from Alzheimer's mice
reveals inﬂammation and dysfunction. Neurobiol. Aging 35,
2746–2760
43.
Parhizkar, S. et al. (2019) Loss of TREM2 function increases
amyloid seeding but reduces plaque-associated ApoE. Nat.
Neurosci. 22, 191–204
44.
Liao, F. et al. (2018) Targeting of nonlipidated, aggregated
apoE with antibodies inhibits amyloid accumulation. J. Clin.
Invest. 128, 2144–2155
45.
Shi, Y. et al. (2017) ApoE4 markedly exacerbates tau-mediated
neurodegeneration in a mouse model of tauopathy. Nature
549, 523–527
46.
Koistinaho, M. et al. (2004) Apolipoprotein E promotes astro-
cyte colocalization and degradation of deposited amyloid-
beta peptides. Nat. Med. 10, 719–726
47.
Ulrich, J.D. et al. (2018) ApoE facilitates the microglial response
to amyloid plaque pathology. J. Exp. Med. 215, 1047–1058
Trends in Immunology
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9
833

48.
Liu, C.C. et al. (2017) ApoE4 accelerates early seeding of
amyloid pathology. Neuron 96, 1024–1032
49.
Lin, Y.T. et al. (2018) APOE4 causes widespread molecular
and cellular alterations associated with Alzheimer's disease
phenotypes in human iPSC-derived brain cell types. Neuron
98, 1141–1154
50.
Liddelow, S.A. et al. (2017) Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are
induced by activated microglia. Nature 541, 481–487
51.
Hong, S. et al. (2016) Complement and microglia mediate early
synapse loss in Alzheimer mouse models. Science 352,
712–716
52.
Barbar, L. et al. (2020) CD49f Is a novel marker of functional
and reactive human iPSC-derived astrocytes. Neuron 107,
436–453.e12
53.
Joshi, A.U. et al. (2019) Fragmented mitochondria released from
microglia trigger A1 astrocytic response and propagate inﬂam-
matory neurodegeneration. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 1635–1648
54.
Yun, S.P. et al. (2018) Block of A1 astrocyte conversion by mi-
croglia is neuroprotective in models of Parkinson's disease.
Nat. Med. 24, 931–938
55.
Diaz-Castro, B. et al. (2019) Astrocyte molecular signatures in
Huntington's disease. Sci. Transl. Med. 11, eaaw8546
56.
Kleffman, K. et al. (2019) Melanoma-secreted amyloid beta
suppresses neuroinﬂammation and promotes brain metasta-
sis. bioRxiv Published online November 26, 2019. https://doi.
org/10.1101/854885
57.
Gibson, E.M. et al. (2019) Methotrexate chemotherapy induces
persistent tri-glial dysregulation that underlies chemotherapy-
related cognitive impairment. Cell 176, 43–55
58.
Hartmann, K. et al. (2019) Complement 3(+)-astrocytes are
highly abundant in prion diseases, but their abolishment led
to an accelerated disease course and early dysregulation of mi-
croglia. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 7, 83
59.
Jurado, K.A. et al. (2018) Antiviral CD8 T cells induce Zika-
virus-associated paralysis in mice. Nat. Microbiol. 3, 141–147
60.
Daniels, B.P. et al. (2017) Regional astrocyte IFN signaling re-
stricts pathogenesis during neurotropic viral infection. J. Clin.
Invest. 127, 843–856
61.
Karpuk, N. et al. (2011) Neuroinﬂammation leads to region-
dependent alterations in astrocyte gap junction communica-
tion and hemichannel activity. J. Neurosci. 31, 414–425
62.
Garber, C. et al. (2019) T cells promote microglia-mediated syn-
aptic elimination and cognitive dysfunction during recovery from
neuropathogenic ﬂaviviruses. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 1276–1288
63.
Babcock, A. and Owens, T. (2003) Chemokines in experimen-
tal autoimmune encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis. Adv.
Exp. Med. Biol. 520, 120–132
64.
Sauder, C. et al. (2000) Chemokine gene expression in astro-
cytes of Borna disease virus-infected rats and mice in the ab-
sence of inﬂammation. J. Virol. 74, 9267–9280
65.
Stuve, O. et al. (2002) The role of the MHC class II
transactivator in class II expression and antigen presentation
by astrocytes and in susceptibility to central nervous system
autoimmune disease. J. Immunol. 169, 6720–6732
66.
Guttenplan, K.A. and Liddelow, S.A. (2019) Astrocytes and mi-
croglia: models and tools. J. Exp. Med. 216, 71–83
67.
Parkhurst, C.N. et al. (2013) Microglia promote learning-
dependent synapse formation through brain-derived neuro-
trophic factor. Cell 155, 1596–1609
68.
Elmore, M.R. et al. (2014) Colony-stimulating factor 1 recep-
tor signaling is necessary for microglia viability, unmasking a
microglia progenitor cell in the adult brain. Neuron 82,
380–397
69.
Anderson, M.A. et al. (2016) Astrocyte scar formation aids cen-
tral nervous system axon regeneration. Nature 532, 195–200
70.
Spangenberg, E.E. et al. (2016) Eliminating microglia in
Alzheimer's mice prevents neuronal loss without modulating
amyloid-beta pathology. Brain 139, 1265–1281
71.
Spangenberg, E. et al. (2019) Sustained microglial depletion
with CSF1R inhibitor impairs parenchymal plaque develop-
ment in an Alzheimer's disease model. Nat. Commun. 10,
3758
72.
Elmore, M.R.P. et al. (2018) Replacement of microglia in the
aged brain reverses cognitive, synaptic, and neuronal deﬁcits
in mice. Aging Cell 17, e12832
73.
Szalay, G. et al. (2016) Microglia protect against brain injury
and their selective elimination dysregulates neuronal network
activity after stroke. Nat. Commun. 7, 11499
74.
Guillemaud, O. et al. (2020) Complex roles for reactive
astrocytes in the triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer
disease. Neurobiol. Aging 90, 135–146
75.
Guttenplan, K.A. et al. (2020) Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes
drive neuronal death after retinal injury. Cell Rep. 31, 107776
76.
Dejanovic, B. et al. (2018) Changes in the synaptic proteome
in tauopathy and rescue of tau-induced synapse loss by C1q
antibodies. Neuron 100, 1322–1336
77.
Litvinchuk, A. et al. (2018) Complement C3aR inactivation
attenuates tau pathology and reverses an immune network
deregulated in tauopathy models and Alzheimer's disease.
Neuron 100, 1337–1353
78.
Bohlen, C.J. et al. (2019) Isolation and culture of microglia.
Curr. Protoc. Immunol. 125, e70
79.
Mrdjen, D. et al. (2018) High-dimensional single-cell mapping
of central nervous system immune cells reveals distinct myeloid
subsets in health, aging, and disease. Immunity 48, 599
80.
Louveau, A. et al. (2015) Structural and functional features of
central nervous system lymphatic vessels. Nature 523,
337–341
81.
Marsh, S.E. et al. (2016) The adaptive immune system restrains
Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis by modulating microglial
function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 113, E1316–E1325
82.
Gagliano, S.A. et al. (2016) Genomics implicates adaptive and
innate immunity in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases. Ann.
Clin. Transl. Neurol. 3, 924–933
83.
Raj, T. et al. (2014) Polarization of the effects of autoimmune
and neurodegenerative risk alleles in leukocytes. Science
344, 519–523
84.
Lopes Pinheiro, M.A. et al. (2016) Immune cell trafﬁcking
across the barriers of the central nervous system in multiple
sclerosis and stroke. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1862, 461–471
85.
Doyle, K.P. et al. (2015) B-lymphocyte-mediated delayed
cognitive impairment following stroke. J. Neurosci. 35,
2133–2145
86.
Itagaki, S. et al. (1988) Presence of T-cytotoxic suppressor and
leucocyte common antigen positive cells in Alzheimer's disease
brain tissue. Neurosci. Lett. 91, 259–264
87.
Baruch, K. et al. (2015) Breaking immune tolerance by
targeting Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells mitigates Alzheimer's
disease pathology. Nat. Commun. 6, 7967
88.
Brochard, V. et al. (2009) Inﬁltration of CD4+ lymphocytes into
the brain contributes to neurodegeneration in a mouse model
of Parkinson disease. J. Clin. Invest. 119, 182–192
89.
Dansokho, C. et al. (2016) Regulatory T cells delay disease
progression in Alzheimer-like pathology. Brain 139, 1237–1251
90.
Jangi, S. et al. (2016) Alterations of the human gut microbiome
in multiple sclerosis. Nat. Commun. 7, 12015
91.
Kipnis, J. et al. (2004) Dual effect of CD4+CD25+ regulatory
T cells in neurodegeneration: a dialogue with microglia. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101, 14663–14669
92.
Saikali, P. et al. (2010) Contribution of astrocyte-derived IL-15
to CD8 T cell effector functions in multiple sclerosis.
J. Immunol. 185, 5693–5703
93.
Erny, D. et al. (2015) Host microbiota constantly control matu-
ration and function of microglia in the CNS. Nat. Neurosci. 18,
965–977
94.
Rothhammer, V. et al. (2016) Type I interferons and microbial
metabolites of tryptophan modulate astrocyte activity and
central nervous system inﬂammation via the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor. Nat. Med. 22, 586–597
95.
Hornung, B.V.H. et al. (2019) Issues and current standards of con-
trols in microbiome research. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 95, ﬁz045
96.
Chai, H. et al. (2017) Neural circuit-specialized astrocytes:
transcriptomic, proteomic, morphological, and functional evi-
dence. Neuron 95, 531–549
97.
Clarke, L.E. et al. (2018) Normal aging induces A1-like astrocyte
reactivity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 115, E1896–E1905
98.
Boisvert, M.M. et al. (2018) The aging astrocyte transcriptome
from multiple regions of the mouse brain. Cell Rep. 22, 269–285
99.
Clarke, L.E. and Liddelow, S.A. (2017) Neurobiology: diversity
reaches the stars. Nature 548, 396–397
Trends in Immunology
834
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9

100. Zamanian, J.L. et al. (2012) Genomic analysis of reactive
astrogliosis. J. Neurosci. 32, 6391–6410
101. Schafer, D.P. et al. (2012) Microglia sculpt postnatal neural cir-
cuits in an activity and complement-dependent manner.
Neuron 74, 691–705
102. Stevens, B. et al. (2007) The classical complement cascade
mediates CNS synapse elimination. Cell 131, 1164–1178
103. Chung, W.S. et al. (2013) Astrocytes mediate synapse elimina-
tion through MEGF10 and MERTK pathways. Nature 504,
394–400
104. Tasdemir-Yilmaz, O.E. and Freeman, M.R. (2014) Astrocytes
engage unique molecular programs to engulf pruned neuronal
debris from distinct subsets of neurons. Genes Dev. 28, 20–33
105. Morizawa, Y.M. et al. (2017) Reactive astrocytes function as
phagocytes after brain ischemia via ABCA1-mediated path-
way. Nat. Commun. 8, 28
106. Habib, N. et al. (2017) Massively parallel single-nucleus RNA-
seq with DroNc-seq. Nat. Methods 14, 955–958
107. Macosko, E.Z. et al. (2015) Highly parallel genome-wide ex-
pression proﬁling of individual cells using nanoliter droplets.
Cell 161, 1202–1214
108. Lareau, C.A. et al. (2019) Droplet-based combinatorial indexing
for massive-scale single-cell chromatin accessibility. Nat.
Biotechnol. 37, 916–924
109. Granja, J.M. et al. (2019) Single-cell multiomic analysis identiﬁes
regulatory programs in mixed-phenotype acute leukemia. Nat.
Biotechnol. 37, 1458–1465
110. Grosselin, K. et al. (2019) High-throughput single-cell ChIP-seq
identiﬁes heterogeneity of chromatin states in breast cancer.
Nat. Genet. 51, 1060–1066
111. Chen, C. et al. (2017) Single-cell whole-genome analyses by
linear ampliﬁcation via transposon insertion (LIANTI). Science
356, 189–194
112. Vitak, S.A. et al. (2017) Sequencing thousands of single-cell ge-
nomes with combinatorial indexing. Nat. Methods 14, 302–308
113. Cao, J. et al. (2018) Joint proﬁling of chromatin accessibility and
gene expression in thousands of single cells. Science 361,
1380–1385
114. Chen, S. et al. (2019) High-throughput sequencing of the tran-
scriptome and chromatin accessibility in the same cell. Nat.
Biotechnol. 37, 1452–1457
115. Li, Q. et al. (2019) Developmental heterogeneity of microglia
and brain myeloid cells revealed by deep single-cell RNA se-
quencing. Neuron 101, 207–223
116. Zhou, Y. et al. (2020) Human and mouse single-nucleus transcripto-
mics reveal TREM2-dependent and TREM2-independent cellular
responses in Alzheimer's disease. Nat. Med. 26, 131–142
117. Gosselin, D. et al. (2017) An environment-dependent transcrip-
tional network speciﬁes human microglia identity. Science 356,
eaal3222
118. Mathys, H. et al. (2019) Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of
Alzheimer's disease. Nature 570, 332–337
119. Grubman, A. et al. (2019) A single-cell atlas of entorhinal cortex from
individuals with Alzheimer's disease reveals cell-type-speciﬁc gene
expression regulation. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 2087–2097
120. Del-Aguila, J.L. et al. (2019) A single-nuclei RNA sequencing
study of Mendelian and sporadic AD in the human brain.
Alzheimers Res. Ther. 11, 71
121. Olah, M. et al. (2018) A transcriptomic atlas of aged human mi-
croglia. Nat. Commun. 9, 539
122. Zhong, J. et al. (2020) Integrated proﬁling of single cell
epigenomic and transcriptomic landscape of Parkinson’s dis-
ease mouse brain. bioRxiv Published online February 4,
2020. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.04.933259
123. Zeisel, A. et al. (2018) Molecular architecture of the mouse ner-
vous system. Cell 174, 999–1014
124. Polioudakis, D. et al. (2019) A single-cell transcriptomic atlas of
human neocortical development during mid-gestation. Neuron
103, 785–801
125. Welch, J.D. et al. (2019) Single-cell multi-omic integration compares
and contrasts features of brain cell identity. Cell 177, 1873–1887
126. Wheeler, M.A. et al. (2020) MAFG-driven astrocytes promote
CNS inﬂammation. Nature 578, 593–599
127. Ero, C. et al. (2018) A cell atlas for the mouse brain. Front
Neuroinform. 12, 84
128. Keller, D. et al. (2018) Cell densities in the mouse brain: a sys-
tematic review. Front. Neuroanat. 12, 83
129. Pelvig, D.P. et al. (2008) Neocortical glial cell numbers in human
brains. Neurobiol. Aging 29, 1754–1762
130. Batiuk, M.Y. et al. (2020) Identiﬁcation of region-speciﬁc astro-
cyte subtypes at single cell resolution. Nat. Commun. 11, 1220
131. Butler, A. et al. (2018) Integrating single-cell transcriptomic data
across different conditions, technologies, and species. Nat.
Biotechnol. 36, 411–420
132. Wolf, F.A. et al. (2018) SCANPY: large-scale single-cell gene
expression data analysis. Genome Biol. 19, 15
133. Amezquita, R.A. et al. (2020) Orchestrating single-cell analysis
with Bioconductor. Nat. Methods 17, 137–145
134. La Manno, G. et al. (2018) RNA velocity of single cells. Nature
560, 494–498
135. Vento-Tormo, R. et al. (2018) Single-cell reconstruction of
the early maternal-fetal interface in humans. Nature 563,
347–353
136. Browaeys, R. et al. (2020) NicheNet: modeling intercellular
communication by linking ligands to target genes. Nat.
Methods 17, 159–162
137. Bustin, S.A. et al. (2009) The MIQE guidelines: minimum infor-
mation for publication of quantitative real-time PCR experi-
ments. Clin. Chem. 55, 611–622
138. Brazma, A. et al. (2001) Minimum information about a microar-
ray experiment (MIAME)-toward standards for microarray data.
Nat. Genet. 29, 365–371
139. Ivanov, I.I. et al. (2006) The orphan nuclear receptor
RORgammat directs the differentiation program of proinﬂam-
matory IL-17+ T helper cells. Cell 126, 1121–1133
140. Chen, W.-T. et al. (2020) Spatial and temporal transcriptomics
reveal microglia-astroglia crosstalk in the amyloid-β plaque
cell niche of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Published online July
17, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.06.038
141. Alsema, A.M. et al. (2020) Proﬁling microglia from AD donors
and non-demented elderly in acute human post-mortem corti-
cal tissue. bioRxiv Published online March 19, 2020. https://
doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.18.995332
142. Vainchtein, I.D. and Molofsky, A.V. (2020) Astrocytes and microg-
lia: in sickness and in health. Trends Neurosci. 43, 144–154
143. Liddelow, S.A. and Barres, B.A. (2017) Reactive astrocytes:
production, function, and therapeutic potential. Immunity 46,
957–967
144. Li, D. et al. (2020) Hippocampal microglial activation triggers a
neurotoxic-speciﬁc astrocyte response and mediates etomidate-
induced long-term synaptic inhibition. J. Neuroinﬂammation 17, 109
145. Papalexi, E. and Satija, R. (2018) Single-cell RNA sequencing to
explore immune cell heterogeneity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 18, 35–45
146. Ding, J. et al. (2020) Systematic comparative analysis of single
cell RNA-sequencing methods. Nat. Biotechnol. 38, 737–746
147. Mereu, E. et al. (2020) Benchmarking single-cell RNA sequencing
protocols for cell atlas projects. Nat. Biotechnol. 38, 747–755
148. Morabito, S. et al. (2019) Integrative genomics approach iden-
tiﬁes conserved transcriptomic networks in Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. bioRxiv Published online July 7, 2019. https://doi.org/
10.1101/695221
149. Velmeshev, D. et al. (2019) Single-cell genomics identiﬁes cell
type-speciﬁc molecular changes in autism. Science 364,
685–689
150. Schirmer, L. et al. (2019) Neuronal vulnerability and multilineage
diversity in multiple sclerosis. Nature 573, 75–82
151. Lawson, L.J. et al. (1990) Heterogeneity in the distribution and
morphology of microglia in the normal adult mouse brain.
Neuroscience 39, 151–170
152. Mittelbronn, M. et al. (2001) Local distribution of microglia in the
normal adult human central nervous system differs by up to one
order of magnitude. Acta Neuropathol. 101, 249–255
Trends in Immunology
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9
835

===== Lim2021_eLife_Microglia+AxonPruning =====
*For correspondence:
edward.ruthazer@mcgill.ca
Competing interests: The
authors declare that no
competing interests exist.
Funding: See page 29
Received: 16 August 2020
Accepted: 28 February 2021
Published: 16 March 2021
Reviewing editor: Carol A
Mason, Columbia University,
United States
Copyright Lim and Ruthazer.
This article is distributed under
the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License,
which permits unrestricted use
and redistribution provided that
the original author and source are
credited.
Microglial trogocytosis and the
complement system regulate axonal
pruning in vivo
Tony KY Lim, Edward S Ruthazer*
Department of Neurology & Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute-
Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
Abstract Partial phagocytosis—called trogocytosis—of axons by microglia has been
documented in ex vivo preparations but has not been directly observed in vivo. The mechanisms
that modulate microglial trogocytosis of axons and its function in neural circuit development remain
poorly understood. Here, we directly observe axon trogocytosis by microglia in vivo in the
developing Xenopus laevis retinotectal circuit. We show that microglia regulate pruning of retinal
ganglion cell axons and are important for proper behavioral response to dark and bright looming
stimuli. Using bioinformatics, we identify amphibian regulator of complement activation 3, a
homolog of human CD46, as a neuronally expressed synapse-associated complement inhibitory
molecule that inhibits trogocytosis and axonal pruning. Using a membrane-bound complement C3
fusion protein, we demonstrate that enhancing complement activity enhances axonal pruning. Our
results support the model that microglia remodel axons via trogocytosis and that neurons can
control this process through expression of complement inhibitory proteins.
Introduction
Microglia, the immune cells of the CNS, are vital for the maintenance and development of a healthy
brain. Constantly surveilling the brain (Nimmerjahn et al., 2005; Wake et al., 2009), these highly
phagocytic cells are thought to contribute to developmental synaptic remodeling by phagocytosing
inappropriate or supernumerary synapses, a hypothesis that has derived considerable support from
histological and immunohistochemical evidence identifying synaptic components within endocytic
compartments in microglia (Paolicelli et al., 2011; Schafer et al., 2012; Stevens et al., 2007;
Tremblay et al., 2010). This hypothesis is further supported by numerous studies demonstrating
that
microglia
depletion
leads
to
exuberant
axonal
outgrowth
(Pont-Lezica
et
al.,
2014;
Squarzoni et al., 2014), impaired pruning of excess synapses (Ji et al., 2013; Milinkeviciute et al.,
2019), and increased spine density (Wallace et al., 2020) during development.
Studies depleting microglia or disrupting microglial function provide indirect evidence to support
the hypothesis that microglia remodel synapses through phagocytic mechanisms. An inherent weak-
ness of indirect approaches is that the source of the synaptic material within microglia is unknown.
For example, it is possible that synaptic components may be found within microglia due to clearance
of apoptotic neurons rather than synaptic pruning. More direct approaches are required to verify
whether microglia collect synaptic material from living neurons. Currently, direct evidence of com-
plete elimination of synapses by microglial engulfment remains elusive. However, instead of remov-
ing entire synapses, microglia have been documented engaging in trogocytosis, or partial
elimination, of axons and presynaptic boutons in ex vivo organotypic cultures and in fixed brain tis-
sue using electron microscopy (Weinhard et al., 2018), although it remains to be seen whether
microglial trogocytosis of axons is a phenomenon that occurs in vivo.
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
1 of 35
RESEARCH ARTICLE

Even if we accept the hypothesis that microglia trogocytose the axonal compartment, many ques-
tions remain. What impact does partial elimination of presynaptic structures have on circuit remodel-
ing? It is unclear if this phenomenon is required for proper wiring of neuronal circuits. Does
microglial trogocytosis of axons affect axon morphology? While disrupting microglial function enhan-
ces axon tract outgrowth (Pont-Lezica et al., 2014; Squarzoni et al., 2014), it is unknown if this
result is because of a disruption in microglial trogocytosis, or whether non-phagocytic mechanisms
are in play. Is axonal trogocytosis by microglia mechanistically similar to complement-mediated syn-
aptic pruning? There is extensive evidence demonstrating that the complement system regulates
synaptic pruning by microglia via the complement protein C3 (Paolicelli et al., 2011; Schafer et al.,
2012; Stevens et al., 2007). However, knockout (KO) mice lacking complement receptor type 3
(CR3),
the
receptor
for
activated
C3,
do
not
exhibit
a
deficit
in
microglial
trogocytosis
(Weinhard et al., 2018), raising the possibility that microglial trogocytosis of axons is mechanistically
distinct from complement-mediated synaptic pruning.
In this study, we addressed these questions and directly observed in vivo trogocytosis of retinal
ganglion cell (RGC) axons by individual microglial cells in real-time using the developing Xenopus
laevis retinotectal circuit. We then developed an assay to monitor microglial trogocytosis of axons
among the population of microglia in the optic tectum. To investigate the functional role of micro-
glial trogocytosis, we depleted microglial cells and found that this enhanced axon arborization and
reversed the behavioral responses to dark and bright looming stimuli. We identified amphibian regu-
lator of complement activation 3 (aRCA3) (Oshiumi et al., 2009), a homolog of mammalian CD46,
as an endogenously expressed, synapse-associated, complement inhibitory molecule in Xenopus lae-
vis RGC neurons. Overexpression of aRCA3 inhibited trogocytosis and axonal pruning. Conversely,
expression of a membrane-bound complement C3 fusion protein in RGCs enhanced axonal pruning.
Our findings provide direct in vivo evidence supporting the hypothesis that microglia trogocytose
presynaptic axonal elements and supports a model in which microglial trogocytosis regulates axonal
pruning
to
promote
proper
neural
wiring
during
development
(Schafer
et
al.,
2012;
Weinhard et al., 2018). In this model, neurons exert local control of microglial trogocytosis and axo-
nal pruning by expressing complement regulatory proteins.
Results
Microglia in Xenopus laevis tadpoles resemble neonatal mammalian
microglia
Microglia in albino Xenopus laevis tadpoles were labeled with IB4-isolectin conjugated fluorophores
for in vivo imaging. IB4-isolectin binds the RET receptor tyrosine kinase on microglial cells
(Boscia et al., 2013), but does not lead to production of tumor necrosis factor-a or alterations in
microglial morphology (Grinberg et al., 2011). Injection of fluorophore conjugated IB4-isolectin into
the third ventricle of Xenopus laevis tadpoles labels highly mobile cells (Figure 1A and Video 1A)
that have both ameboid-like and primitive ramified-like morphologies, resembling the morphology
of embryonic microglial cells. Ameboid microglia are round or irregular cells with filopodia and/or
pseudopodia, while primitive ramified microglia have scantly developed, poorly branching processes
(Dalmau et al., 1997; Dalmau et al., 1998). Interestingly, IB4-isolectin-labeled cells can be observed
switching back and forth between ameboid-like and primitive ramified-like morphologies (Figure 1B
and Video 1B), suggesting that microglial morphology during development may be more dynamic
than previously thought. Microglial cell bodies in the adult brain demonstrate low mobility (migra-
tion), while microglia in developing brain have highly mobile cell bodies (Smolders et al., 2019).
Microglial mobility was determined to be 1.7 ± 0.3 mm/min (mean ± SD) (Figure 1C), comparable to
what has been observed in neonatal rodent slice culture (1.4 mm/min at E15.5) (Smolders et al.,
2017). To provide functional confirmation that IB4-isolectin-labeled cells are microglial cells, a laser
irradiation injury was performed on the neuropil region. As expected of microglial cells, IB4-isolec-
tin-labeled cells responded to injury by surrounding the damaged zone and removing injured tissue
(Figure 1D and Video 2).
In developing zebrafish larvae, microglia primarily localize to the cell body layer of the optic tec-
tum and are largely excluded from the tectal neuropil (Svahn et al., 2013). Conversely, microglia in
developing mammalian models are found in neuropil regions (Dalmau et al., 1997; Hoshiko et al.,
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
2 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

2012; Tremblay et al., 2010). In the Xenopus laevis retinotectal circuit, RGC axons project to the
contralateral optic tectum, where they arborize and synapse on tectal neurons in the neuropil region
(Figure 2A). To examine whether Xenopus microglia interact with the tectal neuropil, RGC axons
innervating the neuropil were labeled by bulk electroporation with a plasmid encoding pH-stable
green fluorescent protein (pHtdGFP). In vivo live imaging revealed that, microglia in developing Xen-
opus laevis can be found in both the cell body layer and the neuropil region (Video 3A). Microglia
move in and out of the neuropil region from the cell body layer (Figure 2B and Video 3B) and move
freely through the neuropil (Figure 2C and Video 3B). Additionally, microglia extend processes into
the neuropil to contact axons, with interactions ranging from minutes to hours in duration
(Figure 2D and Video 3C).
In vivo imaging of RGC neurons reveals microglial trogocytosis of axons
and presynaptic structures
We then sought to examine whether microglia cells engage in trogocytosis of RGC axons in the
developing Xenopus laevis retinotectal circuit. As endosomal organelles are typically acidified
(Casey et al., 2010), pH-stability of dyes and fluorescent proteins is an important consideration
A
D
B
C
ȝP
IB4-isolectin
PLQ
PLQ
DPHERLGOLNH
SULPLWLYHUDPL¿HGOLNH
-4h
-2h
0h
+0.5h
+1h
+2h
+4h
+6h
Laser lesion
Pre-injury
Migration
Phagocytosis
ȝP
Clearance
0
2
4
6
0
10
20
30
40
Mobility (Pm/min)
Relative frequency (%)
Figure 1. IB4-isolectin-conjugated fluorophores label microglial cells in developing Xenopus laevis tadpoles. (A) The tadpole brain colorized for
identification (yellow = olfactory bulb and forebrain, green = optic tectum, blue = hindbrain). To label microglia, IB4-isolectin conjugated fluorophores
are injected into the 3rd ventricle (red). (B) Dynamic cells with both ameboid-like and primitive ramified-like morphologies are labeled by IB4-isolectin.
(C) The distribution in mobility of IB4-isolectin-labeled cells under normal conditions. Average velocity is 1.8 ± 0.5 mm/min (mean ± SD, n = 5). (D) Laser
irradiation injury of the neuropil and response by IB4-isolectin-labeled cells. Laser irradiation injury induced a region of damaged, autofluorescent,
tissue. IB4-isolectin-labeled cells mobilize to the injury site and remove the injured tissue by phagocytosis. IB4-isolectin-labeled cells are shown in red,
and eGFP-labeled RGC axons are shown in green.
The online version of this article includes the following source data for figure 1:
Source data 1. Microglia mobility measurements in Figure 1C.
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
3 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

when performing live imaging of trogocytosis
(Shinoda et al., 2018). To reduce quenching of
fluorescence, we used pHtdGFP (pKa = 4.8)
(Roberts et al., 2016) which is more pH-stable
than EGFP (pKa = 6.15). We expressed pHtdGFP
in RGC axons by electroporation in the eye and
labeled microglia with Alexa 594-conjugated IB4-
isolectin. Two-photon live imaging revealed that
the amount of green fluorescence associated
with individual microglial cells increased following
interactions with pHtdGFP-labeled axons. In the
example shown in Video 4A, a microglial cell
increases in green fluorescence by twofold fol-
lowing interaction with a pHtdGFP-labeled axon
(Figure 2—figure supplement 1A). Similarly, in
the example shown in Figure 2E and Video 4B,
the green fluorescence in the microglial cell
increased threefold following interaction with a
pHtdGFP-labeled axon (Figure 2—figure supple-
ment 1B). The real-time increase in microglial
green fluorescence suggests direct transfer of
fluorescent protein from the pHtdGFP-labeled
axon and provides direct in vivo evidence of
microglial trogocytosis of the presynaptic RGC
axon.
Because microglia in developing Xenopus lae-
vis tadpoles are highly mobile, the possibility that
they may leave the imaging field complicates
measuring trogocytosis of axons by individual microglia. To quantify microglial trogocytosis, we
instead took the approach of measuring microglial green fluorescence across the population of
microglia within the optic tectum. A greater number of pHtdGFP-labeled axons in the optic tectum
is expected to lead to more frequent opportunities for trogocytotic interactions between microglia
and pHtdGFP-labeled axons, resulting in greater
amounts of green fluorescent material found
within the microglial population. Based on this
principle, we developed an assay to measure
microglial trogocytosis of RGC axons in Xenopus
laevis tadpoles. At developmental stage 39/40,
RGC axons were labeled by retinal electropora-
tion with plasmid encoding pHtdGFP, and micro-
glia were labeled by intraventricular injection of
Alexa 594-conjugated IB4-isolectin (Figure 3A).
By 2 days post-labeling, axons begin expressing
pHtdGFP and innervate the optic tectum. This
also corresponds to the period when microglia
begin to extensively colonize the optic tectum.
At day 4 and day 5 post-labeling, the optic tec-
tum was imaged by two-photon microscopy. The
number of pHtdGFP-labeled axons present in
the optic tectum was counted and the green
fluorescence within the population of microglia
in the imaging field was quantified using 3D
masking
with
the
IB4-isolectin
channel
(Figure 3B). To control for the possibility of RGC
apoptosis, data were excluded if axonal bleb-
bing was observed, or if the number of axons
Video 1. IB4-isolectin-labeled cells in Xenopus laevis
tadpoles are morphologically dynamic and highly
mobile. (A) IB4-isolectin cells are highly mobile.
Timestamp = HH:MM. (B) IB4-isolectin labeled cells
have a dynamic morphology, switching back and forth
between ameboid-like and primitive ramified-like
morphologies.
https://elifesciences.org/articles/62167#video1
Video 2. Response of IB4-isolectin-labeled cells to
injury. IB4-isolectin-labeled cells respond to tissue
injury by mobilization to the injury site and
phagocytosis of injured tissues. Also shown
in Figure 1D. Timestamp = HH:MM.
https://elifesciences.org/articles/62167#video2
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
4 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

A
0h
1h
2h
3h
4h
B
C
0h
1h
2h
3h
4h
ȝP
D
prolonged contacts
0min
36min
78min
ȝP
brief contacts
ȝP
0min
12min
24min
Microglia enter the neuropil region
Microglia surveil the neuropil
Microglia send processes into the neuropil
Microglia
Retina
Optic 
7HFWXP
E
-30min
30min
90min
150min
210min
270min
330min
390min
ȝP
5HDOWLPHLQFUHDVHLQPLFURJOLDOJUHHQÀXRUHVFHQFH
following interaction with pHtdGFP-labeled axon
Retinal 
Ganglion 
Cell Axons 
(Neuropil)
Tectal Neurons
(Cell Body Layer)
ȝP
Figure 2. Microglia surveil the tectal neuropil, contact RGC axons, and increase in green fluorescence following an interaction with pHtdGFP-labeled
axons in real-time. (A) A diagram of the developing Xenopus laevis retinotectal circuit. (B) The tectal neuropil does not exclude microglia in Xenopus
laevis. The yellow dotted line indicates the border of the cell body layer and the neuropil region. Microglia (red) can be observed migrating in and out
Figure 2 continued on next page
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
5 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

decreased from day 4 to day 5. Even when electroporation yields no labeled axons, some basal
green fluorescence in microglial cells is still observed (Figure 3C and Figure 3—figure supplement
1). This is because microglia have high levels of autofluorescent molecules such as lipofuscin, biliru-
bin, and porphyrins (Mitchell et al., 2010). At day 4, there is a weak positive correlation between
microglial green fluorescence and the number of pHtdGFP-labeled axons in the optic tectum, a rela-
tionship which is significantly strengthened on day 5 (Figure 3D). The change in green fluorescence
associated with microglia from day 4 to day 5 significantly correlates with the number of pHtdGFP-
labeled axons in the optic tectum (Figure 3—figure supplement 2A) suggesting that microglial cells
accumulate pHtdGFP from intact axons between day 4 and day 5 post-labeling.
To determine if synaptic material is being trogocytosed by microglia, we generated a synapto-
physin-pHtdGFP fusion protein (SYP-pHtdGFP). SYP is a presynaptic vesicle protein (Valtorta et al.,
2004), and SYP fusion proteins are commonly used as synaptic vesicle markers (Nakata et al., 1998;
Ruthazer et al., 2006). Expressing SYP-pHtdGFP in RGC neurons yielded axons with pHtdGFP
puncta along the length of their terminal arbors (Figure 3E). When SYP-pHtdGFP is expressed in
RGC axons, on day 4, no correlation is observed between microglial green fluorescence and the
number of SYP-pHtdGFP-labeled axons in the
optic tectum. However, by day 5, a correlation
between microglial green fluorescence and the
number
of
SYP-pHtdGFP-labeled
axons
is
observed (Figure 3F). The change in microglial
green fluorescence from day 4 to day 5 is pro-
portionate to the number of SYP-pHtdGFP-
labeled axons in the optic tectum (Figure 3—fig-
ure supplement 2B), suggesting that microglial
cells trogocytose and accumulate presynaptic
elements from RGC axons over the period from
day 4 to day 5.
Depletion of microglial cells
enhances RGC axon branching and
reverses the profile of behavioral
responses to dark and bright
looming stimuli
To assess the functional roles of microglial trogo-
cytosis,
we
first
depleted
microglia
using
PLX5622. PLX5622 is an inhibitor of colony stim-
ulating factor one receptor (CSF1R), which is a
tyrosine kinase receptor essential for microglia
survival (Elmore et al., 2014; Erblich et al.,
2011). Animals reared in 10 mM PLX5622 had
significantly reduced microglia numbers in the
optic tectum compared to vehicle-treated ani-
mals (Figure 4A and Figure 4B). Morphological
analysis of surviving microglia also revealed a
Figure 2 continued
of the neuropil region from the cell body layer. A single registered optical section is shown. (C) Microglia surveil the neuropil. A microglial cell is
followed over time as it traversed different depths in the tectum. (D) Microglia extend processes (white arrows) into the neuropil. Contact duration
varied between minutes and hours. (E) A microglial cell (blue arrow) interacts with a pHtdGFP-labeled RGC axon and increases in green fluorescence in
real-time. The colocalization of green and red is colorized as white.
The online version of this article includes the following source data and figure supplement(s) for figure 2:
Figure supplement 1. Green fluorescence in microglial cells increases in real-time following interaction with pHtdGFP-labeled axons.
Figure supplement 1—source data 1. Fluorescence changes in microglial cells in time lapse imaging experiments from Figure 2—figure supplement
1.
Video 3. Microglia surveil the tectal neuropil in
developing Xenopus laevis. (A) Microglia associate with
the tectal neuropil in Xenopus laevis. Timestamp = HH:
MM. (B) The neuropil does not exclude microglia.
Microglia can mobilize into the neuropil region from
the cell body layer and can freely move through the
neuropil region. Timestamp = HH:MM. (C) Microglia
surveil the tectal neuropil by extending processes into
the neuropil from the cell body layer. Timestamp = HH:
MM.
https://elifesciences.org/articles/62167#video3
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
6 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

reduction in the number of processes per micro-
glial cell, indicating a less ramified morphology
(Figure 4C).
Next, we interrogated the effect of microglial
depletion on the morphology of single RGC
axons. Axons were followed for several days in
control
and
microglia-depleted
animals
(Figure 4D). Microglial depletion with PLX5622
did not affect axon arbor length (Figure 4E) but
significantly
increased
the
number
of
axon
branches (Figure 4F), suggesting that microglia
negatively regulate axonal arborization during
development.
We then sought to delineate the functional
effects of microglial depletion on the develop-
ment of the retinotectal circuit. Previous reports
in Xenopus laevis and in zebrafish have shown
that the retinotectal circuit is a vital processing
and decision-making center for the visual detec-
tion of looming objects (Dong et al., 2009;
Khakhalin et al., 2014). Therefore, we devel-
oped a free-swimming looming stimulus assay in
Xenopus tadpoles (Figure 5A) to determine the
functional
outcomes
of
disrupting
microglial
function
in
this
circuit.
Tadpole
behavioral
responses to dark looming stimuli or bright
looming stimuli (Figure 5B) were recorded and
custom computer vision software was used to
track the locomotor response of the tadpole
(Figure 5C).
Figure 5D shows contrails from representative animals in response to dark looming stimuli. In
vehicle-treated animals, dark looming stimuli evoked stereotypical defensive escape behavior
(Video 5A), whereas microglia-depleted animals were less likely to make defensive responses to
dark looming stimuli (Video 5B). Presentation of dark looming stimuli elicited an increase in velocity
in control animals (Figure 5E), with a peak in instantaneous velocity at 1.1 ± 0.1 s (mean ± SD, n = 8)
post-stimulus. The distance traveled by control tadpoles over the 3 s immediately following presen-
tation of a dark looming stimulus increased compared to the period before the stimulus was pre-
sented (Figure 5F). This increase was absent in microglia-depleted animals. We categorized tadpole
responses to looming stimuli as exhibiting defensive behavior, absence of defensive behavior or
undeterminable (excluded from response rate calculation). Microglia-depletion significantly reduced
the response rate to dark looming stimuli (Figure 5G).
Figure
5H
shows
contrails
from
representative
animals
in
response
to
bright
looming
stimuli. Surprisingly, bright looming stimuli rarely evoked defensive escape behavior in control ani-
mals (Video 6A) but often evoked robust responses in microglia-depleted animals (Video 6B). Pre-
sentation of bright looming stimuli elicited an increase in velocity in microglia-depleted animals
(Figure 5I), with a peak in instantaneous velocity at 1.9 ± 0.6 s (mean ± SD, n = 8) after the onset of
stimulus presentation. The distance traveled by microglia-depleted tadpoles over the 3 s immedi-
ately following presentation of a bright looming stimulus increased compared to the period before
the stimulus was presented (Figure 5J). This increase was absent in vehicle-treated animals. Further-
more, microglia-depletion significantly increased the response rate to bright looming stimuli
(Figure 5K).
In trials where animals exhibited escape behavior to dark or bright looming stimuli, microglia
depletion did not significantly alter escape distance, maximum escape velocity, or escape angle,
suggesting that microglial depletion did not disrupt motor function (Figure 5—figure supplement
1).
Video 4. In vivo real-time trogocytosis in Xenopus
laevis tadpoles imaged by 2-photon microscopy. (A) A
microglial cell increases in green fluorescence in real-
time after an interaction with a pHtdGFP-labeled axon.
The colocalization of green and red is colorized as
white. Timestamp = HH:MM. (B) Another example of a
microglial cell increasing in green fluorescence
following an interaction with a pHtdGFP-labeled axon.
This example is shown in Figure 2E. Timestamp = HH:
MM.
https://elifesciences.org/articles/62167#video4
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
7 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

0
20
40
60
80
100
# pHtdGFP-labeled axons
Microglial green fluorescence
(arbitrary unit)
n=12
***
n=11
***
n=8
****
n=16
ns
Day 4
Day 5
Day 4
Day 5
Day 4
Day 5
No axons
1-4 axons
5-8 axons
9-12 axons
Day 4
Day 5
A
B
Stage 39/40
RGC electroporation 
with pHtdGFP and
labeling of microglia 
with IB4-isolectin
in vivo 
imaging
in vivo 
imaging
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 0
Stage 47
Stage 46
Labeled axons innervate optic tectum
C
E
F
ȝP
IB4-isolectin Alexa 594
SYP-pHtdGFP
Microglia colonize the optic tectum
D
# SYP-pHtdGFP labeled axons
Microglial green fluorescence
(arbitrary unit)
0
4
8
12
0
10
20
30
40
50
n = 57
Day 4
Day 5
r = 0.063
p = 0.64
r = 0.34
p = 0.010
Data Aquisition:
2-photon 830 nm
3D masks of microglia
IB4-isolectin Alexa 594
pHtdGFP
Average microglial 
JUHHQÀXRUHVFHQFH
ȝP
# pHtdGFP-labeled axons
Microglial green fluorescence
(arbitrary unit)
0
4
8
12
0
20
40
60
80
100
Day 4
Day 5
n = 47
r = 0.30
p = 0.038
r = 0.52
p = 0.002
Figure 3. Microglia accumulate green fluorescence label from axons expressing pHtdGFP or SYP-pHtdGFP. (A) Timeline of trogocytosis assay. Axons
were labeled with pH-stable GFP (pHtdGFP). 2-photon imaging was performed on day 4 and day 5 post-labeling. (B) Measurement of green
fluorescence signal from microglia. pHtdGFP-labeled axons (green) were imaged concurrently with microglia (magenta). 3D microglia ROIs were
automatically generated (magenta outlines). The average microglial green fluorescence was quantified from the population of microglia sampled in the
Figure 3 continued on next page
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
8 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

Bioinformatic identification of amphibian regulator of complement
activation 3 (aRCA3), a neuronally expressed membrane-bound
complement inhibitory molecule and homolog of human CD46
Microglial depletion enhanced axonal arborization and perturbed functional development of the reti-
notectal circuit. As microglia are known to secrete trophic factors and cytokines (Parkhurst et al.,
2013; Solek et al., 2018), signaling mechanisms unrelated to trogocytosis may be at work. To better
discern a role of trogocytosis in modulating axon morphology, we searched for a molecule that
would inhibit axon trogocytosis. Because complement C3 is a known mediator of phagocytosis
(Brown and Neher, 2014) and has been proposed to accumulate at synapses and tag them for
removal by microglial phagocytosis (Schafer et al., 2012; Stevens et al., 2007), we carried out a
bioinformatics screen to identify neuronally expressed proteins that have potential inhibitory activity
against complement C3.
To search for proteins that inhibit complement C3, we first used the STRING Protein-Protein
Association Network to identify proteins which interact with human complement C3 (Figure 6A). To
select for complement inhibitory proteins, our search was then refined by focusing on proteins con-
taining CCP (domains abundant in complement control proteins) motifs, which are highly conserved
modules abundant in proteins responsible for negative regulation of the complement system
(Norman et al., 1991). The top CCP-containing proteins identified by STRING were queried on the
Allen Brain Institute human multiple cortical areas RNA-seq dataset (Allen Institute for Brain Sci-
ence, 2015; Hodge et al., 2019). Of the CCP-containing proteins identified by STRING, only CD46
is highly expressed by human CNS neurons (Figure 6B).
Using NCBI protein-protein BLAST, the Xenopus laevis protein with the highest similarity to
human CD46 was identified as amphibian Regulator of Complement Activation 3 (aRCA3) (Table 1).
aRCA3 is a protein uncharacterized in Xenopus laevis but characterized as a membrane-associated
complement regulatory protein in Xenopus tropicalis (Oshiumi et al., 2009). Like human CD46, Xen-
opus laevis aRCA3 is a type I transmembrane protein with many extracellular CCP domains and a
stop-transfer anchor sequence near the C-terminus of the protein (Figure 6C). As a comparison, the
second and third most similar Xenopus laevis proteins, complement receptor two and complement
component four binding protein, do not share a protein architecture with CD46. The tertiary struc-
ture of Xenopus laevis aRCA3 resembles that of human CD46 (Video 7A and Video 7B). Despite
having twice the number of CCP domains as human CD46, aRCA3 is a likely homolog of CD46. The
number
of
CCP
domains
of
CD46
homologs
varies
across
species—for
example,
human
(Lublin et al., 1988) and rodent CD46 have four CCP domains (Miwa et al., 1998), the Gallus gallus
homolog (CREM) has six CCP or CCP-like domains (Oshiumi et al., 2005), and homologs in Danio
rerio (rca2.1) (Tsujikura et al., 2015), Equus caballus (MCP), and Coturnix japonica (MCP-like) each
have five CCP domains.
Figure 3 continued
z-stack. (C) Presence of pHtdGFP-labeled axons in the optic tectum increases microglial green fluorescence between day 4 and day 5. Two-way RM
ANOVA interaction F(3,43) = 6.14, p=0.0014. Sidak’s multiple comparison test ***p<0.001, ****p<0.0001. (D) Microglial green fluorescence weakly
correlates with the number of pHtdGFP-labeled axons in the optic tectum on day 4 (n = 47, Pearson’s r = 0.30, p=0.038) and moderately correlates on
day 5 (n = 47, Pearson’s r = 0.52, p=0.0002). The same dataset is analyzed in C. (E) SYP-pHtdGFP fusion protein localizes pHtdGFP to presynaptic
puncta. (F) Microglial green fluorescence does not significantly correlate with the number of SYP-pHtdGFP-labeled axons in the optic tectum on day 4
(n = 57, Pearson’s r = 0.063, p=0.64), and weakly correlates on day 5 (n = 57, Pearson’s r = 0.34, p=0.010).
The online version of this article includes the following source data and figure supplement(s) for figure 3:
Source data 1. Mean microglial-associated green fluorescence as a function of axon number measured over 24 hr.
Figure supplement 1. The presence of pHtdGFP-labeled axons significantly increases microglial green fluorescence between day 4 and day 5.
Figure supplement 1—source data 1. Histograms of microglial-associated green fluorescence as a function of axon number measured over 24 hr from
Figure 3—figure supplement 1.
Figure supplement 2. Correlation between the change in microglial green fluorescence from day 4 to day 5 and the number of pHtdGFP-labeled and
SYP-pHtdGFP-labeled axons.
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
9 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

To investigate whether RGC neurons endogenously express aRCA3, retinal sections were probed
by fluorescence RNAscope in situ hybridization (Wang et al., 2012). Probes against aRCA3, the pos-
itive control transcript RNA polymerase II subunit A (polr2a.L), and the negative control transcript
bacterial dihydrodipicolinate reductase (DapB) were hybridized on PFA fixed retinal sections
(Figure 6D). As expected, DapB transcripts were not detected in the retina, whereas the housekeep-
ing polr2a transcript was ubiquitously expressed. In contrast, aRCA3 transcripts localize to the
A
BODIPY
ȝP
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Vehicle Control
ȝ03/;
B
C
D
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Vehicle Control
ȝ03/;
pHtdGFP
E
F
ȝP
ȝ
BODIPY
IB4-isolectin Alexa 594
Days post-treatment
# of processes
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
0
1
2
3
4
Vehicle (n=8)
10 PM PLX5622 (n=8)
***
Days post-electroporation
Axon arbor length (Pm)
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Vehicle (n=7)
10 PM PLX5622 (n=19)
ns
Days post-electroporation
# of branches
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
0
50
100
150
*
Vehicle (n=7)
10 PM PLX5622 (n=19)
Days post-treatment
# microglia
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
0
10
20
30
40
50
Vehicle (n=8)
10 PM PLX5622 (n=8)
****
****
****
Figure 4. CSF1R antagonism depletes microglia from the optic tectum and increases axon arbor branch number. (A) Animals were treated with vehicle
or 10 mM PLX5622. Brain structures and microglia were labeled using CellTracker Green BODIPY (green) and IB4-isolectin (red), respectively. The white
dotted line indicates the border of the optic tectum. Single optical sections are shown. (B) PX5622 depletes microglia in the optic tectum. Mixed-effects
REML model interaction F(3,39) = 14.23, p<0.0001. Sidak’s multiple comparison post-hoc test ****p<0.0001. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. (C)
PLX5622 reduces the number of processes per microglia. Mixed-effects REML model main effect F(1,14)=18.42, ***p<0.001. Data are shown as mean ±
SEM. (D) Monitoring of individual RGC axons in vehicle control and PLX5622-treated animals. (E) Microglial depletion with PLX5622 did not affect axon
arbor length. Two-way RM ANOVA main effect F(1,24)=0.4141, p=0.53. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. (F) Microglial depletion with PLX5622 increased
axon branch number. Two-way RM ANOVA main effect F(1,24)=5.581, p=0.027. Data are shown as mean ± SEM.
The online version of this article includes the following source data for figure 4:
Source data 1. Microglia and axon morphometric properties from time lapse imaging over 4 days.
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
10 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

A
Projector
(Lens removed) Projector
lens
3D printed 
lens mount
Large glass 
bowl
Webcam
Petri dish
Tadpole
Paper 
screen
3D printed 
stage
B Dark looming stimulus
Time
Bright looming stimulus
Time
C
E
Vehicle Control
ȝ03/;
Dark looming stimuli
I
Vehicle Control
ȝ03/;
G
K
V
V
0 s
+1 s
V
+3 s
D
H
F
J
E
F
J
G
K
Bright looming stimuli
Figure 5. Microglial depletion reverses the expected behavioral response to both dark and bright looming stimuli. (A) Schematic of a looming
behavioral task to assess visuomotor responses in Xenopus laevis tadpoles. Stage 47 animals were presented looming stimuli and free-swimming
escape responses were recorded. (B) Exponentially expanding dark and bright circles were presented as looming stimuli. (C) Representative response
to dark looming stimulus (presented at 0 s) in a vehicle-treated animal. A contrail is drawn from 0 to 2 s post-stimulus. (D) Representative contrails of
Figure 5 continued on next page
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
11 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

ganglion cell layer (Figure 6E), revealing that the aRCA3 gene is endogenously expressed in RGC
neurons.
aRCA3 associates with synapses, enhances axonal arborization and
inhibits microglial trogocytosis
It is unknown whether aRCA3 localizes to the correct cellular compartments to protect axons from
complement attack. To investigate this, we examined the localization of aRCA3 by tagging it with
mCherry (Figure 7A). This aRCA3-mCherry fusion protein was expressed together with SYP-
pHtdGFP, which localizes to synaptic puncta (Figure 3E). SYP-pHtdGFP and aRCA3-mCherry coloc-
alize when co-expressed in the same axon (Figure 7B). The high degree of colocalization between
SYP-pHtdGFP and aRCA3-mCherry suggests that aRCA3 distributes to similar subcellular compart-
ments as the presynaptic marker SYP (Figure 7C).
Next, we examined the effect of aRCA3 overexpression on microglial trogocytosis. pHtdGFP was
expressed in RGC neurons with or without overexpression of aRCA3, and microglial trogocytosis
was quantified by measuring microglial green fluorescence on day 4 and day 5 post-labeling. Expres-
sion of pHtdGFP in RGC neurons resulted in a significant correlation between microglial green fluo-
rescence and the number of pHtdGFP-labeled
axons on day 5 post-labeling (Figure 7D), a rela-
tionship that was not observed when aRCA3 was
overexpressed (Figure 7E). Overexpression of
aRCA3 significantly reduced the correlation coef-
ficient between the change in microglial green
fluorescence from day 4 to day 5 and the number
of
pHtdGFP-labeled
axons
(Figure
7—figure
supplement 1), suggesting that overexpression
of aRCA3 reduces microglial trogocytosis.
We then examined the effect of aRCA3 over-
expression on axon morphology in single RGC
axons over several days (Figure 7F). Overexpres-
sion of aRCA3 resulted in significantly greater
axon arbor length compared to control axons
(Figure 7G). Similarly, axon branch number was
greater in axons overexpressing aRCA3 com-
pared to control axons (Figure 7H). These results
show that aRCA3 overexpression causes axons to
have larger and more highly branched arbors.
Figure 5 continued
the escape responses to dark looming stimuli in a single animal (10 trials). (E) After the dark looming stimulus is presented (0 s), vehicle-treated animals
(blue) increase in velocity, whereas microglia-depleted animals (red) do not. n = 8. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. (F) Presentation of dark looming
stimuli increases distance traveled over 3 s in vehicle-treated animals (blue) but not microglia-depleted animals (red). 2-way RM ANOVA interaction F
(1,14) = 15.82, p=0.0014. Sidak’s multiple comparisons test ****p<0.0001. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. (G) Microglia depletion reduces the escape
probability to dark looming stimuli. Mann-Whitney test **p<0.01, n = 8. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. (H) Representative contrails to bright looming
stimuli. (I) After the bright looming stimulus is presented (0 s), microglia-depleted animals (red) increase in velocity, whereas vehicle-treated animals
(blue) do not. n = 8. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. (J) Presentation of bright looming stimuli increases distance traveled over 3 s in microglia-
depleted animals (red) but not vehicle-treated animals (blue). Two-way RM ANOVA interaction F(1,14) = 5.291, p=0.037. Sidak’s multiple comparisons
test **p<0.01. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. (K) Microglia depletion increases the escape probability to bright looming stimuli. Mann-Whitney test
*p<0.05, n = 8. Data are shown as mean ± SEM.
The online version of this article includes the following source data and figure supplement(s) for figure 5:
Source data 1. Effects of microglial depletion on escape behavior induced by looming stimuli.
Figure supplement 1. Motor characteristics of escape behavior are not significantly altered by PLX5622-induced microglial depletion.
Video 5. Representative responses to dark looming
stimuli in control and microglia-depleted animals. (A)
Representative response to dark looming stimuli in a
vehicle control animal. (B) Representative response to
dark looming stimuli in a microglia-depleted animal.
https://elifesciences.org/articles/62167#video5
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
12 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

While CD46 is best known for its ability to
inactivate complement C3 and complement C4,
CD46 can also signal through intracellular tyro-
sine
kinase
activity
under
certain
conditions
(Riley-Vargas et al., 2004). This raises the poten-
tial caveat that the increased axonal arborization
induced by overexpression of aRCA3 may result
from aberrant intracellular signaling. Using a bio-
informatic
tool,
NetPhos3.1
with
cutoff
scores > 0.6 (Blom et al., 2004), we did not find
a predicted tyrosine kinase phosphorylation site
on the cytoplasmic region of aRCA3. Nonethe-
less, it is possible that aRCA3 may exert some of
its effects through an intracellular signaling path-
way. To provide further functional validation that
the complement system affects axonal arboriza-
tion, we examined the effects of enhancing com-
plement activity on axon morphology.
Expression of a membrane-bound
complement C3 fusion protein
reduces RGC axon size and
branching
If aRCA3 affects axon morphology by inhibiting complement activity, enhancing complement activity
on single axons should produce effects opposite to that of aRCA3 overexpression. To explore this
possibility, we designed an axon surface-localized complement C3 fusion protein to enhance com-
plement activity on individual axons (Figure 8A). Synaptobrevin, also known as vesicle-associated
membrane protein 2 (VAMP2), is concentrated in synaptic vesicles, though a significant fraction of
VAMP2 is also present on the axon surface (Ahmari et al., 2000; Sankaranarayanan and Ryan,
2000). We cloned Xenopus laevis complement C3 and fused the N-terminus to the extracellular
C-terminus of Xenopus laevis VAMP2. This design was chosen in favor of a GPI anchor design that
modifies the C-terminus C345C domain of complement C3 as this domain undergoes major rear-
rangement during activation and proteolysis (32˚ rotation, 10 A˚ translation) (Janssen et al., 2005). In
contrast, the N-terminus of complement C3 is exposed on the surface of the protein and located on
the MG1 domain, a domain that does not undergo marked confirmational changes upon comple-
ment C3 activation and proteolysis (3˚ rotation, 1 A˚ translation). Thus, expression of VAMP2-C3 in
RGC neurons results in axons tagged with extracellular membrane-bound complement C3. While we
used complement C3 precursor to generate the VAMP2-C3 fusion protein, complement C3 under-
goes
spontaneous,
low-level
activation
through
the
alternative
complement
pathway
(Pangburn et al., 1981).
VAMP2-C3 was co-expressed with pHtdGFP in RGC neurons, and axons were monitored over
several days (Figure 8B). To control for the possibility that VAMP2 overexpression may affect axon
morphology, we also overexpressed VAMP2 alone in RGC axons. Expression of VAMP2-C3 in RGC
axons significantly reduced axon arbor length and axon branch number when compared to control
or VAMP2 overexpression (Figure 8C and Figure 8D), demonstrating that enhancing complement
activity negatively regulates axonal arborization.
Discussion
In vivo evidence of microglial trogocytosis of axons during healthy
development
Previous real-time imaging experiments in ex vivo slice culture have shown that microglia trogocy-
tose presynaptic elements (Weinhard et al., 2018). Our real-time imaging results now add in vivo
support to the hypothesis that microglia engulf synaptic material via trogocytosis. Additionally, label-
ing of axons with pHtdGFP or SYP-pHtdGFP resulted in an increase in fluorescent label within
Video 6. Representative responses to bright looming
stimuli in control and microglia-depleted animals. (A)
Representative response to bright looming stimuli in a
vehicle control animal. (B) Representative response to
bright looming stimuli in a microglia-depleted animal.
https://elifesciences.org/articles/62167#video6
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
13 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

A
THY1
THY1
FCGR2A
FCGR2A
CD14
CD14
CD33
CD33
CD81
CD81
CD19
CD19
ICAM1
ICAM1
ICAM2
ICAM2
ITGAM
ITGAM
CR2
CR2
ITGB2
ITGB2
C3AR1
C3AR1
CD59
CD59
CFHR5
CFHR5
CR1
CR1
CD46
CD46
C3
C3
C5AR1
C5AR1
CFHR1
CFHR1
CD97
CD97
CD55
CD55
CFI
CFI
C4A
C4A
C4B
C4B
CFHR4
CFHR4
CFH
CFH
CFB
CFB
C2
C2
CFD
CFD
CFHR3
CFHR3
C5AR2
C5AR2
SMART Protein Domains: SM00032
Domain abundant in Complement Control Proteins
=
B
C
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
0
100
200
300
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
CCP
0
100
200
300
400
500
CD46 (human)
LOC108708165 - aRCA3 (Xenopus laevis)
= Transmembrane region
CCP
CCP
= Complement Control  
    Protein modules
Non-cytoplasmic
Cytoplasmic
Non-cytoplasmic
Cytoplasmic
D
DapB
Polr2a.L
aRCA3
ȝP
ȝP
ONL
INL
IPL
GCL
Lens
E
C3
CD46
CD55
CFH
CFB
CR1
CR2
CFHR1
CFHR3
CFHR4
CFHR5
0
2
4
6
8
10
Log2(CPM+1)
Microglia
Vascular cells
Oligodendrocytes
Oligodendrocyte 
progenitor cells
Astrocytes
Excitatory neurons
Inhibitory neurons
Expression
7ULPPHGPHDQ
Figure 6. Identification of a neuronally expressed membrane-bound complement inhibitory protein, amphibian regulator of complement activation 3
(aRCA3), the predicted homolog of human CD46. (A) Complement C3 was queried on the STRING Protein-Protein Association Network and the top 30
Figure 6 continued on next page
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
14 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

microglia between days 4 and 5 post-labeling. As SYP-pHtdGFP is primarily localized to synaptic
vesicles, this suggests that the axonal material that microglia engulf contains presynaptic vesicles
and is consistent with correlative electron microscopy studies that have demonstrated putative pre-
synaptic vesicles within microglia (Weinhard et al., 2018), although we did not use correlative elec-
tron microscopy to confirm this in our study.
Numerous past studies have shown that during development microglia have synaptic components
within phagocytic compartments (Paolicelli et al., 2011; Schafer et al., 2012; Stevens et al., 2007;
Tremblay et al., 2010). However, apoptosis is a prominent feature of neural development
(Nijhawan et al., 2000), and it is unclear whether the source of synaptic material within microglia is
because of engulfment of apoptotic neuronal components or if it is due to engulfment of synaptic
material from live neurons. When investigating trogocytosis, we minimized the effect of apoptosis by
excluding measurements when the number of axons between imaging sessions decreased or when
axonal blebbing was observed, providing in vivo direct evidence that microglia accumulate fluores-
cent label from living axons.
Expression of complement inhibitory or complement enhancing
molecules in neurons regulates axon morphology and trogocytosis by
microglia
Activation of complement C3 exposes a reactive thioester bond that covalently attaches to amine or
carbohydrate groups on cell surfaces (Sahu et al., 1994). Microglia express CR3, a receptor for com-
plement C3 (Ling et al., 1990), and binding of CR3 to its ligand induces phagocytosis
(Newman et al., 1985). Complement C3 localizes to synapses during development and tags synap-
ses for removal by microglia (Stevens et al., 2007). The importance of complement C3 in synaptic
pruning has been studied by disrupting the C3 pathway using C3 KO mice (Stevens et al., 2007),
CR3 KO mice (Schafer et al., 2012), or recently, with the exogenous neuronal expression of the
complement inhibitory proteins Crry (Werneburg et al., 2020) and CD55 (Wang et al., 2020). Here
we show that enhancing the C3 pathway with a membrane-bound VAMP2-C3 fusion protein
increases axonal pruning at the single axon level. Conversely, overexpression of an endogenous
Figure 6 continued
interaction partners are displayed. Red nodes represent proteins which contain complement control domains that inhibit complement activity. Line
thickness indicates the strength of data supporting protein interaction. (B) Complement inhibitory proteins identified by STRING were screened for
neuronal expression in the Allen Brain Map human cortical transcriptomics dataset. Cell type taxonomy and hierarchical clustering was determined
according to previous analysis (Hodge et al., 2019). Only CD46 is highly expressed by neurons. Heat map color scale denotes log two expression
levels as represented by trimmed mean (25–75%). CPM = counts per million. (C) Protein architecture of CD46 and the most similar Xenopus laevis
homolog (aRCA3). Both human CD46 and Xenopus laevis aRCA3 are type I transmembrane proteins, with a non-cytoplasmic region that contains many
complement control protein modules, and a transmembrane anchor near the C-terminus. (D) Fluorescent RNAscope in situ hybridization on retina
sections shows that aRCA3 is endogenously expressed in the retina. Negative control probe DapB was not detected in the retina. Housekeeping gene
Polr2a.L was expressed ubiquitously. (E) High magnification of the highlighted region in Figure 5D. aRCA3 is highly expressed in the GCL, and is
present at lower levels in the INL and ONL. GCL = Ganglion Cell Layer; IPL = Inner Plexiform Layer; INL = Inner Nuclear Layer; ONL = Outer Nuclear
Layer.
The online version of this article includes the following source data for figure 6:
Source data 1. Human cell type expression profiles from the Allen Human Brain database for probable complement inhibitory proteins identified by
STRING.
Table 1. Top three most similar proteins to human CD46 in the Xenopus laevis genome.
Protein name
Query coverage
Percent identity
E-value
1
Amphibian Regulator of Complement Activation 3 (aRCA3)
64%
34.77%
three  10 41
2
Complement Receptor Type 2
70%
31.77%
four  10 35
3
Complement Component 4 Binding Protein
76%
31.17%
four  10 35
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
15 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

membrane-bound complement inhibitory mole-
cule inhibits axonal pruning and trogocytosis
(Figure 9A).
While VAMP2-C3 clearly produced effects on
axon morphology, we did not rule out the possi-
bility that the expression of VAMP2-C3 in RGC
neurons may be producing effects on axons that
are not mediated by the complement system.
Additionally,
we
were
unable
to
determine
whether VAMP2-C3 expression enhanced micro-
glial trogocytosis as electroporation of RGC neu-
rons
with
VAMP2-C3
rarely
yielded
labeled
axons. We speculate that expression of VAMP2-
C3 in RGC neurons reduces viability, as previous
studies have shown that the complement cas-
cade mediates phagocytosis of RGC neurons
during development (Anderson et al., 2019).
Furthermore, our study indirectly examined the
effects of VAMP2-C3 and aRCA3 on microglial trogocytosis. Future experiments could directly
examine the effects of VAMP2-C3 expression and aRCA3 overexpression on trogocytosis rates by
real-time imaging.
It is hypothesized that neurons endogenously express membrane-bound complement inhibitory
molecules to protect synapses from phagocytosis (Stephan et al., 2012; Stevens et al., 2007), and
our data support this hypothesis. Recently, sushi repeat protein X-linked 2 (SRPX2) has been identi-
fied as a endogenous neuronal complement inhibitor in the mammalian system which protects syn-
apses from complement C1 tagging (Cong et al., 2020). SRPX2 is a secreted protein, and while
secreted complement inhibitory molecules can act via cell-autonomous mechanisms to protect the
neuron that produced it, such molecules also have non-autonomous actions due to the ability to dif-
fuse through the extracellular environment. Conversely, a membrane-bound complement inhibitory
molecule acts solely through cell-autonomous mechanisms and allows for greater spatiotemporal
control of local complement protection. While the identity of a membrane-bound complement inhib-
itory molecule endogenous to mammalian neurons remains elusive, in this study we characterized
Xenopus laevis aRCA3, an endogenously expressed, synaptic vesicle-associated, complement inhibi-
tory molecule. aRCA3 is the most similar amphibian homolog of human CD46. CD46 is a membrane-
bound complement inhibitory molecule that cleaves activated complement C3 and C4 (Barilla-
LaBarca et al., 2002). Using the Allen Brain Institute human multiple cortical areas RNA-seq dataset
(Allen Institute for Brain Science, 2015), we report that CD46 transcripts are enriched in human
neurons. Interestingly, CD46 associates directly with b1-integrins (Lozahic et al., 2000), an adhesion
molecule present on neuronal surfaces (Neugebauer and Reichardt, 1991) and enriched in synapto-
somes (Chan et al., 2003), suggesting that it too may be localized to axon surfaces and synapses. In
our study, we show that aRCA3 expression inhibits both axon trogocytosis by microglia and axonal
pruning—we speculate that CD46 may perform similar functions in mammals. Excessive synaptic
pruning is thought to be one of the underlying causes of schizophrenia (Sellgren et al., 2019), and
three large-scale genetic susceptibility studies have identified the CD46 gene as a significant Schizo-
phrenia-risk locus (Ha˚vik et al., 2011; Kim et al., 2020; Ripke et al., 2014). Clearly, the role of
CD46 in neurodevelopment warrants further study.
Microglia actively suppress exuberant arborization at the single axon
level
Disrupting microglial function by depletion increases axon tract innervation in prenatal models
(Pont-Lezica et al., 2014; Squarzoni et al., 2014). As depleting microglia increases the number of
neural progenitor cells (Cunningham et al., 2013) and the number of RGC neurons in the embryonic
retina (Anderson et al., 2019), it was unclear whether the increased axon tract innervation that
occurs following microglial depletion resulted from a deficit of microglial-mediated axonal pruning,
or whether it was because of an increase in the overall number of axons. To address this, we exam-
ined the effect of microglial depletion on the morphology of single axons, showing that microglia
Video 7. Predicted tertiary protein structure of CD46
and aRCA3. (A) The predicted tertiary protein structure
of CD46. (B) The predicted tertiary protein structure of
aRCA3.
https://elifesciences.org/articles/62167#video7
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
16 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

# pHtdGFP-labeled axons
Microglial green fluorescence
(arbitrary unit)
0
4
8
0
20
40
60
aRCA3 Day 5
aRCA3 Day 4
r = 0.019
p = 0.91
r = -0.017
p = 0.92
n = 41
# pHtdGFP-labeled axons
Microglial green fluorescence
(arbitrary unit)
0
4
8
0
10
20
30
40
50
Control Day 5
Control Day 4
r = 0.23
p = 0.16
r = 0.56
p = 0.0002
n = 40
F
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Control
aRCA3
G
H
ȝP
A
B SYP-pHtdGFP
D5&$P&KHUU\
0HUJH
C
D5&$P&KHUU\SL[HOLQWHQVLW\
6<3S+WG*)3SL[HOLQWHQVLW\
0
255
255
0
256
128
64
32
16
8
4
2
1
ȝP
pHtdGFP
D
E
G
H
pHtdGFP
aRCA3 + pHtdGFP
Figure 7. RGC overexpression of synapse-associated aRCA3 inhibits microglial trogocytosis and increases axon arborization. (A) An aRCA3-mCherry
fusion protein was co-expressed with SYP-pHtdGFP in RGC axons. (B) Representative RGC axon expressing aRCA3-mCherry and SYP-pHtdGFP. SYP-
pHtdGFP is concentrated at synaptic puncta. aRCA3-mCherry colocalizes with SYP-pHtdGFP. (C) Colocalization analysis of the axon shown in B.
Scatterplot of pixel intensities shows a high degree of association between aRCA3-mCherry and SYP-pHtdGFP. After applying Costes threshold,
Pearson’s r = 0.90. (D) Microglial green fluorescence is not significantly correlated with the number of pHtdGFP-labeled axons in the optic tectum on
day 4 (n = 40, Pearson’s r = 0.23, p=0.16), and moderately correlated on day 5 (n = 40, Pearson’s r = 0.56, p=0.0002). (E) When aRCA3 is overexpressed,
microglial green fluorescence is not significantly correlated with the number of pHtdGFP-labeled axons in the optic tectum on either day 4 (n = 41,
Pearson’s r = 0.019, p=0.91) or on day 5 (n = 41, Pearson’s r = 0.017, p=0.92). (F) Individual control and aRCA3 overexpressing RGC axons were imaged
over several days. (G) aRCA3 overexpression increases axon arbor length. Two-way RM ANOVA interaction F(3,102) = 5.43, p=0.0017. Sidak’s multiple
Figure 7 continued on next page
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
17 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

depletion significantly increased axon branch number. Thus, our study supports the model that the
increase in axon tract innervation resulting from microglial depletion is because of increased arbori-
zation of individual axons (Figure 9B).
The observations that microglial depletion and overexpression of the complement inhibitor
aRCA3 in RGC neurons enhanced axonal arborization suggests that both phenomena may act
through a common mechanism. These results support the hypothesis that microglial trogocytosis
Figure 7 continued
comparison test *p<0.05, **p<0.01. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. (H) aRCA3 overexpression increases axon branch number. Two-way RM ANOVA
interaction F(3,102) = 4.73, p=0.0039. Sidak’s multiple comparison test **p<0.01, ***p<0.001, ****p<0.0001. Data are shown as mean ± SEM.
The online version of this article includes the following source data and figure supplement(s) for figure 7:
Source data 1. Colocalization analysis for aRCA3-mCherry and SYP-pHtdGFP.
Source data 2. Changes in green fluorescence associated with microglia and axonal morphometric analysis comparing control and aRCA3 overexpress-
ing axons.
Figure supplement 1. Correlation between the change in microglial green fluorescence from day 4 to day 5 and the number of pHtdGFP-labeled
axons with and without aRCA3 overexpression.
A
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Control
VAMP2-C3
pHtdGFP
C
D
ȝP
B
VAMP2
VAMP2 C3
VAMP2-C3
C
D
VAMP2
VAMP2
Figure 8. Expressing VAMP2-C3 fusion protein in RGC neurons reduces axon arbor size and branch number. (A) Complement C3 was fused to the
C-terminus of VAMP2 to create a complement enhancing molecule which is targeted to the axon surface and synapses. (B) Axons from control, VAMP2-
C3 expressing, and VAMP2 overexpressing RGC neurons were imaged over several days. (C) Expression of VAMP2-C3 reduces RGC axon arbor length
compared to control and VAMP2 overexpression. Two-way RM ANOVA interaction F(6,75)=3.48, p=0.0044. Sidak’s multiple comparison test *p<0.05,
**p<0.01, ***p<0.001. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. (D) Expression of VAMP2-C3 reduces RGC branch number compared to control and VAMP2
overexpression. Two-way RM ANOVA interaction F(6,75)=4.15, p=0.0012. Sidak’s multiple comparison test *p<0.05, ***p<0.001, ****p<0.0001. Data are
shown as mean ± SEM.
The online version of this article includes the following source data for figure 8:
Source data 1. Morphometric analyses comparing control, VAMP2-C3 and VAMP2 expressing axons over 4 days.
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
18 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

suppresses both axon branching and axon growth through the removal of extra branches and axonal
material. While this explanation is at odds with the observation that microglia-depletion did not
increase axon arbor length, it is important to note that with aRCA3 overexpression, a single axon
gains a relative growth advantage over other axons—this is distinct from the case of microglial
depletion, where all axons profit from the same increased growth. If all axons are growing larger at
the same pace, competitive mechanisms (Gosse et al., 2008; Ruthazer et al., 2003) might be
expected to constrain axon arbor sizes. Another interesting possibility is that microglia preferentially
engage in trogocytosis at short, dynamic branches over longer, established, mature branches. In this
case, microglial depletion results in a greater number of short branches, which over the short time
course in this study, do not significantly impact axon branch length.
It is worth considering that there may be unintended side-effects of microglial depletion with
PLX5622 and that many microglial functions beyond trogocytosis of axons may be altered. In our
A
B
Complement activity 
+
-
Impaired axonal pruning
Excessive axonal pruning
Normal axonal pruning
Microglial depletion
Increased axonal 
arborization
Normal development
Microglial-mediated 
axonal pruning
Reduced axonal 
arborization
microglial-mediated 
axonal pruning
Appropriate wiring
Inappropriate wiring
Microglia
Impaired
Appropriate 
behaviour
Inappropriate 
behaviour
Figure 9. The complement system and microglia regulate axonal pruning at the single axon level. (A) Inhibiting complement activity through
overexpression of a membrane-bound complement inhibitory molecule results in impaired axonal pruning; conversely, increasing complement activity
through expression of a membrane-bound complement enhancing molecule results in excessive axonal pruning. (B) During normal development,
microglia actively trogocytose and prune axons. Disrupting microglial function via microglial depletion increases axonal arborization and also disrupts
the proper response to dark and bright looming stimuli.
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
19 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

study, we found that CSF1R inhibition reduced process branching of remaining microglial cells, an
observation that has also been seen in rodents (Elmore et al., 2014). Decreased microglial process
complexity
often
accompanies
release
of
cytokines
and
other
neuromodulatory
molecules
(Karperien et al., 2013; Hanisch, 2002). While we did not study the effect of microglial depletion
on cytokine and chemokine production in this study, past studies have shown that cytokines and che-
mokines in non-disease mouse models are not altered by PLX5622 (Reshef et al., 2017). A further
potential confound is that low expression of CSF1R has been reported in some neurons in mice hip-
pocampus (Luo et al., 2013). It is possible that CSF1R is present in Xenopus laevis RGC neurons and
we did not exclude the possibility that PLX5622 may be acting directly on RGC axons in our study.
Microglia contribute to proper wiring of the retinotectal circuit in
developing Xenopus laevis
A
feed-forward
network
drives
visually
evoked
escape
behavior
in
Xenopus
tadpoles
(Khakhalin et al., 2014). In the retina, photoreceptors act on bipolar cells, which act on RGCs. Some
RGCs are tuned to detect looming (Dunn et al., 2016; Mu¨nch et al., 2009), and the population of
RGCs that respond to dark looming stimuli are distinct from the population of RGCs that respond to
bright looming stimuli (Temizer et al., 2015). In zebrafish, these distinct RGC populations project to
different arborization fields in the optic tectum (Robles et al., 2014; Temizer et al., 2015) where
the execution of looming computation and behavioral decision-making occurs (Barker and Baier,
2015; Fotowat and Gabbiani, 2011). In highly predated animals such as crabs, zebrafish, and mice
(Oliva et al., 2007; Temizer et al., 2015; Yilmaz and Meister, 2013), dark looming stimuli—which
signal imminent threat such as an oncoming object or predator—reliably induce escape responses,
whereas bright looming stimuli—which may occur as the animal exits a tunnel or traverses its envi-
ronment—are less effective.
Microglial depletion does not appear to alter motor functionality, suggesting that the hindbrain
and motor circuitry remain intact. Instead, the effects of microglia depletion on looming-evoked
escape behavior must occur further upstream in the retina, the optic tectum, or in the projections
from the tectal neurons to the hindbrain. As microglia depletion induces exuberant RGC axonal
arborization, one explanation for why microglia depletion disrupts defensive behavior to dark loom-
ing stimuli is that the dark looming-sensitive RGC axons cannot effectively wire with their tectal neu-
ron counterparts, resulting in a misclassification of threatening visual stimuli when axonal pruning is
disrupted. When microglia are depleted, axons form more errant connections, and dark looming-
sensitive RGC axons may instead wire together with tectal neurons which are not associated with
threat classification, reducing the probability that dark looming stimuli elicit escape responses. We
predict that the reverse is true for bright looming-sensitive RGC axons, whereby microglia depletion
results in increased likelihood of errant wiring between bright looming RGC axons and tectal neu-
rons that classify threatening visual stimuli, leading to enhancement of escape behavior to bright
looming stimuli. Conversely, it is possible that dark and bright looming-sensitive RGC axons are dif-
ferentially affected by microglial depletion or the circuitry of the retina upstream of RGCs is remod-
eled following microglial depletion, both of which could produce the abnormal behavioral outcomes
we observed. Indeed, the mechanism linking microglial depletion to improper response to looming
stimuli is unclear and warrants future investigation.
Synaptic pruning and trogocytosis are two sides of the same coin:
axonal pruning
Classically, synaptic pruning has been described as the engulfment and elimination of synapses, a
phenomenon dependent on the complement pathway (Paolicelli et al., 2011; Perry and O’Connor,
2008; Schafer et al., 2012; Stevens et al., 2007). While no deficit in microglial trogocytosis has
been observed in ex vivo cultures from CR3 KO mice (Weinhard et al., 2018), one interpretation for
this result is that synaptic pruning and trogocytosis are unique phenomena mediated by different
mechanisms. However, our study suggests that complement-mediated synaptic pruning and trogo-
cytosis are mechanistically related. We find that the complement system influences both axonal tro-
gocytosis and axonal arborization, and it is possible that in CR3 KO mice, compensation through
one of the other receptors for activated C3 occurs. For example, microglia express complement
receptor type 4 (CR4) (Allen Institute for Brain Science, 2015; Hodge et al., 2019) which can bind
Lim and Ruthazer. eLife 2021;10:e62167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.62167
20 of 35
Research article
Immunology and Inflammation
Neuroscience

===== Lipovsek2021_JNeuro_PATCHseq+Review =====
Symposium/Mini-Symposium
Patch-seq: Past, Present, and Future
Marcela Lipovsek,1
Cedric Bardy,2,3
Cathryn R. Cadwell,4
Kristen Hadley,5
Dmitry Kobak,6 and
Shreejoy J. Tripathy7,8,9
1Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King’s College London, London SE1 1UL, United
Kingdom, 2Laboratory for Human Neurophysiology and Genetics, South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute (SAHMRI), Adelaide
5000, SA, Australia, 3College of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders University, Bedford Park 5042, SA, Australia, 4Department of Pathology,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, 5Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle, Washington 98109, 6Institute for
Ophthalmic Research, University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany, 7Krembil Centre for Neuroinformatics, Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health, Toronto, Ontario M5T 1R8, Canada, 8Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5T 1R8, Canada, and 9Institute
of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada
Single-cell transcriptomic approaches are revolutionizing neuroscience. Integrating this wealth of data with morphology and
physiology, for the comprehensive study of neuronal biology, requires multiplexing gene expression data with complementary
techniques. To meet this need, multiple groups in parallel have developed “Patch-seq,” a modification of whole-cell patch-
clamp protocols that enables mRNA sequencing of cell contents after electrophysiological recordings from individual neurons
and morphologic reconstruction of the same cells. In this review, we first outline the critical technical developments that
enabled robust Patch-seq experimental efforts and analytical solutions to interpret the rich multimodal data generated. We
then review recent applications of Patch-seq that address novel and long-standing questions in neuroscience. These include
the following: (1) targeted study of specific neuronal populations based on their anatomic location, functional properties, lin-
eage, or a combination of these factors; (2) the compilation and integration of multimodal cell type atlases; and (3) the inves-
tigation of the molecular basis of morphologic and functional diversity. Finally, we highlight potential opportunities for
further technical development and lines of research that may benefit from implementing the Patch-seq technique. As a multi-
modal approach at the intersection of molecular neurobiology and physiology, Patch-seq is uniquely positioned to directly
link gene expression to brain function.
Key words: electrophysiology; transcriptomics; neuronal morphology; patch-clamp; single cell; multi-modal
Introduction
Single-cell approaches have been a cornerstone of neuroscience
research for over a century, beginning with the Golgi staining
(Golgi, 1873) and the exquisite descriptions of neuronal mor-
phologies by Ramón y Cajal (1909; De Carlos and Borrell, 2007).
Later on, the development of electrophysiological recording tech-
niques allowed the study of individual neuronal responses
(Hodgkin and Huxley, 1952; Hubel and Wiesel, 1959). Among
these, the patch-clamp technique enabled isolated access to an
individual neuron to study the ionic currents traversing the
plasma membrane (Neher and Sakmann, 1976; Sakmann and
Neher, 1984). Initial studies of the gene expression patterns of
specific neuronal types relied on the purification of genetically la-
beled cells, followed by mRNA preparation and expression
microarrays or RNA sequencing (Sugino et al., 2006; Okaty et al.,
2009, 2011; Fishell and Rudy, 2011). These experiments looked
at bulk samples of hundreds to millions cells, and so were limited
by both the availability of known cell type-specific markers and
the population average of gene expression levels. More recently,
single-cell methods have entered the transcriptomic domain and
revolutionized neuroscience, providing unparalleled insight into
numerous neuronal features, such as cell type diversity (Zeisel et
al., 2015, 2018; Gokce et al., 2016; Tasic et al., 2016, 2018; Stanley
et al., 2020), developmental and differentiation trajectories
(Habib et al., 2016; Kee et al., 2017; Nowakowski et al., 2017; Mi
et al., 2018; Raj et al., 2018), and activity state (Chevée et al.,
2018; Hrvatin et al., 2018; Jaeger et al., 2018; Sathyamurthy et al.,
2018), all revealed by genome-wide gene expression patterns.
However, the overall complexity and diversity of neurons often
requires a combination of methodological approaches to address
experimental questions. For example, recent developments in spa-
tial transcriptomics have started profiling the expression of
Received June 30, 2020; revised Nov. 11, 2020; accepted Oct. 22, 2020.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
M.L. was supported by a Consolidator Grant from the European Research Council (Grant 725729;
FUNCOPLAN) to Matthew Grubb. C.B. was supported by the Ian Potter Foundation, the Flinders Foundation,
Impact Philanthropy, Cancer Australia, and the Australian Department of Health. K.H. was supported by the
Allen Institute for Brain Sciences. D.K. was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Grant
BE5601/4-1 and the Cluster of Excellence “Machine Learning—New Perspectives for Science”, EXC 2064,
Project 390727645), the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (Grants FKZ 01GQ1601 and 01IS18039A),
and the National Institute of Mental Health of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number
U19MH114830. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the
official views of the National Institutes of Health. S.J.T. was supported by the CAMH Discovery Fund, the
Krembil Foundation, the Kavli Foundation, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (Grant NGN-171423),
and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (Grants RGPIN-2020-05834 and DGECR-
2020-00048). We thank Matthew Grubb for helpful comments on the manuscript and for kickstarting the
organization of the mini-symposium.
Correspondence should be addressed to Marcela Lipovsek at marcela.lipovsek@kcl.ac.uk or Shreejoy J.
Tripathy at shreejoy.tripathy@utoronto.ca.
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1653-20.2020
Copyright © 2021 the authors
The Journal of Neuroscience, February 3, 2021 • 41(5):937–946 • 937

hundreds or thousands of genes in neurons,
while preserving tissue architecture (Chen et
al., 2015; Wang et al., 2018; Eng et al., 2019;
Rodriques et al., 2019; Soldatov et al., 2019),
and implementations of well established
techniques for the combined evaluation of
morphologic features and electrophysiologi-
cal properties in the same individual neurons
have been fundamental for improving our
understanding of the cell types that are the
building blocks of neuronal circuits (Jiang et
al., 2015; Markram et al., 2015; Zeng and
Sanes, 2017; Gouwens et al., 2019).
The study of genome-wide gene expres-
sion patterns concomitantly with other
neuronal features has only recently become
possible. Initial steps toward establishing
direct links between electrophysiological
properties and gene expression involved
the profiling of a small number of genes
using RT-PCR (Eberwine et al., 1992;
Lambolez et al., 1992; Sucher and Deitcher,
1995; Chiang, 1998; Sucher et al., 2000;
Toledo-Rodriguez et al., 2004; Pfeffer et al.,
2013; Toledo-Rodriguez and Markram,
2014)
or
higher-throughput
expression
microarrays (Subkhankulova et al., 2010)
on cytosolic aspirates sampled using the
patch pipette. Though groundbreaking,
these experiments were limited to small
numbers of genes and/or cells. More
recently, a number of groups have simulta-
neously developed Patch-seq, a multimodal
method that combines electrophysiological
recordings with single-cell whole-transcrip-
tome profiling in the same individual cells
(Fig. 1). The first attempt at single-cell
RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) from neu-
rons collected with a patch pipette profiled
a very small number of samples (Table 1)
and yielded sequencing data of low quality
(Qiu
et
al.,
2012).
Improvements
in
scRNAseq (Picelli et al., 2014b) and adaptations of the patch-
clamp technique facilitated the successful and reliable implemen-
tation of Patch-seq (Bardy et al., 2016; Cadwell et al., 2016; Chen
et al., 2016; Földy et al., 2016; Fuzik et al., 2016). Following these
initial studies, the Patch-seq technique has been further optimized
and applied to a number of model systems (Table 1). Moreover,
these new types of experiments necessitated the development of
innovative data analysis tools suitable for handling multimodal
datasets (Kobak et al., 2018; Gala et al., 2019; Bernaerts et al., 2020).
In this review, we outline both experimental and analytical
strategies for generating and interpreting high-quality Patch-seq
data. We provide examples of new biological insights that have
resulted from this transformative technique and further discuss
outstanding questions especially well suited to the rich datasets
produced by this multimodal approach.
The Patch-seq experimental workflow
Patch-seq experiments profile the electrophysiological properties
and transcriptome of the same individual neurons, with the goal of
identifying the underlying relationships between gene expression
and neuronal function. Additionally, recorded neurons can be
backfilled with appropriate dies to evaluate cell morphology.
Sample collection
Patch-seq experiments begin with whole-cell patch-clamp
recordings from individual neurons to characterize their electro-
physiological properties. There are a number of published proto-
cols for Patch-seq (Table 1) that have been optimized for
collecting mRNA from neurons recorded in acute brain slices
(Cadwell et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2020; Lipovsek et al., 2020;
Mahfooz and Ellender, 2021), or in vitro cell cultures (van den
Hurk et al., 2018), and allowing subsequent morphologic recon-
struction (Cadwell et al., 2017; van den Hurk et al., 2018; Scala et
al., 2019, 2020; Gouwens et al., 2020; Que et al., 2020). Below, we
discuss commonalities and differences between these protocols.
Given the ubiquitous nature of mRNA-degrading RNases
in the environment and the small amount of mRNA present
in each individual cell, Patch-seq protocols emphasize the im-
portance of maintaining strict RNase-free conditions during
sample collection and before reverse transcription (RT). This
includes meticulously cleaning any surfaces that may come
into contact with the mRNA sample or internal solution using
Figure 1.
Schematic workflows of Patch-seq using various experimental model systems. A, On acute brain slices, electro-
physiological recordings are performed on identified neurons, and the cell processes are filled with dye for subsequent mor-
phologic reconstruction. During sample collection, most of the cytoplasmic contents are aspirated (generally including the
nucleus) and transferred to an individual tube containing lysis buffer. The single-cell transcriptomes are then obtained using
scRNAseq protocols. B, Electrophysiological recordings can also be performed on neuronal cultures (e.g., iPSC-derived neu-
rons). Simultaneous, live imaging of the recorded neuron is possible if the recording pipette contains a fluorescent dye. After
recording and imaging, the whole cell is collected using the patch pipette and the transcriptome obtained via scRNAseq. C,
In vivo patch-clamp recordings are used to study the responses of individual neurons to sensory stimuli. Using the patch pip-
ette, each neuron can then be collected and processed for scRNAseq and for in vivo Patch-seq.
938 • J. Neurosci.,February 3, 2021 • 41(5):937–946
Lipovsek et al. · Advancements inPatch-seq

an RNase decontamination solution and maintaining strict
RNase-free conditions while preparing all pre-RT solutions.
Standard electrophysiological protocols can be performed in
Patch-seq experiments to quantify the physiological properties of
interest. The diameter of the recording pipette tip may need to
be adjusted (typically, slightly larger tips are used; but see the
study by Lipovsek et al., 2020) to facilitate the aspiration of cell
contents into the pipette. Additionally, smaller than normal vol-
umes of internal solution are used to avoid dilution of the RNA
and reduce the surface area of glass in contact with the sample,
which can lead to sample loss. Finally, the internal solution can
be modified to further promote RNA preservation by adding cal-
cium chelators, RNA carriers, and/or RNase inhibitors (Cadwell
et al., 2017; van den Hurk et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2020; Lipovsek
et al., 2020; Mahfooz and Ellender, 2021). In light of these modi-
fications, the recordings may be more challenging compared
with standard patch-clamp conditions and the overall recording
time may need to be shortened to ensure minimal RNA
degradation. In addition, the use of calcium chelators in the inter-
nal solution to reduce RNase activity (Sucher and Deitcher, 1995;
Sucher et al., 2000) may also reduce the amplitude of calcium-de-
pendent currents. With these caveats, there is no limit to the types
of electrophysiological experiments that can be performed before
aspiration of the cell contents for transcriptomic analysis.
After electrophysiological recordings are completed, the cyto-
sol is aspirated into the recording pipette by applying negative
pressure. The main objective is to collect the cell contents while
maintaining a stable electrical seal between the pipette and the
cell membrane, thus avoiding contamination from the extracel-
lular solution. In recent protocols, it has been demonstrated that
extracting both the cytosol and the nucleus, for example, using
the nucleated patch technique, can greatly improve RNA yield
and transcriptomic data quality (Gouwens et al., 2020; Lee et al.,
2020; Lipovsek et al., 2020; Scala et al., 2020). After collection,
the cell contents are deposited in individual tubes containing
lysis and/or RT buffer.
Table 1. Summary of published Patch-seq datasets
Publication
Dataset
Model system
Preparation
cDNA synthesis—library preparation
Total cells
Accession
Qiu et al., 2012
Cultured hippocampal neurons – layer 5
cortical neurons
Mouse
Primary cultures – acute slices
SMARTer—adapter ligation
8
NA
Cadwell et al., 2016
Layer 1 cortical interneurons and pyramidal
neurons
Mouse
Acute slices and in vivo
Smart-seq2—Tagmentation
58
E-MTAB-4092
Fuzik et al., 2016
Layers 1 and 2 cortical interneurons and py-
ramidal neurons
Mouse
Acute slices
STRT-C1 (UMIs) —Tagmentation
80
GSE70844
Chen et al., 2016
Stem-cell derived neurons
Human
Cultured cells
(Tang et al., 2010) —NEBNext Ultra
20
GSE77564
Földy et al., 2016
Hippocampus pyramidal cells and
interneurons
Mouse
Acute slices
SMARTer—Tagmentation
93
GSE75386
Bardy et al., 2016
iPSC-derived neurons and astrocytes
Human
Cultured cells
SMARTer—Tagmentation
56
GSE159074
Pfeffer and Beltramo, 2017
Interneurons and pyramidal neurons -Visual
cortex/ hippocampus
Mouse
Acute slices
CEL-Seq2
833
GSE90822
Muñoz-Manchado et al., 2018
Stratium interneurons
Mouse
Acute slices
STRT-C1 (UMIs) —Tagmentation
98
GSE106708
Luo et al., 2019
Hippocampus VIP1 projecting interneurons
Mouse
Acute slices
SMART-Seq v4—Tagmentation
8
GSE109755
Wang et al., 2019
Temperature sensitive neurons - preoptic
area of the hypothalamus
Mouse
Acute slices
Smart-seq2—Tagmentation
68
GSE126657
Winterer et al., 2019
Hippocampus interneurons
Mouse
Acute slices
SMART-Seq v4—Tagmentation
46
GSE124847
Oberst et al., 2019
Neuronal progenitors in developing mouse
neocortex
Mouse
Acute slices
SMART-Seq v4—Tagmentation
65
GSE122644
Scala et al., 2019
Layer 4 sensory cortex neurons
Mouse
Acute slices
Smart-seq2—Tagmentation
110
GSE134378
Laboissonniere et al., 2019
Retinal ganglion cells
Mouse
Acute dissection
SMART-Seq v4—Tagmentation
14
PRJNA548506
Ellender et al., 2019
Somatosensory cortex excitatory neurons
Mouse
Acute slices
Smart-seq2—Tagmentation
376
NA
Fuzik et al., 2019
Glutamatergic neurons of the indusium
griseum
Mouse
Acute slices
Smart-seq2—Tagmentation
NA
NA
Kim et al., 2020b
Neurons from embryonic brain
Human
Acute slices
Modified aRNA—Illumina TrueSeq NuGEN Ovation
1013
GSE144216
Cadwell et al., 2020
Clonally related cortical excitatory neurons
Mouse
Acute slices
Smart-seq2—Tagmentation
220
GSE140946
Liu et al., 2020
Visual cortex light sensitive neurons
Mouse
In vivo
Smart-seq2—adapter ligation
53
GSE115997
He et al., 2020
Glucose (in)sensitive hypothalamic neurons
Mouse
Acute slices
SMART-Seq v4—Tagmentation
8
GSE146543
Camunas-Soler et al., 2020
Pancreas islet cells
Human
Dispersed islet cells
Smart-seq2—Tagmentation
1369
GSE124742
Oláh et al., 2020
Hippocampus CCK1 interneurons
Rat
Acute slices
SMART-Seq v4—Tagmentation
16
GSE133951
Que et al., 2020
Hippocampus PV1 interneurons
Mouse
Acute slices
SMART-Seq v4—Tagmentation
89
GSE142546
Gouwens et al., 2020
Visual cortex GABAergic neurons
Mouse
Acute slices
SMART-Seq v4—Tagmentation
4270
NEMO archivea
Scala et al., 2020
Excitatory and inhibitory neurons of the
motor cortex
Mouse
Acute slices
Smart-seq2—Tagmentation
1221
NEMO archiveb
Berg et al., 2020
Cortical glutamatergic neurons
Human
Acute slices
SMART-Seq v4—Tagmentation
385
NA
Bakken et al., 2020
Primary motor cortex neurons
Marmoset Human
Acute slices
SMART-Seq v4—Tagmentation
12
NA
Cadwell et al., 2017
Cortical neurons
Mouse
Acute slices
Smart-seq2—Tagmentation
Protocol paper
van den Hurk et al., 2018
iPSC-derived neurons
Human
Cultured cells
SMARTer—Tagmentation
Protocol paper
Lipovsek et al., 2020
Dopaminergic neurons of the olfactory bulb
Mouse
Acute slices
Smart-seq2—Tagmentation
Protocol paper
Lee et al., 2020
Primary visual cortex
Mouse
Acute slices
SMART-Seq v4—Tagmentation
Protocol paper
Mahfooz and Ellender, 2021
Cortical neurons
Mouse
Acute slices
Smart-seq2—Tagmentation
Protocol book chapter
NA, Not available.
a http://data.nemoarchive.org/other/grant/AIBS_patchseq/transcriptome/scell/SMARTseq/
b http://data.nemoarchive.org/biccn/grant/zeng/tolias/
Lipovsek etal. · Advancements inPatch-seq
J. Neurosci.,February 3, 2021 • 41(5):937–946 • 939

During recording, neurons can be filled with biocytin, ena-
bling subsequent recovery of detailed cellular morphology
(Cadwell et al., 2017; Fig. 1A). While this was not realized by the
earliest applications of Patch-seq (Cadwell et al., 2016; Fuzik et
al., 2016), recent adaptations to the internal and external solu-
tions have substantially improved cell filling (Cadwell et al.,
2017; Gouwens et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020; Scala et al., 2020).
Subsequent staining and morphologic reconstruction are further
enhanced by the slow and careful retraction of the pipette during
the sample collection step after electrophysiological recordings
(Gouwens et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020). Alternatively, if rhoda-
mine is added to the intracellular solution, fluorescent images of
the live neuron can be acquired before sample collection (Bardy
et al., 2016; van den Hurk et al., 2018; Fig. 1B).
The potential applications of Patch-seq approaches span
model systems, including traditional rodent models (Cadwell et
al., 2016; Földy et al., 2016; Fuzik et al., 2016, 2019; Muñoz-
Manchado et al., 2018; Ellender et al., 2019; Laboissonniere et
al., 2019; Oberst et al., 2019; Scala et al., 2019, 2020; Wang et
al., 2019; Winterer et al., 2019; Cadwell et al., 2020; Gouwens
et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020; Oláh et al., 2020;
Que et al., 2020), neurons derived from induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs; Bardy et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2016), and less
genetically tractable models such as nonhuman primates
(Bakken et al., 2020) and primary human tissue (Berg et al.,
2020; Kim et al., 2020b). Patch-seq protocols have also been
applied to non-neuronal pancreatic islet cells (Camunas-Soler
et al., 2020). The basic procedure is very similar regardless of
the model system, although the patching and sample collection
techniques are tailored to the specific features of the tissue and cell
type at hand (e.g., cell size, number of projections, age, myeliniza-
tion). For example, the negative pressure applied to aspirate the
cell contents needs to be carefully calibrated. In some instances (e.
g., nonhuman primates and human tissue), cell viability is more
variable, and so the extraction pressure needs to be adapted to
each individual cell, with typically higher pressure applied for
larger cell sizes. Also, if the neuron being extracted has a large
number of projections embedded within the tissue, a careful bal-
ance between high and low negative pressure is needed to extract
the cell contents without tearing the delicate processes.
The application of Patch-seq to the study of human iPSC-
derived neurons in vitro was developed independently (Bardy et
al., 2016; Chen et al., 2016; van den Hurk et al., 2018) but shares
features with Patch-seq methods tailored for acute brain slices
(van den Hurk et al., 2018). The main advantages of the cell cul-
ture-based approach reside in the ability to perform high-resolu-
tion imaging of the live cells for morphology reconstructions and
an enhanced capability to collect RNA from the entire neuron
(Fig. 1B). The latter provides a more accurate representation of
the complete transcriptional program of the cell, including
mRNAs localized to synapses or dendrites (Cajigas et al., 2012),
otherwise hidden in most other single-cell analyses that are re-
stricted to the mRNA localized to the soma or the nucleus.
Extraction of the complete cell (including soma and neurites)
may prove more or less technically challenging depending on the
stiffness of extracellular matrix, the size of the dendritic arboriza-
tion, and neuronal adherence. In summary, Patch-seq is a versa-
tile methodology, and the choice of protocol and model system
depends on the experimental question at hand.
cDNA synthesis, library preparation, and sequencing
Having collected the contents from individually recorded
neurons, subsequent steps aim to generate quantitative gene
expression information using scRNAseq workflows. These
involve cDNA synthesis and preparation of sequencing libra-
ries. The protocol to be used is chosen before sample collec-
tion, as this will dictate the composition of the collection
buffer. The cell contents aspirated using the patch recording
pipette can be deposited into lysis buffer or on a buffer con-
taining components for the RT reaction. Depending on the
collection buffer and experimental workflow, RT reactions
are performed on the day of recording or, following short-
term storage at 80°C, RT reactions can be performed in
batches after sample collection is completed.
Patch-seq is not compatible with high-throughput droplet-
based scRNAseq methods, such as 10 Genomics or Drop-seq
(Macosko et al., 2015), but can be combined with tube/plate-
based methods for the preparation of cDNA and sequencing
libraries. Synthetic mRNA spike-ins [e.g., ERCC (External RNA
Controls Consortium) spike-ins; Jiang et al., 2011] can be
included at this point, or in the internal solution used for electro-
physiological recordings, to help control for technical variability.
The most commonly used cDNA synthesis protocols are com-
mercial (e.g., SMART-seq version 4, Clontech) or “off-the-shelf”
versions of the popular Smart-Seq2 protocol (Picelli et al.,
2014b). These are based on full-length cDNA synthesis and
amplification using a template-switching oligonucleotide, fol-
lowed by amplification of full-length cDNA. Other protocols
allow for the incorporation of unique molecular identifiers
(UMIs) followed by isolation of 59-end fragments (Zeisel et al.,
2015). The choice between full-length cDNA versus UMI-based
approaches will depend on the experimental questions and data
analysis workflow. The former is more sensitive and provides
full-length coverage, allowing for analysis of splice variants
(Ziegenhain et al., 2017), while the latter provides absolute num-
bers of molecule counts, correcting for library amplification bias.
The newly developed Smart-Seq3 protocol combines full cDNA
coverage and UMIs, greatly improving mRNA quantification
and identification of isoforms (Hagemann-Jensen et al., 2020),
and is compatible with Patch-seq workflows.
The preparation of sequencing libraries is usually performed
using tagmentation-based methods, with either commercially
available kits (e.g., Illumina Nextera XT) or off-the-shelf reagents
(Picelli et al., 2014a,b). Both the cDNA and sequencing libraries
undergo standard quality control steps. These may include capil-
lary electrophoresis (e.g., Bioanalyzer or TapeStation) and quan-
tification (e.g., Qubit) of amplified cDNA from individual cells
(Cadwell et al., 2017; van den Hurk et al., 2018), as well as quan-
titative RT-PCR for housekeeping or marker genes and/or tech-
nical spike-ins (if included in the preparation; van den Hurk et
al., 2018). Low-quality samples can be excluded from sequencing
to conserve resources. Finally, short-read sequencing is typically
performed on Illumina platforms. cDNA/library preparation and
sequencing amount to most of the costs of running Patch-seq
experiments. The choice between using commercially available
kits or off-the-shelf reagents (see above) also greatly impacts
overall expenses. For example, the cost of the SMART-seq ver-
sion 4 kit (Takara) ranges from $40 to $90 per cell (excluding
sequencing and equipment costs), whereas using off-the-shelf
reagents can reduce the cost of library preparation to ;$20 per
cell (Cadwell et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2020).
Data processing and analysis
Bioinformatics pipelines for low-level processing of Patch-seq
data are typically identical to those currently in use for dissoci-
ated single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-seq data (Lun et al.,
940 • J. Neurosci.,February 3, 2021 • 41(5):937–946
Lipovsek et al. · Advancements inPatch-seq

2016; Luecken and Theis, 2019; Vieth et al., 2019). In brief,
sequenced reads are first aligned to the reference genome and
then quantified, typically at the gene level. In Patch-seq, up to
;50% of reads come from unspliced transcripts (presumed to
originate from the cell nucleus; Cadwell et al., 2017; Scala et al.,
2020), similar to single-nucleus RNA-seq (Bakken et al., 2018),
and so it can be beneficial to use both exonic and intronic read
counts to quantify gene expression (Gouwens et al., 2020; Lee et
al., 2020; Scala et al., 2020).
Following mapping and read quantification, there are a num-
ber of sample-level quality metrics that should be considered for
Patch-seq. These include standard metrics commonly used for
scRNAseq, such as the number of reads and genes detected per
cell, the fraction of reads that map to the genome, the proportion
of reads aligning to mitochondrial genes and spike-ins (if
included), and the distribution of reads across intergenic, exonic,
and intronic regions (Lun et al., 2016; Luecken and Theis, 2019;
Vieth et al., 2019). These assessments are especially important
when laboratories are in the early stages of implementing Patch-
seq, as the harvesting and sequencing of degraded mRNA often
result in low-quality data. Additional quality control specific to
Patch-seq involves quantifying mRNA contamination because
of inadvertent sampling of mRNA from off-target sources, such
as surrounding cells and neuropil (Tripathy et al., 2018;
Gouwens et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020; Scala et al., 2020). Using
high-quality dissociation-based scRNAseq as a reference, no-
ticeable glial contamination (e.g., microglial markers) has often
been observed in Patch-seq samples obtained from acute brain
slices. Computational approaches have been developed for
quantifying and addressing the effect of these confounds in the
context of downstream analyses (Tripathy et al., 2018; Lee et al.,
2020).
Data analysis workflows will depend on the specific research
questions being asked. When the objective is to study cell types, a
common first step is to “map” Patch-seq transcriptomes to an
existing transcriptomic reference atlas (Scala et al., 2019, 2020;
Cadwell et al., 2020; Gouwens et al., 2020; Que et al., 2020). This
is a key analysis step for classifying Patch-seq samples, as disso-
ciation-based scRNAseq datasets typically encompass several
orders of magnitude more cells and therefore provide more ro-
bust transcriptomic identification of cell types. Despite differ-
ences in expression profiles between Patch-seq and reference
scRNAseq data, accurate mapping is typically possible using
correlation-based methods (Fuzik et al., 2016; Stuart et al.,
2019; Berg et al., 2020; Gouwens et al., 2020; Scala et al., 2020).
This allows confident assignment of reference transcriptomic
types to each Patch-seq cell and their positioning onto a
reduced dimension (tSNE or UMAP) reference visualization
(Kobak and Berens, 2019). Patch-seq cells with poor or incon-
sistent mapping to the reference atlas can then be discarded in
an additional quality control step (Gouwens et al., 2020; Scala
et al., 2020).
Finally, given the multimodal nature of Patch-seq data, there
is strong interest in dedicated statistical tools for multimodal
data exploration and visualization. Several methods relating gene
expression to electrophysiological properties and allowing for
low-dimensional visualizations have been developed, based on
reduced-rank regression (Kobak et al., 2018), coupled autoen-
coders (Gala et al., 2019), and bottleneck networks (Bernaerts et
al., 2020). It remains a challenge to include morphologic data in
these statistical frameworks because of lower sample sizes and
difficulties with adequately representing neural morphologies as
feature vectors.
Using Patch-seq to address novel biological
questions
The advantages of targeted cell sampling
Though relatively low throughput, the Patch-seq sample collec-
tion presents one crucial advantage over standard dissociation-
based scRNAseq approaches: the experimenter knows exactly
from which cell the transcriptomic sample is being collected (Fig.
2A). This knowledge has been exploited to address multiple
questions by pairing transcriptomes with spatial context, mor-
phology, connectivity, and functional phenotypes (to name a
few). For example, sample collection using the Patch-seq
approach identified correlations between transcriptomes and
neuronal position (Pfeffer and Beltramo, 2017; Gouwens et al.,
2020; Scala et al., 2020), projection pattern, sensory response
type (Pfeffer and Beltramo, 2017), and long-range axonal con-
nectivity (Luo et al., 2019). The transcriptomes of individual cells
identified solely by their functional response properties, such as
thermosensitive neurons of the preoptic area of the hypothala-
mus (Wang et al., 2019), light-sensitive and insensitive neurons
of the visual cortex (Liu et al., 2020), and glucose-inhibited/
excited neurons of the ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (He
et al., 2020) have been contrasted, via Patch-seq, for the first
time, revealing new molecular markers and genes involved in dif-
ferential functional responses.
Targeted Patch-seq experiments also allow studying neurons
with a shared developmental lineage. For example, Patch-seq
revealed that cortical excitatory neurons derived from a common
early progenitor are transcriptomically diverse and no more
likely to belong to the same transcriptomic cell type than ran-
domly selected neurons in similar anatomic locations (Cadwell
et al., 2020). However, Patch-seq performed on excitatory neu-
rons derived from different progenitor pools at later develop-
mental stages revealed that apical intermediate progenitors
contribute to a transcriptionally distinct layer 2/3 neuronal sub-
type (Ellender et al., 2019). Finally, in combination with elegant
transplantation experiments, sample collection via Patch-seq
identified a prominent role for Wnt signaling in the temporal
specification of apical neuronal progenitors (Oberst et al., 2019).
A Rosetta stone for integrating multimodal atlases of cell
type diversity
The latest and largest scRNAseq studies of the mammalian brain
describe hundreds of different transcriptomically defined cell
types (La Manno et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2020), identified by clus-
tering analysis. However, for many of these, the morphoelectric
identity remains unknown. Patch-seq approaches are bridging
this gap by directly profiling morphologic and electrophysiologi-
cal phenotypes, alongside the transcriptomes, followed by mapping
these multimodally defined cells onto comprehensive scRNAseq
atlases (Fig. 2B). The first multimodal Patch-seq studies identified
morphoelectrically and transcriptomically distinct neurons in layers
1 and 2 of the cortex (Cadwell et al., 2016; Fuzik et al., 2016). The
latest multimodal classification efforts have profiled thousands of
neurons in the mouse visual and motor cortices, comprising the
majority of known transcriptomically defined cell types (Gouwens
et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020; Scala et al., 2020; Table 1).
The identification of distinct cell types is not always straight-
forward. In the striatum, transcriptomic classification of spiny
projection neurons identified continuous as well as discrete varia-
tion between cell types (Gokce et al., 2016; Stanley et al., 2020).
Application of Patch-seq to striatum interneurons uncovered a
continuum of transcriptomic gradients that correlate with a
Lipovsek etal. · Advancements inPatch-seq
J. Neurosci.,February 3, 2021 • 41(5):937–946 • 941

continuum of electrophysiological pheno-
types (Muñoz-Manchado et al., 2018), indi-
cating that graded phenotypes may be a
defining feature of neuronal diversity, at
least in the striatum. In the hippocampus,
Patch-seq of morphologically distinct par-
valbumin-positive
interneurons
found
them to be biophysically and transcription-
ally homogeneous, but identified a develop-
mental change in transcriptomic state that
is characterized by the unexpected onset of
hemoglobin expression (Que et al., 2020).
Further exploiting the potential of Patch-
seq data, multimodal analysis refined the
classification of layer 4 interneurons of the
mouse visual and somatosensory cortex,
suggesting that transcriptomically similar
neurons can differ in terms of morphology
and electrophysiology, depending on their
cortical area (Scala et al., 2019).
The picture emerging from cross-mo-
dality studies is that no single feature is
sufficient to unequivocally identify cell
types. A study in the motor cortex sug-
gested that, while broad families of tran-
scriptomic cell types have distinct and
essentially nonoverlapping morphoelectric
phenotypes, closely related transcriptomic
cell types are not well separated in the
morphoelectric space (Scala et al., 2020). Also, corticocortical
projection neurons of the visual cortex, identified as a single
transcriptomically defined cell cluster, correspond to distinct cell
types, defined by their anatomic projections and connectivity
patterns (Kim et al., 2020a). Finally, continuous variation of
morphologic, electrophysiological, and/or transcriptomic fea-
tures between related cell types can limit the ability to predict
one from the other, although using more than one modality can
enhance prediction (Gouwens et al., 2020). The examples dis-
cussed above highlight the requirement for multimodal profiling
to better determine cell identity and have crucial implications for
the conceptual and empirical definitions of cell types, subtypes,
and states (Zeng and Sanes, 2017).
Uncovering the molecular basis of morphologic and
functional diversity
The unbiased nature of single-cell transcriptomics makes Patch-
seq ideal for generating novel hypotheses about the molecular
underpinnings of morphologic and functional diversity. By tar-
geting recordings to previously known functionally distinct cell
types, the transcriptomic basis of such differences can now be
potentially elucidated using Patch-seq (Wang et al., 2019; He et
al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020). The predictive power of the Patch-seq
approach to reveal features of neuronal function within local cir-
cuitry was illustrated in CCK1 interneurons. Here, transcrip-
tomic data identified differential expression of 5-HT3 receptor
subunits between interneuron types. At the functional level, this
resulted in differential responses to serotonin and the further
demonstration that, in interneurons that lack 5-HT3 receptors
mRNA, responses to serotonin are driven by gap junction cou-
pling to neighboring cells (Fuzik et al., 2016). Similarly, Patch-
seq identified novel differentially expressed genes including cell
adhesion and synaptic regulatory molecules, that may underlie
differences in the connectivity of distinct subtypes of layer 1
interneurons (Cadwell et al., 2016).
Multimodal experiments have identified cell types with distinct
functional or morphologic features that show highly similar tran-
scriptomic profiles (Scala et al., 2019; Que et al., 2020; Kim et al.,
2020a). In-depth analysis of one such example in the rat hippo-
campus found that CCK1 interneurons of the CA3 area that dis-
play different excitability properties express distinct isoforms of
voltage-gated potassium channel auxiliary subunits (Oláh et al.,
2020). This demonstrates that subtle differences in transcriptomic
profile can have profound consequences for neuronal function.
The potential for Patch-seq to predict functional states has
also been demonstrated in human iPSC-derived neuronal cul-
tures (Bardy et al., 2016). Such cultures often comprise neuronal
populations of heterogeneous electrophysiological states or neu-
rodevelopmental maturity. Applied to a Patch-seq dataset of
iPSC-derived neurons, a machine-learning classifier efficiently
predicted the electrophysiological state of individual neurons
from their transcriptional profile (Fig. 2C). Once trained on
Patch-seq data, such a classifier was applied to thousands of neu-
rons profiled by high-throughput scRNAseq, allowing the study
of functional heterogeneity in iPSC-derived cultures (Bardy et
al., 2016). Similar machine learning approaches for predicting
aspects of neuronal physiology from genome-wide gene expres-
sion have also been implemented on layer 1 cortical interneurons
(Cadwell et al., 2016). Patch-seq can further be used to identify
specific genes whose expression correlates strongly with electro-
physiological properties (Fig. 2D). For example, mRNA level of
Kcna1, which codes for subunits of the Kv1.1 voltage-gated po-
tassium channel, correlates strongly with cell-to-cell variability in
action potential width among inhibitory cell types in the hippo-
campus and striatum (Bomkamp et al., 2019).
Finally, Patch-seq methods are not restricted to neurons. An
extensive study of human pancreas samples combined electro-
physiological measurements of exocytosis and channel activity
Figure 2.
Diagrams of typical analytic workflows for Patch-seq experiments. A, Patch-seq allows the direct targeting of
identified cells of interest (e.g., genetically labeled, retrogradely labeled by targeting the projection site or by their unique
responses to a stimulus). B, The gene expression profile of Patch-seq samples can be used to map cells onto a reference
scRNAseq dataset, thus assigning a multimodal phenotype to transcriptomically identified cell clusters. C, Multimodal Patch-
seq data can be used to train a machine learning algorithm that can be used to predict the functional state of cells collected
in independent scRNAseq datasets. D, Patch-seq data can be used to identify gene expression patterns that correlate with
morphoelectric properties and other phenotypes.
942 • J. Neurosci.,February 3, 2021 • 41(5):937–946
Lipovsek et al. · Advancements inPatch-seq

with scRNAseq of pancreatic b -cells (Camunas-Soler et al., 2020).
Subsequent analyses of cell function and gene expression networks
identified a gene set associated with functional heterogeneity that
can be used to predict endocrine physiology. The authors go fur-
ther to demonstrate that Patch-seq can be used to study cryopre-
served tissue (Camunas-Soler et al., 2020). The application of
these novel approaches to patient samples holds great promise for
future research and therapeutic avenues for the treatment of
diabetes.
Outstanding questions and future directions
Patch-seq is a multimodal approach that can simultaneously pro-
file multiple aspects of neuronal biology, namely their transcrip-
tome, electrophysiological properties, anatomic location, and
morphology. As such, it holds immense potential to address a
multitude of outstanding questions in neuroscience. Approaches
using Patch-seq have already made significant contributions to
the identification of cell types and subtypes (Muñoz-Manchado
et al., 2018; Gouwens et al., 2020; Scala et al., 2020), providing an
essential backdrop for current and future neuroscience research.
The Patch-seq methodology presents three significant chal-
lenges. First, it is relatively low throughput, as the number of cells
that can be profiled in a given experiment is governed by the
practical considerations of patch-clamp electrophysiology (as
opposed to the high throughput of droplet-based scRNAseq),
made more cumbersome by the specific requirements of Patch-
seq sample collection. Second, Patch-seq is a laborious technique
to learn and master. However, recent protocol improvements
have substantially improved the success rates of critical mRNA
sample collection and morphology recovery steps (Cadwell et al.,
2017; Gouwens et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020; Lipovsek et al., 2020;
Scala et al., 2020). Last, Patch-seq requires interdisciplinarity, as
it yields multiple types of data, each calling for their own skillset
to analyze and interpret. Higher-throughput methods can indi-
vidually profile the modalities targeted by Patch-seq. Using dedi-
cated data analysis tools, these can be combined post hoc to start
exploring their relationships (Tripathy et al., 2017; Butler et al.,
2018). However, Patch-seq is unique in the sense that all data
modalities are acquired from each individual cell simultaneously,
providing unique and integrative opportunities for cross-modal
data exploration.
Overall, Patch-seq is a versatile methodology and can be
applied to any sample suitable for patch-clamp experiments.
Decades of electrophysiological research provide virtually endless
tried experimental model systems. Going beyond traditional
acute mouse or rat brain slices, Patch-seq has already been
implemented on neurosurgically resected human tissues to iden-
tify increased glutamatergic neuron diversity in the human cor-
tex (Berg et al., 2020) and in a comparative study of mouse,
marmoset, and human motor cortex (Bakken et al., 2018).
Improvement, refinement, and modifications of patch-clamp
recordings and sequencing methodologies will undoubtedly
extend the reach of Patch-seq methods. To date, Patch-seq has
already been applied to in vivo recordings (Cadwell et al., 2016;
Pfeffer and Beltramo, 2017; Liu et al., 2020), thus opening up the
opportunity to co-opt invaluable experimental paradigms (e.g.,
learning and memory, sensory processing, and motor control)
into multimodal workflows to ultimately study the relationships
between gene expression and behavior. Furthermore, incorporat-
ing additional steps after sample collection to separate the
mRNA from the rest of the cell contents (e.g., G&T protocol for
simultaneous genome and transcriptome profiling; Macaulay et
al., 2016; Lipovsek et al., 2020) could provide the opportunity to
study additional modalities. For example, chromatin accessibility
or DNA methylation patterns can be profiled on the genomic
DNA (Smallwood et al., 2014; Buenrostro et al., 2015) to investi-
gate the epigenomic correlates of functional phenotypes, and
advances in single-cell proteomics will enable assaying protein
abundance levels (Labib and Kelley, 2020). Finally, Patch-seq
could be combined with CRISPR-based gene expression pertur-
bation experiments (Gomez et al., 2019) to simultaneously study
the transcriptomic and functional effects of specific mutations at
the single-cell level.
Future experimental questions will undoubtedly drive proto-
col innovations. Placed at the intersection between the functional
and molecular domains, Patch-seq approaches are ideally suited
to explore open questions on cell state dynamics. For a
defined cell type, how is the functional state affected by
external input? Which are the key genes that define a func-
tional state? How does a change in functional state relate to
changes in transcriptomic state? Addressing these questions
will contribute to identifying the molecular players shaping
the landscape of possible states a given cell can adopt during
development, aging, and disease (Trapnell, 2015).
A yet untapped area of investigation for Patch-seq are the
transcriptomic mechanisms of synapse function and plasticity.
These experiments would require improvements in both record-
ing conditions and scRNAseq methods to mitigate the effects on
mRNA stability of extended recording periods and to capture
transcriptomic changes related to mRNA transport and localiza-
tion. Additionally, Patch-seq approaches can be a starting point
for studying circuit assembly. For example, a description of a cell
type-specific code of synaptic and cell adhesion molecules and its
relationship with a functional phenotype could be used to predict
circuit connectivity from single cell-level transcriptomic data
(Földy et al., 2016). With the expansion of Patch-seq data-
sets, this approach can first be validated on known connected
neurons and subsequently exploited to predict hitherto
unknown connections. Finally, multi-Patch-seq experiments,
in which pairs (or groups) of neurons are simultaneously
recorded to determine their connectivity and subsequently
collected for sequencing, would allow a direct correlation
between gene expression and connectivity of transcriptomi-
cally and morphoelectrically defined neurons.
Another exciting area of investigation is using Patch-seq to
disentangle the causality between molecules and function. For
example, while many genes might appear correlated with a quan-
titative functional feature, such as an electrophysiological prop-
erty (Cadwell et al., 2016; Földy et al., 2016), pinpointing which
of these genes is likely to drive the causal relationship is a major
goal of multimodal experimental approaches (Tripathy et al.,
2017; Bomkamp et al., 2019). Addressing these questions will
require further experimental manipulations alongside the devel-
opment of new data analysis frameworks to distill understanding
from complex multimodal datasets.
Overall, multimodal approaches to study cell types and func-
tion are becoming the norm, as new experimental and analytical
tools are developed, allowing the exploration of long-standing
and novel questions in neuroscience. Many of these approaches
are focused on increasing the experimental throughput, aiming
at profiling the highest number of cells possible. In parallel,
lower-throughput approaches that are tailored to addressing spe-
cific questions can be equally or more powerful. Though Patch-
seq is a laborious approach, by directly interrogating the connec-
tions between organizational levels it is already proving invalu-
able for advancing our understanding of neuronal function.
Lipovsek etal. · Advancements inPatch-seq
J. Neurosci.,February 3, 2021 • 41(5):937–946 • 943

References
Bakken TE, Hodge RD, Miller JA, Yao Z, Nguyen TN, Aevermann B, Barkan
E, Bertagnolli D, Casper T, Dee N, Garren E, Goldy J, Graybuck LT, Kroll
M, Lasken RS, Lathia K, Parry S, Rimorin C, Scheuermann RH, Schork
NJ, et al. (2018) Single-nucleus and single-cell transcriptomes compared
in matched cortical cell types. PLoS One 13:e0209648.
Bakken TE, Jorstad NL, Hu Q, Lake BB, Tian W, Kalmbach BE, Crow M,
Hodge RD, Krienen FM, Sorensen SA, Eggermont J, Yao Z, Aevermann
BD, Aldridge AI, Bartlett A, Bertagnolli D, Casper T, Castanon RG,
Crichton K, Daigl TL, et al. (2020) Evolution of cellular diversity in pri-
mary motor cortex of human, marmoset monkey, and mouse. bioRxiv
016972. doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.31.016972.
Bardy C, van den Hurk M, Kakaradov B, Erwin JA, Jaeger BN, Hernandez
RV, Eames T, Paucar AA, Gorris M, Marchand C, Jappelli R, Barron J,
Bryant AK, Kellogg M, Lasken RS, Rutten BPF, Steinbusch HWM, Yeo
GW, Gage FH (2016) Predicting the functional states of human iPSC-
derived neurons with single-cell RNA-seq and electrophysiology. Mol
Psychiatry 21:1573–1588.
Berg J, Sorensen SA, Ting JT, Miller JA, Chartrand T, Buchin A, Bakken TE,
Budzillo A, Dee N, Ding S-L, Gouwens NW, Hodge RD, Kalmbach B,
Lee C, Lee BR, Alfiler L, Baker K, Barkan E, Beller A, Berry K, et al.
(2020) Human cortical expansion involves diversification and specializa-
tion of supragranular intratelencephalic-projecting neurons. bioRxiv
018820. doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.31.018820.
Bernaerts Y, Berens P, Kobak D (2020) Sparse bottleneck networks for explor-
atory analysis and visualization of neural Patch-seq data. arXiv:2006.10411.
Bomkamp C, Tripathy SJ, Bengtsson Gonzales C, Hjerling-Leffler J, Craig
AM, Pavlidis P (2019) Transcriptomic correlates of electrophysiological
and morphological diversity within and across excitatory and inhibitory
neuron classes. PLoS Comput Biol 15:e1007113.
Buenrostro JD, Wu B, Litzenburger UM, Ruff D, Gonzales ML, Snyder MP,
Chang HY, Greenleaf WJ (2015) Single-cell chromatin accessibility
reveals principles of regulatory variation. Nature 523:486–490.
Butler A, Hoffman P, Smibert P, Papalexi E, Satija R (2018) Integrating sin-
gle-cell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and
species. Nat Biotechnol 36:411–420.
Cadwell CR, Palasantza A, Jiang X, Berens P, Deng Q, Yilmaz M, Reimer J,
Shen S, Bethge
M, Tolias KF, Sandberg
R, Tolias AS (2016)
Electrophysiological, transcriptomic and morphologic profiling of single
neurons using Patch-seq. Nat Biotechnol 34:199–203.
Cadwell CR, Scala F, Li S, Livrizzi G, Shen S, Sandberg R, Jiang X, Tolias AS
(2017) Multimodal profiling of single-cell morphology, electrophysiol-
ogy, and gene expression using Patch-seq. Nat Protoc 12:2531–2553.
Cadwell CR, Scala F, Fahey PG, Kobak D, Mulherkar S, Sinz FH,
Papadopoulos S, Tan ZH, Johnsson P, Hartmanis L, Li S, Cotton RJ,
Tolias KF, Sandberg R, Berens P, Jiang X, Tolias AS (2020) Cell type com-
position and circuit organization of clonally related excitatory neurons in
the juvenile mouse neocortex. Elife 9:e52951.
Cajigas IJ, Tushev G, Will TJ, tom Dieck S, Fuerst N, Schuman EM (2012)
The local transcriptome in the synaptic neuropil revealed by deep
sequencing and high-resolution imaging. Neuron 74:453–466.
Camunas-Soler J, Dai X-Q, Hang Y, Bautista A, Lyon J, Suzuki K, Kim
SK, Quake SR, MacDonald PE (2020) Patch-seq links single-cell
transcriptomes to human islet dysfunction in diabetes. Cell Metab
31:1017–1031.e4.
Chen KH, Boettiger AN, Moffitt JR, Wang S, Zhuang X (2015) Spatially
resolved, highly multiplexed RNA profiling in single cells. Science 348:
aaa6090.
Chen X, Zhang K, Zhou L, Gao X, Wang J, Yao Y, He F, Luo Y, Yu Y, Li S,
Cheng L, Sun YE (2016) Coupled electrophysiological recording and sin-
gle cell transcriptome analyses revealed molecular mechanisms underly-
ing neuronal maturation. Protein Cell 7:175–186.
Chevée M, Robertson JDJ, Cannon GH, Brown SP, Goff LA (2018) Variation
in activity state, axonal projection, and position define the transcriptional
identity of individual neocortical projection neurons. Cell Rep 22:441–
455.
Chiang LW (1998) Detection of gene expression in single neurons by patch-
clamp and single-cell reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. J
Chromatogr A 806:209–218.
De Carlos JA, Borrell J (2007) A historical reflection of the contributions
of Cajal and Golgi to the foundations of neuroscience. Brain Res Rev
55:8–16.
Eberwine J, Yeh H, Miyashiro K, Cao Y, Nair S, Finnell R, Zettel M, Coleman
P (1992) Analysis of gene expression in single live neurons. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 89:3010–3014.
Ellender TJ, Avery SV, Mahfooz K, Scaber J, von Klemperer A, Nixon SL,
Buchan MJ, van Rheede JJ, Gatti A, Waites C, Pavlou HJ, Sims D, Newey
SE, Akerman CJ (2019) Embryonic progenitor pools generate diversity in
fine-scale excitatory cortical subnetworks. Nat Commun 10:5224.
Eng C-HL, Lawson M, Zhu Q, Dries R, Koulena N, Takei Y, Yun J, Cronin
C, Karp C, Yuan G-C, Cai L (2019) Transcriptome-scale super-resolved
imaging in tissues by RNA seqFISH. Nature 568:235–239.
Fishell G, Rudy B (2011) Mechanisms of inhibition within the telencephalon:
“where the wild things are”. Annu Rev Neurosci 34:535–567.
Földy C, Darmanis S, Aoto J, Malenka RC, Quake SR, Südhof TC (2016)
Single-cell RNAseq reveals cell adhesion molecule profiles in electrophy-
siologically defined neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113:E5222–
E5231.
Fuzik J, Zeisel A, Máté Z, Calvigioni D, Yanagawa Y, Szabó G, Linnarsson S,
Harkany T (2016) Integration of electrophysiological recordings with sin-
gle-cell RNA-seq data identifies neuronal subtypes. Nat Biotechnol
34:175–183.
Fuzik J, Rehman S, Girach F, Miklosi AG, Korchynska S, Arque G, Romanov
RA, Hanics J, Wagner L, Meletis K, Yanagawa Y, Kovacs GG, Alpár A,
Hökfelt TGM, Harkany T (2019) Brain-wide genetic mapping identifies
the indusium griseum as a prenatal target of pharmacologically unrelated
psychostimulants. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 116:25958–25967.
Gala R, Gouwens N, Yao Z, Budzillo A, Penn O, Tasic B, Murphy G,
Zeng H, Sümbül U (2019) A coupled autoencoder approach for
multi-modal
analysis
of
cell
types.
In:
Advances
in
Neural
Information Processing Systems 32 (Wallach H, Larochelle H,
Beygelzimer A, Alché-Buc F, Fox E, Garnett R, eds), pp 9267–9276.
Red Hook, NY: Curran Associates.
Gokce O, Stanley GM, Treutlein B, Neff NF, Camp JG, Malenka RC,
Rothwell PE, Fuccillo MV, Südhof TC, Quake SR (2016) Cellular taxon-
omy of the mouse striatum as revealed by single-cell RNA-Seq. Cell Rep
16:1126–1137.
Golgi C (1873) Sulla struttura della sostanza grigia del cervelo. Gazzetta
Medica Italiana Lombardia 33:244–246.
Gomez JA, Beitnere U, Segal DJ (2019) Live-animal epigenome editing: con-
vergence of novel techniques. Trends Genet 35:527–541.
Gouwens NW, Sorensen SA, Berg J, Lee C, Jarsky T, Ting J, Sunkin SM, Feng
D, Anastassiou CA, Barkan E, Bickley K, Blesie N, Braun T, Brouner K,
Budzillo A, Caldejon S, Casper T, Castelli D, Chong P, Crichton K, et al.
(2019) Classification of electrophysiological and morphological neuron
types in the mouse visual cortex. Nat Neurosci 22:1182–1195.
Gouwens NW, Sorensen SA, Baftizadeh F, Budzillo A, Lee BR, Jarsky T,
Alfiler L, Baker K, Barkan E, Berry K, Bertagnolli D, Bickley K, Bomben
J, Braun T, Brouner K, Casper T, Crichton K, Daigle TL, Dalley R, de
Frates RA, et al. (2020) Integrated morphoelectric and transcriptomic
classification of cortical GABAergic cells. Cell 183:935–953.e19.
Habib N, Li Y, Heidenreich M, Swiech L, Avraham-Davidi I, Trombetta JJ,
Hession C, Zhang F, Regev A (2016) Div-Seq: single-nucleus RNA-Seq
reveals dynamics of rare adult newborn neurons. Science 353:925–928.
Hagemann-Jensen M, Ziegenhain C, Chen P, Ramsköld D, Hendriks G-J,
Larsson AJM, Faridani OR, Sandberg R (2020) Single-cell RNA counting
at allele and isoform resolution using Smart-seq3. Nat Biotechnol
38:708–714.
He Y, Xu P, Wang C, Xia Y, Yu M, Yang Y, Yu K, Cai X, Qu N, Saito K,
Wang J, Hyseni I, Robertson M, Piyarathna B, Gao M, Khan SA, Liu F,
Chen R, Coarfa C, Zhao Z, et al. (2020) Estrogen receptor-a expressing
neurons in the ventrolateral VMH regulate glucose balance. Nat
Commun 11:2165.
Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF (1952) A quantitative description of membrane cur-
rent and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve. J Physiol
117:500–544.
Hrvatin S, Hochbaum DR, Nagy MA, Cicconet M, Robertson K, Cheadle L,
Zilionis R, Ratner A, Borges-Monroy R, Klein AM, Sabatini BL,
Greenberg ME (2018) Single-cell analysis of experience-dependent tran-
scriptomic states in the mouse visual cortex. Nat Neurosci 21:120–129.
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN (1959) Receptive fields of single neurones in the cat’s
striate cortex. J Physiol 148:574–591.
Jaeger BN, Linker SB, Parylak SL, Barron JJ, Gallina IS, Saavedra CD,
Fitzpatrick C, Lim CK, Schafer ST, Lacar B, Jessberger S, Gage FH (2018)
944 • J. Neurosci.,February 3, 2021 • 41(5):937–946
Lipovsek et al. · Advancements inPatch-seq

A novel environment-evoked transcriptional signature predicts reactivity
in single dentate granule neurons. Nat Commun 9:3084.
Jiang L, Schlesinger F, Davis CA, Zhang Y, Li R, Salit M, Gingeras TR, Oliver
B (2011) Synthetic spike-in standards for RNA-seq experiments. Genome
Res 21:1543–1551.
Jiang X, Shen S, Cadwell CR, Berens P, Sinz F, Ecker AS, Patel S, Tolias AS
(2015) Principles of connectivity among morphologically defined cell
types in adult neocortex. Science 350:aac9462.
Kee N, Volakakis N, Kirkeby A, Dahl L, Storvall H, Nolbrant S, Lahti L,
Björklund ÅK, Gillberg L, Joodmardi E, Sandberg R, Parmar M,
Perlmann T (2017) Single-cell analysis reveals a close relationship
between differentiating dopamine and subthalamic nucleus neuronal lin-
eages. Cell Stem Cell 20:29–40.
Kim EJ, Zhang Z, Huang L, Ito-Cole T, Jacobs MW, Juavinett AL, Senturk G,
Hu M, Ku M, Ecker JR, Callaway EM (2020a) Extraction of distinct neu-
ronal cell types from within a genetically continuous population. Neuron
107:274–282.e6.
Kim JMH, Camarena A, Walker C, Lin MY, Wolseley V, Souaiaia T,
Thornton M, Grubbs B, Chow RH, Evgrafov OV, Knowles JA (2020b)
Robust RNA-Seq of aRNA-amplified single cell material collected by
patch clamp. Sci Rep 10:1979.
Kobak D, Berens P (2019) The art of using t-SNE for single-cell transcrip-
tomics. Nat Commun 10:5416.
Kobak D, Bernaerts Y, Weis MA, Scala F, Tolias A, Berens P (2018) Sparse
reduced-rank regression for exploratory visualization of paired multivari-
ate datasets. bioRxiv 302208. doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/302208.
Labib M, Kelley SO (2020) Single-cell analysis targeting the proteome. Nat
Rev Chem 4:143–158.
Laboissonniere LA, Goetz JJ, Martin GM, Bi R, Lund TJS, Ellson L, Lynch
MR, Mooney B, Wickham H, Liu P, Schwartz GW, Trimarchi JM (2019)
Molecular signatures of retinal ganglion cells revealed through single cell
profiling. Sci Rep 9:15778.
La Manno G, Siletti G, Furlan K, Gyllborg A, Vinsland D, Langseth CM E,
Khven I, Johnsson A, Nilsson M, Lönnerberg P, Linnarsson S (2020)
Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain. bioRxiv 184051.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051.
Lambolez B, Audinat E, Bochet P, Crépel F, Rossier J (1992) AMPA receptor
subunits expressed by single purkinje cells. Neuron 9:247–258.
Lee BR, Budzillo A, Hadley K, Miller JA, Jarsky T, Baker K, Hill D, Kim L,
Mann R, Ng L, Oldre A, Rajanbabu R, Trinh J, Braun T, Dalley R,
Gouwens NW, Kalmbach BE, et al. (2020) Scaled high fidelity electro-
physiological, morphological, and transcriptomic cell characterization.
bioRxiv 369082. doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.04.369082.
Lipovsek M, Browne L, Grubb MS (2020) Protocol for Patch-seq of small
interneurons. STAR Protoc 100146.
Liu J, Wang M, Sun L, Pan NC, Zhang C, Zhang J, Zuo Z, He S, Wu Q,
Wang X (2020) Integrative analysis of in vivo recording with single-cell
RNA-seq data reveals molecular properties of light-sensitive neurons in
mouse V1. Protein Cell 11:417–432.
Luecken MD, Theis FJ (2019) Current best practices in single-cell RNA-seq
analysis: a tutorial. Mol Syst Biol 15:e8746.
Lun ATL, McCarthy DJ, Marioni JC (2016) A step-by-step workflow for low-
level analysis of single-cell RNA-seq data with Bioconductor. F1000Res
5:2122.
Luo X, Muñoz-Pino E, Francavilla R, Vallée M, Droit A, Topolnik L (2019)
Transcriptomic profile of the subiculum-projecting VIP GABAergic neu-
rons in the mouse CA1 hippocampus. Brain Struct Funct 224:2269–2280.
Macaulay IC, Teng MJ, Haerty W, Kumar P, Ponting CP, Voet T (2016)
Separation and parallel sequencing of the genomes and transcriptomes of
single cells using G&T-seq. Nat Protoc 11:2081–2103.
Macosko EZ, Basu A, Satija R, Nemesh J, Shekhar K, Goldman M, Tirosh I,
Bialas AR, Kamitaki N, Martersteck EM, Trombetta JJ, Weitz DA, Sanes
JR, Shalek AK, Regev A, McCarroll SA (2015) Highly parallel genome-
wide expression profiling of individual cells using nanoliter droplets. Cell
161:1202–1214.
Mahfooz K, Ellender TJ (2021) Combining whole-cell patch-clamp record-
ings with single-cell RNA sequencing. In: Patch clamp electrophysiology
(Dallas M, Bell D, eds), pp 179–189. New York: Springer US.
Markram H, Muller E, Ramaswamy S, Reimann MW, Abdellah M, Sanchez
CA, Ailamaki A, Alonso-Nanclares L, Antille N, Arsever S, Kahou GAA,
Berger TK, Bilgili A, Buncic N, Chalimourda A, Chindemi G, Courcol J-
D, Delalondre F, Delattre V, Druckmann S, et al. (2015) Reconstruction
and simulation of neocortical microcircuitry. Cell 163:456–492.
Mi D, Li Z, Lim L, Li M, Moissidis M, Yang Y, Gao T, Hu TX, Pratt T, Price
DJ, Sestan N, Marín O (2018) Early emergence of cortical interneuron di-
versity in the mouse embryo. Science 360:81–85.
Muñoz-Manchado AB, Bengtsson Gonzales C, Zeisel A, Munguba H,
Bekkouche B, Skene NG, Lönnerberg P, Ryge J, Harris KD, Linnarsson S,
Hjerling-Leffler J (2018) Diversity of interneurons in the dorsal striatum
revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing and PatchSeq. Cell Rep 24:2179–
2190.e7.
Neher E, Sakmann B (1976) Single-channel currents recorded from mem-
brane of denervated frog muscle fibres. Nature 260:799–802.
Nowakowski TJ, Bhaduri A, Pollen AA, Alvarado B, Mostajo-Radji MA, Di
Lullo E, Haeussler M, Sandoval-Espinosa C, Liu SJ, Velmeshev D,
Ounadjela JR, Shuga J, Wang X, Lim DA, West JA, Leyrat AA, Kent WJ,
Kriegstein AR (2017) Spatiotemporal gene expression trajectories reveal
developmental hierarchies of the human cortex. Science 358:1318–1323.
Oberst P, Fièvre S, Baumann N, Concetti C, Bartolini G, Jabaudon D (2019)
Temporal plasticity of apical progenitors in the developing mouse neo-
cortex. Nature 573:370–374.
Okaty BW, Miller MN, Sugino K, Hempel CM, Nelson SB (2009)
Transcriptional and electrophysiological maturation of neocortical fast-
spiking GABAergic interneurons. J Neurosci 29:7040–7052.
Okaty BW, Sugino K, Nelson SB (2011) Cell type-specific transcriptomics in
the brain. J Neurosci 31:6939–6943.
Oláh VJ, Lukacsovich D, Winterer J, Arszovszki A, Lo†rincz A, Nusser Z,
Földy C, Szabadics J (2020) Functional specification of CCK1 interneur-
ons by alternative isoforms of Kv4.3 auxiliary subunits. Elife 9:e58515.
Pfeffer CK, Beltramo R (2017) Correlating anatomy and function with gene
expression in individual neurons by combining in vivo labeling, patch
clamp, and single cell RNA-seq. Front Cell Neurosci 11:376.
Pfeffer CK, Xue M, He M, Huang ZJ, Scanziani M (2013) Inhibition of inhi-
bition in visual cortex: the logic of connections between molecularly dis-
tinct interneurons. Nat Neurosci 16:1068–1076.
Picelli S, Björklund ÅK, Reinius B, Sagasser S, Winberg G, Sandberg R
(2014a) Tn5 transposase and tagmentation procedures for massively
scaled sequencing projects. Genome Res 24:2033–2040.
Picelli S, Faridani OR, Björklund ÅK, Winberg G, Sagasser S, Sandberg R
(2014b) Full-length RNA-seq from single cells using Smart-seq2. Nat
Protoc 9:171–181.
Qiu S, Luo S, Evgrafov O, Li R, Schroth GP, Levitt P, Knowles JA, Wang K
(2012) Single-neuron RNA-Seq: technical feasibility and reproducibility.
Front Genet 3:124.
Que L, Lukacsovich D, Földy C (2020) Transcriptomic homogeneity and an
age-dependent onset of hemoglobin expression characterize morphological
PV types. bioRxiv 913103. doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.21.913103.
Raj B, Wagner DE, McKenna A, Pandey S, Klein AM, Shendure J, Gagnon
JA, Schier AF (2018) Simultaneous single-cell profiling of lineages and
cell types in the vertebrate brain. Nat Biotechnol 36:442–450.
Ramón y Cajal S (1909) Histologie du système nerveux de l’homme & des
vertébrés. Paris: Maloine.
Rodriques SG, Stickels RR, Goeva A, Martin CA, Murray E, Vanderburg CR,
Welch J, Chen LM, Chen F, Macosko EZ (2019) Slide-seq: a scalable tech-
nology for measuring genome-wide expression at high spatial resolution.
Science 363:1463–1467.
Sakmann B, Neher E (1984) Patch clamp techniques for studying ionic chan-
nels in excitable membranes. Annu Rev Physiol 46:455–472.
Sathyamurthy A, Johnson KR, Matson KJE, Dobrott CI, Li L, Ryba AR,
Bergman TB, Kelly MC, Kelley MW, Levine AJ (2018) Massively parallel
single nucleus transcriptional profiling defines spinal cord neurons and
their activity during behavior. Cell Rep 22:2216–2225.
Scala F, Kobak D, Shan S, Bernaerts Y, Laturnus S, Cadwell CR, Hartmanis L,
Froudarakis E, Castro JR, Tan ZH, Papadopoulos S, Patel SS, Sandberg R,
Berens P, Jiang X, Tolias AS (2019) Layer 4 of mouse neocortex differs in
cell types and circuit organization between sensory areas. Nat Commun
10:4174.
Scala F, Kobak D, Bernabucci M, Bernaerts Y, Cadwell CR, Castro JR,
Hartmanis L, Jiang X, Laturnus S, Miranda E, Mulherkar S, Tan ZH Yao
Z, Zeng H, Sandberg R, Berens P, Tolias AS (2020) Phenotypic variation
of transcriptomic cell types in mouse motor cortex. Nature. Advance
online publication. Retrieved Nov 12, 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-
2907-3.
Lipovsek etal. · Advancements inPatch-seq
J. Neurosci.,February 3, 2021 • 41(5):937–946 • 945

Smallwood SA, Lee HJ, Angermueller C, Krueger F, Saadeh H, Peat J,
Andrews SR, Stegle O, Reik W, Kelsey G (2014) Single-cell genome-wide
bisulfite sequencing for assessing epigenetic heterogeneity. Nat Methods
11:817–820.
Soldatov R, Kaucka M, Kastriti ME, Petersen J, Chontorotzea T, Englmaier L,
Akkuratova N, Yang Y, Häring M, Dyachuk V, Bock C, Farlik M,
Piacentino ML, Boismoreau F, Hilscher MM, Yokota C, Qian X, Nilsson
M, Bronner ME, Croci L, et al. (2019) Spatiotemporal structure of cell
fate decisions in murine neural crest. Science 364:eaas9536.
Stanley G, Gokce O, Malenka RC, Südhof TC, Quake SR (2020) Continuous
and discrete neuron types of the adult murine striatum. Neuron 105:688–
699.e8.
Stuart T, Butler A, Hoffman P, Hafemeister C, Papalexi E, Mauck WM, Hao
Y, Stoeckius M, Smibert P, Satija R (2019) Comprehensive integration of
single-cell data. Cell 177:1888–1902.
Subkhankulova T, Yano K, Robinson HPC, Livesey FJ (2010) Grouping and
classifying electrophysiologically-defined classes of neocortical neurons
by single cell, whole-genome expression profiling. Front Mol Neurosci
3:10.
Sucher NJ, Deitcher DL (1995) PCR and patch-clamp analysis of single neu-
rons. Neuron 14:1095–1100.
Sucher NJ, Deitcher DL, Baro DJ, Warrick RM, Guenther E (2000) Genes
and channels: patch/voltage-clamp analysis and single-cell RT-PCR. Cell
Tissue Res 302:295–307.
Sugino K, Hempel CM, Miller MN, Hattox AM, Shapiro P, Wu C, Huang ZJ,
Nelson SB (2006) Molecular taxonomy of major neuronal classes in the
adult mouse forebrain. Nat Neurosci 9:99–107.
Tang F, Barbacioru C, Nordman E, Li B, Xu N, Bashkirov VI, Lao K, Surani
MA (2010) RNA-Seq analysis to capture the transcriptome landscape of a
single cell. Nat Protoc 5:516–535.
Tasic B, Menon V, Nguyen TN, Kim TK, Jarsky T, Yao Z, Levi B, Gray LT,
Sorensen SA, Dolbeare T, Bertagnolli D, Goldy J, Shapovalova N, Parry S,
Lee C, Smith K, Bernard A, Madisen L, Sunkin SM, Hawrylycz M, et al.
(2016) Adult mouse cortical cell taxonomy revealed by single cell tran-
scriptomics. Nat Neurosci 19:335–346.
Tasic B, Yao Z, Graybuck LT, Smith KA, Nguyen TN, Bertagnolli D, Goldy J,
Garren E, Economo MN, Viswanathan S, Penn O, Bakken T, Menon V,
Miller J, Fong O, Hirokawa KE, Lathia K, Rimorin C, Tieu M, Larsen R,
et al. (2018) Shared and distinct transcriptomic cell types across neocorti-
cal areas. Nature 563:72–78.
Toledo-Rodriguez M, Markram H (2014) Single-cell RT-PCR, a technique to
decipher the electrical, anatomical, and genetic determinants of neuronal
diversity. Methods Mol Biol 1183:143–158.
Toledo-Rodriguez M, Blumenfeld B, Wu C, Luo J, Attali B, Goodman P,
Markram H (2004) Correlation maps allow neuronal electrical properties
to be predicted from single-cell gene expression profiles in rat neocortex.
Cereb Cortex 14:1310–1327.
Trapnell C (2015) Defining cell types and states with single-cell genomics.
Genome Res 25:1491–1498.
Tripathy SJ, Toker L, Li B, Crichlow C-L, Tebaykin D, Mancarci BO, Pavlidis
P (2017) Transcriptomic correlates of neuron electrophysiological diver-
sity. PLoS Comput Biol 13:e1005814.
Tripathy SJ, Toker L, Bomkamp C, Mancarci BO, Belmadani M, Pavlidis P
(2018) Assessing transcriptome quality in Patch-seq datasets. Front Mol
Neurosci 11:363.
van den Hurk M, Erwin JA, Yeo GW, Gage FH, Bardy C (2018) Patch-seq
protocol to analyze the electrophysiology, morphology and transcriptome
of whole single neurons derived from human pluripotent stem cells.
Front Mol Neurosci 11:261.
Vieth B, Parekh S, Ziegenhain C, Enard W, Hellmann I (2019) A systematic
evaluation of single cell RNA-seq analysis pipelines. Nat Commun
10:4667.
Wang TA, Teo CF, Åkerblom M, Chen C, Tynan-La Fontaine M, Greiner
VJ, Diaz A, McManus MT, Jan YN, Jan LY (2019) Thermoregulation via
temperature-dependent PGD2 production in mouse preoptic area.
Neuron 103:309–322.e7.
Wang X, Allen WE, Wright MA, Sylwestrak EL, Samusik N, Vesuna S, Evans
K, Liu C, Ramakrishnan C, Liu J, Nolan GP, Bava F-A, Deisseroth K
(2018) Three-dimensional intact-tissue sequencing of single-cell tran-
scriptional states. Science 361:eaat5691.
Winterer J, Lukacsovich D, Que L, Sartori AM, Luo W, Földy C (2019)
Single-cell RNA-Seq characterization of anatomically identified OLM
interneurons in different transgenic mouse lines. Eur J Neurosci 50:
3750–3771.
Yao Z, Nguyen TC, van Velthoven CTJ, Goldy J, Sedeno-Cortes AE,
Baftizadeh F, Bertagnolli D, Casper T, Crichton K, Ding SL, Fong O,
Garren E, Glandon A, Gray J, Graybuck LT, Hirschstein D, Kroll M,
Lathia K, Levi B, McMillen D, et al. (2020) A taxonomy of transcriptomic
cell types across the isocortex and hippocampal formation. bioRxiv
015214. doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.30.015214.
Zeisel A, Hochgerner H, Lönnerberg P, Johnsson A, Memic F, van der Zwan
J, Häring M, Braun E, Borm LE, La Manno G, Codeluppi S, Furlan A, Lee
K, Skene N, Harris KD, Hjerling-Leffler J, Arenas E, Ernfors P, Marklund
U, Linnarsson S (2018) Molecular architecture of the mouse nervous sys-
tem. Cell 174:999–1014.e22.
Zeisel A, Muñoz-Manchado AB, Codeluppi S, Lönnerberg P, La Manno G,
Juréus A, Marques S, Munguba H, He L, Betsholtz C, Rolny C, Castelo-
Branco G, Hjerling-Leffler J, Linnarsson S (2015) Cell types in the mouse
cortex and hippocampus revealed by single-cell RNA-seq. Science
347:1138–1142.
Zeng H, Sanes JR (2017) Neuronal cell-type classification: challenges, oppor-
tunities and the path forward. Nat Rev Neurosci 18:530–546.
Ziegenhain C, Vieth B, Parekh S, Reinius B, Guillaumet-Adkins A, Smets M,
Leonhardt H, Heyn H, Hellmann I, Enard W (2017) Comparative analy-
sis of single-cell RNA sequencing methods. Mol Cell 65:631–643.e4.
946 • J. Neurosci.,February 3, 2021 • 41(5):937–946
Lipovsek et al. · Advancements inPatch-seq

===== Llorens-Bobadilla2015_CellStemCell_scTx+SVZ+NSC =====
Article
Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals a Population of
Dormant Neural Stem Cells that Become Activated
upon Brain Injury
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d NSCs in multiple states of activation coexist in the adult SVZ
d Dormancy is associated with high glycolytic and lipid
metabolism
d Activation is associated with high protein synthesis and
differentiation priming
d IFN-g activates a state-dependent response to acute
ischemic injury in NSCs
Authors
Enric Llorens-Bobadilla, Sheng Zhao,
Avni Baser, Gonzalo Saiz-Castro, Klara
Zwadlo, Ana Martin-Villalba
Correspondence
a.martin-villalba@dkfz.de
In Brief
Llorens-Bobadilla et al. perform single-
cell RNA sequencing of acutely isolated
neural stem cells (NSCs) from the adult
SVZ, identifying lineage-primed NSCs
residing along a continuum of co-existing
states between dormancy and activation.
NSCs in different states possess unique
molecular features and exhibit differential
responses to acute ischemic brain injury.
Accession Numbers
GSE67833
Llorens-Bobadilla et al., 2015, Cell Stem Cell 17, 1–12
September 3, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002

Cell Stem Cell
Article
Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals
a Population of Dormant Neural Stem Cells
that Become Activated upon Brain Injury
Enric Llorens-Bobadilla,1,2 Sheng Zhao,1,2 Avni Baser,1 Gonzalo Saiz-Castro,1 Klara Zwadlo,1 and Ana Martin-Villalba1,*
1Molecular Neurobiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany
2Co-ﬁrst author
*Correspondence: a.martin-villalba@dkfz.de
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002
SUMMARY
Heterogeneous pools of adult neural stem cells
(NSCs) contribute to brain maintenance and regener-
ation after injury. The balance of NSC activation and
quiescence, as well as the induction of lineage-spe-
ciﬁc transcription factors, may contribute to diversity
of neuronal and glial fates. To identify molecular
hallmarks governing these characteristics, we per-
formed single-cell sequencing of an unbiased pool
of adult subventricular zone NSCs. This analysis
identiﬁed a discrete, dormant NSC subpopulation
that already expresses distinct combinations of line-
age-speciﬁc transcription factors during homeosta-
sis. Dormant NSCs enter a primed-quiescent state
before activation, which is accompanied by downre-
gulation of glycolytic metabolism, Notch, and BMP
signaling and a concomitant upregulation of line-
age-speciﬁc transcription factors and protein syn-
thesis. In response to brain ischemia, interferon
gamma signaling induces dormant NSC subpopula-
tions to enter the primed-quiescent state. This study
unveils general principles underlying NSC activation
and lineage priming and opens potential avenues
for regenerative medicine in the brain.
INTRODUCTION
Neural stem cells (NSCs, also known as type B cells) majorly
contribute to cellular plasticity in the adult brain. In the subven-
tricular zone (SVZ) niche, these cells continuously generate
neuroblasts that migrate along the rostral migratory stream to
the olfactory bulb to produce new granule and periglomerular
neurons (Ihrie and Alvarez-Buylla, 2011; Ming and Song, 2011).
Emerging evidence suggests that NSCs are functionally het-
erogeneous. For example, cells expressing different combina-
tions of classical stem cells markers (i.e., glutamate aspartate
transporter [GLAST], glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein [GFAP], and
BLBP), coexist in vivo and produce progeny with different dy-
namics (Calzolari et al., 2015; Codega et al., 2014; Giachino
et al., 2014; Mich et al., 2014). NSCs not only differ in their state
of activation, but also distinct pools of NSCs with different
capacity to produce neuronal and glial progeny have been pro-
posed to exist in the adult SVZ (Calzolari et al., 2015; Merkle
et al., 2007; Ortega et al., 2013; Young et al., 2007).
However, because previous studies have been limited to the
study of only a small number of factors or have been performed
in potentially mixed cell populations, it is currently unknown how
NSC
activation
and
lineage
determination
is
molecularly
controlled. After brain injury, endogenous NSCs can be activated
to produce multiple types of progeny to contribute to brain repair
(Nakafuku and Grande, 2013; Benner et al., 2013). It is currently
unclear how distinct pools of NSCs may react to brain injury and
the molecular triggers of injury-induced activation of NSCs.
Here we isolated NSCs from their in vivo niche to study their
molecular heterogeneity in an unbiased manner using single-
cell transcriptomics. We report pervasive molecular heterogene-
ity in NSCs and uncover dynamic state transitions during both
homeostasis and injury.
RESULTS
Transcriptome Analysis of Single NSCs
To resolve the molecular proﬁles of individual NSCs, we
analyzed their transcriptome by single-cell RNA-seq. NSCs
were isolated from their natural environment according to the
expression of GLAST and Prominin1 (also known as CD133;
Prom1). GLAST expression largely overlaps with that GFAP
(Beckervordersandforth et al., 2010; Codega et al., 2014; Platel
et al., 2009), and reporter expression of hGFAP-GFP together
with Prom1 has been used to mark and extract SVZ NSCs (Beck-
ervordersandforth et al., 2010; Codega et al., 2014; Mirzadeh
et al., 2008). In addition, GLAST+/Prom1+ cells correspond to
radial glia in the developing brain (Johnson et al., 2015). We ﬁrst
conﬁrmed the presence of GLAST and Prominin1 in adult
SVZ wholemount stainings. Consistent with their NSC identity,
GLAST+ cells coexpressed GFAP and were located at the center
of the pinwheel structures (Figure 1A). In agreement with previ-
ous reports, GLAST expression colocalized with Prominin1 in
some monociliated cells, but not in multiciliated ependymal cells
(Figure 1A) (Lavado and Oliver, 2011). As determined by ﬂow
cytometry, CD45GLAST+Prom1+ cells constituted a distinct
population that did not overlap with PSA-NCAM-expressing
neuroblasts or CD24hiProm1hi ependymal cells, and only
partially overlapped with O4-expressing oligodendrocytes (Fig-
ure 1C and Figure S1). To validate NSC behavior in vivo, we per-
formed orthotopic SVZ transplants. One month after injection
Cell Stem Cell 17, 1–12, September 3, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
1
Please cite this article in press as: Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals a Population of Dormant Neural Stem Cells that
Become Activated upon Brain Injury, Cell Stem Cell (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002

into the SVZ, GLAST+/Prom1+-cells expressed GFAP+ and were
located in the host niche from where they continuously produced
olfactory bulb granule and periglomerular neurons for a period of
at least 1 month (Figure S1). Thus, our combination of surface
markers allows the isolation of NSCs by ﬂow cytometry, circum-
venting the need for transgenic animals.
We next analyzed the transcriptome of 104 GLAST+/Prom1+
and 26 PSA-NCAM+ cells by single-cell RNA-seq using Smart-
seq2 technology (Picelli et al., 2013). Two replicates from 1,000
cells were additionally prepared as population controls. Single-
cell libraries were sequenced at an average depth of 8.3 million
read pairs, with an average transcriptome alignment rate of
59% (Table S1). While gene expression levels were highly
correlated between population replicates (Pearson r = 0.96),
we observed higher variability between single cells (Pearson
0.11 < r < 0.64; mean 0.38). Yet, the gene expression levels of
the single cell ensemble highly correlate to the population
samples (Pearson r = 0.85) (Figure S2). Consistent with previous
studies (Treutlein et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2014), RNA spike-in
standards that were included to control for technical noise
showed high correlation across transcript abundances that
spanned approximately ﬁve orders of magnitude (Figure S2).
We next performed principal component analysis (PCA) on all
cells using the gene expression values of genes that were
detected in at least two cells (TMM-FPKM > 1, 15,846 genes).
This unbiased analysis clearly discriminated three main clusters
of cells (Figure 1D). These clusters were assigned to different cell
types after we scrutinized the genes exhibiting the highest coor-
dinates in the respective principal component for known marker
genes (Figure 1E). One cell cluster encompassed PSA-NCAM+
cells and associated with expression of neuroblast markers
such as doublecortin (Dcx), CD24a, and Tubb3. The second
cluster, containing the majority of the GLAST+/Prom1+ cells
(92 out of 104), associated with expression of NSC markers
like Glast (Slc1a3), Tlx (Nr2e1), Sox9, Vcam1, and Hes5. The
smallest cluster associated with the oligodendroglial genes
Sox10, Plp1, and Mbp (12 out of 104) (see Figure S1). Oligoden-
drocytes express very low levels of GLAST and Prom1, and for
further experiments we excluded them by co-staining cells
with O4+ in ﬂow cytometry (see Figure S1). Thus, PSA-NCAM+
and GLAST+/Prom1+ cells have distinct transcriptomes that
can be classiﬁed by single-cell RNA-seq and correspond to neu-
roblasts and NSCs, respectively.
NSCs Are Molecularly Heterogeneous
To gain further insights into the molecular heterogeneity of these
cell types, genes with the highest coordinates in the ﬁrst four prin-
cipal components (1,844 genes with correlation coefﬁcient >0.5
GLAST
PROM1
GLAST
PSA-NCAM
A
B
D
−25
0
25
50
75
−40
−20
0
20
40
 PC2 (4.01% ) 
 PC3 (3.28% ) 
 PC2 (4.01% ) 
 PC3 (3.28% ) 
NSC
Oligo.
NB
E
C
ßCAT
GLAST
GFAP
PROM1
SVZ
NSC
a
Neuroblast
as
robl
robla
Ne
Neu
SVZ
−1.0
−0.5
0
0.5
1.0
−1.0
−0.5
0
0.5
1.0
Tubb3
Sox10
Cd24a
Dcx
Hes5
Sox9
Nr2e1
Mbp
Glast
Figure 1. Single-Cell RNA-Seq Analysis of NSCs and Neuroblasts Deﬁnes Cell-Type-Speciﬁc Transcriptomes
(A) Confocal images of a wholemount staining of the lateral wall of the lateral ventricle. Cells were immunostained for GLAST (green), GFAP (blue), and Prominin1
(Prom-1) (white). Pinwheel structures are deﬁned by b-catenin (red). Arrowheads mark the cilium of monociliated GLAST- and Prom1-expressing cells. Scale
bar, 10 mm.
(B) Schematic representation of the SVZ.
(C) FACS strategy for the isolation of NSCs, which express both GLAST and Prom1, and neuroblasts, which express PSA-NCAM, from the SVZ niche. See also
Figures S1 and S2.
(D) PCA of single-cell RNA-seq transcriptomes from 104 GLAST/Prominin1 and 26 PSA-NCAM cells. See also Table S1.
(E) Genes characterizing each population based on the correlations with principal components 2 and 3 from the PCA (each point corresponds to a gene and
previously known marker genes are highlighted in color).
2
Cell Stem Cell 17, 1–12, September 3, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
Please cite this article in press as: Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals a Population of Dormant Neural Stem Cells that
Become Activated upon Brain Injury, Cell Stem Cell (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002

and p < 10e9, Table S2) were used for unsupervised hierarchical
clustering. This approach further partitioned NSCs, but not neu-
roblasts or oligodendrocytes, into two additional subpopulations
(Figure 2A). One NSC cluster associated with expression of Egfr,
a known marker of active NSCs (Codega et al., 2014), and with
cell-cycle-related genes (e.g., Mki67 and Mcm2), on the basis
of which we named them active NSCs (aNSCs). Conversely, the
cluster that lacked activation markers was named quiescent
NSCs (qNSCs). Cell-to-cell Pearson correlation coefﬁcients,
which measure the similarity between gene expression across in-
dividual cells, also validated the presence of these clusters (Fig-
ure S3). In addition, we conﬁrmed the identity of these clusters
by comparing our data to that of previous datasets (Figure S3).
To obtain functional insights into the gene classes that deﬁne
each cell subtype, we performed gene ontology and pathway
analyses (Huang et al., 2009) on the seven modules of co-regu-
lated genes obtained by hierarchical clustering (Figure 2A). Of
note, each cluster contains not only coding genes that may
include novel marker genes, but also lncRNAs expressed in a
cell-type- and state-speciﬁc manner (Table S2). As expected,
genes that were uniquely expressed in oligodendrocytes, were
enriched in functional categories such as myelination, synaptic
transmission, and oligodendrocyte differentiation (class I). The
other gene modules (class II–VII) corresponded to dynamically
regulated genes between qNSCs, aNSCs, and neuroblasts (Fig-
ure 2B), likely reﬂecting state transitions along the neurogenic
A
NB
B
aNSC
qNSC
Olig.
Nr. of genes
Glast expr.
I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.
VI.
VII.
0
5
10
15
0
5
10
15
0
5
10
15
0
5
10
15
0
5
10
15
qNSC1 qNSC2 aNSC1 aNSC2
NB
Class II.
Lipid 
biosynthesis
e.g. Fasn
Class III. 
Glycolisis, 
glial markers
e.g. Blbp, Tlx,
Hes5, Aldh1l1
Class IV. 
Cell cycle
e.g. Egfr, 
Ascl1
Class V.
Ribosome
e.g. Rpl’s
Class VII.
Neuron diff.
e.g. Dlx, 
Sp8, Gad1, 
Dcx
0
5
10
15
Class VI.
Mitosis
e.g. Mki67,
Aurkb
log2(TMM-FPKM)
log2(TMM-FPKM)
log2(TMM-FPKM)
log2(TMM-FPKM)
log2(TMM-FPKM)
log2(TMM-FPKM)
EGFR+
35-40%
EGFR-
60-65%
from CD45-O4-GLAST+PROM1+
GLAST
EGFR
C
D
E
−5
0
5
Row Z−Score
2000
7000
Component 2
Component 1
qNSC1
qNSC2
aNSC1
aNSC2
qNSC
aNSC
DAPI
GLAST
OP-Puro
Merge
NB
qNSC
aNSC
NB
0
20
40
Rel. OP-Puro incorporation
***
***
0
10
20
**
GLASThi GLASTlo
hi
lo
Gene nr.
1000
5000
Expr.(TPM) 
Figure 2. Single-Cell RNA-Seq Uncovers NSC Heterogeneity
(A) Hierarchical clustering of 1,844 genes with high correlation (p < 1e9) with the ﬁrst four principal components of PCA identiﬁes four main, molecularly distinct
populations. Quiescent and active NSC groups are further subdivided in two subgroups. See also Figure S3. Cells are shown in rows and genes in columns.
(B) Violin plots showing the course of expression for genes in clusters II–VII in cells from the neurogenic lineage (NSCs and neuroblasts). Main Gene Ontology
terms for each class are highlighted (see also Table S2).
(C) Minimum spanning tree (MST) constructed by Monocle based on the expression pattern of 2,688 genes with the highest coordinates (p < 10e5) with ﬁrst two
dimensions of PCA on qNSCs and aNSCs. Each point represents a cell and the solid black line indicates the pseudotime ordering. Different groups are color-
coded based on PCA clustering.
(D) FACS strategy to enrich for qNSCs and aNSCs by ﬂow cytometry based on EGFR expression. For the inset in (E), EGFR cells were split according to GLAST
expression as depicted with the dashed line.
(E) Representative image of a qNSC, aNSC, and neuroblasts (NBs) incubated with OP-Puro for 1 hr and immunostained for GLAST. Quantiﬁcation of the relative
OP-Puro incorporation in the different cell groups is shown at right (qNSCs = 1 ± 0.09; aNSCs = 7.91 ± 0.35; NBs = 1.35 ± 0.05; mean and SD are shown; n = 1,029
cells from four replicates; ***p < 0.001 by two-way ANOVA, Holm-Sidak-corrected). The inset shows quantiﬁcation of OP-Puro incorporation in GLASThi and
GLASTlo qNSCs as measured 1 hr after OP-Puro and 24 hr after sorting (hi = 1 ± 0.45, lo = 3.4 ± 0.50; n = 108 cells from two replicates; p < 0.01; Student’s t test).
See also Figure S4. Scale bar, 10 mm.
Cell Stem Cell 17, 1–12, September 3, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
3
Please cite this article in press as: Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals a Population of Dormant Neural Stem Cells that
Become Activated upon Brain Injury, Cell Stem Cell (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002

lineage. Expression of these genes further divided quiescent
and active NSCs into two subpopulations each (qNSC1/2 and
aNSC1/2) that reﬂect four different states within NSCs that
have not been described previously. To gain further resolution
of this partition, we performed pseudotemporal ordering of the
transcriptional dynamics in these cells (Trapnell et al., 2014).
Applying this algorithm, cells are ordered in ‘‘pseudotime,’’ a
quantitative measure of the progress along a biological pro-
cess (NSC exit from dormancy in this case). This analysis placed
qNSC1 at one end of the continuum, followed by qNSC2,
aNSC1, and aNSC2 (Figure 2C). Lineage tracing of Glast-ex-
pressing cells has shown that after temozolomide-induced
ablation of Glastlow active cells, the Glasthigh-subpopulation,
which contains our qNSC1, generate active progeny as well as
neuroblasts (Mich et al., 2014). Thus, the pseudotime analysis
together with previous lineage tracing of Glast-cells suggests
that a dormant state (qNSC1) precedes a primed-quiescent
state (qNSC2) before an NSC becomes active.
Genes expressed in all NSC subpopulations (class II and III)
have functions in metabolic pathways. Class II was associated
with fatty acid metabolism and lipid biosynthesis (e.g., Fasn
and Ldhb). Lipogenesis has recently emerged as a key metabolic
pathway in hippocampal NSC maintenance (Knobloch et al.,
2013). Our data show that this process operates in the SVZ in
both quiescent and active NSCs and not in their differentiated
progeny. Class III genes, which include many NSC/astrocyte
markers (e.g., Nr2e1, Hes5, Fabp7 [Blbp], Aldh1l1, Slc1a3, and
Slc1a2), were enriched for genes involved in glycolysis. We
ﬁnd that expression of these genes is highest in qNSCs and
already lower in aNSCs, suggesting that glycolytic metabolism
is a deﬁning feature of qNSCs, similar to quiescent stem cells
in the hematopoietic system (Simsek et al., 2010). The decrease
of glial-associated genes in aNSCs compared to qNSCs sug-
gests that the glial gene-expression program starts to be shut
down at the aNSC level, presumably to initiate the acquisition
of neuronal fate.
The gene signature most closely associated with aNSCs
comprised three gene modules functionally related to cell cycle
(class IV; including Egfr and Cdk2), protein synthesis (class V;
e.g., Rpl family), and mitosis (class VI; e.g., Aurkb), with this latter
module separating non-mitotic-aNSC1 and mitotic-aNSC2.
Genes involved in protein synthesis also explained the separa-
tion between dormant (qNSC1) and primed-quiescent (qNSC2)
cells, suggesting that translational activation is one of the earlier
events in the exit from dormancy. In support of this ﬁnding, PCA
performed exclusively on qNSCs as well as other independent
clustering methods again distinguished the same partition (Fig-
ure S3). The requirement of a tight regulation of global protein
translation in stem cell function has been previously reported
for hematopoietic stem cells (Signer et al., 2014). For functional
validation of the RNA-seq data, we measured the rate of protein
synthesis in aNSCs and qNSCs by O-propargyl-puromycin
(OP-Puro) incorporation (Liu et al., 2012) directly after ﬂow cy-
tometry. aNSCs exhibited a 7.9-fold increase in the rate of pro-
tein synthesis as compared to qNSCs (Figures 2D and 2E and
Figure S4). Consistently, after we injected OP-Puro intraventric-
ularly, we found that Ki67+ aNSCs are the cells with the highest
translational activity in the intact SVZ in vivo (Figure S4). Notably,
ependymal cells appeared almost unstained, indicating a
comparatively very low level of translation (Figure S4). Because
Glast mRNA expression is higher in dormant NSCs, we hypoth-
esized that surface-protein expression of GLAST in combination
with Prom1 and the absence of EGFR could be used to enrich for
dormant and primed-quiescent NSCs (Figure 2D). Analysis of
OP-Puro incorporation in GLASThi and GLASTlo qNSCs showed
that cells in the primed-quiescent state, GLASTlo, have a higher
rate of protein synthesis than their dormant counterparts,
GLASThi cells (Figure 2E). Together, these data validate our
strategy to enrich for dormant and primed-quiescent NSCs
and show that the global rate of protein synthesis deﬁnes these
two states.
The last gene module comprised genes expressed in neuro-
blasts (class VII; e.g., Dlx family, Sp8, Dcx, and Gad1), which
were functionally involved in neuron differentiation. Of note,
many neuroblast-associated genes started to be upregulated
at the aNSC level, indicating that these cells had initiated
the differentiation program. Altogether, the transcriptome of
NSCs is spread across a continuum of dormancy to activation
that is associated with dynamic and stage-speciﬁc molecular
signatures.
NSCs Have a Distinct Molecular Proﬁle
NSCs, and specially qNSCs, share many markers (i.e., Aldh1l1
and Gjb6) and molecular features (i.e., high glycolytic activity)
with more mature parenchymal astrocytes. This prompted us
to validate the in vivo neurogenic activity of qNSCs by orthotopic
transplantation. Similar to the total NSC population and as previ-
ously described (Codega et al., 2014), qNSCs entered activation
in vivo and produced neuroblasts and olfactory neurons for a
period of at least 1 month after being injected into the SVZ
(Figure S1). We next performed single-cell RNA-seq analyses
of 21 GLASThi (CD45,O4) astrocytes from the striatum and
the somatosensory cortex to compare their transcriptome to
that of SVZ NSCs. PCA placed parenchymal astrocytes at one
end of the NSC-‘‘activation-state’’ continuum, preceding, and
with only a minor overlap with, dormant qNSC1 cells (Figure 3A).
As recently described (Zeisel et al., 2015), even at these low cell
numbers, we were able to observe two main clusters of cortical
astrocytes (not shown). We next set out to identify genes that
would distinguish qNSC1 from parenchymal astrocytes by using
a likelihood-ratio test (McDavid et al., 2013), which has been
recently applied to single-cell transcriptomes of closely related
cell populations (Macosko et al., 2015). This analysis revealed
that qNSC1 cells express higher levels of transcripts known to
be enriched in SVZ NSCs like Thbs4 or Rarres2 (Beckervorder-
sandforth et al., 2010; Benner et al., 2013). We also describe
the expression of additional factors that exhibit preferential
expression in the SVZ in the adult brain (Figure 3B and Fig-
ure S3H). Among NSC-enriched transcripts (cluster III in Fig-
ure 2A), we found that the tetraspanins Cd9 and Cd81 were
more highly expressed in qNSC1 than in parenchymal astrocytes
(Figure 3B and Figure S3H). To validate whether CD9 expression
could indeed distinguish NSCs from parenchymal astrocytes, we
tested CD9 expression by ﬂow cytometry. Consistent with the
RNA-seq data, NSCs expressed substantially higher levels of
CD9 in their surfaces as compared to cortical and striatal astro-
cytes (Figure 3C and Figure S3). To examine the spatial location
of CD9 within the SVZ, we performed immunohistochemical
4
Cell Stem Cell 17, 1–12, September 3, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
Please cite this article in press as: Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals a Population of Dormant Neural Stem Cells that
Become Activated upon Brain Injury, Cell Stem Cell (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002

staining in SVZ wholemounts and coronal sections. Coronal sec-
tions showed CD9 to be highly expressed across the entire
ventricular wall, which includes expression in ependymal cells
and GFAP-NSCs. In the underlying parenchyma, CD9 is ex-
pressed in white matter, labeling some axons (Figure 3D and Fig-
ure S3). Wholemount staining conﬁrmed CD9 localization across
the ventricular surface, including in the membrane of some
monociliated NSCs at the center of pinwheels (Figure 3E). Since
aNSCs also share many molecular features (i.e., Ascl1 expres-
sion) with transit amplifying progenitors (TAPs, also known as
type C), we also analyzed the transcriptome of 27 EGFR+
(CD45,O4,PSA-NCAM,GLAST/Prom1) TAPs. As shown
in the PCA in Figure 3A, TAPs constitute a cluster that immedi-
ately follows aNSC2 along the lineage progression continuum.
Altogether, NSCs in their multiple states have distinct molecular
hallmarks that allow them to be distinguished from closely
related cell types.
Transcriptional Control of NSC Activation
To uncover putative transcriptional regulators of the quiescent
and active states, we subjected the 92 NSC transcriptomes to
PCA using only the expression values of transcription factors
(TFs) (Zhang et al., 2012). Indeed, TF expression alone identiﬁed
qNSC and aNSC clusters, which completely overlapped with
the whole-transcriptome PCA-based separation (Figure 4A). The
TFs Sox9, Id2, and Id3, among others, were associated with
quiescence. The active state was associated with the expression
of immediate early genes Egr1, Fos, SoxC factors (Sox4 and
Sox11), and Ascl1. Further, comparison of the aNSC signature
(genes in classes IV–VI in Figure 2A) to recent Ascl1 ChIP-seq
data (Andersen et al., 2014) revealed that a signiﬁcant proportion
of the aNSC transcriptome is under the direct control of Ascl1
(17.4%, p < 1.65e13; Figure S3). These data implicate Ascl1
as a key factor in the activation of NSCs, consistent with its func-
tion in the dentate gyrus (Andersen et al., 2014). Notably, we also
A
B
C
E
D
Figure 3. Unique Molecular Properties of NSCs
(A) PCA of the transcriptome of 92 NSCs, 21 astrocytes, and 27 TAPs. Note that parenchymal astrocytes (Astro.) and transient amplifying progenitors (TAPs) are
each at one end of the NSC activation continuum.
(B) Violin plots with superimposed boxplots for the expression of Thbs4 and Cd9 in astrocytes and dormant NSCs (qNSC1). Benjamini-Hochberg corrected
p values are by likelihood-ratio test.
(C) Scheme of the location of the cells analyzed by FACS. In the bottom, a histogram depicting both CD9 expression in GLAST+ (CD45,O4) cells from the cortex
(Ctx) and striatum (Str.) and GLAST+PROM1+ (CD45,PSA-NCAM,O4) cells from the SVZ (NSCs) is shown.
(D) Confocal image of the anterior septal (left) and lateral (right) ventricle walls immunostained for CD9. See also Figure S3. Arrows indicate the location of
ventricle-contacting GFAP-expressing cells.
(E) Confocal stack of an SVZ wholemount immunostained for CD9. The ﬁrst 1 mm from the ventricle is shown in the confocal stack. The arrow indicates CD9 signal
at the center of a representative pinwheel. Scale bar, 10 mm. LV, lateral ventricle; CC, corpus callosum.
Cell Stem Cell 17, 1–12, September 3, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
5
Please cite this article in press as: Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals a Population of Dormant Neural Stem Cells that
Become Activated upon Brain Injury, Cell Stem Cell (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002

observed that neuroblast-associated TFs such as Dlx1, Dlx2, and
Bcl11a were detected in aNSCs. Since previous cell-population-
based studies could not exclude minor neuroblast contaminations
(Beckervordersandforth et al., 2010; Codega et al., 2014), our sin-
gle-cell approach provides now deﬁnitive evidence for the initia-
tion of a lineage differentiation program in aNSCs based on the
co-expressionofstem cell- and differentiation-associatedfactors.
Notch signaling has been proposed as an essential regulator
of quiescence and as a generator of heterogeneity in NSCs (Ba-
sak et al., 2012; Giachino and Taylor, 2014; Imayoshi et al., 2010;
Kawaguchi et al., 2013). Consistently, using one-dimensional PC
projections (Durruthy-Durruthy et al., 2014), we found that
Notch2 receptor and the Notch target gene Lfng were enriched
in qNSCs (Figure 4B). Notch ligands Dll1 and Dll3 showed the
aNSC
qNSC
 
Class TF I
Id2, Id3, Id4
Sox9
Class TF II
Egr1, Fos,
Ascl1,
SoxC
SVZ
D
A
Nr2f1
Fezf2
Emx1
Neurog2
Eomes
Neurod4
Meis1
Dlx6
Pbx3
Nkx2-1
Nkx6-2
Dlx2
Dlx1
Gsx1
Gsx2
Sp8
Gli1
Pax6
Mef2c
Meis2
Olig2
Etv1
Ascl1
Nr2f1
Fezf2
Emx1
Neurog2
Eomes
Neurod4
Meis1
Dlx6
Pbx3
Nkx2-1
Nkx6-2
Dlx2
Dlx1
Gsx1
Gsx2
Sp8
Gli1
Pax6
Mef2c
Meis2
Olig2
Etv1
Ascl1
−1
0
0.5
1
Correlation
−0.5
Dorsal
Ventral
Dorso-
lateral
Dorsal 
(TH)
Oligo.
Lfng
low
high
Relative expression
Notch2 
−25
0
25
50
 PC1 (32.74% ) 
Dll1
Dll3
qNSC
aNSC
Id2
Bmpr1b
Bmp1
Bmp6
−25
0
25
50
 PC1 (32.74% ) 
qNSC
aNSC
TF I.
TF II.
Actb
Slc1a3
Egfr
Emx1
Gli1
Arhgap9
qNSC
aNSC
0-20
0-20
0-20
0-20
−4
−2
0
2
4
Row Z−Score
dSVZ
vSVZ
NR2F1
NR2F1
GFAP
A
C
D
E
B
Figure 4. Transcriptional Control of NSC Activation and Lineage Priming
(A) Hierarchical clustering of the expression levels of 135 transcription factors with strong correlation (p < 1e5) in the ﬁrst two principal components in the PCA.
PCA was performed on 92 NSC transcriptomes. Selected TFs in each cluster are highlighted. Cells are shown in rows and genes in columns.
(B) One-dimensional PCA of 92 NSCs. Each point corresponds to one cell and the color on each cell corresponds the scaled expression value of the respective
gene in each single cell.
(C) Correlation heatmap for 23 selected transcription factors in 92 NSCs. See also Table S3.
(D) Confocal image of the SVZ immunostained for NR2F1 and GFAP. Scale bar, 100 mm.
(E) Representative genome tracks showing the expression of dorsal marker Emx1 and ventral marker Gli1 in two qNSCs and two aNSCs. The aNSC marker Egfr
and two widely expressed genes (Actb and Slc1a3) are shown.
6
Cell Stem Cell 17, 1–12, September 3, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
Please cite this article in press as: Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals a Population of Dormant Neural Stem Cells that
Become Activated upon Brain Injury, Cell Stem Cell (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002

opposite pattern of expression, suggesting that they are already
segregated at the RNA level. Since quiescent and active NSCs
are in direct contact in the niche (Codega et al., 2014; Kawaguchi
et al., 2013; Mich et al., 2014), our data are in agreement with a
model in which Dll-expressing aNSCs directly control dormancy
of qNSCs. To test whether Notch inhibition would be sufﬁcient
to drive qNSCs into activation, we treated qNSCs puriﬁed by
ﬂow cytometry (GLAST+/Prom1+/EGFR) with the g-secretase
inhibitor DAPT. Indeed, a short DAPT treatment increased OP-
Puro incorporation in qNSCs and increased the percentage of
activated cells (Figure S4). We also examined the distribution
of components of the BMP pathway. This pathway is known to
promote quiescence in hair follicle stem cells (Genander et al.,
2014). Here we found that expression of the BMP-target Id2
correlated with the expression of the receptor Bmpr1b in
qNSCs. Interestingly, the ligands Bmp1 and Bmp6 followed
the same pattern (Figure 4B). These results suggest that BMP,
unlike Notch signaling, may regulate quiescence in an autocrine
manner.
NSCs Are Primed for Lineage Differentiation
NSCs in the adult SVZ generate several subtypes of olfactory
bulb interneurons. These subtypes are believed to be derived
from distinctly located sets of committed NSCs, and not from
a pan-subtype multipotent NSC (Brill et al., 2009; Kelsch et al.,
2007; Merkle et al., 2007; Young et al., 2007). Different combina-
tions of TFs have been identiﬁed to be necessary or correlate
with the generation of speciﬁc neuronal subtypes (reviewed in
Alvarez-Buylla et al., 2008; Sequerra, 2014). The analyses of
TF combinations have been limited to a handful of factors
assayed at a time, precluding in-depth knowledge of the es-
tablishment and extent of this patterning. To identify the different
TF combinations across the 92 NSC transcriptomes, we
manually curated a list of subtype-associated TFs (Table S3)
and measured their expression correlation coefﬁcients (Shalek
et al., 2013). This analysis uncovered several clusters of factors
whose expression varied in a correlated manner in the ﬁrst ﬁve
principal components (50% of variation; Figure 4C). The pres-
ence of TFs with known spatial distribution within the clusters
facilitated the reconstruction of the original location of the
different NSCs within the SVZ. Dorsal markers like Emx1 corre-
lated with Eomes (also known as Tbr2), Neurod4, and Neurog2,
known to specify glutamatergic interneurons in the dorsal aspect
of the SVZ (Brill et al., 2009). These genes also clustered with
Fezf2 and Nr2f1 (also known as COUP-TF1), suggesting that
these genes might be involved in the speciﬁcation of dorsally
generated interneurons. Indeed, as predicted in silico, we found
Nr2f1 expression to be dorsally restricted (Figure 4D). Ventral
markers Nkx2-1 and Nkx6-2 were highly correlated to one
another and inversely correlated with dorsal markers. Unexpect-
edly, they did not cluster with Gli1, another ventral marker (Ihrie
et al., 2011), suggesting that they constitute non-overlapping
domains within the ventral SVZ. Laterally expressed genes,
i.e., Gsx2 and Dlx2, clustered in a distinct domain, consistent
with a recent report (Lo´ pez-Jua´ rez et al., 2013). Pax6 expression
deﬁned another cluster, which included its cofactor Meis2
(Agoston et al., 2014), and presumably deﬁned the dopaminergic
periglomerular neuron-generating domain. Last, we observed a
cluster that included the oligodendroglial TF Olig2. This cluster
contained Ascl1, which due to its broader expression was also
associated with other domains (e.g., Pax6). Since Ascl1-lineage
cells within the SVZ generate oligodendrocytes (Parras et al.,
2004), we hypothesized that this domain corresponds to a
distinct non-neurogenic NSC pool fated to become oligoden-
droglia (Ortega et al., 2013). Taken together, unbiased clustering
of lineage-related TFs deﬁnes another layer of heterogeneity
within NSCs that correlates with speciﬁc neuronal and glial sub-
types in their progeny, thus highlighting the fate-restricted nature
of adult NSCs. Importantly, this fate restriction is observed in
both active and quiescent cells (Figure 4E).
Ischemic Brain Injury Activates Dormant NSCs via
Interferon Gamma
The analysis of NSCs during homeostasis revealed pervasive
heterogeneity within NSCs. To study the transcriptional response
of NSCs to a physiological perturbation in vivo, we subjected
animals to a transient bilateral common carotid artery occlusion
that results in ischemic striatal damage (Yoshioka et al., 2011).
Single-cell RNA-seq libraries were generated from 45 NSCs
isolated from the SVZ 2 days after ischemia (Figure 5A). In addi-
tion, two replicates from 1,000 NSCs likewise isolated from SVZ
2 days after ischemia were used as population controls. Com-
bined PCA of injured and non-injured NSCs revealed that
ischemic injury activated the transition of NSCs into activation
(Figure 5B). Notably, we observed that only a few injured NSCs
were in a dormant state while the proportion of primed-quiescent
and active NSCs strikingly increased upon injury (qNSC1: 6.67%
injured versus 40.2% naive; qNSC2: 37.8% injured versus 26.1%
naive; aNSC: 55.5% injured versus 33.7% naive; p = 8e5). We
also noted that several injured NSCs with a primed-quiescent
signature retained expression of genes otherwise only expressed
by dormant cells under homeostatic conditions (Figure 5C). We
hypothesize that these genes are a remnant of their previous
dormant state and call them ‘‘dormancy trace genes.’’ The tran-
sition from dormant to a primed-quiescent state (qNSC1 to
qNSC2) involves the activation of protein synthesis and cell-cycle
genes, which is reminiscent of the alert state of quiescent muscle
stem cells when exposed to a remote injury (Rodgers et al., 2014).
To identify the underlying regulatory networks, we next per-
formed PCA on the injured NSC transcriptomes using injury-
induced genes extracted from the population RNA-seq data
(‘‘Injury signature;’’ 399 differentially expressed genes with
2-fold change and padj < 0.1, Table S4). This analysis showed
that the response was not homogeneous across all NSCs, but
instead revealed the presence of subsets of cells with low and
high induction of the injury signature (Figure S5). We then
performed unsupervised hierarchical clustering on 61 genes
with the highest PC1 coordinates (correlation coefﬁcient > 0.45
and p < 1e2) (Figure S5). This analysis further conﬁrmed the
heterogeneous injury response in NSCs. Interestingly, most of
the cells with a higher induction of the injury signature belonged
to the quiescent group, while most of the aNSCs showed only a
mild induction. These results also highlight that differentially
expressed genes identiﬁed in population analyses may reﬂect
high levels of induction in only certain subsets of cells within
that population. Finally, we performed upstream regulator
analysis using the software Ingenuity to identify putative molec-
ular triggers of the injury response. This analysis showed an
Cell Stem Cell 17, 1–12, September 3, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
7
Please cite this article in press as: Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals a Population of Dormant Neural Stem Cells that
Become Activated upon Brain Injury, Cell Stem Cell (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002

overrepresentation of interferon gamma (IFN-g) target genes
within our signature (Figure 5D). We next examined the transcrip-
tome of 34 NSCs isolated from the SVZ of IFN-g-Receptor1-deﬁ-
cient (Ifngr1/) mice 2 days after ischemic injury. Indeed, the
injury-induced upregulation of INF-g-response genes was abro-
gated in 90% of the Ifngr1/ cells (Figure S5 and Figure 5E).
A 
B  
C  
D  
E  
F  
Figure 5. IFN-g-Driven Activation of Dormant NSCs after Ischemic Injury
(A) Scheme of the experimental design.
(B) PCA of 124 NSC transcriptomes (92 non-injured, in grayscale; 45 ischemic injured, in red). The proportion of NSCs within the different transition states is
signiﬁcantly changed by the injury (p < 0.0006, Fisher test).
(C) Relative gene expression values of dormant-NSC (qNSC1)-associated genes projected into the PCA shown in (B). Note that some injured cells (triangles)
within the qNSC2 cluster retain higher expression than their non-injured counterparts.
(D) STRING-based interaction plot for genes with the highest PC1 correlation in Figure S5A. See also Table S4. Only genes with at least one interaction are shown.
In red, predicted IFN-g target genes based on upstream regulator analysis (IPA) (p < 4.74e10) are shown.
(E) Heatmap showing relative gene expression values across individual cells for 61 genes with the highest PC1 correlation (p < 1e2). Genes are shown in rows
and cells from WT-injured and Ifngr1/ Injured mice are shown in columns.
(F) Relative proportions of cells (from WT, WT-Injured, and Ifngr1/ Injured mice) in each of the qNSC subclasses as deﬁned in Figure 2. p values (Fisher’s exact
test) are ***p = 0.0006 and *p = 0.02.
8
Cell Stem Cell 17, 1–12, September 3, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
Please cite this article in press as: Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals a Population of Dormant Neural Stem Cells that
Become Activated upon Brain Injury, Cell Stem Cell (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002

Importantly, the exit of NSCs from the dormant into the primed-
quiescent state drastically decreased in the absence of IFNgR1
(60.7% qNSC1 in naive WT mice; 15.0% in injured WT mice; and
53.9% in Ignr1/ injured mice; p < 0.006 and p < 0.02, Fig-
ure 5F). This effect was likely not due to developmental deﬁcits
in these mice since WT and Ifnr/ mice showed similar numbers
of dormant and quiescent NSCs (Figure S5).
Taken together, our data indicate that injury activates the
transition of dormant NSCs into a primed quiescent state that
subsequently proceeds to activation via triggering of interferon
signaling.
DISCUSSION
Despite intensive investigation on NSC identity, it has remained
unclear to what degree cells in different states of activation or
lineage priming exist in vivo. By applying single-cell transcrip-
tomics to an unbiased pool of NSCs, we have reconstructed
at high resolution the molecular events orchestrating NSC acti-
vation, from dormancy to the generation of diverse progeny. In
agreement with previous studies (Codega et al., 2014; Mich
et al., 2014), we found NSCs in quiescent and active states. Add-
ing to this picture, our single-cell approach uncovered that dur-
ing the progression from a quiescent to an active state, NSCs
transit through multiple intermediate states that could not be
captured with commonly used markers or population-based
studies. Most interestingly, we ﬁnd NSCs in a state of dormancy
characterized by a particularly low protein synthesis rate. These
cells progress to activation through an intermediate state of
primed quiescence, in which cells begin to increase their protein
synthesis machinery. These two states closely resemble the
recently described transition from G0 to an enhanced Galert
quiescent state in muscle satellite cells (Rodgers et al., 2014).
It will be interesting to study whether this constitutes a general
mechanism of stem cell activation in homeostasis across many
organs. Our data point toward a prominent role for translational
control during several steps of NSC lineage progression. As
more experimental tools become available to study protein syn-
thesis in vivo (Buszczak et al., 2014), it will be important to study
whether translational control exerts a regulatory effect on spe-
ciﬁc sets of transcripts to control NSC behavior.
One key step for future functional studies on NSCs is to ﬁnd
stage-speciﬁc markers to distinguish them from other niche
cells. Our comparative analysis of the transcriptome of individual
NSCs and other related cell types, such as neuroblasts, TAPs,
oligodendrocytes, and parenchymal astrocytes will help in the
identiﬁcation of NSC- and subtype-speciﬁc markers. As an
example, we have found that CD9 expression levels distinguishe
parenchymal astrocytes from SVZ NSCs. Of note, high CD9 also
marks Prom1 GLAST-expressing cells exclusively in the SVZ
and may thus allow the identiﬁcation of a broader pool of
NSCs than the one marked by Prom1. In addition, stage-speciﬁc
markers will allow distinction of the different subpopulations
within NSCs, which will be critical to address the kinetics and
the neurogenic contribution of these cells. Previous fate map-
ping of Glast-expressing cells demonstrates that Glasthigh cells,
presumably including dormant NSCs, are indeed neurogenic
during niche repopulation (Mich et al., 2014). In line with this
ﬁnding, we show that after an ischemic insult NSCs transition
from a dormant to a primed-quiescent state, shown to be neuro-
genic in transplantation experiments. However, deﬁnitive proof
of their neurogenic ability awaits future conﬁrmation by trans-
plantation studies or exclusive lineage tracing of dormant NSCs.
Single-cell analysis also enabled us to study the coordinated
expression of subtype-speciﬁc TFs in NSCs at higher throughput
than conventional methods. Such analyses will provide a power-
ful means to identify TFs involved in the speciﬁcation of particular
neuronal subtypes that may be used for reprogramming ap-
proaches (Amamoto and Arlotta, 2014).
The high degree of NSC heterogeneity found in our study also
poses some important questions. Do the different subgroups
contribute equally to homeostatic neurogenesis? Do some cells
serve as a reservoir for brain repair? Along this line, we have
found here that dormant and quiescent NSCs are more respon-
sive to an injured environment. This is consistent with the notion
that qNSCs express a higher number of membrane receptors to
sense and respond to changes in their microenvironment (Co-
dega et al., 2014). However, within the injury niche, only a subset
of NSCs responds to IFN-g. The nature of this heterogeneous
response remains unknown, and we can only speculate that it
might be inﬂuenced by temporal dynamics, position within the
niche, or paracrine inhibition from early responder cells (Shalek
et al., 2014). Likewise, the presence of the injury-signature in
some Ifngr1/ NSCs might be explained by the concomitant ac-
tivity of other cytokines. Interestingly, IFN-g promotes exit from
dormancy into a primed quiescent state. A similar role of inter-
feron signaling has been previously reported for hematopoietic
stem cells where an acute treatment with interferon-a triggers
proliferation of dormant HSCs (Essers et al., 2009).
In summary, our data show that multiple molecularly distinct
groups of NSCs that respond differently to physiological stimuli
coexist in the adult neurogenic niche. We anticipate that the un-
derstanding and implementation of this molecular diversity will
be critical in harnessing the potential of NSCs for brain repair.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Animals
C57BL/6 male mice between 8 and 12 weeks of age were used for all exper-
iments. Mice were purchased from Charles River or bred in house at the
DKFZ Center for Preclinical Research facility. Animals were housed under
standard conditions and fed ad libitum. Male and female Ifngr1/ (Ifnar1+/
and Ifnar1/) (Huang et al., 1993) mice were 3 months old and backcrossed
to a C57BL/6 background. All procedures were in accordance with the
DKFZ guidelines and approved by the Regierungpra¨ sidium Karlsruhe.
Global Forebrain Ischemia
Global ischemia was performed using the bilateral common carotid artery oc-
clusion method essentially as previously described (Yoshioka et al., 2011).
Brieﬂy, mice were deeply anesthetized and a laser Doppler probe (Perimed)
was ﬁxed at the skull for continuous measurement of regional cerebral blood
ﬂow (rCBF). Next, both common carotid arteries were exposed and clamped
with surgical microclamps (Stoelting) for a period of 22 min prior to reperfusion.
Only animals with an ischemic rCBF smaller than 13% of the pre-ischemic
value were used.
Stereotactic Injections
For transplantation experiments, two injections containing approximately
2,000–4,000 cells puriﬁed by ﬂow cytometry from pan-YFP or pan-Tomato
(Rainbow 2) mice were performed at the following coordinates zeroed at the
bregma: 0.0/1.4/2.1 and 0.5/1.2/2.2 mm. Recipient mice were age and
Cell Stem Cell 17, 1–12, September 3, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
9
Please cite this article in press as: Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals a Population of Dormant Neural Stem Cells that
Become Activated upon Brain Injury, Cell Stem Cell (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002

gender matched. Mice were sacriﬁced at the indicated time point. To measure
protein synthesis in the SVZ, 1.5 ml of 20mM OP-Puro (dissolved in 5% DMSO
in PBS) was injected into the lateral ventricle at the following coordinates:
0.5/1.2/2 mm. Mice were sacriﬁced 30 min later and the contralateral hemi-
sphere was analyzed.
Flow Cytometry and Cell Picking
Animals were sacriﬁced by cervical dislocation and their brains were immedi-
ately placed on ice. The lateral SVZ was microdissected as a whole mount as
previously described (Mirzadeh et al., 2010). Pooled SVZ tissue (one to ﬁve
mice) was digested with trypsin and DNase according to the Neural Tissue
Dissociation kit in a Gentle MACS Dissociator (Miltenyi). To isolate cortical
and striatal astrocytes, we microdissected tissue pieces similarly sized to
the SVZ wholemount from the cortex immediately above the corpus callosum
and from the striatum after having dissected out the ventricle wall, and we pro-
cessed them in parallel. After being sorted, cells were manually picked with a
micropipette under continuous visual inspection in a Zeiss microscope. Picked
cells were frozen at 80C until further processing. For details regarding cell
staining, sorting, and picking, see Supplemental Experimental Procedures.
Library Preparation and Sequencing
RNA-seq libraries were prepared using Smart-seq2 technology as previously
described (Picelli et al., 2014). Brieﬂy, lysed cells were thawed and subjected
to reverse transcription using an oligo(dT) primer and a locked nucleic
acid (LNA)-containing template-switching oligonucleotide (Exiqon). In a
randomly selected set of samples, we included ERCC Spike-Ins (Ambion) at
a 1:1,000,000 dilution. Full-length cDNAs were ampliﬁed by 20 cycles of
PCR using KAPA HiFi DNA polymerase (KAPA biosystems). Ampliﬁed cDNAs
for every single cell were quantiﬁed and run on a High Sensitivity Bioanalyzer
chip (Agilent). Samples containing no material or in which the cDNA appeared
degraded were excluded (approximately 10%) from further processing.
cDNAs were then converted into libraries for Illumina sequencing according
to the Nextera XT Sample Preparation (Illumina) protocol with minor modiﬁca-
tions. For population studies, approximately 1 ng of total RNA from approxi-
mately 1,000 cells was subjected to the SMARTer Ultra Low RNA kit (Clontech)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were sequenced in an
Illumina HiSeq 2000. For details, see Supplemental Experimental Procedures.
Immunohistochemistry, Immunocytochemistry, and Cell Culture
Mice were transcardially perfused ﬁrst with HBSS and then with 4% parafor-
maldehyde (PFA). SVZ wholemounts were processed for staining as previously
described (Mirzadeh et al., 2010). For staining of cells directly after sorting,
cells were plated in PDL and laminin-coated Lab-Tek chambers (Thermo) until
they adhered or until the duration of the respective treatment. Afterward, cells
were ﬁxed for 20 min with 2% PFA in the medium and stained following stan-
dard procedures. The alkyne group in OP-Puro was detected using an Alexa-
488- or Alexa-647-coupled azide according to the Click-iT Cell Reaction Buffer
Kit (Life Technologies). FAC-sorted cells were incubated in the absence of
growth factors in Neurobasal medium supplemented with B27, glutamine,
and Pen/Strep. Cells were treated with 10 mM DAPT (Sigma) or DMSO (Sigma)
for the indicated time. OP-Puro (Jena Biosciences) was added to the cells at
50 mM for 1 hr prior to ﬁxation. Antibodies are listed in the Supplemental Exper-
imental Procedures.
Imaging
Confocal images were acquired in a Leica TCS SP5 confocal microscope. Im-
age J was used for processing and images were only adjusted for brightness
and contrast. For OP-Puro quantiﬁcations, all images within compared groups
were acquired with identical settings. Analysis was performed in ImageJ soft-
ware using a custom-written macro for unbiased segmentation and quantiﬁca-
tion of pixel intensity and cell size. OP-Puro quantiﬁcations are depicted as the
integrated pixel intensity within a cell and normalized to a reference group
within the same experiment. In graphs, mean and SD are shown. Illustrator
CS5 (Adobe) was used for ﬁgure assembly.
Processing and Analysis of Single-Cell RNA-Seq Data
Data analysis was performed as described in detail in the Supplemental Exper-
imental Procedures. Brieﬂy, the quality of raw reads was checked by FASTQC
and reads were trimmed using Btrim64 (Kong, 2011). Trimmed reads were
mapped to mouse genome (ENSEMBL Release 78) using STAR_2.4.0g (Dobin
et al., 2013). RNA-seq data quality metrics for each cell, including total reads,
transcriptome mapped reads, and transcriptome mapped rate was calculated
by picard-tools-1.123 (https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/) as shown in
Table S1. Next, gene expression matrices were generated as previously
described (Shalek et al., 2013, 2014). To compare expression levels of
different genes across samples, we performed an additional TMM (trimmed
mean of M values) normalization on FPKM (fragments per kilobase of
transcript per million mapped reads) using Trinity (Haas et al., 2013) (http://
trinityrnaseq.github.io/) based on edgeR (Robinson and Oshlack, 2010). PCA
on gene expression matrices was done using custom R scripts based on
FactoMineR library (http://factominer.free.fr/). Hierarchical clustering was
performed on cells and on the genes identiﬁed by PCA using Euclidean
distance or correlation metric. We also assessed the stability of the number
of clusters identiﬁed by hierarchical clustering by a previously described
resampling method (Wu et al., 2014). To reconstruct the pseudotemporal
order of NSCs, we applied Monocle (Trapnell et al., 2014) to the expression
pattern of genes with the highest coordinates (p < 10e5) with the ﬁrst three
dimensions of PCA. To determine qNSC1-enriched genes, a likelihood-ratio
test (McDavid et al., 2013) was used to test genes that were differentially ex-
pressed between qNSC1 and astrocytes (p < 0.01, Benjamini and Hochberg
corrected).
ACCESSION NUMBERS
Data have been deposited in GEO under accession number GEO: GSE67833.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information for this article includes ﬁve ﬁgures, four tables, and
Supplemental Experimental Procedures and can be found with this article on-
line at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
E.L.-B. designed the study, performed experiments, analyzed and inter-
preted data, and prepared the manuscript. S.Z. participated in experimental
design, performed the computational analyses, interpreted data, and pre-
pared the manuscript. A.B. performed experiments and analyzed data.
G.S.-C. and K.Z. performed experiments. A.M.-V. aided in conceptual design
and study coordination, interpreted data, and prepared the manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank S. Wolf from the DKFZ Genomics and Proteomics Core Facility; K.
Borowski from the Heidelberg University Hospital FACS Core Facility; mem-
bers of the DKFZ Flow Cytometry Core Facility; K. Busch and H.-R. Rodewald
for pan-YFP mice; M. Essers for Ifngr1/ and Ifnr/ mice; A. Lu¨ tge for data
analysis; S. Limpert for technical assistance; D. Krunic and the Light Micro-
scopy Core Facility for support with image analysis; L. Buades for preparing
the graphical abstract; and the members of the Martin-Villalba laboratory for
critically reading the manuscript. This work was supported by the German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), a DAAD-LaCaixa scholarship to E.L.-B.,
and the German Research Foundation (DFG; SFB-873).
Received: March 25, 2015
Revised: May 18, 2015
Accepted: July 2, 2015
Published: July 30, 2015
REFERENCES
Agoston, Z., Heine, P., Brill, M.S., Grebbin, B.M., Hau, A.-C., Kallenborn-
Gerhardt, W., Schramm, J., Go¨ tz, M., and Schulte, D. (2014). Meis2 is a
Pax6 co-factor in neurogenesis and dopaminergic periglomerular fate speciﬁ-
cation in the adult olfactory bulb. Development 141, 28–38.
10
Cell Stem Cell 17, 1–12, September 3, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
Please cite this article in press as: Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals a Population of Dormant Neural Stem Cells that
Become Activated upon Brain Injury, Cell Stem Cell (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002

Alvarez-Buylla, A., Kohwi, M., Nguyen, T.M., and Merkle, F.T. (2008). The het-
erogeneity of adult neural stem cells and the emerging complexity of their
niche. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 73, 357–365.
Amamoto, R., and Arlotta, P. (2014). Development-inspired reprogramming of
the mammalian central nervous system. Science 343, 1239882.
Andersen, J., Urba´ n, N., Achimastou, A., Ito, A., Simic, M., Ullom, K.,
Martynoga, B., Lebel, M., Go¨ ritz, C., Frise´ n, J., et al. (2014). A transcriptional
mechanism integrating inputs from extracellular signals to activate hippocam-
pal stem cells. Neuron 83, 1085–1097.
Basak, O., Giachino, C., Fiorini, E., Macdonald, H.R., and Taylor, V. (2012).
Neurogenic subventricular zone stem/progenitor cells are Notch1-dependent
in their active but not quiescent state. J. Neurosci. 32, 5654–5666.
Beckervordersandforth, R., Tripathi, P., Ninkovic, J., Bayam, E., Lepier, A.,
Stempfhuber, B., Kirchhoff, F., Hirrlinger, J., Haslinger, A., Lie, D.C., et al.
(2010). In vivo fate mapping and expression analysis reveals molecular hall-
marks of prospectively isolated adult neural stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 7,
744–758.
Benner, E.J., Luciano, D., Jo, R., Abdi, K., Paez-Gonzalez, P., Sheng, H.,
Warner, D.S., Liu, C., Eroglu, C., and Kuo, C.T. (2013). Protective astrogenesis
from the SVZ niche after injury is controlled by Notch modulator Thbs4. Nature
497, 369–373.
Brill, M.S., Ninkovic, J., Winpenny, E., Hodge, R.D., Ozen, I., Yang, R., Lepier,
A., Gasco´ n, S., Erdelyi, F., Szabo, G., et al. (2009). Adult generation of glutama-
tergic olfactory bulb interneurons. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1524–1533.
Buszczak, M., Signer, R.A.J., and Morrison, S.J. (2014). Cellular differences in
protein synthesis regulate tissue homeostasis. Cell 159, 242–251.
Calzolari, F., Michel, J., Baumgart, E.V., Theis, F., Go¨ tz, M., and Ninkovic, J.
(2015). Fast clonal expansion and limited neural stem cell self-renewal in the
adult subependymal zone. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 490–492.
Codega, P., Silva-Vargas, V., Paul, A., Maldonado-Soto, A.R., Deleo, A.M.,
Pastrana, E., and Doetsch, F. (2014). Prospective identiﬁcation and puriﬁca-
tion of quiescent adult neural stem cells from their in vivo niche. Neuron 82,
545–559.
Dobin, A., Davis, C.A., Schlesinger, F., Drenkow, J., Zaleski, C., Jha, S., Batut,
P., Chaisson, M., and Gingeras, T.R. (2013). STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq
aligner. Bioinformatics 29, 15–21.
Durruthy-Durruthy, R., Gottlieb, A., Hartman, B.H., Waldhaus, J., Laske, R.D.,
Altman, R., and Heller, S. (2014). Reconstruction of the mouse otocyst and
early neuroblast lineage at single-cell resolution. Cell 157, 964–978.
Essers, M.A.G., Offner, S., Blanco-Bose, W.E., Waibler, Z., Kalinke, U.,
Duchosal, M.A., and Trumpp, A. (2009). IFNalpha activates dormant haemato-
poietic stem cells in vivo. Nature 458, 904–908.
Genander, M., Cook, P.J., Ramsko¨ ld, D., Keyes, B.E., Mertz, A.F., Sandberg,
R., and Fuchs, E. (2014). BMP signaling and its pSMAD1/5 target genes differ-
entially regulate hair follicle stem cell lineages. Cell Stem Cell 15, 619–633.
Giachino, C., and Taylor, V. (2014). Notching up neural stem cell homogeneity
in homeostasis and disease. Front. Neurosci. 8, 32.
Giachino, C., Basak, O., Lugert, S., Knuckles, P., Obernier, K., Fiorelli, R.,
Frank, S., Raineteau, O., Alvarez-Buylla, A., and Taylor, V. (2014). Molecular di-
versity subdivides the adult forebrain neural stem cell population. Stem Cells
32, 70–84.
Haas, B.J., Papanicolaou, A., Yassour, M., Grabherr, M., Blood, P.D., Bowden,
J., Couger, M.B., Eccles, D., Li, B., Lieber, M., et al. (2013). De novo transcript
sequence reconstruction from RNA-seq using the Trinity platform for reference
generation and analysis. Nat. Protoc. 8, 1494–1512.
Huang, S., Hendriks, W., Althage, A., Hemmi, S., Bluethmann, H., Kamijo, R.,
Vilcek, J., Zinkernagel, R.M., and Aguet, M. (1993). Immune response in mice
that lack the interferon-gamma receptor. Science 259, 1742–1745.
Huang, W., Sherman, B.T., and Lempicki, R.A. (2009). Bioinformatics enrich-
ment tools: paths toward the comprehensive functional analysis of large
gene lists. Nucleic Acids Res. 37, 1–13.
Ihrie, R.A., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2011). Lake-front property: a unique
germinal niche by the lateral ventricles of the adult brain. Neuron 70, 674–686.
Ihrie, R.A., Shah, J.K., Harwell, C.C., Levine, J.H., Guinto, C.D., Lezameta, M.,
Kriegstein, A.R., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2011). Persistent sonic hedgehog
signaling in adult brain determines neural stem cell positional identity.
Neuron 71, 250–262.
Imayoshi, I., Sakamoto, M., Yamaguchi, M., Mori, K., and Kageyama, R.
(2010). Essential roles of Notch signaling in maintenance of neural stem cells
in developing and adult brains. J. Neurosci. 30, 3489–3498.
Johnson, M.B., Wang, P.P., Atabay, K.D., Murphy, E.A., Doan, R.N., Hecht,
J.L., and Walsh, C.A. (2015). Single-cell analysis reveals transcriptional hetero-
geneity of neural progenitors in human cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 637–646.
Kawaguchi, D., Furutachi, S., Kawai, H., Hozumi, K., and Gotoh, Y. (2013). Dll1
maintains quiescence of adult neural stem cells and segregates asymmetri-
cally during mitosis. Nat. Commun. 4, 1880.
Kelsch, W., Mosley, C.P., Lin, C.-W., and Lois, C. (2007). Distinct mammalian
precursors are committed to generate neurons with deﬁned dendritic projec-
tion patterns. PLoS Biol. 5, e300.
Knobloch, M., Braun, S., Zurkirchen, L., von Schoultz, C., Zamboni, N.,
Arau´ zo-Bravo, M.J., Kovacs, W.J., Karalay, O., Suter, U., Machado, R.A.,
et al. (2013). Metabolic control of adult neural stem cell activity by Fasn-depen-
dent lipogenesis. Nature 493, 226–230.
Kong, Y. (2011). Btrim: a fast, lightweight adapter and quality trimming pro-
gram for next-generation sequencing technologies. Genomics 98, 152–153.
Lavado, A., and Oliver, G. (2011). Six3 is required for ependymal cell matura-
tion. Development 138, 5291–5300.
Liu, J., Xu, Y., Stoleru, D., and Salic, A. (2012). Imaging protein synthesis in
cells and tissues with an alkyne analog of puromycin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 109, 413–418.
Lo´ pez-Jua´ rez, A., Howard, J., Ullom, K., Howard, L., Grande, A., Pardo, A.,
Waclaw, R., Sun, Y.Y., Yang, D., Kuan, C.Y., et al. (2013). Gsx2 controls re-
gion-speciﬁc activation of neural stem cells and injury-induced neurogenesis
in the adult subventricular zone. Genes Dev. 27, 1272–1287.
Macosko, E.Z., Basu, A., Satija, R., Nemesh, J., Shekhar, K., Goldman, M.,
Tirosh, I., Bialas, A.R., Kamitaki, N., Martersteck, E.M., et al. (2015). Highly
Parallel
Genome-wide
Expression
Proﬁling
of
Individual
Cells
Using
Nanoliter Droplets. Cell 161, 1202–1214.
McDavid, A., Finak, G., Chattopadyay, P.K., Dominguez, M., Lamoreaux, L.,
Ma, S.S., Roederer, M., and Gottardo, R. (2013). Data exploration, quality con-
trol and testing in single-cell qPCR-based gene expression experiments.
Bioinformatics 29, 461–467.
Merkle, F.T., Mirzadeh, Z., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2007). Mosaic organization
of neural stem cells in the adult brain. Science 317, 381–384.
Mich, J.K., Signer, R.A., Nakada, D., Pineda, A., Burgess, R.J., Vue, T.Y.,
Johnson, J.E., and Morrison, S.J. (2014). Prospective identiﬁcation of function-
ally distinct stem cells and neurosphere-initiating cells in adult mouse fore-
brain. eLife 3, e02669.
Ming, G.-L., and Song, H. (2011). Adult neurogenesis in the mammalian brain:
signiﬁcant answers and signiﬁcant questions. Neuron 70, 687–702.
Mirzadeh, Z., Merkle, F.T., Soriano-Navarro, M., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., and
Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2008). Neural stem cells confer unique pinwheel architec-
ture to the ventricular surface in neurogenic regions of the adult brain. Cell
Stem Cell 3, 265–278.
Mirzadeh, Z., Doetsch, F., Sawamoto, K., Wichterle, H., and Alvarez-Buylla, A.
(2010). The subventricular zone en-face: wholemount staining and ependymal
ﬂow. J. Vis. Exp. 39, http://dx.doi.org/10.3791/1938.
Nakafuku, M., and Grande, A. (2013). Patterning and Cell Type Speciﬁcation in
the Developing CNS and PNS (Academic Press).
Ortega, F., Gasco´ n, S., Masserdotti, G., Deshpande, A., Simon, C., Fischer, J.,
Dimou, L., Chichung Lie, D., Schroeder, T., and Berninger, B. (2013).
Oligodendrogliogenic and neurogenic adult subependymal zone neural stem
cells constitute distinct lineages and exhibit differential responsiveness to
Wnt signalling. Nat. Cell Biol. 15, 602–613.
Parras, C.M., Galli, R., Britz, O., Soares, S., Galichet, C., Battiste, J., Johnson,
J.E., Nakafuku, M., Vescovi, A., and Guillemot, F. (2004). Mash1 speciﬁes neu-
rons and oligodendrocytes in the postnatal brain. EMBO J. 23, 4495–4505.
Cell Stem Cell 17, 1–12, September 3, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
11
Please cite this article in press as: Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals a Population of Dormant Neural Stem Cells that
Become Activated upon Brain Injury, Cell Stem Cell (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002

Picelli, S., Bjo¨ rklund, A˚ .K., Faridani, O.R., Sagasser, S., Winberg, G., and
Sandberg, R. (2013). Smart-seq2 for sensitive full-length transcriptome
proﬁling in single cells. Nat. Methods 10, 1096–1098.
Picelli, S., Faridani, O.R., Bjo¨ rklund, A˚ .K., Winberg, G., Sagasser, S., and
Sandberg, R. (2014). Full-length RNA-seq from single cells using Smart-
seq2. Nat. Protoc. 9, 171–181.
Platel, J.-C., Gordon, V., Heintz, T., and Bordey, A. (2009). GFAP-GFP neural
progenitors are antigenically homogeneous and anchored in their enclosed
mosaic niche. Glia 57, 66–78.
Robinson, M.D., and Oshlack, A. (2010). A scaling normalization method for
differential expression analysis of RNA-seq data. Genome Biol. 11, R25.
Rodgers, J.T., King, K.Y., Brett, J.O., Cromie, M.J., Charville, G.W., Maguire,
K.K., Brunson, C., Mastey, N., Liu, L., Tsai, C.-R., et al. (2014). mTORC1 con-
trols the adaptive transition of quiescent stem cells from G0 to GAlert. Nature
510, 393–396.
Sequerra, E.B. (2014). Subventricular zone progenitors in time and space:
generating neuronal diversity. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 8, 434.
Shalek, A.K., Satija, R., Adiconis, X., Gertner, R.S., Gaublomme, J.T.,
Raychowdhury, R., Schwartz, S., Yosef, N., Malboeuf, C., Lu, D., et al.
(2013). Single-cell transcriptomics reveals bimodality in expression and
splicing in immune cells. Nature 498, 236–240.
Shalek, A.K., Satija, R., Shuga, J., Trombetta, J.J., Gennert, D., Lu, D., Chen,
P., Gertner, R.S., Gaublomme, J.T., Yosef, N., et al. (2014). Single-cell RNA-
seq reveals dynamic paracrine control of cellular variation. Nature 510,
363–369.
Signer, R.A., Magee, J.A., Salic, A., and Morrison, S.J. (2014). Haematopoietic
stem cells require a highly regulated protein synthesis rate. Nature 509, 49–54.
Simsek, T., Kocabas, F., Zheng, J., Deberardinis, R.J., Mahmoud, A.I., Olson,
E.N., Schneider, J.W., Zhang, C.C., and Sadek, H.A. (2010). The distinct
metabolic proﬁle of hematopoietic stem cells reﬂects their location in a hypoxic
niche. Cell Stem Cell 7, 380–390.
Trapnell, C., Cacchiarelli, D., Grimsby, J., Pokharel, P., Li, S., Morse, M.,
Lennon, N.J., Livak, K.J., Mikkelsen, T.S., and Rinn, J.L. (2014). The dynamics
and regulators of cell fate decisions are revealed by pseudotemporal ordering
of single cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 381–386.
Treutlein, B., Brownﬁeld, D.G., Wu, A.R., Neff, N.F., Mantalas, G.L., Espinoza,
F.H., Desai, T.J., Krasnow, M.A., and Quake, S.R. (2014). Reconstructing line-
age hierarchies of the distal lung epithelium using single-cell RNA-seq. Nature
509, 371–375.
Wu, A.R., Neff, N.F., Kalisky, T., Dalerba, P., Treutlein, B., Rothenberg, M.E.,
Mburu, F.M., Mantalas, G.L., Sim, S., Clarke, M.F., and Quake, S.R. (2014).
Quantitative assessment of single-cell RNA-sequencing methods. Nat.
Methods 11, 41–46.
Yoshioka, H., Niizuma, K., Katsu, M., Sakata, H., Okami, N., and Chan, P.H.
(2011). Consistent injury to medium spiny neurons and white matter in the
mouse
striatum
after
prolonged
transient
global
cerebral
ischemia.
J. Neurotrauma 28, 649–660.
Young, K.M., Fogarty, M., Kessaris, N., and Richardson, W.D. (2007).
Subventricular zone stem cells are heterogeneous with respect to their embry-
onic origins and neurogenic fates in the adult olfactory bulb. J. Neurosci. 27,
8286–8296.
Zeisel, A., Mun˜ oz-Manchado, A.B., Codeluppi, S., Lo¨ nnerberg, P., La Manno,
G., Jure´ us, A., Marques, S., Munguba, H., He, L., Betsholtz, C., et al. (2015).
Brain structure. Cell types in the mouse cortex and hippocampus revealed
by single-cell RNA-seq. Science 347, 1138–1142.
Zhang, H.-M., Chen, H., Liu, W., Liu, H., Gong, J., Wang, H., and Guo, A.-Y.
(2012). AnimalTFDB: a comprehensive animal transcription factor database.
Nucleic Acids Res. 40, D144–D149.
12
Cell Stem Cell 17, 1–12, September 3, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
Please cite this article in press as: Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals a Population of Dormant Neural Stem Cells that
Become Activated upon Brain Injury, Cell Stem Cell (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002

===== Llorens-Bobadilla2020_Science_SCI+scTx+OLIG2 =====
RESEARCH ARTICLE SUMMARY
◥
NEURODEVELOPMENT
A latent lineage potential in resident neural stem
cells enables spinal cord repair
Enric Llorens-Bobadilla, James M. Chell, Pierre Le Merre, Yicheng Wu, Margherita Zamboni,
Joseph Bergenstråhle, Moa Stenudd, Elena Sopova, Joakim Lundeberg, Oleg Shupliakov,
Marie Carlén, Jonas Frisén*
INTRODUCTION: The capacity of a tissue to re-
generate itself rests on the potential of its
resident cells to replace cells lost to injury.
Some tissues, such as skin or intestine, do
this remarkably well through the activation
of tissue-specific stem cells. Injuries to the
central nervous system (CNS), in contrast,
often lead to permanent functional impair-
ment; some cells lost to injury are never re-
placed. Neural stem cells have been identified
in the adult brain and spinal cord and are
activated by injury. However, injury-activated
neural stem cells predominantly produce scar-
forming astrocytes, and the contribution of
neural stem cells to cell replacement is insuf-
ficient for regeneration. To design regener-
ative strategies aimed at recruiting resident
neural stem cells for repair, it is essential to
know whether greater regenerative potential
exists and how to elicit such potential.
RATIONALE: The spinal cord is a great system to
study neural stem cell recruitment for repair.
The neural stem cell potential of the spinal
cord resides in a well-characterized popula-
tion of ependymal cells. Ependymal cells, nor-
mally quiescent, are activated by injury to
generate almost exclusively scar-forming as-
trocytes. Ependymal-derived astrocytes help
to preserve tissue integrity, but other cell types,
such as myelin-forming oligodendrocytes, are
insufficiently replaced. In parallel, neural stem
cell transplantation has proven to be beneficial
to recovery after spinal cord injury—a benefit
that is associated with the increased supply of
oligodendrocytes able to remyelinate demye-
linated axons. Ependymal cells share a devel-
opmental origin with spinal oligodendrocytes,
which led us to explore whether a latent po-
tential for expanded oligodendrocyte gener-
ation might exist.
RESULTS: We integrated single-cell RNA se-
quencing (scRNA-seq) and single-cell assay
for transposase-accessible chromatin using
sequencing (scATAC-seq) to study lineage po-
tential in adult ependymal cells of the mouse
spinal cord. We found that the genetic program
for oligodendrocyte generation is accessible
in ependymal cells. However, this program is
latent, as oligodendrocyte genes are not ex-
pressed. In particular, we found that a large
fraction of binding sites for OLIG2, the tran-
scription factor that initiates developmental
oligodendrogenesis, had basal accessibility,
despite OLIG2 and its key target genes not
being expressed in adult ependymal cells. To
study whether this latent accessibility was
associated with a greater capacity to produce
oligodendrocytes, we genetically engineered
a mouse model to express OLIG2 in adult epen-
dymalcells. WefoundthatOLIG2 expressionwas
compatible with ependymal identity during
homeostasis. However, after injury, OLIG2 ex-
pression led to the increased accessibility of
the latent program and subsequent expression
of genes specifying oligodendrocyte identity.
Unfolding of the latent program was followed
by efficient oligodendrocyte production from
ependymal cells, but not from astrocytes, after
injury. Using scRNA-seq of ependymal-derived
cells, we found that new oligodendrocytes fol-
lowed the developmental program of oligoden-
drocyte maturation, including a self-amplifying
oligodendrocyte progenitorcell–like state. These
cells later matured to acquire the identity of
resident mature myelinating oligodendrocytes.
Further, ependymal oligodendrocyte genera-
tion occurred in parallel and not at the ex-
pense of astrocyte scarring. Newly recruited
ependymal-derived oligodendrocytes migrated
to sites of demyelination, where they remyeli-
nated axons over the long term. Finally, using
optogenetics, we found that ependymal-derived
oligodendrocytes contributed to normalizing
axon conduction after injury.
CONCLUSION: Adult neural stem cells have a
greater potential for regeneration than is nor-
mally manifested. Targeted activation of such
potential leads to the recruitment of neural
stem cells for the generation of remyelinat-
ing oligodendrocytes in numbers comparable
to those obtained via cell transplantation.
Resident stem cells can thus serve as a re-
servoir for cellular replacement and may offer
an alternative to cell transplantation after
CNS injury.▪
RESEARCH
Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Science 370, 73 (2020)
2 October 2020
1 of 1
The list of author affiliations is available in the full article online.
*Corresponding author. Email: jonas.frisen@ki.se
Cite this article as E. Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Science 370,
eabb8795 (2020). DOI: 10.1126/science.abb8795
READ THE FULL ARTICLE AT
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb8795
Myelinated
axon
Demyelinated
axon
Ependymal-derived
oligodendrocyte
Oligodendrocyte
Latent accessibility of 
oligodendrocyte genes in ependymal cells
Injured
Ependymal
cell
Enhanced 
injury repair
+ Olig2
Ependymal-derived
scar astrocyte
Integration of single-cell RNA-seq and
ATAC-seq from the mouse spinal cord
Latent potential in neural stem cells. Through the integration of different layers of genomic information in
single cells, we found that the genetic program for oligodendrocyte generation is latently accessible in
ependymal neural stem cells of the adult spinal cord. After injury, activating the latent potential by forced
OLIG2 expression unfolds efficient oligodendrocyte generation, leading to enhanced repair.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on September 12, 2021

RESEARCH ARTICLE
◥
NEURODEVELOPMENT
A latent lineage potential in resident neural stem
cells enables spinal cord repair
Enric Llorens-Bobadilla1, James M. Chell1*, Pierre Le Merre2, Yicheng Wu1, Margherita Zamboni1,
Joseph Bergenstråhle3, Moa Stenudd1, Elena Sopova2, Joakim Lundeberg3, Oleg Shupliakov2,4,
Marie Carlén2,5, Jonas Frisén1†
Injuries to the central nervous system (CNS) are inefficiently repaired. Resident neural stem cells manifest
a limited contribution to cell replacement. We have uncovered a latent potential in neural stem cells to
replace large numbers of lost oligodendrocytes in the injured mouse spinal cord. Integrating multimodal
single-cell analysis, we found that neural stem cells are in a permissive chromatin state that enables
the unfolding of a normally latent gene expression program for oligodendrogenesis after injury. Ectopic
expression of the transcription factor OLIG2 unveiled abundant stem cell–derived oligodendrogenesis,
which followed the natural progression of oligodendrocyte differentiation, contributed to axon remyelination,
and stimulated functional recovery of axon conduction. Recruitment of resident stem cells may thus
serve as an alternative to cell transplantation after CNS injury.
T
he adult mammalian central nervous
system (CNS) has a limited capacity for
regeneration after injury, and functional
impairments typically persist permanent-
ly (1). Resident neural stem cells exist in
the brain and spinal cord, but they show a pro-
pensity to generate an astrocyte scar at the
expense of multilineage cell replacement after
injury, leading to regeneration failure (2–5).
Recruiting endogenous stem cells for cell re-
placement has become one of the main goals
of regenerative medicine in the CNS (6), but
whether greater regenerative potential exists
remains unknown.
Latent accessibility of the regulatory program
for oligodendrogenesis in spinal cord
ependymal cells
The stem cell potential of the spinal cord re-
sides in the small population of ependymal cells
(7–9). To explore the lineage potential of epen-
dymal cells, we performed single-cell assay for
transposase-accessible chromatin using se-
quencing (scATAC-seq) (10) of resident non-
neuronal cell populations in the mouse spinal
cord, enriching for ependymal cells during
sorting (Fig. 1A and supplementary materials).
We directly compared our scATAC-seq profiles
of 1100 cells with single-cell RNA sequencing
(scRNA-seq) of the same tissue (fig. S1) (11).
Integration of the promoter and gene body
accessibility in scATAC-seq together with mark-
er gene expression in scRNA-seq led to the
identification of clusters of ependymal cells,
astrocytes, oligodendrocyte progenitor cells,
vascular endothelial cells, and pericytes in our
scATAC-seq dataset (Fig. 1, B and C, and fig.
S2, A to F), thus capturing the major scar-
forming cell populations in the spinal cord (2).
Besides the concordance that promoter and
gene body accessibility showed with RNA
expression, differential accessibility analyses
identified 17,000 regulatory regions with cluster-
specific accessibility patterns (fig. S2, G and H).
Motif enrichment analyses on cluster-specific
regulatory regions revealed high enrichment
of predicted transcription factors, such as reg-
ulatory factor X (RFX) factors for ependymal
cells (12) (Fig. 1D). We observed that the motifs
for the canonical oligodendrocyte lineage tran-
scription factors OLIG2 and SOX10 were highly
accessible not only in oligodendrocyte progen-
itor cells (OPCs) but also in ependymal cell
clusters (Fig. 1D). This was unexpected, as
OLIG2 and SOX10 are expressed in oligodendro-
cyte lineage cells but not in adult ependymal
cells (Fig. 1E and fig. S3) (8). To further explore
this observation, we examined the accessibility
of oligodendrocyte-lineage transcription fac-
tor loci, including SOX10, a factor essential
for oligodendrogenesis with some previously
characterized regulatory regions (13, 14). We
noted that a conserved SOX10 enhancer (28 kb
upstream) accessible in OPCs also showed
accessibility in ependymal cells, but less in
other clusters (Fig. 1E). A similar pattern was
observed in multiple other oligodendrocyte
lineage genes (fig. S4, A to D). The SOX10
enhancer contained an OLIG2 binding site
(Fig. 1F), which led us to explore whether
accessibility at OLIG2 binding sites was a
more general phenomenon. Indeed, OLIG2
binding sites accessible in oligodendrocyte
progenitors were also highly enriched in the
accessible landscape of ependymal cell clus-
ters, despite OLIG2 not being expressed (Fig.
1G). The genetic program for oligodendro-
genesis is thus permissive in ependymal cells
despite the lack of expression of its critical
regulators.
Expression of OLIG2 in ependymal cells leads
to activation of the latent oligodendrocyte
lineage program after injury
OLIG2 initiates developmental oligodendro-
genesis upstream of SOX10, with the expression
of SOX10 marking the irreversible commitment
to the oligodendrocyte lineage (15, 16). To study
whether introducing the expression of OLIG2
in adult ependymal cells would lead to the de-
ployment of the permissive oligodendrocyte
program, we generated Rosa-CAG-LSL-Olig2-
IRES-tdTomato (Olig2-tdT) mice for condi-
tional and simultaneous expression of OLIG2
and tdTomato upon cre-mediated recombina-
tion (fig. S5A). To express OLIG2 specifically in
ependymal cells and their progeny, we crossed
Olig2-tdT mice to Foxj1-creER mice, generating
Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice, with Foxj1-tdT serving as
control mice (Fig. 2A). Tamoxifen induction led
to OLIG2 expression in all recombined cells at
levels ~5 times those in nonrecombined OLIG2-
expressing parenchymal cells (Fig. 2B and fig.
S5B). We first performed ATAC-seq on isolated
ependymal cells from uninjured Foxj1-tdT and
Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice. In addition, to study the
ependymal response to injury at the chromatin
level, we also isolated cells 1 or 5 days after a
dorsal funiculus incision injury (Fig. 2C), when
the ependymal cell progeny begin to mobilize
toward the injury site but still express ependy-
mal markers (fig. S5, C to E). To define the
associated transcriptional programs, we per-
formed RNA-seq on matched samples collected
in parallel (fig. S6). Comparative analysis re-
vealed high concordance between the global
chromatin accessibility of ependymal cells
from uninjured Foxj1-tdT and Foxj1-Olig2-
tdT mice, with increasingly different profiles
after injury (Fig. 2D). To study changes in the
activity of the oligodendrocyte gene expres-
sion program, we measured the accessibility
of OPC-enriched regions that contained OLIG2
binding sites in ependymal cells (1560 regions;
Fig. 2E). Although the accessibility did not
increase in ependymal cells from uninjured
mice in the presence of OLIG2, these sites
rapidly gained accessibility after injury in
OLIG2-expressing ependymal cells [increases
by factors of 1.5 and 1.9 at 1 and 5 days post-
injury (dpi), respectively; Fig. 2F]. Increased
accessibility was also observed in the complete
set of OPC-enriched regions, and the OLIG2
motif was highly enriched in all the regions
RESEARCH
Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Science 370, eabb8795 (2020)
2 October 2020
1 of 8
1Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska
Institutet, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden. 2Department
of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77 Stockholm,
Sweden. 3Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet
Science Park, SE-171 21 Solna, Sweden. 4Institute of
Translational Biomedicine, St. Petersburg State University,
199034 St. Petersburg, Russia. 5Department of Biosciences
and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, SE-141 83 Huddinge,
Sweden.
*Present address: 10X Genomics, Södra Fiskartorpsvägen 15C,
SE-114 33 Stockholm, Sweden.
†Corresponding author. Email: jonas.frisen@ki.se
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on September 12, 2021

that gained accessibility after injury (fig. S5,
F to I), which suggests that accessibility gains
in the oligodendrocyte program were a direct
consequence of OLIG2 binding. Accessibility
gains were greater in oligodendrocyte lineage
regions than in regions defining astrocyte or
vascular cell clusters, suggesting specificity
(fig. S5H), and led to nascent expression of the
nearest genes (fig. S5J). Further, regions that
gained accessibility included several upstream
enhancers of SOX10, and accessibility in those
regions was highly correlated with the onset of
SOX10 expression (Fig. 2, G and H) and the
subsequent accessibility of its target sites (fig.
S5K). Together, these findings show that the
program for oligodendrogenesis has a latent
accessibility in ependymal cells and that this
latent program can be rapidly unveiled in the
presence of OLIG2 in response to injury.
Activation of the latent oligodendrocyte
program leads to efficient oligodendrocyte
production after injury
Oligodendrocytes are vulnerable to CNS dam-
age, and oligodendrocyte loss leads to the dys-
myelination of spared and regenerated axons
after spinal cord injury (17, 18). We next asked
whether the increased accessibility of the oligo-
dendrocyte lineage program in ependymal cells
would lead to the generation of oligodendro-
cytes during injury repair (Fig. 3A). As pre-
viously described, injury induced a vigorous
ependymal cell response characterized by pro-
liferation and migration of the ependymal cell
progeny to the lesion site in Foxj1-tdT mice
(Fig. 3, B and C). The tdTomato-labeled progeny
in Foxj1-tdT mice consisted almost exclusively
of cells expressing the astrocyte marker SOX9,
which contributed to the formation of the glial
Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Science 370, eabb8795 (2020)
2 October 2020
2 of 8
Acot5
Cd24a
Capsl
Gfap
Slc7a10
Gpr17
Egfl7
Foxd1
EP
ACNT1
ACNT2
OPC
COP/NFOL
NFOL/MFOL
MOL
VEC
PER
scRNA-seq (n=9932)
B
Acot5
Cd24a
Capsl
Gfap
Slc7a10
Gpr17
Egfl7
Foxd1
scATAC-seq (n=1085)
OPC
EP1
ACNT1
ACNT2
VEC
PER
EP2
EP3
C
Accessibility
RFX
KLF4
ESR1
ROR
NOTO
ASCL1
E2F
FLI1
ETS1
SOX10
OLIG2
−2
0
2
Motif
z-score
Motif enrichment scATAC-seq
EP1
ACNT1
ACNT2
OPC
VEC
PER
EP2
EP3
Cluster
Expression
D
E
G
A
Single-cell ATAC-seq
(~1100 cells)
NSC enrichment
FACS 
Cluster identification
via reference scRNA-seq
Promoter and gene 
body accessibility
Multilineage 
accessibility?
Expression
Accessibility
Sox10
(mRNA)
Sox10 enhancer
chr15:79192518-79194107 
Ependymal
Ependymal
OPC
OPC
Conservation
OLIG2 ChIPseq
Refseq (mm10)
10kb
Sox10
z-enrichment
0
200
PER
VEC
OPC
ACNT2
ACNT1
EP3
EP2
EP1
Accessible OLIG2 binding
site enrichment vs expression
Expression
(boxplot)
0
4
F
Fig. 1. Integration of scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq uncovers latent accessibility
of the oligodendrocyte lineage program in ependymal cells. (A) scATAC-seq
was performed on non-neuronal cells from the mouse spinal cord. Ependymal
neural stem cells (NSCs) were enriched during fluorescence-activated cell
sorting (FACS; see supplementary materials). Genes with variable promoter and
gene body accessibility were identified and used as anchors to reference cell
types identified in scRNA-seq. (B) UMAP projection of non-neuronal spinal cord
single-cell transcriptomes from (11). Clusters were annotated according
to the reference atlas (11). EP, ependymal; ACNT, non-telencephalon astrocyte;
OPC, oligodendrocyte progenitor cell; COP, committed oligodendrocyte progenitor;
NFOL, newly formed oligodendrocyte; MFOL, myelin-forming oligodendrocyte; MOL,
mature oligodendrocyte; VEC, vascular endothelial cell; PER, pericyte. The
expression of cluster-specific markers is projected on UMAP on the right.
(C) UMAP projection of non-neuronal spinal cord cell transcriptomes assayed
by scATAC-seq. Clusters were annotated according to the correspondence
between gene accessibility and scRNA-seq expression (fig. S1). The accessibility
of representative cluster-specific markers is projected on UMAP on the right.
(D) Heat map showing motif enrichment in genomic regions with cluster-specific
accessibility. Scaled enrichment scores for the top 100 motifs per cluster are
shown. OLIG2 and SOX10 motifs show enrichment in OPCs and ependymal
clusters (arrowheads at left). (E) Expression of SOX10 is restricted to cells from
the oligodendrocyte lineage, whereas a 28-kb upstream enhancer of SOX10 is
accessible in OPCs and in ependymal cells. (F) The enhancer, highlighted in
magenta, is highly conserved (shown in the placental mammal phastCons track)
and contains an OLIG2 binding site. ChIP, chromatin immunoprecipitation.
(G) Enrichment for OLIG2 binding sites in the accessible-chromatin landscape of
ependymal cells. Gray bars show Z enrichments; box plots show OLIG2 expression
in the respective clusters.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on September 12, 2021

scar (Fig. 3C and fig. S7A). Consistent with
previous observations (8), we also detected a
low number of cells expressing the oligoden-
drocyte lineage (OL) marker SOX10 (<1% of the
ependymal cell progeny) 4 weeks after injury
(fig. S7C).
In line with the lack of chromatin accessi-
bility changes prior to injury, recombined epen-
dymal cells in Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice remained
by the central canal and retained their nor-
mal morphology in the absence of injury (Fig.
3D). However, after injury, OLIG2-expressing
ependymal cells generated a large number of
SOX10-positive cells, in addition to generating
astrocytes in the scar (Fig. 1E). Four weeks
after injury, these SOX10-positive oligodendro-
glial cells were abundant, constituting ~30%
of the ependymal cell progeny (fig. S7, B and C).
We refer to these cells as ependymal-derived
oligodendrocyte lineage cells (epOLs) to dis-
tinguish them from other parenchymal oli-
godendrocyte lineage cells. We followed the
process of epOL generation over time; this re-
vealed a progressive generation of SOX10+ tdT+
cells (11,000 ± 3000 cells 12 weeks after injury)
(Fig. 3F and fig. S7, D and E), which corre-
sponds to an increase in oligodendroglial cell
production from ependymal cells by a factor
of >40. In parallel, relative to Foxj1-tdT mice at
2, 4, and 12 weeks after injury, the total num-
bers of ependymal cell progeny in Foxj1-Olig2-
tdT mice increased by factors of 1.3, 2.2, and
2.7, respectively (Fig. 3G); this finding suggests
that epOL generation did not occur at the ex-
pense of astrocyte generation and did not lead
to ependymal cell depletion (fig. S7, F to H).
Interestingly, forced OLIG2 expression in pa-
renchymal astrocytes failed to elicit efficient
oligodendrogenesis after injury (fig. S8), sup-
porting the view that ependymal cells are spe-
cifically permissive to oligodendrogenesis.
Ependymal-derived oligodendrogenesis
molecularly recapitulates developmental
oligodendrogenesis and is compatible
with astrocyte generation
We next sought to molecularly reconstruct
ependymal oligodendrogenesis at single-cell
resolution. For this, we isolated tdTomato+
cells from three cohorts of Foxj1-tdT and Foxj1-
Olig2-tdT mice: uninjured, 2 weeks after injury,
and 4 weeks after injury (Fig. 3A). Cells were
then profiled using droplet-based 3′ single-cell
RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). After sequenc-
ing and filtering (fig. S9, A to D), we recovered
a total of ~3000 single-cell transcriptomes.
Computational analyses revealed the presence
of six clusters organized in two main groups,
one defined by Sox9 expression (four clusters)
and the other one by Sox10 expression (two
clusters; Fig. 3, H to J). The first cluster of Sox9-
expressing cells contained the vast majority of
cells from uninjured Foxj1-tdT and Foxj1-Olig2-
tdT mice and expressed the highest levels of
ependymal markers (e.g., Rarres2, Cd27, Nnat).
We denote this cluster as ependymal (EP).
Ependymal cells from uninjured Foxj1-tdT
and Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice clustered tightly
together, which suggests that OLIG2 had only
a mild influence on the ependymal cell tran-
scriptome in the absence of injury (Fig. 3K).
The other three clusters of Sox9-expressing
cells were enriched in the ependymal cell prog-
eny from both Foxj1-tdT and Foxj1-Olig2-tdT
mice 2 and 4 weeks after injury, which progres-
sively shifted in the t-distributed stochastic neigh-
bor embedding (tSNE) space (Fig. 3, H and K,
and fig. S9F). Cells in these clusters were char-
acterized by up-regulation of astrocyte mark-
ers (e.g., Vim, Gfap, Cryab) and concomitant
down-regulation of ependymal markers (Fig. 3,
Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Science 370, eabb8795 (2020)
2 October 2020
3 of 8
Foxj1-tdT
Foxj1-Olig2-tdT
CAG
LSL tdTomato
CAG
LSL
tdTomato
Olig2 IRES
Foxj1-tdT
Foxj1-Olig2-tdT
Foxj1
CreER
Ependymal cells:
X
A
X
Uninj
1dpi
5dpi
ATAC-seq
(1000 cells)
tdT+ 
FACS
Foxj1-tdT vs Foxj1-Olig2-tdT
E
F
B
D
-20
0
20
-10
0
10
PC1 (76%)
PC2 (9%)
Global chromatin accessibility
0
0.6
1.2
Uninj
1dpi
5dpi
n=1560
Foxj1-tdT
Foxj1-Olig2-tdT
p<2.2e-16
p<2.2e-16
p=0.18
0.9X
1.5X
1.9X
1
0
Normalized 
accessibility
Sample
OPC OLIG2 binding sites (n=1560) 
0.5kb
Uninj
1dpi
5dpi
Foxj1-
tdT
Foxj1-
Olig2-tdT
Normalized accessibility
Uninj
1dpi
5dpi
Foxj1-tdT
DAPIOLIG2tdT
C
Foxj1-tdT
Foxj1-Olig2-tdT
0
250
500
2500
5000
Olig2
0
500
1000
Sox10
1dpi
5dpi
Uninj
Normalized expression
G
10kb
Sox10
Uninj
1dpi
5dpi
OLIG2
 ChIP
Ependymal cell ATAC-seq
Gm10863
H
RNA-seq
Foxj1-tdT
Foxj1-Olig2-tdT
Fig. 2. The latent oligodendrogenic program in ependymal cells unfolds
after injury in the presence of OLIG2. (A) Schematic representation of
the experimental design for fate mapping of ependymal cells and induction of
OLIG2 expression in recombined cells. (B) OLIG2 immunostaining shows
the absence of expression in Foxj1-tdT ependymal cells and uniform nuclear
expression in Foxj1-Olig2-tdT cells. Insets show magnification of ependymal
cells. Scale bar, 50 mm. (C) We isolated tdTomato+ (tdT) cells from tamoxifen-
injected Foxj1-tdT and Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice at different time points after a
dorsal funiculus incision injury (uninjured, 1 dpi, and 5 dpi) and performed
ATAC-seq. (D) Principal components analysis of the global chromatin accessibility
profiles of cells from Foxj1-tdT and Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice. (E) Normalized
genomic accessibility (ATAC-seq counts per million) heat map for OPC-enriched
genomic regions containing OLIG2 binding sites. Regions were scaled to
0.5 kb; each lane represents the average of two replicates. (F) Tukey box
plots showing the accessibility of regions in (E) reveal a rapid increase
in accessibility in OLIG2-expressing ependymal cells after injury. P values are
from Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s post hoc test. (G) Genomic
tracks showing normalized accessibility (scale 0 to 1.5) upstream of SOX10.
Sample colors as in (F). (H) Expression of OLIG2 and SOX10 by RNA-seq
(n = 2; lines and shaded regions denote means ± SD).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on September 12, 2021

I and J). Gene Ontology analysis indicated that
cells in these clusters up-regulated programs
for cell division, migration, gliogenesis, and
response to wounding, in line with being scar-
forming cells (fig. S10, A and B). We named
these clusters astroependymal 1 to 3 (AE1, AE2,
and AE3) to reflect the ependymal origin and
acquisition of astroglial identity.
Expression of Sox10 defined the other two
clusters (Fig. 3I), which corresponded to the
epOLs identified above. These cells did not
express the ependymal or astroependymal
programs, and the acquisition of oligoden-
droglial identity was fully supported by Gene
Ontology analyses (fig. S10, C and D). The
epOL cells were absent in uninjured mice
and emerged after injury almost exclusively
in Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice (38% of Foxj1-Olig2-
tdT and 0.4% of Foxj1-tdT cells 4 weeks after
injury) (Fig. 3K and fig. S9E).
When visualized using diffusion maps, cells
from Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice (uninjured, 2 weeks
after injury, and 4 weeks after injury, re-
spectively) were organized along two diver-
gent paths, with cells from the ependymal
cluster enriched at the vertex, and AE3 and
epOL2 cells enriched at the respective branch
ends (Fig. 4, A and B). Pseudotime score de-
termined with the diffusion map closely re-
flected time after injury (Fig. 4, C and D) and
further supported AE3 and epOL2 as the ter-
minal differentiation states of the divergent
branches of ependymal cell differentiation.
Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Science 370, eabb8795 (2020)
2 October 2020
4 of 8
Foxj1-tdT Uninj
Foxj1-tdT SCI
Foxj1-Olig2-tdT Uninj
Foxj1-Olig2-tdT SCI
DAPI SOX10 tdT
B
C
DAPI SOX10 tdT
D
E
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
Total tdT+ cells
Uninj
2wpi
4wpi
12wpi
*
Uninj
2wpi
4wpi
12wpi
0
5000
10000
15000
Total SOX10+ tdT+ cells
F
**
**
**
G
A
Single-cell 
RNAseq
(~3000 cells)
Generation of oligodendrocytes?
Molecular identity?
Uninjured, 2, 4 and 
12 weeks post SCI
Panel B-G
Uninjured, 2 and 
4 weeks post SCI
Panel H-K
Foxj1-tdT vs Foxj1-Olig2-tdT
Uninj
2wpi
0
3
Sox9
4
Stmn2
5
Cd27
0
4
Vim
Id4
2
Sox10
4
Pdgfra
4
Mog
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
Myrf
H
I
Astro-ependymal
Oligodendroglial
Ptgds
Mobp
Plp1
Ptprz1
Cspg5
Gfap
Lgals3
Cryab
Stmn2
Cd27
Rarres2
Vim
Mag
Fyn
Nnat
Cluster
Cluster
Expression
J
4wpi
EP
AE1
AE2
AE3
epOL1
epOL2
3
0
tSNE 1
tSNE 2
scRNAseq of fate-mapped ependymal progeny 
(Foxj1-tdT + Foxj1-Olig2-tdT; Uninj, 2wpi and 4wpi)
2 0 -2
epOL
AE
EP
K
Foxj1-tdT
Foxj1-Olig2
-tdT
Foxj1-tdT
Foxj1-Olig2
-tdT
Cluster
Fig. 3. Ependymal cells can generate abundant oligodendrocytes after
injury. (A) Schematic representation of the experimental design to assess
ependymal oligodendrogenesis. SCI, spinal cord injury. (B to G) The spinal cord
was analyzed 2, 4, and 12 weeks after injury. (B) Coronal view of an uninjured
spinal cord at the thoracic level in a Foxj1-tdT mouse, showing specific
recombination in ependymal cells. (C) Coronal view of the Foxj1-tdT spinal cord
4 weeks after injury, showing scar formation from ependymal cell progeny. At
right, magnification of the box in (C). (D) Coronal view of an uninjured spinal cord
at the thoracic level in a Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mouse, showing specific recombination
in the ependymal layer and absence of migration. (E) Coronal view of the
Foxj1-Olig2-tdT spinal cord 4 weeks after injury, showing abundant SOX10+ tdT+
cells. At right, magnification of the box in (E). (F) Quantification of ependymal-
derived oligodendrocytes in Foxj1-tdT and Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice uninjured
and 2, 4, and 12 weeks post-injury (wpi) (n = 3 or 4). Total numbers of cells in
the injured segment are shown (see supplementary materials). (G) Quantification
of the total numbers of ependymal-derived cells in Foxj1-tdT and Foxj1-Olig2-tdT
mice uninjured and 2, 4, and 12 wpi in the injured segment (n = 3 or 4).
Horizontal bar in (F) and (G) denotes the mean. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 [one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey post hoc test]. (H to K) The
identity of the ependymal progeny was assessed by scRNA-seq 2 and 4 weeks
after spinal cord injury. (H) tSNE visualization of the single-cell transcriptomes
of all tdT+ cells (Foxj1-tdT and Foxj1-Olig2-tdT; uninjured, 2 and 4 wpi) color-
coded by cluster: EP, ependymal; AE, astroependymal; epOL, ependymal-derived
oligodendrocyte lineage. (I) Violin plots showing the expression of representative
cluster-specific genes. Sox9 and Sox10 demarcate the two main cell groups
(EP-AE and epOL). OL clusters are defined by the expression of immature
(Pdgfra) and mature (Myrf, Mog) oligodendrocyte lineage markers. (J) Heat map
of the average scaled expression of the top cluster-specific genes. For the full
list of top marker genes, see data S1. (K) tSNE visualization of the identity of fate-
mapped ependymal cells split by sampling time and colored by genotype.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on September 12, 2021

This indicates that OLIG2 biases ependymal
fate decisions early and that once commit-
ment to an astroependymal or an oligoden-
drocyte fate takes place, cells progress further
in the respective branch.
During developmental oligodendrogenesis,
oligodendrocyte progenitors undergo a step-
wise differentiation process that was recently
characterized at the single-cell level (19). We
calculated the scores for the top 50 gene ex-
pression signatures of the respective oligoden-
drocyte lineage maturation stage for every
single cell from Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice and pro-
jected it onto the principal curve trajectory
(Fig. 4E) as well as whole-transcriptome cor-
relation with each developmental maturation
stage (fig. S11). This analysis revealed that as
epOL cells progress in pseudotime along the
oligodendrocyte lineage branch, they sequen-
tially turn on and off the respective gene ex-
pression program in an orderly manner. This
finding agrees with the observed progressive
decrease of PDGFRA+ and progressive increase
in CC1+ epOLs (Fig. 4, F to I). Lineage progres-
sion included, among other states, the transi-
tion through a proliferative OPC-like state that
could be observed even 12 weeks after injury
(Fig. 4E and fig. S10E); this suggests that the
epOL population amplifies itself and could
sustain itself without continuous ependymal
cell input.
We observed that mature epOLs almost ex-
clusively expressed the marker of mature
oligodendrocyte subtype 5/6 (MOL5/6) Ptgds
and not the mature oligodendrocyte subtype 2
(MOL2) marker Klk6 (20), even in the vicinity
of nonrecombined oligodendrocytes express-
ing Klk6 (Fig. 4J); this finding implies that
ependymal-derived oligodendrocytes acquired
specific mature identities. We did not observe
epOLs expressing the Schwann cell marker
myelin protein zero (figs. S10F and S11). Thus,
ependymal-derived oligodendrogenesis results
in the production of transcriptionally mature
oligodendrocytes.
Ependymal-derived oligodendrocytes
remyelinate axons
To address whether mature epOLs were capa-
ble of remyelination, we studied their interac-
tion with spared axons in spinal cord cross
sections 3 months after a dorsal funiculus
incision spinal cord injury (Fig. 5A). High-
power confocal micrographs revealed that
tdTomato membrane extensions colocalized
with myelin basic protein (MBP) in axon wrap-
pings, indicative of myelination (Fig. 5B).
In sagittal sections, tdTomato sheaths from
epOLs colocalized with the paranodal marker
contactin-associated protein (CASPR), indica-
tive of myelin formation (Fig. 5C). We next used
expansion microscopy (21) to obtain further
information regarding epOL axon ensheath-
ment. To this end, we crossed Foxj1-Olig2-tdT
mice with Thy1-GFP mice. Expansion of the
tissue allowed reconstruction of epOL-axon
contacts and revealed epOL ensheathment
of axons (Fig. 5D and movie S1). Further, elec-
tron microscopy of the regions containing
epOL-axon contacts revealed compact myelin
formation from tdTomato-immunoreactive
ependymal-derived oligodendrocytes (Fig. 5,
E to G, and fig. S12). EpOLs thus participate
in axon remyelination after injury.
Ependymal-derived oligodendrocytes support
the recovery of axon conduction after injury
We thereafter turned to a clinically relevant
moderate thoracic contusion model to further
study the function of epOLs during injury re-
pair. The response to the moderate contusion
differed strikingly between Foxj1-Olig2-tdT and
Foxj1-tdT mice (Fig. 6A), whereas the scarring
and general locomotion remained similar (fig.
S13, C to I). As a result of the larger affected
area after contusion injury, the number of
epOLs in Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice increased by a
factor of 3 in comparison to the dorsal funic-
ulus incision model and exceeded by more than
two orders of magnitude the number produced
in Foxj1-tdT mice (32,000 ± 4900 SOX10+ tdT+
cells 12 weeks after injury; Fig. 6, B and C,
and fig. S13, A and B). Relevant for potential
Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Science 370, eabb8795 (2020)
2 October 2020
5 of 8
J
Klk6
(MOL2)
MOL WM
SOX10 tdT Klk6
DAPI SOX10 Klk6
Astroglial
Oligo.
Ependymal
A
E
I
Ptgds
(MOL5/6)
early
late
Pseudotime
D
NFOL
MFOL
MOL
OPC
COP
EP
0
max
Uninj
2wpi
4wpi
Vim
Id4
Myrf
Pdgfra
0
max
Sox9
Sox10
Expression
B
C
EP
AE1
AE2
AE3
epOL1
epOL2
*
*
*
*
Clusters
Astro.
Oligo.
DAPI PDGFRA tdT
OPC
F
G
H
DC1
DC2
Uninj
2wpi
4wpi
12wpi
0
20
40
60
PDGFRA+SOX10+tdT+/
SOX10+tdT+ (%)
nd
Uninj
2wpi
4wpi
12wpi
0
50
100
CC1+SOX10+tdT+/
SOX10+ tdT+ (%)
***
**
nd
*
***
DAPI CC1 tdT
NFOL-MOL
Fig. 4. Ependymal oligodendrogenesis recapitulates developmental
oligodendrogenesis. (A) Diffusion map analysis of the injury response of fate-
mapped ependymal cells from Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice (uninjured, 2 wpi, and 4 wpi)
captures the progression along two divergent branches. Cells are color-coded
according to cluster identity (see Fig. 3H). (B) Expression of astrocyte and
oligodendrocyte lineage genes defining each branch. (C) Diffusion map pseudotime
projected onto the principal curve. (D) Sampling time matches pseudotime
progression along both branches. (E) Signature scores for oligodendrocyte lineage
stages projected onto the diffusion map principal curve show stepwise ependymal
oligodendrogenesis. EP, ependymal; OPC, oligodendrocyte progenitor cell; COP,
committed oligodendrocyte progenitor; NFOL, newly formed oligodendrocyte;
MFOL, myelin-forming oligodendrocyte; MOL, mature oligodendrocyte. (F and
G) Percentage of epOLs expressing the OPC marker PDGFRA over time (n = 3 or
4). (H and I) Percentage of epOLs expressing the mature OL marker CC1 over time
(n = 3 or 4). (J) Mature epOLs express Ptgds and not Klk6, as shown in the
projected expression in the diffusion map and RNAscope 12 weeks after injury.
Asterisks show tdT-negative OLs expressing Klk6 in the vicinity of tdT-positive epOLs.
Arrowheads highlight some epOLs. WM, white matter. Scale bars, 50 mm (insets,
10 mm). Horizontal bar in (G) and (I) denotes the mean. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01,
***P < 0.001 (one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey post hoc test).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on September 12, 2021

therapeutic strategies, tamoxifen adminis-
tration starting 1 day after contusion led to
oligodendrogenesis in a manner similar to
pre-injury tamoxifen administration (fig. S14).
Axons that remain after a spinal cord injury
can undergo substantial remyelination in ro-
dents (22–24), but this process is protracted
and incomplete; these axons often exhibit
pathological myelin and aberrant conduction,
and they can persist as electrically silent fibers
chronically (22, 25). Given that epOL genera-
tion had an additive effect over oligodendro-
cyte generation from OPCs (fig. S13, J to L),
we studied whether epOLs could improve the
recovery of axon conduction. Corticospinal
neurons located in layer V of the motor cortex
send descending fibers directly to the spinal
cord. The descending fibers are part of the
corticospinal tract (CST), synapse directly on
motor neurons in the spinal cord, and are di-
rectly involved in motor control. To inves-
tigate whether epOL-derived remyelination
could improve axon conduction in the CST
after spinal cord injury, we performed electro-
physiology in combination with optogenetics
in vivo in anesthetized mice. To label and en-
able optogenetic activation of the CST, we
injected an AAV expressing ChR2-EGFP (AAV9-
CAG-ChR2-EGFP) or EGFP (AAV9-CAG-EGFP)
as control into layer V of the motor cortex
(26, 27) (fig. S15, A to D).
Light-evoked compound action potential
(optoCAP) volleys were detectable in the tho-
racic spinal cord at distances within at least
3 mm from the site of light delivery in mice
expressing ChR2-EGFP in the CST (fig. S16,
A and B) but were completely absent in mice
expressing only EGFP (fig. S16C). In vivo mea-
surement of the latency of the optoCAPs re-
vealed a CST conduction velocity broadly
concordant to the described slow conduction
of the pyramidal tract in mice (4.57 ± 1.96 m/s;
fig. S16, D to G) (28).
We next investigated optoCAPs and conduc-
tion velocities 12 to 14 weeks after contusion
injury in Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice and their Olig2-
tdT littermates (controls not expressing Foxj1-
creER), all expressing ChR2-EGFP in the CST.
We applied optogenetic stimulation to the
dorsal surface of the spinal cord two seg-
ments rostral to the lesion and recorded the
induction of optoCAP immediately rostral or
caudal to the epicenter of the lesion injury
(Fig. 6D). We did not detect optoCAP induc-
tion in recordings caudal to the lesion in either
group, owing to the sparsity of spared or
regenerated CST axons (fig. S15B). Recordings
immediately rostral to the lesion’s epicenter
revealed optoCAPs in most but not all mice
(8/11 Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice and 4/6 control
mice; Fig. 6E). The same investigation was
conducted in uninjured mice and revealed
that optoCAPs could invariably be recorded
at the same location in all animals (9/9 mice,
tamoxifen-injected Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice, and
Olig2-tdT control mice; fig. S16G). The results
indicate a partial CST conduction block in in-
jured mice. Injured Olig2-tdT (control) mice
displayed a severely reduced conduction veloc-
ity relative to uninjured counterparts (mean
CST conduction velocity for injured controls
was 19.0 ± 2.83% of the CST conduction velocity
of uninjured mice; Fig. 6F). This reduction was
partially rescued in injured Foxj1-Olig2-tdT
mice (mean CST conduction velocity for injured
Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice was 27.9 ± 6.53% of the
CST conduction velocity for uninjured mice;
Fig. 6F). Last, we investigated the relation-
ship between the conduction velocity and the
level of CST remyelination in all injured mice.
Conduction velocity was correlated to the per-
centage of myelin sheaths in the CST (Fig. 6, G
and H). Together, our results support the idea
that remyelination by newly recruited epen-
dymal cell progeny can improve axon conduc-
tion after injury.
Discussion
Spontaneous cell replacement after injury is
very limited. In both the brain and the spinal
cord, the neural stem cells at large contribute
only to astrogliogenesis after acute injuries
(2). The apparent lineage restriction in stem
cells has promoted the search for alternative
sources for neuronal and oligodendroglial cell
replacement, such as exogenous cell trans-
plantation and direct reprogramming of local
cell types (3). Here, in contrast, we show that
there is a latent potential for cell replacement
that enables their efficient recruitment for
endogenous regeneration.
Injury was a requirement for the unfold-
ing of the oligodendrocyte gene expression
program, as we did not detect oligodendro-
genesis from uninjured OLIG2-expressing epen-
dymal cells. Injury-induced inflammatory
mediators have been shown to facilitate line-
age plasticity (29, 30). Such signals might act
by providing a required cofactor to facilitate
OLIG2 access to chromatin, as reported for Brg1
(31), whose expression was injury-dependent
in ependymal cells (fig. S6D). OLIG2 was pre-
dicted to have a DNA binding domain with
possible pioneer activity based on its structure
(32).WeobservedthatOLIG2,whenexpressedin
ependymal cells, may instead direct stimulus-
dependent transcription factors to latent
oligodendrocyte lineage enhancers, in a manner
Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Science 370, eabb8795 (2020)
2 October 2020
6 of 8
epOL Remyelination?
Foxj1-Olig2-tdT Thy1-GFP
12 weeks after SCI
A
tdT
CASPR
tdT
MBP
NF
B
C
Thy1-GFPtdT
Thy1-GFPtdT
tdT
Thy1-GFP
ExM
D
50µm
E
F
G
Fig. 5. Ependymal-derived oligodendrocytes contribute to remyelination. (A) Myelination analyses
were performed in Foxj1-Olig2-tdT Thy1-GFP mice 12 weeks after dorsal funiculus incision injury.
(B) Colocalization of tdTomato (tdT) and MBP wrapping axons stained against neurofilament (NF)
(arrowheads). (C) epOL-derived myelin sheaths colocalize with the paranodal marker CASPR (arrowheads).
(D) Expansion microscopy (ExM) shows axon wrapping by epOLs. Left: Example of a white matter area
analyzed by ExM; epOLs in red, Thy1-GFP axons in cyan. Right: 3D reconstruction of a segmented
inset showing wrapping of a Thy1-GFP neuronal process by a tdT-expressing epOL. (E) Electron micrograph
of a tdT-immunoreactive cell and its process (red pseudocolor) initiating axon wrapping and myelination.
Note the labeled cytoplasmic inner tongue of the epOL under the myelin sheath. (F and G) Compact
myelin sheaths produced by the epOL at higher magnification from boxed areas in (E). Scale bars, 5 mm
[(B) and (C)], 50 mm (D), 1 mm (E), 0.1 mm [(F) and (G)].
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on September 12, 2021

similar to that described for activity-induced
enhancer selection in neurons (33). These
latent enhancers might have been established
during development when the progenitors of
some ependymal cells express OLIG2 (34–36)
and might have been maintained without
sustained OLIG2 expression (37).
The need for enhanced remyelination ex-
tends to multiple neurological pathologies.
Forebrain neural stem cells generate substan-
tial numbers of oligodendrocytes after injury
(38), and potential for a greater contribution
exists (39). This greater potential suggests
that latent accessibility of the oligodendrocyte
program might be a feature of the adult stem
cell pool; we have observed concordant chro-
matin profiles with ependymal cells at key loci
(fig. S17). Parenchymal OPC–derived oligoden-
drogenesis and neural stem cell–derived oligo-
dendrogenesis obey different signals (39),
and neural stem cell–derived oligodendrocytes
produced thicker myelin than that derived
from parenchymal OPCs (38). We have fur-
ther observed that ependymal-derived oligo-
dendrogenesis can have an additive effect on
OPC-derived oligodendrogenesis. This raises
the possibility that neural stem cells and paren-
chymal progenitor oligodendrogenesis could
be simultaneously enhanced, with potentially
synergistic effects.
On average, 32,000 epOLs were generated
after contusion spinal cord injury, which is
comparable to the reported survival and inte-
gration of ~30,000 oligodendrocytes after
transplantation (40). Regenerated axons are
often unmyelinated (41), and promoting their
conduction can enhance functional recovery
(42). In addition, forced neuronal activity stim-
ulates the recruitment of new oligodendrocytes
for adaptive remyelination (43). The delivery
of viral cargo in preclinical settings is under-
going rapid progress (44). It may be possible to
deliver OLIG2 or manipulate its upstream reg-
ulators (45) to elicit ependymal oligodendro-
genesis in a therapeutic setting. Combinatorial
strategies aimed at promoting recovery of mul-
tiple cellular compartments simultaneously
thus emerge as an attractive possibility.
Our work shows that the endogenous stem
cell response can be engineered to generate
cells with appropriate identity without com-
promising normal tissue recovery. Redirecting
endogenous cell populations for cellular re-
placement to enhance the self-repair capacity
Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Science 370, eabb8795 (2020)
2 October 2020
7 of 8
A
F
H
CV?
T9 SCI
0
10
20
30
40
CV (% from uninjured)
*
G
30
40
50
60
70
MBP+GFP+/GFP+ (%) in CST
*
D
E
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Uninjured
Olig2-tdT (12wpi)
Foxj1-Olig2-tdT (12wpi)
0.2
Time (ms)
optoCAP
0
10
20
30
40
CV (% from uninjured)
Pearson’s r=0.506
p=0.030
Olig2-tdT
Foxj1-
Olig2-tdT
AAV ChR2-EGFP
B
C
-1.20
1000
250
2000
500
tdT+ cells per section 
Distance from epicenter (mm)
1.2
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
 Total SOX10+ tdT+ cells
**
0
Foxj1-tdT
Foxj1-Olig2-tdT
40
50
60
70
MBP+GFP+/GFP+ (%) in CST
SOX10+
SOX10-
Foxj1-tdT 12wpi (Contusion)
Foxj1-Olig2-tdT 12wpi (Contusion)
Fig. 6. Ependymal-derived oligodendrocytes support the recovery of axon
conduction after injury. (A) Sagittal view of the injured spinal cord. Ependymal
cells from Foxj1-tdT mice generate progeny that contribute to the astrocyte
scar. The ependymal response is increased and spreads rostrocaudally in spared
but reactive tissue in Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice because of the generation of epOLs
(inset). (B) Quantification of the total number of oligodendrocytes in the injured
segment generated by ependymal cells 12 weeks after contusion SCI (n = 2 to 4).
Horizontal bar denotes the mean. **P < 0.01 [Student’s t test, t(4) = 8.570].
(C) Linear regression analysis of the location of astroglial (SOX10–) and
oligodendroglial (SOX10+) ependymal-derived cells with respect to the lesion
epicenter in Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice 12 weeks after contusion. Data are means ± SD
(n = 4). (D) Schematic representation of the strategy to measure conduction
velocity in the CST. AAV-CAG-ChR2-EGFP was injected in the motor cortex to label
corticospinal neurons. Optical stimulation (473 nm) was applied two segments
rostral to the lesion epicenter, and electrophysiological recordings were made
above and below the lesion. (E) Average traces for the light-evoked compound
action potential (optoCAP) in the CST in uninjured mice (Foxj1-Olig2-tdT and
Olig2-tdT, blue, n = 9), injured controls (Olig2-tdT, gray, n = 4), and injured Foxj1-
Olig2-tdT mice (red, n = 8). The blue vertical bar indicates the 2-ms light pulse.
Shading indicates ±SEM. (F) Quantification of the conduction velocity (CV) in the
CST in injured controls and injured Foxj1-Olig2-tdT mice measured immediately
rostral to the lesion core. Horizontal bar denotes the mean. *P < 0.05 [Student’s
t test, t(10) = 2.551]. (G) Quantification of the percentage of myelinated CST axons
(MBP+ GFP+) from the total number of GFP+ axons that survived in the 1.2 mm
rostral to the epicenter in control (gray, n = 4) and Foxj1-Olig2-tdT (red, n = 6)
mice. Horizontal bar denotes the mean. *P < 0.05 [Student’s t test, t(7) = 2.984].
(H) Regression analysis shows the correlation between conduction velocity
and level of myelination in the CST. Scale bars, 1 mm (insets, 100 mm).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on September 12, 2021

of the nervous system may thus be explored as
a therapeutic alternative to cell transplantation.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1.
J. Silver, M. E. Schwab, P. G. Popovich, Central nervous system
regenerative failure: Role of oligodendrocytes, astrocytes,
and microglia. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 7, a020602
(2014). doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a020602; pmid: 25475091
2.
J. Frisén, Neurogenesis and Gliogenesis in Nervous System
Plasticity and Repair. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 32, 127–141
(2016). doi: 10.1146/annurev-cellbio-111315-124953;
pmid: 27298094
3.
R. A. Barker, M. Götz, M. Parmar, New approaches for brain
repair-from rescue to reprogramming. Nature 557, 329–334
(2018). doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0087-1; pmid: 29769670
4.
E. J. Benner et al., Protective astrogenesis from the SVZ niche
after injury is controlled by Notch modulator Thbs4. Nature
497, 369–373 (2013). doi: 10.1038/nature12069;
pmid: 23615612
5.
M. Faiz et al., Adult Neural Stem Cells from the Subventricular
Zone Give Rise to Reactive Astrocytes in the Cortex after
Stroke. Cell Stem Cell 17, 624–634 (2015). doi: 10.1016/
j.stem.2015.08.002; pmid: 26456685
6.
F. D. Miller, D. R. Kaplan, Mobilizing endogenous stem cells for
repair and regeneration: Are we there yet? Cell Stem Cell 10,
650–652 (2012). doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.05.004;
pmid: 22704501
7.
C. B. Johansson et al., Identification of a neural stem cell in the
adult mammalian central nervous system. Cell 96, 25–34
(1999). doi: 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80956-3; pmid: 9989494
8.
K. Meletis et al., Spinal cord injury reveals multilineage
differentiation of ependymal cells. PLOS Biol. 6, e182 (2008).
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182; pmid: 18651793
9.
F. Barnabé-Heider et al., Origin of new glial cells in intact and
injured adult spinal cord. Cell Stem Cell 7, 470–482 (2010).
doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2010.07.014; pmid: 20887953
10. A. T. Satpathy et al., Massively parallel single-cell chromatin
landscapes of human immune cell development and
intratumoral T cell exhaustion. Nat. Biotechnol. 37, 925–936
(2019). doi: 10.1038/s41587-019-0206-z; pmid: 31375813
11. A. Zeisel et al., Molecular Architecture of the Mouse Nervous
System. Cell 174, 999–1014.e22 (2018). doi: 10.1016/
j.cell.2018.06.021; pmid: 30096314
12. M.-I. Chung et al., Coordinated genomic control of ciliogenesis
and cell movement by RFX2. eLlife 3, e01439 (2014).
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm727; pmid: 17897962
13. T. Werner, A. Hammer, M. Wahlbuhl, M. R. Bösl, M. Wegner,
Multiple conserved regulatory elements with overlapping
functions determine Sox10 expression in mouse
embryogenesis. Nucleic Acids Res. 35, 6526–6538 (2007).
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm727; pmid: 17897962
14. A. Antonellis et al., Identification of neural crest and glial
enhancers at the mouse Sox10 locus through transgenesis in
zebrafish. PLOS Genet. 4, e1000174 (2008). doi: 10.1371/
journal.pgen.1000174; pmid: 18773071
15. Q. R. Lu et al., Common developmental requirement for Olig
function indicates a motor neuron/oligodendrocyte
connection. Cell 109, 75–86 (2002). doi: 10.1016/S0092-8674
(02)00678-5; pmid: 11955448
16. Q. Zhou, D. J. Anderson, The bHLH transcription factors OLIG2
and OLIG1 couple neuronal and glial subtype specification.
Cell 109, 61–73 (2002). doi: 10.1016/S0092-8674(02)00677-3;
pmid: 11955447
17. Y. Zhang et al., An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing
database of glia, neurons, and vascular cells of the cerebral
cortex. J. Neurosci. 34, 11929–11947 (2014). doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.1860-14.2014; pmid: 25186741
18. P. Assinck, G. J. Duncan, B. J. Hilton, J. R. Plemel, W. Tetzlaff,
Cell transplantation therapy for spinal cord injury. Nat. Neurosci.
20, 637–647 (2017). doi: 10.1038/nn.4541; pmid: 28440805
19. S. Marques et al., Oligodendrocyte heterogeneity in the mouse
juvenile and adult central nervous system. Science 352,
1326–1329 (2016). doi: 10.1126/science.aaf6463;
pmid: 27284195
20. E. M. Floriddia et al., Distinct oligodendrocyte populations have
spatial preference and injury-specific responses. bioRxiv
[preprint]. 6 July 2019.pmid: 580985
21. F. Chen, P. W. Tillberg, E. S. Boyden, Expansion microscopy.
Science 347, 543–548 (2015). doi: 10.1126/science.1260088;
pmid: 25592419
22. Z. C. Hesp, E. Z. Goldstein, C. J. Miranda, B. K. Kaspar,
D. M. McTigue, Chronic oligodendrogenesis and remyelination
after spinal cord injury in mice and rats. J. Neurosci. 35,
1274–1290 (2015). doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2568-14.2015;
pmid: 25609641
23. P. Assinck et al., Myelinogenic Plasticity of Oligodendrocyte
Precursor Cells following Spinal Cord Contusion Injury.
J. Neurosci. 37, 8635–8654 (2017). doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.2409-16.2017; pmid: 28760862
24. B. E. Powers et al., Remyelination reporter reveals prolonged
refinement of spontaneously regenerated myelin. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 4075–4080 (2013). doi: 10.1073/
pnas.1210293110; pmid: 23431182
25. N. D. James et al., Conduction failure following spinal cord
injury: Functional and anatomical changes from acute to
chronic stages. J. Neurosci. 31, 18543–18555 (2011).
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4306-11.2011; pmid: 22171053
26. D. O. Dias et al., Reducing Pericyte-Derived Scarring Promotes
Recovery after Spinal Cord Injury. Cell 173, 153–165.e22
(2018). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.02.004; pmid: 29502968
27. N. Jayaprakash et al., Optogenetic Interrogation of Functional
Synapse Formation by Corticospinal Tract Axons in the
Injured Spinal Cord. J. Neurosci. 36, 5877–5890 (2016).
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4203-15.2016; pmid: 27225775
28. H. Tanaka, K. Ono, H. Shibasaki, T. Isa, K. Ikenaka,
Conduction properties of identified neural pathways in
the central nervous system of mice in vivo. Neurosci. Res.
49, 113–122 (2004). doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2004.02.001;
pmid: 15099709
29. J. Lee et al., Activation of innate immunity is required for
efficient nuclear reprogramming. Cell 151, 547–558 (2012).
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.09.034; pmid: 23101625
30. L. Mosteiro et al., Tissue damage and senescence provide critical
signals for cellular reprogramming in vivo. Science 354, aaf4445
(2016). doi: 10.1126/science.aaf4445; pmid: 27884981
31. Y. Yu et al., Olig2 targets chromatin remodelers to enhancers
to initiate oligodendrocyte differentiation. Cell 152, 248–261
(2013). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.12.006; pmid: 23332759
32. A. Soufi et al., Pioneer transcription factors target partial DNA
motifs on nucleosomes to initiate reprogramming. Cell 161,
555–568 (2015). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.03.017;
pmid: 25892221
33. T. Vierbuchen et al., AP-1 Transcription Factors and the BAF
Complex Mediate Signal-Dependent Enhancer Selection.
Mol. Cell 68, 1067–1082.e12 (2017). doi: 10.1016/j.
molcel.2017.11.026; pmid: 29272704
34. N. Masahira et al., Olig2-positive progenitors in the embryonic
spinal cord give rise not only to motoneurons and
oligodendrocytes, but also to a subset of astrocytes and
ependymal cells. Dev. Biol. 293, 358–369 (2006). doi: 10.1016/
j.ydbio.2006.02.029; pmid: 16581057
35. H. Fu et al., Molecular mapping of the origin of postnatal spinal
cord ependymal cells: Evidence that adult ependymal cells
are derived from Nkx6.1+ ventral neural progenitor cells.
J. Comp. Neurol. 456, 237–244 (2003). doi: 10.1002/cne.10481;
pmid: 12528188
36. W. D. Richardson, N. Kessaris, N. Pringle, Oligodendrocyte
wars. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 11–18 (2006). doi: 10.1038/
nrn1826; pmid: 16371946
37. G. C. Hon et al., Epigenetic memory at embryonic enhancers
identified in DNA methylation maps from adult mouse tissues.
Nat. Genet. 45, 1198–1206 (2013). doi: 10.1038/ng.2746;
pmid: 23995138
38. Y. L. Xing et al., Adult Neural Precursor Cells From the
Subventricular Zone Contribute Significantly to
Oligodendrocyte Regeneration and Remyelination. J. Neurosci.
34, 14128–14146 (2014), doi: 10.1038/nature14957;
pmid: 26416758
39. J. Samanta et al., Inhibition of Gli1 mobilizes endogenous
neural stem cells for remyelination. Nature 526, 448–452
(2015). doi: 10.1038/nature14957; pmid: 26416758
40. A. Yasuda et al., Significance of remyelination by neural stem/
progenitor cells transplanted into the injured spinal cord.
Stem Cells 29, 1983–1994 (2011). doi: 10.1002/stem.767;
pmid: 22028197
41. L. T. Alto et al., Chemotropic guidance facilitates axonal
regeneration and synapse formation after spinal cord injury.
Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1106–1113 (2009). doi: 10.1038/nn.2365;
pmid: 19648914
42. F. Bei et al., Restoration of Visual Function by Enhancing
Conduction in Regenerated Axons. Cell 164, 219–232 (2016).
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.11.036; pmid: 26771493
43. E. M. Gibson et al., Neuronal activity promotes
oligodendrogenesis and adaptive myelination in the
mammalian brain. Science 344, 1252304 (2014). doi: 10.1126/
science.1252304; pmid: 24727982
44. E. Hudry, L. H. Vandenberghe, Therapeutic AAV Gene Transfer
to the Nervous System: A Clinical Reality. Neuron 101,
839–862 (2019). doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2019.02.017;
pmid: 30844402
45. E. Dessaud et al., Interpretation of the sonic hedgehog
morphogen gradient by a temporal adaptation mechanism.
Nature 450, 717–720 (2007). doi: 10.1038/nature06347;
pmid: 18046410
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the Karolinska Center for Transgene Technologies
(KCTT) for mouse generation, S. Edwards from the Advanced
Light Microscopy Facility at SciLifeLab for help with light sheet
microscopy, S. Giatrellis for help with flow cytometry, the
Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing through Uppsala
Multidisciplinary Center for Advanced Computational Science
(UPPMAX) for computational resources, and L. Buades for
preparing graphical illustrations. Funding: Supported by Human
Frontiers Science Programme long-term fellowship LT001040/
2017 (E.L.-B.), a Marie Sklodowska-Curie Action fellowship (J.M.C.),
and grants from the Swedish Research Council, the Swedish
Cancer Society, the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research,
Knut och Alice Wallenbergs Stiftelse, the Strategic Research
Programme in Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine at Karolinska
Institutet (StratRegen), Hjärnfonden, St. Petersburg University grant
ID 51132811, Karolinska Institutet, the Torsten Söderbergs Stiftelse,
and the Wings for Life Spinal Cord Research Foundation. Author
contributions: Conceptualization, J.F., J.M.C., and E.L.-B.;
methodology, E.L.-B., J.M.C., P.L.M., O.S., M.C., and J.F.; software,
M.Z., E.L.-B., J.B., and P.L.M.; formal analysis, E.L.-B., M.Z., J.B.,
and P.L.M.; investigation, E.L.-B., Y.W., J.M.C., P.L.M., E.S., O.S.,
and M.S.; electron microscopy, O.S. and E.S.; data curation,
M.Z., J.B., Y.W., and E.L.-B.; writing–original draft, E.L.-B.; writing–
review and editing, J.F. and all authors; visualization, E.L.-B.,
P.L.M., M.Z., and J.B.; funding acquisition, J.F., M.C., O.S., and J.L.;
supervision, J.F. Competing interests: E.L.-B., J.B., J.L., and
J.F. are consultants to 10X Genomics. J.M.C. is currently employed
by 10X Genomics. Data and materials availability: All raw
sequencing data in the study as well as filtered gene expression
and chromatin accessibility matrices have been deposited in Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession number GSE148316.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
science.sciencemag.org/content/370/6512/eabb8795/suppl/DC1
Materials and Methods
Figs. S1 to S17
Table S1
References (46–75)
Data S1 to S3
Movie S1
MDAR Reproducibility Checklist
View/request a protocol for this paper from Bio-protocol.
24 March 2020; accepted 4 August 2020
10.1126/science.abb8795
Llorens-Bobadilla et al., Science 370, eabb8795 (2020)
2 October 2020
8 of 8
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on September 12, 2021

Use of think article is subject to the Terms of service
Science (ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue NW,
Washington, DC 20005. The title Science is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim
to original U.S. Government Works
A latent lineage potential in resident neural stem cells enables spinal cord repair
Enric Llorens-BobadillaJames M. ChellPierre Le MerreYicheng WuMargherita ZamboniJoseph BergenstråhleMoa
StenuddElena SopovaJoakim LundebergOleg ShupliakovMarie CarlénJonas Frisén
Science, 370 (6512), eabb8795.
Spinal cord stem cells
Injuries to the mammalian spinal cord do not heal easily. Llorens- Bobadilla et al. studied mouse ependymal cells,
which function as stem cells for the spinal cord (see the Perspective by Becker and Becker). Chromatin accessibility
and transcriptomic assays revealed that these cells carry a latent ability to differentiate into oligodendrocytes, which
is much needed for remyelination of axons around an injury. The ependymal cells were triggered to differentiate
into oligodendrocytes by expression of the oligodendrocyte lineage transcription factor OLIG2. Expression of OLIG2
in ependymal cells specifically and inducibly enabled the production of oligodendrocytes. The ependymal-derived
oligodendrocytes aided axon remyelination and improved axon conduction after spinal cord injury.
Science, this issue p. eabb8795; see also p. 36
View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abb8795
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on September 12, 2021

===== Love2013_NatCellBiol_ROS-XenopusTailRegeneration =====
L E T T E R S
Amputation-induced reactive oxygen species are
required for successful Xenopus tadpole
tail regeneration
Nick R. Love1,2, Yaoyao Chen1,2,4, Shoko Ishibashi1,2, Paraskevi Kritsiligkou1, Robert Lea1,2, Yvette Koh1,2,
Jennifer L. Gallop3, Karel Dorey1,2 and Enrique Amaya1,2,5
Understanding the molecular mechanisms that promote
successful tissue regeneration is critical for continued
advancements in regenerative medicine. Vertebrate amphibian
tadpoles of the species Xenopus laevis and Xenopus tropicalis
have remarkable abilities to regenerate their tails following
amputation1,2, through the coordinated activity of numerous
growth factor signalling pathways, including the Wnt, Fgf, Bmp,
Notch and TGF-β pathways3–6. Little is known, however, about
the events that act upstream of these signalling pathways
following injury. Here, we show that Xenopus tadpole tail
amputation induces a sustained production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) during tail regeneration. Lowering ROS levels,
using pharmacological or genetic approaches, reduces the level
of cell proliferation and impairs tail regeneration. Genetic
rescue experiments restored both ROS production and the
initiation of the regenerative response. Sustained increased
ROS levels are required for Wnt/β-catenin signalling and the
activation of one of its main downstream targets, fgf20 (ref. 7),
which, in turn, is essential for proper tail regeneration. These
ﬁndings demonstrate that injury-induced ROS production is an
important regulator of tissue regeneration.
To better understand the genetic and molecular mechanisms
underlying X. tropicalis tadpole tail regeneration, we recently performed
a microarray screen examining gene expression during regeneration,
which uncovered a number of coordinately upregulated genes involved
in the production of ROS and H2O2 (ref. 2). Indeed, H2O2 and other
ROS, traditionally viewed as harmful to cells, are now appreciated to
have pleiotropic biological effects on various cellular processes, many
of which could play roles during tissue regeneration8,9. This prompted
1Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. 2The Healing Foundation Centre, Michael Smith Building, University of
Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. 3The Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK. 4Present address: Wellcome Trust Centre for Stem Cell Research, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK.
5Correspondence should be addressed to E.A. (e-mail: Enrique.Amaya@manchester.ac.uk)
Received 18 June 2012; accepted 26 November 2012; published online 13 January 2013; DOI: 10.1038/ncb2659
us to examine the production and role of ROS during vertebrate tail
regeneration in Xenopus tadpoles.
We first sought to determine whether there was a change in ROS
levels following Xenopus tadpole tail amputation and during the
subsequent tail regeneration process. To image ROS in vivo, we used the
ratiometric reporter fluorophore HyPerYFP (ref. 10). This YFP variant
possesses an oxidative sensitive OxyR domain that, following oxidation,
causes a reversible conformational change in HyPerYFP and marked
change in fluorescence excitation, a reaction that is particularly sensitive
to H2O2 over other ROS (ref. 10). Hence, a simple calculation of the
HyPerYFP oxidized 490 nm/reduced 402 nm excitation ratio provides
an in vivo assay of intracellular H2O2 or closely related ROS levels11,12.
We generated several X. laevis transgenic lines that express HyPerYFP
ubiquitously from the CMV promoter, and the F0 founders successfully
passed their transgenes to the F1 generation (Fig. 1a and Supplementary
Fig. S1a)13. To assess any changes in H2O2 during regeneration, we
amputated the tails of F1 or F2 HyPerYFP transgenic tadpoles, and
found a marked increase in intracellular H2O2 following tail ampu-
tation (Fig. 1b). Interestingly, the H2O2 levels remained high during
the entire tail regeneration process, which lasts several days (Fig. 1b).
Titrations with exogenous H2O2 during tail regeneration suggested that
regenerating tissues maintain a sustained level of intracellular H2O2
concentrations between 50 and 200 µM (Supplementary Fig. S1b).
To confirm these findings, we sought other means to detect ROS in
regenerative tissue in vivo. Using the H2O2-sensitive fluorogenic dyes
5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate
and superoxide (O2−)-sensitive dihydroethidium14, we obtained
similar results to those we obtained using the HyPerYFP probe
(Supplementary Fig. S1c). Given that an increase in pH can lead to a
change in the HyperYFP ratio10, we next used a pH-sensitive probe,
222
NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | NUMBER 2 | FEBRUARY 2013
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited.  All rights reserved. 

L E T T E R S
Bright field
a
b
F1 transgenic
Trans
2 mpa
6 hpa
1 dpa
2 dpa
3 dpa
4 dpa
6 dpa
6.0
1.5
400 µm
1,000 µm
HyPer ratio [H2O2]
HyPerYFP
Figure 1 Production of ROS during Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration.
(a) Bright-ﬁeld and ﬂuorescence micrographs of a tadpole derived from
the F1 generation of a transgenic X. laevis line that expresses the
H2O2 sensor HyPerYFP ubiquitously10. (b) HyPerYFP transillumination
(Trans) imaging of a representative regenerating tadpole tail. [H2O2] is
derived from the excitation ratio of HyPerYFP490nm/HyPerYFP402 nm.
mpa, minutes post-amputation; hpa, hours post-amputation; dpa,
days post-amputation. Owing to the size of the regenerated tail, the
6 dpa time point panels are derived from the merging of
three images.
pHluorin15, and found that regenerating tails do not possess a pH
level above 8.0 that would have generated a false-positive increased
HyPerYFP ratio (Supplementary Fig. S1d). Together, these data and the
HyPerYFP imaging results provide compelling evidence that tadpole
tail regeneration is associated with a sustained presence of relatively
high levels of H2O2 and/or other related ROS.
Previous reports in zebrafish have shown that epidermal injury
results in the production of H2O2, which acts as a chemoattractant
for inflammatory cells11,12. Consistent with these reports, we found
that epidermal wounding also caused an increase in ROS levels at the
injury site, which remained elevated until wound healing was complete
(Supplementary Fig. S2).
Given that tadpole tail amputation induces a massive recruitment
of inflammatory cells to the site of injury13 and inflammatory cells are
known to produce high levels of ROS (refs 9,16), we examined whether
the increase in ROS was due to the recruitment of inflammatory cells.
Two pieces of experimental evidence argued against this possibility.
First, we labelled the inflammatory cells of HyPerYFP transgenic
tadpoles with RFP (see Methods) and found that the increase in
ROS levels peaked within one hour post-amputation (hpa), whereas
the main recruitment of inflammatory cells did not begin until
2 hpa (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Video). Second, tadpoles with
diminished inflammatory cells (morphants for spib, which encodes a
transcription factor required for primitive myeloid cell development17;
Fig. 2c) showed no significant difference in HyPerYFP ratios versus
control morphant tadpoles following tail amputation (Fig. 2d,e).
These two sets of data strongly suggest that the sustained ROS levels
during tail regeneration are largely produced by non-inflammatory
wound-resident cells, a finding consistent with previous reports
examining zebrafish epidermal wounding11.
To address the role of ROS during tail regeneration, we decreased
ROS levels following amputation using several methods. We first
used two chemicals that target the NADPH oxidase (NOX) enzyme
complexes, a main source of cellular ROS (ref. 9 and Supplementary
Fig. S3). We found that 2 µM diphenyleneiodonium (DPI), a flavopro-
tein inhibitor, which targets the NOX subunit18,19 and 200 µM apocynin
(APO), which disrupts the assembly of the NOX complex20, signifi-
cantly reduced ROS levels by 12 hpa (Fig. 3a and see Supplementary Fig.
S3 for chemical structures and putative modes of action of the three
inhibitors). Given that DPI and APO may have off-target effects19,21, we
used 5–50 times lower concentrations of these inhibitors than others
have used for similar experiments11,21. In addition, we used a different
method of lowering ROS levels, namely the therapeutic anti-oxidant
and free radical scavenger MCI-186 (tradename Edaravone)22,23. We
found that 200 µM MCI-186 also reduced ROS levels, although
to a lesser extent than DPI or APO (Fig. 3a). Notably, lowering
amputation-induced ROS levels using these inhibitors resulted in
an impairment of tail regeneration, as evidenced by shorter tail
length at 72 hpa (Fig. 3b). However, the failure of tail regeneration
in ROS-inhibitor-treated tadpoles at 72 hpa could have simply been
due to a delay in the regeneration program. To address this possibility,
we cultured tadpoles following amputation for three days under ROS
inhibition and then moved the tadpoles into fresh medium without
the inhibitors until day 7 post-amputation, the time period needed
for completion of tail regeneration13 (Fig. 3c). This analysis showed
that DPI or APO treatment over the first 3 days post-amputation
effectively precluded the regeneration program from reinitiating, even
if the inhibitors were removed thereafter. In contrast, MCI-186, which
had the least lowering effect on the HyPerYFP ratio, impaired or delayed
regeneration while present, but in its absence, regeneration resumed
NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | NUMBER 2 | FEBRUARY 2013
223
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited.  All rights reserved. 

L E T T E R S
mpa
a
b
c
d
e
Trans
HyPer ratio
HyPer increase versus
inflammatory cell recruitment
Time after amputation (min)
Inflammatory cells
200 µm
8
0
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
100 µm
1,000 µm
Sudan black B
HyPer ratio
6.0
0.5
2
3
4
5
6
7
30
20
Recruited inflammatory cells (n)
10
spib MO
cMO
spib MO
cMO
NS
(12)
(9)
0
Average HyPer ratio
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
Relative HyPer ratio increase
0.5
cMO
MO
1
19
38
138
249
360
Figure 2 Amputation-induced ROS production does not depend on
inﬂammatory cells. (a) Frames from the Supplementary Video showing
transillumination (Trans), H2O2 production (HyPerYFP) and inﬂammatory
cell (labelled with RFP) recruitment during the ﬁrst 6 h following
amputation. The ﬁlled red arrowhead points to a blood clot that quickly
forms in the distal site of the dorsal aorta following tail amputation2. The
open red arrowhead points to ﬁrst inﬂammatory cell recruited into the
area under examination. The coloured lines show the migratory paths of
the recruited inﬂammatory cells. (b) Quantiﬁcation showing the change in
average HyPerYFP ratio in relation to the number or recruited inﬂammatory
cells into the area examined in the Supplementary Video. (c) Sudan black
B staining of inﬂammatory cells in regenerative bud tissue at 24 hpa,
showing the decreased number of inﬂammatory cells in spib versus control
morphant (cMO) tadpoles. (d) Representative HyPerYFP imaging of control
and spib morphants at 24 h after tail amputation. (e) Quantiﬁcation of
H2O2 production using the HyPerYFP probe in control and spib morphants.
Error bars indicate s.d. of the mean. n tadpole tails analysed indicated in
brackets. NS; P > 0.05.
such that after 7 days, the regenerated tails were largely similar to those
in the dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO)-treated controls (Fig. 3c). These
data suggested that NOX complex activity is required for the initiation
of the regeneration program in the first 3 days post-amputation, and
regeneration is unable to recover thereafter, whereas the antioxidant
scavenger merely delays the regeneration program while present.
We next sought to rescue the defects of ROS-inhibitor-treated
tadpoles by the addition of exogenous H2O2 to the media. However,
combining ROS inhibitors with prolonged, systemic exposure to H2O2,
even as low as 50 µM, for time periods longer than 24 h was toxic to
tadpoles, thus precluding us from attempting regeneration phenotypic
rescue experiments with exogenous H2O2. Given the difficulty we
encountered attempting to rescue the chemical-inhibitor-derived
phenotypes with exogenous H2O2, we turned to genetic perturbation
approaches aimed at inhibiting NOX-mediated ROS production
during tail regeneration. Our previous micro-array data suggested
that the expression levels of cytochrome b-245 α polypeptide, cyba
(also known as p22phox, which encodes a necessary subunit in
NOX complexes 1, 2 and 4; Supplementary Fig. S3b)24, more than
trebled following amputation and remained upregulated throughout
regeneration (array target Str.15394.1.S1_at; ref. 13). We confirmed
the expression of cyba in newly amputated and regenerative tissue using
PCR with reverse transcription (RT–PCR) and in situ hybridization
(Supplementary Fig. S4). We then generated an antisense morpholino
oligonucleotide (MO) designed to block the translation of cyba and,
because antibodies recognizing the Xenopus cyba homologue are not
available, we confirmed the efficacy of the MO using a carboxy-terminal
tagged cyba–FLAG epitope fusion construct (Fig. 4a). We also generated
an amino-terminal myc-tagged version of cyba that was insensitive to
the cyba MO knockdown effect, for use as a rescue construct (Fig. 4b).
224
NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | NUMBER 2 | FEBRUARY 2013
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited.  All rights reserved. 

L E T T E R S
DMSO
a
b
c
Trans
HyPer ratio
DPI
APO
MCI
Trans
Bright field
DMSO
DPI
APO
MCI
1,000 μm
200 μm
200 μm
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
(10)
8
1
(10)
(11)
NS
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
(12)
(12)
(12)
(12)
(11)
(11)
(12)
(8)
(11)
DMSO
Average HyPer ratio
APO
MCI
DPI
DMSO
Regeneragted tail length (mm)
Regeneragted tail length (mm)
APO
MCI
DPI
DMSO
APO
MCI
DPI
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0
1
2
3
DMSO
DPI
APO
MCI
Figure 3 Pharmacologically lowering ROS levels impairs tail regeneration.
(a) Representative transillumination (Trans) and HyPerYFP imaging and
quantiﬁcation of tadpole tails treated with DMSO, 2 µM DPI, 200 µM
APO or 200 µM MCI-186 (MCI) treatments at 12 h after amputation.
(b) Representative tails and quantiﬁcation of regenerated tail length at 72 h
after amputation following the indicated inhibitor treatments. (c) Images
and quantiﬁcation of tadpoles that were exposed to DMSO, DPI, APO or
MCI-186 (the same doses as above) from 0 to 72 hpa, and then cultured in
normal media until 7 days post-amputation. Error bars indicate s.d. of the
mean of (n) specimens. The red lines indicate initial point of amputation.
Signiﬁcance was determined using one-way ANOVA versus DMSO control.
∗∗P < 0.01; ∗∗∗P < 0.001; not signiﬁcant (NS), P > 0.05.
We injected 20 ng of the cyba atg MO with 250 pg of either rfp
or myc-cyba messenger RNA into fertilized embryos and assessed
the post-amputation ROS production and the regenerative response
(Fig. 4c,d). HyPerYFP imaging revealed that cyba morphants had a
∼33% reduction in amputation-induced ROS, a loss that was rescued
by co-injecting the morpholino-insensitive N-terminal myc-tagged
cyba variant. Notably, the decrease in ROS in cyba morphants correlated
with a marked decrease in regenerative bud tissue formation, an effect
that was partially rescued using myc–cyba co-expression (Fig. 4d).
These data show that a portion of the amputation-induced ROS increase
is mediated by the NOX–Cyba complex, and that the regenerative
response requires this enzymatic source of ROS.
We next examined potential regenerative mechanisms that might
be affected by the ROS produced following tail amputation and
during regeneration. Intriguingly, previous reports had linked NOX-
mediated H2O2 production with cell proliferation and growth factor
signalling25–28. During Xenopus tail regeneration, a localized increase
in cell proliferation in the injured and regenerating tail occurs at
24–36 hpa, and these proliferating cells can be assayed by the presence of
phospho-histone H3 (pH3), a marker for mitotic cells2,29. To determine
whether ROS production was necessary for cell proliferation during tail
regeneration, we returned to the use of chemical inhibitors for these
experiments owing to the transient nature of Xenopus morpholino
injections30. Treatment of regenerating tails with DPI and APO, and,
NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | NUMBER 2 | FEBRUARY 2013
225
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited.  All rights reserved. 

L E T T E R S
cyba–FLAG mRNA
Anti-FLAG
Trans
80
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗
60
(10)
(11)
(11)
(11)
(12)
(12)
40
20
Control
cyba MO + rfp
cyba MO + myc–cyba
Control
cyba MO + rfp
cyba MO + myc–cyba
HyPer ratio increase (%)
Regenerative bud length (μm)
Control
20 ng cyba MO 
+250 pg rfp mRNA
20 ng cyba MO 
+250 pg myc–cyba mRNA
HyPer (H2O2)
Nonspecific
–
+
+
–
+
–
0
8
200 μm
cyba MO
Anti-Myc
Anti-EIF4E
120
160
80
40
a
c
d
b
–
+
+
myc–cyba mRNA
–
+
–
cyba MO
T0
24 hpa
T0
24 hpa
T0
24 hpa
Figure 4 Morpholino-mediated knockdown of cyba results in lowered
amputation-induced ROS production and decreased regenerative
tissue formation. (a) Western blot against the FLAG epitope in
cyba–ﬂag -mRNA-injected cyba morphant or control embryos. (b) Western
blot against the myc epitope in myc–cyba-mRNA-injected cyba morphant or
control embryos. (c) Representative transillumination (Trans) and HyPerYFP
imaging at amputation (T0) and 24 hpa in control, cyba morphants, and
myc–cyba rescue cyba morphants, showing inhibition of ROS production
and regenerative tissue formation by the cyba MO and rescue by co-injection
of the MO-resistant myc–cyba mRNA. The black ﬁlled arrowhead shows a
regenerative bud. The quantiﬁcation of HyPerYFP ratio increases following
amputation in control, cyba morphants, and myc-cyba rescue construct
injected cyba morphants is shown to the right of the panels. (d) Quantiﬁcation
of regenerative bud formation in control tadpoles, cyba morphants, and cyba
morphants injected with the myc–cyba rescue construct. Error bars indicate
s.d. of (n) specimens. Signiﬁcance was determined using one-way ANOVA
versus control. ∗∗P < 0.01; ∗∗∗P < 0.001. Uncropped images of blots are
shown in Supplementary Fig. S6a,b.
to a lesser extent MCI-186, significantly decreased the level of cell
proliferation as assayed by pH3 staining at 36 hpa (Fig. 5a) and thus
suggested a potential defect in growth factor signalling within these
inhibitor-treated tadpole tails.
Wnt and Fgf signalling have been associated with increased cell
proliferation during tissue regeneration31–33. To assess the dynamics of
ROS and Wnt/β-catenin signalling during tail regeneration, we used a
X. tropicalis Wnt/β-catenin signalling reporter line, which uses multi-
merized TCF optimal promoter (TOP) sites to drive the expression of
destabilized GFP (dsGFP; fluorescent protein half-life of 2 h; ref. 34).
We observed an absence of Wnt/β-catenin signalling at the wound
site immediately after amputation, which was followed by a sustained
activation of Wnt/β-catenin signalling from 24 hpa, as assayed by the
expression of the destabilized GFP reporter (Supplementary Fig. S5a).
Indeed, we found that inhibiting ROS production using DPI, APO or
MCI-186 treatment starting from amputation until 36 hpa resulted
in a marked decreased in Wnt/β-catenin signalling, as evidenced by a
decreased Wnt/β-catenin-directed dsGFP fluorescence signal (Fig. 5b).
A previous report had shown that H2O2 modulates Wnt/β-catenin
signalling in vitro through nucleoredoxin (nxn), a small redox-sensitive
protein from the thioredoxin family35. Using in situ hybridization, we
found that nxn was expressed during tail regeneration (Supplementary
Fig. S5b). Although we have not specifically addressed the role of
nxn during tail regeneration in this study, its expression provides a
putative molecule linking changes in ROS levels with alterations in
Wnt/β-catenin signalling activity.
fgf20 is a direct transcriptional target of Wnt/β-catenin signalling7
and it is markedly upregulated during X. laevis tail regeneration3.
Furthermore, our previous microarray analysis showed that fgf20
was the most highly upregulated fgf gene during X. tropicalis tail
regeneration2. We confirmed this upregulation by whole-mount in
situ hybridization, where we detected high expression levels of fgf20
in the regenerative bud tissue, starting from 12 hpa (Supplementary
Fig. S5c). Notably, we found that the level of expression of fgf20 was
decreased in tadpoles treated with the ROS inhibitors DPI, APO or
MCI-186 (Fig. 5c,d). Given that fgf20 is a main transcriptional target of
Wnt/β-catenin signalling in Xenopus, these results further suggest that
amputation-induced ROS are required for Wnt/β-catenin signalling in
the early and intermediate stages of tail regeneration.
We then examined whether fgf20, one of many fgf genes expressed
during tail regeneration3,13, was itself necessary for tadpole tail regenera-
tion. In zebrafish, fgf20 has been shown to be essential for the formation
of regenerative blastema tissue following tail fin amputation31; however,
its role during Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration had not been addressed.
To address the role of fgf20 in the regenerative response, we designed
two antisense morpholinos targeting two separate splice junctions
in X. tropicalis fgf20 (Supplementary Fig. S5c), and we found that
both morpholinos were similarly efficient in reducing fgf20 transcript
levels as assayed by RT–PCR (Fig. 5d). Following tail amputation, fgf20
morphant tadpoles were able to heal the wound at the amputation site,
but they failed to mount a full regenerative response. More specifically,
we noted a significant defect in the regeneration of the axial tissues of
the tail, corresponding to the tissue that expresses fgf20, and overall tail
regrowth was significantly reduced in fgf20 versus control morphants
tadpoles (Fig. 5e,f). These data show that fgf20 function is required for
the regeneration of the axial tissues of the tail, but not for the healing
and regeneration of the epidermal tissues.
Thus, our data show that Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration requires
a sustained production of H2O2 or closely related ROS, especially
during the first 72 h following amputation. ROS are likely to have
pleiotropic effects on cellular physiology, including metabolism,
motility, proliferation and signalling, owing to the potential global
effects that oxidation might have on protein function8,9. In our study,
we focused on Wnt signalling and cell proliferation owing to the
known role that oxidation has on these aspects of cell biology and
their previously established roles during tail regeneration. Our finding
that a change in ROS levels is required for proper Wnt signalling
during tadpole tail regeneration is particularly interesting. It is generally
226
NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | NUMBER 2 | FEBRUARY 2013
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited.  All rights reserved. 

L E T T E R S
pH3 DAPI
TOP:dsGFP
DMSO
DMSO
DPI
DPI
APO
APO
MCI
MCI
DMSO
DPI
APO
MCI
DMSO
DPI
DMSO
DPI
APO
MCI
Bright field
100 μm
100 μm
125 μm
200 μm
DMSO
fgf20
rpl8
fgf20
fgf20
rpl8
DPI
APO
cMO
1.2
1.0
(12)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗
∗
∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
(12)
(12)
(11)
(11)
(10)
(11)
(9)
0.8
Mitotic index
0.6
0.4
Relative fluorescence
MO1
MO2
MCI
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
Regenerated tail length (mm)
0.5
(15)
(15)
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
cMO
fgf20 MO
a
c
e
b
d
f
g
cMO
fgf20 MO
Figure 5 Amputation-induced ROS are important for proper growth
factor signalling during tail regeneration. (a) Representative images
and quantiﬁcation of X. laevis tadpole tail mitotic cells at 36 hpa
when cultured in control (DMSO) or ROS inhibitors DPI (2 µM), APO
(200 µM) and MCI-186 (MCI; 200 µM). (b) Representative images
and relative Wnt/β-catenin signalling reporter dsGFP ﬂuorescence
(TOP:dsGFP) signal at 36 hpa in control (DMSO) or ROS inhibitors DPI-
(2 µM), APO- (50 µM) and MCI-186- (200 µM) treated X. tropicalis
tadpoles. (c) RT–PCR reactions amplifying fgf20 or reference gene
rpl8 in control (DMSO) or ROS inhibitors DPI (2 µM), APO (50 µM)
and MCI-186 (200 µM) at 36 hpa in X. tropicalis tadpoles. (d) In situ
hybridization of fgf20 in DMSO controls versus DPI-treated X. tropicalis
tadpole tails during the tail regrowth phase of tail regeneration.
(e) RT–PCR reactions detecting fgf20 in X. tropicalis control or fgf20
morphants. (f) Representative regenerated control (cMO) or fgf20
morphant tadpole tails at 48 hpa. (g) Quantiﬁcation of regenerated
tail length in control or fgf20 morphants. Error bars indicate s.e.m. of
(n) specimens. Signiﬁcance was determined using one-way ANOVA or
unpaired t-tests. ∗P < 0.05; ∗∗∗P < 0.001. Uncropped images of blots
are shown in Supplementary Fig. S6d,e.
recognized that Wnt signalling plays a critical role in almost every
studied regeneration system, from Hydra to mammals, yet very little is
known about what controls the activation of Wnt signalling following
injury36,37. Thus, our work suggests that increased production of
ROS plays a critical role in facilitating Wnt signalling following
injury, and therefore allows the regeneration program to commence.
Given the ubiquitous role of Wnt signalling in regenerative events37,
this finding is intriguing as it might provide a general mechanism
for injury-induced Wnt signalling activation across all regeneration
systems, and furthermore, manipulating ROS may provide a means to
induce the activation of a regenerative program in those cases where
regeneration is normally limited.
□
METHODS
Methods and any associated references are available in the online
version of the paper.
Note: Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank P. Niethammer (Sloan-Kettering Institute, USA) for the pCS2+ HyperYFP
construct, the University of Manchester Bioimaging Facility for guidance with
imaging, and R. Paredes and Y. Matsubayashi for advice on statistical analyses. We
also thank N. Papalopulu and C. Thompson for comments on the manuscript. This
work was supported by a Wellcome Trust Program Grant (E.A.), a Wellcome Trust
Career Development Fellowship (J.L.G.), a Wellcome Trust PhD Studentship (P.K.),
and grants from the BBSRC (K.D.), The Healing Foundation (N.R.L., Y.C., E.A.) and
The National Science Foundation (N.R.L.).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
N.R.L. designed and carried out most of the experiments in this study and co-wrote
the manuscript. Y.C. established the HyPerYFP assay in Xenopus, generated spib
morphants, and assisted in many of the other experiments in the study. S.I. generated
the cyba constructs, and P.K. generated the pHlourin constructs. K.D. performed
western blot analyses on the tagged cyba constructs and helped prepare the
manuscript. Y.K. performed the C1-blastomere injections and cell-tracking analysis
of the inflammatory cells. R.L. performed the whole-mount in situ hybridizations
and whole-mount immunohistochemistry experiments. J.L.G. generated the initial
finding that the antioxidant MCI-186 could be used to lower ROS in Xenopus.
E.A. supervised the project, aided with embryo experiments and co-wrote the
manuscript.
NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | NUMBER 2 | FEBRUARY 2013
227
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited.  All rights reserved. 

L E T T E R S
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Published online at www.nature.com/doiﬁnder/10.1038/ncb2659
Reprints and permissions information is available online at www.nature.com/reprints
1.
Slack, J. M., Lin, G. & Chen, Y. The Xenopus tadpole: a new model for regeneration
research. Cell Mol. Life Sci. 65, 54–63 (2008).
2.
Love, N. R. et al. Genome-wide analysis of gene expression during Xenopus tropicalis
tadpole tail regeneration. BMC Dev. Biol. 11, 70 (2011).
3.
Lin, G. & Slack, J. M. Requirement for Wnt and FGF signaling in Xenopus tadpole
tail regeneration. Dev. Biol. 316, 323–335 (2008).
4.
Sugiura, T., Tazaki, A., Ueno, N., Watanabe, K. & Mochii, M. Xenopus Wnt-5a
induces an ectopic larval tail at injured site, suggesting a crucial role for
noncanonical Wnt signal in tail regeneration. Mech. Dev. 126, 56–67 (2009).
5.
Beck,
C. W.,
Christen,
B.
&
Slack,
J. M.
Molecular
pathways
needed
for
regeneration
of
spinal
cord
and
muscle
in
a
vertebrate.
Dev.
Cell
5,
429–439 (2003).
6.
Ho, D. M. & Whitman, M. TGF-β signaling is required for multiple processes during
Xenopus tail regeneration. Dev. Biol. 315, 203–216 (2008).
7.
Chamorro, M. N. et al. FGF-20 and DKK1 are transcriptional targets of
β-catenin and FGF-20 is implicated in cancer and development. EMBO J. 24,
73–84 (2005).
8.
Finkel, T. & Holbrook, N. J. Oxidants, oxidative stress and the biology of ageing.
Nature 408, 239–247 (2000).
9.
Lambeth, J. D. NOX enzymes and the biology of reactive oxygen. Nature Rev.
Immunol. 4, 181–189 (2004).
10. Belousov, V. V. et al. Genetically encoded ﬂuorescent indicator for intracellular
hydrogen peroxide. Nat. Methods 3, 281–286 (2006).
11. Niethammer, P., Grabher, C., Look, A. T. & Mitchison, T. J. A tissue-scale gradient
of hydrogen peroxide mediates rapid wound detection in zebraﬁsh. Nature 459,
996–999 (2009).
12. Yoo, S. K., Starnes, T. W., Deng, Q. & Huttenlocher, A. Lyn is a redox sensor that
mediates leukocyte wound attraction in vivo. Nature 480, 109–112 (2011).
13. Love, N. R. et al. pTransgenesis: a cross-species, modular transgenesis resource.
Development 138, 5451–5458 (2011).
14. Owusu-Ansah, E., Yavari, A., Mandal, S. & Banerjee, U. Distinct mitochondrial
retrograde signals control the G1-S cell cycle checkpoint. Nat. Genet. 40,
356–361 (2008).
15. Miesenbock, G., De Angelis, D. A. & Rothman, J. E. Visualizing secretion and
synaptic transmission with pH-sensitive green ﬂuorescent proteins. Nature 394,
192–195 (1998).
16. West, A. P. et al. TLR signalling augments macrophage bactericidal activity through
mitochondrial ROS. Nature 472, 476–480 (2011).
17. Costa, R. M., Soto, X., Chen, Y., Zorn, A. M. & Amaya, E. Spib is required for primitive
myeloid development in Xenopus. Blood 112, 2287–2296 (2008).
18. O’Donnell, B. V., Tew, D. G., Jones, O. T. & England, P. J. Studies on the inhibitory
mechanism of iodonium compounds with special reference to neutrophil NADPH
oxidase. Biochem. J. 290, 41–49 (1993).
19. Kahles, T. & Brandes, R. P. NADPH oxidases as therapeutic targets in ischemic
stroke. Cell Mol. Life Sci. 69, 2345–2363 (2012).
20. Stefanska, J. & Pawliczak, R. Apocynin: molecular aptitudes. Mediators Inﬂamm.
2008, 106507 (2008).
21. Wind, S. et al. Comparative pharmacology of chemically distinct NADPH oxidase
inhibitors. Br. J. Pharmacol. 161, 885–898 (2010).
22. Otomo, E. Effect of a novel free radical scavenger, edaravone (MCI-186), on
acute brain infarction. Randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study at
multicenters. Cerebrovasc. Dis. 15, 222–229 (2003).
23. Yoneyama, M., Kawada, K., Gotoh, Y., Shiba, T. & Ogita, K. Endogenous reactive
oxygen species are essential for proliferation of neural stem/progenitor cells.
Neurochem. Int. 56, 740–746 (2010).
24. Ambasta, R. K. et al. Direct interaction of the novel Nox proteins with p22phox is
required for the formation of a functionally active NADPH oxidase. J. Biol. Chem.
279, 45935–45941 (2004).
25. Le Belle, J. E. et al. Proliferative neural stem cells have high endogenous ROS levels
that regulate self-renewal and neurogenesis in a PI3K/Akt-dependant manner. Cell
Stem. Cell 8, 59–71 (2011).
26. Sundaresan, M., Yu, Z. X., Ferrans, V. J., Irani, K. & Finkel, T. Requirement for
generation of H2O2 for platelet-derived growth factor signal transduction. Science
270, 296–299 (1995).
27. Yanes, O. et al. Metabolic oxidation regulates embryonic stem cell differentiation.
Nat. Chem. Biol. 6, 411–417 (2010).
28. Dickinson, B. C., Peltier, J., Stone, D., Schaffer, D. V. & Chang, C. J. Nox2 redox
signaling maintains essential cell populations in the brain. Nat. Chem. Biol. 7,
106–112 (2011).
29. Hendzel, M. J. et al. Mitosis-speciﬁc phosphorylation of histone H3 initiates
primarily within pericentromeric heterochromatin during G2 and spreads in an
ordered fashion coincident with mitotic chromosome condensation. Chromosoma
106, 348–360 (1997).
30. Nutt, S. L., Bronchain, O. J., Hartley, K. O. & Amaya, E. Comparison of morpholino
based translational inhibition during the development of Xenopus laevis and Xenopus
tropicalis. Genesis 30, 110–113 (2001).
31. Whitehead, G. G., Makino, S., Lien, C. L. & Keating, M. T. fgf20 is essential for
initiating zebraﬁsh ﬁn regeneration. Science 310, 1957–1960 (2005).
32. Lee, Y., Grill, S., Sanchez, A., Murphy-Ryan, M. & Poss, K. D. Fgf signaling instructs
position-dependent growth rate during zebraﬁsh ﬁn regeneration. Development 132,
5173–5183 (2005).
33. Stoick-Cooper, C. L., Moon, R. T. & Weidinger, G. Advances in signaling in
vertebrate regeneration as a prelude to regenerative medicine. Genes Dev. 21,
1292–1315 (2007).
34. Denayer, T., Tran, H. T. & Vleminckx, K. Transgenic reporter tools tracing endogenous
canonical Wnt signaling in Xenopus. Methods Mol. Biol. 469, 381–400 (2008).
35. Funato, Y., Michiue, T., Asashima, M. & Miki, H. The thioredoxin-related
redox-regulating protein nucleoredoxin inhibits Wnt-β-catenin signalling through
dishevelled. Nat. Cell Biol. 8, 501–508 (2006).
36. Galliot, B. & Chera, S. The Hydra model: disclosing an apoptosis-driven generator of
Wnt-based regeneration. Trends Cell Biol. 20, 514–523 (2010).
37. Whyte, J. L., Smith, A. A. & Helms, J. A. Wnt signaling and injury repair. Cold Spring
Harb. Perspect. Biol. 4, a008078 (2012).
228
NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | NUMBER 2 | FEBRUARY 2013
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited.  All rights reserved. 

DOI: 10.1038/ncb2659
M E T H O D S
METHODS
Xenopus tadpole tail amputation and culture. A 0.025% MS222, pH 7.5
solution in 0.1× MMR was used to anaesthetize X. laevis and X. tropicalis tadpoles
before tail amputation, and tails were cut from NF (Nieuwkoop–Faber) stage 41–47
tadpoles38 using a sterilized scalpel. Tadpoles were cultured individually in 6-well
dishes in 0.1× MMR and in the presence of gentamicin (Sigma).
In vivo imaging of ROS. F0 transgenic X. laevis were generated using restriction-
enzyme-mediated integration39 with SwaI and a CMV:HyPerYFP plasmid13.
For live-animal imaging, specimens were anaethesized in a filter-sterilized
solution of 0.1× MMR solution containing 0.025% MS222 (pH 7.5) and
placed in a glass-bottom dish. HyPerYFP and pHluorin ratiometric imaging
analysis was performed using a Nikon TE2000 PFS microscope, a mercury
illumination source, and a Cascade II electron multiplying CCD (charge-
coupled device) camera (Photometric) using excitation filters of 402/15 nm
and 490/20 nm, and an emission filter of BP525/36. Further bright-field and
fluorescent imaging was performed with Leica M165FC, Leica MZ APO or
Olympus IX70 machines using mercury illumination sources and standard
FITC, RFP or DAPI filters. The fluorogenic dyes 5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-2′,7′-
dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate and dihydroethidium were obtained from
Molecular Probes (Life Technologies) diluted in DMSO and imaged according to
ref. 14. For HyPerYFP and pHluorin ratios, the 490 nm and 402 nm excitation
images were background subtracted, smoothened and divided as previously
described11. For HyPerYFP ratio measurements and comparisons, the area ∼200 µm
from the wound site and regenerating tail margin was analysed.
Chemical and genetic manipulations. Stock solutions of 2 mM DPI (Sigma-
Aldrich), 200 mM APO (Sigma-Aldrich) and 200 mM MCI-186 (Cayman
Chemical) were prepared in DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich). X. tropicalis embryos
with deficient myeloid inflammatory cells were generated by injecting a pre-
viously characterized spib morpholino into 1-cell stage embryos17. Synthetic
mRNA was transcribed from pCS2+-derived DNA templates40, using the
SP6 mMessage kit (Ambion) and purified using MegaClear (Ambion). To
create the cyba fusion constructs, the cyba open reading frame was amplified
by RT–PCR (primers 5′-CTTGAATTCAAGGCCTATGGGACAGATAGAATGG-
3′
and
5′-CATCTCGAGTACATTATC-TGTGACAGGAATAG-3′)
and,
after
digestion with EcoRI and XhoI, was inserted into the EcoRI/XhoI site of
pCS2+MT (ref. 40) to make myc–cyba. A C-terminal FLAG-tagged cyba
(cyba–FLAG) construct was similarly made by inserting the cyba open reading
frame into a pCS2+-derived plasmid containing a FLAG tag. The following
antisense MOs were synthesized by Gene Tools and were reconstituted as
a 20 µg µl−1stock solution: the ATG start codon targeting X. laevis cyba (5′-
CCTCTGAAAATGGGACAGATAGAATGGGCAATGTGGGC-3′); splice junction
targeting the first exon–intron (5′-GGCAGCGATACGTACCAAAGCGGCT-3′)
boundary and the first intron–second exon boundary (5′-AGGATACCTGCAAATA-
ATAGAAGAT-3′) of X. tropicalis fgf20. Tadpoles with RFP-labelled inflammatory
cells were generated by injecting RFP mRNA into the C1 blastomere as previously
described41.
Whole-mount in situ hybridization, histology and immunostaining. Sudan
black B staining was performed on MEMFA-fixed tadpoles in accordance with
the company protocol (Sigma-Aldrich). For whole-mount immunohistochemistry,
tadpoles were fixed in MEMFA and antibodies were diluted in BBT (1× PBS, 1%
BSA and 0.1% Triton X-100) with 5% heat-treated lamb serum. Primary antibodies
were used as follows: anti-pH3 (mouse, 1:1,000, Abcam, ab14955); anti-myc
epitope (mouse, 1:1,000, Santa Cruz, sc-40); anti-FLAG (mouse, 1:1,000, Sigma,
A8592); anti-eIF4E (rabbit, 1:1,000 Cell Signaling, 9742). Secondary antibodies
for whole-mount immunostaining were the anti-mouse conjugated to Alexa-
568 (1:1,000, Invitrogen). To generate mitotic indices, pH3-positive cells were
counted in the most distal ∼200 µm of the regenerating tail and normalized to
1 by dividing by the average of the control group. For whole-mount in situ
hybridization, DIG probes were generated from a linearized fgf20 (ref. 42) or
pCS2+ cyba DNA plasmids using 10× DIG nucleotide mix and T7 RNA polymerase
(Roche). Hybridization and chromogenic reactions were performed as previously
described6.
RT–PCR. Tissue samples were pooled and kept in Qiagen’s RNALater before
RNA extraction. Samples were homogenized using a syringe in buffer RLT, further
homogenized with Qiagen’s Qiashredder, and RNA was extracted using RNAeasy
Mini (Qiagen). The complementary DNA synthesis was performed using the
High Capacity cDNA Synthesis Kit (Applied Biosystems). For PCR reactions, the
primers used were: cyba, forward 5′-CTGGACTGATCCTTCTTGCT-3′, reverse
5′-CTGCCAAGTACTTCTGACCA-3′; rpl8, forward 5′-GCCCGTGCCTCTGGTA-
ACTACGC-3′, reverse 5′-ACCACCACCAGCAACAACCCCA-3′; fgf20, forward
5′-CTCTACTGTAGGACCGGCTTCC-3′, reverse 5′-CCAGTTCTCCTCAAACTG-
TTCCCG-3′; nxn, forward 5′-GACCCAGAAGGACTGGAGTTTCC-3′, reverse
5′-GCATGGAGGGCACCAGTGTGC-3′.
Statistics. Statistical analyses were performed with Prism (GraphPad Software).
Data sets were first checked for variance, and the appropriate t-tests or one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) tests were used to generate P values.
38. Nieuwkoop, P. D. & Faber, J. Normal Table of
Xenopus laevis (Daudin): A
Systematical and Chronological Survey of the Development from the Fertilized Egg
Till the End of Metamorphosis (Garland Publishing, 1994).
39. Kroll, K. L. & Amaya, E. Transgenic Xenopus
embryos from sperm nuclear
transplantations reveal FGF signaling requirements during gastrulation. Development
122, 3173–3183 (1996).
40. Turner,
D. L.
&
Weintraub,
H.
Expression
of
achaete-scute
homolog
3
in
Xenopus embryos converts ectodermal cells to a neural fate. Genes Dev. 8,
1434–1447 (1994).
41. Chen, Y. et al. C/EBPα initiates primitive myelopoiesis in pluripotent embryonic cells.
Blood 114, 40–48 (2009).
42. Lea, R., Papalopulu, N., Amaya, E. & Dorey, K. Temporal and spatial expression
of FGF ligands and receptors during Xenopus development. Dev. Dyn. 238,
1467–1479 (2009).
NATURE CELL BIOLOGY
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited.  All rights reserved.

===== Lust2019_DevNeurobiol_BrainRegen =====
424
A Comparative Perspective on Brain Regeneration in 
Amphibians and Teleost Fish
Katharina Lust
, Elly M. Tanaka
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria
Received 21 August 2018; revised 20 December 2018; accepted 26 December 2018
ABSTRACT:  Regeneration of lost cells in the central 
nervous system, especially the brain, is present to varying 
degrees in different species. In mammals, neuronal cell 
death often leads to glial cell hypertrophy, restricted 
proliferation, and formation of a gliotic scar, which 
prevents neuronal regeneration. Conversely, amphibians 
such as frogs and salamanders and teleost fish possess 
the astonishing capacity to regenerate lost cells in several 
regions of their brains. While frogs lose their regenerative 
abilities 
after 
metamorphosis, 
teleost 
fish 
and 
salamanders are known to possess regenerative 
competence even throughout adulthood. In the last 
decades, substantial progress has been made in our 
understanding of the cellular and molecular mechanisms 
of brain regeneration in amphibians and fish. But how 
similar are the means of brain regeneration in these 
different species? In this review, we provide an overview 
of common and distinct aspects of brain regeneration in 
frog, salamander, and teleost fish species: from the origin 
of regenerated cells to the functional recovery of behaviors. 
© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Develop Neurobiol 79: 424–436, 2019
Keywords: regeneration; brain; amphibian; teleost fish
INTRODUCTION
Both amphibians and teleost fish are excellent re-
generative model systems and possess the ability to 
replace missing cells, appendages, and organs (Poss 
et al., 2002; Eguchi et al., 2011; Singh et al., 2012), 
including substantial parts of the central nervous sys-
tem (Becker et al., 1997; Yoshino and Tochinai, 2004; 
Bernardos et al., 2007; Berg et al., 2010; Kroehne et 
al., 2011; Maden et al., 2013; Langhe et al., 2017). 
While common concepts certainly underlie regener-
ation among these different animals, recent research 
has also uncovered some surprising variations that 
provide insight into the diversity of ways in which re-
generation can be achieved or inhibited. For example, 
the red spotted newt (Notophthalmus viridescens) and 
the axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum), two salamander 
species separated by over 100 million years of evolu-
tion, use distinct mechanisms to regenerate muscle—
namely via dedifferentiation or activation of satellite 
stem cells, respectively (Sandoval-Guzmán et al., 
2014). Heart and retina regeneration, which is present 
in zebrafish (Danio rerio) (Poss et al., 2002; Bernardos 
et al., 2007), is absent or impaired in another teleost 
fish species, the Japanese medaka (Oryzias latipes) 
(Lai et al., 2017; Lust and Wittbrodt, 2018). Such ex-
amples indicate the importance of studying numerous 
species to comprehend different strategies that have 
evolved and could eventually be used to induce regen-
eration in non-regenerative species.
Teleost fish and amphibians each present advan-
tages for studying brain regeneration. Teleost fish, 
especially the zebrafish, are established genetic 
models that have already contributed immense foun-
dational knowledge on stem and progenitor cells 
involved in brain regeneration. The repertoire of mu-
tants, genome editing tools as well as the availability 
Correspondence to: Katharina Lust (katharina.lust@imp.ac.at).
Contract grant sponsor: H2020 European Research Council; 
contract grant number: 742046.
© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Neurobiology Published by 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License, which permits 
use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial 
purposes.
Published online 21 February 2019 in Wiley Online Library 
(wileyonlinelibrary.com). 
DOI 10.1002/dneu.22665
 1932846x, 2019, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dneu.22665 by Ulsan National Institute Of Science And Technology (Unist), Wiley Online Library on [28/10/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

A Comparative Perspective on Brain Regeneration    425
Developmental Neurobiology
of transgenic lines (Howe et al., 2013; Hwang et al., 
2013; Kettleborough et al., 2013) make the zebraf-
ish an excellent model for studying the molecular 
requirements of regeneration. Amphibian brain 
regeneration studies have a rich history; however, 
amphibians have been less studied in recent years. 
Anuran amphibians, such as the African clawed frog 
Xenopus laevis, are an interesting study model as 
they lose their regenerative abilities after metamor-
phosis, thus offering the opportunity to study the 
loss of regeneration within a single animal model. 
Conversely, urodele amphibians, such as newts and 
axolotls, are able to regenerate throughout their 
lifetime. Newts and axolotls might be particularly 
advantageous systems for studying telencephalon 
regeneration. The overall telencephalic neuroanato-
mies of newts and axolotls show greater similarities 
to those of mammals than the inverted anatomy in 
teleost fish (see Figure 1). Furthermore, the three 
currently most widely used species, the red spotted 
newt, the Iberian ribbed newt (Pleurodeles waltl), 
and the axolotl, exhibit clear differences in the 
proliferation pattern of brain ventricular cells. The 
proliferation of these cells ranges from complete qui-
escence to continuous proliferation, which offers an 
attractive base for comparative studies (Berg et al., 
2010; Maden et al., 2013; Joven et al., 2018). Recent 
efforts in sequencing the genomes of Xenopus ­laevis 
(Session et al., 2016), axolotl (Nowoshilow et al., 
2018), and the Iberian ribbed newt (Elewa et al., 
2017) as well as the establishment of genetic tools, 
such as lineage tracing (Khattak et al., 2013; Joven 
et al., 2018) and CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome 
editing (Blitz et al., 2013; Fei et al., 2014, 2016, 
2017; Aslan et al., 2017; Elewa et al., 2017) provide 
new opportunities to study brain regeneration in 
­exquisite detail in these animals (Table 1).
BRAIN REGENERATION IN ANURAN 
AMPHIBIANS
A key point of interest in anuran amphibians is the 
decline of regenerative abilities during, and after met-
amorphosis. The first report on brain regeneration in 
frogs dates back to 1890, in which removing the cer-
ebral hemispheres from adult Xenopus laevis led to 
the formation of a cerebral mass, which was thought 
to contain newly born nerve cells (Danielewsky, 
1890). Later studies revealed that Xenopus laevis can 
regenerate both telencephalon and optic tectum dur-
ing larval stages (Srebro, 1957; Yoshino and Tochinai, 
2004) (Filoni and Gibertini, 1969), whereas regenera-
tion and wound closure are absent in adults (Srebro, 
1965). Alongside this decline in regenerative abilities, 
the number of undifferentiated, proliferating cells de-
creases in the brains of larval and metamorphosing 
animals (Yoshino and Tochinai, 2004).
In Xenopus larvae, the source of regenerated cells 
lies within the ventricular zones of the respective 
brain region, similar to salamanders and teleost fish. 
In both the telencephalon and optic tectum, injury 
induces an increase in the proliferation of Musashi1-
positive tectal progenitors as well as Sox2-expressing 
neural progenitors, which ultimately differentiate into 
N-β-tubulin-positive neurons (Yoshino and Tochinai, 
2004; McKeown et al., 2013). It has not been ad-
dressed if Musashi1-positive and Sox2-positive cells 
are the same cell population and harbor the same re-
generative potentials.
While the understanding of the molecular mech-
anisms underlying brain regeneration in anurans is 
currently sparse, the system has been important in 
demonstrating the requirement of nerves for brain 
­regeneration. Input from the olfactory placode and 
the olfactory nerve is required for telencephalon re-
generation in Xenopus and, similarly, optic tectum re-
generation is dependent on optic nerve input (Yoshino 
and Tochinai, 2006). Interestingly, nerve dependency 
has long been studied in the context of limb regen-
eration in salamanders (Stocum, 2011) and Xenopus 
tadpoles (Filoni and Paglialunga, 1990) as well as fin 
regeneration in fish (Simões et al., 2014) where the 
nerves contribute factors that induce the proliferation 
of ­undifferentiated progenitor cells in the ­blastema. It 
­remains to be addressed whether the nerve ­dependency 
of brain regeneration and limb regeneration are a ­result 
of common underlying mechanisms.
Another unanswered question is whether cells in 
the adult frog brain are intrinsically incompetent to 
perform a regenerative response or whether extrinsic 
signals create a regeneration-deficient environment. 
To address this, larval or froglet telencephalon cell 
suspensions were transplanted into the space created 
in froglet brains by partially removing the telenceph-
alon (Yoshino and Tochinai, 2004). Surprisingly, en-
dogenous and transplanted cells were able to close the 
wound and generate a deformed telencephalon-like 
structure that connected with the olfactory nerves. 
This led to the proposal that adult frogs do not lack 
the neural stem cells necessary for brain regeneration 
but that instead the failure of adult ependymal neural 
cells to migrate and close the wound might result in 
failed regeneration. These results raise an interesting 
question that could be addressed in the future: Would 
adult frogs be able to regenerate smaller injuries, or 
selective ablation of cell types, that do not require 
massive wound closure?
 1932846x, 2019, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dneu.22665 by Ulsan National Institute Of Science And Technology (Unist), Wiley Online Library on [28/10/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

426    Lust and Tanaka
Developmental Neurobiology
Figure 1  Brain structure and neurogenic niches during homeostasis and regeneration in salamanders 
and teleost fish. (A and B) Schematic illustrations of the lateral and dorsal views of salamander (A) and 
zebrafish (B) brains. OB = olfactory bulb, T = telencephalon, OT = optic tectum, D = diencephalon, 
H = hypothalamus, C = cerebellum, R = rhombencephalon. (A′ – B″) Cross sections through telen-
cephalon and midbrain of red spotted newt, axolotl (A′, A″), and zebrafish (B′, B″). The left hemisphere 
depicts the proliferative behavior of cells during homeostasis, while the right hemisphere depicts the 
proliferative behavior of cells following injury. Thick grey lines indicate the ventricular zones, har-
boring radial glia or ependymoglia. Note the inverted organization of the teleost fish telencephalon, in 
which radial glia and non-epithelial progenitors line the outside and neurons are located on the inside. 
(A′) In red spotted newts, ependymoglia (red) proliferate during homeostasis in confined hot spots, 
while in axolotl ependymoglia proliferation (green) is observed along the entire ventricular zone. In 
red spotted newts, ependymoglia cells at hot spots increase their proliferation rate in response to in-
jury and additional hot spots of proliferation are generated. In axolotl, ependymoglia proliferation is 
increased. (A″) The midbrain of red spotted newts is quiescent during homeostasis, while axolotl mid-
brain ependymoglia are proliferative. Upon injury in red spotted newts, ependymoglia re-enter the cell 
cycle locally where neurons were lost. Midbrain regeneration in axolotl has not been studied. (B′) In ze-
brafish, radial glia as well as non-epithelial progenitors (blue) actively divide during homeostasis. Upon 
injury, additional radial glia and non-epithelial progenitors are activated to proliferate. (B″) During 
homeostasis in the optic tectum, radial glia lining the roof of the tectal ventricle are quiescent, while 
neuroepithelial-like progenitors located at the tectal marginal zone (TMZ) are proliferative. Upon in-
jury, neuroepithelial-like progenitors increase their proliferation and radial glia enter the cell cycle
 1932846x, 2019, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dneu.22665 by Ulsan National Institute Of Science And Technology (Unist), Wiley Online Library on [28/10/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

A Comparative Perspective on Brain Regeneration    427
Developmental Neurobiology
BRAIN REGENERATION IN URODELE 
AMPHIBIANS
In contrast to anuran amphibians, urodeles such as 
newts and axolotls maintain their regenerative abili-
ties throughout adulthood. The first studies on brain 
regeneration in salamanders date back to 1916 when 
Harold Burr found that forebrain regeneration oc-
curs in axolotl larvae (Burr, 1916). Adult axolotls are 
also able to fully regenerate when a large portion of 
their telencephalon is removed (Kirsche and Kirsche, 
1964a) and can even recover from complete lobec-
tomy (Richter, 1968). Recent studies have revealed 
that the original neuronal diversity, even at the level 
of subpopulations, is regenerated after such injuries 
(Amamoto et al., 2016). Importantly however, resec-
tion of the whole telencephalic hemisphere does not 
lead to regeneration (Kirsche and Kirsche, 1964a). A 
detailed analysis of the proliferative dynamics in the 
axolotl brain using thymidine analogue incorpora-
tion has uncovered that ependymoglia cells display 
neurogenic potential across all brain regions under 
homeostatic conditions, as well as after injury to the 
telencephalon (Maden et al., 2013). As in Xenopus, 
the olfactory nerve has been shown to play a cru-
cial role during telencephalic regeneration (Kirsche 
and Kirsche, 1964b; Maden et al., 2013). Removal 
of the olfactory nerve blocks regeneration until it is 
reconnected to the remaining part of the telencepha-
lon (Maden et al., 2013). While some studies have 
speculated that the olfactory nerve is a source of 
cells that migrate into the injured telencephalon to 
initiate regeneration (Kirsche and Kirsche, 1964b; 
Winkelmann and Winkelmann, 1970; Richter, 1968), 
it is more probable that the nerve provides cues to 
stimulate the proliferation of ependymal cells in the 
telencephalon (Maden et al., 2013). The molecu-
lar nature of these signals, and how they reach the 
ependymoglia cells to initiate the regenerative pro-
gram, remains unknown. It is also not known if nerve 
dependency in the brain reflects a need for extracel-
lular signaling factors secreted by nerve cells, or for 
olfactory or visual experience (or a combination of 
both).
Several newt species have also been used to un-
derstand regeneration in different brain regions. 
Mechanical removal of large portions of the optic tec-
tum leads to regeneration in the Italian crested newt 
(Triturus cristatus carnifex) (Minelli and Del Grande, 
1974a, 1974b; Minelli et al., 1987, 1990). Optic tec-
tum regeneration as well as retinotectal projection re-
covery can be observed in Japanese fire belly newts 
(Cynops pyrrhogaster) (Okamoto et al., 2007). The 
red spotted newt has been established as a great model 
to study cell type-specific regeneration, for example of 
dopaminergic in the midbrain or cholinergic neurons 
in the telencephalon (Berg et al., 2010; Kirkham et 
al., 2014). In contrast to the axolotl, homeostatic pro-
liferation in the red spotted newt is restricted to the 
forebrain, but quiescent ependymoglia cells can also 
proliferate in response to injury and regenerate lost 
cell types in other brain regions such as the midbrain 
(Berg et al., 2010). Ependymoglia have been identi-
fied as the source of brain regeneration in both the 
red spotted and Iberian newts, through thymidine 
analogue incorporation and lineage tracing by elec-
troporation of reporter constructs (Berg et al., 2010; 
Kirkham et al., 2014; Joven et al., 2018)., Two types of 
ependymoglia have been identified in the telencepha-
lon of the red spotted newt, and these are distributed 
unevenly along the ventricle (Kirkham et al., 2014). 
Type-1 ependymoglia are dispersed along the ventricle 
and create new neurogenic regions after injury. They 
express both glutamine synthetase and glial fibrillary 
acidic protein and are considered to be slowly dividing 
stem cells as they retain the thymidine analogue BrdU 
for long periods of time in pulse-chase experiments. 
Type-2 ependymoglia are located in proliferative hot 
spots. They express glial fibrillary acidic protein and 
do not retain BrdU for long periods of time, leading 
to their classification as transit-amplifying cells. Upon 
ablation of cholinergic neurons to de novo neurogenic 
niches, proliferation of type-1 cells as well as appear-
ance of type-2 cells is observed. It will be important 
to determine the heterogeneities in ependymoglia cell 
types, exact lineage relationships, and their potencies 
during growth and regeneration in both the axolotl and 
newts to understand how similar or different they are 
to cells in other species.
The signaling pathways controlling brain regen-
eration have been studied in the red spotted newt 
using several experimental paradigms. Hameed 
and colleagues investigated how environmental 
factors may put species under a selective pressure 
to manifest regenerative abilities. The authors sim-
ulated experimentally the low oxygen conditions 
that newts experience in the wild during winter and 
examined the response of the brain to these condi-
tions (Hameed et al., 2015). Reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) accumulated in ependymoglia and induced 
cell cycle re-entry, ultimately leading to neurogen-
esis. Modulation of the oxygen levels also led to the 
activation of microglia, although these cells have no 
role in promoting the proliferation of ependymog-
lia. It was shown that regeneration under normoxia 
is also ROS-dependent, indicating that this mecha-
nism might have been co-opted during evolution to 
allow regeneration.
 1932846x, 2019, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dneu.22665 by Ulsan National Institute Of Science And Technology (Unist), Wiley Online Library on [28/10/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

428    Lust and Tanaka
Developmental Neurobiology
Table 1  Overview of brain regeneration studies across different amphibian and teleost fish species
Brain region
Organism
Regeneration
Injury type
Cells of origin
Molecular pathways
Functional recovery
Telencephalon
Amphibians
African clawed frog 
(Xenopus laevis)
+
Removal of anterior half 
(Yoshino and Tochinai, 
2004, 2006)
Musashi1+ progeni-
tors (Yoshino and 
Tochinai, 2004)
−
Response to food odor 
(Yoshino and Tochinai, 
2006)
only in larval 
stages 47–54
Axolotl (Ambystoma 
mexicanum)
+
Partial removal of dorsal 
telencephalon (Kirsche and 
Kirsche, 1964a; Maden et 
al., 2013; Amamoto et al., 
2016)
Ependymoglia 
(Maden et al.,  
2013)
−
Electrophysiological 
features (Amamoto et 
al., 2016)
Red spotted newt 
(Notophthalmus 
viridescens)
+
Ablation of cholinergic  
neurons (Berg et al., 2011; 
Kirkham et al., 2014)
Ependymoglia 
(Kirkham et al., 
2014)
Notch (Kirkham et al., 
2014)
−
Teleost Fish
Zebrafish (Danio 
rerio)
+
Stab lesion (via skull or  
nostril) (Kroehne et al., 
2011; März et al., 2011; 
Baumgart et al., 2012; 
Kishimoto et al., 2012)
Radial glia and 
non-glial progeni-
tors (Kroehne et 
al., 2011)
Cysteinyl leukotriene 
receptor 1 (Kyritsis  
et al., 2012)
−
Fibroblast growth factor 
(Kizil et al., 2012)
Gata3 (Kizil et al., 
2012)
Id1(Rodriguez Viales  
et al., 2015)
Notch (Kishimoto  
et al., 2012)
Goldfish (Carassius 
auratus)
+
Removal (Bernstein, 1967; 
Bernstein and Sadlack,  
1969)
−
−
Locomotor function 
(Venables et al., 2018)
Tyrosine hydroxylase-positive 
neuron ablation (Venables et 
al., 2018)
Guppy (Lebistes 
reticulatus)
+
Complete removal (Maron, 
1963)
−
−
−
Stickleback 
(Gasterosteus 
aculeatus)
+
Bilateral removal (area  
dorsalis pars lateralis) 
(Seegar, 1961)
Starts in ependymal 
layer (Seegar,  
1961)
−
Parental and sexual 
behavior (Seegar, 1961)
(Continues)
 1932846x, 2019, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dneu.22665 by Ulsan National Institute Of Science And Technology (Unist), Wiley Online Library on [28/10/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

A Comparative Perspective on Brain Regeneration    429
Developmental Neurobiology
Brain region
Organism
Regeneration
Injury type
Cells of origin
Molecular pathways
Functional recovery
Optic Tectum
Amphibians
African clawed frog 
(Xenopus laevis)
+
Removal of optic lobe 
(McKeown et al., 2013)
Sox2+ progenitors 
(McKeown et al., 
2013)
−
Visual avoidance behavior 
(McKeown et al., 2013)
only in larval 
stages 47–54
Italian crested newt 
(Triturus cristatus 
carnifex)
+
Partial removal (Minelli and 
Del Grande, 1974a, 1974b; 
Minelli et al., 1987, 1990)
−
−
−
Japanese fire belly 
newt (Cynops 
pyrrhogaster)
+
Unilateral removal (Okamoto 
et al., 2007)
−
−
−
Teleost Fish
Zebrafish (Danio 
rerio)
+
Stab lesion (Lindsey et al., 
2018)
Neuroepithelial-like 
progenitors and 
radial glia  
(Lindsey et al., 
2018)
−
−
Goldfish (Carassius 
auratus)
+
Unilateral removal (Davis and 
Schlumpf, 1984)
−
−
Reappearance of vision 
(Davis and Schlumpf, 
1984)
Crucian carp 
(Carassius 
carassius)
+
Unilateral removal (Kirsche 
and Kirsche, 1961)
−
−
Locomotor function 
(Kirsche and Kirsche, 
1961)
Mesencephalon
Amphibians
Red spotted newt 
(Notophthalmus 
viridescens)
+
Ablation of dopaminergic 
neurons (Parish et al., 2007; 
Berg et al., 2010, 2011)
Ependymoglia 
(Parish et al.,  
2007; Berg et al., 
2010, 2011
Dopamine (Berg et al., 
2011)
Motor behavior (Parish et 
al., 2007)
Ablation of cholinergic  
neurons (Berg et al., 2011)
Reactive oxygen  
species (Hameed  
et al., 2015)
Sonic hedgehog  
(Berg et al., 2010)
Iberian ribbed newt 
(Pleurodeles walt)
+
Ablation of dopaminergic 
neurons (Joven et al., 2018)
Ependymoglia  
(Joven et al., 2018)
−
−
Cerebellum
Teleost Fish
Zebrafish (Danio 
rerio)
+
Unilateral ablation (Kaslin  
et al., 2017)
Neuroepithelial-like 
stem cells (Kaslin 
et al., 2017)
−
Swimming behavior 
(Kaslin et al., 2017)
Brown ghost 
knifefish 
(Apteronotus 
leptorhynchus)
+
Stab lesion (Zupanc et al., 
1998; Clint and Zupanc, 
2001; Zupanc and Clint, 
2001; Zupanc and Zupanc, 
2006)
−
−
−
Note Other anuaran amphibians such as Rana esculenta and Rana fusca do not exhibit brain regeneration.
+ Indicates that regeneration is present.
− Indicates that no studies have been performed.
 1932846x, 2019, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dneu.22665 by Ulsan National Institute Of Science And Technology (Unist), Wiley Online Library on [28/10/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

430    Lust and Tanaka
Developmental Neurobiology
Regeneration not only requires the activation of 
stem or progenitor cell proliferation but also the ap-
propriate termination to avoid tumor formation. One 
mechanism to ensure this is through negative feed-
back from differentiated cells. In the newt midbrain, 
dopaminergic neurons exert a proliferation block on 
ependymoglia cells via dopamine signaling (Berg et 
al., 2011). Loss of dopamine production after targeted 
ablation of dopaminergic neurons lifts this block, 
allowing ependymoglia to enter the regenerative 
program until the block is reinstated via the regener-
ation of dopaminergic neurons. In addition, regener-
ation of dopaminergic neurons is also dependent on 
Sonic hedgehog signaling (Berg et al., 2010), which 
has also been studied in other models such as tail in 
axolotl (Schnapp et al., 2005) and lens regeneration 
in newts (Tsonis et al., 2004). Whether or not the 
same mechanisms are used to elicit regeneration in 
other parts of the brain and in other salamander spe-
cies will be an interesting future direction to pursue. 
Indeed, it is a promising time to study salamander 
brain regeneration, as gene editing tools, transgenic 
Cre-driver strains, as well as genomic resources have 
been recently developed for both the axolotl (Khattak 
et al., 2013; Fei et al., 2014, 2016, 2017; Nowoshilow 
et al., 2018) and the Iberian ribbed newt (Elewa et 
al., 2017).
BRAIN REGENERATION IN TELEOST 
FISH
Various teleost fish species have been studied in brain 
regeneration research, such as goldfish (Carassius 
auratus) (Bernstein and Sadlack, 1969; Davis and 
Schlumpf, 1984; Pflugfelder, 1965), adult sticklebacks 
(Gasterosteus aculeatus) (Seegar, 1961, 1962, 1965), 
guppies (Poecilia reticulata) (Maron, 1963), caruscian 
carps (Carassius carassius) (Kirsche and Kirsche, 
1961), and the brown ghost knifefish (Apteronotus 
leptorhynchus) (Zupanc et al., 1998; Zupanc and Ott, 
1999; Clint and Zupanc, 2001; Zupanc and Clint, 
2001; Zupanc and Zupanc, 2006). However, in the last 
decades, the zebrafish has become the favored model 
to investigate regeneration of the telencephalon, optic 
tectum, and cerebellum.
The identification of the cells responsible for brain 
regeneration has been limited to thymidine analogue 
incorporations in most teleost fish (stickleback and 
goldfish). In contrast, the zebrafish has served as a 
great model to understand stem and progenitor cell 
dynamics during brain regeneration due to its com-
patibility with Cre-loxP-mediated lineage tracing. 
The teleost telencephalon harbors neurogenic radial 
glial cells that act as self-renewing and multipotent 
progenitors at the single cell level, behaving as bona 
fide neural stem cells (Rothenaigner et al., 2011). 
In addition, non-glial cycling neuroblasts, possi-
ble equivalents of mammalian transit-amplifying 
progenitors, are dispersed along the telencephalic 
ventricle (März et al., 2010). Altogether four types 
of ventricular cells have been identified in the tel-
encephalon: PCNA-negative radial glia (“type I”), 
PCNA-positive radial glia (“type II”), which are 
highly similar to the ependymoglia types found in 
the newt telencephalon, and dividing non-glial pro-
genitors (“type IIIa and IIIb”) (März et al., 2010). 
Upon injury, the proliferation rate of both radial glia 
and non-glial progenitors is increased, ultimately 
leading to replacement of the lost cells (März et al., 
2011; Kroehne et al., 2011; Baumgart et al., 2012; 
Kishimoto et al., 2012). Noninvasive in vivo imag-
ing and lineage-tracing of individual cells have been 
used to understand the dynamic behaviors of radial 
glia during homeostasis and regeneration (Barbosa 
et al., 2015; Dray et al., 2015). Surprisingly, it was 
found that mechanical lesion leads to increased 
symmetric, neurogenic divisions of radial glia, 
which results in the depletion of stem cells (Barbosa 
et al., 2015). While the authors showed that the ze-
brafish brain undergoes a decline in proliferative 
cells with age, it remains to be determined whether 
the ventricular zone undergoes reductions in size 
and cell number, as would be predicted. Moreover, 
these results raise the question of whether repeated 
injury to the telencephalon would eventually result 
in failed regeneration. Additionally, it could be of 
great interest to compare the injury-induced behav-
iors of radial glia in different telencephalic regions, 
which could relate to the diverse behaviors observed 
during homeostasis (Dray et al., 2015).
Recent studies in other areas of the zebrafish brain 
have uncovered important differences in the source 
of regeneration, even in the same species. Whereas 
the telencephalon relies on both radial glia and non-
glial progenitors during homeostasis and regenera-
tion, a clear separation between these two cell types 
can be determined in the optic tectum (Lindsey et 
al., 2018). Neuroepithelial-like progenitors, which are 
restricted to the edge of the optic tectum, proliferate 
during homeostasis and increase their proliferation 
rate following stab lesion injury (Lindsey et al., 2018). 
Radial glia, which line the ventricle, are quiescent 
during homeostasis, but become activated to prolifer-
ate following injury (Lindsey et al., 2018). Conversely, 
during regeneration of the adult zebrafish cerebellum, 
radial glia cells play only minor roles. Here, neuroep-
ithelial-like stem cells are the source of regeneration, 
 1932846x, 2019, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dneu.22665 by Ulsan National Institute Of Science And Technology (Unist), Wiley Online Library on [28/10/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

A Comparative Perspective on Brain Regeneration    431
Developmental Neurobiology
although they fail to regenerate all cell types (Kaslin 
et al., 2017).
How the presence of an injury reaches the cells re-
sponsible for regeneration, and the molecular pathways 
involved in regulating the proliferation and differenti-
ation of these cells, has been extensively studied in ze-
brafish. Activation of the immune system is one of the 
first responses detected after injury and is necessary 
and sufficient to enhance the proliferation of radial 
glia (Kyritsis et al., 2012). These observations stand 
in contrast to results from red spotted newts, in which 
prolonged microglia responses are detrimental for the 
generation of dopaminergic neurons (Kirkham et al., 
2011). In zebrafish, Cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 
signaling is a necessary and sufficient component of 
this response. Overexpression of Cysteinyl leukotriene 
receptor 1 in the uninjured brain leads to increased 
proliferation, as well as expression of the zinc-finger 
transcription factor gata3. Gata3 expression itself is in-
duced only after injury in both radial glia and newborn 
neurons and is necessary, but not sufficient, for pro-
liferation, neurogenesis, and distribution of newborn 
neurons in the tissue (Kizil et al., 2012). Interestingly, 
Gata3 has similar functions during regeneration of the 
heart and fins. Its expression is directly regulated by 
Fgf signaling in an injury-dependent context in both 
brain and fin and is likely involved in the regenerative 
response of additional tissues, as its expression is also 
induced after injury to the cerebellum, optic tectum, 
spinal cord, and liver.
It will be exciting to investigate if the signaling 
pathways that have been studied in the context of tel-
encephalon regeneration also play a conserved func-
tional role in regeneration of the optic tectum and 
cerebellum, where different progenitors are induced 
to proliferate upon injury.
HOW CAN WE INTEGRATE AND 
COMPARE KNOWLEDGE FROM 
DIFFERENT BRAIN INJURIES AND 
DIFFERENT SPECIES?
When comparing our current knowledge on brain re-
generation in aquatic species, it becomes clear that 
there are both similarities and differences. For exam-
ple, both the newt and zebrafish telencephalon harbor 
similar glial cell populations: quiescent type I radial 
glia/ependymoglia as well as proliferating type II 
radial glia/ependymoglia. These two glia types are 
comparatively similar with respect to marker gene ex-
pression and proliferative behaviors. However, in ad-
dition to these glial cell types, each species contains 
unique cell types. Neuroepithelial-like progenitors, 
like the type III cells in zebrafish, have not been de-
tected in any salamander telencephalon studied to 
date. Conversely, glutamine synthetase-negative, glial 
marker-positive cells are not present in the zebrafish 
telencephalon.
One might additionally wonder how different 
types of injury affect the outcome of regeneration. 
Common, comparable injury models exist for other 
regenerative organs such as limbs in urodeles and an-
urans (Dent, 1962; Iten and Bryant, 1973). A diver-
sity of injury paradigms have been used for the brain, 
which has complicated comparison, as some striking 
differences exist in the requirements for regeneration 
in each case. Selective ablation of specific neuronal 
cell types using drugs does not injure ependymoglia 
or radial glia and solely requires the regeneration of 
the ablated cell lineage. Large injuries, generated by 
the removal of brain tissue, lead to injury of the ven-
tricular zone, likely death of ependymoglia or radial 
glia and multiple different cell types that need to be 
regenerated subsequently. It remains to be addressed 
whether the same cell populations are responsible for 
regeneration in both injury models, and whether they 
use comparable or differential signaling pathways.
Evidence that different injury models lead to di-
vergent outcomes was found in the zebrafish telen-
cephalon. Radial glia in zebrafish react to stab wound 
injuries through the skull by upregulation of glial 
fibrillary acidic protein and glial swelling (März et 
al., 2010; Kishimoto et al., 2012), while this reaction is 
not induced when injury is generated through the nos-
tril (Kroehne et al., 2011; Baumgart et al., 2012). It is 
likely that the injury through the skull is more compa-
rable to large ablations, as ependymoglia and the ven-
tricle are injured and the cerebrospinal fluid can leak 
into the brain tissue. Whether this results in different 
injury signals being present and different ependymog-
lia being activated remains to be addressed.
Finally, one might also wonder whether different 
injury methods might reveal differential regenerative 
potentials. It is curious to note that the adult goldfish 
telencephalon does not undergo regeneration when 
a large brain mass is removed, while, in contrast, it 
can regenerate dopaminergic neurons after selective 
chemical ablation (Bernstein, 1967; Venables et al., 
2018). In light of the recent findings that radial glia 
in the zebrafish telencephalon have a limited capacity 
for self-renewal (Barbosa et al., 2015), one wonders 
whether regeneration of large injuries can be accom-
plished at all in zebrafish. Even though the removal 
of telencephalic regions has not been performed in 
zebrafish, it could be speculated that massive injuries 
would not be regenerated due to the lack of sufficient 
self-renewing divisions. Newts and axolotl have the 
 1932846x, 2019, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dneu.22665 by Ulsan National Institute Of Science And Technology (Unist), Wiley Online Library on [28/10/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

432    Lust and Tanaka
Developmental Neurobiology
ability to regenerate large injuries, opening up the 
question of whether the self-renewing capacities of 
salamander glial cells differ from those observed in 
zebrafish. It is possible that signaling pathways such 
as the planar cell polarity pathway, which has been 
shown to direct self-renewing divisions in axolotl 
spinal cord regeneration (Albors et al., 2015) and in 
mouse brain development (Delaunay et al., 2014), 
are active in salamander glia cells but not in teleost 
fish. Additionally, these results raise the question of 
whether the lack of regeneration in adult Xenopus is 
to some extent caused by the lack of glial self-renewal. 
It is tempting to speculate that low numbers of self-re-
newing divisions, leading to a rapid depletion of glia 
cells, might impede the closure of large injuries. The 
fact that the transplantation of both larval and froglet 
brain cells into an injured froglet brain results in im-
proved regeneration could also be explained by this 
hypothesis: increased numbers of ependymal cells, 
regardless of whether they are derived from larvae or 
froglets, could provide an increased cellular source for 
regeneration. With this in mind, it will be interesting 
to address whether adult frogs are able to regenerate 
neuronal cells in response to selective ablations.
FUNCTIONAL RECOVERY AND 
THE PERFECTION OF BRAIN 
REGENERATION
Limb regeneration, as well as spinal cord regeneration, 
in salamanders predominantly results in the reappear-
ance of a perfect, functional copy of the original struc-
ture (Schnapp et al., 2005; Diogo et al., 2014). Is this 
also achieved after brain regeneration? As the brain 
is the central unit that orchestrates the execution of 
behaviors, it is extremely attractive to address the res-
toration of function.
One important requirement to understand whether 
an original copy can be regenerated faithfully is the 
ability to distinguish different cell types, such as 
neuronal subtypes and their localization across brain 
areas. Amamoto and colleagues have addressed this 
problem to great detail in the axolotl telencephalon, 
which regenerates all neuronal subtypes after removal 
of a large portion of the telencephalon (Amamoto et 
al., 2016). However, the regenerated structure is disor-
ganized: the distribution of neurons is altered and neu-
ronal subtypes are not arranged in distinct domains 
as seen before injury. The reason for this uncoupling 
of cell type diversity and spatial organization is not 
yet known, and the functional consequences of such 
a disorganized, regenerated brain area remain to be 
analyzed in the future. In the zebrafish retina, it has 
been shown that the specificity of neuronal connec-
tions is to largely maintained during regeneration 
(Yoshimatsu et al., 2016). H3 horizontal cells, which 
preferentially connect to ultraviolet cones, re-establish 
their connections following ultraviolet cone ablation 
and regeneration. However, the cues determining 
synaptic specificity can only be maintained within a 
limited time period after injury. Upon regeneration, 
delay by repeated ablation of ultraviolet cones synap-
tic specificity is not restored. These results indicate 
that comparing large injuries, which require long time 
periods to be regenerated, to smaller, cell-type spe-
cific ablations could be important when addressing 
the re-emergence of synaptic connections during brain 
regeneration.
Studying functional recovery after brain regen-
eration requires the recording and quantification of 
stereotypic behaviors. Xenopus has proven to be an 
optimal model, as it performs highly stereotypic be-
haviors. A food-induced response known as “fore-
limb sweeping” has been used to study functional 
telencephalic regeneration in larval Xenopus brains 
(Hutchison, 1964; Avila and Frye, 1977; Yoshino 
and Tochinai, 2006). A visual avoidance response 
to moving stimuli serves as a readout for functional 
optic tectum regeneration (McKeown et al., 2013). A 
commonly used assay to study functional recovery 
after brain injury in teleost fish and salamanders is 
the re-occurrence of locomotor function. Such assays 
have been utilized after injury and regeneration of the 
cerebellum in zebrafish (Kaslin et al., 2017) as well as 
after targeted ablation and regeneration of dopaminer-
gic neurons in the goldfish telencephalon (Venables 
et al., 2018). Likewise, in red spotted newts, locomo-
tor recovery assays were used to study functional re-
generation of dopaminergic and cholinergic neurons 
(Parish et al., 2007).
In the future, it will be exciting to determine if a 
regenerated brain is able to fulfill the same functions 
as the original, and whether plasticity in neuronal con-
nections and a failure to re-establish synaptic connec-
tions might be reasons why brain regeneration does 
not lead to perfect regeneration in some cases.
CONCLUSION
We have acquired substantial knowledge on the pro-
cesses of injury-induced proliferation and neurogen-
esis in the brains of different species. In the future, 
it will be interesting to use comparable injury mod-
els to assess the differences and similarities between 
species more rigorously. By doing so, we will be able 
to achieve a more comparative understanding of the 
 1932846x, 2019, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dneu.22665 by Ulsan National Institute Of Science And Technology (Unist), Wiley Online Library on [28/10/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

A Comparative Perspective on Brain Regeneration    433
Developmental Neurobiology
processes involved in brain regeneration, which will 
help determine the strategies that could be used to in-
duce brain repair in non-regenerative species.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors indicate no potential conflicts of 
interests.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to Leo Otsuki for his helpful com-
ments on the manuscript.
This work was supported by the Research Institute of 
Molecular Pathology (IMP).
K.L. is supported by a Long-Term Fellowship from the 
Human Frontier Science Program LT000605/2018-L.
LITERATURE CITED
Albors, A.R., Tazaki, A., Rost, F., Nowoshilow, S., Chara, O. 
and Tanaka, E.M. (2015) Planar cell polarity-mediated in-
duction of neural stem cell expansion during axolotl spinal 
cord regeneration. Elife, 4, e10230.
Amamoto, R., Gisselle, V., Huerta, L., Takahashi, E., Dai, 
G., Grant, A., et al. (2016) Adult axolotls can regenerate 
original neuronal diversity in response to brain injury. 
Elife, 5, e13998.
Aslan, Y., Tadjuidje, E., Zorn, A.M. and Cha, S.-W. (2017) 
High efficiency non-mosaic CRISPR mediated knock-in 
and mutations in F0 Xenopus. Development, 144, 
2852–2858.
Avila, V.L. and Frye, P.G. (1977) Feeding behavior in 
the African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis Daudin). 
Herpetologica, 33, 152–161.
Barbosa, J.S., Sanchez-Gonzalez, R., Di Giaimo, R., 
Baumgart, E.V., Theis, F.J., Götz, M., et al. (2015) Live 
imaging of adult neural stem cell behavior in the intact and 
injured zebrafish brain. Science, 348, 789–793.
Baumgart, E.V., Barbosa, J.S., Bally-cuif, L., Götz, M. and 
Ninkovic, J. (2012) Stab wound injury of the zebrafish tel-
encephalon: a model for comparative analysis of reactive 
gliosis. Glia, 60, 343–357.
Becker, T., Wullimann, M.F., Becker, C.G., Bernhardt, 
R.R. and Schachner, M. (1997) Axonal regrowth after 
spinal cord transection in adult zebrafish. The Journal of 
Comparative Neurology, 377, 577–595.
Berg, D.A., Kirkham, M., Beljajeva, A., Knapp, D., 
Habermann, B., Ryge, J., et al. (2010) Efficient regenera-
tion by activation of neurogenesis in homeostatically qui-
escent regions of the adult vertebrate brain. Development, 
138, 4127–4134.
Berg, D.A., Kirkham, M., Wang, H., Frisén, J. and Simon, 
A. (2011) Dopamine controls neurogenesis in the adult 
salamander midbrain in homeostasis and during regener-
ation of dopamine neurons. Cell Stem Cell, 8, 426–433.
Bernardos, R.L., Barthel, L.K., Meyers, J.R. and Raymond, 
P.A. (2007) Late-stage neuronal progenitors in the retina 
are radial Müller glia that function as retinal stem cells. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 7028–7040.
Bernstein, J.J. (1967) The regenerative capacity of the telen-
cephalon of the goldfish and rat. Experimental Neurology, 
17, 44–56.
Bernstein, J. and Sadlack, F. (1969) The formation of new 
neurons following telencephalic lesions in goldfish. The 
Anatomical Record, 163.
Blitz, I.L., Biesinger, J., Xie, X. and Cho, K.W.Y. (2013) 
Biallelic genome modification in F0 Xenopus tropica-
lis embryos using the CRISPR/Cas system. Genesis, 51, 
827–834.
Burr, H. (1916) Regeneration in the brain of Amblystoma. 
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 26, 203–211.
Clint, S.C. and Zupanc, G.K.H. (2001) Neuronal re-
generation in the cerebellum of adult teleost fish, 
Apteronotus leptorhynchus: guidance of migrat-
ing young cells by radial glia. Developmental Brain 
Research, 130, 15–23.
Danielewsky, B. (1890) Über die Regeneration der Grosshirn 
Hemisphären beim Frosch. Verh X inter med Kongr Bd. 2.
Davis, R. and Schlumpf, B. (1984) Visual recovery in gold-
fish following unilateral optic tectum ablation. Evidence 
of competition between optic axons for tectal targets. 
Behavioural Brain Research, 3, 287–291.
Delaunay, D., Cortay, V., Patti, D., Knoblauch, K. and 
Dehay, C. (2014) Mitotic spindle asymmetry: a Wnt/PCP-
regulated mechanism generating asymmetrical division in 
cortical precursors. Cell Reports, 6, 400–414.
Dent, J.N. (1962) Limb regeneration in larvae and meta-
morphosing individuals of the South African clawed toad. 
Journal of Morphology, 110, 61–77.
Diogo, R., Nacu, E. and Tanaka, E.M. (2014) Is salamander 
limb regeneration really perfect? Anatomical and mor-
phogenetic analysis of forelimb muscle regeneration in 
GFP-transgenic axolotls as a basis for regenerative, devel-
opmental, and evolutionary studies. Anatomical Record, 
297, 1076–1089.
Dray, N., Bedu, S., Vuillemin, N., Alunni, A., Coolen, M., 
Krecsmarik, M., et al. (2015) Large-scale live imag-
ing of adult neural stem cells in their endogenous niche. 
Development, 142, 3592–3600.
Eguchi, G., Eguchi, Y., Nakamura, K., Yadav, M.C., Millán, 
J.L. and Tsonis, P.A. (2011) Regenerative capacity in 
newts is not altered by repeated regeneration and ageing. 
Nature Communications, 2, 384.
Elewa, A., Wang, H., Talavera-López, C., Joven, A., Brito, 
G., Kumar, A., et al. (2017) Reading and editing the 
Pleurodeles waltl genome reveals novel features of tetra-
pod regeneration. Nature Communications, 8, 1–9.
Fei, J., Schuez, M., Tazaki, A., Taniguchi, Y., Roensch, K. 
and Tanaka, E.M. (2014) CRISPR-mediated genomic de-
letion of Sox2 in the axolotl shows a requirement in spinal 
cord neural stem cell amplification during tail regenera-
tion. Stem Cell Reports, 3, 444–459.
 1932846x, 2019, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dneu.22665 by Ulsan National Institute Of Science And Technology (Unist), Wiley Online Library on [28/10/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

434    Lust and Tanaka
Developmental Neurobiology
Fei, J., Knapp, D., Schuez, M., Murawala, P., Zou, Y., Singh, 
S.P., et al. (2016) Tissue- and time-directed electropora-
tion of CAS9 protein – gRNA complexes in vivo yields 
efficient multigene knockout for studying gene function in 
regeneration. Regenerative Medicine, 1, 1–9.
Fei, J.-F., Schuez, M., Knapp, D., Taniguchi, Y., Drechsel, 
D.N. and Tanaka, E.M. (2017) Efficient gene knockin in 
axolotl and its use to test the role of satellite cells in limb 
regeneration. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 114, 12501–12506.
Filoni, S. and Gibertini, G. (1969) A study of the regenerative 
capacity of the central nervous system of anuran amphibia 
in relation to their stage of development. I. Observations 
on the regeneration of the optic lobe of Xenopus laevis 
(Daudin) in the larval stages. Archives of Biological, 80, 
369–411.
Filoni, S. and Paglialunga, L. (1990) Effect of denerva-
tion on hindlimb regeneration in Xenopus laevis larvae. 
Differentiation, 43, 10–19.
Hameed, L.S., Berg, D.A., Belnoue, L., Jensen, L.D., Cao, 
Y. and Simon, A. (2015) Environmental changes in oxygen 
tension reveal ROS-dependent neurogenesis and regenera-
tion in the adult newt brain. Elife, 4, e08422.
Howe, K., Clark, M.D., Torroja, C.F., Torrance, J., Berthelot, 
C., Muffato, M., et al. (2013) The zebrafish reference ge-
nome sequence and its relationship to the human genome. 
Nature, 496, 498–503.
Hutchison, J.B. (1964) Investigations on the neural con-
trol of clasping and feeding in Xenopus laevis (Daudin). 
Behaviour, 24, 47–65.
Hwang, W.Y., Fu, Y., Reyon, D., Maeder, M.L., Tsai, 
S.Q., Sander, J.D., et al. (2013) Efficient genome ed-
iting in zebrafish using a CRISPR-Cas system. Nature 
Biotechnology, 31, 227–229.
Iten, L.E. and Bryant, S.V. (1973) Forelimb regenera-
tion from different levels of amputation in the newt, 
Notophthalmus viridescens: length, rate, and stages. 
Wilhelm Roux’ Archiv für Entwicklungsmechanik der 
Organismen, 173, 263–282.
Joven, A., Wang, H., Pinheiro, T., Hameed, L.S., Belnoue, 
L. and Simon, A. (2018) Cellular basis of brain matura-
tion and acquisition of complex behaviors in salamanders. 
Development, 145, dev160051.
Kaslin, J., Kroehne, V., Ganz, J., Hans, S. and Brand, M. 
(2017) Distinct roles of neuroepithelial-like and ra-
dial glia-like progenitor cells in cerebellar regeneration. 
Development, 144, 1462–1471.
Kettleborough, R.N.W., Busch-Nentwich, E.M., Harvey, 
S.A., Dooley, C.M., De Bruijn, E., Van Eeden, F., et al. 
(2013) A systematic genome-wide analysis of zebrafish 
protein-coding gene function. Nature, 496, 494–497.
Khattak, S., Schuez, M., Richter, T., Knapp, D., Haigo, 
S.L., Sandoval-Guzmán, T., et al. (2013) Germline trans-
genic methods for tracking cells and testing gene function 
during regeneration in the axolotl. Stem Cell Reports, 1, 
90–103.
Kirkham, M., Berg, D.A. and Simon, A. (2011) Microglia 
activation during neuroregeneration in the adult vertebrate 
brain. Neuroscience Letters, 497, 11–16.
Kirkham, M., Hameed, L.S., Berg, D.A., Wang, H. and 
Simon, A. (2014) Progenitor cell dynamics in the newt 
telencephalon during homeostasis and neuronal regener-
ation. Stem Cell Reports, 2, 507–519.
Kirsche, W. and Kirsche, K. (1961) Experimentelle 
Untersuchungen zur Frage der Regeneration und Funktion 
des Tectum Opticum von Carassius carassius. Zeitschrift 
fuer Mikroskopisch-Anatomische Forschung, 67, 140–182.
Kirsche, K. and Kirsche, W. (1964a) Regenerative processes 
in the telencephalon of Ambystoma mexicanum. Journal 
fur Hirnforschung 7, 421–436.
Kirsche, K. and Kirsche, W. (1964b) Experimentelle 
Untersuchung über den Einfluß der Regeneration des Nervus 
olfactorius auf die Vorderhirnregeneration von Ambystoma 
mexicanum. Journal fur Hirnforschung, 7, 315–333.
Kishimoto, N., Shimizu, K. and Sawamoto, K. (2012) 
Neuronal regeneration in a zebrafish model of adult brain 
injury. Disease Models & Mechanisms, 5, 200–209.
Kizil, C., Kyritsis, N., Dudczig, S., Kroehne, V., 
Freudenreich, D., Kaslin, J., et al. (2012) Regenerative 
neurogenesis from neural progenitor cells requires inju-
ry-induced expression of Gata3. Developmental Cell, 23, 
1230–1237.
Kroehne, V., Freudenreich, D., Hans, S., Kaslin, J. and Brand, 
M. (2011) Regeneration of the adult zebrafish brain from 
neurogenic radial glia-type progenitors. Development, 
138, 4831–4841.
Kyritsis, N., Kizil, C., Zocher, S., Kroehne, V., Kaslin, J., 
Freudenreich, D., et al. (2012) Acute inflammation initi-
ates the regenerative response in the adult zebrafish brain. 
Science, 338, 1353–1356.
Lai, S., Kuenne, C., Kuan, J., Lai, H., Tsedeke, A.T., 
Guenther, S., et al. (2017) Reciprocal analyses in zebrafish 
and medaka reveal that harnessing the immune response 
promotes cardiac regeneration. Elife, 6, e25605.
Langhe, R., Chesneau, A., Colozza, G., Hidalgo, M., Ail, 
D., Locker, M., et al. (2017) Müller glial cell reactiva-
tion in Xenopus models of retinal degeneration. Glia, 65, 
1333–1349.
Lindsey, B.W., Aitken, G.E., Tang, J.K., Khabooshan, M. 
and Vandestadt, C. (2018) Tectal stem cells display di-
verse regenerative capacities. bioRxiv 268136, https://doi.
org/10.1101/268136
Lust, K. and Wittbrodt, J. (2018) Activating the regenerative 
potential of Müller glia cells in a regeneration-deficient 
retina. Elife, 7, e32319.
Maden, M., Manwell, L.A. and Ormerod, B.K. (2013) 
Proliferation zones in the axolotl brain and regeneration of 
the telencephalon. Neural Development, 8, 1–15.
Maron, K. (1963) Endbrain regeneration in Lebistes reticu-
latus. Folia Biologica (Praha), 11, 1–10.
März, M., Chapouton, P., Diotel, N., Vaillant, C., Hesl, B., 
Takamiya, M., et al. (2010) Heterogeneity in progenitor 
cell subtypes in the ventricular zone of the zebrafish adult 
telencephalon. Glia, 58, 870–888.
März, M., Schmidt, R., Rastegar, S. and Strahle, U. (2011) 
Regenerative response following stab injury in the adult 
zebrafish telencephalon. Developmental Dynamics, 240, 
2221–2231.
 1932846x, 2019, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dneu.22665 by Ulsan National Institute Of Science And Technology (Unist), Wiley Online Library on [28/10/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

A Comparative Perspective on Brain Regeneration    435
Developmental Neurobiology
McKeown, C.R., Sharma, P., Sharipov, H.E., Shen, W. and 
Cline, H.T. (2013) Neurogenesis is required for behav-
ioral recovery after injury in the visual system of Xenopus 
laevis. The Journal of Comparative Neurology, 521, 
2262–2278.
Minelli, G. and Del Grande, P. (1974a) Histoautoradiographic 
studies of encephalic reactions in regeneration of the optic 
tectum of Triturus cristatus carnifex. Archivio Italiano di 
Anatomia e di Embriologia, 79, 103–114.
Minelli, G. and Del Grande, P. (1974b) Localization and 
quantitative analysis of the elements leading to the re-
generation of the optic tectum in the adult Triturus cri-
status carnifex. Zeitschrift für mikroskopisch-anatomische 
Forschung, 88, 209–224.
Minelli, G., Franceschini, V., Del Grande, P. and Ciani, F. 
(1987) Newly-formed neurons in the regenerating optic 
tectum of Triturus cristatus carnifex. Basic and Applied 
Histochemistry, 31,43–52.
Minelli, G., del Grande, P., Franceschini, V. and Ciani, F. 
(1990) Proliferative response of the mesencephalic matrix 
areas in the reparation of the optic tectum of Triturus cri-
status carnifex. Zeitschrift für mikroskopisch-anatomische 
Forschung, 104, 17–25.
Nowoshilow, S., Schloissnig, S., Fei, J.F., Dahl, A., Pang, 
A.W.C., Pippel, M., et al. (2018) The axolotl genome and 
the evolution of key tissue formation regulators. Nature, 
554, 50–55.
Okamoto, M., Ohsawa, H., Hayashi, T., Owaribe, K. and 
Tsonis, P.A. (2007) Regeneration of retinotectal projec-
tions after optic tectum removal in adult newts. Molecular 
Vision, 13, 2112–2118.
Parish, C.L., Beljajeva, A., Arenas, E. and Simon, A. (2007) 
Midbrain dopaminergic neurogenesis and behavioural 
recovery in a salamander lesion-induced regeneration 
model. Development, 134, 2881–2887.
Pflugfelder, O. (1965) Reparative und regenerative prozesse 
nach partieller zerstörung von fischgehirnen. Zool. Jb. 
Physiol, 71, 301–314.
Poss, K.D., Wilson, L.G. and Keating, M.T. (2002) Heart 
regeneration in zebrafish. Science, 298, 2188–2190.
Richter, W. (1968) Regenerative vorgange nach einseitiger 
enfernung des caudalen endhirnabschnittes einschliesslich 
des telo-diencephalen grenzbereiches bei ambystoma 
mexicanum. Journal für Hirnforschung, 10, 515–534.
Rodriguez Viales, R., Diotel, N., Ferg, M., Armant, O., 
Eich, J., Alunni, A., März, M., Bally-Cuif, L., Rastegar, S. 
and Strähle, U. (2015) The helix-loop-helix protein Id1 
controls stem cell proliferation during regenerative neu-
rogenesis in the adult zebrafish telencephalon. Stem Cells, 
33, 892–903.
Rothenaigner, I., Krecsmarik, M., Hayes, J.A., Bahn, B., 
Lepier, A., Fortin, G., et al. (2011) Clonal analysis by 
distinct viral vectors identifies bona fide neural stem 
cells in the adult zebrafish telencephalon and character-
izes their division properties and fate. Development, 138, 
1459–1469.
Sandoval-Guzmán, T., Wang, H., Khattak, S., Schuez, 
M., Roensch, K., Nacu, E., et al. (2014) Fundamental 
differences in dedifferentiation and stem cell recruitment 
during skeletal muscle regeneration in two salamander 
species. Cell Stem Cell, 14, 174–187.
Schnapp, E., Kragl, M., Rubin, L. and Tanaka, E.M. 
(2005) Hedgehog signaling controls dorsoventral pat-
terning, blastema cell proliferation and cartilage induc-
tion during axolotl tail regeneration. Development, 132, 
3243–3253.
Seegar, J. (1961) Telencephalon and behaviour in 
Gasterosteus aculeatus. Behaviour, 18, 256–287.
Seegar, J. (1962) Die Funktion des Vorderhirns in 
Bezug auf das angeborene Verhalten des dreidorni-
gen Stichlingsmännchen – zugleich ein Beitrag über 
Neuronenregeneration im Fischgehirn. Acta Morph Neerl 
Scand, 5, 49–64.
Seegar, J. (1965) Behavioural aspects of degeneration and 
regeneration in fish brain. Progress in Brain Research, 14, 
143–231.
Session, A.M., Uno, Y., Kwon, T., Chapman, J.A., Toyoda, 
A., Takahashi, S., et al. (2016) Genome evolution in 
the allotetraploid frog Xenopus laevis. Nature, 538, 
336–343.
Simões, M.G., Bensimon-Brito, A., Fonseca, M., Farinho, 
A., Valério, F., Sousa, S., et al. (2014) Denervation im-
pairs regeneration of amputated zebrafish fins. BMC 
Developmental Biology, 14, 10–12.
Singh, S.P., Holdway, J.E. and Poss, K.D. (2012) 
Regeneration of amputated zebrafish fin rays from de novo 
osteoblasts. Developmental Cell, 22, 879–886.
Srebro, Z. (1957) Regeneration of the endbrain in Xenopus 
laevis tadpoles. Folia Biologica (Krakow), 5, 211–232.
Srebro, Z. (1965) Endbrain regeneration in adult Xenopus 
laevis. Folia Biologica, 13, 269–280.
Stocum, D.L. (2011) The role of peripheral nerves in urodele 
limb regeneration. European Journal of Neuroscience, 34, 
908–916.
Tsonis, P.A., Vergara, M.N., Spence, J.R., Madhavan, M., 
Kramer, E.L., Call, M.K., et al. (2004) A novel role of the 
hedgehog pathway in lens regeneration. Developmental 
Biology, 267, 450–461.
Venables, M.J., Xing, L., Edington, C.C. and Trudeau, V.L. 
(2018) Neuronal regeneration in the goldfish telencepha-
lon following 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyri-
dine (MPTP) insult. FACETS, 3, 358–374.
Winkelmann, E. and Winkelmann, A. (1970) Experimentelle 
untersuchungen zur regeneration des telencephalon von 
ambystoma mexicanum nach resektion beider hemi-
spharen. 
Zeitschrift 
für 
Mikroskopisch-Anatomische 
Forschung, 82, 149–171.
Yoshimatsu, T., D’Orazi, F.D., Gamlin, C.R., Suzuki, 
S.C., Suli, A., Kimelman, D., et al. (2016) Presynaptic 
partner selection during retinal circuit reassembly var-
ies with timing of neuronal regeneration in vivo. Nature 
Communications, 7, 1–10.
Yoshino, J. and Tochinai, S. (2004) Successful reconstitution 
of the non-regenerating adult telencephalon by cell trans-
plantation in Xenopus laevis. Development, Growth and 
Differentiation, 46, 523–533.
 1932846x, 2019, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dneu.22665 by Ulsan National Institute Of Science And Technology (Unist), Wiley Online Library on [28/10/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

436    Lust and Tanaka
Developmental Neurobiology
Yoshino, J. and Tochinai, S. (2006) Functional regeneration 
of the olfactory bulb requires reconnection to the olfac-
tory nerve in Xenopus larvae. Development, Growth and 
Differentiation, 48, 15–24.
Zupanc, G.K.H. and Clint, S.C. (2001) Radial glia-mediated 
up-regulation of somatostatin in the regenerating adult fish 
brain. Neuroscience Letters, 309, 149–152.
Zupanc, G.K.H. and Ott, R. (1999) Cell proliferation after 
lesions in the cerebellum of adult teleost fish: time course, 
origin, and type of new cells produced. Experimental 
Neurology, 160, 78–87.
Zupanc, M.M. and Zupanc, G.K.H. (2006) Upregulation 
of calbindin-D28k expression during regeneration in the 
adult fish cerebellum. Brain Research, 1095, 26–34.
Zupanc, G.K.H., Kompass, K.S., Horschke, I., Ott, R. and 
Schwarz, H. (1998) Apoptosis after injuries in the cere-
bellum of adult teleost fish. Experimental Neurology, 152, 
221–230.
 1932846x, 2019, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dneu.22665 by Ulsan National Institute Of Science And Technology (Unist), Wiley Online Library on [28/10/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

===== Ma2018_JNeurosci_Foxj1SchwannCells+CNSremyelination =====
Development/Plasticity/Repair
A Subpopulation of Foxj1-Expressing, Nonmyelinating
Schwann Cells of the Peripheral Nervous System Contribute
toSchwannCellRemyelinationintheCentralNervousSystem
XDan Ma,1* Bowei Wang,1,3* Malgorzata Zawadzka,1,4 Ginez Gonzalez,1 Zhaozong Wu,1 Bin Yu,3 Emma L. Rawlins,2
Robin J.M. Franklin,1 and XChao Zhao1
1Wellcome Trust-Medical Research Council Cambridge Stem Cell Institute and Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
CB2 0AH, United Kingdom, 2The Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QN, United Kingdom,
3Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Southern Medical University, Baiyun, Guangzhou 510515, P.R. China, and 4Laboratory of Neuromuscular Plasticity,
Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, Pasteur 3, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland
New myelin sheaths can be restored to demyelinated axons in a spontaneous regenerative process called remyelination. In general, new
myelinsheathsaremadebyoligodendrocytesnewlygeneratedfromawidespreadpopulationofadultCNSprogenitorscalledoligodendrocyte
progenitorcells(OPCs).NewmyelininCNSremyelinationinbothexperimentalmodelsandclinicaldiseasescanalsobegeneratedbySchwann
cells (SCs), the myelin-forming cells of the PNS. Fate-mapping studies have shown that SCs contributing to remyelination in the CNS are
often derived from OPCs and appear not to be derived from myelinating SCs from the PNS. In this study, we address whether CNS
remyelinating SCs can also be generated from PNS-derived cells other than myelinating SCs. Using a genetic fate-mapping approach, we
have found that a subpopulation of nonmyelinating SCs identified by the expression of the transcription factor Foxj1 also contribute to
CNS SC remyelination, as well as to remyelination in the PNS. We also find that the ependymal cells lining the central canal of the spinal
cord, which also express Foxj1, do not generate cells that contribute to CNS remyelination. These findings therefore identify a previously
unrecognized population of PNS glia that can participate in the regeneration of new myelin sheaths following CNS demyelination.
Key words: CNS remyelination; Foxj1; peripheral nerve; Schwann cells
Introduction
Remyelination is the process by which new myelin sheaths are
restored to demyelinated axons (Franklin and ffrench-Constant,
2017). In the CNS, remyelination is mediated by oligodendro-
cytes newly generated from a widespread and abundant popula-
Received March 2, 2018; revised July 9, 2018; accepted July 31, 2018.
Authorcontributions:D.M.,R.J.M.F.,andC.Z.editedthepaper;C.Z.wrotethefirstdraftofthepaper.R.J.M.F.and
C.Z. designed research; D.M., B.W., M.Z., G.G., Z.W., and C.Z. performed research; M.Z. and E.L.R. contributed un-
publishedreagents/analytictools;D.M.,B.W.,B.Y.,E.L.R.,andC.Z.analyzeddata;R.J.M.F.andC.Z.wrotethepaper.
ThisworkissupportedbygrantsfromtheUKMultipleSclerosisSociety(Grant941),theMedicalResearchCouncil
(GrantMR/M010531/1),theRoyalSociety(GrantNA150482),theAdelsonMedicalResearchFoundation,andacore
support grant from the Wellcome Trust and the Medical Research Council to the Wellcome Trust Medical Research
CouncilCambridgeStemCellInstitute.B.W.receivedfundingfromtheGuangzhouCityOverseasStudyandResearch
Scheme. We thank Professor W.D. Richardson for providing the PDGFRa-CreERT2 and Sox10iCre lines and Daniel
Morrison for assisting with tissue processing for electron microscopy.
D.Ma’spresentaddress:CentreforRegenerativeMedicine,AstonMedicalSchool,AstonUniversity,AstonTrian-
gle, Birmingham B4 7ET, UK.
*D.M. and B.W. contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence should be addressed to either Chao Zhao or Robin J.M. Franklin, Wellcome Trust–Medical Re-
search Council Cambridge Stem Cell Institute and Department of Clinical Neurosciences; University of Cambridge,
Clifford Allbutt Building, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, CB2 0AH, UK, E-mail: rjf1000@cam.ac.uk or
cz213@cam.ac.uk.
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0585-18.2018
Copyright © 2018 Ma, Wang et al.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International, which permits unrestricted use, distribution and reproduction in
anymediumprovidedthattheoriginalworkisproperlyattributed.
Significance Statement
Remyelination failure in chronic demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis drives the current quest for developing means
by which remyelination in CNS can be enhanced therapeutically. Critical to this endeavor is the need to understand the mecha-
nismsofremyelination,includingthenatureandidentityofthecellscapableofgeneratingnewmyelinsheath-formingcells.Here,
we report a previously unrecognized subpopulation of nonmyelinating Schwann cells (SCs) in the PNS, identified by the expres-
sion of the transcription factor Foxj1, which can give rise to SCs that are capable of remyelinating both PNS and CNS axons. These
cells therefore represent a new cellular target for myelin regenerative strategies for the treatment of CNS disorders characterized
by persistent demyelination.
9228 • The Journal of Neuroscience, October 24, 2018 • 38(43):9228–9239

tion of adult multipotent progenitor cells commonly called
oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) (Franklin and
ffrench-Constant, 2017). Somewhat counterintuitively, de-
myelinated axons in the CNS can also be remyelinated by
Schwann cells (SCs), the myelinating cells of the PNS
(Blakemore, 1975). This atypical SC remyelination of the CNS
occurs not only in experimental models of CNS demyelina-
tion, but also in a number of naturally occurring demyelinat-
ing pathologies of autoimmune, traumatic, genetic, and toxic
origin (Ghatak et al., 1973; Itoyama et al., 1983, 1985; Duncan
and Hoffman, 1997). It was originally believed that these CNS
SCs were entirely of peripheral origin, immigrating into the
damaged CNS following a breach in the astrocytic glia limitans
(Franklin and Blakemore, 1993; Duncan and Hoffman, 1997).
However, more recent genetic fate-mapping studies in which
reporter proteins are expressed exclusively with adult OPCs
have revealed that most are derived from OPCs and that very
few are derived from myelinating SCs of the PNS (Zawadzka et
al., 2010; Assinck et al., 2017). Nevertheless, these studies do
not exclude the possibility that PNS cells other than myelinat-
ing SCs may provide a source of CNS SCs (Zujovic et al.,
2010). Even though the adult PNS does not contain a popula-
tion of progenitor cells equivalent to OPCs and PNS remyeli-
nation is often by mature SCs undergoing “dedifferentiation”
into an immature progenitor state and generate remyelinating
SCs (Jessen and Mirsky, 2005, 2016), there are other cells types
that may potentially be sources of CNS SCs, especially those of
neural crest origin such as nonmyelinating SCs (Remak cells)
and endoneurial fibroblasts.
In the present study, we used an inducible Cre-Lox fate-
mapping strategy to assess the contribution of Foxj1-expressing
cells to the remyelination following lysolecithin-induced demy-
elination in the spinal cord. The original rationale for our choice
of Foxj1-Cre was to establish whether Foxj1-expressing ependy-
mal cells contribute to CNS remyelination given recent reports
of their plasticity following traumatic spinal cord injury (Me-
letis et al., 2008). Although we found no evidence of Foxj1 
ependymal cells contributing to the generation of new remy-
elinating cells, we instead found expression of Foxj1 in non-
myelinating SCs and evidence that these cells are a source of
CNS remyelinating SCs.
Materials and Methods
Animals. Mice with C57BL6 background expressing Foxj1-CreERT2
(Rawlins et al., 2007), PDGFRa-CreERT2 (Rivers et al., 2008), and
Sox10-CreERT2 (Laranjeira et al., 2011; Zhao et al., 2015) were crossed
with Cre-dependent reporter mouse lines expressing farnesylated GFP
(Rawlins et al., 2009) (Rosa-CAG-fGFP) to produce double heterozy-
gous mice, denoted as Foxj1-GFP, PDGFRa-GFP, and Sox10-GFP, re-
spectively (Fig. 1A). Mice of either sex have been used in this study. For
each experimental group, three to nine animals were used; the exact
numbers used in quantification are provided in the Results section.
All animal studies were conducted under the Animals (Scientific Pro-
cedures) Act 1986 Amendment Regulations 2012 following ethical
review by the University of Cambridge Animal Welfare and Ethical
Review Body.
Tamoxifen administration and surgery. To induce Cre-mediated re-
combination, mice at the age of 7–8 weeks were administered with ta-
moxifen prepared in corn oil (Sigma-Aldrich) at 250 mg/kg daily for 4
consecutive days by oral gavage. Subsequent procedures were performed
8–10 d following the final tamoxifen administration. All surgical proce-
dures were conducted under aseptic conditions and the animals were
provided perioperative analgesia (buprenorphine 0.05 mg/kg, i.p.) and
additional care. CNS demyelination lesions were created in dorsal or
ventral spinal cord white matter by direct injection of lysolecithin as
described previously (Zhao et al., 2008). Briefly, under isoflurane anes-
thesia, the dorsal surface of thoracolumbar spinal cord was exposed by
removing the soft tissue between vertebra between T13 and L1. One
microliter of lysolecithin (1% in PBS) was injected into dorsal or ventral
funiculus via a 10 l Hamilton syringe with a fine glass tip from pulled
capillary attached.
Sciatic nerve crush and transection injuries were induced under
isoflurane anesthesia. A 0.5 cm length of mouse sciatic nerve was
exposed at the level of midfemur. A crush injury was created by
clamping the entire nerve with a pair of fine forceps (Dumont #5 at a
marked position 3 mm from the tip) for 20 s twice. Sciatic nerve
transection was conducted by cutting the nerve with a pair of fine
scissors (10.5 cm, straight). The intact contralateral nerve served as a
control.
Mice were killed by injection of 20% pentobarbital (Pentoject)
followed by transcardiac perfusion fixation with 4% paraformalde-
hyde prepared in PBS, pH 7.4. The required tissue was removed and
further immersion-fixed with the same fixative for 2 h at room tem-
perature, followed by treatment with 20% sucrose prepared in PBS at
4°C overnight. Frozen sections were cut at 12 m for image analysis
following immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridization.
Immunohistochemistry. Frozen sections of 12 m thickness were
subject to a standard protocol for immunofluorescence staining as
described previously (Zhao et al., 2008). Where required, heat-
mediated antigen retrieval was performed using a commercial antigen
retrieval solution (Sigma-Aldrich). The following antibodies were
used: goat /rabbit anti-GFP (Abcam), rabbit anti-Olig2 (Millipore),
rabbit anti-GFAP (Dako), rabbit anti-periaxin (gift from Professor
Peter Brophy or from Sigma-Aldrich), rabbit anti-S100 (Dako), rat
anti-PDGFRa (CD140a; BD Bioscience), rabbit anti-prolyl-4 hydrox-
ylase  (P4HB; Abcam), rabbit anti-HSP47 (BioVision), rabbit anti-
IBA1 (Wako), rabbit anti-smooth muscle actin (SMA; Abcam), rabbit
anti-Ki67 (Abcam), chicken anti-myelin protein zero (P0) (Abcam),
goat anti-Sox2 and goat anti-Sox10 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), rat
anti-CD31 (BD Biosciences), rabbit anti-fibronectin (Millipore), rat
anti-L1cam (Millipore), and rabbit anti-Foxj1 (Insight Biotechnol-
ogy) Secondary antibodies against relevant primary antibodies la-
beled with either Alexa Fluor 488 or Alexa Fluor 594 were from
Thermo Fisher Scientific. The images were acquired with a Leica SP5
confocal microscope or a Zeiss Axio Observer A1 fluorescence Imag-
ing System.
In situ hybridization. Expression of Foxj1 was examined using single-
plex RNAscope in situ hybridization (chromogenic). The mouse Foxj1
probe and all reagents were obtained from ACDBio (https://acdbio.
com/) and the hybridization and visualization were performed on frozen
sections from paraformaldehyde-fixed animals according to the manu-
facturer’s protocol.
RT-PCR. Fresh pieces of spinal cord or sciatic nerve were dissected
out from normal wild-type mice 8–9 weeks old following euthanasia.
Total RNA were extracted using RNeasy mini kit and cDNA was
prepared using the QuantiTech Reverse Transcription kit (all from
Qiagen), which incorporated a genomic DNA wipe-out step. Conven-
tional PCR was performed using a commercial PCR mix (MegaMix
Blue; Cambio). PCR products from spinal cord and sciatic nerve were
verified by sequencing.
Immunoblot. Spinal cord and sciatic nerves were harvested as for
RT-PCR. Protein extraction was performed using CelLytic MT Cell
Lysis buffer (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with protease inhibitor
mixture. Equal amounts of protein were denatured in sample buffer
and resolved on 4–12% SDS-polyacrylamide gels (Invitrogen). Foxj1
was detected using mouse anti-foxj1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and
visualized with ECL Plus (GE Healthcare).
Pre-embedding immunogold labeling electron microscopy. Animals ad-
ministered with tamoxifen for fate mapping were fixed by perfusion via
the left ventricle with 3% PFA and 0.5% glutaraldehyde in PBS. After
washing with PBS, segments of sciatic nerve and spinal cord were embed-
ded with 4% low-melting-point agarose and sliced at 100 m on a vi-
bratome (Leica). Pre-embedding immunogold labeling was performed
Ma, Wang et al. • Nonmyelinating Schwann Cells and CNS Remyelination
J. Neurosci., October 24, 2018 • 38(43):9228–9239 • 9229

according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Aurion). Briefly, following
permeabilization and blocking, the tissue slices were incubated at 4°C
with goat anti-GFP antibody (Abcam) for 48 h, followed by ultrasmall
gold particle-conjugated anti-goat IgG (Aurion) for 48 h at 4°C. The
samples were then subjected to a standard resin-embedding protocol
incorporating a silver enhancement step after osmium tetroxide (0.5%)
treatment. The ultrathin sections were examined on a Hitachi H600
transmission electron microscope.
Quantification. Immunolabeled cells were quantified by counting the
positive cells in which the nucleus was also stained with DAPI on sec-
tions. Data are presented as mean  SE as the relative proportion of two
labeled populations. A minimum of three animals have been included in
B
DR 
CB
LV 
GFPNF200
TN
SN
Foxj1
CreER
CAG
fGFP
STOP
LoxP
LoxP
CAG
fGFP
tamoxifen
A
C
D
E
F
CC
GFPNF200
G
B
SN
SC
H
I
J
M
L
Immuno-
blot
RT-PCR
DRG
K
*
SN
SN
VR
Central 
canal
Sciatic 
nerve
DRG
N
O
GFPFoxj1
GFPFoxj1
CC
VR
In situ hybridisation
GFPNF200
GFPNF200
GFPPRX
GFPPRX
GFPP0
GFPS100b
GFPSox2
GFPNF200
Figure 1.
Foxj1 controlled GFP expression labels cells in both the CNS and PNS. A, Diagram illustrating transgene design of Foxj1 promoter-controlled, tamoxifen-induced activation
of fGFP reporter gene expression. B–K are images from multiple immunostaining for GFP and different cell markers. GFP-expressing cells are detected in ependymal cells lining lateral
ventricles (LV; B); ependymal cells in the central canal of spinal cord (CC; C), which coexpress Sox2; and Bergmann glia in cerebellum cortex (CB; D). Foxj1-controlled GFP is also expressed
in the PNS. GFP  cells are scattered between neurofilament-positive axons in spinal dorsal roots (DR) (E, transverse section), sciatic nerves (SN, F, longitudinal section), and trigeminal
nerves (TN) (G, longitudinal sections). GFP-expressing cells do not colocalize with myelinating SC markers (H, inset shows transverse view), P0 (I), and S100 (J, transverse section).
Image in K is from a dorsal root ganglion (DRG) showing GFP-expressing cells among nerve fibers but few among neuronal cell bodies (asterisk). Occasionally, Foxj1-GFP cells surround
a DRG neuron at axonal entry zone (inset in K). Image L illustrates immunoreactive Foxj1  cells in small number of ependymal cells in CC, which also expressed GFP (solid arrowhead).
However, not all GFP  are detected with Foxj1  (open arrowhead). Nucleus-localized Foxj1 is detectable in the transverse section of ventral root (VR) of spinal cord in GFP  or GFP 
cells (M). The blue color in all images is the DAPI-stained nucleus. Foxj1 protein and mRNA can be detected in peripheral nerves as well as spinal cords (SC) by Western blot and RT-PCR
(N). Foxj1 transcript can be visualized by the sensitive RNAScope technique in sciatic nerve and spinal cord central canal (O). Scale bars in the images indicate 20 m except for E, which
is 50 m, and K, which is 100 m.
9230 • J. Neurosci., October 24, 2018 • 38(43):9228–9239
Ma, Wang et al. • Nonmyelinating Schwann Cells and CNS Remyelination

each experimental group. To compare cell pro-
portion in dorsal and ventral spinal roots,
transverse sections were used for cell counts,
and Student’s t test was used for statistical
analysis.
Results
Foxj1 labels CNS ependymal cells and
nonmyelinating cells in
peripheral nerve
Consistent with previous studies (Yu et
al., 2008; Muthusamy et al., 2014), tamox-
ifen administration in mice expressing
Foxj1 fate-mapping reporter construct
(Foxj1-GFP; Fig. 1A) led to induction of
GFP expression in ependymal cells lining
the cerebral ventricles and central canal in
the spinal cord (Fig. 1B,C). Labeled cells
were also found in other parts of brain
including the molecular layer of cerebel-
lum (Fig. 1D). In the spinal cord labeling
was restricted to the ependymal cells of
the central canal. Labeled cells were also
detected in dorsal and ventral spinal roots
(Fig. 1E) and throughout the sciatic and
trigeminal nerves (Fig. 1F,G). We found
on an average of 46.41  8.79% (n  9) of
ependymal cells were labeled with GFP in
tamoxifen inducible Foxj1-GFP mice.
Since Foxj1 expression appears to be high-
est in ependymal cells in the nervous sys-
tem, we expect the induction efficiency
would be similar or lower in other cell
types in CNS and peripheral nerves.
The findings prompted us to charac-
terize the distribution and identity of the
Foxj1 labeled (Foxj1 ) cells in the PNS
by immunohistochemistry using specific
markers for each major cell type. As illus-
trated in Figure 1, F–I, GFP  cells in lon-
gitudinal sections of sciatic nerve had an
elongated morphology with oval-shaped
nuclei. These cells did not surround axons
as revealed by double immunostaining for
neurofilament, as an axonal marker (Fig.
1E–G), and did not have overlapping ex-
pression with myelinating SC-specific
markers, periaxin (PRX), myelin protein
zero (MPZ), and S100 (Fig. 1H–J), indi-
cating that the reporter protein GFP was
not expressed by myelinating SCs. Foxj1
labeled cells were occasionally found in
the dorsal root ganglia (DRG), but far less
abundantly than in peripheral nerves (Fig.
1K). We found that occasionally Foxj1-
GFP  cells were present at the edge of
DRG, with processes wrapping DRG neu-
rons (Fig. 1K, inset), but these were rare.
To determine whether the Foxj1 promoter-
driven GFP expression reflected the expres-
sion of Foxj1 itself, we examined the level of
Foxj1 protein by immunohistochemistry,
Western blot, and mRNA with RT-PCR in
peripheral nerves. Immunostaining only
Foxj1-GFP
GFPP4HB
GFPSMA
GFPCD31
B
A
D
E
I
GFPNF
Foxj1-GFP
PDGFRa-GFP
G
GFPP75
GFPP4HB
GFPCD140a
GFPSMA
H
GFPCD140a
Foxj1-GFP
Foxj1-GFP
Foxj1-GFP
PDGFRa-GFP
PDGFRa-GFP
Foxj1-GFP
GFPP75
Foxj1-GFP 
GFPIBA1
F
GFPHSP47
C
Foxj1Cre
J
K
L
GFPNG2
GFPFN
GFPP75
H’
Foxj1-GFP
Figure 2.
Foxj1-GFP-labeled cells express fibroblast markers but are of a distinct population from PDGFRa-GFP labeled cells in
peripheral nerves. Immunofluorescence characterization of normal sciatic nerves (SN) from Foxj1-GFP mice treated with tamox-
ifen.DoubleimmunostainingforGFPandvariousmarkerswasperformedonlongitudinalsections.Colocalizedstainingismarked
witharrowheads.OverlaidimagesshowthatFoxj1labeledcellsinSNarenotassociatedwithendothelialcellslabeledbyCD31(A),
nor do they express the macrophage marker IBA1 (B). A proportion of GFP  cells are labeled with NG2 (C) and proteins usually
expressedbyfibroblastssuchasfibronectin(FN,D),P4HB(E),SMA(F),andHSP47(G).InD–G,thesplitchannelviewsoftheboxed
area by dotted lines are shown in separate images. Foxj1-GFP-labeled cells also expressed P75NTRs (H and confocal orthogonal
viewinH).GFP-labeledcellsdonotcoexpressPDGFRa(CD140a,I).PDGFRafate-mappingGFPreportermicewerecharacterized
bydoubleimmunostaining.PDGFRa-GFPlabeledcellsarenotassociatedwithneurofilament-labeledaxons(J).TheGFP cellsare
confirmedexpressingCD140a(insetinJ)andaredoublelabeledwithP4HBandSMA(KandinsetinK).PDGFRa-GFP-labeledcells
are also detected for P75NTR (L). Scale bar indicates 50 m for all images.
Ma, Wang et al. • Nonmyelinating Schwann Cells and CNS Remyelination
J. Neurosci., October 24, 2018 • 38(43):9228–9239 • 9231

detectsasmallnumberofependymalcellsin
the central canal, not in all GFP-expressing
cells (Fig. 1L). In the ventral root of the spi-
nal cord, nucleus-localized Foxj1 cells
were detected and the intensity of staining
wasweak(Fig.1M).Thelowertissuelevelof
expression in sciatic nerve was consistent
with Western blot and RT-PCR compared
with spinal cord tissue (Fig. 1N). A very low
levelofFoxj1mRNAexpressionwasfurther
confirmed with in situ hybridization using
the sensitive RNAScope technique (Fig.
1O).
Foxj1-expressing cells in peripheral
nerve are a subpopulation of
nonmyelinating SCs with
fibroblast-like features
We next performed a series of double-
labeling immunohistochemistry experi-
ments to determine the identity of
Foxj1-labeled cells in peripheral nerves. In
addition to axons and myelinating SCs,
the peripheral nerves contain endothelial
cells, pericytes, residential macrophages,
fibroblast-like cells, and nonmyelinating
SCs, which group small diameter axons
into Remak bundles. Double-labeling im-
munofluorescence staining showed that
GFP was not expressed by CD31-labeled
endothelial cells (Fig. 2A), nor by macro-
phages marked by ionized calcium-bind-
ing adapter molecule 1 (IBA1; Fig. 2B). A
proportion of Foxj1-GFP-labeled cells
(10% GFP  cells) were found to express
NG2 (Fig. 2C), which has been associated
with endoneurial fibroblast-like cells in
the peripheral nerves (Richard et al., 2012,
2014). Further staining revealed that GFP
expression colocalized with a number of
other fibroblast-expressed molecules such
as fibronectin, prolyl-4-hydroxylase B
(P4HB), smooth muscle actin (SMA), and
heat shock protein 47 (HSP47) (Fig. 2D–
G). However, a considerable proportion
(73.4%  12.7%) of GFP  cells also ex-
press the p75 neurotrophin receptor
(P75NTR) (Fig 2H,H), which is regarded
as a marker specific for SC precursors and
nonmyelinating SCs (NMSCs). Foxj1-
GFP  cells did not express CD140a (Fig.
2I), also known as platelet-derived
growth factor receptor  (PDGFRa),
which we and others have previously
shown to mark fibroblasts in peripheral
nerves (Raivich and Kreutzberg, 1987; Zawadzka et al., 2010). We
compared the distribution of labeled cells in sciatic nerve of PDG-
FRa-driven fate-mapping mice and found that most PDGFRa-
GFPcellsalsoexpressedCD140a, as expected (Fig. 2J, inset), as well
as P4HB and SMA (Fig. 2K, inset). Unexpectedly, PDGFRa-GFP
cells were found to be labeled by P75 (Fig. 2L). Therefore, even
though Foxj1- and PDGFRa-labeled cells both can express fibro-
blast markers, they are mutually exclusive with regard to the ex-
pression of CD140a and therefore likely belong to separate
populations in adult peripheral nerves.
We next performed further characterization to verify whether
Foxj1 was expressed by NMSCs (Remak cells) using additional
markers. Most Foxj1-GFP-labeled cells (77.8%  5%) in normal
adult sciatic nerve colocalized with L1 cell adhesion molecule
(Fig. 3A), a protein expressed by immature myelinating cells and
NMSCs in peripheral nerves and some neurons (Nieke and
Foxj1-GFP 
GFPL1
GFPSox10
GFPGFAP
DR
VR
Foxj1-GFP 
DR
VR
DRG
A
B
E
D
F
G
GFP
NF200
Merged
Sox10-GFP 
PDGFRa-GFP 
H
I
C
GFPL1
Foxj1-GFP 
Foxj1-GFP 
Foxj1-GFP 
Foxj1-GFP 
PDGFRa-GFP 
GFPDAPI
DR
VR
L1
Figure 3.
Foxj1 labels nonmyelinating SCs. Images in A–F illustrate merged double immunofluorescence staining on longitu-
dinalsectionsofsciaticnerve(SN)fromadultFoxj1-GFPmicetreatedwithtamoxifen.MostGFP-expressingcellscoexpresstheL1
cell adhesion molecule, a marker of nonmyelinating SCs in peripheral nerves (A). GFP-expressing cells can also express Sox10, a
neural crest-related transcription factor (B). The single channel images of the same area in A and B marked by dotted line are
showninimagesetsontherightsideofthemainimages.PDGFRa-labeledcells(PDGFRa-GFP)insciaticnervesdonotcoexpressL1
(C).LowlevelsofGFAParedetectedinFoxj1-GFP-expressingcells(D,inset).CostainingforGFPandneurofilamentrevealsaclose
association between GFP and small-diameter axons (arrowheads) (E). Dorsal and ventral roots (DR and VR, respectively) from
lumbarspinalcordwerestainedforGFP,showinggreaternumbersofFoxj1-GFP cellsindorsalroot(F)andthiswascorrelated
with the proportion of L1 immunoreactivity in corresponding locations (inset in F). G–I are images from pre-embedding immu-
nogold electron microscopy against GFP on SN from Foxj1 and Sox10 fate-mapping mice. Silver-enhanced gold particles were
mainlydetectedon“Remak”bundlesinFoxj1-GFPsamples(G),whereasthemajorityofgoldparticlesinSox10fate-mappingmice
are deposited in SC cytoplasm around the myelinated axons but excluded from compact myelin sheaths (H). PDGFRa labeling
identifies endoneurial fibroblast like cells (I). Scale bars: A–E, 25 m; F, 50 m; G, 2 m; H, I, 1 m.
9232 • J. Neurosci., October 24, 2018 • 38(43):9228–9239
Ma, Wang et al. • Nonmyelinating Schwann Cells and CNS Remyelination

Schachner, 1985; Samatov et al., 2016). No PDGFRa-GFP-
labeled cells were detected to coexpress L1 (Fig. 3C). Foxj1-GFP
cells also expressed Sox10 (Fig. 3B), a neural crest transcription
factor and pan-SC lineage marker (Nonaka et al., 2008), as well as
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), an intermediate filament
found in NMSCs (Fig. 3D) (Jessen et al., 1990). These observa-
tions strongly suggested that Foxj1 expression labels a subpopu-
lation of NMSCs, a conclusion supported by the observations
that GFP  cells were found in close association with small cali-
ber, neurofilament-positive axons in a manner that resembled
Remak bundles (Fig. 3E) and considerably more Foxj1-GFP 
cells were detected in dorsal roots compared with ventral roots of
spinal cord, the former containing a higher proportion of non-
myelinated fibers (Griffin and Thompson, 2008; He et al., 2012)
(Fig. 3F). However, there was no significant difference in the
percentage of L1-expressing GFP  cells between dorsal and ven-
tral spinal root (87.38  3.95%, n  5 vs 81.51  5.86, p  0.447).
Quantification showed that less than half
(40.55  10.46%, n  6) of L1  cells in
SN were labeled for GFP, though this pro-
portion is likely under estimated consid-
ering the level of inducible recombination
efficiency. We then confirmed the expres-
sion of Foxj1 likely in NMSCs by immu-
nogold electron microscopy: the silver
enhanced gold particles conjugated with
GFP antibody were found clearly concen-
trated in Remak bundles (Fig. 3G),
whereas in Sox10-GFP mice, labeling was
mainly in the cytoplasm of myelinating
SCs (Fig. 3H). In PDGFRa-GFP mice, the
gold particles were found in NMSCs that
resembled fibroblast-like cells (Fig. 3I).
The results indicate that Foxj1-GFP 
cells express markers for fibroblasts and
NMSCs, raising the possibility that either
Foxj1 labels both populations or these
marker lack specificity in peripheral
nerves. To resolve this, we further charac-
terized unlesioned peripheral nerves by
immunostaining with several selected
markers for fibroblasts and the NMSC
marker L1. We use L1 as an NMSC marker
because almost all L1  cells also express
p75 (97.39  0.7%, n  6) and a similar
proportion of P75  cells expressed L1
(73.69  4.63%, n  6). Many of the L1 
fraction of P75  cells exhibited a different
morphology from the typical elongated
shape of L1  cells (Fig. 4D), suggesting
that these cells may account for the
fibroblast-like
population
labeled
by
PDGFRa (Fig. 2L). As shown in Fig. 4, L1
was coexpressed with P4HB, fibronectin,
and NG2. Quantification indicated that
the overlapping cells only accounted for
25% of L1  cells, which were colabeled
with either P4HB (25.37  6.46%, n  6)
or NG2 (16.5  5.23%, n  3). Similarly,
20% of either P4HB  cells (17.21 
2.57%, n  6) or NG2  cells (17.52 
3.08%, n  3) also expressed L1. Triple-
labeled cells that were also L1  and GFP 
were detected with all of the fibroblast markers tested. The results
confirmed that a population of NMSCs express markers used to
label fibroblasts in various tissues.
Peripheral nerve-derived Foxj1  cells but not ependymal
cells contribute to CNS SC remyelination
Next, we investigated whether Foxj1-GFP-labeled cells contrib-
ute to remyelination in the CNS. We performed spinal cord focal
demyelination by injecting lysolecithin into the white matter of
tamoxifen-treated mice. Discrete, focal lesions were created in
either the dorsal or ventral white matter funiculi of the thoraco-
lumbar spinal cord (Fig. 5A–H). Within dorsal lesions, very few
GFP-expressing cells were detected at 5, 14, and 21 d postlesions
(dpl) despite their close vicinity to the central canal in which
ependymal cells were labeled (Fig. 5A–D). However, considerable
numbers of GFP-expressing cells were present in ventral lesions
at both 14 and 21 dpl, when remyelination is in progress or near
L1P75DAPI
L1
P75
L1
FN
L1FNDAPI
L1
P4HB
GFP
A
B
C
L1P4HBDAPI
A’
A”
B’
B”
C’
C”
L1
NG2
D
D’
D”
L1NG2DAPI
Figure 4.
Nonmyelinating SCs express fibroblast markers. Image sets A–C illustrate immunostaining of longitudinal sections
from unlesioned sciatic nerves for L1Cam (L1, green), a marker labeling nonmyelinating SCs, with markers labeling peripheral
nerve fibroblasts (red). The merged images show that a proportion of L1 immunoreactive cells colocalize with P4HB (A–A),
fibronectin(FN,B–B),andNG2(C–C).ImagesetDshowsthatthemajorityofL1-labeledcellsarealsopositiveforP75NTR(P75)
(DandmergedimageD)andaproportionofP75 cellsarenotlabeledwithL1.TheopenarrowheadshighlightaP75 cellthat
is not labeled with L1 (D and D). The solid arrowheads in all images indicate examples of colocalization. Scale bar indicates
50 m, applicable to all images.
Ma, Wang et al. • Nonmyelinating Schwann Cells and CNS Remyelination
J. Neurosci., October 24, 2018 • 38(43):9228–9239 • 9233

completion. The labeled cells were mainly
located in the center of the lesion (Fig.
5G,H). To identify the fate of GFP  cells
following demyelination, we performed
immunohistochemistry for specific mark-
ers of CNS glial cells: Olig2 for oligoden-
drocyte lineage cells, GFAP for astrocytes,
and IBA1 for microglia/macrophages. No
GFP  cells expressed any of these mark-
ers, indicating that Foxj1  cells do not
give rise to CNS cell types in the white
matter (Fig. 5I–K). The distribution of
GFP  cells, however, resembled that pre-
viously described for remyelinating SCs
(Zawadzka et al., 2010). The majority of
the GFP-expressing cells present in the le-
sion at 14 dpl also expressed PRX (Fig.
5L,M), a marker only expressed in my-
elinating SCs (Gillespie et al., 1994;
Zawadzka et al., 2010). It is also confirmed
by double immunostaining with P0 (Fig.
5N). Therefore, Foxj1  cells can give rise
to remyelinating SCs following CNS de-
myelination. There was considerable
variation in the numbers of Foxj1-
derived SCs: among the nine mice with
ventral lesions, five contained GFP 
cells in the demyelinated area. The pro-
portion of GFP-labeled PRX  cells over
all PRX  SCs ranged from none to
33%. An average of 54.18  12.08%
(n  5) of GFP  cells in the ventral le-
sions at 14 dpl coexpressed PRX and
most of the PRX GFP  cells resembled
the morphology of PRX  cells (Fig. 5L).
In dorsal and some ventral spinal cord
lesions, despite of the absence of Foxj1-
labeled cells following demyelination,
remyelinating SCs were invariably de-
tected, which were most likely generated
from OPCs.
To establish the origin of Foxj1-GFP 
CNS remyelinating SCs, we first investi-
gated whether they might be derived from
Foxj1  ependymal cells. We used a
FGFR3-GFP mouse reporter line, in
which GFP is expressed by both ependymal cells and astrocytes
(Zawadzka et al., 2010). In ventral lesions, there was an abun-
dance of GFP GFAP  astrocytes in and around the lesion and
surrounding a central region containing many PRX-expressing
SCs: however, none of these SCs coexpressed GFP (Fig. 6A).
Many of the GFP  cells within the ventral lesion were located
around the CNS–PNS transitional region (Fig. 6L,M). This led
us to conclude that the GFP  CNS remyelinating SCs in Foxj1-
GFP fate-mapping mice were derived from Foxj1  cells present
within peripheral nerves. This conclusion was supported by the
occurrence of Ki67 -proliferating L1  cells in ventral roots ad-
jacent to ventral white matter lesions at 5 dpl (but not on the
contralateral unlesioned side) (Fig. 6B–D), indicating a CNS in-
jury induced response. There was no Ki67  ependymal cells
found in central canal in the spinal cords with white matter le-
sions (Fig. 6B, inset). In addition, all ventral lesions containing
Foxj1-GFP cells (five of nine animals) were directly adjacent to
ventral spinal roots in which a direct injury from the lesion in-
duction likely occurred because a small number of GFP-labeled
PRX  were also found, but were not present in the contralateral
side (Fig. 6E,F).
Foxj1-expressing cells in peripheral nerves respond to
peripheral nerve injury and give rise to repair SCs
The ability of Foxj1  cells in peripheral nerve to contribute to
CNS remyelination prompted us to examine their response to
peripheral nerve injury. Following sciatic nerve crush, there was
an increase in GFP  cells within lesioned area (Fig. 7A–E) asso-
ciated with the expression of the proliferation marker Ki67 (Fig.
7B, inset). At 21 and 28 d postinjury (dpi), many GFP cells dis-
played a morphology resembling myelinating SCs with distinct
appearance of cytoplasmic bands (Fig. 7D,E). Double labeling
with the myelinating SC marker PRX confirmed a close colocal-
ization (Fig. 7F). As in CNS lesions, GFP also surrounded myelin
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
GFPDAPI
GFPGFAPDAPI
GFPOlig2DAPI
GFPIBA1DAPI
GFPPRXDAPI
GFPPRXDAPI
5 dpl
14 dpl
21dpl
GFPP0DAPI
I
J
K
L
M
N
Figure5.
Foxj1-labeledcellsgiverisetoremyelinatingSCsindemyelinatinglesionsinspinalcordwhitematter.Demyelination
lesions were induced in mice Foxj1-GFP-expressing mice by direct injection of lysolecithin in either dorsal or ventral funiculi as
showninAandE,withcorrespondingimagesfromGFPimmunostainingfor5,14,and21dpl.FewGFP-expressingcellshavebeen
detected in dorsal lesions (B–D), whereas a large number of GFP  cells are found in ventral lesions from 14 dpl (F–H). Double
immunostainingindicatesthatFoxj1-GFPcellsdonotexpresstheastrocytemarkerGFAP(I),theoligodendrocytelineagemarker
Olig2(J),northemicroglialmarkerIBA1(K).LshowsthatconsiderablenumbersofGFP-expressingcellscoexpressthemyelinating
SC marker PRX (arrows). The box area is shown as split channels (L1 and L2) and merged in (L3). M, Orthogonal view of confocal
images of double immunostaining confirming the colocalization of GFP and PRX in ventral lesions at 14 dpl. The SC identity of
GFP cellsinlesionisverifiedbycolocalizationwithmyelinP0,asillustratedbyorthogonalconfocalviewinN.Insetsintheimages
showmagnifiedareainlesionsinrespectiveimagesmarkedwithdottedoutlines,foreitherdoublestaining(I–K)orsinglecolors
(G, L). Scale bars in B indicate 100 m and apply to C, D, and F–H. Scale bar in I indicates 50 m and applies to J and K. In L–N,
the scale bars indicate 25 m.
9234 • J. Neurosci., October 24, 2018 • 38(43):9228–9239
Ma, Wang et al. • Nonmyelinating Schwann Cells and CNS Remyelination

labeled with antibodies to P0 (Fig. 7G). Further staining with
neurofilament antibody confirmed GFP ensheathing axons in a
manner suggestive of myelin sheath formation (Fig. 7H). Quan-
tification of the lesion area at 28 dpi indicated that 30% of
PRX  cells were also GFP  and nearly 80% of GFP-labeled cells
coexpressed PRX (Fig. 7I), suggesting that most Foxj1  cells
associated with the lesion became myelinating SCs. As a control,
we performed crush injury on PDGFRa-GFP mice. There was a
considerable increase in GFP labeled cells at 28 dpi compared
with controls (Fig. 7J,K). However, there was no overlap be-
tween GFP and PRX immunoreactivity (Fig. 7K), confirming
that PDGFRa-GFP cells did not give rise to new SCs. This obser-
vation is consistent with previous reports that PDGFRa-labeled
cells in the PNS do not make SCs (Zawadzka et al., 2010; Assinck
et al., 2017).
We further examined the response of Foxj1-labeled cells in a
sciatic nerve transection model. Following transection, a connec-
tive tissue bridge forms between the proximal and distal stumps
that contains macrophages, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and
NMSCs (McDonald et al., 2006). At 7 dpi, the numbers of Foxj1 
cells were increased in the proximal and
distal stumps (Fig. 8A,C). The cells had an
elongated bipolar spindle shape and were
aligned in the direction of the nerve lon-
gitudinal axis. Foxj1  cells were present
in the bridge (Fig. 8B). The numbers of
GFP  cells in the bridge were similar to
those identified in samples from Sox10-
GFP reporter mice that were also sub-
jected to nerve transection (Fig. 8D).
Because Sox10-GFP labels both myelinat-
ing and nonmyelinating SCs before injury
induction (Fig. 8E,F), one would predict
significantly more GFP  cells in injury
area. That there were not suggested that
NMSCs may be the predominant SCs re-
sponding to injury at early stage following
injury. To provide direct evidence for the
relative contribution of myelinating and
nonmyelinating SCs to the regeneration
of PNS injury, definitive cell-specific fate
mapping using transgenic fate-mapping
mouse lines of equal recombination effi-
ciency would be necessary.
Discussion
Remyelination in the CNS is usually
achieved by newly generated oligoden-
drocytes derived from CNS progenitor
cells (often called OPCs). In some cir-
cumstances, especially when there is
concurrent loss of astrocytes, remyeli-
nating SCs also occur. Fate-mapping
data
suggest
that
the
predominant
source of the both new oligodendrocyte
and SCs are PDGFRa/NG2-expressing
OPCs, which are actively recruited into
the demyelinated area. Neither astro-
cytes nor mature oligodendrocytes are
sources
of
new
remyelinating
cells
(Zawadzka et al., 2010; Crawford et al.,
2016). However, other cell types may
also contribute to remyelinating cell
population, such as ependymal cells (EPCs) lining the ventri-
cles and central canal of spinal cord. In this study, we ad-
dressed the question by the genetic fate-mapping to label
Foxj1-expressing EPCs and follow their distribution at differ-
ent stages of remyelination following lysolecithin-induced de-
myelination in the spinal cord. Foxj1, a master regulator in the
formation of motile cilia, is a specific marker of ciliated cells
such as lung epithelial cells and EPCs. In this study, we found
that Foxj1 is also expressed by a population of NMSCs and that
these cells can give rise to remyelinating SCs in the CNS.
Our discovery of remyelinating CNS SCs derived from Foxj1-
expressing cells raised the question from exactly which Foxj1
population these cells originated. Several studies have reported
that EPCs in the CNS display properties of adult stem cells, re-
sponding to injuries and contributing substantially to other neu-
ral lineage cells, particularly scar-forming astrocytes (Johansson
et al., 1999; Meletis et al., 2008; Carle´n et al., 2009). These reports
suggested that EPCs may also be a source of new remyelinating
cells in CNS. However, our data argue against this prediction
A’’’
SC lesion, 5dpl
VR
GFPPRXDAPI
Ki67DAPI
Ki67L1DAPI
Ki67DAPI
FGFR3-GFP
A
A’
A”
B
D
C
E
F
PRXGFP
PRXGFP
Foxj1-GFP
Foxj1-GFP
Figure6.
SCremyelinationfromFoxj1-GFP-labeledcellsinspinalcordlesionsarenotderivedfromependymalcells,butlikely
originate from peripheral nerves. A, Demyelinated lesion at 21 dpl in ventral spinal cord white matter of a FGFR3-GFP reporter
mouse treated with tamoxifen. Image shows overlaid double immunostaining for GFP and PRX, with the dotted line marking the
boundaries of the lesion. GFP is expressed by ependymal cells lining the central canal of the spinal cord (inset). A magnified area
withintheredboxinthelesioninAshowingseparateandoverlaidchannelsindicatingnonoverlappingexpressionofGFPandPRX
isshowninA,A,andA).Billustratesaventralspinalcordlesion(whitedottedline)at5dplimmunostainedfortheproliferation
markerKi67.Ki67 cellsarefoundintheadjacentventralroots(VR,greendottedline),butnotinependymalcellsincentralcanal
(inset). There are no Ki67  cells in the contralateral VR (C). The Ki67  nucleus are found in L1  cells in the VR of ventral spinal
cord lesion side (D). E and F illustrate Foxj1-GFP cells colabeled with PRX in the VR of spinal cord lesion side at 14 dpl, but none in
the VR of contralateral side. Scale bars indicate 100 m in A, 50 m in B, and 20 m in C–F.
Ma, Wang et al. • Nonmyelinating Schwann Cells and CNS Remyelination
J. Neurosci., October 24, 2018 • 38(43):9228–9239 • 9235

because, using a FGFR3 fate-mapping approach that labels EPCs
as well as astrocytes, we could not detect any remyelinating SCs
labeled in any demyelinating lesions in the spinal cord. Moreover,
no pronounced proliferation of EPCs in the central canal at the
level of focal demyelination lesions was detected. These results
lead us to conclude that, despite their stem cell characteristics and
involvement in other CNS injury models, EPCs in the spinal cord
do not contribute to remyelination. The reasons for the discrep-
ancy are not entirely clear. One plausible explanation could be
that there is little or no direct EPC damage in focal demyelination
model or in the experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
modelusedbyothers(Guoetal.,2011),whereasthisislikelytooccur
Proximal
Crushed
GFPDAPI
GFPPRXDAPI
0
20
40
60
80
100
E
F
 28 dpi
28 dpi
GFPDAPI
 0 dpi
F”
5 dpi
14 dpi
 21 dpi
A
B
C
D
Ki67
GFP+PRX+/PRX+
GFP+PRX+/GFP+
G
I
Percentage of
 immunostained cells
J
K’
PDGFRa-GFP
28 dpi
GFPPRXDAPI
GFPPRXDAPI
K
28 dpi
Foxj1-GFP
28 dpi
GFPNF
GFPP0DAPI
H
Figure7.
Foxj1-GFP-labeledcellsbecomerepairSCsfollowingsciaticnerveinjury.Sciaticnervecrushlesionswerecreatedinadultmiceexpressingreportergenesandsampleswereanalyzedby
immunofluorescencestaining.A–DshowanareaofsciaticnerveinlongitudinalsectionimmunostainedtorevealFoxj1-GFP-labeledcellsinnormal(A)andcrushednerveat5,14,and21dpi(B–D,
respectively). Inset in B illustrates GFP  cells expressing Ki67. E is a montage combined from a series of overlapping images spanning the proximal and crushed site at 28 dpi. Doubling
immunostaining shows that, at 28 dpl, GFP colocalizes with the mature myelinating SC marker PRX (F). The dotted outlined area is shown in single channels as in insets in F, with examples of
colocalizationmarkedwitharrows.GFPlabelsthemyelinatedaxonsmarkedbymyelinP0,whichappearsonlylocalizedinthecytoplasmratherthancompactmyelin(G).GFP-labeledcellsenclose
the axons (arrows) marked by neurofilament (NF) staining (H). Approximately 30% of remyelinated axons in the crush area are labeled with GFP, but 	70% of GFP immunoreactivity colocalizes
withPRX(meanSE,n3;I).JandKshowGFPandPRXdoubleimmunostainingincontrol(uninjurednerve)andcrushedsciaticnervefromPDGFRa-GFPanimalsat28dpi.Themagnifiedboxed
area in K is shown in K which shows that there is no colocalization between GFP and PRX. Scale bars indicate 50 m for all images.
9236 • J. Neurosci., October 24, 2018 • 38(43):9228–9239
Ma, Wang et al. • Nonmyelinating Schwann Cells and CNS Remyelination

in the “stab” injury model used to provide evidence for a significant
EPC role in regeneration (Barnabe´-Heider et al., 2010). Other stud-
ies show that, whereas there is no significant change in EPC prolif-
eration in central canal following pure demyelinating injury, this
does occur following traumatic injury (Lacroix et al., 2014) and the
involvement is dependent on direct ependymal injury (Ren et al.,
2017). It is also possible that, because different fate-mapping mouse
lines were used in this study and that by Guo et al. (2011), different
subpopulations or additional population of cells are labeled.
We conclude that the Foxj1-labeled remyelinating SCs came
from the PNS. Early studies on the presence of SCs in the demy-
elinated CNS, either in human diseases or animal models, sug-
gested that these cells were likely derived from SCs that invaded
the CNS from the PNS (Blakemore, 1975; Itoyama et al., 1983;
Dusart et al., 1992; Duncan and Hoffman, 1997; Jasmin et al.,
2000). This conclusion was largely based on the proximity of CNS
SC remyelination to the spinal root transition zone (although SC
remyelination has also been reported in CNS areas such as the
cerebellar peduncles that are more remote from an obvious PNS
source of SCs). However, our genetic fate-mapping experiments,
which allowed tracing of prelabeled P0-expressing myelinating
SCs, showed that the contribution of existing SCs to CNS remy-
elination was minimal and that most were derived from CNS-
resident OPCs (Zawadzka et al., 2010). These findings led to the
conclusion that nearly all remyelinating cells in the CNS lesions
are of CNS origin. However, fate mapping of PNS cells using the
P0-driven reporter lines did not exclude the possibility that other
PNS cells including NMSCs might also contribute (because P0 is
largely expressed by myelinating SCs) (Jessen and Mirsky, 2005).
The current study with lineage tracing demonstrated that, follow-
ing demyelination of the ventral spinal cord, many remyelinating
SCs came from Foxj1-labeled cells from peripheral nerves. The
extent of the peripheral contribution of CNS remyelination is
location dependent, invariably occurring adjacent to the spinal
root entry zone, where the glia limitans has likely been breached
(Duncan and Hoffman, 1997). In areas relatively distant to pe-
ripheral nerves, where there is no obvious breach in the glia limi-
tans, no Foxj1-GFP expression was evident even though there
was substantial SC-mediated remyelination in the lesions, which
is therefore likely to be OPC derived. Our data also suggest that
proximity of demyelinating CNS lesions to spinal roots is likely
necessary for Foxj1  cells to contribute to CNS remyelination. In
ventral spinal cord lesions, GFP  cells could not be detected
unless they were adjacent to a ventral root. Requirement of direct
injury of spinal roots may also be necessary to mobilize the
Foxj1  cells because proliferating and remyelinating Foxj1-GFP
labeled cells occur only in the ventral roots of lesion side, not on
the contralateral side.
We have provided evidence that the Foxj1-expressing cells in
peripheral nerves are a subpopulation of NMSCs. Both myelinat-
ing SCs and NMSCs are differentiated from SC precursors, which
originate from neural crest stem cells (Jessen and Mirsky, 2005,
2016; Taveggia et al., 2005). In response to axonal injury, both
myelinating SCs and NMSCs undergo a cellular reprogramming
to assume an immature phenotype mediated by activation of
transcription factor c-Jun to become “repair SCs” (Bungner cells)
(Arthur-Farraj et al., 2012). Although repair SCs from the two
origins are rarely distinguishable, subtle differences in how the
two types of mature SCs respond to nerve injuries may exist.
However, establishing whether this is the case has been hampered
by markers that unambiguously distinguish the two types of ma-
ture cell. Grafting from sensory nerves containing NMSCs into
GFPPRXDAPI
Sox10-GFP
GFPPRXDAPI
Sox10-GFP
GFPPRXDAPI
Foxj1-GFP
Foxj1-GFP
GFPPRXDAPI
GFPPRXDAPI
Cut 7 dpi, proximal
Cut 7 dpi, bridge
Cut 7 dpi, bridge
Intact sciatic nerve
GFPL1DAPI
Intact sciatic nerve
Cut 7 dpi, distal
GFPPRXDAPI
E
A
B
F
C
D
Sox10-GFP
Figure8.
Early-appearingSClineagecellsfollowingnervetransectionaremainlyNMSCs.ImmunohistochemistryforGFPandPRXwasperformedonlongitudinalsectionsofsciaticnervesfrom
micethatreceivedtransectioninjury.Shownisanareaofproximalstump(A),rejoiningbridge(B),anddistalstamp(C)followingsciaticcut7dpifromatamoxifen-treatedFoxj1-GFPmouse.Staining
ofGFP-expressingcellsatthebridgeatthesametimepointfollowingtransectionfromaSox10-GFPmouseisshowninD.EshowsanareaofintactsciaticnervefromSox10-GFPmiceindicatingthat
both myelinating (arrows) and nonmyelinating cells (arrowheads) have been labeled by GFP. The GFP-labeled cells in Sox10-GFP sciatic nerve coexpress L1, as shown in confocal image in F,
confirming their identity as nonmyelinating SCs. Scale bars indicate 100 m in A–D and 50 m in E and F.
Ma, Wang et al. • Nonmyelinating Schwann Cells and CNS Remyelination
J. Neurosci., October 24, 2018 • 38(43):9228–9239 • 9237

injured motor nerves, which have few NMSCs, yields a “sensory
pattern” in growth factor expression, suggesting that injury-
activated repair SCs of NMSC origin may have different roles in
regulating the regenerative response to injury (Ho¨ke et al., 2006).
Our data support a distinctive regenerative capacity in cells de-
rived from NMSC because it is these cells that seem predomi-
nantly able to contribute to CNS remyelination. Relevant to our
study, it is clear that NMSCs do not need their own axon to be
damaged, but instead are able to respond to injury-associated
diffusible signals from damaged myelinated fibers, which elicit
proliferation of NMSCs (Murinson and Griffin, 2004). It remains
to be established what signals generated by CNS white matter
demyelinating injury can activate and mobilize Foxj1 NMSCs in
nearby peripheral nerves.
What is the nature of the Foxj1-expressing cells in peripheral
nerves? We believe these cells to be NMSCs (based largely on the
immunoelectron microscopy evidence). However, they also ex-
press markers more commonly associated with fibroblasts such
as fibronectin, P4HB, and HSP47 (Parrinello et al., 2010) in intact
peripheral nerves and in vitro. Endoneurial fibroblasts are de-
rived from neural crest stem cells during development (Joseph et
al., 2004) and play a role in SC sorting during peripheral nerve
injury (Parrinello et al., 2010). However, their molecular identity
seems unclear and they lack specific markers (Richard et al.,
2012). The expression of NG2 and other markers in fibroblasts or
NMSCs has been a subject of discussion that has not been com-
pletely resolved (Martin et al., 2001; Zhang et al., 2001; Rezajooi
et al., 2004). The expression of fibroblast markers implies that
their mesenchymal features allow their regenerative capacity,
which is induced in dedifferentiated SCs following injury (Cle-
ments et al., 2017). In our studies, we were able to distinguish
between a PDGFRA  fibroblast, which does not contribute to
generation of either CNS or PNS remyelinating SCs (Zawadzka et
al., 2010; Assinck et al., 2017), and a Foxj1  NMSC with fibro-
blast features, which is able to generate remyelinating SCs in both
the CNS and PNS. It cannot be excluded that the L1 Foxj1  cells
may be a separate population from NMSCs and are not of PDG-
FRA  fibroblast-like population in the PNS. The identification
of this population is hampered by low efficiency in transgene
induction by tamoxifen, promiscuity of fibroblast markers, and
the limitations of immunohistochemistry. However, the bound-
ary of these cell types may be naturally overlapping given that
some of them have a shared developmental origin from neural
crest progenitors. Another potential source of cells expressing
similar markers is pericytes, but they are unlikely to overlap with
the Foxj1-GFP population because our unpublished fate-
mapping data showed that PDGFRb-GFP cells did not give rise to
SCs following sciatic nerve crush. There is a population of cells
called boundary cap cells identified only in developmental spinal
roots at the boundary of CNS and PNS, which had been described
to have stem cell properties (Zujovic et al., 2010). However, these
cells are unlikely to be associated with Foxj1  cells because they
have never been found in the adult peripheral nerves and they
behave differently by making remyelinating oligodendrocytes in-
stead of SCs when grafted in CNS lesions (Zujovic et al., 2010,
2011).
References
Arthur-Farraj PJ, Latouche M, Wilton DK, Quintes S, Chabrol E, Banerjee A,
Woodhoo A, Jenkins B, Rahman M, Turmaine M, Wicher GK, Mitter R,
Greensmith L, Behrens A, Raivich G, Mirsky R, Jessen KR (2012) c-jun
reprograms Schwann cells of injured nerves to generate a repair cell es-
sential for regeneration. Neuron 75:633–647. CrossRef Medline
Assinck P, Duncan GJ, Plemel JR, Lee MJ, Stratton JA, Manesh SB, Liu J,
Ramer LM, Kang SH, Bergles DE, Biernaskie J, Tetzlaff W (2017) My-
elinogenic plasticity of oligodendrocyte precursor cells following spinal
cord contusion injury. J Neurosci 37:8635–8654. CrossRef Medline
Barnabe´-Heider F, Go¨ritz C, Sabelstro¨m H, Takebayashi H, Pfrieger FW,
Meletis K, Frise´n J (2010) Origin of new glial cells in intact and injured
adult spinal cord. Cell Stem Cell 7:470–482. CrossRef Medline
Blakemore WF (1975) Remyelination by Schwann cells of axons demyeli-
nated by intraspinal injection of 6-aminonicotinamide in the rat. J Neu-
rocytol 4:745–757. CrossRef Medline
Carle´n M, Meletis K, Go¨ritz C, Darsalia V, Evergren E, Tanigaki K, Amendola
M, Barnabe´-Heider F, Yeung MS, Naldini L, Honjo T, Kokaia Z, Shuplia-
kov O, Cassidy RM, Lindvall O, **Frise´n J (2009) Forebrain ependymal
cells are notch-dependent and generate neuroblasts and astrocytes after
stroke. Nat Neurosci 12:259–267. CrossRef Medline
Clements MP, Byrne E, Camarillo Guerrero LF, Cattin AL, Zakka L, Ashraf A,
Burden JJ, Khadayate S, Lloyd AC, Marguerat S, Parrinello S (2017) The
wound microenvironment reprograms Schwann cells to invasive
mesenchymal-like cells to drive peripheral nerve regeneration. Neuron
96:98–114.e7. CrossRef Medline
Crawford AH, Tripathi RB, Foerster S, McKenzie I, Kougioumtzidou E, Grist
M, Richardson WD, Franklin RJM (2016) Pre-existing mature oligo-
dendrocytes do not contribute to remyelination following toxin-induced
spinal cord demyelination. Am J Pathol 186:511–516. CrossRef Medline
Duncan ID, Hoffman RL (1997) Schwann cell invasion of the central ner-
vous system of the myelin mutants. J Anat 190:35–49. CrossRef Medline
Dusart I, Marty S, Peschanski M (1992) Demyelination, and remyelination
by Schwann cells and oligodendrocytes after kainate-induced neuronal
depletion in the central nervous system. Neuroscience 51:137–148.
CrossRef Medline
Franklin RJM, Blakemore WF (1993) Requirements for Schwann cell mi-
gration within CNS environments: a viewpoint. Int J Dev Neurosci 11:
641–649. CrossRef Medline
Franklin RJM, Ffrench-Constant C (2017) Regenerating CNS myelin–from
mechanisms to experimental medicines. Nat Rev Neurosci 18:753–769.
CrossRef Medline
Ghatak NR, Hirano A, Doron Y, Zimmerman HM (1973) Remyelination in
multiple sclerosis with peripheral type myelin. Arch Neurol 29:262–267.
CrossRef Medline
Gillespie CS, Sherman DL, Blair GE, Brophy PJ (1994) Periaxin, a novel
protein of myelinating Schwann cells with a possible role in axonal en-
sheathment. Neuron 12:497–508. CrossRef Medline
Griffin JW, Thompson WJ (2008) Biology and pathology of non-
myelinating Schwann cells. Glia 56:1518–1531. CrossRef Medline
Guo F, Maeda Y, Ma J, Delgado M, Sohn J, Miers L, Ko EM, Bannerman P, Xu
J, Wang Y, Zhou C, Takebayashi H, Pleasure D (2011) Macroglial plas-
ticity and the origins of reactive astroglia in experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis. J Neurosci 31:11914–11928. CrossRef Medline
He Q, Man L, Ji Y, Zhang S, Jiang M, Ding F, Gu X (2012) Comparative
proteomic analysis of differentially expressed proteins between peripheral
sensory and motor nerves. J Proteome Res 11:3077–3089. CrossRef
Medline
Ho¨ke A, Redett R, Hameed H, Jari R, Zhou C, Li ZB, Griffin JW, Brushart TM
(2006) Schwann cells express motor and sensory phenotypes that regu-
late axon regeneration. J Neurosci 26:9646–9655. CrossRef Medline
Itoyama Y, Webster HD, Richardson EP Jr, Trapp BD (1983) Schwann cell
remyelination of demyelinated axons in spinal cord multiple sclerosis
lesions. Ann Neurol 14:339–346. CrossRef Medline
Itoyama Y, Ohnishi A, Tateishi J, Kuroiwa Y, Webster HD (1985) Spinal
cord multiple sclerosis lesions in japanese patients: Schwann cell remyeli-
nation occurs in areas that lack glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). Acta
Neuropathol 65:217–223. CrossRef Medline
Jasmin L, Janni G, Moallem TM, Lappi DA, Ohara PT (2000) Schwann cells
are removed from the spinal cord after effecting recovery from paraplegia.
J Neurosci 20:9215–9223. CrossRef Medline
Jessen KR, Mirsky R (2005) The origin and development of glial cells in
peripheral nerves. Nat Rev Neurosci 6:671–682. CrossRef Medline
Jessen KR, Mirsky R (2016) The repair Schwann cell and its function in
regenerating nerves. J Physiol 594:3521–3531. CrossRef Medline
Jessen KR, Morgan L, Stewart HJ, Mirsky R (1990) Three markers of adult
nonmyelin-forming Schwann cells, 217c(Ran-1), A5E3 and GFAP: devel-
opment and regulation by neuron-Schwann cell interactions. Develop-
ment 109:91–103. Medline
9238 • J. Neurosci., October 24, 2018 • 38(43):9228–9239
Ma, Wang et al. • Nonmyelinating Schwann Cells and CNS Remyelination

Johansson CB, Momma S, Clarke DL, Risling M, Lendahl U, Frise´n J (1999)
Identification of a neural stem cell in the adult mammalian central ner-
vous system. Cell 96:25–34. CrossRef Medline
Joseph NM, Mukouyama YS, Mosher JT, Jaegle M, Crone SA, Dormand EL,
Lee KF, Meijer D, Anderson DJ, Morrison SJ (2004) Neural crest stem
cells undergo multilineage differentiation in developing peripheral nerves
to generate endoneurial fibroblasts in addition to Schwann cells. Devel-
opment 131:5599–5612. CrossRef Medline
Lacroix S, Hamilton LK, Vaugeois A, Beaudoin S, Breault-Dugas C, Pineau I,
Le´vesque SA, Gre´goire CA, Fernandes KJ (2014) Central canal ependy-
mal cells proliferate extensively in response to traumatic spinal cord in-
jury but not demyelinating lesions. PLoS One 9:e85916. CrossRef Medline
Laranjeira C, Sandgren K, Kessaris N, Richardson W, Potocnik A, Vanden
Berghe P, Pachnis V (2011) Glial cells in the mouse enteric nervous
system can undergo neurogenesis in response to injury. J Clin Invest
121:3412–3424. CrossRef Medline
Martin S, Levine AK, Chen ZJ, Ughrin Y, Levine JM (2001) Deposition of
the NG2 proteoglycan at nodes of ranvier in the peripheral nervous sys-
tem. J Neurosci 21:8119–8128. CrossRef Medline
McDonald D, Cheng C, Chen Y, Zochodne D (2006) Early events of periph-
eral nerve regeneration. Neuron Glia Biol 2:139–147. CrossRef Medline
Meletis K, Barnabe´-Heider F, Carle´n M, Evergren E, Tomilin N, Shupliakov
O, Frise´n J (2008) Spinal cord injury reveals multilineage differentiation
of ependymal cells. PLoS Biol 6:e182. CrossRef Medline
Murinson BB, Griffin JW (2004) C-fiber structure varies with location in
peripheral nerve. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 63:246–254. CrossRef
Medline
Muthusamy N, Vijayakumar A, Cheng G Jr, Ghashghaei HT (2014) A
knock-in Foxj1(CreERT2::GFP) mouse for recombination in epithelial
cells with motile cilia. Genesis 52:350–358. CrossRef Medline
Nieke J, Schachner M (1985) Expression of the neural cell adhesion mole-
cules L1 and N-CAM and their common carbohydrate epitope L2/HNK-1
during development and after transection of the mouse sciatic nerve.
Differentiation 30:141–151. CrossRef Medline
Nonaka D, Chiriboga L, Rubin BP (2008) Sox10: a pan-Schwannian and
melanocytic marker. Am J Surg Pathol 32:1291–1298. CrossRef Medline
Parrinello S, Napoli I, Ribeiro S, Wingfield Digby P, Fedorova M, Parkinson
DB, Doddrell RD, Nakayama M, Adams RH, Lloyd AC (2010) EphB
signaling directs peripheral nerve regeneration through Sox2-dependent
Schwann cell sorting. Cell 143:145–155. CrossRef Medline
Raivich G, Kreutzberg GW (1987) Expression of growth factor receptors in
injured nervous tissue. II. induction of specific platelet-derived growth
factor binding in the injured PNS is associated with a breakdown in the
blood-nerve barrier and endoneurial interstitial oedema. J Neurocytol
16:701–711. CrossRef Medline
Rawlins EL, Ostrowski LE, Randell SH, Hogan BL (2007) Lung develop-
ment and repair: contribution of the ciliated lineage. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 104:410–417. CrossRef Medline
Rawlins EL, Okubo T, Xue Y, Brass DM, Auten RL, Hasegawa H, Wang F,
Hogan BL (2009) The role of Scgb1a1  clara cells in the long-term
maintenance and repair of lung airway, but not alveolar, epithelium. Cell
Stem Cell 4:525–534. CrossRef Medline
Ren Y, Ao Y, O’Shea TM, Burda JE, Bernstein AM, Brumm AJ, Muthusamy N,
Ghashghaei HT, Carmichael ST, Cheng L, Sofroniew MV (2017)
Ependymal cell contribution to scar formation after spinal cord injury is
minimal, local and dependent on direct ependymal injury. Sci Rep
7:41122. CrossRef Medline
Rezajooi K, Pavlides M, Winterbottom J, Stallcup WB, Hamlyn PJ, Lieberman
AR, Anderson PN (2004) NG2 proteoglycan expression in the periph-
eral nervous system: upregulation following injury and comparison with
CNS lesions. Mol Cell Neurosci 25:572–584. CrossRef Medline
Richard L, Topilko P, Magy L, Decouvelaere AV, Charnay P, Funalot B, Vallat
JM (2012) Endoneurial fibroblast-like cells. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
71:938–947. CrossRef Medline
Richard L, Ve´drenne N, Vallat JM, Funalot B (2014) Characterization of
endoneurial fibroblast-like cells from human and rat peripheral nerves.
J Histochem Cytochem 62:424–435. CrossRef Medline
Rivers LE, Young KM, Rizzi M, Jamen F, Psachoulia K, Wade A, Kessaris N,
Richardson WD (2008) PDGFRA/NG2 glia generate myelinating oligo-
dendrocytes and piriform projection neurons in adult mice. Nat Neurosci
11:1392–1401. CrossRef Medline
Samatov TR, Wicklein D, Tonevitsky AG (2016) L1CAM: cell adhesion and
more. Prog Histochem Cytochem 51:25–32. CrossRef Medline
Taveggia C, Zanazzi G, Petrylak A, Yano H, Rosenbluth J, Einheber S, Xu X,
Esper RM, Loeb JA, Shrager P, Chao MV, Falls DL, Role L, Salzer JL
(2005) Neuregulin-1 type III determines the ensheathment fate of axons.
Neuron 47:681–694. CrossRef Medline
Yu X, Ng CP, Habacher H, Roy S (2008) Foxj1 transcription factors are
master regulators of the motile ciliogenic program. Nat Genet 40:1445–
1453. CrossRef Medline
Zawadzka M, Rivers LE, Fancy SP, Zhao C, Tripathi R, Jamen F, Young K,
Goncharevich A, Pohl H, Rizzi M, Rowitch DH, Kessaris N, Suter U,
Richardson WD, Franklin RJM (2010) CNS-resident glial progenitor/
stem cells produce Schwann cells as well as oligodendrocytes during re-
pair of CNS demyelination. Cell Stem Cell 6:578–590. CrossRef Medline
Zhang Y, Tohyama K, Winterbottom JK, Haque NS, Schachner M, Lieber-
man AR, Anderson PN (2001) Correlation between putative inhibitory
molecules at the dorsal root entry zone and failure of dorsal root axonal
regeneration. Mol Cell Neurosci 17:444–459. CrossRef Medline
Zhao C, Fancy SP, ffrench-Constant C, Franklin RJM (2008) Osteopontin is
extensively expressed by macrophages following CNS demyelination but
has a redundant role in remyelination. Neurobiol Dis 31:209–217.
CrossRef Medline
Zhao C, Ma D, Zawadzka M, Fancy SP, Elis-Williams L, Bouvier G, Stockley
JH, de Castro GM, Wang B, Jacobs S, Casaccia P, Franklin RJM (2015)
Sox2 sustains recruitment of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells following
CNS demyelination and primes them for differentiation during remyeli-
nation. J Neurosci 35:11482–11499. CrossRef Medline
Zujovic V, Thibaud J, Bachelin C, Vidal M, Coulpier F, Charnay P, Topilko P,
Baron-Van Evercooren A (2010) Boundary cap cells are highly compet-
itive for CNS remyelination: fast migration and efficient differentiation in
PNS and CNS myelin-forming cells. Stem Cells 28:470–479. CrossRef
Medline
Zujovic V, Thibaud J, Bachelin C, Vidal M, Deboux C, Coulpier F, Stadler N,
Charnay P, Topilko P, Baron-Van Evercooren A (2011) Boundary cap
cells are peripheral nervous system stem cells that can be redirected into
central nervous system lineages. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108:10714–
10719. CrossRef Medline
Ma, Wang et al. • Nonmyelinating Schwann Cells and CNS Remyelination
J. Neurosci., October 24, 2018 • 38(43):9228–9239 • 9239

===== MacDonald2021_FrontierCellularNeuro_Ependyma+scTx =====
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 15 July 2021
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2021.703951
Edited by:
Deborah Kurrasch,
University of Calgary, Canada
Reviewed by:
Jiami Guo,
University of Calgary, Canada
Esther López-Bayghen,
Instituto Politécnico Nacional de
México (CINVESTAV), Mexico
*Correspondence:
Jo Anne Stratton
jo.stratton@mgill.ca
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Non-Neuronal Cells,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience
Received: 01 May 2021
Accepted: 22 June 2021
Published: 15 July 2021
Citation:
MacDonald A, Lu B, Caron M,
Caporicci-Dinucci N, Hatrock D,
Petrecca K, Bourque G and
Stratton JA (2021) Single Cell
Transcriptomics of Ependymal Cells
Across Age, Region and Species
Reveals Cilia-Related and Metal Ion
Regulatory Roles as Major Conserved
Ependymal Cell Functions.
Front. Cell. Neurosci. 15:703951.
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2021.703951
Single Cell Transcriptomics of
Ependymal Cells Across Age, Region
and Species Reveals Cilia-Related
and Metal Ion Regulatory Roles as
Major Conserved Ependymal Cell
Functions
Adam MacDonald 1, Brianna Lu 1, Maxime Caron 2, Nina Caporicci-Dinucci 1,
Dale Hatrock 1, Kevin Petrecca 1, Guillaume Bourque 2 and Jo Anne Stratton 1*
1Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada,
2Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
Ependymal cells are ciliated-epithelial glial cells that develop from radial glia along
the surface of the ventricles of the brain and the spinal canal. They play a critical
role in cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) homeostasis, brain metabolism, and the clearance of
waste from the brain. These cells have been implicated in disease across the lifespan
including developmental disorders, cancer, and neurodegenerative disease. Despite
this, ependymal cells remain largely understudied. Using single-cell RNA sequencing
data extracted from publicly available datasets, we make key ﬁndings regarding the
remarkable conservation of ependymal cell gene signatures across age, region, and
species. Through this unbiased analysis, we have discovered that one of the most
overrepresented ependymal cell functions that we observed relates to a critically
understudied role in metal ion homeostasis. Our analysis also revealed distinct subtypes
and states of ependymal cells across regions and ages of the nervous system.
For example, neonatal ependymal cells maintained a gene signature consistent with
developmental processes such as determination of left/right symmetry; while adult
ventricular ependymal cells, not spinal canal ependymal cells, appeared to express
genes involved in regulating cellular transport and inﬂammation. Together, these ﬁndings
highlight underappreciated functions of ependymal cells, which will be important to
investigate in order to better understand these cells in health and disease.
Keywords: ependymal cell, ependyma, human, mouse, neonatal, adult, brain homeostasis, single-cell RNA-seq
(scRNA-seq)
INTRODUCTION
Ependymal cells are ciliated glial cells that form an epithelial barrier, called the ependyma, lining
the brain’s ventricular system and the spinal cord’s central canal. They develop from radial glia
along the surface of the ventricles of the brain and spinal canal starting from the first postnatal
days, thereby providing an interface between the parenchyma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-filled
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
1
July 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 703951

MacDonald et al.
Transcriptomic Analysis of Ependymal Cells
cavities throughout life. This interface allows ependymal cells to
control the bidirectional passage of immune cells and solutes
between the CSF and interstitial fluid (Alvarez and Teale,
2007; Mastorakos and McGavern, 2019); while also providing
homeostatic regulation of molecules (Bedussi et al., 2015; Ma
et al., 2017); in addition to playing a critical role in sensing
and propelling CSF via primary and motile cilia, respectively
(Bolborea et al., 2015).
Three subtypes of ependymal cells have been described:
E1, E2, and E3 ependymal cells. The three distinct ependymal
cell subtypes are defined by their cilia number and regional
distribution (Mirzadeh et al., 2008, 2017) where E1 ependymal
cells possess multiple motile cilia and are the most abundant
subtype in the adult brain, occupying the majority of the
lateral (forebrain), third (midbrain) and fourth (hindbrain)
ventricles. E2 cells possess both primary and motile cilia and
are bi-ciliated (Mirzadeh et al., 2008) and line the spinal canal
(Alfaro-Cervello et al., 2012) in addition to occupying a portion
of the third and fourth ventricles of the brain (Mirzadeh
et al., 2017); while E3 ependymal cells have primary cilia, are
uniciliated (Mirzadeh et al., 2017), and exist primarily in a
small portion of the third ventricle, inhabiting the preoptic and
infundibular recesses (Mirzadeh et al., 2017). The multitude of
functions and diverse roles that these cells play is understudied
(Lorencova et al., 2020).
In this study, publicly available single-cell transcriptomic
datasets were screened to identify datasets encompassing
ependymal cells across age, nervous system region, and species.
Following quality control (QC) scrutiny, we were able to
identify four datasets encompassing high-quality ependymal
cells, including mouse ependymal cells from the adult and
neonatal forebrain, and the spinal cord, in addition to ependymal
cells from the adult human forebrain. By comparing datasets,
we find striking homogeneity across ependymal cells in age,
species, and region. This included a highly conserved gene
signature related to metal ion regulation functions, which we
confirmed using RNAscope—a fluorescence in situ hybridization
strategy. Yet we also identified gene signatures that distinguished
ependymal cells from neonatal and adult contexts, in addition
to gene signatures that distinguished between the brain and
spinal cord regions, which suggests that ependymal cell states
and subtypes also have differing functions and mechanisms for
maintaining CNS health.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Single-Cell RNAseq Data Sourcing
Neonatal mouse forebrain dataset (n = 3) was accessed via
GEO: GSE123335 (Loo et al., 2019), adult mouse forebrain
dataset (n = 4) was accessed via GEO: GSE100320 (Shah
et al., 2018), while the mouse spinal cord dataset (n = 3) was
accessed from the PaglaoDB database under SRA/SRS accession
numbers
SRA667466/SRS3059989,
SRA667466/SRS3059990,
and SRA667466/SRS3059991. The human forebrain dataset
(n = 5) was provided by Dr. Petrecca and can be made available
by the corresponding author upon request.
Single-Cell RNAseq Quality Control
All datasets were imported into the Seurat (v4.0.1) R toolkit
for QC and downstream analysis (Macosko et al., 2015). All
functions were run with default parameters unless specified
otherwise. Cells were excluded during QC selection according
to recommended Seurat parameters: if the number of unique
genes detected was less than 200, if the number of unique
genes detected was greater than 2,500, or if the percentage of
mitochondrial genes expressed was greater than 5% (or 10% in
the case of the adult brain datasets). Gene expression was log
normalized to a scale factor of 10,000. Following QC cut-offs, we
identified 18,357 unique features across 41 ependymal cells in the
neonatal dataset, 15,259 unique features across 142 ependymal
cells in the adult mouse brain dataset, 24,506 unique features
across 344 ependymal cells in the spinal cord dataset, and
18,312 unique features across 33 ependymal cells in the adult
human brain datasets.
Single Cell Analysis
All codes are available at Github1. Pseudotime was performed
using the Slingshot (v1.8.0) package (Street et al., 2018)
where analysis was conducted on ependymal cell and radial
glia clusters identified by the expression of marker genes
Foxj1
and
Gfap,
respectively.
Default
parameters
were
used throughout the workflow. An associated heatmap was
generated as part of the standard Slingshot workflow. GO-term
analysis was performed using the clusterProfiler (v3.18.1)
package (Yu et al., 2012) where the top 200 differentially
expressed
genes
were
input
(significantly
regulated;
p-
value < 0.05 following Bonferonni correction), and the
output figure contained the top 30 most significant GO-
terms. P-values were adjusted by false discovery rate during
clusterProfiler
analysis.
clusterProfiler
(v3.18.1)
was
also
used to generate the cnetplots provided in Supplemental
Material, using the top 30 GO-terms, top 200 genes, and
otherwise
default
parameters.
Unless
otherwise
stated,
heatmaps were generated using default parameters for the
DoHeatmap function in Seurat. For heatmap in Figure 1E:
immature and mature genes from neonatal pseudotime analysis
were input and the heatmap was generated using the adult
dataset. Technical limitations prevented us from including
one gene (1700009P17Rik) as it was not found in the adult
dataset. For heatmap in Figure 5A: ependymal cells from
each mouse dataset were integrated using SCTransform and
the top 60 differentially expressed genes were determined
(significantly regulated; p-value < 0.05 following Bonferonni
correction) by comparing genes up in neonatal ependymal
cells, genes up in adult ependymal cells, genes up in spinal
cord ependymal cells, genes down in neonatal ependymal
cells,
genes
down
in
adult
ependymal
cells,
and
genes
down in spinal cord ependymal cells compared to all other
ependymal cells in the merged dataset. Heatmap was created
with parameters adjusted to include the top 10 significant genes
for each comparison.
1https://github.com/StrattonLab/scRNAseq_Frontiers
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
2
July 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 703951

MacDonald et al.
Transcriptomic Analysis of Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 1 | Mature ependymal cells are detectable in the brain by postnatal day 0 and are maintained in adulthood. (A) UMAP plot of single-cell transcriptional
proﬁles from neonatal mouse brain. One cluster in the neonatal brain was identiﬁed as ependymal cells (box) as per the expression of ependymal cell marker genes
such as Foxj1, Pifo, and Dynlrb2 (presented in violin plots). (B) UMAP plot of single-cell transcriptional proﬁles from adult mouse brain. One cluster was identiﬁed as
ependymal cells (box) as per the expression of ependymal cell marker genes such as Foxj1, Pifo, and Dynlrb2 (presented in violin plots). (C) PCA plot depicting
pseudotime trajectory of ependymal cell development in neonatal mouse brain. Ependymal cells (Foxj1+ cluster) and radial glia (Gfap+ cluster; ependymal cell
precursor cells) were extracted from the neonatal dataset and then pseudotime ordering was performed using Slingshot. This revealed a curved trajectory (line)
where radial glia (immature ependymal cells, blue) give rise to mature ependymal cells (red) via an ordered progression of transcriptional changes. X- and Y-axis
represent the ﬁrst and second raw component scores, respectively. (D) Heatmap of differentially expressed genes generated from pseudo-ordered data in (C). This
revealed the top 50 most dynamically expressed genes across the pseudo-ordered state (Mature, red; Intermediate, green; Immature, blue). (E) Heatmap of adult
brain ependymal cells. Selected genes representative of immature ependymal cells (blue in D) and mature ependymal states (red in D) from the neonatal dataset
were plotted demonstrating a striking overlap between mature genes in neonatal and adult ependymal cells. Note the lack of immature gene signatures in adult
ependymal cells is consistent with the adult ependymal cell population being fully mature by this stage.
Tissue
C57B6/J mice were used (Charles River Laboratories). Neonatal
animals were postnatal day 0–1 (n = 3 per group), while
adult animals were 12 weeks old (n = 3 per group). Mice
were housed in a vivarium under pathogen-free conditions in
cages of up to five animals. Studies were approved by the
McGill University Animal Care and Use Committee (UACC)
under animal use protocol 2019-8102. UACC guidelines on
the ethical use and care of animals were followed. Human
brain autopsy tissue was provided by Dr. Prat (U of Montreal)
under McGill University Health Centre REB ethics #2020-
6185.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
3
July 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 703951

MacDonald et al.
Transcriptomic Analysis of Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 2 | In situ detection of mature ependymal cell genes in the ventricular lining of neonatal and adult brain validates the presence of mature ependymal cells
from postnatal day 0 onwards. (A,C) Representative images of neonatal (A) and adult (C) mouse brains demonstrate the expression of Foxj1 (left panels) and
Fam183b (right panels) along the ventricles at both ages (green). Note the localization of mature ependymal cells along the medial wall of the neonatal ventricle
suggesting the temporal progression of ependymal cell development follows a medial to lateral dynamic. LV = Lateral Ventricle. Scale bars: 200 µm (A,C overview);
50 µm (A,C zoomed). Dotted lines show ventricle-ependyma interface. (B,D) Quantiﬁcation of the percentage of cells (DAPI+) expressing Foxj1 or Fam183b along
the ventricular lining of the neonatal (B) and adult (D) mouse brain (n = 3; mean ± SEM).
In situ Hybridization
Following cardiac 4% PFA perfusion, brains were harvested
and post-fixed in PFA for 2 h. Brains were then kept in 30%
sucrose at 4◦C until they sank (48 h for mature brain, 24 h
for neonatal brain), at which point brains were individually
snap-frozen in O.C.T. (Tissue-Tek) and stored at −80◦C. Tissue
was coronally cryosectioned at 15 µm on Superfrost Plus slides
(Fisher) at −20◦C and stored at −80◦C until processing for
RNAscope (Advanced Cell Diagnostics, ACD). Human tissue
was freshly collected then snap-frozen in OCT. Following
cryosectioning, human tissue was fixed on-slide in 4% PFA
for 15 min. For all tissue, RNA in situ hybridization was
performed using RNAscope® (ACD). Tissue was processed
according to the protocol set out in the user manual for
fixed-frozen tissue unless otherwise stated. Briefly, slides were
incubated in a target retrieval solution at 95◦C for 15 min.
Sections were then washed with 100% EtOH and air-dried
for 5 min at room temperature. Sections were ringed using
hydrophobic barrier pen (ImmEdge, Vector Labs; Cat. No.
310018) and then incubated with protease III for 20 min
at room temperature. Sections were then washed once with
PBS before carrying out RNAscope multiplex assays according
to the manufacturer’s protocols, albeit we used one single
wash following each incubation to minimize tissue erosion. All
incubations were at 40◦C and used a humidity control chamber
(HybEZ oven, ACD; Cat. No. 321711). Mouse probes were:
Foxj1-C2 (Cat. No. 317091-C2), Fam183b (Cat. No. 515951),
Mt3 (Cat. No. 504061), and Rarres2 (Cat. No. 572581), in
addition to one human probe MT3-C2 (Cat. No. 525421-C2).
Opal dye 520 and 570 fluorophores (Cat. No. FP1487001KT
and Cat. No. FP1488001KT, respectively; Akoya Biosciences)
were diluted in RNAscope TSA dilution buffer (1:1,000;
Cat. No. 322809). Nuclei were labeled with DAPI (1/5,000;
Invitrogen). Slides were mounted in PermaFluor Mounting
Media (Thermofisher). Sections were imaged using a Zeiss Axio
Observer (20× tile scan for the overview, 40× for zoomed
images).
FIJI (ImageJ) was used to measure ventricle lining length
and to measure the length of probe coverage along lining to
calculate a percentage value that represents the coverage over
the ventricle or canal. For Rarres2 quantification, we measured
the length of probe coverage along the medial ventricular lining.
Statistical analyses were conducted with Graphpad Prism 8 and
significance levels were obtained using one-way ANOVAs using
Holm–Sidak’s test to correct for multiple comparisons.
RESULTS
Publicly
available
single-cell
transcriptomic
datasets
were
screened to identify datasets encompassing ependymal cells
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
4
July 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 703951

MacDonald et al.
Transcriptomic Analysis of Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 3 | Conservation of ependymal cell GO-terms in the ventricular lining of the brain across age and species. (A,B,D) Dot plots representing GO-terms
generated from the top 200 differentially expressed genes in ependymal cells (vs. all other cell types in the respective dataset) were generated using clusterProﬁler.
The top 30 most signiﬁcant GO-terms were plotted. GO-terms clustered in three major categories that were shared across age and species: cilia-related terms
(green), metal ion-related terms (orange), and transport-related terms (blue). Dot size represents gene counts in the respective pathway. Node color intensity shows
enrichment degree (p-values adjusted by FDR). Q-values were assigned to the horizontal axis to control for false positive discovery rate. (A) GO-terms in the neonatal
mouse brain (20/30 terms are cilia-related, 4/30 are metal ion-related, 1/30 is transport-related, and 5/30 were other functions unique to the neonatal dataset). (B)
GO-terms in the adult mouse brain (15/30 terms are cilia-related, 9/30 terms are metal ion-related, 1/30 is transport-related, and 5/30 were other functions unique to
the adult dataset). (C) UMAP plot of single-cell transcriptional proﬁles from the adult human brain. One cluster was identiﬁed as ependymal cells (box) as per the
expression of ependymal cell marker genes such as Foxj1, Pifo, and Dynlrb2 (presented in violin plots). (D) GO-terms in the adult human brain (20/30 functions are
cilia-related, 8/30 terms are metal ion-related, 1/30 is transport-related, and 1/30 is related to a miscellaneous function).
across age, region, and species. We extensively screened
the literature and single-cell databases (PanglaoDB, Single
Cell Portal, Single Cell Expression Atlas, etc.) to identify
ependymal
cell
populations
from
diverse
environments
and
conditions.
Following
QC
scrutiny,
we
were
able
to
identify
four
datasets
encompassing
high-quality
ependymal cells, including ependymal cells from adult and
neonatal forebrain, and from spinal cord in the mouse,
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
5
July 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 703951

MacDonald et al.
Transcriptomic Analysis of Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 4 | Conservation of ependymal cell GO-terms and genes related to metal ion regulatory functions across age, species, and region. (A) UMAP plot of
single-cell transcriptional proﬁles from adult mouse spinal cord. One cluster was identiﬁed as ependymal cells (box) as per the expression of ependymal cell marker
genes such as Foxj1, Pifo, and Dynlrb2 (presented in violin plots). (B) Dot plots representing GO-terms generated from the top 200 differentially expressed genes in
ependymal cells (vs. all other cell types in the respective dataset) were generated from the adult mouse spinal cord dataset. The top 30 most signiﬁcant GO-terms
were plotted. GO-terms clustered in two major categories: cilia-related terms (green) and metal ion-related terms (orange; 9/30 terms are cilia-related, 8/30 terms are
metal ion-related, and 13/30 were other functions unique to the spinal cord dataset). Dot size represents gene counts. Node color intensity shows enrichment
degree (p-values adjusted by FDR). Q-values were assigned to the horizontal axis to control for false positive discovery rate. (C–E) Representative images of the
neonatal ventricular lining (C), adult ventricular lining (D), and spinal canal (E) demonstrates the expression of a gene associated with metal ion buffering (Mt3) in
mouse tissue (arrow). (F) Quantiﬁcation of the percentage of cells (DAPI+) expressing Mt3 along the ventricular and canal linings in mouse brain and spinal cord
(n = 3; mean ± SEM). Note the localization of Mt3 along the entire lining, including in the neonatal brain along the lateral border where mature ependymal cells do not
reside. This suggests that metal ion related functions of the ventricular lining may be initiating even before the full maturation of ependymal cells. (G) Representative
image of the adult human brain demonstrates the expression of MT3 in the ventricular lining (arrow). (H) Quantiﬁcation of the percentage of cells (DAPI+) expressing
MT3 along the ventricular lining in human brain. Scale bars: 200 µm (C–E overview), 50 µm (C–E zoomed; and G). LV = Lateral Ventricle.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
6
July 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 703951

MacDonald et al.
Transcriptomic Analysis of Ependymal Cells
FIGURE 5 | Unique ependymal cell signatures across age and region. (A) Heatmap displaying the top 60 differentially expressed ependymal cell genes from the
neonatal mouse brain (N, red), the adult mouse brain (A, green), and the mouse spinal cord (blue). (B–D) Representative images demonstrating expression of
Rarres2 (green) and Foxj1 (red) in ependymal cells (arrow) of the neonatal mouse brain (B), adult mouse brain (C), and the mouse spinal cord (D). Note the complete
lack of expression of Rarres2 in ependymal cells in the spinal canal as well as only a subset of cells expressing Rarres2 in the ventricular lining in early development
compared to 100% expression in the adult ventricular lining. Scale bars: 200 µm (B–D overview); 50 µm (B–D zoomed). (E) Quantiﬁcation of the percentage of cells
(DAPI+) expressing Rarres2 along the ventricular (medial) and spinal canal lining (n = 3; mean ± SEM). ∗∗∗p < 0.0001. In (D), dotted lines show the central
canal-ependymal lining interface.
in
addition
to
ependymal
cells
from
the
adult
human
brain.
Mature Ependymal Cells Are Detectable in
the Brain by Postnatal Day 0 and Are
Maintained in Adulthood
Our goal was to compare ependymal cells at their earliest stage of
maturity with ependymal cells that were well established mature
cells in the adult forebrain. By comparing ependymal cells at
two polar ages where the microenvironments are highly unique,
we hypothesized that any similarities would likely reflect the
most conserved and relevant gene signatures underlying critical
ependymal cell-related functions for the maintenance of the
brain. As such, we first sourced a single cell dataset at postnatal
day 0, an age that others have shown to be one of the earliest
stages of mature ependymal cell generation in the forebrain
(Harkins et al., 2021). Indeed, our clustering analysis in postnatal
day 0 brain identified one defined cluster expressing genes that
were highly specific to mature ependymal cells (Figure 1A).
This included genes such as: Foxj1, a transcription factor which
acts as a master regulator of ciliogenesis (Jacquet et al., 2009);
Pifo, a protein-coding gene involved in ciliary movement (Kinzel
et al., 2010); and Dynlrb1, a protein-coding gene involved in
dynein-mediated transport (Terenzio et al., 2020). We similarly
identified this same ependymal cell population in an adult brain
dataset (Figure 1B). To establish whether mature cells from
postnatal day 0 had an extensive gene signature reflective of a
mature ependymal cell state, we defined the most mature gene
signatures detectable in neonatal ependymal cells and compared
this to adult ependymal cells. To accomplish this, we performed
pseudotime ordering of ependymal cells as well as their precursor
cells (radial glia) which were also detectable in the postnatal
day 0 mouse brain (Figure 1C). This approach allowed us
to order cells based on their developmental progression and
identify gene signatures reflective of both the most mature
and immature states (Figure 1D). Strikingly, 14/15 genes
most associated with the mature state in the postnatal day
0 brain (including Lrcc1, Meig1, Fam183b, Foxj1 etc.) were
also highly expressed in adult ependymal cells suggesting that
fully mature ependymal cells are detectable at postnatal day
0 (Figure 1E). Similarly, the majority of genes that were
characteristic of the immature state (Phyhipl, Ncan, Bcan etc.)
were not expressed by adult ependymal cells, consistent with
the adult ependymal cell population being fully mature in
adulthood. All further bioinformatic analysis was completed
on the mature ependymal cell cluster from the neonatal and
adult brain. We also performed validation experiments using
RNAscope technology (Wang et al., 2012) on tissue sections
collected from neonatal mice and postnatal week 12 adult mice
(n = 3 per group). The two genes we assessed, which are
associated with the mature state (Foxj1 and Fam183b) were
expressed in the ventricular lining at both ages (Figures 2A–D).
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
7
July 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 703951

MacDonald et al.
Transcriptomic Analysis of Ependymal Cells
Albeit the entire ventricular lining of the adult brain expressed
Foxj1 and Fam183b, only a portion of the lining of the neonatal
brain expressed these markers (Foxj1: 34.22% ± 4.18%; Fam183b:
20.12% ± 4.45). This expression in the neonatal lining was
restricted to the medial wall suggesting that the temporal
progression of ependymal cell development follows a medial to
lateral dynamic as others have described (Abdelhamed et al.,
2018).
Conservation of a Homogenous
Ependymal Cell Transcriptome Across
Age, Species, and Region
It is well established that E1 ependymal cells monopolize
the lateral ventricles of the forebrain and are the major
ependymal cell subtype in the brain (Ohata and Alvarez-
Buylla, 2016). In order to determine how this ependymal cell
subtype is affected by age and species, we used gene ontology
(GO)-term analysis to compare mouse neonatal and adult
ependymal cells (from datasets described above), as well as
adult human ependymal cells, all derived from the forebrain
(Figures 3A,B,D, Supplementary Figure 1). As with mouse
neonatal and adult datasets, clustering analysis was performed
on adult human brain tissue in order to identify any cluster
expressing genes that were specific to mature ependymal cells
in human tissue. Indeed, we found one cluster expressing Foxj1,
Pifo, and Dynlrb1 (Figure 3C). All ependymal cell clusters
across datasets were compared to all other cell types in their
respective datasets to generate the top 200 differentially expressed
ependymal cell genes (for all genes significantly upregulated,
p < 0.001 following Bonferroni correction, see Supplementary
Table 1) then clusterProfiler was used to generate the top 30 most
significant GO-terms for each dataset. GO-terms clustered
in three major categories that were shared across age and
species, including cilia-related terms, metal ion-related terms,
and transport-related terms. Strikingly, GO-terms associated
with metal ion-related functions made up 4/30, 9/30, and
8/30 of GO-terms in mouse neonatal, mouse adult, and human
adult datasets, respectively, demonstrating conservation of this
critically understudied function for ependymal cells (Zatta et al.,
2008). Not surprisingly 20/30, 15/30, and 20/30 of GO-terms
in mouse neonatal, mouse adult, and human adult datasets,
respectively, were related to cilia consistent with the field
focusing largely on this aspect of ependymal cell biology (del
Bigio, 2010). Finally, we also noted 1/30 GO-terms in each dataset
relating to transport. This is consistent with the knowledge that
these cells regulate the bidirectional transport of factors between
CSF and interstitial fluid (Trillo-Contreras et al., 2019). There
were also unique GO-terms relating to each dataset, but these
were minimal and mostly did not have a common theme in
comparison to those that were shared (5/30, 5/30, 1/30 unique
GO-terms in mouse neonatal, mouse adult, and human adult
datasets, respectively).
Given the striking conservation of ependymal cell GO-terms
across age and species, we were interested in assessing
whether this conservation was maintained across ependymal
cell
subtypes.
To
assess
this,
we
sourced
a
single
cell
transcriptomic dataset from the mouse spinal cord, which
is composed of E2 ependymal cells (Alfaro-Cervello et al.,
2012). As with the forebrain datasets, clustering analysis
was performed on spinal cord tissue in order to identify
any cluster expressing genes that were specific to mature
ependymal cells in the spinal cord. Indeed, we found one
cluster expressing Foxj1, Pifo, and Dynlrb1 (Figure 4A). This
ependymal cell cluster was then compared to all other cell
types in this dataset to generate the top 200 differentially
expressed ependymal cell genes (for all genes significantly
upregulated, p < 0.001 following Bonferroni correction, see
Supplementary Table 1) then clusterProfiler was used to
generate the top 30 most significant GO-terms (Figure 4B,
Supplementary Figure 1D). As with forebrain ependymal
cells, GO-terms are clustered into several major categories,
including cilia-related terms and metal ion-related terms.
Strikingly, GO-terms associated with metal ion-related functions
made up 8/30 of the GO-terms demonstrating conservation
of this critically understudied function, even in E2 ependymal
cells. Not surprisingly 9/30 GO-terms were related to cilia
consistent with the field focusing largely on this aspect of
ependymal cell biology (del Bigio, 2010) but no transport-
related GO-terms were detected. There were also unique
GO-terms which made up far more of the top 30 GO-terms
in the spinal cord (13/30) compared to the forebrain datasets
which may suggest a more diverse repertoire of functions in
E2 ependymal cells.
We performed validation experiments to confirm metal
ion-related findings using RNAscope technology (Wang et al.,
2012) on tissue sections collected from the brains of neonatal
mice (n = 3 per group), postnatal week 12 adult mice (n = 3 per
group), and adult human autopsy (n = 1), as well as from the
spinal cords of postnatal week 12 adult mice (n = 3 per group). A
primary gene involved in metal ion buffering is metallothionein
3 (Mt3) and we found that this gene was highly expressed in
all ventricular and canal linings (74.6–100%, Figures 4C–H).
Interestingly, Mt3 was usually localized along the entire lining
of the ventricles and the canal, including in the neonatal brain
along the lateral border where mature ependymal cells do not
reside. This suggests that metal ion-related functions in the
ventricular lining may be initiated even before the full maturation
of ependymal cells.
Unique Ependymal Cell Signatures Across
Age and Region
Albeit our analysis suggests a striking maintenance of ependymal
cell function across diverse contexts, we were interested in
further exploring potential differences between ependymal cells
across age and region. To do this, we integrated mouse datasets
from the neonatal brain, adult brain, and spinal cord in
order to perform direct comparisons. Interestingly, the most
striking difference between datasets existed when contrasting
the spinal cord with brain datasets (Figure 5A) consistent with
the spinal cord having more unique GO-terms (Figure 4B)
and these cells being E2 cells in contrast to the E1 cells
found in the neonatal and adult brain (Redmond et al.,
2019). A top differentially expressed gene upregulated in spinal
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
8
July 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 703951

MacDonald et al.
Transcriptomic Analysis of Ependymal Cells
cord ependymal cells was Plp1 (Figure 5A) consistent with a
unique spinal cord GO-term: ‘‘oligodendrocyte differentiation’’
(Figure 4B). While neonatal and adult brain ependymal
cells shared more similarities, there were some upregulated
genes unique to the neonatal brain (including Ccdc104 and
Ccdc19, involved in the development of cilia) and some
unique to the adult brain (including Rarres2, involved in
initiating inflammation; Figure 5A).
We performed validation experiments on Rarres2 to confirm
its unique expression in the adult brain at the exclusion of the
neonatal brain or spinal cord. This gene was chosen given its
involvement in the inflammatory response and the topographic
distribution of inflammatory lesions that appear to be highly
prevalent in the parenchyma lining the ventricular system in
the adult brain (Hatrock et al., 2020). We used RNAscope
technology (Wang et al., 2012) on tissue sections collected
from neonatal mice, postnatal week 12 adult mice, and spinal
cord tissue (n = 3 per group; Figures 5B–E). Consistent with
our transcriptomic analysis, we found that Rarres2 was highly
expressed in adult brain (100%), minimally expressed in the
neonatal brain (12.28% ± 1.31%), and undetectable in the spinal
cord (0%).
DISCUSSION
Our functional genomics analysis has confirmed a prominent
role for cilia-related functions in ependymal cells consistent with
the field (del Bigio, 2010; Wallmeier et al., 2019; Lorencova et al.,
2020), which was apparent across age, species, and ependymal
subtypes. In addition, we have uncovered an underappreciated
function for ependymal cells: metal ion regulation, which
is remarkably overrepresented, and conserved across species,
age, and ependymal subtype. Although largely homogenous,
ependymal cells across age and region also have some unique
predicted functions as well. Together, our data proposes several
underappreciated shared and unique ependymal functions that
warrant further investigation.
Our analysis demonstrated that the top 30 GO-terms included
four to nine metal ion-related terms across age, species, and
ependymal subtypes. Albeit the adult mouse brain dataset
revealed the most numerous metal ion-related GO-terms (nine
out of the top 30 terms were metal ion-related), these terms
were also well represented in the adult human brain and spinal
cord (8 out of 30 terms), which suggests a critical role for metal
ion regulation in the maintenance of adult brain homeostasis
irrelevant of ependymal subtype. Metal ion regulation is critical
for the maintenance of homeostasis throughout the body, which,
leads to oxidative stress and toxicity, if dysregulated (Valko et al.,
2005; Salim, 2017). Indeed, several diseases such as cancer (Valko
et al., 2006), autism (Nadeem et al., 2020), Wilson’s disease
(Kitzberger et al., 2005), and Alzheimer’s disease (Lovell et al.,
1998; Miller et al., 2006; Everett et al., 2021) are associated
with a dysregulation of metal ion homeostasis. Very few studies
have analyzed the role of metal ion regulation in the brain,
nor how ependymal cells might be involved. In 2008, Zatta
et al. (2008) investigated metal ion accumulation in the brain
of aging cattle and found that the accumulation of copper, zinc,
and manganese was dependent on age. They also found that
the major cell types expressing metallothionein, which is the
major metal-ion binding protein that buffers heavy metals, were
ependymal cells and astrocytes. In our analysis, we also identified
metallothionein in both ependymal cells and astrocytes, although
it was only ependymal cells, not astrocytes, that were enriched
in GO-terms associated with metal ion regulation (astrocyte
data not shown), which could suggest a more prominent role
for ependymal cells in regulating metal ion homeostasis. There
are three major metallothioneins. MT1 and MT2 are found
non-specifically across mammalian organ systems, while MT3 is
predominantly CNS-specific (Coyle et al., 2002; Miyazaki et al.,
2002). Interestingly, MT3 is downregulated in Alzheimer’s brains
(El Ghazi et al., 2006) but how this contributes to disease
pathogenesis and whether a dyshomeostasis in ependymal
cell-specific metal ion detoxification function contributes to
disease is unknown (Everett et al., 2021).
Interestingly, neonatal ependymal cells had the least number
of metal ion GO-terms (4 out of the top 30 terms). Rather
these ependymal cells are dominated by GO-terms associated
with ciliogenesis and cilia motility, consistent with these cells
developing cilia at this early-stage of life (Jacquet et al., 2009).
The presence of other GO-terms associated with developmental
processes such as determination of left/right symmetry also
appeared in neonatal ependymal cells. This is consistent with
ependymal cells playing a role in determining the symmetrical
development of mammals across the medio/lateral plane (Chen
et al., 1998; Wallmeier et al., 2019). Indeed, the absence of
functional genes in ciliopathies such as in primary ciliary
dyskinesia (PCD) and Kartagener syndrome, can lead to
asymmetrical development. For instance, in FOXJ1 mutant
patients, left/right asymmetry occurs and leads to organ laterality
defects (Catana and Apostu, 2017). It is thought that during
embryogenesis, when ciliary beating patterns are disrupted,
the laterality of organ placement is disrupted, and in the
most severe cases can result in long-term defects including
congenital heart defects. The contribution of ependymal cells
in maintaining body symmetry during development has not
been studied.
We noted the presence of immune-related genes, such
as retinoic acid receptor responder protein 2 (RARRES2 or
Chemerin) which was largely restricted to adult ventricular
ependymal cells. RARRES2 is a 14 kDa protein secreted in an
inactive form (prochemerin) which is then activated through
the cleavage of the C-terminus by inflammatory serine proteases
(Zabel et al., 2005). It is a potent chemoattractant that regulates
the recruitment of circulating immune cells via binding of the
G protein-coupled receptor CMKLR1 (Wittamer et al., 2003;
Zabel et al., 2008; Huang et al., 2020). Interestingly, in multiple
sclerosis—a common chronic inflammatory disease of the CNS,
the most consistent region of inflammatory lesion formation
is the periventricular area, directly adjacent to ependymal cells
lining the brain’s ventricles (Haider et al., 2016). Why immune
cells target this defined region is not known. While lesions also
form in the spinal cord, these lesions are not as commonly
found lining the spinal canal, which raises the possibility that
ependymal cells may play a critical role in the recruitment
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
9
July 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 703951

MacDonald et al.
Transcriptomic Analysis of Ependymal Cells
of immune cells in the brain via chemoattractants such as
RARRES2.
Based on our GO-term analysis, the presence of genes
responsible for transport functions in ependymal cells from
both the human and mouse ventricles suggests that E1 cells play
a critical transport role, which appears to be less prominent
in E2 cells from the spinal cord. Aquaporin-4, which is
a membrane channel protein, is one transport-associated
gene driving the extracellular transport GO-term in our
forebrain datasets. Aquaporin-4 responds passively to osmotic
gradients and is responsible for the fast transportation of
water through its cell membrane. This is critical for the
efficient operation of the glymphatic system, important for
waste removal, as well as fine-tuning potassium homeostasis.
The mechanisms of glymphatic waste clearance in the CNS
have been studied extensively in the brain but not the
spinal cord (Dupont et al., 2019). These findings suggest
glymphatic clearance may have unique regulatory mechanisms
in
the
spinal
cord
compared
to
the
brain,
warranting
further investigation.
E2 cells have previously been shown to be capable of
contributing to the regenerative response following spinal cord
injury (Johansson et al., 1999; Namiki and Tator, 1999; Mothe
and Tator, 2005), consistent with spinal cord ependymal cells
in our dataset being associated with a GO-term related to the
regulation of precursor cell proliferation (‘‘negative regulation
of neural precursor cell proliferation’’). This GO-term was
not detected in brain ependymal cells suggesting that E2 cells
may be uniquely involved in actively suppressing proliferative
responses in normal health, but under disease or injury
conditions, this suppression may be lifted unleashing a dormant
regenerative capacity. Interestingly, our previous data assessing
the regenerative potential of ependymal cells in the lateral
ventricles of the adult mouse did not detect any regenerative
potential of E1 cells (Shah et al., 2018). Further studies are needed
to clarify the functional similarities and differences between
E1 and E2 ependymal cells in relation to their regenerative
potential.
Our data implicate ependymal cells in several under-
characterized functions related to maintaining brain homeostasis
throughout life. Most immediately, deciphering the role of
ependymal-mediated metal ion regulation will be critical to
understanding the contribution of these cells to regulating
oxidative stress and toxicity in health and disease.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included
in the article/Supplementary Material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author.
ETHICS STATEMENT
The animal study was reviewed and approved by McGill
University Animal Care and Use Committee.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
AM carried out most bioinformatic and RNAscope work. BL,
DH, and NC-D supported tissue processing and RNAscope work.
MC supported bioinformatics work, while GB supervised MC.
AM prepared figures and drafted the manuscript. JS conceived
and designed the project, supervised the work, and prepared and
approved the final manuscript. KP provided human single cell
data. All authors contributed to the article and approved the
submitted version.
FUNDING
This work was supported by a Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada Grant (NSERC, DGECR-2021-
00164) and a Canadian Foundations for Innovations grant
(CFI, 40317). BL was supported by an Undergraduate Student
Research Award (USRA) from NSERC. DH was supported by
a McGill Regenerative Medicine Scholarship, Esther Cushing
Fellowship, and Davis Fellowship. NC-D was supported by a
Canada Graduate Scholarship from the Canadian Institute of
Health Research (CIHR).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the staff at the Centre for Neurological
Disease Models at the Neuro, as well as support from Manon
Blain and Jack Antel. We would like to thank Drs. Alex Prat
and Stephanie Zandee for providing human autopsy brain tissue.
Finally, we would like to thank Sherilyn Recinto for support with
GO-term analysis.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online
at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fncel.2021.7039
51/full#supplementary-material.
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 1 | GO-analysis networks displaying
gene-GO-term connections for each ependymal cell cluster. Top 30 GO-terms
(tan nodes) for each ependymal cluster are displayed, demonstrating the genes
(gray nodes) that are associated with GO-terms. All included genes are part of the
top 200 upregulated genes for that ependymal cluster. Ependymal clusters are
displayed for neonatal mouse brain (A), adult mouse brain (B), adult human brain
(C), and mouse spinal cord (D).
REFERENCES
Abdelhamed, Z., Vuong, S. M., Hill, L., Shula, C., Timms, A., Beier, D., et al. (2018).
A mutation in Ccdc39 causes neonatal hydrocephalus with abnormal motile
cilia development in mice. Development 145:dev154500. doi: 10.1242/dev.
154500
Alfaro-Cervello, C., Soriano-Navarro, M., Mirzadeh, Z., Alvarez-Buylla, A.,
and Garcia-Verdugo, J. M. (2012). Biciliated ependymal cell proliferation
contributes to spinal cord growth. J. Comp. Neurol. 520, 3528–3552.
doi: 10.1002/cne.23104
Alvarez, J. I., and Teale, J. M. (2007). Differential changes in junctional complex
proteins suggest the ependymal lining as the main source of leukocyte
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
10
July 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 703951

MacDonald et al.
Transcriptomic Analysis of Ependymal Cells
infiltration into ventricles in murine neurocysticercosis. J. Neuroimmunol. 187,
102–113. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2007.05.005
Bolborea, M., Helfer, G., Ebling, F. Y., and Barrett, P. (2015). Dual signal
transduction pathways activated by TSH receptors in rat primary tanycyte
cultures. J. Mol. Endocrinol. 54, 241–250. doi: 10.1530/JME-14-0298
Bedussi, B., van Lier, M. G. J. T. B., Bartstra, J. W., de Vos, J., Siebes, M.,
VanBavel, E., et al. (2015). Clearance from the mouse brain by convection
of interstitial fluid towards the ventricular system. Fluids Barriers CNS 12:23.
doi: 10.1186/s12987-015-0019-5
Catana,
A.,
and
Apostu,
A.
P.
(2017).
The
determination
factors
of
left-right asymmetry disorders- a short review. Clujul Med. 90, 139–146.
doi: 10.15386/cjmed-701
Chen, J., Knowles, H. J., Hebert, J. L., and Hackett, B. P. (1998). Mutation of
the mouse hepatocyte nuclear factor/forkhead homologue 4 gene results in
an absence of cilia and random left-right asymmetry. J. Clin. Invest. 102,
1077–1082. doi: 10.1172/JCI4786
Coyle, P., Philcox, J. C., Carey, L. C., and Rofe, A. M. (2002). Metallothionein: the
multipurpose protein. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 59, 627–647. doi: 10.1007/s00018-002-
8454-2
del Bigio, M. R. (2010). Ependymal cells: biology and pathology. Acta Neuropathol.
119, 55–73. doi: 10.1007/s00401-009-0624-y
Dupont, G., Schmidt, C., Yilmaz, E., Oskouian, R. J., Macchi, V., de Caro, R., et al.
(2019). Our current understanding of the lymphatics of the brain and spinal
cord. Clin. Anat. 32, 117–121. doi: 10.1002/ca.23308
El Ghazi, I., Martin, B. L., and Armitage, I. M. (2006). Metallothionein-3 is a
component of a multiprotein complex in the mouse brain. Exp. Biol. Med.
(Maywood) 231, 1500–1506. doi: 10.1177/153537020623100908
Everett, J., Lermyte, F., Brooks, J., Tjendana-Tjhin, V., Plascenia-Villa, G., Hands-
Portman, I., et al. (2021). Biogenic metallic elements in the human brain? Sci.
Adv. 7:eabf6707. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abf6707
Haider, L., Zrzavy, T., Hametner, S., Höftberger, R., Bagnato, F., Grabner, G., et al.
(2016). The topograpy of demyelination and neurodegeneration in the multiple
sclerosis brain. Brain 139, 807–815. doi: 10.1093/brain/awv398
Harkins, D., Cooper, H. M., and Piper, M. (2021). The role of lipids in ependymal
development and the modulation of adult neural stem cell function during
aging and disease. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 112, 61–68. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.
2020.07.018
Hatrock, D., Caporicci-Dinucci, N., and Stratton, J. A. (2020). Ependymal cells and
multiple sclerosis: proposing a relationship. Neural Regen. Res. 15, 263–264.
doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.265551
Huang, C.-L., Xiao, L.-L., Xu, M., Li, J., Li, S.-F., Zhu, C.-S., et al. (2020). Chemerin
deficiency regulates adipogenesis is depot different through TIMP1. Genes Dis.
doi: 10.1016/j.gendis.2020.04.003. [Online ahead of Print].
Jacquet, B. V., Salinas-Mondragon, R., Liang, H., Therit, B., Buie, J. D., Dykstra, M.,
et al. (2009). FoxJ1-dependent gene expression is required for differentiation of
radial glia into ependymal cells and a subset of astrocytes in the postnatal brain.
Development 136, 4021–4031. doi: 10.1242/dev.041129
Johansson, C. B., Momma, S., Clarke, D. L., Risling, M., Lendahl, U., and Frisén, J.
(1999). Identification of a neural stem cell in the adult mammalian central
nervous system. Cell 96, 25–34. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80956-3
Kinzel, D., Boldt, K., Davis, E. E., Burtscher, I., Trümbach, D., Diplas, B., et al.
(2010). Pitchfork regulates primary cilia disassembly and left-right asymmetry.
Dev. Cell 19, 66–77. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.06.005
Kitzberger, R., Madl, C., and Ferenci, P. (2005). Wilson disease. Metab. Brain Dis.
20, 295–302. doi: 10.1007/s11011-005-7910-8
Loo, L., Simon, J. M., Xing, L., McCoy, E. S., Niehaus, J. K., Guo, J., et al. (2019).
Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of mouse neocortical development. Nat.
Commun. 10:134. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-08079-9
Lorencova, M., Mitro, A., Jurikova, M., Galfiova, P., Mikusova, R., Krivosikova, L.,
et al. (2020). Ependymal cells surface of human third brain ventricle
by
scanning
electron
microscopy.
Bratisl.
Lek.
Listy
121,
437–443.
doi: 10.4149/BLL_2020_071
Lovell, M. A., Robertson, J. D., Teesdale, W. J., Campbell, J. L., and
Markesbery, W. R. (1998). Copper, iron and zinc in Alzheimer’s disease senile
plaques. J. Neurol. Sci. 158, 47–52. doi: 10.1016/s0022-510x(98)00092-6
Ma, Q., Ineichen, B. V., Detmar, M., and Proulx, S. T. (2017). Outflow of
cerebrospinal fluid is predominantly through lymphatic vessels and is reduced
in aged mice. Nat. Commun. 8:1434. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-01484-6
Macosko, E. Z., Basu, A., Satija, R., Nemesh, J., Shekhar, K., Goldman, M., et al.
(2015). Highly parallel genome-wide expression profiling of individual cells
using nanoliter droplets. Cell 161, 1202–1214. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.002
Mastorakos, P., and McGavern, D. (2019). The anatomy and immunology of
vasculature in the central nervous system. Sci. Immunol. 4:eaav0492. doi: 10.
1126/sciimmunol.aav0492
Miller, L. M., Wang, Q., Telivala, T. P., Smith, R. J., Lanzirotti, A., and
Miklossy, J. (2006). Synchrotron-based infrared and X-ray imaging shows
focalized accumulation of Cu and Zn co-localized with beta-amyloid deposits
in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Struct. Biol. 155, 30–37. doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2005.
09.004
Mirzadeh, Z., Kusne, Y., Duran-Moreno, M., Cabrales, E., Gil-Perotin, S.,
Ortiz, C., et al. (2017). Bi- and uniciliated ependymal cells define
continuous floor-plate-derived tanycytic territories. Nat. Commun. 8:13759.
doi: 10.1038/ncomms13759
Mirzadeh, Z., Merkle, F. T., Soriano-Navarro, M., Garcia-Verdugo, J. M.,
and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2008). Neural stem cells confer unique pinwheel
architecture to the ventricular surface in neurogenic regions of the adult brain.
Cell Stem Cell 3, 265–278. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.07.004
Miyazaki, I., Asanuma, M., Higashi, Y., Sogawa, C. A., Tanaka, K., and Ogawa, N.
(2002). Age-related changes in expression of metallothionein-III in rat brain.
Neurosci. Res. 43, 323–333. doi: 10.1016/s0168-0102(02)00057-3
Mothe, A. J., and Tator, C. H. (2005). Proliferation, migration and differentiation
of endogenous ependymal region stem/progenitor cells following minimal
spinal cord injury in the adult rat. Neuroscience 131, 177–187. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroscience.2004.10.011
Nadeem, M. S., Al-Abbasi, F. A., Kazmi, I., Murtaza, B. N., Zamzami, M. A.,
Kamal,
M.
A.,
et
al.
(2020).
Multiple
risk
factors:
a
challenge
in
the
management
of
autism.
Curr.
Pharm.
Des.
26,
743–754.
doi: 10.2174/1381612826666200226101218
Namiki, J., and Tator, C. H. (1999). Cell proliferation and nestin expression in the
ependyma of the adult rat spinal cord after injury. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol.
58, 489–498. doi: 10.1097/00005072-199905000-00008
Ohata, S., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2016). Planar organization of multiciliated
ependymal (E1) cells in the brain ventricular epithelium. Trends Neurosci. 39,
543–551. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2016.05.004
Redmond, S. A., Figueres-Oñate, M., Obernier, K., Nascimento, M. A.,
Parraguez, J. I., López-Mascaraque, L., et al. (2019). Development of ependymal
and postnatal neural stem cells and their origin from a common embryonic
progenitor. Cell Rep. 27, 429.e3–441.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.01.088
Salim, S. (2017). Oxidative stress and the central nervous system. J. Pharmacol.
Exp. Ther. 360, 201–205. doi: 10.1124/jpet.116.237503
Shah, P. T., Stratton, J. A., Stykel, M. G., Abbasi, S., Sharma, S., Mayr, K. A.,
et al. (2018). Single-cell transcriptomics and fate mapping of ependymal cells
reveals an absence of neural stem cell function. Cell 173, 1045.e9–1057.e9.
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.063
Street, K., Risso, D., Fletcher, R. B., Das, D., Ngai, J., Yosef, N., et al. (2018).
Slingshot: cell lineage and pseudotime inference for single-cell transcriptomics.
BMC Genomics 19:477. doi: 10.1186/s12864-018-4772-0
Terenzio, M., di Pizio, A., Rishal, I., Marvaldi, L., di Matteo, P., Kawaguchi, R.,
et al. (2020). DYNLRB1 is essential for dynein mediated transport and
neuronal survival. Neurobiol. Dis. 140:104816. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2020.
104816
Trillo-Contreras, J. L., Toledo-Aral, J. J., Echevarría, M., and Villadiego, J. (2019).
AQP1 and AQP4 contribution to cerebrospinal fluid homeostasis. Cells 8:197.
doi: 10.3390/cells8020197
Valko, M., Morris, H., and Cronin, M. T. D. (2005). Metals, toxicity and oxidative
stress. Curr. Med. Chem. 12, 1161–1208. doi: 10.2174/0929867053764635
Valko, M., Rhodes, C. J., Moncol, J., Izakovic, M., and Mazur, M. (2006). Free
radicals, metals and antioxidants in oxidative stress-induced cancer. Chem.
Biol. Interact. 160, 1–40. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2005.12.009
Wallmeier, J., Frank, D., Shoemark, A., Nöthe-Menchen, T., Cindric, S.,
Olbrich, H., et al. (2019). De novo mutations in FOXJ1 result in a
motile ciliopathy with hydrocephalus and randomization of left/right body
asymmetry. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 105, 1030–1039. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.
09.022
Wang, F., Flanagan, J., Su, N., Wang, L.-C., Bui, S., Nielson, A., et al. (2012).
RNAscope: a novel in situ RNA analysis platform for formalin-fixed, paraffin-
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
11
July 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 703951

MacDonald et al.
Transcriptomic Analysis of Ependymal Cells
embedded tissues. J. Mol. Diagn. 14, 22–29. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2011.
08.002
Wittamer, V., Franssen, J.-D., Vulcano, M., Mirjolet, J.-F., le Poul, E., Migeotte, I.,
et al. (2003). Specific recruitment of antigen-presenting cells by chemerin, a
novel processed ligand from human inflammatory fluids. J. Exp. Med. 198,
977–985. doi: 10.1084/jem.20030382
Yu, G., Wang, L.-G., Han, Y., and He, Q.-Y. (2012). ClusterProfiler: an R package
for comparing biological themes among gene clusters. OMICS 16, 284–287.
doi: 10.1089/omi.2011.0118
Zabel, B. A., Allen, S. J., Kulig, P., Allen, J. A., Cichy, J., Handel, T. M., et al.
(2005). Chemerin activation by serine proteases of the coagulation, fibrinolytic
and inflammatory cascades. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 34661–34666. doi: 10.1074/jbc.
M504868200
Zabel, B. A., Nakae, S., Zúñiga, L., Kim, J.-Y., Ohyama, T., Alt, C., et al. (2008).
Mast cell-expressed orphan receptor CCRL2 binds chemerin and is required
for optimal induction of IgE-mediated passive cutaneous anaphylaxis. J. Exp.
Med. 205, 2207–2220. doi: 10.1084/jem.20080300
Zatta, P., Drago, D., Zambenedetti, P., Bolognin, S., Nogara, E., Peruffo, A., et al.
(2008). Accumulation of copper and other metal ions and metallothionein I/II
expression in the bovine brain as a function of aging. J. Chem. Neuroanat. 36,
1–5. doi: 10.1016/j.jchemneu.2008.02.008
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 MacDonald, Lu, Caron, Caporicci-Dinucci, Hatrock, Petrecca,
Bourque and Stratton. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s)
and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No
use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with
these terms.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
12
July 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 703951

===== Maden2018_IntJDevBiol_Regeneration-Evolution =====
The evolution of regeneration – 
where does that leave mammals? 
MALCOLM MADEN*
Department of Biology & UF Genetics Institute, University of Florida, USA
ABSTRACT  This brief review considers the question of why some animals can regenerate and oth­
ers cannot and elaborates the opposing views that have been expressed in the past on this topic, 
namely that regeneration is adaptive and has been gained or that it is a fundamental property of 
all organisms and has been lost. There is little empirical evidence to support either view, but some 
of the best comes from recent phylogenetic analyses of regenerative ability in Planarians which 
reveals that this property has been lost and gained several times in this group. In addition, a non-
regenerating species has been induced to regenerate by altering only one signaling pathway. Ex­
trapolating this to mammals it may be the case that there is more regenerative ability in mammals 
than has typically been thought to exist and that inducing regeneration in humans may not be as 
impossible as it may seem. The regenerative abilities of mammals is described and it turns out that 
there are several examples of classical epimorphic regeneration involving a blastema as exemplified 
by the regenerating Urodele limb that can be seen in mammals. Even the heart can regenerate in 
mammals which has long been considered to be a property unique to Urodeles and fish and several 
recent examples of regeneration have come from recent studies of the spiny mouse, Acomys, which 
are discussed here. It is suggested that a much more thorough phylogenetic analysis of mamma­
lian regeneration would likely reveal some important insights into the evolution of regeneration. 
KEY WORDS: evolution, regeneration, mammal, Planarian, spiny mouse
One of the most enduring questions in the regeneration field must 
surely be: why can some organisms regenerate and others can­
not? This question has been debated for more than 100 years and 
although there is little empirical evidence to support one view or the 
other this does not detract from the fascination with the question 
as well as its importance for regenerative medicine. 
One view is that regeneration is a fundamental property of all 
organisms and it has been lost during evolution in many species as 
a result of selection against because it may have been detrimental 
or simply neutral with regard to survival and so it would have been 
eliminated. This is the popular contemporary view (Bely & Nyberg, 
2010) and stretches back to the views of Morgan (1901, as dis­
cussed in Goss, 1991, 1992). Bely & Nyberg have concluded that 
the metazoan ancestor, the bilaterian ancestor, the deuterostome 
ancestor and the lophotrochozoan ancestor were all capable of 
extensive regeneration. It has been lost in the ecdysozoa and in 
the chordates is present in some urochordates and amphibians 
but has been lost in birds and mammals. If this is indeed the case, 
then examples of regeneration should all resemble each other and 
to a great degree, at least in vertebrates, they do. Regeneration 
of complex tissues such as limbs and tails proceeds by rapid epi­
Int. J. Dev. Biol. 62: 369-372 (2018)
https://doi.org/10.1387/ijdb.180031mm
www.intjdevbiol.com
*Address correspondence to:  Malcolm Maden. Department of Biology & UF Genetics Institute, University of Florida, USA.  e-mail: malcmaden@ufl.edu
Submitted: 12 January, 2018; Accepted: 16 January, 2018.
ISSN: Online 1696-3547, Print 0214-6282
© 2018 UPV/EHU Press
Printed in Spain
Abbreviations used in this paper: ac, apical cap; bl, blastema.
dermal wound healing, dedifferentiation of mesodermal cells and 
release of stem cells to generate a blastema, proliferation of the 
blastema, induction of signaling pathways to pattern the blastema 
and redifferentiation of tissues in a proximal to distal sequence. 
There is also a neurotrophic requirement which is considered to 
be the provision of a proliferation-inducing neurotrophic molecule 
from the nerves or Schwann cells (Farkas et al., 2016). But what 
about organs that do not produce a blastema during regeneration, 
for example the skin which regenerates after epithelial wound 
closure over a scab (if present) but the dermal fibroblasts do not 
seem to accumulate together to form a blastema even though they 
proliferate extensively during skin regeneration?. Likewise the 
replacement of cardiomyocytes in the heart requires a stimulus 
from the epicardium but there is no blastema-like structure and 
again with lens regeneration where only one cell type is involved 
and here the process only involves dedifferentiation, proliferation 
and redifferentiation. So a blastema may not be an absolute re­
quirement for epimorphic regeneration as long as proliferation can 

370    M. Maden
occur in an orderly fashion. Nevertheless, this view of regeneration 
is a very positive one from the point of view of the ultimate aim of 
inducing regeneration in humans because if all regenerative pro­
cesses are fundamentally the same then studies on the axolotl are 
highly relevant to inducing the property in humans. It also means 
that in non-regenerating organisms such as humans the ability 
to regenerate has likely been blocked and to permit regeneration 
we ‘only’ have to find out how to unblock the process rather than 
re-invent the wheel.
The alternative view, that evolution has selected for each example 
of regeneration independently and that it arose separately as an 
adaptation to environmental pressures has also been a popular 
view over time. This adaptive property of regeneration means that 
in animals that frequently lose parts such as appendages the ability 
to regenerate them is a selective advantage and this concept is 
frequently discussed in terms of the more a structure is liable to be 
injured in nature the more likely it is to be able to regenerate. This 
certainly applies to the lizard tail which is apparently frequently lost 
in nature – as frequently as 85% in some estimates (Vitt & Cooper, 
1986) and many marine invertebrates in which a large proportion of 
the population (97%) may be regenerating at any one time (Clark 
et al., 2007). T.H. Morgan was not an advocate of this view and 
set out to test this in hermit crabs which only expose the first two 
pairs of legs while the remaining three pairs are protected inside 
the shell (discussed in Goss, 1992). Yet the third, fourth and fifth 
leg can regenerate as well as the first two. Similarly, now we know 
that internal organs of lower vertebrates can regenerate such as 
the heart, the lens or the forebrain this begs the question: how 
many times had the heart been damaged in order for regeneration 
to be adaptive in this circumstance or the lens and so on? This 
adaptive hypothesis has very different implications from the innate 
hypothesis above for the practicalities of inducing regeneration in 
humans because if each system has evolved separately then they 
are unique in their mechanisms and learning about axolotl limb 
regeneration may have no relevance to anything else or learning 
how to induce regeneration in mice as a model system may have 
no relevance to inducing it in humans.
Some of the most relevant studies in relation to these two ar­
guments have been conducted on Planarians. The regenerative 
abilities of Planarians are legendary and were the subject of T.H. 
Morgan’s studies on regeneration. However, regenerative ability is 
not universal amongst Planarians as many species are incapable 
of regenerating and a phylogenetic analysis of 60 regenerating and 
non-regenerating species by J. Rink (pers.comm.) has revealed 
this patchy distribution. There are clear examples where some 
branches of the tree can no longer regenerate and the ability must 
have been lost and there are also examples of where subsequent 
branches of the tree can regenerate and the ability must have been 
regained. This analyses of large numbers of closely related spe­
cies reveals that it may not be so hard to gain or lose regenerative 
ability as we might imagine as this has happened several times in 
Planarians. Indeed the molecular basis of this property has been 
determined for one species which cannot regenerate its head, 
Dendrocoelum lacteum (Liu et al., 2013). After amputation of the 
head the initial phases of regeneration, wound healing and estab­
lishment of a blastema occurred normally but what goes wrong is 
the subsequent lack of expression of head fate specification genes 
and the continued expression of tail specification genes. Since 
the inhibition of Wnt/b-catenin is required for head specification in 
other regenerating Planarians the inhibition of b-catenin signaling 
was all that was required to turn this non-regenerating species 
into a regenerating one. A remarkably simple requirement for one 
gene on the Wnt pathway in amongst all the thousands of genes 
required for regeneration. This experiment shows that it may not 
be so hard to gain regenerative ability as we might imagine and 
gives great impetus to the search for ways of inducing regenera­
tion in mammals. It also suggests that the most likely scenario for 
the evolution of regeneration - innate or adaptive - is the former.
This type of phylogenetic analysis really needs to be done in 
mammals to see if these same characteristics apply. The com­
mon view is that mammals (and birds) do not regenerate, but that 
depends on what you mean by regeneration. At the molecular or 
cellular level, regeneration is ubiquitous to multicellular organ­
isms—molecular turnover of membranes and proteins, turnover of 
cell types such as blood cells, continual replacement of the surface 
epithelium or the gut lining, slow turnover of resident stem cell 
populations, and universal ability of epithelia to heal over wounds. 
This is physiological regeneration. At first sight what seems to 
have been lost is the ability to regrow organs or complex tissues. 
But is this true or have regenerative abilities never been tested in 
mammals because it is assumed that they do not?
There are already some striking examples of anatomically 
complex tissues that can regenerate in mammals. The annual 
replacement of deer antlers is surely one of the most conspicuous 
examples and antler regeneration shows many features typical of 
regeneration in lower vertebrates (Goss, 1983). After shedding the 
antler the wound is healed by migration of adjacent skin over the 
pedicle which does not form a scar but instead is an active and 
inductive tissue. Dermal cells and periosteal cells intermingle in 
the healing area which will grow into the new antler bud and there 
are extensive down-pushings of the epithelium at the tip into the 
mesoderm of the bud reminiscent of the apical cap of the limb 
blastema. If the wound skin is damaged it can give rise to a small 
ectopic antler and if normal full-thickness skin is grafted over the 
pedicle stump then antler regeneration is inhibited. The pedicle 
can be transplanted to other regions of the body where it will form 
an ectopic antler. New antler growth is derived from fibroblast-like 
cells derived from the periosteum of the pedicle (maybe also from 
the dermis of the healing skin) and the cells at the tip resemble 
blastemal cells in their undifferentiated nature and high proliferation 
rate. The rapidly growing antler is covered in velvet, (regenerated 
non-scarring skin) which contains glands and hairs (minus erector 
pili muscles) that are formed de novo at the tip of the growing antler. 
Therefore this skin is a highly regenerative tissue. Thus antlers 
show many of the features of lower vertebrate regeneration and 
could be an amazing system for studying mammalian regenera­
tion were it not for their obvious drawbacks as a model organism.
The generation of a blastema is the hallmark of complex tis­
sue regeneration but this is not the only regenerating mammalian 
system with a blastema because the digit tips of mice (Borgens, 
1982; Neufeld & Zhou 1995; Muneoka et al., 2008), rats (Said et al., 
2004), monkeys (Singer et al., 1987) and humans (Illingworth, 1974; 
Rinkevich et al., 2015) can regenerate by a process which seems 
remarkably similar to that of the antler. After re-epithelialization, 
a blastema is formed consisting mostly of osteoblasts formed by 
bone breakdown which then proliferates and redifferentiates into 
new bone. The blastemal cells are lineage restricted rather than 
dedifferentiating to a multipotent/totipotent cell type (Lehoczky et 

Mammalian regeneration in an evolutionary context    371 
al., 2011; Rinkevitch et al., 2011) and proliferate under the influence 
of Wnt signaling from the nail bed (Takeo et al., 2013) and factors 
secreted by nerve-associated Schwann cells (Johnston et al., 2016). 
Thus the presence of a blastema in antler and digit regeneration 
as well as the regenerating limb of Urodeles suggests that similar 
processes may be going on both in mammals and axolotls. 
We have recently described another blastema that appears 
in mammals, during regeneration of ear punches of spiny mice, 
Acomys (Fig. 1 A,B). A complex arrays of tissues is regenerated 
from this blastema – cartilage, skeletal muscle, dermis, hairs and 
sebaceous glands (Seifert et al., 2012). This phenomenon was 
first observed in rabbits (Voronstova & Liosner, 1960; Joseph & 
Dyson 1966; Goss & Grimes, 1972) and subsequently has been 
observed in all species of Acomys examined (Gawriluk et al., 2016), 
athymic nude mice (Gawronska-Kozak, 2004) in small holes of the 
MRL mouse ear (Clarke et al., 1998) and in chinchillas, cows, pigs 
(Williams-Boyce & Daniel, 1986), pikas and bats (Goss, 1987). Even 
more remarkably like the amphibian limb blastema this ear blastema 
shows neurotrophic dependence because if the auricular nerve is 
cut then the ear punch does not regenerate (Buckley et al., 2011). 
This phenomenon can also be seen during normal regeneration 
of the ear punch in Acomys. After the damage the proximal half 
of the circle (closest to the head) regenerates quite fast and the 
distal half of the circle (farthest from the head) hardly regenerates 
at all (Fig. 1C) and the hole finally closes in a very distal position. 
Sectioning these segments of the regenerating ear and staining 
for nerve fibres reveals that the proximal blastema which does all 
of the regenerating is riddled with nerve fibres (Fig. 1E) whereas 
they are completely absent in the distal blastema which hardly 
grows at all (Fig. 1D) (Gawriluk et al., 2016).
If the skin regrows perfectly over the ear punches in these 
animals then the body skin ought to regenerate as well. This has 
been reported in rabbits (Billingham & Russell, 1956) without a 
histological study, but has been well documented in Acomys species 
(Seifert et al., 2012; Brant et al., 2015; 2016). Following various 
sizes of full thickness wounds as well as full thickness burns in 
Acomys the wound epithelium covers the wound twice as fast as 
the rate of Mus wounds and within two weeks new hair follicles can 
be seen developing across the wound which are undergoing Wnt7a 
signaling. These newly regenerated hair follicles deepen into the 
new dermis of the wound bed and produce sebaceous glands and 
erector pili muscles so they are fully functional. There is a much 
reduced inflammatory reaction in Acomys compared to Mus with 
far fewer cytokines and lower levels of cytokines induced, MMPs 
are higher in Acomys and the matrix of the wound bed is softer, 
expressing lower levels of collagens. Eventually even the skeletal 
muscle of the panniculus carnosus regenerates which is a striking 
behavior because the act of removing the skin creates a hole in 
the muscle layer which is equivalent to a volumetric muscle loss 
injury which does not regenerate in other mammalian laboratory 
organisms or humans.
Even more impressively for a mammal, heart regeneration is not 
just restricted to Urodeles and zebrafish but also occurs in newborn 
mice after either a myocardial infarction induced by ligating the 
coronary artery or after apex resection as in Urodeles and zebraf­
ish (Porello et al., 2011, 2013). In mice this ability is lost at P7, but 
in Acomys cardiac regenerative ability is retained into adulthood. 
Following a myocardial infarction induced by coronary artery liga­
tion adult Acomys show an amazing regenerative recovery. After 
two weeks there is a massively reduced region of scarring, the 
ventricular wall does not thin and the ejection fraction is completely 
normal. In contrast the Mus heart has a huge region of fibrosis, 
the ventricle wall thins excessively and there is a 71% reduction 
in ejection fraction (Qui et al., in preparation).
The mammalian liver also regenerates after partial hepatectomy 
and although this is referred to as compensatory hypertrophy be­
cause the removed parts of the liver are not regenerated instead 
the remaining parts expand to compensate, this is still a complex 
process involving the coordinated upregulation of cytokine, growth 
factor, and metabolic networks resembling true regeneration 
(Fausto et al., 2006). Similarly, the lung can undergo compensatory 
hypertrophy after removal of one or more of the lobes in exactly 
the same manner as the liver – the remaining tissue increases in 
alveolar number to compensate for the loss (Matsumoto et al., 
2009). Interestingly this process is not a hallmark of incomplete 
or inefficient epimorphic regeneration as might be imagined and 
only seen in a supposed non-regenerating system like a mammal 
because the axolotl also regenerates its lung by compensatory 
Fig. 1. Axolotl and mammalian blastemas. (A) A blastema (bl) growing 
on the amputated limb of a juvenile axolotl. Ac, apical cap. (B) A blastema 
(bl) growing on the regenerating ear of Acomys. Ac, thickened apical 
epidermis which resembles the apical cap of the regenerating limb in (A). 
(C) The regenerating ear punch in Acomys showing eccentric growth with 
almost all of the regeneration coming from the proximal semi-circle (lower 
arrow) and virtually none from the distal segment of the circle (upper arrow). 
(D) Section through the distal segment of the regenerating ear stained 
with RT97 antibody to identify nerve fibres. None are present here. (E) 
Section through the distal segment of the regenerating ear stained with 
RT97 antibody to identify nerve fibres. There are many fibres present here.
B
C
D
E
A

372    M. Maden
hypertrophy (Monaghan, pers. comm.) even though it is the cham­
pion of blastemal based epimorphic regeneration. 
There are also some other very surprising examples of mam­
malian organ regeneration. The mouse pancreas can regenerate 
after surgical removal of 60-90% of the tissue (Stocum, 2006). 
Skeletal muscle regenerates after a variety of injuries such as 
myotoxin administration or freezing, but not if complete pieces of 
muscle are removed, presumably because muscle regeneration 
requires a connective tissue framework to promote and guide 
regeneration, but as mentioned above Acomys can regenerate 
muscle after such tissue removal injuries.
It is clear therefore that there are a surprisingly large number of 
tissues and organs that can regenerate in mammals ranging from 
the heart to the skin and that is based upon a very small sample 
(maybe 25 species) of the 5400 species of mammals which are 
present on earth. What really needs to be done in mammals is a 
thorough phylogenetic analysis as has been done in Planarians 
as discussed above. It would not be surprising if many more 
mammals were discovered with regenerative powers and that 
even in mammals regenerative abilities may have been been lost 
and regained several times as in Planarians. If so then this is a 
very positive outlook for discovering how to induce regeneration 
in non-regenerating mammals and ultimately humans.
References
BELY A E and NYBERG K G (2009). Evolution of animal regeneration: re-emergence 
of a field. Trends Ecol Evol 25: 161-170.
BILLINGHAM R E and RUSSELL P S (1956). Incomplete wound contracture and the 
phenomenon of hair neogenesis in rabbits’ skin. Nature 177: 791-792.
BORGENS R B (1982). Mice regrow the tips of their foretoes. Science 217: 747-750.
BRANT J O, LOPEZ M-C, BAKER H V, BARBAZUK W B and MADEN M (2015). A 
comparative analysis of gene expression profiles during skin regeneration in Mus 
and Acomys. PlosOne 10: e0142931.
BRANT J O, YOON J H, POLVADORE T, BARBAZUK W B and MADEN M (2016). 
The cellular basis of scar-free skin regeneration in the spiny mouse. Wound Rep 
Regen 24: 75-88.
BUCKLEY G, METCALFE A D and FERGUSON M J W (2011). Peripheral nerve re­
generation in the MRL/MpJ ear wound model. J Anatomy 218: 163-172. 
CLARKE L D, CLARK R K and HEBER-KATZ E (1998). A new murine model for 
mammalian wound repair and regeneration. Clin Immunol Immunopath 88: 35–45.
CLARK M S, DUPONT S, ROSETTI H, BURNS G, THORNDYKE M C and PECK 
L S (2007). Delayed arm regeneration in the Antarctic brittle star Ophionotus 
victoriae. Aquat Biol 1: 45-53.
FARKAS J E, FREITAS P D, BRYANT D M, WHITED J L and MONAGHAN J R (2016). 
Neuregulin-1 signaling is essential for nerve-dependent axolotl limb regeneration. 
Development 143: 2724-2731.
FAUSTO N, CAMPBELL J S and RIEHLE K J (2006). Liver Regeneration. Hepatol­
ogy 43: 45–53.
GAWRILUK T R, SIMKIN J, THOMPSON K L, BISWAS S K, CLARE-SALZLER Z, 
KIMANI J M, KIAMA S G, SMITH J J, EZENWA V O and SEIFERT A W (2016). 
Comparative analysis of ear-hole closure identifies epimorphic regeneration as 
a discrete trait in mammals. Nature Comm 7: 11164.
GOSS R J (1983). Deer Antlers: Regeneration, function and evolution. Acad Press, 
New York, New York.
GOSS R J (1987). Why mammals don’t regenerate – or do they? NIPS 2: 112-115.
GOSS R J (1991). The natural history (and mystery) of regeneration. In ‘A history of 
regeneration research’ C.E. Dinsmore ed. Camb Univ Press 7 -23.
GOSS R J (1992). The evolution of regeneration: adaptive or inherent? J Theor Biol 
159: 241-260.
GOSS R J and GRIMES L N (1972). Tissue interactions in the regeneration of rabbit 
ear holes. Am Zool 12: 151-157.
GOWRONSKA-KOSAK B (2004). Regeneration of the ears of immunodieficient 
mice: identification and lineage analysis of mesenchymal stem cells. Tissue Eng 
10: 1251-1265.
ILLINGWORTH C M (1974). Trapped fingers and amputated finger tips in children. 
J Pediatr Surg 9: 853-858.
JOHNSTON A P, YUZWA S A, CARR M J, MAHMUD N, STORER M A, KRAUSE 
M P et al., (2016). Dedifferentiated Schwann cell precursors secreting paracrine 
factors are required for regeneration of the mammalian digit tip. Cell Stem Cell 
19: 433-438.
JOSEPH J and DYSON M (1966). Tissue replacement in the rabbits’ ear. Br J Surg 
53: 372-380.
LEHOCZKY J A, ROBERT B and TABIN C J (2011). Muse digit tip regeneration is medi­
ated by fate-restricted progenitor cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108: 20609-20614.
LIU S-Y, SELCK C, FRIEDRICH B,  LUTX R, VILA-FARRE M,  DAHL A,  BRANDL 
H,  LAKSHMANAPERUMAL N, HENRY I and RINK J C (2013). Reactivating 
head regrowth in a regeneration-deficient planarian species. Nature 500: 81–84.
MATSUMOTO K, NAGAYASU T, HISHIKAWA Y, TAGAWA T et al.,2009). Keratino­
cyte growth factor accelerates compensatory growth in the remaining lung after 
trilobectomy in rats. J Thor Cardio Surg 137: 1499-1507.
MUNEOKA K, ALLAN C H. YANG X, LEE J and HAN M (2008). Mammalian regenera­
tion and regenerative medicine. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today 84: 265-280.
NEUFELD D A and ZHAO W (1995). Bone regrowth after digit tip amputation in mice 
is equivalent in adults and neonates. Wound Repair Regen 3: 461-466.
PORELLO E R, MAHMOUD A I, SIMPSON E, HILL J A, RICHARDSON J A, OLSON E 
N and SADEL H A (2011). Transient regenerative potential of the neonatal mouse 
heart. Science 331: 1078-1080.
PORELLO E R, MAHMOOD A I, SIMPSON E, JOHNSON B A, GRINSFELDER D, 
CANSECO D, MAMMEN P P, ROTHERMEL B A, OLSON E N and SADEL H A 
(2013). Regulation of neonatal and adult mammalian heart regeneration by the 
mir-15 family. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110: 187-192.
RINKEVICH Y, LINDAU P, UENO H, LONGAKER M T and WEISSMAN I L (2011). 
Germ-layer and lineage-restricted stem/progenitors regenerate the mouse digit 
tip. Nature 476: 409-413.
RINKEVICH Y, MAAN Z N, WALMSLEY G G and SEN S K (2015). Injuries to appendage 
extremities and digit tips: a clinical and cellular update. Dev Dynam 244: 641-650.
SAID S, PARKE W and NEUFELD D A (2004).Vascular supplies differ in regenerat­
ing and nonregenerating amputated rodent digits. Anat. Rec. A Discov Mol Cell 
Evol Biol 278: 443-449.
SEIFERT A, KIAMA SG, SEIFERT M, GOHEEN J, PALMER T and MADEN M (2012). 
Weak skin and tissue regeneration in African spiny mice (Acomys). Nature 489: 
561-566.
SHIEH S-J and CHENG T-C (2015). Regeneration and repair of human digits and 
limbs: fact and fiction. Regeneration 2: 149-168.
SINGER M, WECHESSER E C, GERAUDIE J, MAIER C E and SINGER J (1987). 
Open finger tip healing and replacement after distal amputation in rhesus mon­
key with comparison to limb regeneration in lower vertebrates. Anat Embryol 
Berl 177: 29-36.
STOCUM D L (2006). Regenerative Biology and Medicine. Academic Press.
TAKEO M, CHOU W C, SUN Q, LEE W, RABBANI P, LOOMIS C, TAKETO M M and 
ITO M (2013). Wnt activation in nail epithelium couples nail growth to digit regen­
eration. Nature 499: 228-232.
VITT L J and COOPER W E (1986). Tail loss, tail color, and predator escape in 
Eumeces (Lacertilia: Scincidae): age-specific differences in costs and benefits. 
Can J Zool 64: 583-592.
VORONSTOVA M A and LIOSNER L D (1960). Asexual propagation and regenera­
tion. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
WILLIAMS-BOYCE P K and DANIEL J C (1986). Comparison of ear tissue regenera­
tion in mammals. J Anat 149: 55-63.

Further Related Reading, published previously in the Int. J. Dev. Biol. 
Amphioxus regeneration: evolutionary and biomedical implications
Ildikó M.L. Somorjai
Int. J. Dev. Biol. (2017) 61: 689-696
https://doi.org/10.1387/ijdb.170219is
Regeneration in spiralians: evolutionary patterns and developmental processes
Alexandra E. Bely, Eduardo E. Zattara and James M. Sikes
Int. J. Dev. Biol. (2014) 58: 623-634
https://doi.org/10.1387/ijdb.140142ab
Segment formation in Annelids: patterns, processes and evolution
Guillaume Balavoine
Int. J. Dev. Biol. (2014) 58: 469-483
https://doi.org/10.1387/ijdb.140148gb
Hydra, a fruitful model system for 270 years
Brigitte Galliot
Int. J. Dev. Biol. (2012) 56: 411-423
5 yr ISI Impact Factor (2016) = 2.421
https://doi.org/10.1387/ijdb.120086bg
Hydra, a model system to trace the emergence of boundaries in developing eumetazoans
Angelika Böttger and Monika Hassel
Int. J. Dev. Biol. (2012) 56: 583-591
https://doi.org/10.1387/ijdb.113454ab
The head organizer in Hydra
Hans R. Bode
Int. J. Dev. Biol. (2012) 56: 473-478
https://doi.org/10.1387/ijdb.113448hb
Comprehensive gene expression analyses in pluripotent stem cells of a planarian, 
Dugesia japonica
Norito Shibata, Tetsutaro Hayashi, Ryutaro Fukumura, Junsuke Fujii, Tomomi Kudome-
Takamatsu, Osamu Nishimura, Syozo Sano, Fuyan Son, Nobuko Suzuki, Ryoko Araki, Masumi 
Abe and Kiyokazu Agata
Int. J. Dev. Biol. (2012) 56: 93-102
https://doi.org/10.1387/ijdb.113434ns

===== Maden2020_Development_RegenerationModel-SpinyMouse =====
PRIMER
Model systems for regeneration: the spiny mouse,
Acomys cahirinus
Malcolm Maden* and Justin A. Varholick
ABSTRACT
The spiny mouse, Acomys spp., is a recently described model
organism for regeneration studies. For a mammal, it displays
surprising powers of regeneration because it does not fibrose (i.e.
scar) in response to tissue injury as most other mammals, including
humans, do. In this Primer article, we review these regenerative
abilities, highlighting the phylogenetic position of the spiny mouse
relative to other rodents. We also briefly describe the Acomys tissues
that have been used for regeneration studies and the common
features of their regeneration compared with the typical mammalian
response. Finally, we discuss the contribution that Acomys has made
in understanding the general principles of regeneration and elaborate
hypotheses as to why this mammal is successful at regenerating.
KEY WORDS: Spiny mouse, Acomys, Tissue regeneration, Fibrosis,
Scarring
Introduction
The field of regenerative medicine aims to identify strategies to
either engineer or repair human tissues, organs and body parts that
cannot naturally be replaced when damaged by trauma or disease.
Who would not want to take a drug to stimulate the proliferation of
cardiomyocytes and recover from a heart attack? Or, stimulate
axonal regrowth across a site of contusion in the spinal cord and
recover function of the lower body and extremities? To solve this
problem of inducing regeneration in humans, conventional wisdom
suggests that we must identify the molecular and cellular signals that
guide regeneration in regeneration-competent organisms, such as
axolotls and zebrafish, and extrapolate what we learn to induce it in
regeneration-incompetent organisms such as rats and mice, and
eventually humans.
But is it true that mammals really are regeneration-incompetent
organisms? The general impression would surely be yes, mammals
cannot regenerate, but a deeper look across the remarkably few
species that have been investigated reveals some surprises. For
example, human children and mice can regenerate their digit tips
(Illingworth, 1974; Yu et al., 2019); mammalian fetuses can heal
skin wounds in a regenerative manner (Yates et al., 2012); male deer
can annually regenerate their antlers, which are initially covered in
skin or velvet which itself has regenerated (Goss, 1983); young
C57BL/6J mice can regenerate hair follicles via wound-induced hair
follicle neogenesis following large skin wounds (Ito et al., 2007);
the neonatal mouse heart can regenerate until postnatal day 7
(Porrello et al., 2011); and some species can regenerate large holes
punched through their ears, including rabbits (Gawriluk et al., 2016;
Voronstova and Liosner, 1960) and perhaps also chinchillas, cows
and pigs (Williams-Boyce and Daniel, 1986). It is also known that
several individual mammalian tissues can regenerate, such as
skeletal muscle after myotoxin administration (Musarò, 2014) and
the liver, which displays prodigious powers of proliferation during
compensatory hypertrophy (Fausto et al., 2012). This compensatory
hypertrophy is a process which the lungs can also undergo (Hsia,
2017), whereby the tissue remaining after removal of part of the
organ expands to compensate for the missing part. Many
mammalian epithelial tissues, such as the epidermis or the
intestinal lining, also exhibit continuous replacement, although
this is a property of all animals and so is not considered an unusual
regenerative process. Admittedly, all of these regenerative abilities
observed in mammals are limited compared with those seen in
axolotls (Joven et al., 2019) or zebrafish (Marques et al., 2019), but
this only represents a very narrow sampling of extant mammalian
species and there may be some truly regeneration-competent
mammals out there that remain undiscovered.
Spiny mice, Acomys spp., are one such example of a regeneration-
competent mammal, regenerating several tissues of their body to full
functionality after injury – rather than the reduced functionality
normally observed after scarring or fibrosis. Here, we provide an
overview of the history and regenerative abilities of spiny mice. We
propose that if fibrosis can be prevented in humans – as it is in spiny
mice – then we may be able to regenerate a surprising array of
tissues. Moreover, we highlight how the study of spiny mice can
allow us to begin to compare regeneration-competent mammals
with regeneration-incompetent mammals to discover the cellular
and molecular signals governing regeneration.
General background on Acomys
There are 2050 living species of rodents (which are defined by
having upper and lower pairs of continually growing incisors) and
two thirds of these belong to the family Muroidea. There are likely
16 subfamilies of Muroidea including the old world rats (Rattus)
Model systems for regeneration
This article is part of a series entitled ‘Model systems for regeneration’.
This series of articles aims to highlight key model systems and species
that are currently being used to study tissue and organ regeneration.
Each article provides background information about the phylogenetic
position of the species, its life-cycle and habitat, the different organs and
tissues that regenerate, and the experimental tools and techniques that
are available for studying these organisms in a regenerative context.
Importantly, these articles also give examples of how the study of these
models has increased our understanding of regenerative mechanisms
more broadly, and how some of the open questions in the field of
regeneration may be answered using these organisms. To see the full
collection as it grows, please visit: https://dev.biologists.org/collection/
regeneration_models.
Department of Biology & UF Genetics Institute, University of Florida, PO Box
118525, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA.
*Author for correspondence (malcmaden@ufl.edu)
M.M., 0000-0001-7178-5309
1
© 2020. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Development (2020) 147, dev167718. doi:10.1242/dev.167718
DEVELOPMENT

and mice (Mus), which are placed in the subfamily Muridae
(Steppan and Schenk, 2017). Spiny mice of the genus Acomys are
placed in one of the other subfamilies called Deomyinae
(previously
called
Acomyinae)
along
with
Rudd’s
mouse
(Uranomys), the Congo forest mouse or link rat (Deomys), and
the brush-furred mouse (Lophuromys) (Steppan and Schenk, 2017)
(Fig. 1). The closest relatives to Deomyinae are the gerbils of the
subfamily Gerbillinae (Chevret et al., 1993; Steppan and Schenk,
2017) from which they separated 17.6-20 million years ago.
There are at least five major groups in the genus Acomys:
subspinosus,
spinosissimus,
russatus,
wilsoni
and
cahirinus
(Aghová
et
al.,
2019).
All
species
share
morphological
characteristics of dorsal spine-like hairs, which are golden brown,
grey or rusty brown depending on the species. Ventral hairs are
white. Spiny mice are distributed throughout Africa, the eastern
Mediterranean, some Mediterranean islands, the Arabian Peninsula,
Iran and Pakistan (Jeremy and Bates, 1994). Only three species have
been tested for regenerative ability: Acomys percivali (from the
wilsoni group), Acomys kempi (from the cahirinus group) and
Acomys cahirinus (Gawriluk et al., 2016; Seifert et al., 2012). All
three have been shown to regenerate tissue of the ear following a
biopsy punch, although only the regeneration of A. cahirinus has
been studied extensively. Thus, we might assume that regeneration
is a property of the genus.
The colonies that are currently maintained in Europe, USA and
Australia are A. cahirinus, although one colony of Acomys dimidiatus
is maintained in Geneva (Montandon et al., 2014). Because of their
relatively long history of use as laboratory animals, there are several
papers published on the care, maintenance and management of
colonies, from early days (Strasser, 1968; Young, 1976) up until the
present day (Dickinson and Walker, 2007; Haughton et al., 2016;
Pinheiro et al., 2018). From these latter works it appears that their
lifespan is usually 3-4 years, but can extend to 6 years.
Spiny mice have a complex social organization and are often
housed in groups of up to 20 to permit communal breeding,
although keeping three to five females and one male together in a
cage allows the parentage of the pups to be determined (Haughton
et al., 2016). Gestation lasts 39 days, considerably longer than in
other rodents, and one to four pups (usually two or three) are
produced. The pups are precocial and born with grey fur, open eyes
and unfurled ears, and they are soon mobile and eating solid food.
After 6 weeks, the grey coloured pups (Fig. 2) start producing the
thick spiny hairs – from posterior to anterior, on the dorsum – and as
a result change their coat colour to that of the adult (Fig. 2). They
become sexually mature at 3-4 months of age (Dieterlen, 1961).
Females have an 11-day oestrus cycle after which they undergo
menstruation (Bellofiore and Evans, 2019). Mating does not result
in the formation of a vaginal plug, making identification of the day
of fertilization impossible, although later stages of gestation have
been identified by ultrasound (Dickinson and Walker, 2007).
Although spiny mice have recently come to prominence because
of their striking ability to regenerate several organs and tissues, as
described below, they have been used as research animals and kept
in breeding colonies since at least 1911 (Bonhote, 1911). Indeed, it
is surprising that their regenerative abilities had not been observed
before 2012 (Seifert et al., 2012). Previous research using spiny mice
11 other subfamilies 
Rattus
Mus
Lophiomys
Meriones
Uranomys
Deomys
Lophuromys
Acomys
Muridae
Lophiomyinae
Gerbillinae
Deomyinae
Muroidea
Fig. 1. Phylogeny and phenotype of Acomys. Phylogenetic position of the
genus Acomys among the 15 sub-families of the family Muridae. There are four
genera including Acomys in the sub-family Deomyinae, the closest relatives of
which are the gerbils. Adapted from Steppan and Schenk, 2017.
Pup 
Juvenile
Adult
Side
view
Top
view
Fig. 2. Hair colour and development in Acomys. Images of the hair colour at three stages of development of Acomys cahirinus viewed from the side (top row)
and from above (bottom row). Pups (left column) are born with grey hairs; the golden spiny hairs first begin to appear on the caudal dorsum as sexual maturity
approaches (middle column), spreading completely over the dorsum by adulthood (right column). See Jiang et al. (2019) for details on different hair types and their
development.
2
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev167718. doi:10.1242/dev.167718
DEVELOPMENT

has included studies into diabetes, because these mice show
spontaneous degeneration of the islets of Langerhans and are prone
to hyperglycaemia and diabetes with obesity but without insulin
resistance (Creutzfeldt et al., 1970; Pictet et al., 1967; Shafrir et al.,
2006). They have also been used to study renal physiology because
they have among the highest recorded urine urea concentration (of
4.7-4.8 M), likely linked to their desert dwelling (Shkolnik and Borut,
1969). Recent research has also described them as the first known
menstruating rodent (Bellofiore and Evans, 2019; Bellofiore et al.,
2017, 2018), despite early studies on their reproductive physiology
(Dewsbury and Hodges, 1987; Peitz, 1981; Peitz et al., 1979).
Studies on the development of spiny mice have been expansive,
examining olfactory response during early post-natal life (Janus,
1988, 1993; Porter and Etscorn, 1976; Porter et al., 1978a,b, 1982,
1986, 1989); fetal, parental and social behaviour (Makin and Porter,
1984; Nováková et al., 2008; Porter, 1976; Porter et al., 1977, 1980,
1981, 1983; Robinson and Smotherman, 1992), and the development
of the kidney (Dickinson et al., 2005), lung (Oosterhuis et al., 1984),
brain (Brunjes, 1989; Brunjes et al., 1989), endocrine system (Lamers
et al., 1986; Quinn et al., 2013) and spiny hairs (Montandon et al.,
2014). Recent research has also used spiny mice as a model of birth
asphyxia (Hutton et al., 2009a,b). Finally, the precocial spiny mouse
has been proposed as a better model for human pregnancy and birth
compared with the altricial mice and rats normally used because the
development of the kidney (Dickinson et al., 2005), liver (Lamers
et al., 1986), lung (Oosterhuis et al., 1984) and various brain regions
(Brunjes, 1989) is essentially completed by the time of birth, which is
more similar to humans than the continued development and
maturation during the neonatal period of other commonly used
rodents (Dickinson and Walker, 2007).
Tools and techniques for studying Acomys
As the spiny mouse is a very new model organism to enter the field
of regeneration, there has been little time to develop tools and
techniques that would enable a molecular analysis of its regenerative
ability. Furthermore, there are some characteristics that make it a
difficult organism for developing such techniques.
As mentioned above, females do not plug following copulation,
making the determination of the day of fertilization difficult. An
alternative approach to obtaining embryos of precise stages is to
coordinate breeding immediately following birth of a litter when the
female is fertile in postpartum oestrus, thus providing the day of
conception for the subsequent litter (Dickinson and Walker, 2007).
This method has been used to obtain two-cell, four-cell and eight-
cell embryos for studying gene transcription (Mamrot et al., 2018
preprint). In addition, ultrasound techniques have been developed
for pregnant Acomys making it possible to detect fetuses from day
12 of gestation (Dickinson and Walker, 2007). However, female
Acomys only produce two to three pups per pregnancy, making the
large-scale production of embryos rather difficult, although
A. dimidiatus tends to have a larger litter size (Frynta et al.,
2011). Superovulation techniques are available though (Pasco et al.,
2012), so the development of in vitro systems for Acomys embryo
culture should be possible.
Cell culture of Acomys tissues is commonly used, with media
composition based on that used to culture mouse tissues (Simkin
et al., 2017; Stewart et al., 2018). In theory, the generation of
immortalized cell lines, transfected cells for lineage studies and
even induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) should therefore now be
possible. Likewise, using CRISPR to alter cells is feasible because
genetic information is available from three published transcriptomes:
one derived from ear regeneration (Gawriluk et al., 2016), one from
early embryos (Mamrot et al., 2018 preprint) and one from skin
regeneration (Brant et al., 2019). Annotated genomes will soon be
available from several groups.
Immunocytochemistry is routinely performed with a range of
commercially available antibodies that have been used to label a
large variety of proteins in Acomys tissues, ranging from
extracellular matrix
(ECM)
proteins,
immune
cell
markers,
cytoplasmic proteins to nuclear transcription factors (Table 1).
There are at least 88 such antibodies reported and ELISAs have also
been used to detect cytokines, thus there appears to be little problem
of cross-reactivity with these antibodies, and where protein
homology has been compared between Acomys, Mus and human
Table 1. Summary of the Acomys proteins that have successfully been detected using antibodies via immunocytochemistry, ELISA and flow
cytometry analyses
Category
Proteins
ECM/adhesion proteins
Collagen I, collagen III, collagen IV, collagen VI, collagen VII, collagen XII,
collagen XVII, fibronectin, tenascin C, laminin, laminin α2, vimentin
Cell surface/plasma membrane proteins
E-cadherin, dystrophin, PDGFRα
Signalling components/transcription factors
pSMAD1/5/8, β-catenin, LEF1, Nkx-2.2, Nkx-6.1, MafA, MafB
Cytokeratins/epidermis markers
Pan cytokeratin, KRT17, K14, K10, K17, AE13, AE15, K15, TRP63, MitfD5
Proliferation markers/cell cycle proteins
Ki67, PCNA, pHH3, p21, p27, p16, p19, p53, p63, pRB, gH2AX
Stem cell markers
SOX2, Pax7, CD34, CD200
Cytoplasmic proteins
α-Smooth muscle actin, MHCIIA, MHCIIB, MyoD, eMHC, perilipin, Nf-κB, Lamp1, fractin
Enzymes
P450c17, cytochrome b5, 3bhsd, tyrosine hydroxylase, caspase 3, Arg1
Neural proteins
β-Tubulin, neurofilament H, synaptophysin, GFAP, Neu-N, peripherin, CNPase
Hormones and receptors
Prolactin, Era, ERb, PR, AR, vasopressin, glucagon, insulin, somatostatin, pancreatic polypeptide,
peptide YY
Immune cell proteins
F4/80, MOMA-2, CD206, IBA1, CD86, MPO, CD3, CD11b
Factors detected by ELISA
IL1a, IL1B, IL1ra, IL2, IL4, IL5, IL6, IL12, IL16, IL17, CXCL2, CSF2, CCL2, CCL3, CCL5,
CXCL1, CXCL13, TNFα, IFNγ, C5
Factors successfully detected via flow analyses
F4/80, CD3, CD196, CD11b, CD206, CD49b
Factors unsuccessfully detected via flow analyses
CD45, TCRab, TCRgd, CD4, CD8, CD25, CD69, CD196, CD49b, CD19, CD23, CD40, CD44
The last row shows those antibodies that are commonly used for Mus, but have failed to identify immune cell types in Acomys using flow cytometry. Data from:
Bellofiore et al., 2017; Brant et al., 2015, 2016, 2019; Castel and Hockman, 1978; Gawriluk et al., 2016, 2019; Gustavsen et al., 2009; Hułas-Stasiak and Gawron,
2007, 2010, 2011; Hutton et al., 2009a,b; Jiang et al., 2019; Maden 2018; Maden et al., 2018; Matias Santos et al., 2016; Montandon et al., 2014; Okamura et al.,
2018 preprint; Pennello et al., 2006; Quinn et al., 2013; Saxena et al., 2019; Seifert et al., 2012; Simkin et al., 2017; Streeter et al., 2019.
3
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev167718. doi:10.1242/dev.167718
DEVELOPMENT

it is expectedly high (Gawriluk et al., 2019 preprint). In
contradiction, however, very few antibodies used for Mus T cell
analysis by flow cytometry cross-react with Acomys (Gawriluk
et al., 2019 preprint; Pennello et al., 2006), suggesting that an
investment in antibody production in this area of research would be
highly beneficial.
Thus, the typical reagents and techniques used in regeneration
research are mostly available for use with Acomys. Once our
understanding of the embryology and reproductive physiology of
Acomys has advanced, it should be possible to generate transgenic
animals, although the small litter size will presumably continue to
be a significant drawback to rapid progress.
Tissue regeneration in Acomys
Despite more than a century of keeping colonies, the regenerative
abilities of Acomys were not reported until 2012 (Seifert et al.,
2012). Then, it was reported that spiny mice captured in the wild
with large areas of dorsal skin missing could regenerate their
skin successfully; it was also noted that their skin was weak and
could tear easily. Their weak skin was previously reported in the
context of the care and general biology of spiny mice. These
early reports advised to avoid tail-handling, as the spiny mice
tail is weak and can deglove (Bate, 1903; Shargal et al., 1999),
and suggested that frequent bite-wounds could be treated with
antibiotic spray ‘until the fur re-grows’ (Dickinson and Walker,
2007). Since these early reports, research into the regeneration
of spiny mouse tissues has expanded from skin and ear
punches to include skeletal muscle, kidneys and the spinal cord
(Fig. 3, Table 2).
Skin
After full-thickness skin removal or full-thickness burn injury, all
the components of the Acomys skin are eventually regenerated, with
each component following their own time scale (Brant et al., 2019,
2016, 2015; Maden, 2018; Seifert et al., 2012). Scab formation and
haemostasis is rapid, and more than 50% of the wound area can
close within 24 h after injury (Seifert et al., 2012). The epidermis –
the outermost layer of the skin – responds immediately by inducing
proliferation around the wound margin, which thickens as a result
and then migrates across the wound. The rate of epithelial migration
is notably quicker than that observed in mouse or rat skin (Seifert
et al., 2012), and in vitro wound healing experiments reveal that
keratinocytes migrate twice as fast in Acomys compared with Mus
(Stewart et al., 2018). By the end of the second week, new hair
placodes are seen in the wound epithelium and regenerate through
defined stages, exhibit high proliferation and reuse molecular
pathways from embryonic hair follicle development. The hair
follicles arise in response to Wnt signalling as determined by
expression of LEF1, a nuclear transcription factor that is a readout of
Wnt signalling (Brant et al., 2019; Seifert et al., 2012). Wnt7a,
which is known to induce hair follicles in transgenic mice (Ito et al.,
2007), is also expressed at this time (Brant et al., 2019), suggesting
similar pathways are used in Acomys and Mus for hair follicle
induction in the epidermis.
During hair development in Mus, the epidermal placode appears
first and is induced by a signal from the dermal mesenchyme, the
so-called ‘first dermal signal’, the nature of which is unknown but
may be another Wnt signal (Millar, 2002). Fibroblast growth factors
(FGFs) and Shh are also involved as mesenchymal signals in hair
development and, based on studies of the wound-induced hair
follicle neogenesis (WIHN) mouse model, it is known that Fgf9
overexpression increases the number of hairs induced by signalling
a feedback loop in dermal fibroblasts involving Wnt2a (Gay et al.,
2013). Similarly, ectopic expression of Shh in the WIHN mouse
model induces extra hair follicles (Lim et al., 2018). Moving
forward, it will be interesting to see whether the same events occur
during follicle regeneration in Acomys.
Following hair follicle induction, hair placodes in the Acomys
wound epithelium grow and deepen into the newly formed tissue of
the wound bed to generate a hair with a dermal papilla. The three
types of hair normally present in Acomys skin (guard, awl and
zigzag) are regenerated in the same proportions (Jiang et al., 2019).
In the fourth week, sebaceous glands develop, along with erector
pili muscles that elevate the new hairs, making them fully functional
(Brant et al., 2016).
Fibroblasts within the dermis – the layer beneath the epidermis –
migrate into the wound bed to replace the missing tissue. These cells
generate a new matrix that is lower in cell density than that in the
corresponding wound site in Mus. As might be expected, there is a
different collagenous organization and composition between
scarring Mus wounds and regenerating Acomys wounds, with the
wound bed of Acomys being arranged more loosely and being lower
in density than that of Mus (Brant et al., 2016). Concerning the
composition, Acomys have low levels of collagens compared with
Mus, particularly collagen 12a1 (Brant et al., 2015, 2016), which is
known to stabilize the ECM and is present in dense connective
tissues. The most obvious matrix-associated differences are in the
matrix remodelling proteins (MMPs), which are highly induced in
Acomys, particularly MMP2 and MMP9 (Brant et al., 2015). By
contrast, tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMPs), are highly induced in
Mus. Considering MMPs and TIMPs in Acomys and Mus, it is
possible that ECM degradation is more active in Acomys wound
healing. Another noteworthy and highly upregulated matrix-
associated gene in Acomys wounds is the collagen triple helix
repeat-containing gene, Cthrc1 (Brant et al., 2019). Interestingly,
the function of this secreted protein has primarily been investigated
in cancer metastasis, which Cthrc1 promotes by enhancing
migration, reducing collagen I expression and production (Pyagay
et al., 2005) and upregulating Wnt signalling and MMP9 expression
(Guo et al., 2017), all highly relevant to skin regeneration. This
Ear
  ● Biopsy punch
Kidney
  ● Unilateral ureteral obstruction
  ● Unilateral ischemia-reperfusion 
Spinal cord
  ● Hemi-crush
Skin
  ● Excision/biopsy
  ● Burn
Skeletal muscle
  ● Repeated myotoxin injection
Fig. 3. Tissue and organ regeneration in Acomys. Schematic of Acomys
cahirinus highlighting the tissue types that can regenerate as well as the
methods that have been used to investigate them.
4
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev167718. doi:10.1242/dev.167718
DEVELOPMENT

matrix protein, along with tenascin C, tenascin N, fibronectin,
laminin α1, fibrillin 2 and aggrecan, produces a loose ‘regenerative
matrix’ in the Acomys wound bed (Brant et al., 2019; Seifert et al.,
2012).
There is also a layer of skeletal muscle at the base of the skin, the
panniculus carnosus, which is particularly well developed in
rodents. Normally, holes punched through skeletal muscle in mice
cannot regenerate because the connective tissue component of the
muscle driving regeneration has been removed (Ciciliot and
Schiaffino, 2010). As such, muscle fails to regenerate in a Mus
skin wound and the formed scar is thinner than the original skin.
However, the muscle in Acomys can fully regenerate (see Skeletal
muscle section). In the second and third weeks after skin wounding,
the levels of embryonic myosin (Myh3) rise 450-fold compared
with baseline levels, and strong staining of this protein can be seen
across the wound bed. After the completion of skin regeneration, at
∼7-8 weeks, mature muscle myosin can be seen in the regenerated
muscle and new neuromuscular junctions demonstrate that this
regenerated muscle of the panniculus carnosus is functional (Brant
et al., 2019, 2016).
Ear punches
Observing the effect of a through-and-through ear punch has been a
quick and easy method for assessing the regenerative ability of
mammals for many years (cf. Goss, 1987). The ear consists of a
plate of cartilage covered by skeletal muscle (with more on the
dorsal side), adipocytes, connective tissue, dermis, and epithelium
containing hairs with their associated sebaceous glands and erector
pili muscles. Thus, full regeneration of the ear punch is clearly a
complex phenomenon, requiring the replacement of a considerable
number of tissues, and it greatly resembles full-thickness skin
regeneration apart from the mode of epithelial healing and the
absence of cartilage in skin.
Holes, typically with a diameter of 4 mm (ranging from 2-8 mm),
are regenerated in all species of Acomys that have been examined
(Gawriluk et al., 2016; Matias Santos et al., 2016; Seifert et al.,
2012). Following damage, the epidermis migrates over the wound to
cover the internal tissues, which begin to lose their differentiated
characteristics as if they were dedifferentiating, as occurs during
salamander limb regeneration. Unlike the skin, epithelial closure of
the wound occurs more rapidly in Mus than in Acomys (Gawriluk
et al., 2016) or at a similar rate (Matias Santos et al., 2016). The
epidermis
becomes thickened,
another characteristic
of
the
amphibian limb, and by the end of the second week a structure
resembling
a
‘blastema’
(the
regenerating
tissue
mass
in
salamanders) forms (Gawriluk et al., 2016; Seifert et al., 2012).
Proliferation of blastemal cells elongates the structure and, by the
end of the third week, re-differentiation of a variety of tissues
occurs. New hair follicles differentiate in a proximal to distal spread,
whereas new cartilage differentiates abutting the cut end of the old
cartilage. By 8 weeks, the 4 mm wound has completely filled in,
with new hairs and skin covering the regenerated plate of cartilage
and new muscle (Matias Santos et al., 2016).
Interestingly, the hole does not regenerate equally around the
circle created by the wound; instead, regeneration occurs from the
proximal part (closer to the head), whereas the distal part hardly
regenerates at all, making the final closure of the hole displaced
from the centre (Matias Santos et al., 2016). This is most likely
because, again like the salamander limb, regenerating ear punches
depend on a functional nerve supply (Buckley et al., 2011) and the
nerve fibres are differentially distributed across the wound
(Gawriluk et al., 2016). The proximal semicircle of the punch
wound has a plentiful supply of axons from the auricular nerve, but
the axons in the distal semicircle of the wound are severed, making
the distal part effectively denervated. The role of nerves in axolotl
limb regeneration is well established (Stocum, 2019) and acts via the
axonal and probably Schwann cell-based synthesis of the growth
factor Neuregulin 1, which is released into the blastemal milieu to
stimulate blastemal cell proliferation (Farkas et al., 2016). It would
be of great interest to determine whether Neuregulin 1 is present in
the Acomys auricular nerve and whether its inhibition prevents ear
hole regeneration. This would re-ignite the debate of whether the
absence of regeneration in various systems is related to an
insufficiency of nerves and/or neuregulin growth factors.
Skeletal muscle
In mammals, skeletal muscle normally regenerates repeatedly
throughout life, owing to the presence of Pax7-positive stem cells,
Table 2. Summary of the tissues that have been used in Acomys regeneration studies
Organ/tissue
Injury method
Reference(s)
General conclusions/comparison with Mus
Skin
4 mm excision
Seifert et al. 2012
Acomys rapidly re-epithelializes, subsequently regenerating hair follicles, hair with
dermal papilla, sebaceous glands, erector pili muscles and skeletal muscle of the
panniculus carnosus. There are significant differences in cytokines, immune cells
and matrix composition between Mus and Acomys.
1.5 cm excision
Jiang et al. 2019;
Seifert et al. 2012
8 mm biopsy punch
Brant et al. 2015, 2016,
2019
1.5 cm burn (100°C)
Maden 2018
Ear
4 mm biopsy punch
Gawriluk et al. 2016;
Matias Santos et al.
2016;
Seifert et al. 2012
Acomys re-epithelializes then generates a thickened epithelium with underlying
mesenchyme resembling a blastema. Blastema grows across the biopsy in a
proximal-distal direction. Hair, skin and cartilage regenerate. Histological analysis
3 months after wound closure indicates variable presence of regenerated muscle.
8 mm biopsy punch
Gawriluk et al. 2016
Skeletal muscle
Repeated myotoxin
injection
Maden et al. 2018
Acomys and Mus regenerate muscle after single injection, yet Acomys does so
quicker. After five successive injections 3 weeks apart, Mus fails to regenerate and
replaces damaged muscle with fat cells, whereas Acomys continues to regenerate.
Kidney
Unilateral ureteral
obstruction
Okamura et al. 2018
Acomys shows full restoration of kidney function after injury without fibrosis,
contrasting with renal failure and fibrosis observed in Mus.
Unilateral ischaemia-
reperfusion injury
Okamura et al. 2018
Spinal cord
Hemi-crush of cervical
region
Streeter et al. 2019
Acomys has reduced spinal inflammation and fibrosis, with reduced collagen
deposition. Bladder clearing suggests restoration of function within 48 h,
contrasting with 21 days in Mus.
5
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev167718. doi:10.1242/dev.167718
DEVELOPMENT

called satellite cells (Chargé and Rudnicki, 2004; Musarò, 2014).
This regeneration occurs following physical or toxic insults to
skeletal muscle, such as injection of cardiotoxin, physical injury
from freezing or crushing, or chemical injury. In general, these
insults induce the breakdown of cell membranes, the invasion of
immune cells, destruction of actin/myosin filaments, activation of
satellite cells, the re-expression of embryonic and developmental
myosins
and
myogenic
regulatory
factors,
and
subsequent
regeneration of muscle fibres. In mice, a common muscle for
investigation is the tibialis anterior, which is found at the front of the
lower leg. After myotoxin injection, the regeneration of this muscle
is unexpectedly fast and is essentially complete by the third week
(14-16 days) after damage (Chargé and Rudnicki, 2004).
Not surprisingly, Acomys can also regenerate the muscle fibres of
the tibialis anterior following similar insults, but does so faster –
within 10 days – when compared with Mus (Maden et al., 2018).
Within 6 days, newly regenerated myofibres are present and the
regenerating muscle expresses embryonic myosin and higher levels
of dystrophin. Following a consistent theme, there are lower levels
of inflammation (see below) and fibrosis as measured by Nf-κB
levels, as well as lower levels of collagen I, collagen III and collagen
XII, and less necrosis. The damaged muscle becomes hugely
infiltrated with M2 pro-regenerative macrophages, which also
occurs
in
Mus,
but
strikingly
lacks
MI
pro-inflammatory
macrophages and has higher levels of the anti-inflammatory
chemokine Cxcl12.
A more dramatic difference between Mus and Acomys muscle
emerges when the tibialis anterior muscle is subjected to repeated
rounds of regeneration (Maden et al., 2018). After five sequential
myotoxin injections, spaced 3 weeks apart, the Acomys tibialis
anterior continues to regenerate perfectly, as it did after only one
round of regeneration. By contrast, the Mus tibialis anterior
fails to regenerate and becomes largely composed of fat cells,
which
replace
the
muscle
fibres
and
differentiate
in
the
interstitium between the fascicles, a result typical of repeated
muscle injury and showing striking resemblance to muscle in
advanced cases of Duchenne muscular dystrophy (Uezumi et al.,
2010, 2011).
As described above, a hole punched through the panniculus
carnosus of Acomys, which is a skeletal muscle layer present at the
base of the dermis, regenerates completely in ∼8 weeks and forms
new neuromuscular junctions, suggesting it is functional (Brant
et al., 2019). This is a striking result because the same damage in
Mus does not trigger regeneration (and instead leads to volumetric
muscle loss) as there is no connective tissue component remaining
to guide regeneration. The fact that Acomys can regenerate this
guidance tissue/cue suggests that a special property resides in the
connective tissue fibroblasts.
Kidney
Typical fibrosis-inducing models in the kidney involve unilateral
ureteral obstruction, whereby one ureter is ligated, and ischaemia
reperfusion injury, whereby vascular supply to the kidney is clamped
for a period of time and the contralateral kidney removed. After ureter
obstruction in Mus, the kidney shows clear hydronephrosis (kidney
swelling) after 14 days with a shrinking of the parenchyma and
weight loss, which is accompanied by an increase in collagen content
and extensive fibrosis (Okamura et al., 2018 preprint). In contrast, the
Acomys obstructed kidney preserves its structure and does not lose its
weight, increase its collagen content or show fibrosis. In addition,
there are reduced numbers of myofibroblasts and F4/80 macrophages
in the Acomys obstructed kidney, and tubular integrity is preserved.
Thus, the Acomys kidney does not respond to damage by inducing
fibrosis and tissue loss.
In the context of the ischaemia reperfusion model, in which
ischaemia is performed for 40 min and the contralateral kidney is
removed after 24 h, both Mus and Acomys show equivalent levels of
elevated blood urea nitrogen and equivalent levels of tubular injury
and tissue damage (Okamura et al., 2018 preprint). This indicates
that the Acomys kidney suffers significant tissue damage after
ischaemia. However, if the contralateral kidney is not removed at the
time of ischaemia (thereby preventing death from kidney failure),
there is an almost complete absence of fibrosis after 14 days and
preservation of renal mass in Acomys compared with the severe
fibrosis and 40% loss of renal mass observed in Mus. Thus, after
ischaemia, Acomys can almost completely restore its kidney
function compared with the progressive renal failure that Mus
normally undergoes.
Spinal cord
Damage to the Mus spinal cord typically results in the appearance of
a fibrotic glial scar, which is thought to be inhibitory to axonal
regrowth across the site of damage and thus prevents any restoration
of function. As a lack of fibrosis is characteristic of the response of
Acomys to the various damages described above, it is also possible
that the same may occur after spinal cord injury. To test this, Mus
and Acomys were subjected to a hemi-crush of the spinal cord in the
cervical region (Streeter et al., 2019). This study revealed that, in
Mus at 3 days post-injury, several pro-inflammatory genes such as
Il6, Cxcl3, Ccl12, Ccl7, Il1b and fibrosis genes such as Tgfb1,
Serpine1 and Timp1 are induced. In contrast, the majority of
upregulated genes in Acomys encode growth factors such as brain-
derived neurotrophic factor and glial cell-derived neurotrophic
factor, or components of the Wnt pathway, or are genes associated
with neural stem cells such as Sox2, Notch1 and Ascl1, or axonal
guidance such as Robo1, Efnb1 and Ntn1. Thus, there appears to be
a completely different spectrum of genes induced in the two species
in response to the same injury. At later sampling times, Acomys
shows reduced immunoreactivity for collagen IV and GFAP, which
are associated with spinal scarring and fibrosis, and reduced
immunoreactivity for IBA1 (also known as AIF1), again suggesting
a reduced immune response. These initial studies need to be
extended to determine whether the reduced immune and fibrotic
response in Acomys results in improved axonal regrowth across the
damage site and improved outcomes, as it does in the regenerative
situations described above.
Insights into the mechanisms of regeneration
Stem cells
Many regenerative processes are associated with the presence of
stem cells, for example the satellite cells of skeletal muscle or the
stem cells of the liver, so it is possible that Acomys has more stem
cells than non-regenerating mammals or that a stem cell population
is present in an Acomys tissue where none exists in other species. In
the one tissue in which this has been examined, the skeletal muscle
of the tibialis anterior, neither of these situations pertains (Maden
et al., 2018). There were more absolute numbers of satellite cells
(Pax7+) in the Acomys muscle fibres, but when corrected for an
increased size of fibres and quantitated relative to myonuclei, the
same value of satellite cells relative to myonuclei was obtained in
both species.
Extrapolating from this very limited data, if there is no difference
in the number of stem cells present in Acomys it is possible that the
special feature that this organism possesses is the ability to
6
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev167718. doi:10.1242/dev.167718
DEVELOPMENT

regenerate its stem cell niches and repopulate them. This may be
why Acomys can regenerate skeletal muscle after the connective
tissue has been removed as well as the fibres themselves. The ability
to regenerate and repopulate stem cell niches is clearly seen in the
case of regenerating hairs, which contain several stem cell
populations in the hair bulge, in the dermal papilla and in the
sebaceous glands. As functional hairs regenerate in the Acomys skin,
this implies these stem cell populations are regenerated from the
basal stem cells that re-epithelialize the wound. Thus, the Acomys
epithelium may exhibit unique properties or it may receive unique
signals compared with the epidermis from other mammals. Some of
these signals are beginning to be identified. For example, the
overexpression of Wnt7a in Mus epidermis induces hair follicle
regeneration after wounding (Ito et al., 2007) and we see high levels
of Wnt7a early during Acomys regeneration (Brant et al., 2019). The
induction of Shh in Mus wounds also induces hair follicle
regeneration (Lim et al., 2018) and we see induction of Shh
during Acomys regeneration (Brant et al., 2019). Uncovering these
signals and finding ones that are unique to Acomys will be a fruitful
avenue for investigation into why Acomys can regenerate but Mus
and humans cannot.
Immune-based regulation
The immune system has long been thought to play a role in
regeneration, with an immature system correlating with the
regenerative ability of lower vertebrates and the skin regenerative
abilities of mammalian fetuses (Mescher and Neff, 2005; Seifert and
Maden, 2014). In both larval frogs and mammalian fetal skin, the
ability to regenerate is lost during development and this loss
correlates with the ability of the immune system to mount an
inflammatory response in the damaged tissues. We might therefore
expect Acomys to generate an immature or embryonic-like immune
response to wounding.
In each of the regenerating systems discussed above, there is
undoubtedly a blunted cytokine and macrophage response. In skin
wounds, several cytokine genes such as Cxcl3, Cxcl5, IL1b, Cxcl1
are massively upregulated in Mus (at least at the gene level)
compared with undamaged levels, but this does not happen in
Acomys, which expresses far fewer pro-inflammatory cytokines
(Brant et al., 2015, 2019). Furthermore, the anti-inflammatory
molecule IL10 is strongly upregulated in Acomys wounds, over
100-fold compared with Mus wounds (Brant et al., 2019). The
macrophage response is also different. In Mus, the early wound is
infiltrated with large numbers of both M1 and M2 macrophages,
whereas the regenerating Acomys dermis displays highly reduced
numbers of macrophages (Brant et al., 2015). There are plenty of
macrophages present in the underlying fascia and at wound
margins but, even then, there is a dearth of F4/80 macrophages
and reduced numbers of IBA1 macrophages, both of which are
pro-inflammatory.
A cytokine analysis in the regenerating ear similarly identified
IL6, CCL2 and CXCL1 expressed at higher levels in Mus fibrotic
wounds, whereas regenerating Acomys ears exhibit higher levels of
IL12 and IL17 (Gawriluk et al., 2019 preprint). There is also a
different macrophage profile in the regenerating ear blastema of
Acomys compared with Mus (Simkin et al., 2017). It is nearly devoid
of classically activated (M1) macrophages, as marked by CD86
staining, but shows plenty of M2 macrophages, as marked by
CD206 staining. There is still an inflammatory phase in Acomys
(IL12 and IL17), which is also marked by a more robust
production of reactive oxygen species from macrophages and there
is a strong influx of CD3+ T cells showing the characteristics of
activated cytotoxic and regulatory T cells (Gawriluk et al., 2019
preprint).
In the regenerating Acomys skeletal muscle, kidney and spinal cord
the story is the same: a reduced inflammatory cytokine response,
reduced numbers of pro-inflammatory M1 macrophages and many
pro-regenerative M2 macrophages are observed. Importantly, when
macrophages are depleted from the regenerating ear, regeneration is
blocked, showing that they have a crucial, positive role in
regeneration,
specifically
in
histolysis
and
re-epithelialization
during the early phases of regeneration (Simkin et al., 2017).
Therefore, it is likely that the macrophage phenotype plays a role in
Acomys regeneration, guiding regeneration rather than fibrosis
following tissue damage.
The reduced cytokine response and the reduced macrophage
response may be responsible for the regeneration versus scarring
seen in Acomys versus Mus. If this is the case, then suppression of
the inflammatory response in Mus, or the deletion of cytokines,
could be used as strategies to generate an improved regenerative
response, and there are indeed some good examples of this (Ferreira
et al., 2006).
Biomechanics
Another aspect of cell biology that, surprisingly, interacts with the
cytokine response concerns the ECM. It was originally observed
that Acomys skin is weak and tears easily (Seifert et al., 2012) and
we now know that this is a property not only of the skin but of the
internal tissues as well (Maden et al., 2018). In addition, the Acomys
skin wound ECM has a different composition to that of Mus,
supporting the idea that there is a pro-regenerative matrix, a concept
which is a guiding principle of attempts to use artificial matrices to
induce regeneration: a pro-regenerative matrix ideally generates a
pro-regenerative microenvironment that promotes tissue regeneration
(He et al., 2018). It is often assumed that a pro-regenerative matrix
contains growth factors that can promote regeneration, but it is also
possible that the biomechanical properties of the matrix itself are
responsible for a reduced inflammatory response and consequent
regeneration. There are several examples of the relationship between
biomechanical forces and stem cell differentiation, but there is also a
relationship between biomechanical forces on a wound and cytokine
induction. For example, it has long been known that decreasing the
mechanical forces on wounds decreases scar formation and,
conversely, that increasing mechanical forces increases scarring
(Wong et al., 2012). Mechanical forces from the matrix are
transmitted to the cell via cell-surface integrins and relayed to the
actin cytoskeleton via a molecule called focal adhesion kinase (FAK;
PTK2). Increasing mechanical forces on a wound increases FAK
activation. Remarkably, FAK also modulates cytokine and immune
signalling;
FAK-knockout
wounds
have
reduced
levels
of
macrophage chemotactic protein (MCP-1; Mcpt1) and Ccr2 (the
cell surface receptor for MCP-1), and reduced levels of F4/80
macrophages (Wong et al., 2012), precisely the phenotype of Acomys
skin wounds.
Thus, it is possible that the evolution of a weak skin phenotype,
which is thought to help Acomys escape from predators, may have
had unexpected consequences on the regeneration of tissues.
Moving forward, we should aim to learn from evolution and
apply this knowledge to understand how to induce regeneration in
regeneration-incompetent mammals.
Conclusions
A. cahirinus is a mammalian model organism that has been used in
research for more than 60 years, but it has only recently been
7
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev167718. doi:10.1242/dev.167718
DEVELOPMENT

discovered that it shows striking powers of regeneration (Fig. 3,
Table 2). The reason for this regenerative potential may be because
Acomys does not fibrose in response to damage, as most mammals
do. Uncovering the molecular and cellular basis of this lack of
fibrosis and learning how to prevent it in other mammals such as
humans may lead to the discovery of therapies for the induction of
regeneration. But before this can happen, the full power of modern
molecular and genetic techniques needs to be applied. Although the
Acomys genome has been sequenced and transcriptomes published,
techniques for manipulating the genome need to be developed to
generate transgenic animals,
which have been valuable in
unravelling gene function in the laboratory mouse. Moreover,
although this new species has the advantages associated with small
rodents as laboratory models, it should be noted that the small
number of embryos produced per litter and the lengthy gestation
time remain as obstacles to rapid progress in understanding
regeneration.
Moving forward, it would be fascinating to survey the regenerative
ability of the close relatives of Acomys, namely Rudd’s mouse
(Uranomys), the Congo forest mouse or link rat (Deomys), and the
brush-furred mouse (Lophuromys), which are members of the same
subfamily of Deomyinae (Fig. 1), to determine whether the
regenerative properties described above have only evolved in the
genus Acomys or are present throughout the subfamily. In the same
regard, the closest subfamily, the Gerbillinae, which includes gerbils,
have been used extensively in research, especially in studying the
central nervous system, but there is no evidence from the literature
that there is any enhanced regeneration potential compared with the
typical mammal; indeed there is an anecdotal report that gerbils do
not regenerate a hole punched through the ear (Goss, 1980). At
present, it thus appears that only the genus Acomys has the ability to
regenerate tissues. However, this comparative approach is certainly a
valuable one towards understanding the evolution of regenerative
ability in mammals and, as emphasized earlier, it may be that there are
other previously unrecognized regenerative species out there waiting
to be discovered.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Funding
Work in the authors’ lab is funded by: National Science Foundation grants 1558017,
1636007; National Institutes of Health grant 1R21 0D023210; W.M. Keck
Foundation grant awarded to M.M.; and a Schweizerischer Nationalfonds zur
Fö rderung der Wissenschaftlichen Forschung Early Postdoc. Mobility Fellowship
(P2BEP3_181707) awarded to J.A.V. Deposited in PMC for release after 12 months.
References
Aghová, T., Palupč ı́ková, K., Š umbera, R., Frynta, D., Lavrenchenko, L. A.,
Meheretu, Y., Sádlová, J., Votýpka, J., Mbau, J. S., Modrý, D. et al. (2019).
Multiple radiations of spiny mice (Rodentia: Acomys) in dry open habitats of Afro-
Arabia: evidence from a multi-locus phylogeny. BMC Evol. Biol. 19, 69. doi:10.
1186/s12862-019-1380-9
Bate, D. M. A. (1903). On the occurrence of Acomys in Cyprus. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist.
11, 565-567. doi:10.1080/00222930308678817
Bellofiore, N. and Evans, J. (2019). Monkeys, mice and menses: the bloody
anomaly of the spiny mouse. J. Assist. Reprod. Genet. 36, 811-817. doi:10.1007/
s10815-018-1390-3
Bellofiore, N., Ellery, S. J., Mamrot, J., Walker, D. W., Temple-Smith, P. and
Dickinson, H. (2017). First evidence of a menstruating rodent: the spiny mouse
(Acomys cahirinus). Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 216, 40.e1-40.e11. doi:10.1016/j.
ajog.2016.07.041
Bellofiore, N., Rana, S., Dickinson, H., Temple-Smith, P. and Evans, J. (2018).
Characterization of human-like menstruation in the spiny mouse: comparative
studies with the human and induced mouse model. Hum. Reprod. 33, 1715-1726.
doi:10.1093/humrep/dey247
Bonhote, J. (1911). Exhibition of and remarks upon a young Cairo Spiny Mouse
(Acomys cahirinus). Proc. Zool. Soc. Lond. I 5, 5-6.
Brant, J. O., Lopez, M.-C., Baker, H. V., Barbazuk, W. B. and Maden, M. (2015). A
comparative analysis of gene expression profiles during skin regeneration in Mus
and Acomys. PLoS ONE 10, e0142931. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0142931
Brant, J. O., Yoon, J. H., Polvadore, T., Barbazuk, W. B. and Maden, M. (2016).
Cellular events during scar-free skin regeneration in the spiny mouse, Acomys.
Wound Repair. Regen. 24, 75-88. doi:10.1111/wrr.12385
Brant, J. O., Boatwright, J. L., Davenport, R., Sandoval, A. G. W., Maden, M. and
Barbazuk, W. B. (2019). Comparative transcriptomic analysis of dermal wound
healing reveals de novo skeletal muscle regeneration in Acomys cahirinus. PLoS
ONE 14, e0216228. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0216228
Brunjes, P. C. (1989). A comparative study of prenatal development in the olfactory
bulb, neocortex and hippocampal region of the precocial mouse Acomys cahirinus
and rat. Dev. Brain Res. 49, 7-25. doi:10.1016/0165-3806(89)90055-2
Brunjes, P. C., Korol, D. L. and Stern, K. G. (1989). Prenatal neurogenesis in the
telencephalon of the precocial mouse Acomys cahirinus. Neurosci. Lett. 107,
114-119. doi:10.1016/0304-3940(89)90801-X
Buckley, G., Metcalfe, A. D. and Ferguson, M. W. J. (2011). Peripheral nerve
regeneration in the MRL/MpJ ear wound model. J. Anat. 218, 163-172. doi:10.
1111/j.1469-7580.2010.01313.x
Castel, M. and Hockman, J. (1978). Immunocytochemistry of the hypothalamo-
neurohypophyseal system in the common spiny mouse, Acomys cahirinus.
Neurosecretion and Neuroendocrine Activity 135-137. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-
66885-2_40
Chargé, S. B. P. and Rudnicki, M. A. (2004). Cellular and molecular regulation of
muscle regeneration. Physiol. Rev. 84, 209-238. doi:10.1152/physrev.00019.
2003
Chevret, P., Denys, C., Jaeger, J. J., Michaux, J. and Catzeflis, F. M. (1993).
Molecular evidence that the spiny mouse (Acomys) is more closely related to
gerbils (Gerbillinae) than to true mice (Murinae). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90,
3433-3436. doi:10.1073/pnas.90.8.3433
Ciciliot, S. and Schiaffino, S. (2010). Regeneration of mammalian skeletal muscle:
basic mechanisms and clinical implications. Curr. Pharm. Des. 16, 906-914.
doi:10.2174/138161210790883453
Creutzfeldt, W., Mende, D., Willms, B. and Soeling, H. D. (1970). Vascular
basement membrane thickness in muscle of spiny mice and activities of glycolysis
and gluconeogenesis in the liver of animals with spontaneous and experimental
diabetes and of untreated human diabetics. Diabetologia 6, 356-360. doi:10.1007/
BF01212249
Dewsbury, D. A. and Hodges, A. W. (1987). Copulatory behavior and related
phenomena in spiny mice (Acomys cahirinus) and hopping mice (Notomys
alexis). J. Mammal. 68, 49-57. doi:10.2307/1381044
Dickinson, H. and Walker, D. W. (2007). Managing a colony of spiny mice (Acomys
cahirinus) for perinatal research. ANZCCART News 20, 4-11.
Dickinson, H., Walker, D. W., Cullen-McEwen, L., Wintour, E. M. and Moritz, K.
(2005). The spiny mouse (Acomys cahirinus) completes nephrogenesis before
birth. Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol. 289, F273-F279. doi:10.1152/ajprenal.00400.
2004
Dieterlen, F. (1961). Beitrage zur Biologie der Stachelmaus, Acomys cahirinus
dimidiatus Cretzschmar. Zeitschrift fü r Saugertierkü nde 16, 1-13.
Farkas, J. E., Freitas, P. D., Bryant, D. M., Whited, J. L. and Monaghan, J. R.
(2016). Neuregulin-1 signaling is essential for nerve-dependent axolotl limb
regeneration. Development 143, 2724-2731. doi:10.1242/dev.133363
Fausto, N., Campbell, J. S. and Riehle, K. J. (2012). Liver regeneration. J. Hepatol.
57, 692-694. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2012.04.016
Ferreira, A. M., Takagawa, S., Fresco, R., Zhu, X., Varga, J. and DiPietro, L. A.
(2006). Diminished induction of skin fibrosis in mice with MCP-1 deficiency.
J. Investig. Dermatol. 126, 1900-1908. doi:10.1038/sj.jid.5700302
Frynta, D., Fraň ková, M., Č ı́ž ková, B., Skarlandtová, H., Galeš toková, K.,
Prů š ová, K., Š milauer, P. and Š umbera, R. (2011). Social and life history
correlates of litter size in captive colonies of precocial spiny mice (Acomys). Acta
Theriol. 56, 289-295. doi:10.1007/s13364-011-0024-2
Gawriluk, T. R., Simkin, J., Thompson, K. L., Biswas, S. K., Clare-Salzler, Z.,
Kimani, J. M., Kiama, S. G., Smith, J. J., Ezenwa, V. O. and Seifert, A. W.
(2016).
Comparative
analysis
of
ear-hole
closure
identifies
epimorphic
regeneration as a discrete trait in mammals. Nat. Commun. 7, 11164. doi:10.
1038/ncomms11164
Gawriluk, T. R., Simkin, J., Hacker, C. K., Kimani, J. M., Kiama, S. G., Ezenwa,
V. O. and Seifert, A. W. (2019). Mammalian musculoskeletal regeneration is
associated with reduced inflammatory cytokines and an influx of T cells. bioRxiv
723783. doi:10.1101/723783
Gay, D., Kwon, O., Zhang, Z., Spata, M., Plikus, M. V., Holler, P. D., Ito, M., Yang,
Z., Treffeisen, E., Kim, C. D. et al. (2013). Fgf9 from dermal γδ T cells induces hair
follicle neogenesis after wounding. Nat. Med. 19, 916-923. doi:10.1038/nm.3181
Goss, R. J. (1980). Prospects for regeneration in man. Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 151,
270-282. doi:00003086-198009000-00038
Goss, R. J. (1983). Deer Antlers Regeneration, Function, and Evolution. 1st edn.
Elsevier.
Goss, R. J. (1987). Why mammals don’t regenerate—or do they? Physiology 2,
112-115. doi:10.1152/physiologyonline.1987.2.3.112
8
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev167718. doi:10.1242/dev.167718
DEVELOPMENT

Guo, B., Yan, H., Li, L., Yin, K., Ji, F. and Zhang, S. (2017). Collagen triple helix
repeat containing 1 (CTHRC1) activates Integrin β3/FAK signaling and promotes
metastasis in ovarian cancer. J. Ovarian. Res. 10, 69. doi:10.1186/s13048-017-
0358-8
Gustavsen, C. R., Kvicerova, C. R., Dickinson, H. and Heller, R. S. (2009).
Acomys, the closest relatives to Gerbils, do express Pdx-1 protein and have
similar islet morphology to Gerbils. Islets 1, 191-197. doi:10.4161/isl.1.3.9557
Haughton, C. L., Gawriluk, T. R. and Seifert, A. W. (2016). The biology and
husbandry of the african spiny mouse (Acomys cahirinus) and the research uses
of a laboratory colony. J. Am. Assoc. Lab. Anim. Sci. 55, 9-17.
He, C., Yang, Z., Jin, Y., Qi, X., Chu, J. and Deng, X. (2018). ADM scaffolds
generate a pro-regenerative microenvironment during full-thickness cutaneous
wound healing through M2 macrophage polarization via lamtor1. Front. Physiol. 9,
657. doi:10.3389/fphys.2018.00657
Hsia, C. C. W. (2017). Comparative analysis of the mechanical signals in lung
development and compensatory growth. Cell Tissue Res. 367, 687-705. doi:10.
1007/s00441-016-2558-8
Hułas-Stasiak, M. and Gawron, A. (2007). Immunohistochemical localization of
estrogen receptors ERα and ERβ in the spiny mouse (Acomys cahirinus) ovary
during postnatal development. J. Mol. Histol. 38, 25-32. doi:10.1007/s10735-006-
9072-3
Hułas-Stasiak, M. and Gawron, A. (2010). Distribution of androgen and
progesterone receptors in the spiny mouse (Acomys cahirinus) ovary during
postnatal life. Repro. Biol. 10, 37-51. doi:10.1016/S1642-431X(12)60036-9
Hułas-Stasiak, M. and Gawron, A. (2011). Follicular atresia in the prepubertal spiny
mouse (Acomys cahirinus) ovary. Apoptosis 16, 967. doi:10.1007/s10495-011-
0626-9
Hutton, L. C., Shields, A. and Walker, W. (2009a). Neuropathology and functional
deficits in a model of birth asphyxia in the precocial spiny mouse (Acomys
cahirinus). Dev. Neurosci. 31, 523-535. doi:10.1159/000251907
Hutton, L. C., Abbass, M., Dickinson, H., Ireland, Z. and Walker, D. W. (2009b).
Neuroprotective properties of melatonin in a model of birth asphyxia in the spiny
mouse (Acomys cahirinus). Dev. Neurosci. 31, 437-451. doi:10.1159/000232562
Illingworth, C. M. (1974). Trapped fingers and amputated finger tips in children.
J. Pediatr. Surg. 9, 853-858. doi:10.1016/S0022-3468(74)80220-4
Ito, M., Yang, Z., Andl, T., Cui, C., Kim, N., Millar, S. E. and Cotsarelis, G. (2007).
Wnt-dependent de novo hair follicle regeneration in adult mouse skin after
wounding. Nature 447, 316-320. doi:10.1038/nature05766
Janus, C. (1988). The development of responses to naturally occurring odours in
spiny mice Acomys cahirinus. Anim. Behav. 36, 1400-1406. doi:10.1016/S0003-
3472(88)80210-0
Janus, C. (1993). Stability of preference for odors after short-term exposure in young
spiny mice. Dev. Psychobiol. 26, 65-79. doi:10.1002/dev.420260106
Jeremy, P. and Bates, J. (1994). The distribution of acomys (rodentia: Muridae) in
Africa and Asia. Isr. J. Zool. 40, 199-214.
Jiang, T.-X., Harn, H. I.-C., Ou, K.-L., Lei, M. and Chuong, C.-M. (2019).
Comparative regenerative biology of spiny (Acomys cahirinus) and laboratory
(Mus musculus) mouse skin. Exp. Dermatol. 28, 442-449. doi:10.1111/exd.13899
Joven, A., Elewa, A. and Simon, A. (2019). Model systems for regeneration:
salamanders. Development 146, dev167700. doi:10.1242/dev.167700
Lamers, W. H., Mooren, P. G., Griep, H., Endert, E., Degenhart, H. J. and
Charles, R. (1986). Hormones in perinatal rat and spiny mouse: relation to altricial
and precocial timing of birth. Am. J. Physiol. 251, E78-E85. doi:10.1152/ajpcell.
1986.251.1.C78
Lim, C. H., Sun, Q., Ratti, K., Lee, S.-H., Zheng, Y., Takeo, M., Lee, W., Rabbani,
P., Plikus, M. V., Cain, J. E. et al. (2018). Hedgehog stimulates hair follicle
neogenesis by creating inductive dermis during murine skin wound healing. Nat.
Commun. 9, 4903. doi:10.1038/s41467-018-07142-9
Maden, M. (2018). Optimal skin regeneration after full thickness thermal burn injury
in the spiny mouse, Acomys cahirinus. Burns 44, 1509-1520. doi:10.1016/j.burns.
2018.05.018
Maden, M., Brant, J. O., Rubiano, A., Sandoval, A. G. W., Simmons, C., Mitchell,
R., Collin-Hooper, H., Jacobson, J., Omairi, S. and Patel, K. (2018). Perfect
chronic skeletal muscle regeneration in adult spiny mice, Acomys cahirinus. Sci.
Rep. 8, 8920. doi:10.1038/s41598-018-27178-7
Makin, J. W. and Porter, R. H. (1984). Paternal behavior in the spiny mouse
(Acomys cahirinus). Behav. Neural Biol. 41, 135-151. doi:10.1016/S0163-
1047(84)90513-2
Mamrot, J., Gardner, D. K., Temple-Smith, P. and Dickinson, H. (2018).
Embryonic gene transcription in the spiny mouse (Acomys cahirinus): an
investigation into the embryonic genome activation. bioRxiv 280412. doi:10.
1101/280412
Marques, I. J., Lupi, E. and Mercader, N. (2019). Model systems for regeneration:
zebrafish. Development 146, dev167692. doi:10.1242/dev.167692
Matias Santos, D., Rita, A. M., Casanellas, I., Brito Ova, A., Araújo, I. M., Power,
D. and Tiscornia, G. (2016). Ear wound regeneration in the African spiny mouse
Acomys cahirinus. Regeneration 3, 52-61. doi:10.1002/reg2.50
Mescher, A. L. and Neff, A. W. (2005). Regenerative capacity and the developing
immune system. Adv. Biochem. Eng. Biotechnol. 93, 39-66. doi:10.1007/b99966
Millar, S. E. (2002). Molecular mechanisms regulating hair follicle development.
J. Investig. Dermatol. 118, 216-225. doi:10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.01670.x
Montandon, S. A., Tzika, A. C., Martins, A. F., Chopard, B. and Milinkovitch,
M. C. (2014). Two waves of anisotropic growth generate enlarged follicles in the
spiny mouse. EvoDevo 5, 33. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-5-33
Musarò, A. (2014). The basis of muscle regeneration. Adv. Biol. 2014, 612471.
doi:10.1155/2014/612471
Nováková, M., Palme, R., Kutalová, H., Janský, L. and Frynta, D. (2008). The
effects of sex, age and commensal way of life on levels of fecal glucocorticoid
metabolites in spiny mice (Acomys cahirinus). Physiol. Behav. 95, 187-193.
doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2008.05.017
Okamura, D. M., Brewer, C. M., Wakenight, P., Bahrami, N., Bernardi, K., Tran,
A., Olson, J., Shi, X., Piliponsky, A. M., Nelson, B. R. et al. (2018). Scarless
repair of acute and chronic kidney injury in African Spiny mice (Acomys cahirinus).
bioRxiv 315069. doi:10.1101/315069
Oosterhuis, W. P., Mooren, P. G., Charles, R. and Lamers, W. H. (1984). Perinatal
Development of the lung in rat and spiny mouse: its relation to altricial and
precocial timing of birth. Neonatology 45, 236-243. doi:10.1159/000242011
Pasco, R., Gardner, D. K., Walker, D. W. and Dickinson, H. (2012). A
superovulation protocol for the spiny mouse (Acomys cahirinus). Reprod. Fertil.
Dev. 24, 1117. doi:10.1071/RD12044
Peitz, B. (1981). The oestrous cycle of the spiny mouse (Acomys cahirinus).
J. Reprod. Fertil. 61, 453-459. doi:10.1530/jrf.0.0610453
Peitz, B., Foreman, D. and Schmitt, M. (1979). The reproductive tract of the male
spiny mouse (Acomys cahirinus) and coagulation studies with other species.
J. Reprod. Fertil. 57, 183-188. doi:10.1530/jrf.0.0570183
Pennello, A., Taylor, J., Matlack, R., Karp, J. and Riggs, J. (2006). Spiny mice
(Acomys cahirinus) do not respond to thymus-independent type 2 antigens. Dev.
Comp. Immunol. 30, 1181-1190. doi:10.1016/j.dci.2006.03.007
Pictet, R., Orci, L., Gonet, A. E., Rouiller, C. and Renold, A. E. (1967).
Ultrastructural studies of the hyperplastic islets of langerhans of spiny mice
(Acomys cahirinus) before and during the development of hyperglycemia.
Diabetologia 3, 188-211. doi:10.1007/BF01222197
Pinheiro, G., Prata, D. F., Araújo, I. M. and Tiscornia, G. (2018). The African spiny
mouse (Acomys spp.) as an emerging model for development and regeneration.
Lab. Anim. 52, 565-576. doi:10.1177/0023677218769921
Porrello, E. R., Mahmoud, A. I., Simpson, E., Hill, J. A., Richardson, J. A., Olson,
E. N. and Sadek, H. A. (2011). Transient regenerative potential of the neonatal
mouse heart. Science 331, 1078-1080. doi:10.1126/science.1200708
Porter, R. H. (1976). Sex-differences in the agonistic behavior of spiny-mice
(Acomys cahirinus). Z. Tierpsychol. 40, 100-108. doi:10.1111/j.1439-0310.1976.
tb00928.x
Porter, R. H. and Etscorn, F. (1976). A sensitive period for the development of
olfactory preference in Acomys cahirinus. Physiol. Behav. 17, 127-130. doi:10.
1016/0031-9384(76)90278-X
Porter, R. H., Deni, R. and Doane, H. M. (1977). Responses of Acomys cahirinus
pups to chemical cues produced by a foster species. Behav. Biol. 20, 244-251.
doi:10.1016/S0091-6773(77)90812-4
Porter, R. H., Wyrick, M. and Pankey, J. (1978a). Sibling recognition in spiny mice
(Acomys cahirinus). Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 3, 61-68. doi:10.1007/BF00300046
Porter, R. H., Doane, H. M. and Cavallaro, S. A. (1978b). Temporal parameters of
responsiveness to maternal pheromone in Acomys cahirinus. Physiol. Behav. 21,
563-566. doi:10.1016/0031-9384(78)90131-2
Porter, R. H., Cavallaro, S. A. and Moore, J. D. (1980). Developmental parameters
of mother-offspring interactions in Acomys cahirinus. Z. Tierpsychol. 53, 153-170.
doi:10.1111/j.1439-0310.1980.tb01047.x
Porter, R. H., Moore, J. D. and White, D. M. (1981). Food sharing by sibling vs
nonsibling spiny mice (Acomys cahirinus). Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 8, 207-212.
doi:10.1007/BF00299832
Porter, R. H., Tepper, V. J., Baumeister, A. A., Cernoch, J. M. and Matochik, J. A.
(1982). Interactions among unfamiliar spiny mouse (Acomys cahirinus) weanlings.
Behav. Neural Biol. 34, 190-200. doi:10.1016/S0163-1047(82)91574-6
Porter, R. H., Cernoch, J. M. and Matochik, J. A. (1983). Littermate influences on
behavioral development in Acomys cahirinus and Mus musculus. Z. Tierpsychol.
62, 93-104. doi:10.1111/j.1439-0310.1983.tb02144.x
Porter, R. H., Matochik, J. A. and Makin, J. W. (1986). Discrimination between full-
sibling spiny mice (Acomys cahirinus) by olfactory signatures. Anim. Behav. 34,
1182-1188. doi:10.1016/S0003-3472(86)80178-6
Porter, R. H., McFadyen-Ketchum, S. A. and King, G. A. (1989). Underlying bases
of recognition signatures in spiny mice, Acomys cahirinus. Anim. Behav. 37,
638-644. doi:10.1016/0003-3472(89)90042-0
Pyagay, P., Heroult, M., Wang, Q., Lehnert, W., Belden, J., Liaw, L., Cramer, R. E.
and Lindner, V. (2005). Collagen triple helix repeat containing 1, a novel secreted
protein in injured and diseased arteries, inhibits collagen expression and promotes
cell migration. Circ. Res. 96, 261-268. doi:10.1161/01.RES.0000154262.07264.12
Quinn, T. A., Ratnayake, U., Dickinson, H., Nguyen, T.-H., McIntosh, M.,
Castillo-Melendez, M., Conley, A. J. and Walker, D. W. (2013). Ontogeny of the
adrenal gland in the spiny mouse, with particular reference to production of the
steroids cortisol and dehydroepiandrosterone. Endocrinology 154, 1190-1201.
doi:10.1210/en.2012-1953
9
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev167718. doi:10.1242/dev.167718
DEVELOPMENT

Robinson, S. R. and Smotherman, W. P. (1992). Behavioral response of altricial
and precocial rodent fetuses to acute umbilical cord compression. Behav. Neural
Biol. 57, 93-102. doi:10.1016/0163-1047(92)90581-N
Saxena, S., Vekaria, H., Sullivan, P. G., Seifert, A. W. (2019). Connective tissue
fibroblasts from highly regenerative mammals are refractory to ROS-induced
cellular senescence. Nat. Communications 10, 4400. doi:10.1038/s41467-019-
12398-w
Seifert, A. W. and Maden, M. (2014). New insights into vertebrate skin regeneration.
Intl. Rev. Cell Mol. Biol. 310, 129-169. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-800180-6.00004-9
Seifert, A. W., Kiama, S. G., Seifert, M. G., Goheen, J. R., Palmer, T. M. and
Maden, M. (2012). Skin shedding and tissue regeneration in African spiny mice
(Acomys). Nature 489, 561-565. doi:10.1038/nature11499
Shafrir, E., Ziv, E. and Kalman, R. (2006). Nutritionally induced diabetes in desert
rodents as models of type 2 diabetes. ILAR J. 47, 212-224. doi:10.1093/ilar.47.3.212
Shargal, E., Rath-Wolfson, L., Kronfeld, N. and Dayan, T. (1999). Ecological and
histological aspects of tail loss in spiny mice (Rodentia: Muridae, Acomys) with a
review of its occurrence in rodents. J. Zool. 249, 187-193. doi:10.1111/j.1469-
7998.1999.tb00757.x
Shkolnik, A. and Borut, A. (1969). Temperature and water relations in two species
of spiny mice (Acomys). J. Mammal. 50, 245-255. doi:10.2307/1378340
Simkin, J., Gawriluk, T. R., Gensel, J. C. and Seifert, A. W. (2017). Macrophages
are necessary for epimorphic regeneration in African spiny mice. eLife 6, e24623.
doi:10.7554/eLife.24623
Steppan, S. J. and Schenk, J. J. (2017). Muroid rodent phylogenetics: 900-species
tree reveals increasing diversification rates. PLoS ONE 12, e0183070. doi:10.
1371/journal.pone.0183070
Stewart, D. C., Serrano, P. N., Rubiano, A., Yokosawa, R., Sandler, J., Mukhtar,
M., Brant, J. O., Maden, M. and Simmons, C. S. (2018). Unique behavior of
dermal cells from regenerative mammal, the African Spiny Mouse, in response to
substrate stiffness. J. Biomech. 81, 149-154. doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2018.10.005
Stocum, D. L. (2019). Nerves and proliferation of progenitor cells in limb
regeneration. Dev. Neurobiol. 79, 468-478. doi:10.1002/dneu.22643
Strasser, H. (1968). A breeding program for spontaneously diabetic experimental
animals: Psammomys obesus (sand rat) and Acomys cahirinus (spiny mouse).
Lab. Anim. Care 18, 328-338.
Streeter, K. A., Sunshine, M. D., Brant, J. O., Sandoval, M. A. G. W., Maden, M.
and Fuller, D. D. (2019). Molecular and histologic outcomes following spinal cord
injury in spiny mice, Acomys cahirinus. J. Comp. Neurol. [Epub ahead of print].
doi:10.1002/cne.24836
Uezumi, A., Fukada, S., Yamamoto, N., Takeda, S. and Tsuchida, K. (2010).
Mesenchymal progenitors distinct from satellite cells contribute to ectopic
fat cell formation in skeletal muscle. Nat. Cell Biol. 12, 143-152. doi:10.1038/
ncb2014
Uezumi, A., Ito, T., Morikawa, D., Shimizu, N., Yoneda, T., Segawa, M.,
Yamaguchi, M., Ogawa, R., Matev, M. M., Miyagoe-Suzuki, Y. et al. (2011).
Fibrosis and adipogenesis originate from a common mesenchymal progenitor in
skeletal muscle. J. Cell. Sci. 124, 3654-3664. doi:10.1242/jcs.086629
Voronstova, M. and Liosner, L. (1960). Asexual Propogation and Regeneration.
Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Williams-Boyce, P. K. and Daniel, J. C. (1986). Comparison of ear tissue
regeneration in mammals. J. Anat. 149, 55-63.
Wong, V. W., Rustad, K. C., Akaishi, S., Sorkin, M., Glotzbach, J. P., Januszyk,
M., Nelson, E. R., Levi, K., Paterno, J., Vial, I. N. et al. (2012). Focal adhesion
kinase links mechanical force to skin fibrosis via inflammatory signaling. Nat. Med.
18, 148-152. doi:10.1038/nm.2574
Yates, C. C., Hebda, P. and Wells, A. (2012). Skin wound healing and scarring: fetal
wounds and regenerative restitution. Birth Defects Res. C Embryo Today 96,
325-333. doi:10.1002/bdrc.21024
Young, D. A. B. (1976). Breeding and fertility of the Egyptian spiny mouse, Acomys
cahirinus: effect of different environments. Lab. Anim. 10, 15-24. doi:10.1258/
002367776780948961
Yu, L., Dawson, L. A., Yan, M., Zimmel, K., Lin, Y.-L., Dolan, C. P., Han, M. and
Muneoka, K. (2019). BMP9 stimulates joint regeneration at digit amputation
wounds in mice. Nat. Commun. 10, 424. doi:10.1038/s41467-018-08278-4
10
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev167718. doi:10.1242/dev.167718
DEVELOPMENT

===== Madl2018_Nature+StemCellBioeng =====
Review
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0089-z
Bioengineering strategies to accelerate 
stem cell therapeutics
Christopher M. Madl1, Sarah C. Heilshorn2 & Helen M. Blau1*
Although only a few stem cell-based therapies are currently available to patients, stem cells hold tremendous regenerative 
potential, and several exciting clinical applications are on the horizon. Biomaterials with tuneable mechanical and 
biochemical properties can preserve stem cell function in culture, enhance survival of transplanted cells and guide 
tissue regeneration. Rapid progress with three-dimensional hydrogel culture platforms provides the opportunity to grow 
patient-specific organoids, and has led to the discovery of drugs that stimulate endogenous tissue-specific stem cells 
and enabled screens for drugs to treat disease. Therefore, bioengineering technologies are poised to overcome current 
bottlenecks and revolutionize the field of regenerative medicine.
S
tem cell therapies have the potential to transform medicine by ena-
bling patient-specific regeneration of injured or diseased tissues, 
providing cures for some of humanity’s most intractable diseases, 
such as muscular dystrophies, diabetes and neurodegeneration. The rapid 
expansion of stem cell research over the past two decades has uncov-
ered methods that use a patient’s own cells to form mature cell types and 
even miniature organs, or organoids, in the laboratory. These strategies 
can harness the native regenerative capacity of somatic stem cells that 
reside in the patient’s own tissues, such as the bone marrow or skeletal 
muscle. Alternatively, the advent of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells 
allows researchers to take mature cells from a patient’s skin or blood and 
reprogram these cells into an immature, embryonic state. These iPS cells 
can then be differentiated into any cell type of any given adult tissue, 
providing an avenue to achieve the goals of personalized medicine. Such 
patient-specific cells can be used to repair damaged tissues or as diag-
nostic tools to screen for drugs or inform treatment decisions made by 
physicians.
Successful reports of translating stem cell therapies to patients over 
the past several years have fostered hope that strategies for regenera-
tive medicine may one day cure some of the most challenging illnesses. 
Recently, genetically modified keratinocyte cultures containing epider-
mal stem cells restored more than 80% of the surface area of the skin of 
a young patient suffering from a deadly blistering disorder1. In other 
examples, embryonic stem (ES) cells or patient-derived iPS cells that 
were differentiated into retinal pigment epithelial cells and transplanted 
into the eye improved the sight of patients at risk of becoming blind due 
to macular degeneration2–4. Despite such highly publicized and exciting 
cases of success, the majority of stem cell clinical trials to date have not 
yet achieved regulatory approval and commercialization as stem cell 
therapies5. Although hundreds of clinical trials are registered with the 
US FDA (Food and Drug Administration) on the clinical trials website 
(https://clinicaltrials.gov/), the only FDA-approved stem cell products 
consist of umbilical cord blood-derived haematopoietic progenitors6. 
World-wide, rigorous clinical trials have led to approval of only a handful 
of therapies based on adult stem cells5. This is not only because of lengthy 
regulatory hurdles, but also due to biological obstacles.
Despite substantial advances in our understanding of stem cell 
biology, several challenges remain that limit the widespread clinical use of 
stem cell therapies. Current hurdles to the clinical translation of stem cell 
therapies include maintenance of the stem cell state, reproducible expan-
sion of large numbers of stem cells for transplantation, efficient control 
of the cell state both pre- and post-transplantation, and protection of the 
cells during and after delivery to patients (Fig. 1). Another bottleneck is 
exemplified by a failure of clinical-grade neural stem cells to replicate the 
regenerative effects of research-grade cells in pre-clinical animal mod-
els, highlighting the difficulties associated with stem cell production and 
transplantation for use in patients7,8. Engineering approaches offer solu-
tions to overcome current limitations. In particular, advances in materials 
science have enabled unprecedented control over the biochemical and 
biophysical properties of materials used for stem cell therapies. Material 
1Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. 2Department of Materials Science and 
Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA. *e-mail: hblau@stanford.edu
Maintain or expand
stem cells
Differentiate or
reprogram cells
Protect cells and
guide regeneration
Stem cell
culture
a
Altering cell
state
b
Delivery
c
Fig. 1 | Challenges in translating stem cell therapies with potential 
bioengineered solutions. a, Present challenges culturing stem cells 
include maintenance of the stem cell state ex vivo16,18,20,21,23–25 and  
efficient expansion of naive stem cells9,10,12,27. b, To fully realize the 
potential of stem cells, reliable protocols for altering cell state must be 
developed, including differentiation of stem cells to mature cell types35–45 
and reprogramming of somatic cells to pluripotent stem cells47,48.  
c, Conventional cell delivery approaches do not address crucial obstacles 
in cell transplantation therapies, including maintaining the viability 
and potency of stem cells during injection49–51, providing a supportive 
microenvironment for the cells after implantation50,52–55, and controlling 
the fate of the cells by providing cues to guide regeneration in vivo56,59. 
Engineering approaches are being applied to design materials to address 
these challenges.
1 7  M A Y  2 0 1 8  |  V O L  5 5 7  |  N A T U R E  |  3 3 5
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Review
insight
properties can be tuned to create an artificial niche to both expand naive 
stem cells and efficiently differentiate stem cells into mature cell types 
(Fig. 2). Material carriers can improve the survival and engraftment of 
transplanted stem cells, and controlling the properties of these carriers 
can promote an enhanced regenerative response from the delivered cells. 
Innovative material design can aid in meeting regulatory standards and 
facilitate the increase in scale necessary for commercialization. Here we 
describe how bioengineered materials have already substantially con-
tributed to stem cell advances and discuss how novel material design 
can overcome remaining difficulties, accelerating and expanding clinical 
applications of stem cell-based therapies.
Expanding stem cells
One of the major bottlenecks in translating stem cell therapies to the 
clinic has been expansion of the large numbers of cells that are required 
for transplantation, typically tens to hundreds of millions of cells per 
patient. Cells to be used for human therapies must be cultured under 
fully defined conditions to meet regulatory requirements and exhibit 
minimal batch-to-batch variation for consistent therapeutic efficacy. 
Furthermore, the platforms used for stem cell expansion must be 
amenable to industrial scale-up.
Historically, the most common techniques used to culture pluripo-
tent stem cells (ES and iPS cells) contained animal-derived compo-
nents, such as a layer of live mouse embryonic fibroblasts or coatings 
of Matrigel, a mixture of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins derived 
from mice. The use of such animal-derived components hinders regula-
tory approval, and ECM extracts such as Matrigel can be highly variable 
in their composition, potentially impacting the reproducibility of cells 
expanded by using this material. To address these issues, coatings for 
tissue culture substrates have been designed to recapitulate specific 
aspects of the native biochemistry. Fully recombinant ECM proteins9, 
surfaces grafted with peptides that promote cell adhesion10,11, and syn-
thetic polymer coatings12 have all been used to facilitate expansion 
of pluripotent stem cells. Additionally, high-throughput techniques 
have enabled screening for matrix-bound protein components and 
their effects on stem cell state, further refining the presentation of 
micro­environmental cues from biomimetic materials. For instance, 
micro-well arrays spotted with proteins led to identification of niche 
factors that promoted neural stem cell (NSC) proliferation13.
In addition to the biochemical composition, the physical proper-
ties of the matrix on which stem cells reside can also alter stem cell 
expansion. One crucial physical regulator of stem cell fate is matrix 
stiffness, a measure of how easily the matrix deforms under an applied 
load. The stiffness of biological materials is often reported as an elastic 
modulus (also known as the Young’s modulus), which is an inherent 
material property, independent of material geometry. In the body, stem 
cells and their progeny experience stiffness spanning several orders 
of magnitude, from relatively compliant brain tissue (elastic moduli 
of approximately 102 Pa)14 to rigid calcified bone (elastic moduli of 
approximately 1010 Pa)15. Systems with a tunable stiffness that encom-
passes a physiological range have typically used materials known as 
hydrogels, which are water-swollen polymer networks.
The profound role of substrate stiffness in regulating the self-renewal 
of somatic stem cells is clear from studies using hydrogel substrates. 
For example, muscle stem cells (MuSCs), which are responsible for the 
maintenance and repair of skeletal muscle tissue, need to be cultured 
on hydrogels with an equivalent stiffness to native muscle tissue to 
maintain their regenerative potential during expansion in culture and 
after transplantation in vivo16. Moreover, substrate elasticity has had a 
crucial role in the ability to ‘rejuvenate’ MuSCs derived from aged mice 
to improve regenerative function17. With ageing, MuSCs acquire intrin-
sic defects that make them less potent than cells derived from young 
mice17, hampering the much-needed therapeutic function of native 
MuSCs in elderly individuals. However, a combination of culturing 
aged MuSCs on compliant substrates with muscle-like stiffness and 
pharmacological inhibition of p38 MAP kinase resulted in expansion of 
a stem cell pool with improved engraftment and regenerative capacity, 
culminating in a marked increase in strength17.
The observation that substrate stiffness in culture can regulate the 
function of expanded stem cells even after transplantation in vivo sug-
gests that the stem cells are capable of ‘remembering’ the mechanical 
environment in which they were cultured. A noteworthy study, which 
used hydrogels that dynamically soften in response to controlled light 
exposure, has shown that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), which are 
bone, cartilage and fat-forming cells derived from the bone marrow, 
possessed a ‘mechanical memory’18. Stiff hydrogels biased the MSCs 
towards differentiation over stem cell maintenance, and prolonged 
culture on stiff substrates resulted in an irreversible loss of stem cell 
potential18. Identification of the molecular mechanisms that are respon-
sible for this mechanical memory may help to restore function in stem 
cells that have acquired defects from fibrotic stiffening due to disease 
and ageing. One such memory molecule in MSCs is the microRNA 
miR-21. Resetting expression levels of miR-21 effectively ‘erased’ the 
memory of being cultured on a stiff substrate19.
Other stem cell types are similarly sensitive to stiffness and expand 
optimally when cultured on substrates of a particular elasticity. Culture 
on compliant substrates enhanced the ex vivo expansion of haemato-
poietic stem cells20,21, which are responsible for reconstituting blood 
and immune cells. Human embryonic stem cells were best maintained 
on relatively compliant substrates, which led to the expression of high 
levels of pluripotency genes and retention of the capacity of these cells 
to differentiate into all three germ layers22.
The two-dimensional (2D) nature of traditional cell culture often 
does not adequately replicate the three-dimensional (3D) environment 
experienced by stem cells in the body. Hydrogels have proven to be 
a useful material platform to culture cells in a more native-like 3D 
microenvironment. Studies of the native ECM revealed that cell- 
secreted enzymes, such as metalloproteases, remodel the matrix to per-
mit cell spreading and migration through their surrounding material. 
Incorporating this principle, hydrogel systems for 3D culture have been 
engineered to permit degradation and remodelling. Matrix remodelling 
Fig. 2 | Recapitulating niche interactions to direct stem cell fate. 
Various biochemical and biophysical factors within the stem cell 
microenvironment combine to modulate cellular behaviours. Careful 
design of materials for stem cell culture and transplantation can effectively 
control matrix properties, such as biochemical composition, mechanics 
and degradation, as well as soluble factor signalling and cell–cell contact to 
regulate stem cell fate.
Matrix
composition
Matrix
degradation
Mechanical
forces
Integration of niche signals
Cell–cell
contact
Altered gene transcription
Expansion
Differentiation
Reprogramming
Matrix
adhesion
ECM
Cell
Cell
Soluble
factors
3 3 6  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  5 5 7  |  1 7  M A Y  2 0 1 8
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Review
insight
has recently been demonstrated to have significant and diverse impacts 
on the expansion of stem cells ex vivo. NSCs embedded within 3D 
hydrogels must remodel the surrounding matrix in order to maintain 
cell–cell contacts and retain their stem cell state, irrespective of matrix 
stiffness23. By contrast, maintenance and proliferation of intestinal 
stem cell cultures is decreased upon culture in hydrogels susceptible 
to degradation by cell-secreted enzymes24. However, to facilitate mat-
uration of intestinal organoid cultures, gradual, passive degradation of 
the matrix is necessary24.
Microstructural variation is an additional parameter provided by the 
native ECM that is not replicated in traditional 2D cultures or homo-
geneous 3D hydrogels. The ECM of many tissues consists of fibrous 
components spanning the nano- to micrometre scales. Cell culture 
substrates presenting features along these length scales can alter cel-
lular behaviour. In one example, nanoscale-patterned surfaces with a 
square lattice geometry promoted enhanced maintenance of a stem 
cell phenotype in cultured MSCs25. ES cells are also acutely sensitive to 
nanoscale topography. Culture on nanoscale smooth surfaces promoted 
ES cell self-renewal and maintenance of pluripotency, whereas culture 
on nanoscale rough surfaces induced spontaneous differentiation26.
Engineered materials can address processing concerns related to 
industrial scale-up of stem cell production. Traditional 2D culture 
methods have high space and nutrient costs. Transitioning to 3D cul-
ture platforms can decrease the amount of surface area required for cell 
culture by stacking cells in the z-dimension. To this end, temperature- 
responsive 3D hydrogel systems have been developed for easy encapsu-
lation and expansion of pluripotent stem cells27. In addition to saving 
space, these hydrogels facilitate the collection of the expanded stem 
cells, which can be triggered by simply lowering the temperature to 
dissolve the polymers comprising the gel27. Successful commercialization 
of stem cell therapies will ultimately require large-scale cell culture 
technologies, such as bioreactors28,29. Many stem cells need to adhere 
to surfaces to maintain their stem cell state, requiring materials that can 
serve as microcarriers that provide both crucial chemical and mechan-
ical cues to cells cultured in large reactors. Good examples of these 
microcarriers are polymeric microbeads coated with matrix proteins as 
supports in stirred reactors30,31 and hydrogel microbeads that facilitate 
adhesion and expansion of pluripotent stem cells in reactor-compatible 
3D microenvironments32.
Altering cell state
Many of the proposed therapeutic applications of stem cells require 
controlled methods of altering cell state. For tissue-replacement ther-
apies using stem cells differentiated into mature cell types, highly effi-
cient differentiation into the target cell population is required to limit 
potential deleterious effects of co-transplanting either highly prolifer-
ative naive stem cells or other potentially antagonistic differentiated 
cells. This concern also applies to in vitro studies of cells derived from 
stem cells, as the presence of improperly differentiated cells can skew 
the results of bulk biochemical assays. Just as physical matrix properties 
can be used to preserve stem cell phenotype, these matrix properties 
can be tuned to direct and augment the differentiation of stem cells.
The first demonstration that physical interactions with the matrix 
could mediate changes in cell state arose from seminal studies of malig-
nant transformation in breast cancer. In 3D cultures of malignant breast 
cancer cells, reversion of the cells to a non-malignant phenotype was 
achieved by blocking specific integrins, the cell-surface receptors that 
connect the intracellular force-generation mechanisms of the cytoskel-
eton to the ECM33. Conversely, increasing matrix stiffness resulted in 
transformation of cells from a benign to a malignant phenotype34. 
These studies pointed to force generation by cells as a means for sensing 
and responding to the mechanical properties of the matrix.
In a ground-breaking study, the differentiation of MSCs was demon-
strated to be biased according to the stiffness of their underlying 
substrate35. MSCs cultured on stiff substrates similar to pre-calcified 
bone preferentially differentiated into bone cells, whereas MSCs cultured 
on intermediate stiffness similar to muscle tissue displayed a more 
muscle-like phenotype35. MSCs cultured on the most compliant matri-
ces, reminiscent of brain tissue, exhibited a neuron-like phenotype35.
The premise that matrix stiffness can alter cell state through force 
generation was corroborated in 3D materials, with an optimal stiffness 
mediating bone differentiation of MSCs through integrin clustering36. 
NSCs are also sensitive to matrix mechanics, preferentially differenti-
ating into neurons on very compliant substrates similar to the elastic-
ity of brain tissue and into supporting glial cells on stiff substrates37. 
Furthermore, matrix stiffness may have a crucial role in developmen-
tal processes, as compliant substrates have been shown to enhance 
the mesodermal differentiation potential of embryonic stem cells38. 
Beyond materials with a fixed stiffness, recent studies have implicated 
the time-dependent mechanical properties of viscoelastic materials as 
regulators of MSC differentiation39–41 (Box 1). At a fixed stiffness, MSC 
differentiation into a bone lineage was markedly enhanced in materials 
with a greater viscous character40.
Various other matrix parameters have been implicated in regulating 
how stem cells alter their cell state. For instance, matrix degradation 
by encapsulated MSCs was required for force generation and sub-
sequent differentiation into a bone lineage42. Cell–cell contacts can 
alter how MSCs respond to mechanical cues43. The cell-adhesive lig-
ands presented by the matrix also play an important part in directing 
differentiation. By controlling the temporal presentation of adhesive 
cues, MSC differentiation into cartilage44 and NSC differentiation into 
neurons45 were enhanced. Because the interactions among multiple 
types of cell-adhesive ligands are often complicated and nonlinear, 
combinatorial studies that include statistical approaches have been used 
to optimize ligand composition to promote differentiation46.
The reprogramming of somatic cells to generate patient-specific iPS 
cells is also highly sensitive to matrix interactions that modulate cell 
state. Traditional iPS cell reprogramming protocols use standard 2D 
tissue culture techniques. However, the properties of the culture sub-
strate can have a substantial impact on the efficiency of iPS cell colony 
generation. Forcing alignment of fibroblasts on substrates with aligned 
microgrooves mediated epigenetic modifications that increased repro-
gramming efficiency47. Transitioning to a 3D hydrogel platform also 
resulted in an increase in efficiency, with optimal matrix properties 
identified via high-throughput screens48. Such technologies have the 
potential to decrease the variability and cost associated with generating 
patient-specific stem cell therapies.
Improving cell delivery
Efficient transplantation and engraftment into host tissues remains a 
notable barrier to therapeutic success. Many cells die from the mechan-
ical damage that is caused by the injection process or fail to engraft in 
the relatively inhospitable microenvironment of damaged tissue. Recent 
advances in material-based cell delivery systems show promise in over-
coming these difficulties.
The simple act of injecting stem cells through a needle significantly 
reduces the viability of the injected cells49,50. As the solution in which 
the cells are suspended transitions from the syringe barrel to the needle, 
the fluid undergoes an increase in velocity of two orders of magnitude, 
exposing the cells to substantial extensional flows that can damage cell 
membranes49. The porous and highly hydrated nature of hydrogels is 
ideally suited to encapsulation of small molecules, growth factors or 
proteins together with stem cells. Injectable hydrogels have been devel-
oped to limit the membrane damage experienced by cells49,51. In these 
systems, the bulk of the hydrogel moves through the needle as a solid; 
only the edges near the needle wall flow like a liquid51. Therefore, the 
vast majority of the cells pass through the needle without experiencing 
damaging shear deformation through extensional flow.
Once injected into tissue, hydrogel carriers can also serve to retain 
the cells at the target location. Very few cells that are delivered via com-
monly used saline injections are retained in tissues for an extended 
period. Rather, the immune response of the host in the damaged 
tissue and the lack of adhesive sites lead to cell death and clearance. 
Accordingly, by increasing the stability of injected hydrogel carriers, 
1 7  M A Y  2 0 1 8  |  V O L  5 5 7  |  N A T U R E  |  3 3 7
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Review
insight
cell retention was increased at the injection site in a mouse model50. 
Moving towards therapeutic applications, injectable hydrogel-mediated 
delivery of endothelial progenitor cells to ischaemic rat hearts increased 
cell engraftment and decreased fibrosis compared to cells injected in 
saline52. Injectable hydrogels have also significantly improved the sur-
vival of iPS cell-derived oligodendrocytes delivered to injured rat spinal 
cords53.
Hydrogels can serve as immuno-protective barriers to shield the 
transplanted cells from host inflammation, overcoming a major diffi-
culty for the use of allogeneic cells for transplantation. A particularly 
poignant case in point is the treatment of diabetes by pancreatic cells 
that comprise the β-islets. The ideal material would protect the trans-
planted cells from immune clearance while permitting sustained insulin 
secretion. Early approaches met with limited clinical success in part 
because of immune responses to both animal-derived cells and the 
materials intended to protect these cells. Islets derived from human ES 
cells and hydrogel materials that elicit minimal inflammatory responses 
have provided new hope that islet transplantation can be used to cure 
type I diabetes54. The immuno-protective effect of hydrogels may also 
facilitate cell-mediated tissue regeneration, as hydrogel delivery of iPS 
cell-derived neural progenitors has been shown to decrease inflam-
mation and improve neuronal differentiation compared to saline 
delivery55.
To enhance the regenerative phenotypes of the delivered cells, some 
of the same matrix properties used to modulate cell state in culture can 
be incorporated into hydrogel delivery vehicles. For instance, differ-
entiation of MSCs towards a bone lineage is known to be mechano-
sensitive in vitro35,36, and transplanting MSCs in hydrogels of optimal 
stiffness enhanced bone regeneration in a critical-sized cranial defect 
model in vivo56. Furthermore, the recent observation that MSC differ-
entiation in vitro depends not only on the time-independent elasticity 
of the material, but also on the time-dependent viscoelasticity of the 
material39–41 (Box 1), also holds true when viscoelastic hydrogels are 
used to transplant MSCs in vivo. Cells delivered in hydrogels with a 
more viscous character exhibited increased bone regeneration in vivo 
compared to hydrogels of a comparable stiffness that were predomi-
nantly elastic57.
Hydrogel microstructure can also profoundly impact the fate of 
transplanted stem cells. Peptide amphiphile hydrogels are a classic 
example of a 3D cell culture material with a characteristic nanoscale 
fibrous architecture58. When these materials are subjected to heating 
and cooling, the peptides self-assemble to form noodles of aligned 
nanofibres that, when mixed in a calcium-rich suspension, can encap-
sulate cells together with growth factors59. These scaffolds increase cell 
viability, mediate cell alignment parallel to the hydrogel nanofibres, and 
have degradation rates that fit the time course of regeneration59. These 
features are ideally suited to MuSC delivery and have led to improved 
MuSC engraftment and muscle repair59.
Successful regeneration of functional tissue requires integration of 
transplanted stem cells with the host vasculature and innervation of 
the newly formed tissue. Neovascularization is critical for long-term 
survival of transplanted cells, as oxygen and nutrient transport require-
ments dictate that, in general, cells must be located within 100–200 μm 
of a capillary60. Classical strategies for vascularization have taken a 
bottom-up approach starting from the individual cellular components 
of blood vessels, relying on self-assembly of either host or exogenous 
endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells. Sequential delivery of 
angiogenic factors from biomaterial scaffolds resulted in initial 
vascular sprouting followed by vessel maturation culminating in a 
more robust vasculature61. Alternative approaches have used co-cul-
tures of endothelial cells, supporting stromal cells and tissue progenitor 
cells to generate vascularized tissues that were perfused by host 
vasculature when transplanted62. More recently, top-down techniques 
starting from the viewpoint of the finalized tissue, including 3D 
printing63 and two-photon lithography64, have been used to produce 
engineered constructs with user-defined vasculature. Innervation of 
engineered tissues can be achieved through delivery of growth factors, 
including classical neurotrophins such as nerve growth factor65 and 
angiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor66.
Improving human cell culture models
Cell transplantation for tissue regeneration is just one facet of personal-
ized medicine made possible by advances in stem cell biology. Patient-
derived iPS cells that can give rise to a myriad of differentiated cell types 
BOX 1 
Elasticity versus viscoelasticity
The term stiffness is commonly used to describe materials that exhibit elastic mechanical properties. When a force is applied to an elastic 
material, the force is retained in the material over time, similar to the way in which a strained rubber band provides constant resistance 
(see figure). The native ECM is not a purely elastic material, but rather exhibits both elastic (solid-like) and viscous (liquid-like) behaviour. 
Viscoelastic materials have time-dependent mechanical properties. For instance, natural ECM exhibits stress-relaxation, where resistance to 
an applied load is dissipated over time by rearrangement of the molecules that comprise the ECM (see Figure). This is analogous to a ball 
of putty deforming over time after a force is applied. Thus, characterizing materials used in cell culture by only stiffness may oversimplify 
the mechanisms by which cells can interact with bioengineered materials. Recent studies have highlighted the importance of accounting 
for viscoelasticity in stem cell differentiation. At a given stiffness, both in 2D and 3D, tuning the viscous characteristics of the material can 
enhance the differentiation of MSCs into bone39–41.
Deformation
Time
Elastic materials
Force
Molecules alter conformation,
but crosslinks remain ﬁxed
Viscoelastic materials
Crosslinks rearrange,
permitting dissipation of force
Force
Force
Time
Deformation
Time
Force
Time
3 3 8  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  5 5 7  |  1 7  M A Y  2 0 1 8
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Review
insight
have provided researchers unprecedented access to diverse healthy and 
diseased samples that can help to inform basic biology, drug screens 
and toxicology studies. A challenge has been the degree of differentia-
tion, as the differentiated cell types obtained are notoriously immature. 
Engineered cellular microenvironments offer hope.
Engineered matrices have been developed to support the complex 
3D architecture of organotypic cultures that are used to study devel-
opmental and disease processes. Synthetic hydrogels can replace the 
highly variable Matrigel substrate in primary24,67 as well as ES and iPS 
cell-derived68 intestinal organoids. Microfilament scaffolds improved 
cortical development in human brain organoids69, and controlling 
matrix stiffness and 2D versus 3D dimensionality permitted generation 
of amnion-like structures70.
Engineered human tissue constructs provide a novel platform to 
study disease progression and test potential therapeutic interventions. 
In a noteworthy example, human iPS cell-derived brain organoids 
produced by bioreactor culture and infected with Zika virus exhib-
ited reduced NSC proliferation, suggestive of a microcephaly-like 
phenotype71. Engineered tissues also enable the study of patient- 
specific genetic diseases. Filamentous matrices were used to generate 
cardiomyocytes from healthy and diseased patients to study contractile 
abnormalities in congenital cardiomyopathy72.
The patient-specific nature of iPS cell-derived cells makes them 
attractive platforms for screening drugs for potential toxicity on an 
individual patient level. For example, cardiomyocytes generated from 
patient-derived iPS cells recapitulate the heightened toxicity in response 
to chemotherapy seen in specific cancer patients73. Advances in engi-
neered microsystems have provided platforms to investigate the effects 
of drug treatment on iPS cell-derived cardiomyocyte function74,75. 
In addition to cardiac models, synthetic matrices have been used to 
improve the sensitivity of vascular toxicity screens76, and microphysi-
ological systems using iPS cell-derived kidney cells recapitulate drug- 
induced kidney toxicity77.
Future outlook
Although only a handful of stem cell therapies have currently been 
approved for use in patients, several exciting clinical applications 
are on the horizon that have benefitted from bioengineered materi-
als (Fig. 3). Rapid progress is being made in the use of organotypic 
cultures from patient-derived stem cells or tissue-specific stem cells in 
hydrogels24,67,68,70,78,79. This advance has led to the discovery of drugs 
to treat disease. A striking example highlights how patient-specific 
organoid cultures can profoundly impact clinical outcome. Intestinal 
organoids derived from patients with cystic fibrosis were grown in 3D 
hydrogels and used to screen drugs that could reverse the effects of the 
disease78. These culture models have uncovered life-changing therapies 
for patients suffering from very rare mutations, or orphan diseases, by 
rapidly and effectively assessing potential efficacy of costly drugs80. As 
a result, patients with cystic fibrosis who once had no treatment options 
have now been matched with drugs that address their disease in cul-
ture, ameliorate their symptoms, and markedly improve their quality of 
life80. In another example, 3D organoid cultures of cochlear stem cells 
enabled identification of a combination of small molecules that can 
stimulate expansion of these cells, which in turn differentiate into hair 
cells responsible for hearing79. This drug combination may enable the 
activation of endogenous stem cells to reverse hearing loss in patients81, 
a problem that confronts our increasingly aged population. Combining 
advances in hydrogel stem cell culture techniques with in silico screens 
can further increase the success rate of identifying new drugs targeting 
endogenous stem cells. Such an in silico approach was instrumental 
in identifying prostaglandin E2 as a natural inflammatory modulator 
capable of potently inducing of skeletal muscle stem cell expansion 
in vitro and muscle regeneration in vivo82. This approach capitalizes 
on the quiescent stem cells resident in muscle tissues throughout life 
that are dedicated to skeletal muscle repair. The function of these cells 
declines with age17. Identification of agents capable of rejuvenating the 
function of these endogenous stem cells opens the door to therapies 
that counter muscle wasting and restore strength, countering frailty, a 
major cause of morbidity with ageing.
Fully realizing the potential of personalized medicine provided by 
stem cells will require advances in bioengineered materials. The native 
stem cell microenvironment is highly dynamic, with temporally varying 
biochemical and biophysical properties. For example, tissue dysfunction 
in ageing and disease is often characterized by fibrosis, which reflects 
3D models of diseases to identify
patient-speciﬁc therapies
a
Platforms to identify drugs to target
endogenous stem cells
Differentiated
cells
Patient with a
genetic disease
Tissue biopsy
3D culture 
platform
Patient-speciﬁc 
organoid
Candidate 
drug screen
Identiﬁed drug
Drug treatment
Identiﬁed drug
Drug treatment
Transplantation
In silico drug screen
Stem cell isolation
Drug candidates
Cultured
stem cells
Engineered 
culture substrate
Screen for drug efﬁcacy
Patient-speciﬁc 
stem cells
Genetically corrected 
stem cells
To replace
damaged tissue
To address disease
mechanism
b
Engineered stem cells for
therapeutic transplantation
c
Fig. 3 | Impact of bioengineering on stem cell advances currently in 
the clinic or on the horizon. a, b, Hydrogel-based culture systems, such 
as intestinal organoid cultures, have enabled identification of promising 
drugs to treat cystic fibrosis78,80 (a), while others are used to target 
endogenous stem cells within tissues to restore hearing79,81 and augment 
strength17,82 (b). c, Treatments in clinical trials that could achieve greater 
efficacy by using engineered scaffolds to culture and transplant cells 
include ES and iPS cell-derived retinal epithelial cells to restore vision to 
macular degeneration patients2–4 and skin grafts of genetically corrected 
epidermal stem cells to save patients from a deadly skin blistering disease1.
1 7  M A Y  2 0 1 8  |  V O L  5 5 7  |  N A T U R E  |  3 3 9
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Review
insight
an increase in deposition and crosslinking of ECM proteins that leads 
to changes in the stiffness and composition of the cellular microenvi-
ronment. Given that cells are acutely sensitive to these signals, biomi-
metic materials are needed that permit incorporation of this dynamism 
to enable improved in vitro models of fibrosis. Recent studies have 
shown promise using light- and enzyme-mediated approaches to alter 
substrate stiffness and presentation of bioactive factors18,44,83–87. In par-
ticular, photo-mediated degradation of hydrogel crosslinks has enabled 
dynamic softening of cell culture substrates to study how stem cells 
respond to changes in their mechanical environment18. Conversely, 
photo-initiated polymerization has enabled in situ stiffening of 
hydrogels87, reminiscent of fibrotic disease states. Combining these 
approaches with genetic reporters commonly used in cell biology set-
tings may enable real-time investigation of signalling changes as a result 
of changes in matrix properties. However, existing chemical approaches 
to dynamically modulate matrix mechanics are commonly limited by 
the use of potentially mutagenic UV light, although chemistries that 
are compatible with two-photon and blue-light illumination have been 
developed44,83. Furthermore, the free radicals generated during pho-
to-initiated polymerization and stiffening may be toxic to sensitive stem 
cells. Future work directed at refining these approaches should focus 
on using less perturbative stimuli, such as visible light and exploring 
fully biocompatible chemistries, to permit completely orthogonal tun-
ing of the cellular microenvironment both in vitro and in vivo. Such 
dynamically tunable systems may improve the accuracy of preclinical 
models by better mimicking the native cellular niche and potentially 
enable modulation of tissue-engineered constructs in vivo to facilitate 
precise spatiotemporal control of morphogenic cues.
Furthermore, we must increase our understanding of the critical role 
of endogenous tissue-specific cell modifications of delivered materials. 
In addition to potential effects on endogenous stem cells, impacts on 
immune cells, which are crucial to efficacious regeneration, are of 
paramount importance. Many existing strategies for material design 
have focused on minimizing the immune response of the host at the 
site of delivery. This is particularly important for the transplanta-
tion of allogeneic, as opposed to patient-specific, stem cell thera-
pies. Initial widespread application of iPS cell therapies may utilize 
libraries of reprogrammed stem cell lines to enable close genetic 
matching between donor and recipient, similar to the way that organ 
donations are screened for a close antigenic match88. Such allogeneic 
approaches do not guarantee successful transplant engraftment and 
may still require immunosuppression, but may provide earlier access 
to stem cell therapies until systems for generating and validating 
patient-specific stem cells are implemented on a large scale. Lessons 
learned from the development of biomaterials for immuno-isolated 
tissue engineering, for instance in islet transplantation for diabetes 
treatment54, can be applied to generate materials that enhance stem 
cell engraftment and function by limiting deleterious local immune 
responses.
The direct participation of immune cells in the process of regener-
ation is increasingly recognized as essential to proper restoration of 
tissue function. Thus, in contrast to materials designed to evade an 
immune response, well-designed immunomodulatory materials could 
aid in the process of regeneration89,90. Although studies to date have 
mostly focused on using materials to direct the immune response to 
existing disease states, such as targeting cancer91,92 or induction of tol-
erance in autoimmune disorders93,94, lessons learned from program-
ming immune cells with biomaterials can be harnessed to improve 
stem cell therapeutic outcomes by orchestrating the immune response 
during regeneration. For instance, self-assembling peptide scaffolds 
have been used to modulate presentation of T cell epitopes, resulting 
in a dose-dependent response to activate different immune cell popu-
lations95. Similar material strategies may be used in tandem with stem 
cell-targeting factors to simultaneously regulate the immunological 
response during tissue regeneration. Initial results using materials to 
control cytokine delivery enabled temporal control over recruitment 
of different macrophage subtypes, which in turn secreted different 
angiogenic factors at appropriate morphogenic time points to enhance 
vascularization of tissue engineered constructs96.
As novel materials are developed for stem cell therapies, regulatory 
requirements must also be considered. Competing interests in designing 
materials that sufficiently recapitulate the complexities of the native 
matrix to control cell fate must be balanced with the need to develop 
scalable, cost-effective platforms for commercialization. For clinical 
use, materials must be fully defined and free of animal-derived compo-
nents. By synthesizing knowledge from fields such as materials science, 
chemistry, bioengineering and cell biology, the groundwork has been 
laid to propel stem cell-based therapies into the clinic.
Received: 15 January 2018; Accepted: 16 March 2018;  
Published online 16 May 2018.
	1.	
Hirsch, T. et al. Regeneration of the entire human epidermis using transgenic 
stem cells. Nature 551, 327–332 (2017).
	2.	
Schwartz, S. D. et al. Embryonic stem cell trials for macular degeneration: a 
preliminary report. Lancet 379, 713–720 (2012).
	3.	
Schwartz, S. D. et al. Human embryonic stem cell-derived retinal pigment 
epithelium in patients with age-related macular degeneration and Stargardt’s 
macular dystrophy: follow-up of two open-label phase 1/2 studies. Lancet 385, 
509–516 (2015).
	4.	
Mandai, M. et al. Autologous induced stem-cell-derived retinal cells for macular 
degeneration. N. Engl. J. Med. 376, 1038–1046 (2017).
	5.	
Trounson, A. & McDonald, C. Stem cell therapies in clinical trials: progress and 
challenges. Cell Stem Cell 17, 11–22 (2015).
	6.	
FDA warns about stem cell therapies. US Food & Drug Administration https://
www.fda.gov/ForConsumers/ConsumerUpdates/ucm286155.htm  
(FDA, 2017).
	7.	
Anderson, A. J., Piltti, K. M., Hooshmand, M. J., Nishi, R. A. & Cummings, B. J. 
Preclinical efficacy failure of human CNS-derived stem cells for use in the 
pathway study of cervical spinal cord injury. Stem Cell Reports 8, 249–263 
(2017).
	8.	
Marsh, S. E. et al. HuCNS-SC Human NSCs fail to differentiate, form ectopic 
clusters, and provide no cognitive benefits in a transgenic model of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Stem Cell Reports 8, 235–248 (2017).
	9.	
Rodin, S. et al. Long-term self-renewal of human pluripotent stem cells on 
human recombinant laminin-511. Nat. Biotechnol. 28, 611–615 (2010).
	10.	 Melkoumian, Z. et al. Synthetic peptide-acrylate surfaces for long-term 
self-renewal and cardiomyocyte differentiation of human embryonic stem cells. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 28, 606–610 (2010).
	11.	 Klim, J. R., Li, L., Wrighton, P. J., Piekarczyk, M. S. & Kiessling, L. L. A defined 
glycosaminoglycan-binding substratum for human pluripotent stem cells. Nat. 
Methods 7, 989–994 (2010).
	12.	 Villa-Diaz, L. G. et al. Synthetic polymer coatings for long-term growth of human 
embryonic stem cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 28, 581–583 (2010).
	13.	 Gobaa, S. et al. Artificial niche microarrays for probing single stem cell fate in 
high throughput. Nat. Methods 8, 949–955 (2011).
	14.	 Gefen, A. & Margulies, S. S. Are in vivo and in situ brain tissues mechanically 
similar? J. Biomech. 37, 1339–1352 (2004).
	15.	 Rho, J. Y., Ashman, R. B. & Turner, C. H. Young’s modulus of trabecular and 
cortical bone material: ultrasonic and microtensile measurements. J. Biomech. 
26, 111–119 (1993).
	16.	 Gilbert, P. M. et al. Substrate elasticity regulates skeletal muscle stem cell 
self-renewal in culture. Science 329, 1078–1081 (2010). 
This study demonstrated that muscle stem cells best maintained their stem 
cell phenotype and regenerative potential when cultured on substrates with 
stiffness approximating that of healthy muscle.
	17.	 Cosgrove, B. D. et al. Rejuvenation of the muscle stem cell population restores 
strength to injured aged muscles. Nat. Med. 20, 255–264 (2014).
	18.	 Yang, C., Tibbitt, M. W., Basta, L. & Anseth, K. S. Mechanical memory and dosing 
influence stem cell fate. Nat. Mater. 13, 645–652 (2014). 
This study used hydrogel substrates that were dynamically softened by light 
to demonstrate that mesenchymal stem cells can ‘remember’ the stiffness of 
the substrates on which they were cultured.
	19.	 Li, C. X. et al. MicroRNA-21 preserves the fibrotic mechanical memory of 
mesenchymal stem cells. Nat. Mater. 16, 379–389 (2017).
	20.	 Holst, J. et al. Substrate elasticity provides mechanical signals for the expansion 
of hemopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 28, 1123–1128 
(2010).
	21.	 Choi, J. S. & Harley, B. A. C. Marrow-inspired matrix cues rapidly affect early fate 
decisions of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Sci. Adv. 3, e1600455 
(2017).
	22.	 Chowdhury, F. et al. Soft substrates promote homogeneous self-renewal of 
embryonic stem cells via downregulating cell-matrix tractions. PLoS ONE 5, 
e15655 (2010).
	23.	 Madl, C. M. et al. Maintenance of neural progenitor cell stemness in 3D 
hydrogels requires matrix remodelling. Nat. Mater. 16, 1233–1242 (2017). 
These studies23,24,42 identified mechanisms by which matrix degradation can 
modulate stem cell fate.
	24.	 Gjorevski, N. et al. Designer matrices for intestinal stem cell and organoid 
culture. Nature 539, 560–564 (2016).
3 4 0  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  5 5 7  |  1 7  M A Y  2 0 1 8
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Review
insight
	25.	 McMurray, R. J. et al. Nanoscale surfaces for the long-term maintenance of 
mesenchymal stem cell phenotype and multipotency. Nat. Mater. 10, 637–644 
(2011).
	26.	 Chen, W. et al. Nanotopography influences adhesion, spreading, and 
self-renewal of human embryonic stem cells. ACS Nano 6, 4094–4103 
(2012).
	27.	 Lei, Y. & Schaffer, D. V. A fully defined and scalable 3D culture system for human 
pluripotent stem cell expansion and differentiation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
110, E5039–E5048 (2013).
	28.	 Zweigerdt, R., Andree, B., Kropp, C. & Kempf, H. in Bioreactors: Design, Operation 
and Novel Applications (ed. Mandenius, C.-F.) (Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2016).
	29.	 Li, Y. et al. Engineering-derived approaches for iPSC preparation, expansion, 
differentiation and applications. Biofabrication 9, 032001 (2017).
	30.	 Nie, Y., Bergendahl, V., Hei, D. J., Jones, J. M. & Palecek, S. P. Scalable culture and 
cryopreservation of human embryonic stem cells on microcarriers. Biotechnol. 
Prog. 25, 20–31 (2009).
	31.	 Kehoe, D. E., Jing, D., Lock, L. T. & Tzanakakis, E. S. Scalable stirred-suspension 
bioreactor culture of human pluripotent stem cells. Tissue Eng. Part A 16, 
405–421 (2010).
	32.	 Tabata, Y., Horiguchi, I., Lutolf, M. P. & Sakai, Y. Development of bioactive 
hydrogel capsules for the 3D expansion of pluripotent stem cells in bioreactors. 
Biomater. Sci. 2, 176–183 (2014).
	33.	 Weaver, V. M. et al. Reversion of the malignant phenotype of human breast cells 
in three-dimensional culture and in vivo by integrin blocking antibodies. J. Cell 
Biol. 137, 231–245 (1997).
	34.	 Paszek, M. J. et al. Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype. Cancer 
Cell 8, 241–254 (2005).
	35.	 Engler, A. J., Sen, S., Sweeney, H. L. & Discher, D. E. Matrix elasticity directs stem 
cell lineage specification. Cell 126, 677–689 (2006). 
This study identified substrate stiffness as a potent regulator of stem cell 
differentiation in 2D culture systems.
	36.	 Huebsch, N. et al. Harnessing traction-mediated manipulation of the cell/matrix 
interface to control stem-cell fate. Nat. Mater. 9, 518–526 (2010).
	37.	 Saha, K. et al. Substrate modulus directs neural stem cell behavior. Biophys. J. 
95, 4426–4438 (2008).
	38.	 Przybyla, L., Lakins, J. N. & Weaver, V. M. tissue mechanics orchestrate 
Wnt-dependent human embryonic stem cell differentiation. Cell Stem Cell 19, 
462–475 (2016).
	39.	 Cameron, A. R., Frith, J. E. & Cooper-White, J. J. The influence of substrate creep 
on mesenchymal stem cell behaviour and phenotype. Biomaterials 32, 
5979–5993 (2011). 
These studies39–41 demonstrated that the viscoelastic properties of 
engineered extracellular matrices can modulate stem cell differentiation.
	40.	 Chaudhuri, O. et al. Hydrogels with tunable stress relaxation regulate stem cell 
fate and activity. Nat. Mater. 15, 326–334 (2016).
	41.	 Das, R. K., Gocheva, V., Hammink, R., Zouani, O. F. & Rowan, A. E. Stress-
stiffening-mediated stem-cell commitment switch in soft responsive hydrogels. 
Nat. Mater. 15, 318–325 (2016).
	42.	 Khetan, S. et al. Degradation-mediated cellular traction directs stem cell fate in 
covalently crosslinked three-dimensional hydrogels. Nat. Mater. 12, 458–465 
(2013).
	43.	 Cosgrove, B. D. et al. N-cadherin adhesive interactions modulate matrix 
mechanosensing and fate commitment of mesenchymal stem cells. Nat. Mater. 
15, 1297–1306 (2016).
	44.	 Kloxin, A. M., Kasko, A. M., Salinas, C. N. & Anseth, K. S. Photodegradable 
hydrogels for dynamic tuning of physical and chemical properties. Science 324, 
59–63 (2009).
	45.	 Freeman, R. et al. Instructing cells with programmable peptide DNA hybrids. 
Nat. Commun. 8, 15982 (2017).
	46.	 Lam, J., Carmichael, S. T., Lowry, W. E. & Segura, T. Hydrogel design of 
experiments methodology to optimize hydrogel for iPSC-NPC culture. Adv. 
Healthc. Mater. 4, 534–539 (2015).
	47.	 Downing, T. L. et al. Biophysical regulation of epigenetic state and cell 
reprogramming. Nat. Mater. 12, 1154–1162 (2013).
	48.	 Caiazzo, M. et al. Defined three-dimensional microenvironments boost 
induction of pluripotency. Nat. Mater. 15, 344–352 (2016).
	49.	 Aguado, B. A., Mulyasasmita, W., Su, J., Lampe, K. J. & Heilshorn, S. C. Improving 
viability of stem cells during syringe needle flow through the design of hydrogel 
cell carriers. Tissue Eng. Part A 18, 806–815 (2012). 
This study identified shear-thinning hydrogels as material carriers to protect 
cells from mechanical damage during injection.
	50.	 Cai, L., Dewi, R. E. & Heilshorn, S. C. Injectable hydrogels with in situ double 
network formation enhance retention of transplanted stem cells. Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 25, 1344–1351 (2015).
	51.	 Yan, C. et al. Injectable solid peptide hydrogel as a cell carrier: effects of shear 
flow on hydrogels and cell payload. Langmuir 28, 6076–6087 (2012).
	52.	 Gaffey, A. C. et al. Injectable shear-thinning hydrogels used to deliver endothelial 
progenitor cells, enhance cell engraftment, and improve ischemic myocardium. 
J. Thorac. Cardiovasc. Surg. 150, 1268–1277 (2015).
	53.	 Führmann, T. et al. Injectable hydrogel promotes early survival of induced 
pluripotent stem cell-derived oligodendrocytes and attenuates longterm 
teratoma formation in a spinal cord injury model. Biomaterials 83, 23–36 (2016).
	54.	 Vegas, A. J. et al. Long-term glycemic control using polymer-encapsulated 
human stem cell-derived beta cells in immune-competent mice. Nat. Med. 22, 
306–311 (2016).
	55.	 Lam, J., Lowry, W. E., Carmichael, S. T. & Segura, T. Delivery of iPS-NPCs to the 
stroke cavity within a hyaluronic acid matrix promotes the differentiation of 
transplanted cells. Adv. Funct. Mater. 24, 7053–7062 (2014).
	56.	 Huebsch, N. et al. Matrix elasticity of void-forming hydrogels controls 
transplanted-stem-cell-mediated bone formation. Nat. Mater. 14, 1269–1277 
(2015). 
This study demonstrated that hydrogel stiffness can modulate stem cell 
behaviour in vivo.
	57.	 Darnell, M. et al. Substrate stress-relaxation regulates scaffold remodeling and 
bone formation in vivo. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 6, 1601185 (2017).
	58.	 Silva, G. A. et al. Selective differentiation of neural progenitor cells by 
high-epitope density nanofibers. Science 303, 1352–1355 (2004).
	59.	 Sleep, E. et al. Injectable biomimetic liquid crystalline scaffolds enhance 
muscle stem cell transplantation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, E7919–
E7928 (2017).
	60.	 Lovett, M., Lee, K., Edwards, A. & Kaplan, D. L. Vascularization strategies for 
tissue engineering. Tissue Eng. Part B Rev. 15, 353–370 (2009).
	61.	 Richardson, T. P., Peters, M. C., Ennett, A. B. & Mooney, D. J. Polymeric system 
for dual growth factor delivery. Nat. Biotechnol. 19, 1029–1034 (2001).
	62.	 Levenberg, S. et al. Engineering vascularized skeletal muscle tissue. Nat. 
Biotechnol. 23, 879–884 (2005).
	63.	 Miller, J. S. et al. Rapid casting of patterned vascular networks for perfusable 
engineered three-dimensional tissues. Nat. Mater. 11, 768–774 (2012).
	64.	 Arakawa, C. K., Badeau, B. A., Zheng, Y. & DeForest, C. A. Multicellular 
vascularized engineered tissues through user-programmable biomaterial 
photodegradation. Adv. Mater. 29, 1703156 (2017).
	65.	 Suuronen, E. J. et al. Functional innervation in tissue engineered models for in 
vitro study and testing purposes. Toxicol. Sci. 82, 525–533 (2004).
	66.	 Shvartsman, D. et al. Sustained delivery of VEGF maintains innervation and 
promotes reperfusion in ischemic skeletal muscles via NGF/GDNF signaling. 
Mol. Ther. 22, 1243–1253 (2014).
	67.	 DiMarco, R. L., Dewi, R. E., Bernal, G., Kuo, C. & Heilshorn, S. C. Protein-
engineered scaffolds for in vitro 3D culture of primary adult intestinal 
organoids. Biomater. Sci. 3, 1376–1385 (2015).
	68.	 Cruz-Acuña, R. et al. Synthetic hydrogels for human intestinal organoid 
generation and colonic wound repair. Nat. Cell Biol. 19, 1326–1335 (2017).
	69.	 Lancaster, M. A. et al. Guided self-organization and cortical plate formation in 
human brain organoids. Nat. Biotechnol. 35, 659–666 (2017).
	70.	 Shao, Y. et al. Self-organized amniogenesis by human pluripotent stem cells in 
a biomimetic implantation-like niche. Nat. Mater. 16, 419–425 (2017).
	71.	 Qian, X. et al. Brain-region-specific organoids using mini-bioreactors for 
modeling ZIKV exposure. Cell 165, 1238–1254 (2016).
	72.	 Ma, Z. et al. Three-dimensional filamentous human diseased cardiac tissue 
model. Biomaterials 35, 1367–1377 (2014).
	73.	 Burridge, P. W. et al. Human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived 
cardiomyocytes recapitulate the predilection of breast cancer patients to 
doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity. Nat. Med. 22, 547–556 (2016).
	74.	 Lind, J. U. et al. Instrumented cardiac microphysiological devices via 
multimaterial three-dimensional printing. Nat. Mater. 16, 303–308 (2017).
	75.	 Ribeiro, A. J. S. et al. Contractility of single cardiomyocytes differentiated from 
pluripotent stem cells depends on physiological shape and substrate stiffness. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 12705–12710 (2015).
	76.	 Nguyen, E. H. et al. Versatile synthetic alternatives to Matrigel for vascular 
toxicity screening and stem cell expansion. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 1, 0096 (2017).
	77.	 Musah, S. et al. Mature induced-pluripotent-stem-cell-derived human 
podocytes reconstitute kidney glomerular-capillary-wall function on a chip. Nat. 
Biomed. Eng. 1, 0069 (2017).
	78.	 Dekkers, J. F. et al. Characterizing responses to CFTR-modulating drugs using 
rectal organoids derived from subjects with cystic fibrosis. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 
344ra84 (2016).
	79.	 McLean, W. J. et al. Clonal expansion of Lgr5-positive cells from mammalian 
cochlea and high-purity generation of sensory hair cells. Cell Rep. 18, 
1917–1929 (2017).
	80.	 Saini, A. Cystic fibrosis patients benefit from mini guts. Cell Stem Cell 19, 
425–427 (2016).
	81.	 Lyon, J. Hearing restoration: a step closer? J. Am. Med. Assoc. 318, 319–320 
(2017).
	82.	 Ho, A. T. V. et al. Prostaglandin E2 is essential for efficacious skeletal muscle 
stem-cell function, augmenting regeneration and strength. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 114, 6675–6684 (2017).
	83.	 Rosales, A. M., Vega, S. L., DelRio, F. W., Burdick, J. A. & Anseth, K. S. Hydrogels 
with reversible mechanics to probe dynamic cell microenvironments. Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. 56, 12132–12136 (2017).
	84.	 DeForest, C. A. & Tirrell, D. A. A photoreversible protein-patterning approach for 
guiding stem cell fate in three-dimensional gels. Nat. Mater. 14, 523–531 
(2015).
	85.	 Lee, T. T. et al. Light-triggered in vivo activation of adhesive peptides regulates 
cell adhesion, inflammation and vascularization of biomaterials. Nat. Mater. 14, 
352–360 (2015).  
This study demonstrated the feasibility of using light as a stimulus to 
dynamically modify biomaterial properties in vivo.
	86.	 Cambria, E. et al. Covalent modification of synthetic hydrogels with bioactive 
proteins via sortase-mediated ligation. Biomacromolecules 16, 2316–2326 
(2015).
	87.	 Guvendiren, M. & Burdick, J. A. Stiffening hydrogels to probe short- and 
long-term cellular responses to dynamic mechanics. Nat. Commun. 3, 792 
(2012).
	88.	 Turner, M. et al. Toward the development of a global induced pluripotent stem 
cell library. Cell Stem Cell 13, 382–384 (2013).
	89.	 Rice, J. J. et al. Engineering the regenerative microenvironment with 
biomaterials. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 2, 57–71 (2013).
1 7  M A Y  2 0 1 8  |  V O L  5 5 7  |  N A T U R E  |  3 4 1
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Review
insight
	90.	 Vishwakarma, A. et al. Engineering immunomodulatory biomaterials to tune the 
inflammatory response. Trends Biotechnol. 34, 470–482 (2016).
	91.	 Ali, O. A., Emerich, D., Dranoff, G. & Mooney, D. J. In situ regulation of DC 
subsets and T cells mediates tumor regression in mice. Sci. Transl. Med. 1, 
8ra19 (2009).
	92.	 Hori, Y., Stern, P. J., Hynes, R. O. & Irvine, D. J. Engulfing tumors with synthetic 
extracellular matrices for cancer immunotherapy. Biomaterials 30, 6757–6767 
(2009).
	93.	 Getts, D. R. et al. Microparticles bearing encephalitogenic peptides induce T-cell 
tolerance and ameliorate experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Nat. 
Biotechnol. 30, 1217–1224 (2012).
	94.	 Yoon, Y. M. et al. A combination hydrogel microparticle-based vaccine prevents 
type 1 diabetes in non-obese diabetic mice. Sci. Rep. 5, 13155 (2015).
	95.	 Pompano, R. R. et al. Titrating T-cell epitopes within self-assembled vaccines 
optimizes CD4+ helper T cell and antibody outputs. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 3, 
1898–1908 (2014).
	96.	 Spiller, K. L. et al. Sequential delivery of immunomodulatory cytokines to 
facilitate the M1-to-M2 transition of macrophages and enhance vascularization 
of bone scaffolds. Biomaterials 37, 194–207 (2015). 
This study demonstrated that regulation of the host immune response can 
enhance regeneration in response to engineered constructs.
Acknowledgements C.M.M. is supported by the Stanford ChEM-H 
Interdisciplinary Postdoctoral Training Program in Quantitative Mechanobiology. 
S.C.H. acknowledges support from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) (U19 
AI116484 and R21 HL13804201), the National Science Foundation (DMR 
1508006) and the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine (CIRM) (RT3-
07948). H.M.B. acknowledges support from the NIH (R01 AG020961, R01 
AR063963, R01 NS089533, and R01 HG00967401), CIRM (DISC1-10036), the 
American Heart Association (17CSA33590101), the Baxter Foundation, and the 
Li Ka Shing Foundation.
Author contributions C.M.M., S.C.H. and H.M.B. all participated in the planning, 
writing and editing of the article.
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to H.M.B.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
3 4 2  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  5 5 7  |  1 7  M A Y  2 0 1 8
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

===== Mahuzier2018_NatComm_EpendymalCilia+Actin =====
ARTICLE
Ependymal cilia beating induces an actin network
to protect centrioles against shear stress
Alexia Mahuzier1, Asm Shihavuddin1,6, Clémence Fournier2,7, Pauline Lansade1, Marion Faucourt1,
Nikita Menezes1, Alice Meunier1, Meriem Garfa-Traoré3, Marie-France Carlier2, Raphael Voituriez4,5,
Auguste Genovesio
1, Nathalie Spassky1 & Nathalie Delgehyr1
Multiciliated ependymal cells line all brain cavities. The beating of their motile cilia con-
tributes to the ﬂow of cerebrospinal ﬂuid, which is required for brain homoeostasis and
functions. Motile cilia, nucleated from centrioles, persist once formed and withstand the
forces produced by the external ﬂuid ﬂow and by their own cilia beating. Here, we show that a
dense actin network around the centrioles is induced by cilia beating, as shown by the
disorganisation of the actin network upon impairment of cilia motility. Moreover, disruption
of the actin network, or speciﬁcally of the apical actin network, causes motile cilia and their
centrioles to detach from the apical surface of ependymal cell. In conclusion, cilia beating
controls the apical actin network around centrioles; the mechanical resistance of this actin
network contributes, in turn, to centriole stability.
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w
OPEN
1 Cilia biology and neurogenesis, Institut de biologie de l’Ecole normale supérieure (IBENS), Ecole normale supérieure, CNRS, INSERM, PSL Université Paris,
75005 Paris, France. 2 Biochimie Biophysique et Biologie Structurale, I2BC, CNRS, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France. 3 Cell Imaging Platform, INSERM US24
Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, Paris Descartes Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Paris, France. 4 Laboratoire de Physique Théorique de la Matière
Condensée, CNRS/UPMC, Paris, France. 5 Laboratoire Jean Perrin, CNRS/UPMC, Paris, France. 6Present address: Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs, Lyngby, Denmark. 7Present address: UPMC University Paris 06 UM 1127, Inserm U1127, CNRS
UMR7225, ICM, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France. These authors contributed equally: Nathalie Spassky, Nathalie Delgehyr. Correspondence and requests
for materials should be addressed to N.S. (email: spassky@biologie.ens.fr) or to N.D. (email: delgehyr@biologie.ens.fr)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2279 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;

M
ulticiliated cells ensure the displacement of liquid or
mucus, which perform essential functions in the
organism, such as the displacement of oocytes in fal-
lopian tubes, the clearance of mucus from the airways, the stirring
of luminal ﬂuid in the efferent ducts or the circulation of cere-
brospinal ﬂuid (CSF) in brain ventricles1,2. Multiciliated cells in
the brain, called ependymal cells, line all brain ventricles and
form a protective barrier3. They also contribute to the neural stem
cell niche4. Ependymal cilia beating ensures the CSF ﬂow
necessary for brain homoeostasis, toxin washout, delivery of
signalling molecules and orientation of the migration of new-
born neurons5. Defective cilia motility is associated with hydro-
cephalus, which increases pressure in the skull due to an increase
in CSF in the ventricular cavities6. Ependymal cells are generated
from radial glial cells during early postnatal stages7. Their
regeneration during aging or under pathological conditions is
limited8, resulting in the partial loss of protection of the brain
parenchyma in aged patients9,10. Most ependymal cells persist,
however, throughout life.
Cilia beating results in mechanical constraints on the cells. For
example, in the multiciliated organism Tetrahymena thermophila,
if the ultrastructure of centrioles is abnormal, the forces exerted at
the base of beating cilia lead to centriole disassembly11,12. To
determine how centrioles withstand these mechanical constraints
lifelong, we focussed on the potential role of the actin cytoske-
leton13. The actin cytoskeleton of multiciliated cells has been the
focus of detailed analysis. Notably, in the multiciliated epidermal
cells of Xenopus larvae, it was demonstrated that two inter-
connected apical and subapical actin networks form a 3D-
network that connects the centrioles, thus contributing to their
spacing and to the synchronisation of cilia beating14. The actin
cytoskeleton is assembled and organised progressively at the
apical surface of multiciliated progenitor cells15–19. It contributes
to the intercalation of the multiciliated cells in the Xenopus epi-
dermis17,18, guides the apical migration and docking of newly
formed centrioles in the plasma membrane14–16,20,21 and parti-
cipates to ciliogenesis16. However, how this actin cytoskeleton
network is assembled in ependymal cells and what its direct links
with centriole stability are have not been addressed so far. In this
study, we describe the coordination between ciliary beating and
actin organisation that actively contributes to the protection of
ependymal cilia and centrioles against the shear stress generated
by ciliary beating and the associated ﬂuid ﬂow.
Results
Actin assembles around centrioles during development. To
investigate when and how the actin network develops around
ependymal cell centrioles, lateral ventricular walls were immu-
nostained with antibodies against cilia, centrioles and ﬁlamentous
actin (F-actin) at different stages during motile cilia formation.
The same area was analysed throughout the paper (Fig. 1a). F-
actin is localised at cell borders at all stages (Fig. 1a). In cells in
which centrioles are not yet ciliated (post-natal day 4, P4), actin
staining at the apical surface (deﬁned by the localisation of the
distal centriolar marker FOP22) is scarce and diffuse. The staining
intensiﬁes all over the cell cortex as ciliation begins (P6). As
motile cilia elongate during cell maturation, actin accumulates in
the centriolar patch (Fig. 1a, b), and is positioned asymmetrically
at the front of mature ependymal cells23 (P15). At this stage, the
actin network is thicker, extending from the apical surface of the
cells (apical actin) to ~1 μm below (subapical actin). Note that at
P15, the apical actin network consists of thick actin cables
oriented towards the rear of the cell, whereas the subapical net-
work contains smaller dot-like actin-positive structures in the
centriolar patch (P15, Fig. 1a).
To characterise the morphology of the apical and subapical
actin networks connected to centrioles in mature ependymal cells
(P15), we used high resolution microscopy (STED, Fig. 1c, d) and
3D-modelling (Fig. 1e). Co-staining of actin with markers of the
distal appendages (Cep16424) or the distal lumen of the centrioles
(centrin25) revealed that the apical actin network is distributed
around the centrioles and extends from the distal appendages to
the centrin-positive distal portion of the centrioles (Fig. 1c, f). We
occasionally observed apical actin ﬁlaments surrounding clusters
of centrioles, the distal appendages of which were merged
(Fig. 1d). Ependymal centrioles or clusters of centrioles are
anchored in the ciliary pocket, a depression of the plasma
membrane26, suggesting that the apical actin ﬁlaments are
organised at this level. Co-staining of actin with markers of the
proximal
end
of
the
centrioles
(Akap45027)
and
rootlets
(Rootletin28) shows that the subapical actin network extends
from the proximal end of the centrioles to their rootlets (Fig. 1c,
f). The apical and subapical actin networks overlap partially along
the Z-axis and link together individual or clusters of centrioles
(Fig. 1e). Therefore, in multiciliated ependymal cells, centrioles
are embedded in a three-dimensional actin structure from their
distal appendages to their rootlets. The assembly and organisation
of this complex actin network in the centriolar patch correlates
with the elongation of motile cilia (Fig. 1a, b). It is unclear,
however, whether ciliogenesis induces the assembly of the actin
network at the centriolar patch or, conversely, whether the
increase in actin assembly leads to cilia elongation.
Cilia beating induces apical actin assembly at centrioles. To
assess the role of cilia in actin organisation, we studied mice in
which genes essential for the development of cilia, such as Kif3A29
(a subunit of the motor protein kinesin-2) or Ift8830 (a homo-
logue intraﬂagellar transport protein 88) or for cilia motility, such
as hydin31 (that causes defects in the central pair of motile cilia
when mutated) or Lrrc6 (axonemal dynein subunit32–34) were
mutated or depleted.
We used hGFAP-Cre; Kif3A conditional knocked out mutant
mice (Kif3A-cKO) that have normal primary cilia in ependymal
cell progenitors, but are virtually devoid of motile cilia on the
lateral wall of the lateral ventricles35 (Supplementary Figure 1a).
F-actin ﬂuorescence immunostaining showed that actin was
distributed homogeneously on the apical cell surface in mature
Kif3A-cKO ependymal cells, whereas an additional apical actin
network was observed in the centriolar patch in controls (Fig. 2a,
b). In the Ift88 conditional mutant (Ift88-cKO), similar results
were obtained (Supplementary Figure 1b). Apical actin enrich-
ment at the centriolar patch correlates with cilia elongation
(Fig. 1a, b) and two independent mutant mice in which motile
cilia are absent, lack the apical centriolar actin network (Fig. 2a, b;
Supplementary Figure 1b). Thus, these results indicate that motile
cilia are a pre-requisite for actin enrichment at the centriolar
patch.
Unlike the apical actin network, the subapical centriolar
distribution of actin was identical in the wild-types and the
ciliary mutants (Fig. 2a, c; Supplementary Figure 1b). Therefore,
the organisation of the subapical actin network around centrioles
is independent of both motile cilia and enrichment of the apical
actin network in the centriolar patch. Since both ciliary mutant
mice (Kif3A-cKO and Ift88-cKO) are devoid of motile cilia, it is
unclear whether the cilia themselves or their motility is required
for assembly of apical actin around the centrioles. To determine
whether cilia motility is required, we used hydin mutant mice that
have stiff vibrating cilia31. Immunostaining of the cilia in hydin
mutant mice conﬁrmed that mature (P15) ependymal cells extend
cilia
that
are
normal
in
terms
of
length
and
density
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2279 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w| www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Apical actin enrichment at centrioles
(centriolar patch/ remaining surface)
Apical
c
d
Actin Cep164
Actin Cep164 Akap450
Actin Rootletin
b
Actin Akap450
Apical
Subapical
Apical actin
Subapical actin
Actin Centrin
P15
Akap450
Cep164
Centriole
Actin
Proximal markers
3D modelling
STED
STED
P15
 Distal markers
A
P
V
D
Centrin
Rootletin
e
Actin Cep164
Centrin
Actin Centrin
Apical
Subapical
Cilium
f
z
x
y
***
***
Apical actin
Subapical actin
P15
Cilium
a
P6
P15
P4
Centrioles Cilia
Cilia <5 µm
Mature, cilia >5 µm
Not ciliated
Centrioles
Apical
Subapical
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Actin
Actin
No cilia
>5 µm
<5 µm
Cilia length
Fig. 1 Formation of a dense actin network at the centriolar patch during ependymal cell differentiation a F-actin (phalloidin, grey), centrioles (FOP, red) and
cilia (GT335, green) in whole mounts of lateral ventricular walls at postnatal days 4 (P4), P6 and P15 at the apical level (colocalising with FOP staining) and
subapical level; the actin network in the centriolar patch thickens as motile cilia grow; cell borders and centriolar patches are outlined with dashed white
and red lines, respectively. Arrows point to long actin ﬁlaments. On the right, a sagittal view of the lateral ventricular wall and the region of interest
analysed throughout the paper (red square); A: Anterior, P: Posterior, D: Dorsal, V: Ventral. b Ratio of mean phalloidin ﬂuorescence intensities in the
centriolar patch (red dashed lines in a) and on the remaining cell surface (white minus red dashed lines) as a function of ciliary length. Error bars represent
the sem of n = 112 cells from three mice; P-values were determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison test; ***P ≤0.0001. c–e
High resolution microscopy (STED) of mature ependymal cells on P15 whole-mount lateral ventricular walls. c Staining of F-actin (phalloidin, grey) and
centriole distal markers, Cep164 (distal appendages, red) or Centrin2-GFP (distal lumen, yellow) that colocalise with the apical actin network, or
centriole proximal markers Akap450 (pericentriolar material, green) or Rootletin (rootlets, cyan) that colocalise with the subapical actin network. d Zoom-
in of Cep164 (red)-, Centrin2-GFP (yellow)- and F-actin (phalloidin, grey)-labelled mature ependymal cells; note a cluster of two centrioles with merged
distal appendages (arrowhead) surrounded by actin. e Three-dimensional modelling of Cep164 (red)-, Akap450 (green)- and F-actin-(grey)-positive
centrioles showing the links between the apical and subapical networks, and between neighbouring centrioles. f Model of centrioles with their associated
actin bundles positioned according to the markers used in this study. Scale bars=5 μm in a and 1 μm in c, d
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2279 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3

(Supplementary Figure 1a, c). Line scans (kymograms) and
quantiﬁcation of cilia beating frequency on side views of videos of
motile cilia showed that the beating frequency was reduced in
hydin mutant mice (Fig. 2d) and its amplitude abnormal
(Supplementary Figure 1d), conﬁrming that hydin mutant cilia
are stiff and beat slowly31. F-actin immunostaining in mature
ependymal cells in hydin mutants showed that the subapical actin
network organisation was unchanged compared to control cells
(Fig. 2a, c), but the apical actin enrichment in the centriolar patch
was decreased (Fig. 2a, b), suggesting that cilia motility is required
for the apical enrichment of actin around the centrioles of mature
ependymal cells.
To
conﬁrm
whether
cilia
motility
is
required
for
the
enrichment in apical actin at the centriolar patch, we blocked
cilia motility by using an shRNA against Lrrc6, a subunit of
axonemal dynein required for this motility32–34. We validated this
strategy by the observation of a decrease in the frequency of cilia
beating with high speed video microscopy on Lrrc6-depleted
ns
ns
ns
ns
Beating frequency (Hz)
WT
Kif3A cKO
Centrioles
Hydin
Apical actin
Subapical actin
P15
NiCl2 1 mM
WT
Hydin
NiCl2
***
***
***
***
Depletions
Subpical actin
enrichment at centrioles
(centriolar patch/remaining surface)
PBS
Explants
shLrrc6
shCtrl
Depletions
Mutants
Explants
Mutants
Depletions
Explants
Mutants
50 ms
Brain slices
Cell culture
shCtrl
shLrrc6
Brain slices
Cell culture
Apical actin
enrichment at centrioles
(centriolar patch/remaining surface)
0
1
2
3
WT
Kif3A
cKO
Hydin
shCtrl shLrrc6
PBS
0
WT
Kif3A
cKO
Hydin
shCtrl shLrrc6
PBS
1
2
3
WT
0
20
40
60
Hydin
shCtrl shLrrc6
NiCl2
1 mM
NiCl2
1 mM
***
***
***
NiCl2
1 mM
a
b
c
d
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2279 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w| www.nature.com/naturecommunications

ependymal cells in culture36,37 (Fig. 2d). Electroporation of the
shRNA construct in the lateral ventricles of new-born mice37,38
and immunostaining of cilia at P15 showed that Lrrc6 depletion
did not affect cilia length and density (Supplementary Figure 1a,
c). Analysis of F-actin immunostaining at P15 revealed that, in
absence of Lrrc6, apical actin was not enriched at the centriolar
patch whereas the organisation of subapical actin remained
unaffected (Fig. 2a–c). We also measured F-actin ﬂuorescence
intensity at the apical and subapical levels compared to
surrounding none-transfected cells, and showed that both apical
and subapical actin levels are decreased in Lrrc6-depleted mature
ependymal cells (Supplementary Figure 1e, f). Altogether, our
results suggest that cilia motility is required for the enrichment of
apical actin at the centriolar patch and for the assembly of a
subpopulation of actin cables at the apical and subapical levels.
To assess whether cilia beating is also required to actively
maintain the apical actin enrichment at the centriolar patch, we
blocked cilia beating in explants of the lateral ventricular wall of
P15 mice, which are lined with ependymal cells bearing motile
cilia and fully developed actin networks. To block cilia beating, we
used NiCl2, which has a direct effect on axonemal dynein11,12,39.
Video-recording of treated cilia conﬁrmed that the cilia stopped
beating in the treated cells (Fig. 2d; Supplementary Figure 1d),
whereas cilia length was unaffected (Supplementary Figure 1a, c).
F-actin immunostaining showed, however, a signiﬁcant decrease
in apical but not subapical actin enrichment at the centriolar
patch (relative to control explants treated with PBS), when cilia
motility was stopped (Fig. 2a–c).
Thus, using genetics or pharmacological treatments, we show
that cilia motility is required to initiate and maintain the apical
actin enrichment at the centriolar patch.
Actin maintains centrioles in mature ependymal cells. To assess
the role in centriolar function of actin assembled around cen-
trioles, we treated P15 explants of lateral ventricular wall, lined
with ependymal cells bearing motile cilia and assembled actin
networks, with cytochalasin-D, which progressively depoly-
merised the actin network at both the apical and subapical levels
and at cell borders, in a dose- and time-dependent manner
(Fig. 3a). Neither the length of the motile cilia (Supplementary
Figure 2a, b) nor their beating frequency (Fig. 3b) was sig-
niﬁcantly affected, even by a long treatment with a high con-
centration (2 μM) of cytochalasin-D. However, cells, cilia tufts
and centriolar patches were smaller after cytochalasin-D treat-
ment (Fig. 3a; Supplementary Figure 2a, c) and the inter-
centriolar distance was slightly decreased (Supplementary Fig-
ure 2d), as previously described in multiciliated Xenopus cells14.
In addition, the number of centrioles also decreased signiﬁcantly
in cytochalasin-D-treated explants (Fig. 3c, d). This decrease was
time- and dose-dependent (Fig. 3c, e, f). The decrease in the size
of the centriolar patch observed after actin disruption (Supple-
mentary Figure 2c) was thus due to both the loss of centrioles and
the decrease in the inter-centriolar distance. Altogether, actin
contributes to centriole maintenance and spacing in ependymal
cells.
The apical actin contributes to centriole maintenance. To
determine which actin network, apical or subapical, is required
for centriole maintenance, we sought of actin nucleators speciﬁ-
cally involved in these networks. There are three different families
of actin nucleators, the Arp2/3 complex that nucleates branched
actin ﬁlaments and the formins and WH2 (Wiskott Aldrich
syndrome protein homology 2)-containing proteins that both
nucleate linear actin ﬁlaments40. We treated explants of lateral
walls of P15 animals, lined with ependymal cells bearing motile
cilia and assembled actin networks, with speciﬁc inhibitors of the
Arp2/3 complex (CK66641) or formins (SMIFH242) to assess their
speciﬁc contribution to the actin structures of mature ependymal
cells. Since we did not observe obvious effect on actin organisa-
tion after CK666 treatment (12 h at 100μM, Fig. 2e), we focused
on formins. With commercially available antibodies, we found
several formins, namely Fhod1, Fmn1, Daam1 and mDia1 that
co-localised with centriole markers in ependymal cells (Fig. 4a),
as previously shown in multiciliated Xenopus epidermal cells for
Daam1 and Fmn117,43. Interestingly, compared to cytochalasin-D
treatment that affected both the apical and subapical actin net-
work (Fig. 3a), SMIFH2-treatment led to a strong decrease of the
apical actin enrichment in the centriolar patch with no major
effect on the organisation of the subapical actin network
(Fig. 4b–d). These results suggest that formins contribute at least
to the maintenance of the apical actin enrichment at the cen-
triolar patch. Interestingly, unlike the effect of cytochalasin-D
treatment, no difference in the inter-centriolar distance was
observed after SMIFH2-treatment (Supplementary Figure 2f),
suggesting that the distance between centrioles is, as previously
suggested14, mainly regulated by the subapical actin organisation
(compare Supplementary Figs. 2d and 2f). Formin inhibition as
well as actin depolymerisation with cytochalasin-D did not affect
cilia length or beating (Supplementary Figure 2a, b; Fig. 4e).
Noteworthy, SMIFH2-treatment induced smaller centriolar pat-
ches (Supplementary Figure 2g) with decreased number of cen-
trioles relative to DMSO treated explants (Fig. 4f, g). Altogether,
these results suggest that, in mature ependymal cells, apical actin
in the centriolar patch helps maintain the correct number of
centrioles.
To conﬁrm that the apical actin network is implicated in
centriole maintenance, we examined the role of the actin binding
protein Cordon-Bleu (Cobl), another actin regulator involved in
the establishment of apical actin structures such as microvilli44–
46. Cobl nucleates and severs linear actin ﬁlaments in vitro and is
Fig. 2 Cilia beating is required for the formation and maintenance of the apical actin network at the centriolar patch a F-actin (phalloidin, grey) and
centrioles (FOP, red) in mature ependymal cells (P15) in ciliary mutant mice (Kif3A cKO or hydin) and wild-type (WT) mice transfected with shRNA
(shCtrl, Control or shLrrc6 directed against the axonemal dynein subunit Lrrc6) or explants of WT ventricular walls treated for 12 h with PBS or 1 mM NiCl2
to block cilia beating; cell borders and centriolar patches are outlined with dashed white and red lines, respectively. Apical actin enriched in the centriolar
patch is reduced in ciliary mutants and after NiCl2 treatment, whereas the subapical network appears unaffected. Scale bar=5 μm. b, c Ratio of mean
phalloidin ﬂuorescence intensities in the centriolar patches (red dashed lines) and in the rest of the cell surface (white minus red dashed lines) at the apical
(b) and subapical (c) levels. Error bars represent the sem of: at the apical level, n = 150 cells for WT, 85 for Kif3A-cKO and 103 for hydin mutants; 25 for
shCtrl, 32 for shLrrc6, 53 for PBS- and 122 for NiCl2-treated explants; at the subapical level, n = 91 cells for WT, 50 for Kif3A-cKO and 51 for hydin mutants;
22 for shCtrl, 32 for shLrrc6,50 for PBS- and 55 for NiCl2-treated explants; from three independent experiments; P-values were determined by one-way
ANOVA followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison test; ***P ≤0.0001; ns, not signiﬁcant P > 0.05. d Representative kymographs (200 ms) of motile cilia in
brain slices from control (WT) or hydin mutant mice or an explant from a WT ventricular wall treated for 12 h with 1 mM NiCl2 or of motile cilia of
ependymal cells in culture transfected with shCtrl or shLrrc6. The graph shows the cilia beating frequency (Hz). Error bars represent the sem of n = 40
cells for WT and hydin mutants; n = 54 cells for NiCl2-treated explants, n = 62 cilia for shCtrl; n = 47 cilia for shLrrc6; from three independent experiments;
P-values were determined with the Mann–Whitney test; ***P ≤0.0001
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2279 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5

mostly expressed in mammalian brain tissue47,48 and in ciliated
epithelial cells in zebraﬁsh49. We ﬁrst veriﬁed that Cobl is
expressed in differentiating ependymal cells by semi-quantitative
RT-PCR in different phases of ependymal cell differentiation in
culture36,37. Increased expression of Cobl correlated with an
increase in the number of multiciliated cells (Supplementary
Figure 3a). In the absence of an antibody against mouse Cobl, we
localised the Cobl protein in ependymal cells by electroporating
the lateral ventricular walls in new-born mice37,38 with a Cobl-
DsRed construct and determined its location at P15. F-actin
labelling in mature ependymal cells showed that the Cobl-DsRed
is expressed in the apical but not subapical actin network
(Fig. 5a).
We then examined, whether Cobl depletion disrupts the apical
actin network during ependymal cell development by electro-
porating an shRNA against mouse Cobl in the brain ventricles at
birth. Two shRNA were designed and validated (Supplementary
Figure 3b–d, and see below). In immature ependymal cells (P6),
no defects in actin organisation or centriole formation, migration
or docking were observed in Cobl-depleted cells, showing that
Cobl is not needed in early stages of multiciliated ependymal cell
development (Supplementary Figure 3e–i). In mature ependymal
cells, however, Cobl-depletion signiﬁcantly decreased actin levels
relative to control shRNAs (Fig. 5b–d), and more highly in the
apical compared to subapical level. Cobl is, therefore, required for
the maintenance of the apical actin network in mature ependymal
DMSO
Centrin-GFP
40 h
P15
2 µM
Centrin-GFP
Time
Dose
50 ms
DMSO
CytoD
40 h
Beating frequency (Hz)
ns
Fold change in centriole number
***
Centriole number
*
*
***
***
***
Fold change in centriole number
DMSO
0
20
40
60
CytoD
2 µm
DMSO
0
50
100
DMSO
CytoD
2 µm
0.5
0.7
0.9
1.1
CytoD
1 µm
0.5
0.7
0.9
1.1
CytoD
12 h
DMSO control 40 h
a
Centrioles
Apical actin
P15
Actin depolymerizing drug CytoD 1 µM 40 h
Centrioles
Apical actin
Subapical actin
Subapical actin
Actin depolymerizing drug CytoD 2 µM 12 h
Centrioles
Apical actin
Subapical actin
Actin depolymerizing drug CytoD 2 µM 40 h
Centrioles
Apical actin
Subapical actin
CytoD 1 µM 40 h
CytoD 2 µM 40 h
CytoD 2 µM 12 h
***
***
***
DMSO
CytoD
6 h
CytoD
40 h
CytoD
40 h
2 µm
c
b
d
e
f
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2279 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w| www.nature.com/naturecommunications

cells. Inter-centriolar distance was unaffected by Cobl depletion
(Supplementary Figure 4a), consistent with its localisation at the
apical level, conﬁrming that centriolar spacing mainly depends on
the subapical actin network. Ependymal cilia beating was still
efﬁcient after Cobl depletion, even though the motile cilia were
slightly shorter (Supplementary Figure 4b, c), in agreement with a
previous report49. Indeed, centriole orientation, which is known
to depend on cilia beating37,50, was not randomised in Cobl-
depleted cells in vivo (Supplementary Figure 4d, e). Similarly, cilia
still beat at a high frequency in Cobl-depleted cells in vitro, only
slightly lower than in controls probably due to their shorter
length (Supplementary Figure 4f). Remarkably, centriolar patch
size and centriole number were signiﬁcantly decreased in Cobl-
depleted cells (Fig. 5e, f; Supplementary Figure 4g). All centrioles
were located in the apical plasma membrane stained with the
membrane-Cherry electroporation reporter, suggesting that no
centrioles were released into the cytoplasm (Fig. 5g). To note, the
ciliary tuft size is affected to the same extent that the centriolar
patch size by Cobl-depletion (Supplementary Figure 4b, g),
suggesting that cilia are lost with centrioles when actin is
impaired.
These results show that both Cobl and formins contribute to
the enrichment of apical actin at the centriolar patch and the
maintenance of centrioles.
The apical actin protects cilia/centrioles from detachment.
Although, apical actin may be required for centriole maintenance,
we noted that centriole loss did not occur in ciliary mutants
(either Kif3A-cKO or hydin) (Supplementary Figure 5a, b) even if
actin enrichment is decreased (Fig. 2a, b). We thus hypothesised
that the forces exerted by cilia beating may be responsible for the
loss of centrioles in the absence of apical actin. We used two
different strategies to rescue centriole loss in the absence of apical
actin. We ﬁrst depolymerised actin in P15 explants with cyto-
chalasin-D, alone or in association with NiCl2 that blocks cilia
beating. Actin was affected by cytochalasin-D treatment in the
presence as in absence of NiCl2 (Supplementary Figure 5c).
However, centriole loss was prevented if both drugs were com-
bined (Fig. 6a, b). For the second strategy, we depleted Cobl in
Kif3A-cKO cells, devoid of motile cilia. This depletion induced a
decrease of apical actin (Supplementary Figure 5d, e) without
affecting centriole number (compare the number of centrioles
after Cobl depletion in control Fig. 5e, f or in Kif3A-cKO Fig. 6c,
d). Thus, the apical actin is required to protect centrioles only
when motile cilia are fully active, suggesting that the forces
exerted by the movement of cilia and/or the external ﬂuid ﬂow
leads to centriole loss when the apical actin is disrupted.
Since no fragmented or whole centrioles were detected inside
the cells when the apical actin network was impaired, we
hypothesised that the centrioles might have been expelled from
cells. To test this hypothesis, we collected the supernatant of
mature ependymal cells in culture incubated with DMSO
(controls) or cytochalasin-D, alone or in association with NiCl2.
Centrioles with their associated cilia were frequently observed in
the supernatants of cytochalasin-D-treated cells compared to the
DMSO-treated controls or cells in which cilia motility was
inhibited by NiCl2 (Fig. 6e, f). This suggests that when the actin
network is destabilised, the forces generated by cilia beating cause
the centrioles to detach from the apical membrane. To assess
whether the ﬂow induced by cilia beating is sufﬁcient to expelled
centriole/cilium from the ependymal cells, we applied an artiﬁcial
external ﬂuid ﬂow37, comparable to physiological ﬂow, on cells
treated with cytochalasin-D and NiCl2. Since the number of
centriole/cilium found in the supernatant was not signiﬁcantly
increased compared to controls, it is likely that the shear stress
induced by the movement of the cilium itself promotes centriole
destabilization in ependymal cells. Nevertheless, we cannot
exclude a weak contribution of the collective ﬂow on the
expulsion.
When apical actin is decreased (either with drugs or in Cobl-
depleted cells) cilia seem to be lost, as well as centrioles
(Supplementary Figs. 2a, 4b). No centriole or cilium are observed
within the cell. The presence of centriole/cilium in the super-
natant of ependymal cells treated with cytochalasin-D suggest
that centrioles are expulsed from the cell through the shear stress
generated by cilia beating forces, when actin is impaired.
Alternatively, drug-induced actin depolymerisation might lead
to a centriole/cilium detachment from the cell, while physiolo-
gically actin protects centrioles against destabilisation through
other mechanisms. Altogether, our results show that cilia motility
induces the assembly of a dense apical actin network around
centrioles that, in turn, contributes to centriole stabilisation
against forces developed by cilia beating/ﬂuid ﬂow (Fig. 6g).
Discussion
We have demonstrated that, during the maturation of ependymal
cells in the developing brain, actin assembles around centrioles at
the base of cilia in two functionally different apical and subapical
networks. Enrichment of apical actin around the centrioles is
induced mechanically by cilia beating. Cilia beating produces
different forces that counteract (i) the force of CSF ﬂow (Fﬂow)
and (ii) the additional torque induced by cilia movement (Ftorque).
To determine an order of magnitude for these forces, we sim-
pliﬁed the system by considering cilia as cylinders with the geo-
metrical parameters of motile cilia (measured on electron
micrographs or on CD24 immunoﬂuorescence), such as radius, r
= 99 nm ± 2 (mean ± sem), centriole length, Lc = 510 nm ± 2
(mean ± sem) and cilia length, L = 11.1 μm ± 0.1 (mean ± sem)
Fig. 3 Actin is required for centriole stability in mature ependymal cells. a F-actin (phalloidin, grey) and centrioles (FOP, red) in mature ependymal cells
from explants treated with DMSO or 1 or 2 μM cytochalasin-D (CytoD) for 12 or 40 h showing concentration- and time-dependent actin impairment; cell
borders and centriolar patches are outlined with dashed white and red lines, respectively. b Representative 200 ms kymographs of motile cilia in brain
slices treated for 40 h with DMSO or 2 μM cytochalasin-D. The graph displays the ciliary beating frequency (Hz) that was not affected by the drug. Error
bars represent the sem of n = 48 cells for DMSO- and CytoD-treated explants, from three independent experiments; P-values were determined with the
Mann-Whitney test; ns, P > 0.05. c Representative images of Centrin2-GFP+ centriolar patches in mature ependymal cells treated with DMSO or 1 or 2μM
cytochalasin-D for 12 to 40 h. d Representative quantiﬁcation of the number of centrioles per cell in lateral wall explant at P15 with contralateral brain of the
same animal treated with DMSO or cytochalasin-D at 1 μM for 40 h. Error bars represent the sem of n = 301 cells for DMSO- and n = 93 for CytoD-treated
explants, from one representative animal out of 6; P-values were determined with the Mann–Whitney test; ***P ≤0.0001. e–f Fold change in centriole
number relative to DMSO-treated contralateral brain in lateral ventricles treated with 1 or 2 μM cytochalasin-D for 6 up to 40 h. A time- (e) and dose- (f)
dependent reduction in the number of centrioles was observed following actin depolymerisation; P-values were determined by one-way ANOVA followed
by Dunn’s multiple comparison test. Error bars represent the sem of for the dose dependent experiments, n = 389, 388 and 940 cells for DMSO-, CytoD
1µM- and CytoD 2µM-treated explants, respectively, from at least three independent experiments. For the time-dependent experiments, n = 2852, 704,
587 and 889 cells for DMSO-, CytoD 6h-, CytoD 12h- and CytoD 40 h-treated explants from at least three independent experiments. *** P ≤0.0001. *
DMSO vs. CytoD 6 h P = 0.0287. *CytoD 12 h vs. CytoD 40 h, P = 0.0484. Scale bars=5 μm
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2279 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7

(Supplementary Figure 6). These cylinders are considered to be
immersed in a medium of low viscosity with their base embedded
in
a
visco-elastic
medium
simulating
the
actin
network.
According to a previous calculation51, the force counteracting the
hydrodynamic ﬂow may be expressed as Fﬂow = CfAL, where L is
the length of the cilia, f the beating frequency (Fig. 2d), A the
beating amplitude (Fig. 2e) and C is the normal force coefﬁcient
(C=
4πμ
LogðL=rÞ = 6×10−3, where μ=10−3 Newton s m−2 is the visc-
osity of the CSF52, and r is the radius of the cilium). Thus, the
force developed by a beating cilium at its base to counteract the
ﬂuid ﬂow is on the order of Fﬂow = 33pNewton (pN). Cilia
beating also induces an additional torque, i.e., a shear stress on
the centriole. In response to this torque a higher force, local and
temporary, is generated at the base of cilium that can be estimated
Apical actin
Apical actin
Formin inhibitor SMIFH2 60 µM
Subapical actin
Subapical actin
ns
50 ms
DMSO 
SMIFH2
DMSO control
Centrioles
12 h
Centrioles
P15
Beating frequency (Hz)
*
***
Daam1
Fmn1
Fhod1
P15
mDia1
Fold change
in centriole number
Centrin-GFP
40 h
P15
SMIFH2 60 µM
DMSO
Merge
Formins
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
DMSO
0.5
0.7
0.9
1.1
DMSO
0
20
40
60
Fhod1 Centrioles
mDia1 Centrioles
Fmn1 Centrioles
Daam1 Centrioles
Apical actin enrichment
at centrioles (centriolar
patch/remaining surface)
Subapical actin enrichment
at centrioles (centriolar
patch/remaining surface)
SMIFH2
60 µm
DMSO
SMIFH2
60 µm
DMSO
SMIFH2
60 µm
***
SMIFH2
60 µm
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2279 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w| www.nature.com/naturecommunications

from the equation Ftorque=FﬂowL/Lc, in which Lc is the size of the
centriole stabilised by the actin-rich network. Thus, Ftorque is on
the order of 728pN. Interestingly, this force is similar to those
developed by some ﬂagella for propulsion53. We have already
determined that some formins (mDia1, Fmn1, Daam1 and
Fhod1) and WH2-dependent actin nucleator (Cobl) are impli-
cated in the assembly of the apical network. The contribution of
formins is particularly noteworthy. Indeed, some members
of the formin family, such as mDia1, have been shown to be
mechanosensitive54–57.
Moreover,
formin
inhibition
(using
SMIFH2) led to a speciﬁc decrease of the apical actin enrichment
at the centriolar patch reminiscent of the actin phenotype
observed in ciliary mutant or after chemical inhibition of ciliary
motility. Further studies are needed to deﬁnitely demonstrate
that formins are indeed activated by ciliary beating in multi-
ciliated cells.
In turn, the apical actin network protects centrioles against the
shear stress, generated by the ﬂuid ﬂow and/or by mechanical
torsion. Our in vitro data using drug to induce actin disruption
suggest that actin protects centriole by preventing them to be pull
out from the cell by motile cilia. However, we cannot rule out
other more direct role of actin for protecting centrioles. The
direct molecular actors linking centrioles to actin have not been
investigated in this study. In this respect, it would be of interest to
analyse the role of centriolar actors also involved in the main-
tenance of centrioles, such as Poc1, FOP or Cep13511,12,58. The
feedback loop between cilia beating and the structural organisa-
tion of the centriolar patch controlled by actin, preserves the
appropriate number of motile cilia in ependymal cells and thus
maintains efﬁcient CSF ﬂow in the brain ventricles. This main-
tenance is essential as the CSF contains many signalling mole-
cules that actively regulate mammalian brain development,
behaviour (e.g. sleep, appetite) and responses to injury5. More-
over, impairment of the CSF ﬂow has also been correlated with
age-related dementia59 and hydrocephalus.
Subapical actin might also help maintain the centrioles, since it
was slightly decreased in most experiments. A close relationship
between centrioles and the subapical actin network has been
noted previously43, suggesting that the reduction of the enrich-
ment of the subapical actin network observed in our experiments
might be due mostly to the decreased number of centrioles. The
subapical actin network may be required for the correct spacing
of centrioles, as in multiciliated Xenopus epidermal cells14,
although the reduction in the inter-centriolar distance might also
be inﬂuenced by cell shrinkage. Indeed, the inter-centriolar dis-
tance was affected by cytochalasin-D that disrupts both the apical
and subapical actin networks, but not after SMIFH2-treatment or
Cobl depletion that mainly disrupt apical actin enrichment at the
centriolar patch.
A role of actin in the maintenance of centrioles has not been
observed thus far in other multiciliated tissues or organisms14,60.
This could be due to insufﬁcient depolymerisation of the apical
actin network in previous studies, since we have shown that the
disappearance of centrioles depends on the dose and duration of
treatment with the actin-depolymerising agent.
Many questions remain to be answered such as: What is the
detailed structural organisation of the apical and subapical actin
networks? What nucleators initiate the subapical network? What
roles are played by each of the various formins localised at the
apical region of centrioles? Are these formins mechanically acti-
vated by cilia beating? What speciﬁc roles are played by the
formins and Cobl, or what signalling pathways activate them?
Interestingly, the role of RhoA-activated actin assembly by Fmn1
in the emergence of the apical surface of multiciliated cells has
recently been reported17,18.
Methods
Transgenic mice. All animal studies were performed in accordance with the
guidelines of the European Community and French Ministry of Agriculture and
were approved by the Ethic comity Charles Darwin (C2EA-05) and “Direction
départementale de la protection des populations de Paris”, (Approval number Ce5/
2012/107; APAFiS #9343). The mouse strains have already been described: RjOrl:
SWISS (Janvier labs), Cen2–GFP61 (CB6-Tg(CAG-EGFP/CETN2)3-4Jgg/J, The
Jackson Laboratory); B6-Kif3atm2Gsn ; B6-Ift88tm1Bky30, C57BL/6-Tg(hGFAP-Cre)
62, C57BL/6-Tg(Nestin-Cre)63, hydin (B6CBACa Aw-J/A-Hydin hy3/J, The Jack-
son Laboratory64). To produce hydin homozygous mutants, we crossed hydin+/−
or hydin+/−/ Cen2-GFP with hydin+/−or hydin+/−/ Cen2-GFP. To produce the
conditional mutant Kif3a (Kif3A-cKO), we crossed Kif3aﬂ/ﬂor Kif3aﬂ/ﬂ/ Cen2–GFP
mice with Kif3ako/+/ Tg(hGFAP-Cre) mice. To produce the conditional mutant
Ift88 (Ift88 cKO), we crossed Ift88ﬂ/ﬂmice with Ift88ko/+/ Tg(Nestin-Cre). Wild-
type littermate mice were used as controls.
Plasmids. Cobl, derived from the mouse Cobl complementary DNA clone
mKIAA0633 (Kazusa DNA Research Institute, Japan), was cloned in pDsRed-N1
(Clontech). To determine siRNA sequences to obtain Cobl depletion, we screened
ten siRNA sequences against Cobl-GFP ectopically expressed in Hela cells. Two
were selected (Supplementary Figure 3b): Cobl sh1: 5′ACCGGTGCATGGTTC-
TAGTCACATTCAAGAGATGTGACTAGAACCATGCACTTTTTCTCGAGG3′
and Cobl sh2: 5′ACCGGTCATCGACTCAAGACTATTTCAAGAGAA-
TAGTCTTGAGTCGATGACTTTTTCTCGAGG3′. We also selected an shRNA
corresponding to an Lrrc6 shRNA previously designed on human sequences from a
homologous region32: 5′ACCGGTGCCCAAGGTAGGAGAAATGATTTCAA-
GAGAATCATTTCTCCTACCTTGGGCACTTTTTCTCGAGG3′. We cloned the
shRNA sequences in the shRNA backbone vectors pcDNA-U6-shRNA and pTRIP-
U6-shRNA-IRES-PGK-GFP-WPRE, as previously described65. The control shRNA
(shCtrl) was generated from AllStars Negative Control siRNA (Qiagen), which
does not recognise mammalian RNAs. The reporter plasmid encoding membrane
Cherry (mCherry) under the control of the CAGGS promoter was co-transfected
with pcDNA-U6-shRNA and was a gift from Xavier Morin. All cells expressing the
shRNA-GFP (pTRIP-U6-shRNA-IRES-PGK-GFP-WPRE) or cells expressing
pCAGGS-mCherry, which were co-transfected with the untagged pcDNA-U6-
shRNA, were considered to be depleted.
Postnatal electroporation. Electroporation of plasmids encoding sh1Cobl or
sh2Cobl or shLrrc6 or shCtrl (U6 backbone untagged) (1.25 μg) and the reporter
Fig. 4 Apical actin nucleated by formins contributes to centriole stability in mature ependymal cells. a Mature (P15) ependymal cell centrioles (labelled
with FOP or Cep164; red) and formins (green and grey); note that all formins colocalise with the centriolar patch (red dashed lines); cell borders are
outlined with dashed white lines. b–d Lateral wall explants from P15 mice treated for 12 h with DMSO or SMIFH2. b F-actin (phalloidin, grey) and centrioles
(FOP, red) in mature ependymal cells from DMSO- or SMIFH2-treated explants. Cell borders and centriolar patches are outlined with dashed white and red
lines, respectively. In control (DMSO-treated) explants, apical actin is enriched in the centriolar patch; formin inhibition prevents enrichment. Subapical
actin staining is slightly affected by SMIFH2-treatment. c, d Ratio between mean phalloidin ﬂuorescence intensities in the centriolar patch (red dashed
lines) and in the remaining cell surface (white minus red dashed lines) at the apical (c) and subapical (d) levels. Error bars represent the sem of: at the
apical level, n = 96 cells for DMSO- and SMIFH2-treated explants; at the subapical level, n = 56 and 82 cells for DMSO- and SMIFH2-treated explants,
respectively, from three independent experiments. P-values were determined by the Mann–Whitney test; *P = 0.0156; ***P ≤0.0001. Scale bars=5 μm. e
Representative kymographs (200 ms) of motile cilia in P15 brain slices treated for 12 h with DMSO or SMIFH2 (formin inhibitor). The graph shows the cilia
beating frequency (Hz); formin inhibition had no effect. Error bars represent the sem of n = 29, 48 cells for DMSO- and SMIFH2-treated explants from
three independent experiments; P-values were determined with the Mann–Whitney test; ns, P > 0.05. f Representative images of Centrin2-GFP+ centriolar
patches. g Fold change in centriole number relative to DMSO-treated contralateral brain in lateral ventricles treated with SMIFH2, showing a reduction of
the centriole number after SMIFH2-treatment; P-values were determined with the Mann–Whitney test. Error bars represent the sem of n = 1572 cells for
DMSO- and 466 for SMIFH2-treated explants, from three independent experiments; ***P ≤0.0001. Scale bars=5 μm
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2279 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9

plasmid mCherry (0.75 µg) was performed on neonates to two-day-old pups, as
previously described38. This co-transfection was used throughout the paper to
deplete Cobl except when co-transfected with the plasmid encoding Cobl-dsRed
where sh1Cobl or shCtrl in the pTRIP backbone (1.25 μg) were used.
Immunostaining. Lateral walls of the lateral brain ventricles were dissected, ﬁxed,
and immunostained, as previously described66. The same area of the lateral walls
was used throughout the study (Fig. 1a). The tissue was treated with 0.1% triton in
BRB80 (80 mM K-Pipes pH6.8; 1 mM MgCl2; 1 mM Na-EGTA) for 1 min and
ﬁxed in methanol at −20 °C for 10 min except for phalloidin stained tissues, which
were detergent-treated and then ﬁxed in 4% PFA in BRB80 for 8 min. The fol-
lowing antibodies were used: mouse IgG1 GT335 (1:2000, Adipogen AG-20B-0020-
C100); rat anti-CD24 (1:200, BD Biosciences 557436); mouse IgG1 GTU88 (1:500,
Sigma T6557); rabbit anti-Cep164 (1:500, NOVUS 45330002); mouse IGg2b anti-
AKAP450 (1:20, CTR453 gift from M. Bornens); rat anti-rootletin (1:50, Santa
Cruz sc-67824); mouse IgG2b anti-Centrins 20H5 (1:2000; Millipore 04-1624);
rabbit or rat anti-dsRed (1:200, Clontech 632496 or 5F8 1:400, Chromotek 5f8-
Cobl-DsRed
Actin
Apical
Subapical
shCtrl
sh1Cobl
Centrioles
Centrioles
P15
Subapical actin
Subapical actin
Apical actin
Apical actin
shCtrl
Centrin-GFP
sh1Cobl
P15
Centrin-GFP
Membrane
XZ
Fold change in centriole number
***
***
*
***
shCtrl
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
sh1Cobl
shCtrl
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
sh1Cobl
0.5
0.7
0.9
1.1
shCtrl
sh2Cobl
sh1Cobl
Fold change in global
subapical actin mean intensity
(sh/surrounding cells)
Fold change in global
apical actin mean intensity
(sh/surrounding cells)
a
b
c
d
e
g
f
Fig. 5 Apical actin nucleated by Cobl also contributes to centriole stability in mature ependymal cells. a F-actin (phalloidin, grey) and Cobl (Cobl-dsRed,
red) in P15 lateral ventricular walls of wild-type mice electroporated at birth with the COBL-dsRed construct; COBL-dsRed is speciﬁcally localised in the
apical but not subapical actin networks. (yellow dashed lines = centriolar patch). b F-actin (phalloidin, grey) and centrioles (FOP, red) in mature ependymal
cells in P15 wild-type mice electroporated at birth with shCtrl or sh1Cobl and the mCherry reporter. Cell borders of transfected cells and centriolar patches
are outlined with dashed white and red lines, respectively. c, d Mean phalloidin ﬂuorescence intensities inside the border of transfected cells relative to
the mean of the three closest non-transfected control cells at the apical (c) and subapical (d) levels; apical and to a lesser extent subapical actin
networks decrease in Cobl-depleted cells. Error bars represent the sem of: at the apical level, n = 35 cells for shCtrl and 46 for sh1Cobl transfected
cells; at the subapical level, n = 33 cells for shCtrl and sh1Cobl from three independent experiments. P-values were determined by the Mann–Whitney test;
*P = 0.0390, ***P ≤0.0001. e–g Mature ependymal cells on lateral ventricular walls of P15 Centrin2-GFP mice transfected at birth with shCtrl or sh1Cobl or
sh2Cobl (dashed white line). e Representative images of Centrin2-GFP+ centriolar patches. f Fold change in centriole number in the sh-transfected cells
(shCtrl, sh1 or sh2Cobl) relative to those in surrounding cells. Error bars represent the sem of n = 236 cells for shCtrl, 129 for sh2Cobl and 106 for sh1Cobl
transfected cells from three independent experiments P-values were determined by the Mann–Whitney test; ***P ≤0.0001. g 3D-modelling of XZ
projections of centrioles (green) docked in the plasma membrane (mCherry reporter, red). Scale bars=5 μm in b, e and 1 µm in a, g
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2279 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w| www.nature.com/naturecommunications

100); chicken anti-GFP (1:800, Aves GFP-1020); rabbit anti-Daam1 (1:50, Euro-
medex 14876-1-AP); rabbit anti-Fhod1 (1:75, Euromedex FP3481); mouse anti-
Fmn1 (1:100, Abcam AB68058); rabbit anti-mDia1 (1:200, BD Biosciences
610848); mouse IGg2b acetylated-tubulin 6-11b1 (1:600, Sigma T6793); mouse
IgG2b anti-FOP (FGFR10P, 1:500, Abnova H00011116-MO) and species-speciﬁc
Alexa Fluor secondary antibodies (1:800, Invitrogen). Phalloidin-A488 was used at
a dilution of 1:50 with primary and secondary antibodies; Phalloidin-A568 was
used at a dilution of 1:40 for the STED experiment.
Optical imagery. Images (230-nm or 210-nm z-steps) of ﬁxed samples were
obtained with either an inverted epiﬂuorescence microscope (Zeiss Axio Observer
Z1) equipped with a Plan-Apochromat ×63 (NA 1.4 oil-immersion) objective, a
Zeiss Apotome with an H/D grid, a CCD camera (ORCA-ER, Hammamatsu), and
Zen2 software, or a confocal microscope (model SP5 or SP8; Leica) with a ×63
(Plan Neoﬂuar NA 1.3 oil-immersion) objective and Leica LAS-AF software. Z-
stack projections along the entire apical surface or 6 z-stacks encompassing the
apical or subapical actin networks (apical, subapical actin) are shown.
ns
ns
Centriole
Axoneme
Formins
Actin
Membrane
Model of centriole stabilisation by actin in ependymal cells
Immature
ependymal cell
Mature
ependymal cell
Cilia beating
Detachment of centrioles
Immotile / growing cilia
Cilia beating
DMSO
PBS
+ NiCl2 1 mM
P15
40 h
Centrioles
DMSO
Cilia Centrioles
D15
Supernatant
24 h
Fold change
in centriole number
ns
Fold change
in centriole number
shCtrl
sh1Cobl
P15
Flow
Flow
Cilia Centrioles
0.5
0.7
0.9
1.1
0.5
0.7
0.9
1.1
0
5
10
- Apical
Actin
CytoD +NiCl2+flux
CytoD 2 µM
CytoD + NiCl2
Centriole+cilia number per ﬁeld
***
***
CytoD 2 µm
+
NiCl2 1 mM
+
Flux
CytoD 2 µm
+
NiCl2 1 mM
CytoD
2 µm
DMSO
or
NiCl2
CytoD 2 µM
Kif3A cKO
centrin-GFP
***
CytoD 2 µm
+
NiCl2 1 mM
NiCl2
1 mM
CytoD
2 µm
DMSO
or PBS
Kif3A cKO
sh1Cobl
Kif3A cKO
shCtrl
a
b
d
c
e
f
g
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2279 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11

STED nanoscopy. Images were acquired by gCW STED microscopy (TCS SP8-
3 × ; Leica Microsystems) with a ×100 oil immersion objective (NA 1.4 oil-
immersion); parameters were optimised for Alexa 532, Alexa 568, and Alexa 488
detection. Samples (pixel size = 30 nm) were excited sequentially at 575 nm, 530
nm, and 490 nm wavelengths with a supercontinuum laser; a 660 nm depletion
laser was used. For Alexa 568, a 20% AOTF conventional scanner (400 Hz, Line
Average 2, Accumulation 3) and a 60% depletion laser were used; ﬂuorescence
(585–610 nm) was collected with a hybrid detector (Gain 30%) in the gated mode
(0.2–6 ns) and a 1 Airy Unit pinhole. For Alexa 532, a 20% AOTF conventional
scanner (400 Hz, Line Average 2, Accumulation 3) and a 100% depletion laser were
used; ﬂuorescence (540–575 nm) was collected using a hybrid detector (Gain 30%)
in the gated mode (0.2–6 ns) and a 1 Airy Unit pinhole. For GFP, a 10% AOTF
conventional scanner (400 Hz, Line Average 2, Accumulation 2), and a 100%
depletion laser were used; ﬂuorescence (500–530 nm) was collected using a hybrid
detector (Gain 30%) in the gated mode (0.5–6 ns) and a 1 Airy Unit pinhole. Stack
images were acquired in 0.4 μm Z-steps.
Phase-contrast video-microscopy. Cilia beating frequencies were analysed with
an inverted epiﬂuorescence microscope (Leica, DMIL LED) equipped with an
apochromat 63 × (NA 1.32 oil-immersion) objective, a FASTCAM mini AX50
camera (Photron) and Photron fastcam software. Mature ependymal ciliary beat-
ings were recorded at 250 images per second in phase contrast with transmitted
light.
Transmission electron microscopy. Transmission electron microscopy was per-
formed, as previously described37. Brains from P21 mice were sectioned into 200
μm slices using a vibratome (VT 1200S, Leica). Sections of the rostral lateral and
dorsal walls of the lateral ventricle were taken apart in PBS under a dissecting
microscope. Ventricle slices were ﬁxed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 4% paraf-
ormaldehyde. Tissues were treated with 1% OsO4. Fixed specimens were washed
and progressively dehydrated. Samples were then incubated in 1% uranyl acetate in
70% methanol. Final dehydratations were made. Samples were pre-impregnated
with ethanol/epon mix (2/1, 1/1, 1/2 ratios subsequently), and impregnated into
epon. Samples were then mounted into epon blocks for 48 h at 60 °C to ensure
polymerisation. Ultrathin sections of 70 nm were cut using an ultramicrotome
(Ultracut E, Reichert-Jung) and analysed using a Jeol 10–11 transmission electron
microscope.
Brain slices. Freshly harvested P15 brains were cut in Hank’s solution (1 × HBSS,
10 mM Hepes, 0.075% sodium bicarbonate, 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin) in 200 µm
coronal sections on a vibratome (Leica VT1200S) and placed in Dulbecco’s
Modiﬁed Eagle’s-Glutamax Medium (DMEM-Glutamax, Invitrogen) supple-
mented with 10% FCS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin.
Drug treatments. Lateral wall explants or brain slices were immersed for the
indicated times at 37 °C with 5% CO2 in DMEM-Glutamax (Invitrogen) supple-
mented with 10% FCS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin and cytochalasin-D to depo-
lymerise actin, SMIFH2 to inhibit formin42 or NiCl2 to block cilia beating39
(Sigma). The lateral ventricular wall of the opposite side of each mouse brain was
used as control and immersed in the same media containing an amount of DMSO
or PBS equivalent to that of the drug. Phalloidin ﬂuorescence after a 12 h or 40 h
incubation shows early and late defects in the actin cytoskeleton.
Cell cultures. Differentiating ependymal cells isolated from mouse brain were
cultured, as previously described66. The shRNA constructs (0.06 μg) and the
Tomato reporter vector (0.04 μg) were co-transfected into 0.25 × 106 cells with the
Jet Prime kit (polyplus transfection) when the cells were harvested for differ-
entiation, according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Supernatant collection. Ependymal cells, derived from Centrin2-GFP mice and
differentiated in culture for 13–15 days, were treated for 24 h with 2 μM
cytochalasin-D or DMSO with or without 1 mM NiCl2 in DMEM-Glutamax
(Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FCS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin. To generate
a ﬂow comparable to physiological values for mature cells we used the rotating unit
described previously37, with the rotating plates at a height of 4 mm and a rotation
speed of 6 rounds/min. Clockwise and anticlockwise rotations were used equally in
our experiments.
The supernatant was then collected and Taxol (2 μM) was added to stabilise
cilia. The supernatant was then centrifuged for 10 min at 150 g to remove cell
debris and 30 min at 12000 × g to concentrate centrioles. The pellet was
resuspended in 4 ml of DMEM-Glutamax supplemented with 1% penicillin/
streptomycin and 2 μM taxol and sedimented on coverslips coated with
Poly-L-lysine by centrifugation at 10,400 × g for 10 min at 4 °C. The cells were ﬁxed
in cold methanol for 10 min and the cilia stained with the GT335 antibody in PBS/
0.1% Tween/3% BSA.
RT-PCR. Total RNA was extracted from ependymal cells with the RNeasy Midi Kit
(Qiagen), according to the manufacturer’s instructions, at different time points
during differentiation in vitro. RNA was converted into single-stranded cDNA
using the Superscript-III Reverse Transcription System (ThermoFisher) with ran-
dom primers, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The following primers
were used for subsequent PCR ampliﬁcation: the housekeeping gene CyclophilinA
Fw primer 5′-ACCCCACCGTGTTCTTCGAC-3′ and Rev primer 5′-CATTTGC
CATGGACAAGATG-3′ for normalisation; the Cobl Fw primer 5′-TGAGATCC
AAGGACAAATGG-3′ and Rev primer 5′-CTCATCTCTGATTTGGGAGG-3′.
CyclophilinA and Cobl were ampliﬁed simultaneously by PCR in the same tube
and the products subjected to agarose gel electrophoresis. Band intensities were
quantiﬁed with ImageJ software and normalised with respect to cyclophilinA.
3D-modelling. Imaris software was used for 3D-modelling.
Data analysis. All analyses were performed on images of the rostro-dorsal part of
the lateral walls of the lateral ventricles to maximise reproducibility (Fig. 1a).
Measurement of phalloidin ﬂuorescence intensity. We compared actin
enrichment (phalloidin ﬂuorescence) in the centriolar patch (delineated by cen-
triole staining) of mature (P15) ependymal cells in ciliary mutant mice, explants
treated with SMIFH2 or DMSO and Lrrc6-depleted cells. The mean intensity of
phalloidin ﬂuorescence was measured in the centriolar patch and on the surface of
the rest of the cell; cell borders and actin linking the centriolar patch to the cell
membrane were excluded. Apical actin was analysed on the sum projection of the 6
z-stacks encompassing Cep164 staining and subapical actin of the 6 z-stacks
encompassing Akap450 staining with ImageJ software. The results are expressed as
the ratio of the values in the centriolar patch over the remaining cell surface.
Total mean actin (phalloidin ﬂuorescence) levels were measured with ImageJ
software in the apical and subapical networks (as deﬁned above) at early (P4 and
P6 mice) or late (P15 mice) stages of differentiation in ependymal cells transfected
with sh1Cobl or shLrrc6 or shCtrl within cell borders, in the sum projection of
transfected cells normalised with respect to the mean signal intensity in the three
closest non-transfected ependymal cells at the same stage, using ImageJ software.
The results are expressed as the ratio of the values of the transfected cells over the
mean values of the three surrounding control cells.
Fig. 6 Forces generated by cilia beating cause centrioles/cilia to detach from actin-deﬁcient ependymal cells. a, b Mature (P15) ependymal cells from
explants treated for 40 h with PBS or DMSO (Control), 1 mM NiCl2 to block cilia beating, 2 µM cytochalasin-D (cytoD) to depolymerise actin, or with both
drugs; a γ-tubulin stained centrioles. b Fold change in centriole number relative to DMSO- or NiCl2-treated contralateral brain, showing that cilia beating
induces centriole destabilisation in absence of actin; P-values were determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison test. n =
781 cells for control-, 597 for CytoD-, 819 for NiCl2- and 547 for CytoD + NiCl2-treated explants, from three independent experiments; ***P ≤0.0001; ns P
> 0.05. c, d Lateral walls of Centrin2-GFP ciliary mutant mice (Kif3A cKO) electroporated at birth with shCtrl or sh1Cobl and a reporter construct
(represented as white dashed lines) and ﬁxed at P15. c Representative Centrin2-GFP+ centriolar patches. d, Fold change in centriole number relative to
surrounding cells, showing no effect of Cobl-depletion on centriole number in ciliary mutant mice. P-values were determined by the Mann–Whitney test.
ns, P > 0.05. n = 101 electroporated cells for Kif3A-cKO shCtrl and Kif3A-cKO sh1Cobl from three independent experiments. e Representative images of the
supernatant of mature ependymal cells from Centrin2-GFP mice in culture. After 15 days of the onset of differentiation, cells were treated for 24 h with
cytochalasin-D or DMSO with or without 1 mM NiCl2 and an external ﬂuid ﬂow; isolated centrioles (Centrin2-GFP, red) with a cilium (GT335, green) were
observed in the supernatant of CytoD-treated cultures. f Number of centrioles associated with a cilium per 63 × ﬁeld. n = 76 ﬁelds for DMSO-, 112 for
CytoD-, 71 for CytoD + NiCl2- and 61 for CytoD + NiCl2 + Flux-treated cell cultures, from three independent experiments; P-values were determined with
the Mann–Whitney test; ***P ≤0.0001. Scale bars=5 μm. g Working model: Ependymal cilia beating leads to actin enrichment at the centriolar patch.
Apical actin is in turn crucial for stabilising centrioles exposed to cilia beating and ﬂuid ﬂow forces. In cells with impaired apical actin, beating cilia cause
centrioles and their associated cilia to detach from the cells. Error bars represent the sem in all graphs
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2279 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w| www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Quantiﬁcation of cilia length. Cilia length was measured on whole-mount pre-
parations of P15 lateral wall and stained with GT335 or 6-11b1 or CD24 that
recognise glutamylated-tubulin, acetylated-tubulin and axonemal membrane,
respectively. The length was evaluated by measuring the distance between the most
peripheral centrioles at the periphery of the patch and the longest stained cilia in
the same area. Three measurements per cells were averaged. The different markers
labelled different portions of cilia. As different markers and ﬁxation were used, the
length was normalised with respect to DMSO-treated explants or surrounding non-
transfected cells (control).
Quantiﬁcation of centriole number. Centriole numbers were determined on
methanol-ﬁxed Centrin2-GFP mice or WT samples stained with γ-tubulin, as
indicated. The distribution of the number of centrioles in mature ependymal cells
varied between animals from different litters (different sizes) of different genetic
backgrounds. We thus normalised centriole number in shRNA transfected cells
with respect to non-transfected surrounding cells. The distribution of the number
of centrioles is equivalent in the two hemi-brains of a given animal. Thus, in drug-
treated explants, centriole number was normalised against the number of centrioles
in the opposite lateral ventricular wall treated with PBS or DMSO. The distribution
of the number of centrioles was also equivalent in two animals from the same litter.
Thus, centriole numbers in ciliary mutants were normalised with respect to the
mean number of centrioles in littermate controls.
In the shRNA experiments, centrioles, represented by Centrin2-GFP dots in
0.23 μm z-sections to include all centrioles of each cell, were counted manually. The
pilot experiment, performed blindly, was similar to subsequent experiments.
Centrin2-GFP dots in the pharmacological experiments were counted
automatically with an in-house ImageJ plugin, using 3D-Gaussian and 3D-LoG
ﬁlter67 blurring to remove noise and artefacts in a 3D-volume. Local 3D-maxima
were then extracted from the ﬁltered image with Fast Filters 3D68 to determine the
centre of the centrins in 3D-space. The parameters of the ﬁlters are based on
average 3D centriole size and are constant in all conditions. Corrections were made
manually. The centriolar patch boundaries were estimated on the basis of the
spatial density of the centrins and corrected manually. The pilot experiment was
also quantiﬁed manually, blind to the experimental conditions; the results were
equivalent to those obtained in the experiments counted automatically.
Quantiﬁcation of centriolar patch size. We also determined, in each cell, the size
of the centriolar patch, deﬁned as the area of the minimum convex xy euclidean
space that contains all the centrioles in the cell. Centriolar patch size, on all cells,
was calculated with Matlab software. Patch size was very sensitive to the presence
of scattered centrioles, because all of the centrioles were taken into consideration.
Distance to the nearest neighbour. For each patch or cell, we also determined the
nearest neighbour xy euclidean distance between centrioles. These distances were
extracted using the cell proﬁler plugin.
Cilia beating frequency and amplitude. Three square 16 pixels2 regions of
interest (ROI), each containing a region with a single beating cilium, were selected
in the transfected cells in culture (12 to 14 days after serum withdrawal) or in
mature ependymal cells in brain slices (P14–15 animals). The number of beats
(frequency in Hz) was counted with the ImageJ z-axis proﬁle and presented as a
scattered dot plot. Kymographs were obtained for the same regions using the
Multiple Kymograph ImageJ plugin of J. Rietdorf and A. Seitz. Amplitude was
determined on the same high-speed recording by measuring the distance between
the maximal and minimal position of the tip of individual cilia.
Determination of centriole orientation. The in-house ImageJ plugin (see above)
was used to detect centrin2-GFP dots and Cep164 staining with manual correc-
tions. Inside each cell, centrins were assigned to their corresponding Cep164 (unit
vector) using the Hungarian algorithm69 that minimises the sum of the distances
between all pairs of points. The angle between the unit vectors and their mean
direction were calculated. The centriolar patch boundaries were estimated from the
spatial density of the centrins and corrected manually. Circular plots with a 20°
binning interval were obtained from the resulting angles. The in-house Matlab
toolbox for generating vector plots and the corresponding analyses can be down-
loaded from https://github.com/biocompibens/centriole_analysis.git.
Statistics. Means of two conditions were compared with the Mann–Whitney test.
Means of more than two conditions were analysed by one-way ANOVA followed
by Dunn’s multiple comparison tests (GraphPad Prism 6.0). The
Kolmogorov–Smirnov or Waston-U2 tests were used to compare whole angle
distributions shown as circular plots (MatLab). The χ2 test for trends was used to
compare centriole neighbour distances (GraphPad Prism 6.0). Scatter plots are
presented as the mean±sem. ROUT methods were used to remove outliers gen-
erated by plugins analysis of automatic counts, with a Q value of 1% (GraphPad
Prism 6.0). All results were obtained in at least three independent experiments on
three different animals or cell cultures.
Code availability. Codes and plugins can be consulted at https://github.com/
biocompibens/centriole_analysis.
Data availability. The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available
within the article and supplementary ﬁles, or available from the authors upon
request.
Received: 21 December 2017 Accepted: 4 May 2018
References
1.
Brooks, E. R. & Wallingford, J. B. Multiciliated cells. Curr. Biol. 24,
R973–R982 (2014).
2.
Hess R. A. in The Epididymis: From Molecules to Clinical Practice: A
Comprehensive Survey of the Efferent Ducts, the Epididymis and the Vas
Deferens (eds Robaire, B. & Hinton, B. T.) 49–80 (Springer US, New York,
2002).
3.
Jiménez, A. J., Domínguez-Pinos, M.-D., Guerra, M. M., Fernández-Llebrez, P.
& Pérez-Fígares, J.-M. Structure and function of the ependymal barrier and
diseases associated with ependyma disruption. Tissue Barriers 2, e28426
(2014).
4.
Tramontin, A. D., Garcia-Verdugo, J. M., Lim, D. A. & Alvarez-Buylla, A.
Postnatal development of radial glia and the ventricular zone (VZ): a
continuum of the neural stem cell compartment. Cereb. Cortex 13, 580–587
(2003).
5.
Zappaterra, M. W. & Lehtinen, M. K. The cerebrospinal ﬂuid: regulator of
neurogenesis, behavior, and beyond. Cell Mol. Life Sci. 69, 2863–2878 (2012).
6.
Zhang, J., Williams, M. A. & Rigamonti, D. Genetics of human hydrocephalus.
J. Neurol. 253, 1255–1266 (2006).
7.
Spassky, N. et al. Adult ependymal cells are postmitotic and are derived from
radial glial cells during embryogenesis. J. Neurosci. 25, 10–18 (2005).
8.
Bruni, J. E. Ependymal development, proliferation, and functions: a review.
Microsc. Res. Tech. 41, 2–13 (1998).
9.
Capilla-Gonzalez, V., Cebrian-Silla, A., Guerrero-Cazares, H., Garcia-
Verdugo, J. M. & Quiñones-Hinojosa, A. Age-related changes in astrocytic
and ependymal cells of the subventricular zone. Glia 62, 790–803 (2014).
10. Shook, B. A. et al. Ventriculomegaly associated with ependymal gliosis and
declines in barrier integrity in the aging human and mouse brain. Aging Cell.
13, 340–350 (2014).
11. Bayless, B. A. et al. Asymmetrically localized proteins stabilize basal bodies
against ciliary beating forces. J. Cell Biol. 215, 457-466 (2016).
12. Bayless, B. A., Giddings, T. H., Winey, M. & Pearson, C. G. Bld10/
Cep135 stabilizes basal bodies to resist cilia-generated forces. Mol. Biol. Cell.
23, 4820–4832 (2012).
13. Chanet, S. & Martin, A. C. Mechanical force sensing in tissues. Prog. Mol. Biol.
Transl. Sci. 126, 317-352 (2014).
14. Werner, M. E. et al. Actin and microtubules drive differential aspects of planar
cell polarity in multiciliated cells. J. Cell Biol. 195, 19–26 (2011).
15. Ioannou, A., Santama, N. & Skourides, P. A. Xenopus laevis nucleotide binding
protein 1 (xNubp1) is important for convergent extension movements and
controls ciliogenesis via regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. Dev. Biol. 380,
243–258 (2013).
16. Pan, J., You, Y., Huang, T. & Brody, S. L. RhoA-mediated apical actin
enrichment is required for ciliogenesis and promoted by Foxj1. J. Cell. Sci.
120, 1868–1876 (2007).
17. Sedzinski, J., Hannezo, E., Tu, F., Biro, M. & Wallingford, J. B. Emergence of
an apical epithelial cell surface in vivo. Dev. Cell. 36, 24–35 (2016).
18. Sedzinski, J., Hannezo, E., Tu, F., Biro, M. & Wallingford, J. B. RhoA regulates
actin network dynamics during apical surface emergence in multiciliated
epithelial cells. J. Cell. Sci. 130, 420 (2017).
19. Boutin, C. et al. A dual role for planar cell polarity genes in ciliated cells. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, E3129–E3138 (2014).
20. Boisvieux-Ulrich, E., Laine, M. C. & Sandoz, D. Cytochalasin D inhibits basal
body migration and ciliary elongation in quail oviduct epithelium. Cell Tissue
Res. 259, 443–454 (1990).
21. Park, T. J., Mitchell, B. J., Abitua, P. B., Kintner, C. & Wallingford, J. B.
Dishevelled controls apical docking and planar polarization of basal bodies in
ciliated epithelial cells. Nat. Genet. 40, 871–879 (2008).
22. Acquaviva, C. et al. The centrosomal FOP protein is required for cell cycle
progression and survival. Cell Cycle 8, 1217–1227 (2009).
23. Hirota, Y. et al. Planar polarity of multiciliated ependymal cells involves the
anterior migration of basal bodies regulated by non-muscle myosin II.
Development 137, 3037–3046 (2010).
24. Graser, S. et al. Cep164, a novel centriole appendage protein required for
primary cilium formation. J. Cell Biol. 179, 321–330 (2007).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2279 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
13

25. Paoletti, A., Moudjou, M., Paintrand, M., Salisbury, J. L. & Bornens, M. Most
of centrin in animal cells is not centrosome-associated and centrosomal
centrin is conﬁned to the distal lumen of centrioles. J. Cell Sci. 109, 3089
(1996).
26. Molla-Herman, A. et al. The ciliary pocket: an endocytic membrane domain at
the base of primary and motile cilia. J. Cell Sci. 123, 1785–1795 (2010).
27. Bailly, E., Dorée, M., Nurse, P. & Bornens, M. p34cdc2 is located in both
nucleus and cytoplasm; part is centrosomally associated at G2/M and enters
vesicles at anaphase. EMBO J. 8, 3985–3995 (1989).
28. Yang, J. et al. Rootletin, a novel coiled-coil protein, is a structural component
of the ciliary rootlet. J. Cell. Biol. 159, 431–440 (2002).
29. Marszalek, J. R., Ruiz-Lozano, P., Roberts, E., Chien, K. R. & Goldstein, L. S.
Situs inversus and embryonic ciliary morphogenesis defects in mouse mutants
lacking the KIF3A subunit of kinesin-II. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96,
5043–5048 (1999).
30. Haycraft, C. J. et al. Intraﬂagellar transport is essential for endochondral bone
formation. Development 134, 307–316 (2007).
31. Lechtreck, K. F., Delmotte, P., Robinson, M. L., Sanderson, M. J. & Witman,
G. B. Mutations in Hydin impair ciliary motility in mice. J. Cell. Biol. 180,
633–643 (2008).
32. Horani, A. et al. LRRC6 mutation causes primary ciliary dyskinesia with
dynein arm defects. PLoS ONE 8, e59436 (2013).
33. Inaba, Y. et al. Transport of the outer dynein arm complex to cilia requires a
cytoplasmic protein Lrrc6. Genes. Cells 21, 728–739 (2016).
34. Kott, E. et al. Loss-of-function mutations in LRRC6, a gene essential for
proper axonemal assembly of inner and outer dynein arms, cause primary
ciliary dyskinesia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 91, 958–964 (2012).
35. Mirzadeh, Z., Han, Y. G., Soriano-Navarro, M., Garcia-Verdugo, J. M. &
Alvarez-Buylla, A. Cilia organize ependymal planar polarity. J. Neurosci. 30,
2600–2610 (2010).
36. El Zein, L. et al. RFX3 governs growth and beating efﬁciency of motile cilia in
mouse and controls the expression of genes involved in human ciliopathies. J.
Cell. Sci. 122, 3180–3189 (2009).
37. Guirao, B. et al. Coupling between hydrodynamic forces and planar cell
polarity orients mammalian motile cilia. Nat. Cell Biol. 12, 341–350 (2010).
38. Boutin, C., Diestel, S., Desoeuvre, A., Tiveron, M. C. & Cremer, H. Efﬁcient
in vivo electroporation of the postnatal rodent forebrain. PLoS ONE 3, e1883
(2008).
39. Larsen, J. & Satir, P. Analysis of Ni(2+)-induced arrest of Paramecium
axonemes. J. Cell. Sci. 99, 33–40 (1991).
40. Skau, C. T. & Waterman, C. M. Speciﬁcation of architecture and function of
actin structures by actin nucleation factors. Annu. Rev. Biophys. 44, 285–310
(2015).
41. Nolen, B. J. et al. Characterization of two classes of small molecule inhibitors
of Arp2/3 complex. Nature 460, 1031–1034 (2009).
42. Rizvi, S. A. et al. Identiﬁcation and characterization of a small molecule
inhibitor of formin-mediated actin assembly. Chem. Biol. 16, 1158–1168
(2009).
43. Yasunaga, T. et al. The polarity protein Inturned links NPHP4 to Daam1 to
control the subapical actin network in multiciliated cells. J. Cell. Biol. 211,
963–973 (2015).
44. Grega-Larson, N. E., Crawley, S. W. & Tyska, M. J. Impact of cordon-bleu
expression on actin cytoskeleton architecture and dynamics. Cytoskeleton 73,
670–679 (2016).
45. Wayt, J. & Bretscher, A. Cordon Bleu serves as a platform at the basal region
of microvilli, where it regulates microvillar length through its WH2 domains.
Mol. Biol. Cell. 25, 2817–2827 (2014).
46. Grega-Larson, N. E., Crawley, S. W., Erwin, A. L. & Tyska, M. J. Cordon bleu
promotes the assembly of brush border microvilli. Mol. Biol. Cell. 26,
3803–3815 (2015).
47. Ahuja, R. et al. Cordon-bleu is an actin nucleation factor and controls
neuronal morphology. Cell 131, 337–350 (2007).
48. Carroll, E. A. et al. Cordon-bleu is a conserved gene involved in neural tube
formation. Dev. Biol. 262, 16–31 (2003).
49. Ravanelli, A. M. & Klingensmith, J. The actin nucleator Cordon-Bleu is
required for development of motile cilia in zebraﬁsh. Dev. Biol. 350, 101–111
(2011).
50. Mitchell, B., Jacobs, R., Li, J., Chien, S. & Kintner, C. A positive feedback
mechanism governs the polarity and motion of motile cilia. Nature 447,
97–101 (2007).
51. Blake, J. Model for micro-structure in ciliated organisms. J. Fluid. Mech. 55, 1-
23 (1972).
52. Bloomﬁeld, I. G., Johnston, I. H. & Bilston, L. E. Effects of proteins, blood cells
and glucose on the viscosity of cerebrospinal ﬂuid. Pediatr. Neurosurg. 28,
246–251 (1998).
53. Chattopadhyay, S., Moldovan, R., Yeung, C. & Wu, X. L. Swimming efﬁciency
of bacterium Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 13712–13717
(2006).
54. Courtemanche, N., Lee, J. Y., Pollard, T. D. & Greene, E. C. Tension
modulates actin ﬁlament polymerization mediated by formin and proﬁlin.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 9752–9757 (2013).
55. Jégou, A., Carlier, M.-F. & Romet-Lemonne, G. Formin mDia1 senses and
generates mechanical forces on actin ﬁlaments. Nat. Commun. 4, 1883 (2013).
56. Yu, M. et al. mDia1 senses both force and torque during F-actin ﬁlament
polymerization. Nat. Commun. 8, 1650 (2017).
57. Kubota, H. et al. Biphasic effect of proﬁlin impacts the formin mDia1 force-
sensing mechanism in actin polymerization. Biophys. J. 113, 461–471 (2017).
58. Meehl, J. B., Bayless, B. A., Giddings, T. H., Pearson, C. G. & Winey, M.
Tetrahymena Poc1 ensures proper intertriplet microtubule linkages to
maintain basal body integrity. Mol. Biol. Cell 27, 2394–2403 (2016).
59. Rubenstein, E. Relationship of senescence of cerebrospinal ﬂuid circulatory
system to dementias of the aged. Lancet 351, 283–285 (1998).
60. Herawati, E. et al. Multiciliated cell basal bodies align in stereotypical patterns
coordinated by the apical cytoskeleton. J. Cell Biol. 214, 571–586 (2016).
61. Higginbotham, H., Bielas, S., Tanaka, T. & Gleeson, J. G. Transgenic mouse
line with green-ﬂuorescent protein-labeled Centrin 2 allows visualization of
the centrosome in living cells. Transgenic. Res. 13, 155–164 (2004).
62. Zhuo, L. et al. hGFAP-cre transgenic mice for manipulation of glial and
neuronal function in vivo. Genesis 31, 85–94 (2001).
63. Dahlstrand, J., Lardelli, M. & Lendahl, U. Nestin mRNA expression correlates
with the central nervous system progenitor cell state in many, but not all,
regions of developing central nervous system. Brain. Res. Dev. Brain Res. 84,
109–129 (1995).
64. Grüneberg, H. Two new mutant genes in the house mouse. J. Genet. 45, 22–28
(1943).
65. Scotto-Lomassese, S. et al. Fragile X mental retardation protein regulates new
neuron differentiation in the adult olfactory bulb. J. Neurosci. 31, 2205–2215
(2011).
66. Delgehyr, N. et al. Ependymal cell differentiation, from monociliated to
multiciliated cells. Methods Cell Biol. 127, 19-35 (2015).
67. Sage, D., Neumann, F. R., Hediger, F., Gasser, S. M. & Unser, M. Automatic
tracking of individual ﬂuorescence particles: application to the study of
chromosome dynamics. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 14, 1372–1383 (2005).
68. Ollion, J., Cochennec, J., Loll, F., Escude, C. & Boudier, T. TANGO: a generic
tool for high-throughput 3D image analysis for studying nuclear organization.
Bioinformatics 29, 1840–1841 (2013).
69. Burkard, R., Dell’Amico, M. & Martello, S. Assignment Problems (Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, 2012).
Acknowledgements
We thank the IBENS Imaging Facility, member of France-BioImaging, supported by the
French National Research Agency (ANR-10-INBS-04, ANR-10-LABX-54 MEMO LIFE,
ANR-11-IDEX-0001-02 PSL) and by the “Région Ile-de-France” (NERF No. 2011-45),
the “Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale” (DGE 20111123023) and the “Fédération
pour la Recherche sur le Cerveau-Rotary International France” (2011). We thank the
“Fondation Imagine” for supporting the acquisition of the Stimulated emission depletion
microscope. We are grateful to L. Goldstein, B. Yoder and J. Gleeson for providing the
Kif3a-cKO, Ift88-cKO and centrin2-GFP mice. We thank X. Morin for the CAAGS-
mCherry plasmid, M. Bornens for the CTR453/AKAP450 antibody and I. Caillé and S.
Scotto for the shRNA backbone. We are grateful to C. Auger, A. Correia, and D. Varela
for their help with the animal husbandry. We greatly appreciated the helpful discussions
with P. Bastin, A. Benmerah, J.F. Joanny and all the members of the Spassky laboratory.
This study was supported by the CNRS, the ENS, the INSERM, the Fondation Pierre-
Gilles de Gennes (FPGG03), the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR-12-BSV4-0006
CILIASTEM), La Ligue contre le Cancer- Comité de Paris (RS14/75-88), the program
≪Investissements d’Avenir≫(ANR-10-LABX-54 MEMO LIFE, ANR-11-IDEX-0001-02
PSL), the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale (20140329547), the INCA grant 2014-1-
PL BIO-11 and the European Research Council (Consolidator grant “EDeN” #647466 to
N.S., Senior grant “forcefulactin” #249982 to M.-F.C.).
Author contributions
A.Mahuzier performed and analysed experiments; A.S., N.M. and A.G. designed the
ImageJ, Cell Proﬁler and Matlab plugins used in this study; C.F. designed the siRNA and
the Cobl construct; P.L. performed electroporations; M.F. optimised electroporation
experiments; A.Meunier performed the electron microscopy used to measure the cen-
triole diameter and length; M.G.-T. developed the STED microscopy; R.V. calculated the
force developed at the base of beating cilia; M.-F.C. initiated the study; N.S. designed the
study and supervised the project; N.D. initiated the study, designed, performed and
analysed experiments and supervised the project; N.D., N.S., and A.Mahuzier wrote the
manuscript. All authors commented on the manuscript.
Additional information
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
018-04676-w.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w
14
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2279 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w| www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2018
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:2279 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04676-w| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
15

===== Marinelli2019_SciRep+SCI_DHA =====
1
Scientific Reports | (2019) 9:8883 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Innovative mouse model mimicking 
human-like features of spinal cord 
injury: efficacy of Docosahexaenoic 
acid on acute and chronic phases
Sara Marinelli   1,2, Valentina Vacca1,2, Federica De Angelis2, Luisa Pieroni2, Tiziana Orsini1, 
Chiara Parisi1, Marzia Soligo3, Virginia Protto3, Luigi Manni3, Roberto Guerrieri4 & 
Flaminia Pavone1,2
Traumatic spinal cord injury has dramatic consequences and a huge social impact. We propose a new 
mouse model of spinal trauma that induces a complete paralysis of hindlimbs, still observable 30 days 
after injury. The contusion, performed without laminectomy and deriving from the pressure exerted 
directly on the bone, mimics more closely many features of spinal injury in humans. Spinal cord was 
injured at thoracic level 10 (T10) in adult anesthetized female CD1 mice, mounted on stereotaxic 
apparatus and connected to a precision impactor device. Following severe injury, we evaluated motor 
and sensory functions, and histological/morphological features of spinal tissue at different time points. 
Moreover, we studied the effects of early and subchronic administration of Docosahexaenoic acid, 
investigating functional responses, structural changes proximal and distal to the lesion in primary 
and secondary injury phases, proteome modulation in injured spinal cord. Docosahexaenoic acid was 
able i) to restore behavioural responses and ii) to induce pro-regenerative effects and neuroprotective 
action against demyelination, apoptosis and neuroinflammation. Considering the urgent health 
challenge represented by spinal injury, this new and reliable mouse model together with the positive 
effects of docosahexaenoic acid provide important translational implications for promising therapeutic 
approaches for spinal cord injuries.
According to the World Health Organization (2013) between 250 000 and 500 000 people suffer a spinal cord 
injury (SCI) every year. People with SCI live with devastating disabilities, experience chronic pain and a sig-
nificant percentage show signs of depression, causing detrimental effects on quality of life and a considerable 
financial burden on society. Tissue damage to the spinal cord results in loss of motor and sensory functions and 
is produced by three main causes: i) destruction from direct trauma ii) compression due to spinal discs or bone 
material pressing against the cord, and iii) reduction in blood flow from the initial damage i.e. ischemia.
Considering the heterogeneity and the complexity of the phenomenon it is critically important to consider 
how much the most utilized experimental models mimic processes and consequences occurring in humans. 
There are a number of models utilized, whose differences are based on the mechanism of injury; the most com-
mon surgical models include transection, compression and contusion among others. Everyone shows advan-
tages and disadvantages mainly related to difficulties to truly express human condition1–6. In general, total spinal 
transection that is performed also in large animals and is widely used to assess regeneration, has little clinical 
relevance, whereas partial transection, even if permits a contralateral side comparison, is limited by an inconsist-
ent reproducibility. On the other hand, the contusion model, considered closer to pathophysiology that occurs 
commonly in humans, implies laminectomy before the spinal cord contusion that reduces the damage and com-
pletely eliminates the compression of bone. In the present paper we present, for the first time, a variation of the 
spinal cord contusion murine model, in which no laminectomy is performed. This model mimics accurately the 
1CNR - National Research Council, Institute of Cell Biology and Neurobiology, 00015, Monterotondo Scalo, Italy. 
2IRCCS - Santa Lucia Foundation, 00143, Roma, Italy. 3CNR - National Research Council, Institute of Translational 
Pharmacology, 00133, Roma, Italy. 4Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Information Engineering «Guglielmo 
Marconi», University of Bologna, 40136, Bologna, Italy. Correspondence and requests for materials should be 
addressed to F.P. (email: flaminia.pavone@cnr.it)
Received: 27 June 2018
Accepted: 28 May 2019
Published online: 20 June 2019
OPEN
Corrected: Publisher Correction

2
Scientific Reports | (2019) 9:8883 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
mechanical trauma found in a variety of human SCI pathologies, reproducing the variety of pathological features 
encountered in clinic and inducing a complete absence of motor recovery. We consider our preclinical model a 
realistic tool for investigating both anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective strategies as a proof of concept for 
novel treatments.
Although there are differences in spinal cord neuroanatomy, physiology and reaction to injury between animal 
species and human, most of knowledge derives from animal models. Experimental studies have demonstrated 
that SCI is a two-step process marked by distinct changes during the primary and secondary injury phases7,8. 
Primary mechanical injury refers to damage sustained at the time of traumatic event through shear forces to 
axons and/or blood vessels. The secondary phase refers to the body’s response to the primary injury and involves 
a host of cellular and molecular events that occur immediately after injury and persist for months to years’, with 
a temporal trend that starts 2 hours after injury (acute), continues with a subacute step (7 to 30 days from injury) 
and becomes chronic 30 days after injury8,9.
Inflammation, which occurs immediately and lasts for several weeks after SCI, plays a fundamental role in 
the secondary injury phase. The inflammatory response is crucial for the clearance of tissue debris, but at the 
same time negatively interferes with healthy tissue and exacerbates the damage, being the extent of inflammatory 
response worsened by proinflammatory cytokines, secreted by microglia and recruited to the injury site, and by 
immune reactive cells10,11.
Wallerian degeneration occurring after SCI is characterized by axonal damage, myelin sheath degenera-
tion and demyelination. Different events are involved including the uncontrolled oxidative stress, ischemia and 
glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity. A main role is played by oligodendrocytes, the only myelin-forming cells 
within the central nervous system, highly vulnerable to damage leading to necrosis and apoptosis12. In subacute 
and chronic phases, the formation of glial scar in the surrounding of cystic cavity at the necrotic part of injury 
epicenter represents a physical barrier to neural function improvement.
Recent papers show that Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) is able to positively influence neuroinflammation, 
promotes tissue protection and neuroplasticity, and increases functional recovery13–20, even if also modest effects 
were reported in humans21 and it is not clear by which mechanism DHA exerts its action22. We though it was 
important to investigate also in our model the effects of DHA administration and the mechanisms by which 
this molecule exerts its effects in vivo. In the present study we confirmed and extended the beneficial effects of 
repeated systemic administration of DHA on the primary and secondary phases of SCI, induced in mice by a new 
experimental procedure that causes human-like functional deficits and tissue/cell response. We demonstrated 
that DHA treatment fully reinstates motor and sensory function, exerts neuroprotective action, modulates cellu-
lar response to injury (apoptosis and survival) and inflammation in astrocytes and microglia, finally resulting in 
promotion of spinal regeneration.
Results
A new mouse model of SCI. 
A severe SCI contusion model should mimic the pathological human condi-
tion and have clinical translational potential for novel treatments. We present a new methodology for a consistent 
model of severe SCI, in which no laminectomy is performed. The use of a stereotactic frame and computer-con-
trolled impactor allows for creation of reproducible injury (Fig. 1A–C). The contusion, performed at T9-T11 
spinal level (Fig. 1D–F), generated an impairment of the hindlimbs (paraplegia) without involving the forelimbs’ 
function (Supplementary Video 1, taken at D30 post-injury). As in human spinal trauma, vertebrae of animals 
subjected to SCI presented several fractures, evidenced by microCT imaging (Fig. 1E). The functional results of 
this contusion model, examined by means of Basso Mouse Scale (BMS)23, demonstrated that different degrees 
of impact produce significantly different behavioural responses, which may be classified as mild, moderate and 
severe. We used the following parameters to induce a severe impact: dwell time of 800 ms, velocity of 3 m/sec and 
depth of 5 mm (for details see Supplementary Table S1).
Only the severe trauma was able to induce a permanent paraplegia in female mice, which, when subjected to 
mild or moderate impact, spontaneously recovered (Fig. 2A). ANOVA two-way for repeated measures showed 
significant main effect for trauma intensity (F2,12 = 106,2; p < 0.001), time (F9,108 = 25,713; p < 0.001) and a signif-
icant intensity × time interaction (F18,108 = 7,658; p < 0.001). Male mice were not considered because preliminary 
experiments have shown that they gradually recovered after SCI (Supplementary Fig. S1). Thus the subsequent 
experiments were carried out in female mice subjected to severe trauma.
Behavioural, histological/morphological and molecular changes induced by severe contusion were investi-
gated 7, 30 or 60 days after trauma in saline-injected mice, which represented our control group for SCI. The 
extent and type of physical damage to the spinal cord, which reflect the ensuing level of functional disruption, 
are impressive in this contusion model. Most of features considered hallmarks in human SCI were analysed. As 
detected by GFAP staining, small microcysts were present 7 days after SCI (Fig. 2D), followed by cavity formation 
30 days after surgery (Fig. 2E) and by extension of cystic cavity (Fig. 2F) and gliosis (Fig. 2G), after 60 days.
The results obtained legitimize the use of CD1 female mice subjected to a severe impact without laminectomy 
as a clinically relevant mouse model. In the following results section a comparison with DHA-treated animals was 
performed to evaluate also in our murine model the already reported neuroprotective efficacy of DHA19 and to 
better understand its mechanisms of action.
SCI-induced paraplegia and absence of tail-flick reflex: reversion by DHA. 
The first day after 
surgery DHA- and saline-treated animals did not show significant differences in Basso Mouse Scale (BMS)23 
scores (Fig. 2B), showing both groups no movement of hindlimbs. However, after a week following surgery, only 
DHA-treated animals improved hindlimb motor function, with significantly higher open field motor ratings 
(>3 points on the BMS scale) compared to saline-treated animals. After 4 weeks following surgery, DHA-treated 
mice completely recovered motor performance while saline-treated mice were still totally paralyzed. ANOVA 

3
Scientific Reports | (2019) 9:8883 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
two-way for repeated measures showed significant main effect for treatment (F1,18 = 36,06; p < 0.001), time 
(F9,162 = 24,32; p < 0.001) and a significant severity × time interaction (F9,162 = 29,73; p < 0.001). Moreover, after 
SCI, saline-treated mice did not show tail withdrawal and always reached cut-off latency (10 sec) during TF meas-
urement (Fig. 2C); on the other hand, DHA-treated mice started to react to the thermal stimulus two days after 
lesion and fully restored the thermal threshold at day 20, as observed in uninjured animals. ANOVA two-way 
for repeated measures showed significant main effect for treatment (F1,16 = 86,07; p < 0.001), time (F9,144 = 15,34; 
p < 0.001) and a significant treatment × time interaction (F9,144 = 24,11; p < 0.001).
Sham-operated animals following saline or DHA treatment, tested for BMS and TF reflex, did not show any 
difference in comparison with naïve mice (Supplementary Fig. S2).
SCI-induced macroscopic tissue damage: amelioration by DHA. 
We examined whether the 
improvement in motor function mediated by DHA treatment was associated with a reduction in primary and 
secondary spinal injury in comparison with control animals (saline-treated mice) (Fig. 2D–G).
Histological sections of spinal cord stained for GFAP, 7 days after impact, showed a reactive gliosis and the 
presence of small cavities in saline-injected mice; DHA reduced the mycrocysts (Fig. 2D) as well as cavity forma-
tion 30 days after SCI (Fig. 2E). Moreover, 60 days after surgery, DHA-treated mice reduced the cystic cavity, as 
demonstrated by the significant increase of regenerated area (Fig. 2F; t10 = 3,699; p < 0.01).
It is noteworthy to observe the different GFAP expression, which reveals the extension of gliosis, in saline 
compared to DHA tissue: GFAP staining is highly localized at the epicenter but it is still present along the spinal 
cord after SCI, while it significantly decreased after DHA treatment not only in proximity of cavity but also at 
Figure 1.  Generation of severe spinal cord injury. (A) Representative example of the exposition of the spinal 
cord in anesthetized animal mounted on a stereotaxic apparatus. (B) Spinal adaptors are connected to a 
cortical PinPoint precision impactor device (Stoelting), being the impactor positioned on T9-T11 vertebrae. 
The graphical impact parameters are used to identify potential outliers. To obtain a severe spinal trauma 
the following parameters are set: - middle, round and flat tip (#4); - velocity 3 m/sec; - depth 5 mm; - dwell 
time 800 ms. (C) Representative example of the impactor on the spinal cord of an anesthetized animal. (D) 
Representative longitudinal and cross-sectional μCT images of thoracic spinal cord in intact and (E) in SCI 
mice, magnification of the impact zone at the thoracic level after SCI is shown in the square. (F) Impact 
generates a perforation of vertebrae bones and some fragments are visible (zoom, arrow). After impact spinal 
cord appears compressed (bottom).

4
Scientific Reports | (2019) 9:8883 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 2.  Behavioural responses, microcystic degeneration and cystic cavitation in the new mouse model 
of SCI. (A) BMS scores in female mice subjected to different degrees of impact. BMS defines the locomotion 
in recovery after SCI. The BMS score ranges from 0 to 9, where 0 indicates complete paralysis and 9 normal 
movement of the hindlimbs. Motor function recovery is significantly different among the three degree of impact 
(°°p < 0.01 mild vs moderate; ***p < 0.001 mild and moderate vs severe SCI, Tukey/Kramer; n = 5 mice/group). 
(B) BMS scores and (C) thermal threshold in daily ip saline- (SAL) or DHA-injected (from D1 to D5 after SCI) 
females. DHA-treated animals (n = 8) show a significant improvement in motor function, as revealed by higher 
BMS values in comparison with SAL-treated animals (n = 11) (***p < 0.001), and a significant recovery of tail-
flick reflex (***p < 0.001) (Tukey/Kramer). (D) Representative images (5X) of small microcysts, as revealed 
by GFAP (green) immunostaining, 7 days after SCI in SAL- and DHA-treated mice. (E) Representative image 
(5X) of cavity formation 30 days after SCI in SAL- and DHA-treated mice. (F) Nuclei stained with DAPI in 
longitudinal representative images (5X) of spinal cord in naïve, SAL- and DHA-treated mice, 60 days after SCI; 

5
Scientific Reports | (2019) 9:8883 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
caudal and cranial levels (Fig. 2G). Moreover, as revealed by high magnification images, different degrees of 
atrogliosis depending on the distance to the epicenter were appreciable. ANOVA two-way for repeated measures 
showed significant main effect for treatment (F1,6 = 12,098; p < 0.05), distance to the epicenter (F6,36 = 12,268; 
p < 0.0001) and a significant treatment x distance interaction (F6,36 = 2,492; p < 0.05) (see the graph).
SCI-induced glial scar formation and microglia activation: reduction by DHA. 
Morphometric 
analysis revealed that the traumatic impact was able to generate a strong astrocytes and microglia response 
(Fig. 3A,B), highlighting significant differences between saline and DHA in astrocyte and microglia dimension 
and morphology. Figure 3A shows that 7 days after injury astrocytes are particularly reactive and hypertrophic 
in saline mice in both distal and peri-lesioned areas, while the glial scar formation is evident at the epicenter. 
DHA reduced astrocytes’ activation, as revealed by the significant decrease in distal (t10 = −4,428; p < 0.01) and 
peri-lesioned areas (t12 = −2,977; p < 0.05). DHA did not induce significant differences at the epicenter but led to 
strong morphological changes: astrocytes are highly ramified but do not show the scarring process as observed 
in saline group.
Usually microglia have a ramified shape in the resting state and react to the spinal insult changing their phe-
notypic profile. In the distal area 7 days after SCI Resting (R) and Hyperactive/Bushy (H/B) microglia were most 
abundant; on the other hand, in the peri-lesioned area all the morphological features of microglia coexist: R, 
H/B and Un-ramified/Ameboid (U/A) (Fig. 3B). The U/A microglia, which is characterized by a phagocytic 
activity, was mainly present in the epicenter. DHA significantly increased the R microglia in distal (t12 = 2,623; 
p < 0.05) and peri-lesioned (t12 = 3,368; p < 0.01) areas and reduced the number of activated microglia (dis-
tal: H/B t12 = -3,410; p < 0.01; peri-lesioned areas: H/B t12 = −3,337; p < 0.01; U/A: t12 = −3,129; p < 0.01), 
while increased R (t12 = 5,423; p < 0.001) and H/B (t12 = 6,273; p < 0.0001) and decreased U/A (t12 = −7,664; 
p < 0.0001) microglia in the epicenter.
SCI-induced proteome alterations: modulation by DHA. 
A comparative proteomic study of the 
injured spinal cord from SAL- or DHA-treated animals, 7 days after injury, highlighted a panel of proteins differ-
entially modulated in the two groups, including some proteins that characterize human SCI neurodegeneration. 
In our experiment we could identify 109 proteins, 56 of which were up-regulated and 53 down-regulated in DHA 
compared to saline group (Supplementary Table S2).
To interpret and understand the results of proteomics data within the contest of this SCI model, we interrogate 
the search tool Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis (IPA®, QIAGEN Inc., https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/prod-
ucts/ingenuitypathway-analysis)24 performing a Core Analysis to know which disease and function were mostly 
associated with our dataset.
Among all Diseases and Biofunction predicted, we focused our attention on Neurological Diseases, where 
we found a significant association among several proteins up-regulated in SAL, such as Myelin oligodendrocyte 
glycoprotein (MOG), Myelin proteolipid protein (PLP1), Sodium/potassium-transporting ATPase subunit beta-2 
(ATP1B2), Neurofilament medium polypeptide (NEFM) and movement disorders, neurodegeneration and paral-
ysis (Table 1).
Several Canonical Pathways were also interestingly associated with our datasets (Table 2). Glycolysis and 
gluconeogenesis, metabolic pathways that guarantee production and utilization of glucose, essential under all 
condition of growth, were up-regulated by DHA administration as well as Semaphorin Signaling in neurons. 
Semaphorins are a family of growth cone guidance molecules implicated in mediating repulsive guidance dur-
ing neurodevelopment and neuronal regeneration. Interestingly also the Mitochondrial Dysfunction pathway 
was affected in this experimental model, underlining the relevant impact of SCI on mitochondrial redox states 
and energy machinery, closely linked to cell death. Specifically, the up-regulation of some peroxiredoxins, of 
Voltage-dependent anion-selective channel 1 (VDAC1) and several Na+/K+-transporting ATPases observed 
after DHA revealed the potential antioxidant properties of this compound, which can exert a neuroprotective 
action. Moreover, according to the modulation of the protein expression measured by the proteomic analysis, IPA 
Upstream Regulator Analysis identified upstream regulators that may be responsible for ongoing gene expres-
sion changes observed in experimental datasets, helping the comprehension of biological processes occurring 
in this model. IPA prediction showed that up-regulation of several proteins in DHA treated animals, e.g, super-
oxide dismutase 2 (SOD2), ATP synthase subunit alpha and beta (ATP5A, ATP5B), can lead to the activation of 
Insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGFR), Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARG1A), 
Insulin receptor (INSR) and transcriptional regulators involved in the regulation of energy metabolism pathways 
(Supplementary Fig. S3). These observations support the hypothesis that DHA treatment can favour the injured 
tissue regeneration.
SCI-produced myelin alterations: counteraction by DHA. 
An increase of MBP expression, analysed 
by immunofluorescence analysis, was observed 7 days after SCI at the epicenter of saline- but not DHA-treated 
spinal tissues in comparison with those from naive, while in the peri-lesioned areas no differences were evi-
dent among groups (Fig. 4A,B). When the myelin protein was analysed at the epicenter 30 days after injury, the 
DHA induced significant (**p < 0.01) beneficial effects, as shown by the percentage increase of regenerated 
area in the graph (n = 3 mice/group). (G) GFAP (green) staining in longitudinal representative images (5X) of 
spinal cord in naïve, SAL- and DHA-treated mice 60 days after SCI. The squares represented high magnification 
images (20x and zoom 2 respectively). The areas 200 μm caudal and cranial in respect to the epicenter cavity 
are quantified in the graph. Note, in the graph, that DHA significantly reduced GFAP expression at caudal and 
cranial level (n = 4 sample/group) (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 vs SAL Student’s t test).

6
Scientific Reports | (2019) 9:8883 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 3.  Morphometric analysis of astrocytes and microglia after SCI. Representative high magnification 
(63X, zoom 3X) images of reactive astrocytes (A) and microglia (B) at distal, peri-lesioned and epicenter areas 
of spinal injured tissues, in saline (SAL) and DHA-treated mice, 7 days (D7) after SCI (n = 3 mice/group). Each 
image was transformed in digital image, where outline of cell silhouettes were identified and automatically 
measured for astrocytes, while microglia were singularly counted and divided about the different morphology. 
(A) Note the increase of GFAP expression and morphological changes showing hypertrophic status of 
astrocytes, with glial scar formation in the epicenter area, in comparison with naïve non-reactive astrocytes 
(in the green frame). As shown in graphs, DHA significantly reduced the dimension of astrocytes (quantified by 
using RGB method that converted pixel in brightness values) in distal and peri-lesioned areas and, even if not 
statistically significant, in the epicenter, where also phenotypic changes occurred in comparison with SAL-
injected mice. (B) After SCI microglia show a hyperactive condition characterized by several phenotypes, differently 
distributed in the analysed areas: from resting (R) to hypertrophic/bushy (H/B) and un-ramified/amoeboid  

7
Scientific Reports | (2019) 9:8883 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
immunostaining of saline group appeared enhanced even if not quantitatively significant; a significant increase 
was observed only in peri-lesioned area of saline group. The samples from DHA-treated group appeared similar 
to those of naïve group. The analysis of variance (ANOVA one-way) demonstrated significant differences among 
groups for D7 and for D30 (F4,24 = 17,744; p < 0.0001 and F4,25 = 8.74; p = 0.0001, respectively).
Investigating by means of Western Blot the time course of MBP expression from 4 h to D7 after lesion in 
saline and DHA samples in comparison with naïve (Fig. 4C) we confirmed a significant difference among groups 
(H6 = 14,771; p < 0.05, Kruskal-Wallis). We noticed a gradual enhancement of the protein starting 4 h after injury 
in saline in comparison with naïve samples, increase that reaches a significant effect 24 h and 7 days after injury. 
Differing from what observed in saline group, the significant increase (p < 0.05), in comparison with the naïve 
level, observed 24 h after trauma in spinal cord of DHA-treated mice disappeared after 7 days, resulting signifi-
cantly different (p < 0.01) from the corresponding value of saline group. Further WB analysis 30 days after trauma 
revealed a significant difference among groups (H2 = 6,489; p < 0.05, Kruskal-Wallis), with a significant reduction 
of MBP in DHA- compared to saline-treated samples.
SCI-induced up-regulation of growth factors: modulation by DHA. 
Considering the increased vas-
cular permeability induced by spinal injury and the role of growth factors (GFs) in cell proliferation and differen-
tiation, we examined the implication of some GFs in our SCI model and the effects of DHA on their expression. 
We investigated a mouse panel (10 total mediators in one experiment) of trophic factors in spinal cord lysates 
24 h and 7 days (D7) after SCI. Table 3 shows the significant decreased/increased levels of trophic factors after 
SCI in tissues derived from saline or DHA mice. Data are shown as fold change (SAL24h/Naïve; DHA24h/ Naïve; 
SALD7/Naïve; DHAD7/ Naïve;). Any ≥1. 5-fold increase or ≤0.65-fold decrease in signal intensity for a single 
analyte between samples may be considered a measurable and significant difference in expression. All trophic 
factors analysed were significantly up-regulated after spinal contusion in the saline group compared to the Naïve 
condition. In particular, there was a great increase of the basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), the Insulin-Like 
Growth Factor I (IGF-I), the epidermal growth factor (EGF) and the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). 
These GFs are still up-regulated after DHA treatment but definitely to a lesser extent.
SCI-induced apoptosis in neurons and oligodendrocytes: reduction by DHA. 
To evaluate the level 
of cell death induced by SCI and to investigate whether DHA treatment interferes with the activation of apop-
tosis pathways, we detected caspase-3 in grey matter 7 days after SCI, at both epicenter and peri-lesioned zone, 
by using immunofluorescence analysis. Staining of transverse sections with NeuN (neurons) (Fig. 5A,B,F) or 
OLIG1 (oligodendrocytes) (Fig. 5C,D,G) and their co-staining (Manders’ coefficient) with caspase-3 revealed a 
number of pathological changes occurring after contusion. Evident marks of cell death such as destruction and 
collapse of cell bodies at the epicenter were appreciable in saline group, in both neurons and oligodendrocytes, 
while DHA treatment preserved some cells. Co-localization analysis revealed a strong correlation (R) between 
NeuN or OLIG-1 and Caspase-3 expression in the impact zone of SCI saline mice while a modest correlation 
was present in DHA-treated mice, which instead showed a greater correlation in peri-lesioned area. Neuronal 
loss in saline-treated mice is still evident in ventral horns at the caudal level (L2) 30 days after surgery (Fig. 5E), 
time point in which the preventive effect of DHA is also confirmed, as revealed by statistical analysis (t17 = 2,192; 
p < 0.05). ANOVA one-way revealed a significant difference in the expression of caspase-3 after SCI, examined in 
treated and naïve samples at the epicenter (F2,24 = 8,910; p < 0.01) and peri-lesioned area (F2,24 = 7,902; p < 0.01). 
Caspase-3 was significantly higher (p < 0.001) in saline compared to naïve but DHA treatment significantly 
(p < 0.01) reduced apoptosis at the epicenter in comparison with saline (Fig. 5F). As far as the peri-lesioned area 
is concerned, treated groups maintained significant differences from naïve but did not significantly differ between 
them. Figure 5G shows that OLIG-1 was significantly enhanced after SCI both in saline- and DHA-treated mice 
in comparison with naïve, mainly at the epicenter. ANOVA one-way showed significant difference among groups 
(F2,24 = 70,657; p < 0.0001 and F2,24 = 57,598; p < 0.0001, for epicenter and peri-lesioned area respectively). 
In the peri-lesioned area a significant difference (p < 0.001) between saline and DHA groups also emerged. 
Immunohistochemical analysis did not show any difference in sham-operated animals (saline or DHA) compared 
to naïve mice (Supplementary Fig. S2).
By means of WB analysis we also investigated p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR), directly involved in 
apoptosis induced by injury in spinal oligodendrocytes through a JNK-mediated mechanism. We observed that 
p75NTR and phosphorylated (p)-JNK were increased after SCI in the three spinal levels examined and were 
down-regulated by DHA, which produced an almost complete disappearance of p75NTR and a parallel great 
reduction of pJNK (Supplementary Fig. S4).
Discussion
The results of the present study have important basic and translational potential for the treatment of SCI, whose 
consequences for patients are terrible, being their quality of life substantially jeopardized. We show that DHA 
exerts a long-lasting neuroprotective action and a significant improvement of functional recovery in a new con-
tusion animal model, which mimics the dramatic human condition.
(U/A) states. As evidenced in graphs, DHA significantly increased the R state in all areas investigated. The 
increase of the H/B phenotype observed at the epicenter supports phagocytic activity, which may contribute to 
homeostasis reinstatement. **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 vs SAL Student’s t test.

8
Scientific Reports | (2019) 9:8883 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Considering the complexity and difficulties involved in translating findings from animal models to clinical tri-
als for this pathological state, it is substantial to choose a model as valid as possible as starting point for preclinical 
evaluation of pharmacological treatments.
There are several animal models used to induce a lesion; they include contusion, hemisection or complete 
transection, and compression models4,6. Lesions induced by these methods may be reproducible; however, they 
are unable to reproduce the biomechanical compression and the systemic complications associated to human 
injuries. There are several aspects on which the choice of animal model may depend. As reported in a survey of 
physicians and scientists involved in the field of neurotrauma25, the contusion model was universally accepted 
to be clinically relevant, being contusive in nature the majority of SCI in humans. Differing from the transection 
model that induces only focal tissue pathology limited to the epicenter, the contusion induces a widespread tis-
sue pathology that extends beyond the epicenter of injury26–29. The contusion model may present the difficulty 
to distinguish between spared and regenerated axons, but may represent, besides its clinical relevance, a strong 
advantage for the study of the pathophysiology of SCI30.
The high individual variability, among strains and species, further highlights the difficulties to translate exper-
imental findings and the importance of the appropriate model23,31–34. It has been reported that rats but not mice 
develop cystic cavity30; however, this is mainly true for C57BL/6 strain, while CD1 strain, as shown in this study, 
presents cavitation even if to a lesser extent than rats35.
To uniform the force delivery across the spinal cord volume, we utilized the computer-controlled impactor 
stabilizing the spine before impact36. Furthermore, to more accurately reproduce a contusive injury as in humans, 
we decided to introduce in our animal model a new important feature, namely the absence of laminectomy. This 
peculiarity is what specifically characterizes this compared to other contusion models and permits us to include 
and examine also the additional damage derived from bone destruction and its consequences.
The experimental contusion model described here causes in female mice a permanent paralysis with evident 
hindlimb deformity and loss of tail-flick reflex and presents from histopathological and morphological point 
of view the devastating characteristics of primary and secondary lesion induced by spinal injury, as previously 
described in literature11,37,38. We observed pathological changes such as cystic cavitation, demyelination, neurons 
and oligodendrocytes apoptosis, loss of motor neurons, together with proliferation and activation of microglia 
and astrocytes, accompanied by inflammatory and immune responses. As a matter of fact, intense local inflam-
mation is an immediate consequence of injury, which causes progressive cavitation and exacerbates the extent of 
the primary lesion; resident astrocytes become reactive, undergo hypertrophy and form a dense glial scar. On the 
one hand the glial scar facilitates the restoration of the blood-brain barrier integrity, on the other constitutes a 
barrier that impedes the axon regeneration and the connections necessary for the functional recovery39.
We observed that the reactive astrocytes, which migrate toward the lesion site, display hypertrophy and 
enlarged cell somas not only at the epicenter but also in the peri-lesioned and distal areas. Morphological shifts 
were evident also for microglia: these cells move from the resting highly branched state to an unramified/amoe-
boid hypertrophic state, mainly in lesion epicenter, suggesting phagocytic activity and pro and anti-inflammatory 
cytokines release.
Diseases and Biofunction
# molecules
Movement Disorders
ACAT1, AHCYL1, AK1, ALB, ALDH5A1, ATP1A2, ATP1A3, ATP1B1, ATP1B2, ATP50, ATP6V1E1, Cdc42, CKB, CNP, 
DPYSL3, ENO2, ENO3, EPB41L3, GAPDH, GNAO1, GPD1, HSP90AA1, MAPT, MBP, MOG, NDRG2, NEFL, PEBP1, 
PGK1, PLP1, PPIA, PRDX2, RHOG, SLC1A2, SNCA, SNCB, SNCG, SOD2, SYN1, TPI1, TUBB1, MTUBB3
42
Neurodegeneration
ATP1B1, CNP, DPYSL2. DPYSL3, GAPDH, MAPT, NEFM, PLP1, RAB1A, SLC1A2, SNCA, SNCB, SOD2
13
Paralysis
ATP1A2, ATP1A3, ATP1B2, HSPD1, MAPT, MBP, MOG, NEFM, PLP1, SLC1A2, SLC25A4, SNCA, TUBB1, TUBB3
14
Glyosis
ALDH5A1, MAPT, MOG, PLP1, S100B, SNCA, SOD2
7
Table 1.  IPA Disease and Biofunction downstream effect analysis. The table summarizes the predicted relation 
between molecules modulated in our datasets and biologica function or disease strictly related to SCI. Proteins 
more espressed in SAL (underlined) and in DHA (bold) spinal tissues are reported.
Name
p-value
Overlap
Glycolysis I
ALDOA, ALDOC, ENO2, ENO3, GAPDH, PGAM1, PGK1, PGK2, TPI1
4.21E-15
39.1% (9/23)
Gluconeogenesis I
ALDOA, ALDOC, ENO2, ENO3, GAPDH, MDH2, PGAM1, PGK1, PGK2
6.71E-15
37.5% (9/24)
Semaphorin Signaling in Neurons
CRMP1, DPYSL2, DPYSL3, RAC1, RHOG, RHOJ, RHOQ
1.76E-08
13.7% (7/51)
Mitochondrial Dysfunction
ATP5B, ATP5D, ATP5H, ATP5O, PRDX3, PRDX5, SNCA, SOD2, VDAC1, VDAC2
3.06E-08
6.3% (10/159)
Table 2.  Top Canonical Pathways. Proteins more espressed in DHA (bold) and in saline (underlined) spinal 
tissues are reported.

9
Scientific Reports | (2019) 9:8883 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 4.  Myelination after SCI: Expression of Myelin Basic Protein. (A) Representative images (63X, zoom 
2) of MBP expression in naïve and saline (SAL)- and DHA-treated mice at the epicenter (EPI) and (B) peri-
lesioned (PERI) areas, 7 (D7) and 30 days (D30) after SCI. The quantification of MBP, in graph, showed 
significant increase of MBP expression in SAL EPI at D7 and SAL PERI at D30 in comparison with naïve, while 
DHA significantly differed from SAL (n = 3 mice/group) (°°°p < 0.001 vs naïve; ***p < 0.001 vs SAL; §§p < 0.01 
SAL PERI vs SAL EPI. Tukey/Kramer). (C) Western blot analysis and quantification of MBP in naïve/N, saline 
(S)(SAL) and DHA-treated mice 4 hours (4 H), 24 hours (24 H) and 7 days (D7) after SCI. The time dependent 
increase of MBP in injured tissues of SAL mice was gradually reduced in DHA-treated animals, where the 
expression of MBP reached the naïve values at D7. At D30 (graph on the right) MBP expression in DHA is 
significantly reduced compared to SAL-treated samples (n = 3 mice/group/time point). (°p < 0.05, °°p < 0.01, 
°°°p < 0.001 vs naïve; *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001 vs SAL; Dunn’s Test).

10
Scientific Reports | (2019) 9:8883 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
In the last decade there was much debate on the anti-inflammatory, neuroprotective and pro-regenerative 
action of omega-3 fatty acids, mainly DHA, in different neurodegenerative disorders15,40. Experimental evidence 
suggests its effect on spinal cord lesions in animal models16,19, while its potential benefit in regenerative medi-
cine is still uncertain and modest effect is also reported21. Some studies reported improved outcome after acute 
administration of DHA alone13,17,18 or in combination with a DHA-enriched diet14,17,41 or with rehabilitation20 
therapy. However, most researches focused on the acute phase of spinal trauma without taking into account the 
most deleterious second phase. Differing from previous studies, we evaluated the effects of repeated systemic 
administration of DHA, daily for 5 days, on both acute and intermediate/chronic phases. Moreover, the papers 
examined, although supporting the use of DHA as possible therapy in spinal trauma, utilized a mouse or rat SCI 
model characterized by spontaneous restoration of motor function also in vehicle treated-animals. Our model, 
in which no improvements are observed even 30 days after injury, represents an encouraging challenge to deeply 
investigate the therapeutic action of this substance in a clinical perspective. We observed that after DHA admin-
istration mice had retrieved in few days the ability to walk and the withdrawal reflex to a thermal stimulus. This 
impressive functional improvement indicates a regenerative potential of DHA, encouraging further investigation 
on mechanism of action of primary and secondary phases. The investigation of the progression of the pathology 
from the epicenter and peri-lesioned area to the distal site may provide extensive evidence for long-lasting bene-
fits in contusion-induced SCI.
The dramatic changes elicited by spinal injury to vascular networks and neural architecture, characterized by 
local inflammation, progressive cavitation and glial scar formation, were significantly affected by DHA. Seven 
days after impact the treatment reduced SCI-induced up-regulation of GFAP, a hallmark of reactive astrocytes, as 
well as the presence of small microcysts. Interestingly, when the gliosis was observed 30 and 60 days following the 
damage, the decrease was evident not only in the proximity of the cavity but also at caudal and cranial levels and 
is associated to tissue regeneration. DHA reduced glial scar after SCI, suggesting that it creates a permissive envi-
ronment for axonal growth and myelination and contributes to functional recovery. In addition, it is noteworthy 
that after DHA some morphological changes occurred, both in astrocytes and microglia. Astrocytes were less 
reactive and did not show the scarring process. Importantly, also microglia activation was significantly reduced 
by DHA: morphological analysis showed evident changes in phenotype, with a strong increase of the R shape in 
all zones examined at D7 and a reduction of U/A at the epicenter in comparison with saline group.
The proteomic analysis further supports our model and the complexity of pathological events that contribute 
to the lack of functional recovery: SCI significantly modulates the expression of many proteins. It is particularly 
interesting to note that, among the Disesases and Biofunction strictly related to SCI and predicted by IPA analysis 
of the proteomics data, most of the proteins associated with paralysis were up-regulated in SAL. Moreover, SCI 
(saline mice) induced a strong up-regulation of two myelin proteins: Myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (Mog) 
and Myelin proteolipid protein (Plp1), which were not induced after DHA administration. It is reported that the 
Growth 
Factor
Function
SAL 24 h/
Naive
DHA 24 h/
Naive
SAL D7/
Naive
DHA D7/
Naïve
bFGF
basic fibroblast growth factor, present in the subendothelial 
extracellular matrix of blood vessels and involved in 
angiogenesis process
15,01 ± 1,56
p = 0,0007
2,04 ± 0,29
p = 0,0144
11,26 ± 2,84
p < 0.0001
2,89 ± 0,96
p = 0,0198
EGF
epidermal growth factor, plays an important role in regulating 
the growth, proliferation and cellular differentiation by binding 
to its receptor EGFR
2,10 ± 0,25
p = 0,0163
1,8 ± 0,30
p = 0.0269
2,67 ± 0,82
p = 0,0139
2,65 ± 0,37
p = 0,0037
IGF-I
insulin-like growth factor I, produced primarily by the liver as 
an endocrine hormone as well as in target tissues in a paracrine/
autocrine fashion. Production is stimulated by growth hormone 
(GH)
6,46 ± 1,33
p < 0,0001
1,71 ± 0,44
p = 0,0589
8,13 ± 1,55
p < 0,0001
1,97 ± 0,93
p = 0,0678
IGF-II
insulin-like growth factor II, believed to be a major fetal growth 
factor in contrast to Insulin-like growth factor 1, which is a 
major growth factor in adults
2,25 ± 0,63
p = 0,0152
3,79 ± 1,56
p = 0,0468
3,93 ± 1,89
p = 0,1044
3,73 ± 0,43
p = 0,021
VEGF-A
Vascular endothelial growth factor A, dimeric glycoprotein that 
plays a significant role in neurons and is considered to be the 
main, dominant inducer to the growth of blood vessels
1,54 ± 0,46
p = 0,4027
1,76 ± 0,48
p = 0,0598
1,93 ± 0,60
p = 0,066
2,09 ± 0.56
p = 0,0192
VEGF R1
Vascular endothelial growth factor Receptor 1, thought to 
modulate VEGFR-2 signaling and to act as a dummy/decoy 
receptor, sequestering VEGF from VEGFR-2 binding
3,89 ± 0,81
p = 0,0002
1,75 ± 0,43
p = 0,0474
2,55 ± 0,90
p = 0,0426
2,01 ± 0,55
p = 0,0268
VEGF R2
Vascular endothelial growth factor Receptor 2, mediates almost 
all of the known cellular responses to VEGF
2,27 ± 0,36
p = 0,0061
1,74 ± 0,36
p = 0,0347
2,69 ± 1,16
p = 0,1113
2,39 ± 0,57
p = 0,0048
VEGF R3
Vascular endothelial growth factor Receptor 3, mediates 
lymphangiogenesis in response to VEGF-C and VEGF-D.s
1,87 ± 0.15
p = 0,0484
1,29 ± 0,15
p = 0,3351
2,58 ± 1,18
p = 0,1555
3,21 ± 0,52
p = 0,0009
VEGF-D
Vascular endothelial growth factor D, needed for the 
development of lymphatic vasculature surrounding lung 
bronchioles.
1,90 ± 0,32
p = 0,0185
1,66 ± 0,32
p = 0,0485
1,81 ± 0,60
p = 0,1152
1,89 ± 0,47
p = 0,0273
HGF
Hepatocyte growth factor, is secreted by mesenchymal cells and 
acts as a multi-functional cytokine on cells of mainly epithelial 
origin. HGF plays a central role in angiogenesis, tumorogenesis, 
and tissue regeneration.
2,54 ± 0,52
p = 0,0022
2,05 ± 0,51
p = 0,0161
2,16 ± 0,60
p = 0,019
2,20 ± 0,46
p = 0,0059
Table 3.  Mouse Antibody Array Glass Chip: Expression of GFs in spinal cord tissue lysates 24 h and seven days 
(D7) post SAL and DHA treatment. Mean ± SE of the fold change values (n.3 values for each time point).  
P values were obtained with a Student’s t-test analysis.

11
Scientific Reports | (2019) 9:8883 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 5.  Apoptosis in primary injury phase. Representative examples of high magnification (63X, zoom 2) 
confocal images of Neurons (NeuN, A and B) or oligodendrocytes (OLIG1, C and D) (green), Caspase-3 (red) 
and their colabeling in ventral horns (VH) of injured spinal cord from saline- (SAL) or DHA-treated animals, 
7 days after SCI, at the epicenter (EPI) and peri-lesioned (PERI) areas. DAPI was used to stain nuclei. Manders’ 
coefficient was utilized to evaluate co-staining between NeuN+ or OLIG-1+ cells and Caspase-3: the R value 
approximating +1 or −1 indicates linear correlation and 0 indicates absence of correlation. (E) Representative 
images of NeuN positive cells (green) and quantification of neurons (n = 3 mice/group) in ventral horn (VH 
NeuN+ cells) 30 days after SCI: DHA significantly (p < 0.05; Student’s t-test) counteracted neuronal loss. (F) 
Brightness values of Caspase-3 expression at the epicenter and perilesioned areas in ventral horns of spinal cord 
from naïve, SAL- and DHA-treated mice (n = 3 mice/group). In comparison with naïve animals, SCI induced a 
higher expression of Caspase-3 at the epicenter, significantly reduced by DHA treatment. After SCI Caspase-3 
expression was less enhanced in the perilesioned area of SAL-treated animals, while a higher expression was 

12
Scientific Reports | (2019) 9:8883 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
overexpression of Mog, a kind of myelin-derived inhibitor, strongly inhibits axonal regeneration42, while Plp1 
induces demyelination and inflammation throughout microglia activation43.
Considering the long-term care of paraplegic patients, great attention should be also paid to metabolic anom-
alies and mitochondrial dysfunction, typically occurring during the secondary injury phase. These alterations 
can expose individuals to higher risk of diseases, therefore their control could represent a potentially therapeutic 
strategy44,45. Then, among all pathways modulated, we focused on metabolic pathways, such as glycolysis and 
gluconeogenesis, and on mitochondrial functionality, whose central role in the regulation of cell life and death is 
well known46. In tissues from DHA-treated mice characteristic proteins of these pathways resulted up-regulated 
compared to saline, e.g. ATP synthase subunits, superoxide dismutase or VDAC, one of the mitochondrial pro-
teins controlling cross-talk between mitochondria and the rest of the cell47.
Reaction to SCI leads to strong up-regulation of different GFs. Specifically, although the most part of GFs 
analyzed are similarly and significantly expressed both in saline and in DHA, bFGF, IGF-I and VEGF-RI are 
particularly up-regulated in saline-SCI mice, presumably for the need to face a major loss of neurons. It has been 
demonstrated that the potent angiogenic and endothelial cell mitogen factor bFGF is strongly up-regulated for 
all the time of oligodendrocytes precursor cells (OPCs) proliferation and maintains OPCs in a continual mitotic 
renewal state48. OPCs proliferation and oligodendrocytes survival are also promoted by IGF-I. In accordance 
with the literature, we found a pronounced oligodendrocytes expression after injury in the glial scar region, and, 
considering the ability of astrocytes to secrete bFGF and IGF, we suggest astrocytes as source of influence for 
survival and proliferation of OPCs. In addition, although controversial reports exist on its role45,49, also VEGF is 
released by astrocytes and is crucially involved in mediating vascular changes following different types of injury50.
Seven days after injury, there is widespread demyelination of spared axons that is associated with additional 
loss of axons. Since massive oligodendrocyte death attributable to apoptosis occurs acutely after SCI, it is likely 
that endogenous OPCs are unable to completely restore the loss of myelin in SCI. Necrotic and apoptotic cell 
death signaling events implicate the activation of caspases in injury-induced neurodegeneration and functional 
impairment. Caspases are activated early after injury in neurons and oligodendrocytes as well as in some astro-
cytes; caspase-3 is also activated in gray and white matter, several segments rostral or caudal to the impact51. 
Our data are consistent with previous observations suggesting how Caspase-3 differentially contributes to the 
expansion of the lesion and to grey matter damage after SCI. Caspase-3 activation could be also related to the 
increased expression of pJNK and p75NTR proteins, demonstrated in saline-treated mice 7 days after SCI in VH 
spinal epicenter and distal area. These markers may therefore reflect one step in a general cell death pathway lead-
ing either to necrosis or to apoptosis, depending on available energy52,53. DHA treatment was able to drastically 
reduce Caspase-3, pJNK and p75NTR mainly at the epicenter, 7 days after SCI.
These results are corroborated by the observation that in spinal cords of DHA-treated mice, besides oligodendro-
cytes, a major number of intact neurons cell bodies were present, indicating an elevated neuroprotective action.
Conclusions
In summary, we developed in mice a new, reliable and sensitive animal model that induces severe spinal injury 
with long-lasting functional deficits. The model presented in this study can not be representative of all spinal 
cord injuries since in human population SCI is extremely heterogeneous; nevertheless it is particularly relevant 
for its capacity to mimic not only paralysis but also several histological features and pathophysiological aspects 
observed in human pathology, allowing the investigation of translational potential of pharmacological therapies 
for traumatic SCI. The positive effects of DHA showing capacity of controlling gliosis and apoptosis in paraplegic 
mice encourage the use of this compound as a therapeutic tool for neuroprotection after SCI.
Material and Methods
Animals. 
CD1 female mice (Charles River Labs, Como, Italy and CNR-EMMA facility, Monterotondo, Italy) 
weighing about 30–35 g at the beginning of the experiments were used. Male mice were not considered because 
preliminary experiments have shown that they gradually recovered after SCI (Supplementary Fig. S1). Upon their 
arrival in the laboratory (at least 2 weeks before the experiments), mice were housed as previously described54, 
in accordance with the guidelines of the Committee for Research and Ethical Issues of IASP (PAIN® 1983, 16, 
109–110) and of the European and Italian National law (DLGs n.26 del 04/03/2014, application of the European 
Communities Council Directive 2010/63/UE) on the use of animal for research. The experimental protocol was 
approved by the Italian Ministry of Education, Universities and Research (Protocol n. 33/2014).
Surgery. 
To perform SCI, animals were deeply anesthetized with a mixture 1:1 of Rompun (Bayer 20 mg/
ml; 0,5 ml/kg) and Zoletil (100 mg/ml; 0,5 ml/kg), the back skin was shaved and disinfected with betadine and 
an incision to expose the vertebral column at the thoracic level was made. Animals mounted on a stereotaxic 
apparatus connected to a cortical PinPoint Precision Impactor Device (Stoelting) (https://www.stoeltingco.com/
cortical-pinpoint-precision-impactor.html) were maintained at 37 °C throughout surgery. The system is designed 
to provide the user with precision control, power, and flexibility to generate accurate, reliable, and reproduci-
ble results. To obtain different degree of trauma severity we set up parameters, as described in Supplementary 
Table S1. Preliminary experiments were carried out in female mice to establish the right parameters inducing a 
severe SCI, on the basis of the BMS23 and of the nociceptive sensitivity measured by Tail-flick test (TF). It has to 
present in DHA-treated mice. (G) Brightness values of OLIG-1 expression was significantly enhanced after SCI 
in ventral horns of spinal cord from both saline- and DHA-treated mice, mainly at the epicenter but also in 
perilesioned area, in comparison with naïve (n = 3 mice/group). °°p < 0.001, °°°p < 0.0001 vs naïve; **p < 0.001 
vs SAL. Tukey/Kramer).

13
Scientific Reports | (2019) 9:8883 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
be considered that some variability is observed and not all animals subjected to “severe” parameters react with a 
complete paralysis. Probably a different pressure of the bone on the spinal cord could be in part responsible of this 
variability, as occurs also in humans. We included only mice that reached 0 value in the BMS.
A severe spinal trauma was induced on the basis of the following parameters: middle, round and flat tip (#4); 
velocity 3 m/sec; depth 5 mm; dwell time 800 ms. Spinal cord was injured at thoracic level 10 (T10) and no lami-
nectomy was performed, as previously described55, thus the contusion deriving from the pressure exerted on the 
bone resembled more closely to human traumatic injury (Fig. 1).
Analysis of the graphical impact parameters, operated by the PinPoint software, was used to identify potential 
outliers. Behavioural analyses were used to corroborate differences in injury severity.
Careful monitoring of animals with daily weight recording and bladder expression allowed the early detection 
of post-operative complications. As postoperative care, the bladder was compressed by manual abdominal pres-
sure twice/daily until bladder function was restored. Animals were maintained at 37° with warmed pad in the first 
24 h, rehydrated with 1 ml of ringer lactate and, to support nutrition, humid food was inserted in the cage. Mice 
used and mortality are summarized in Supplementary Table S3.
Sham-operated animals were subjected only to the surgical procedure to expose spinal cord without inducing 
injury. They were tested for BMS, TF reflex and immunohistochemical analysis concerning neuroglia and caspase 
(Supplementary Fig. S2).
Micro computed tomography. 
Computed tomography datasets were acquired by a high-resolution 3D 
micro-CT imaging system (Skyscan 1172 G Bruker, Kontich – Belgium), with a camera pixel/size of 9 µm, 0.5 mm 
Al filter, tube voltage peak of 49 kV, tube current of 200 µA, exposure time of 250 ms and a scan time of 75 min. 
The 3D images were visualized using 3D Visualization Software CTvox v. 2.5 (Bruker). Details in56.
Drugs. 
Saline or Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA – Sigma Aldrich) (0.082 mg/kg) were intraperitoneally (ip) 
administered within 1 hour from the surgery and repeated once/daily for 5 days. DHA dose was chosen on the 
basis of a previous study13.
Behavioural tests. 
BMS. For injured animals the hindlimb locomotor function was assessed in an open 
field. Two raters blinded to the injury groups scored the functional performances of mice. The BMS score23 ranges 
from 0 to 9, where 0 indicates complete paralysis and 9 normal movement of the hindlimbs. Performances of the 
left and right hindlimbs were averaged in order to obtain the BMS score. Mice were tested for hindlimb func-
tional deficits at 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 10, 14, 17, 20, 30 days after SCI. Only mice completely paralysed (BMS scores = 0) 
after surgery were assigned to the experimental group classified as “severe” and used for the following analyses 
(n = 8/11 per group). The severity of spinal cord injury drastically influenced the survival of mice after surgery 
(Supplementary Table S3).
TF. As an additional way to check the hindlimb paralysis, we tested the withdrawal reflex to a thermal nocic-
eptive stimulus by means of the tail-flick test (Ugo Basile), as previously described57.
Immunohistochemistry. 
Seven, 30 or 60 days post-SCI, three or four mice from each experimental group 
were sacrificed for immunohistochemistry and perfused with saline followed by 4% paraformaldehyde in phos-
phate buffer saline (pH 7.4). Sections (40μ) of spinal cord tissue were prepared as previously described54. For 
double immunofluorescence staining, we used primary and secondary antibodies as in Supplementary Table S4. 
Nuclei were stained with DAPI (1:1000, Jackson ImmunoResearch).
Confocal microscopy and quantification of immunoresponsivity. 
Images of immunostained sections 
were obtained by laser scanning confocal microscopy using a TCS SP5 microscope (Leica Microsystem). All analyses 
were performed in sequential scanning mode to rule out cross-bleeding between channels. Low (5X; 10X; 20X objec-
tive) and high magnification (63X) images of spinal cords sections were operated by I.A.S. software (Delta Systems, 
Italy). Quantification was performed using the ImageJ software (version 1.41, National Institutes of Health, USA).
Fluorescence of proteins was quantified by converting pixels in brightness values using the RGB method of the 
selected area. Positive cells (nuclei) were automatically counted with mark and count tool (n = 3 per group; 2/4 
sections per animal, randomly selected and blinded analysed, except for the evaluation of gliosis in which n = 4/
group were considered).
We examined the colocalization between NeuN or OLIG-1 and Caspase-3 by means of Manders’ coefficient58. 
This analysis uses an iterative procedure to determine what pair of thresholds for the 2 channels of the scatterplot 
gives a Manders’ correlation coefficient (r) of zero for the pixels below the thresholds (Evans, 34: 0–0.19 ‘very 
weak’, 0.20–0.39 ‘weak’, 0.40–0.59 ‘moderate’, 0.60–0.79 ‘strong’, 0.80–1.0 ‘very strong’). A double fluorescence 
image (red and green dyes) was splitted in RedGreenBlu channels and analysed. For each colocalization analysis, 
scatterplots were generated by the Image J program: the intensity of channel 1 pixels is used as the x-coordinate 
whereas the intensity of the channel 2 pixels as the y-coordinate.
For all groups, sections of ventral horns (VH), distal from the impact zone (3–5 mm rostro-caudal to lesion 
epicenter), in the peri-lesioned and in the injured area (epicenter T9–T11), were separately analysed. The lesion 
area and the formation of microcysts and cavity cavitation were evaluated by staining for glial fibrillary acidic 
protein (GFAP) 7, 30 and 60 days after SCI.
Regenerated area and neuronal survival. 
The regenerated area was evaluated in longitudinal section of 
spinal cord (magnification 5X). Values have been obtained on the basis of the following formula: UA/RA*100, 
where UA is width of uninjured and RA the width of regenerated area. Neuronal survival was assessed by count-
ing the NeuN-positive cells in the VH caudal to the lesion (L2).

14
Scientific Reports | (2019) 9:8883 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Gliosis evaluation. 
ImageJ quantification of GFAP expression was performed through Green pixels meas-
urement converted in brightness values on longitudinal section of spinal cord (magnification 5X). Frame of rec-
tangular areas of 100 μm for a total length of 800 μm (from epicenter vs caudal or cranial direction) was singularly 
examined. Damaged area (epicenter −100 μm to +100 μm) was not evaluated for absence of tissue.
Morphometric analysis. 
Morphometric analysis was performed on high-resolution image acquisition cri-
teria: 63X objective, zoom 3X, 1024 × 1024 frame, 10 Hz.
Each image was transformed in binary modality in order to obtain a digital image where outline of cell silhouettes 
were identified and automatically measured for astrocytes, while microglia were singularly counted and divided about 
the different morphology (R: Resting (ramified), H/B: Hyperactive/Bushy, U/A: Un-ramified/Ameboid).
LC-MS experiments and bioinformatics analysis. 
Proteins extracted from SC tissue collected from saline- 
and DHA-treated groups (n = 3 mice/group) at day 7 were analyzed by shotgun proteomics experiments performed 
in LC-MS. Briefly, frozen spinal cord samples homogenized as described later for WB, were precipitated in a solution 
of 80% Acetone at −20 °C O.N. Precipitated proteins were resuspended in a dilution buffer compatible with trypsin 
digestion (6 M Urea in 100mMTris-Cl at pH7.8). Protein concentration was determined by Bradford Assay (BioRad) 
and 50ug of each sample digested with Trypsin, as previously described59, MClass nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Co.) 
coupled with the Q TOF Synapt G2-Si (Waters Co.) were used for chromatographic separation of 0.25 ug of digested 
peptides and Data Independent MS analysis (MSe) as previously described60. Data from three replicate experiments for 
each pool were processed for qualitative and quantitative analysis using the software ProteinLynx Global Server v. 3.0.3 
(PLGS, Waters)59, searching in a mouse database (UniProt KB/Swiss-Prot Protein Knowledgebase release 2016_09, 
released on October 15, 2016, restricted to Mus Musculus taxonomy) to which data from Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
Enolase (accession number: P00924) were appended.
Protein datasets were analysed through use of QIAGEN’s Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis (IPA®, QIAGEN Inc., 
https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuitypathway-analysis)24, Build version: 430520 M Content 
version: 31813283 (Release Date: 2016-12-05, www.ingenuity.com). The datasets, including the gene identifier 
and relative expression values (fold change DHA/SAL) of each protein, were uploaded for Core Analysis applica-
tion that delivers a rapid assessment of the signaling and metabolic pathways, molecular networks, and biological 
processes that are most significantly perturbed.
Western blot. 
For the myelin basic protein (MBP) analysis a total 5 µg of spinal cord samples (T9-T11), from 
3 experimental groups (naïve, saline and DHA), at four time points (4 h-24 h-7 days-30 days) were used (n = 3 
mice/group/time point). Membranes were incubated overnight at 4 °C with the following primary antibody: 
Myelin Basic Protein (MBP101, Abcam Cat# ab62631, RRID:AB_956157) and β-actin (AM1829b, Abgent Cat# 
AM1829b, RRID: AB_10664137). Antibody binding was revealed by using enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) 
(Euroclone, Pero, Mi, Italy). Luminescent bands were imaged with autoradiography (X-ray) films (UltraCruz; 
Santa Cruz Biotechnolgy) and then scanning into a digital format. The βactin bands intensity was used as a 
control for equal protein loading and measured for densitometric analysis using ImageJ 1.49r software (Wayne 
Rasband, National Institutes of Health).
Antibody array. 
The levels of various growth factors in spinal cord tissue lysates at 24 h and seven days (D7) 
post SAL and DHA treatment (n = 3 mice/group/time point) were analysed using a mouse antibody array (Mouse 
Cytokine Antibody Array G series; RayBiotech). Lysis buffer (Raybiotech) containing proteinase inhibitor cock-
tail (Sigma Aldrich) was added to homogenate impact zone fragments of spinal cords, and 30 µg of each sample 
was incubated with the array. Incubation and washes were performed according to the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. The fluorescence intensity for each spot was detected using an Agilent G2564B microarray scanner (Agilent 
Technologies), quantified by the array testing services from RayBiotech and normalized to a positive internal 
controls on each array allowing the array comparison. The fold change (SAL/NAÏVE; DHA/NAÏVE) in each 
sample was then calculated and compared. According to the manufacturer’s instructions, any ≥1.5-fold increase 
or ≤0.65-fold decrease in signal intensity for a single analyte between samples may be considered a measurable 
and significant difference in expression.
Statistics. 
Experimental data are expressed as mean ± SEM. Two-way ANOVAs for repeated measures were 
used to analyse BMS and TF results. Immunohistochemical data, Western blot, morphological analyses and 
antibody array were analysed by means of analysis of variance (ANOVA one-way), Kruskal-Wallis test or by 
Student’s T test depending on data dimension and number of variables. Post-hoc comparisons were carried using 
Tukey-Kramer test for ANOVA or Dunn’s Test (Bonferroni method) for Kruskal-Wallis. Data were considered 
statistically significant at p < 0.05. Statview SAS vers. 5.0, R and GraphPad Prism were used for data analysis.
Data Availability
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding 
author on reasonable request.
References
	 1.	 Stokes, B. T. & Jakeman, L. B. Experimental modelling of human spinal cord injury: a model that crosses the species barrier and 
mimics the spectrum of human cytopathology. Spinal Cord 40, 101–9 (2002).
	 2.	 Talac, R. et al. Animal models of spinal cord injury for evaluation of tissue engineering treatment strategies. Biomaterials 25, 
1505–10 (2004).

15
Scientific Reports | (2019) 9:8883 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
	 3.	 Reier, P. J., Lane, M. A., Hall, E. D., Teng, Y. D. & Howland, D. R. Translational spinal cord injury research: preclinical guidelines and 
challenges. Handb Clin Neurol 109, 411–33 (2012).
	 4.	 Kundi, S., Bicknell, R. & Ahmed, Z. Spinal Cord Injury: Current mammalian models. American Journal of Neuroscience 4(1), 1–12 
(2013).
	 5.	 Kundi, S., Bicknell, R. & Ahmed, Z. The role of angiogenic and wound-healing factors after spinal cord injury in mammals. Neurosci 
Res 76, 1–9 (2013).
	 6.	 Cheriyan, T. et al. Spinal cord injury models: a review. Spinal Cord 52, 588–95 (2014).
	 7.	 Cadotte, D. W. & Fehlings, M. G. Spinal cord injury: a systematic review of current treatment options. Clin Orthop Relat Res 469, 
732–41 (2011).
	 8.	 Rowland, J. W., Hawryluk, G. W., Kwon, B. & Fehlings, M. G. Current status of acute spinal cord injury pathophysiology and 
emerging therapies: promise on the horizon. Neurosurg Focus 25, E2, https://doi.org/10.3171/FOC.2008.25.11.E2. (2008).
	 9.	 Kanno, H. et al. The role of mTOR signaling pathway in spinal cord injury. Cell Cycle 11, 3175–9 (2012).
	10.	 Fehlings, M. G. & Nguyen, D. H. Immunoglobulin G: a potential treatment to attenuate neuroinflammation following spinal cord 
injury. J Clin Immunol 30(Suppl 1), S109–12 (2010).
	11.	 Hausmann, O. N. Post-traumatic inflammation following spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord 41, 369–78 (2003).
	12.	 Li, N. & Leung, G. K. Oligodendrocyte Precursor Cells in Spinal Cord Injury: A Review and Update. Biomed Res Int 2015, 235195, 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/235195 (2015).
	13.	 King, V. R. et al. Omega-3 fatty acids improve recovery, whereas omega-6 fatty acids worsen outcome, after spinal cord injury in the 
adult rat. J Neurosci 26, 4672–80 (2006).
	14.	 Huang, W. L. et al. A combination of intravenous and dietary docosahexaenoic acid significantly improves outcome after spinal cord 
injury. Brain 130, 3004–19 (2007).
	15.	 Dyall, S. C. & Michael-Titus, A. T. Neurological benefits of omega-3 fatty acids. Neuromolecular Med 10, 219–35 (2008).
	16.	 Figueroa, J. D. et al. Docosahexaenoic acid pretreatment confers protection and functional improvements after acute spinal cord 
injury in adult rats. J Neurotrauma 29, 551–66 (2012).
	17.	 Lim, S. N., Huang, W., Hall, J. C., Michael-Titus, A. T. & Priestley, J. V. Improved outcome after spinal cord compression injury in 
mice treated with docosahexaenoic acid. Exp Neurol 239, 13–27 (2013).
	18.	 Paterniti, I. et al. Docosahexaenoic acid attenuates the early inflammatory response following spinal cord injury in mice: in-vivo and 
in-vitro studies. J Neuroinflammation 11, 6 (2014).
	19.	 Samaddar, S. Effect of Docosahexaenoic Acid (DHA) on Spinal Cord Injury. Adv Neurobiol 12, 27–39 (2016).
	20.	 Liu, Z. H., Yip, P. K., Priestley, J. V. & Michael-Titus, A. T. A Single Dose of Docosahexaenoic Acid Increases the Functional Recovery 
Promoted by Rehabilitation after Cervical Spinal Cord Injury in the Rat. J Neurotrauma 34, 1766–1777 (2017).
	21.	 Noguchi, H. et al. Limited effect of omega-3 fatty acids on the quality of life in survivors of traumatic injury: A randomized, placebo-
controlled trial. Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids 127, 1–5 (2017).
	22.	 Trepanier, M. O., Hopperton, K. E., Orr, S. K. & Bazinet, R. P. N-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in animal models with 
neuroinflammation: An update. Eur J Pharmacol 785, 187–206 (2016).
	23.	 Basso, D. M. et al. Basso Mouse Scale for locomotion detects differences in recovery after spinal cord injury in five common mouse 
strains. J Neurotrauma 23, 635–59 (2006).
	24.	 Krämer, A., Green, J., Pollard, J. Jr. & Tugendreich, S. Causal analysis approaches in Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Bioinformatics. 
30(4), 523–30 (2014).
	25.	 Kwon, B. K., Hillyer, J. & Tetzlaff, W. Translational research in spinal cord injury: a survey of opinion from the SCI community. J 
Neurotrauma 27, 21–33 (2010).
	26.	 Tator, C.H. Review of treatment trials in human spinal cord injury: issues, difficulties, and recommendations. Neurosurgery 59, 
957–82, discussion 982–7 (2006).
	27.	 Dobkin, B. H. Curiosity and cure: translational research strategies for neural repair-mediated rehabilitation. Dev Neurobiol 67, 
1133–47 (2007).
	28.	 Siegenthaler, M. M., Tu, M. K. & Keirstead, H. S. The extent of myelin pathology differs following contusion and transection spinal 
cord injury. J Neurotrauma 24, 1631–46 (2007).
	29.	 Blesch, A. & Tuszynski, M. H. Spinal cord injury: plasticity, regeneration and the challenge of translational drug development. 
Trends Neurosci 32, 41–7 (2009).
	30.	 Lee, D. H. & Lee, J. K. Animal models of axon regeneration after spinal cord injury. Neurosci Bull 29(4), 436–444 (2013).
	31.	 Guth, L., Zhang, Z. & Steward, O. The unique histopathological responses of the injured spinal cord. Implications for neuroprotective 
therapy. Ann N Y Acad Sci 890, 366–84 (1999).
	32.	 Sroga, J. M., Jones, T. B., Kigerl, K. A., McGaughy, V. M. & Popovich, P. G. Rats and mice exhibit distinct inflammatory reactions after 
spinal cord injury. J Comp Neurol 462, 223–40 (2003).
	33.	 Kerr, B. J. & David, S. Pain behaviors after spinal cord contusion injury in two commonly used mouse strains. Exp Neurol 206, 240–7 
(2007).
	34.	 Luchetti, S. et al. Comparison of immunopathology and locomotor recovery in C57BL/6, BUB/BnJ, and NOD-SCID mice after 
contusion spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma 27, 411–21 (2010).
	35.	 Inman, D., Guth, L. & Steward, O. Genetic Influences on Secondary Degeneration and Wound Healing Following Spinal Cord Injury 
in Various Strains of Mice. The journal of Comparative Neurology 451, 225–235 (2002).
	36.	 Krishna, V. et al. A contusion model of severe spinal cord injury in rats. J Vis Exp 78, https://doi.org/10.3791/50111 (2013).
	37.	 Ju, G., Wang, J., Wang, Y. & Zhao, X. Spinal cord contusion. Neural Regen Res 9, 789–94 (2014).
	38.	 Walters, E. T. Neuroinflammatory contributions to pain after SCI: roles for central glial mechanisms and nociceptor-mediated host 
defense. Exp Neurol 258, 48–61 (2014).
	39.	 Karimi-Abdolrezaee, S. & Billakanti, R. Reactive astrogliosis after spinal cord injury-beneficial and detrimental effects. Mol 
Neurobiol 46, 251–64 (2012).
	40.	 Bazan, N. G. The onset of brain injury and neurodegeneration triggers the synthesis of docosanoid neuroprotective signaling. Cell 
Mol Neurobiol 26, 901–13 (2006).
	41.	 Ward, R. E., Huang, W., Curran, O. E., Priestley, J. V. & Michael-Titus, A. T. Docosahexaenoic acid prevents white matter damage 
after spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma. 27(10), 1769–80 (2010).
	42.	 Guo, Q., Li, S. & Su, B. Expression of oligodendrocyte myelin glycoprotein and its receptor NgR after the injury of rat central nervous 
system. Neurosci Lett 422, 103–8 (2007).
	43.	 Tatar, C. L. et al. Increased Plp1 gene expression leads to massive microglial cell activation and inflammation throughout the brain. 
ASN Neuro 2, e00043 (2010).
	44.	 O’Brien, L. C., Chen, Q., Savas, J., Lesnefsky, E. J. & Gorgey, A. S. Skeletal muscle mitochondrial mass is linked to lipid and metabolic 
profile in individuals with spinal cord injury. Eur J Appl Physiol 117, 2137–2147 (2017).
	45.	 Scholpa, N. E. & Schnellmann, R. G. Mitochondrial-Based Therapeutics for the Treatment of Spinal Cord Injury: Mitochondrial 
Biogenesis as a Potential Pharmacological Target. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 363, 303–313 (2017).
	46.	 McEwen, M. L., Sullivan, P. G., Rabchevsky, A. G. & Springer, J. E. Targeting mitochondrial function for the treatment of acute spinal 
cord injury. Neurotherapeutics 8, 168–79 (2011).

16
Scientific Reports | (2019) 9:8883 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
	47.	 Shoshan-Barmatz, V. et al. VDAC, a multi-functional mitochondrial protein regulating cell life and death. Mol Aspects Med 31, 
227–85 (2010).
	48.	 Almad, A., Sahinkaya, F. R. & McTigue, D. M. Oligodendrocyte fate after spinal cord injury. Neurotherapeutics 8, 262–73 (2011).
	49.	 Benton, R. L., Maddie, M. A., Gruenthal, M. J., Hagg, T. & Whittemore, S. R. Neutralizing endogenous VEGF following traumatic 
spinal cord injury modulates microvascular plasticity but not tissue sparing or functional recovery. Curr Neurovasc Res 6, 124–31 
(2009).
	50.	 Bartholdi, D., Rubin, B. P. & Schwab, M. E. VEGF mRNA induction correlates with changes in the vascular architecture upon spinal 
cord damage in the rat. Eur J Neurosci 9, 2549–60 (1997).
	51.	 Liu, X. Z. et al. Neuronal and glial apoptosis after traumatic spinal cord injury. J Neurosci 17, 5395–406 (1997).
	52.	 Benchoua, A. et al. Specific caspase pathways are activated in the two stages of cerebral infarction. J Neurosci 21, 7127–34 (2001).
	53.	 Niquet, J., Baldwin, R. A., Allen, S. G., Fujikawa, D. G. & Wasterlain, C. G. Hypoxic neuronal necrosis: protein synthesis-independent 
activation of a cell death program. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100, 2825–30 (2003).
	54.	 Vacca, V. et al. 17beta-estradiol counteracts neuropathic pain: a behavioural, immunohistochemical, and proteomic investigation on 
sex-related differences in mice. Sci Rep. 6, 18980, https://doi.org/10.1038/srep18980 (2016).
	55.	 Marinelli, S., Pavone, F., Luvisetto, S. & Vacca, V. A new therapeutic use of the botulinum neurotoxin serotype A. International 
patent WO 2016170501 A1.
	56.	 Ermakova, O., Orsini, T., Gambadoro, A., Chiani, F. & Tocchini-Valentini, G. P. Three-dimensional microCT imaging of murine 
embryonic development from immediate post-implantation to organogenesis: application for phenotyping analysis of early 
embryonic lethality in mutant animals. Mamm Genome. 29(3–4), 245–259 (2018).
	57.	 D’Amato, F. R. et al. Mild postnatal manipulation reduces proenkephalin mRNA in the striatum in developing mice and increases 
morphine conditioned place preference in adulthood. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 87, 122–9 (2007).
	58.	 Manders, E. M., Stap, J., Brakenhoff, G. J., van Driel, R. & Aten, J. A. Dynamics of three-dimensional replication patterns during the 
S-phase, analysed by double labelling of DNA and confocal microscopy. J Cell Sci 103, 857–862 (1992).
	59.	 Marinelli, S. et al. Schwann cell autophagy counteracts the onset and chronification of neuropathic pain. Pain 155, 93–107 (2014).
	60.	 Alberio, T. et al. Toward the Standardization of Mitochondrial Proteomics: The Italian Mitochondrial Human Proteome Project 
Initiative. J Proteome Res 16, 4319–4329 (2017).
Acknowledgements
The authors are indebted to Edgar T. Walters for helpful comments and critical suggestions. We thank the Animal 
Facility of the CNR/IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation. The work was made possible thanks to the cooperation with 
the Regione Lazio, as part of the “Distretto Tecnologico delle Bioscienze”and supported by FILAS Regione Lazio 
Funds for “Sviluppo della Ricerca sul Cervello”. V.V. was supported by a fellowship from “Fondazione Umberto 
Veronesi”. Additional financial support from the Scientific Agreement with Alma Mater Studiorum - Università 
di Bologna to F.P. and from IASP Early Career Award 2014 to S.M.
Author Contributions
R.G., L.M., F.P. and M.S. conceived the study; S.M., L.M., F.P., M.S. and V.V. designed and interpreted the 
experiments; S.M. and V.V. performed behavioral and immunohistochemical experiments; T.O. performed 
Micro Computed Tomography; L.P. performed LC-MS experiments and bioinformatics analysis; F.D.A., C.P., 
L.M., M.S. and V.P. performed Western Blot; F.D.A. performed Antibody Array; F.D.A., S.M., L.M., F.P., M.S. and 
V.V. analysed data and performed figures. All authors discussed the results. S.M. and F.P. wrote the paper.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45037-x.
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2019

