===== Deng2021_NatComm_scRNAseq+Keloid+Fibroblast =====

ARTICLE
Single-cell RNA-seq reveals ﬁbroblast
heterogeneity and increased mesenchymal
ﬁbroblasts in human ﬁbrotic skin diseases
Cheng-Cheng Deng
1,5, Yong-Fei Hu
1,2,5, Ding-Heng Zhu1,5, Qing Cheng1, Jing-Jing Gu1, Qing-Lan Feng1,
Li-Xue Zhang1, Ying-Ping Xu1, Dong Wang
1,2, Zhili Rong
1,3,4✉& Bin Yang
1✉
Fibrotic skin disease represents a major global healthcare burden, characterized by ﬁbroblast
hyperproliferation and excessive accumulation of extracellular matrix. Fibroblasts are found
to be heterogeneous in multiple ﬁbrotic diseases, but ﬁbroblast heterogeneity in ﬁbrotic skin
diseases is not well characterized. In this study, we explore ﬁbroblast heterogeneity in keloid,
a paradigm of ﬁbrotic skin diseases, by using single-cell RNA-seq. Our results indicate that
keloid ﬁbroblasts can be divided into 4 subpopulations: secretory-papillary, secretory-reti-
cular, mesenchymal and pro-inﬂammatory. Interestingly, the percentage of mesenchymal
ﬁbroblast subpopulation is signiﬁcantly increased in keloid compared to normal scar. Func-
tional studies indicate that mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts are crucial for collagen overexpression in
keloid. Increased mesenchymal ﬁbroblast subpopulation is also found in another ﬁbrotic skin
disease, scleroderma, suggesting this is a broad mechanism for skin ﬁbrosis. These ﬁndings
will help us better understand skin ﬁbrotic pathogenesis, and provide potential targets for
ﬁbrotic disease therapies.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
OPEN
1 Dermatology Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. 2 Department of Bioinformatics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China. 3 Cancer Research Institute, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. 4 State Key
Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, National Clinical Research Center of Kidney Disease, Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research (Ministry of Education),
Guangzhou, China. 5These authors contributed equally: Cheng-Cheng Deng, Yong-Fei Hu, Ding-Heng Zhu. ✉email: rongzhili@smu.edu.cn; yangbin1@smu.
edu.cn
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:3709 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;
F
ibrosis, characterized by ﬁbroblast proliferation and exces-
sive accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM), con-
tributes to a high level of morbidity and mortality
worldwide1,2. Fibrosis can affect any organ, leading to progressive
tissue scarring and organ dysfunction1,2. Fibrotic skin diseases
involve the accumulation of ECM components in the dermis,
which include scleroderma, hypertrophic scar, keloid, and graft-
vs.-host diseases3,4. The global impact of ﬁbrotic skin diseases is
signiﬁcant, which affect millions of people worldwide3,5. To date,
the etiopathogenesis of ﬁbrotic skin diseases has not been thor-
oughly elucidated, and radical treatments are still lacking.
Many cell types, such as vascular endothelial cells, immune
cells, and ﬁbroblasts, that contribute to ﬁbrosis have been
identiﬁed1–3. Fibroblasts are the centric cell type in the process of
skin
ﬁbrosis,
which
leads
to
ECM
accumulation
and
inﬂammation3,4,6,7. Fibroblasts in ﬁbrotic diseases exhibit over-
whelming proliferative potential, increased migration, and inva-
sion capacity, and increased ECM deposition, which contribute to
ﬁbrosis pathogenesis4,6. These actions are primarily driven by
ﬁbrogenic growth factors, such as TGFβ, FGF, PDGF, VEGF, and
POSTN4,6,8,9.
For a long time, it was assumed that ﬁbroblasts were a uniform
population of spindle-shaped cells. However, emerging evidence
indicates that ﬁbroblasts are actually a morphologically and
functionally heterogeneous cell population3,7,10–12. The develop-
ment of single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) gives us an
opportunity to explore ﬁbroblast heterogeneity of the skin under
homeostasis and pathology. scRNA-seq suggested that ﬁbroblasts
can be divided into multiple subgroups in normal human
dermis13–16. scRNA-seq has also been used to study the hetero-
geneity of ﬁbroblasts in some ﬁbrotic diseases, such as lung
ﬁbrosis, systemic sclerosis, and Dupuytren’s disease17–19. How-
ever, to our knowledge, a study regarding scRNA-seq application
for exploring ﬁbroblast heterogeneity in ﬁbrotic skin diseases is
still absent.
In this study, we performed scRNA-seq analysis in keloid, a
paradigm of ﬁbrotic skin diseases6,20. Our results suggested that
keloid ﬁbroblasts can be divided into 4 subpopulations. Com-
pared to normal scar tissue, the percentage of a subpopulation of
ﬁbroblasts expressing mesenchymal cell markers was signiﬁcantly
increased in keloid. Further functional studies revealed that this
subgroup of ﬁbroblasts may be responsible for the overexpression
of collagens in ﬁbrotic skin diseases through POSTN. These
ﬁndings will help us more thoroughly understand ﬁbrotic skin
diseases and provide potential targets for ﬁbrosis therapies.
Results
Single-cell RNA-seq reveals cell heterogeneity of normal scar
and ﬁbrotic skin disease dermis tissues. To dissect the cellular
heterogeneity and explore the regulatory changes of ﬁbrotic
skin diseases, we performed scRNA-seq on keloid, a paradigm
of ﬁbrotic skin diseases, and normal scar dermis tissues
(Fig. 1a). We only used the dermis for scRNA-seq analysis
because keloid represents a skin dermis ﬁbrotic disease. After
stringent quality control (Supplementary Fig. 1a, b), we
obtained transcriptomes of 40,655 cells (keloid: 21,488; normal
scar: 19,167). Unsupervised Uniform Manifold Approximation
and Projection (UMAP)-clustering revealed 21 cell clusters
(Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 1c), which were further clas-
siﬁed as transcriptional cluster proximity via a phylogenetic
cluster tree (Fig. 1c). We identiﬁed 5 ﬁbroblast clusters (C2, C4,
C8, C14, C15) and 3 endothelial cell clusters (C1, C6, C7),
which accounted for the majority of sequenced cells. Some cells
expressed keratinocyte cell markers, which resulted from
incomplete removal of the epidermis. We were unable to
characterize clusters 18 and 21 with speciﬁc marker genes so
these clusters were named “unknown”. Based on hierarchical
clustering (Fig. 1c) and established lineage-speciﬁc marker
genes (Fig. 1d, e), we assigned these clusters into 9 cell lineages.
The ﬁbroblast lineage was identiﬁed by COL1A1, and the
endothelial lineage was identiﬁed by ENG (Fig. 1e).
We next analyzed the proportions of these cell lineages in
keloids and normal scars. We removed the cells in the epidermis,
including keratinocytes and melanocytes, in the proportion
analysis. The cell lineages of keloid and normal scar dermis
showed distinct relative cell number ratios (Fig. 1f). Increased
proportions were observed for endothelial cells and smooth
muscle cells in keloid tissue, which is consistent with reports that
keloids exhibit increased angiogenesis6,20 (Fig. 1f). The propor-
tions of ﬁbroblasts were decreased in keloid tissues compared to
normal scar tissues, perhaps resulting from the excessive
expansion of endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells. We next
explored the number of differentially expressed genes between
keloid and normal scar clusters. The results showed that the
ﬁbroblast had the largest difference (Fig. 1g), suggesting that
ﬁbroblasts undergo signiﬁcant changes during the ﬁbrotic
progress.
Dermal ﬁbroblasts subcluster into distinct cell populations and
mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts are increased in ﬁbrotic skin disease
dermis. Because ﬁbroblasts undergo signiﬁcant changes during
the ﬁbrotic progress in keloid (Fig. 1g), and ﬁbroblasts are
important for ﬁbrotic pathogenesis, we next performed unsu-
pervised clustering on all keloid and normal scar ﬁbroblasts and
observed further heterogeneity with 13 subclusters, sC1 through
sC13 (Fig. 2a). Figure 2b, c shows the cell proportions of the
ﬁbroblast subclusters from keloid and normal scar. From the
results, we can see that the proportion of sC4 was consistently
increased in keloid samples compared to normal scar samples
(Fig. 2b, c).
A recent study suggested that normal human dermis ﬁbroblasts
can
be
divided
into
4
subpopulations:
secretory-papillary,
secretory-reticular,
mesenchymal,
and
pro-inﬂammatory16.
Secretory-papillary
ﬁbroblasts
are
generally
located
in
the
papillary dermis and express known papillary markers, while
secretory-reticular ﬁbroblasts are generally located in the reticular
dermis and express known reticular markers. Mesenchymal
ﬁbroblasts express some mesenchymal progenitor markers, such
as COL11A1 and POSTN, which are involved in skeletal system
development, ossiﬁcation, or osteoblast differentiation16,21,22. The
signatures of pro-inﬂammatory ﬁbroblasts include inﬂammatory
response, cell chemotaxis, and reduced expression of collagens16.
Hierarchical cluster analysis suggested that ﬁbroblasts from keloid
and normal scar could also be divided into 4 subpopulations
(Fig. 2d and Supplementary Fig. 2a–d). The number of cells in
sC8 and sC10-13 subpopulations was very small, so we did not
include them in further subpopulation analysis. To see whether
the 4 ﬁbroblast subpopulations we found could be divided into
secretory-papillary, secretory-reticular, mesenchymal, and pro-
inﬂammatory, we used previously identiﬁed ﬁbroblast subpopu-
lation markers16. The results demonstrated that sC2, sC3, and
sC9 were pro-inﬂammatory ﬁbroblasts, sC6 and sC7 were
secretory-papillary ﬁbroblasts, sC1 and sC4 were mesenchymal
ﬁbroblasts and sC5 were secretory-reticular ﬁbroblasts (Fig. 2e
and Supplementary Fig. 2e).
The expression of speciﬁc collagens has been linked to particular
ﬁbroblast functions. Therefore, we also analyzed the four ﬁbroblast
subpopulations with respect to the level of collagen expression. The
analysis revealed that the collagen gene COL11A1 was speciﬁcally
expressed in sC1 and sC4 ﬁbroblasts (Supplementary Fig. 2f),
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:3709 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
suggesting a stronger mesenchymal component in this cell
subpopulation16,22. In sC2, sC3, and sC9 pro-inﬂammatory
ﬁbroblasts, the expression of collagens was globally reduced16
(Supplementary Fig. 2f). In particular, sC6 and sC7 ﬁbroblasts
expressed COL13A1, COL18A1, and COL23A1, three known
markers of papillary ﬁbroblasts14,16,23 (Supplementary Fig. 2f).
We next compared the proportions of the four ﬁbroblast
subpopulations between keloid and normal scar. The results
showed that the proportions of secretory-papillary, secretory-
reticular, and pro-inﬂammatory subpopulations were decreased,
while the mesenchymal subpopulation was increased in keloid
compared to normal scar (Fig. 2f). The increased mesenchymal
subpopulation in keloid suggested that this population may be very
important for keloid development.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:3709 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3
We next compared differences between keloid mesenchymal
ﬁbroblasts
and
normal
scar
mesenchymal
ﬁbroblasts.
We
identiﬁed skeletal system development, ossiﬁcation, and osteo-
blast differentiation-associated genes, such as COL11A1, COMP,
and POSTN, which were signiﬁcantly increased in keloid
mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Data 1).
Gene ontology (GO) analysis and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
(GSEA)
also
suggested
that
skeletal
system
development,
ossiﬁcation, and osteoblast associated pathways were enriched
in keloid mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts (Fig. 2h, i). These results
suggest that not only was the proportion of mesenchymal
ﬁbroblasts increased but also the identities of mesenchymal
ﬁbroblasts changed in keloid compared to normal scar.
Characteristics of mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts in ﬁbrotic skin
disease dermis. The scRNA-seq analysis revealed that the pro-
portion of mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts was signiﬁcantly increased in
keloid compared to normal scar (Fig. 2f). Thus, our next work
focused on this ﬁbroblast subpopulation. We ﬁrst explored differ-
entially expressed genes between this subpopulation and other
ﬁbroblast subpopulations in keloid. We found that skeletal system
development, ossiﬁcation, and osteoblast differentiation-associated
genes such as POSTN and COL11A1, were enriched in the
mesenchymal subpopulation (Fig. 3a). The heatmap suggested that
gene expression was signiﬁcantly different between the mesenchy-
mal subpopulation and other subpopulations (Fig. 3b). The
increased genes in the mesenchymal subpopulation included some
secretory proteins, such as POSTN, COMP, COL11A1, COL12A1,
and COL5A2 (Fig. 3c and Supplementary Data 2). We also found
that some membrane proteins, such as SDC1, ADAM12, and
CD266 (encoded by TNFRSF12A), were increased, while CD9 was
decreased, in the mesenchymal subpopulation (Fig. 3c). GO and
GSEA analyses suggested that upregulated genes in the mesench-
ymal subpopulation were associated with the collagen organization
process, wound healing, skeletal system development, osteoblast
differentiation, and so on (Fig. 3d and Supplementary Fig. 3a).
The lineages, identities, and roles of cells have been reported
decided by master transcription factors (TFs)24,25. The algorithm
for the reconstruction of accurate cellular networks (ARACNe) is
a powerful algorithm that can identify master players, especially
master TFs, in a gene regulatory network based on a large set of
gene expression data26. To explore master TFs of the ﬁbroblast
subpopulations, we performed ARACNe analysis on our scRNA-
seq data (Fig. 3e and Supplementary Fig. 3b–e). Some osteogen-
esis, chondrogenesis, and ligament and tendon differentiation-
associated TFs, such as SCX, CREB3L1, and RUNX2, were
enriched in the mesenchymal ﬁbroblast subpopulation (Fig. 3e),
consistent with its mesenchymal characteristics.
To validate the ﬁndings identiﬁed by scRNA-seq, we performed
immunoﬂuorescence (IF) staining on skin tissues derived from
normal
control
and
keloid.
Mesenchymal
ﬁbroblasts
were
identiﬁed based on ADAM12 and NREP expression (Fig. 3c). IF
staining results showed that the proportion of ADAM12+/NREP+
cells was higher in keloids than in normal control (Fig. 3f, g).
These staining results validated the results of scRNA-seq.
ADAM12+/NREP+ cells showed a scattered presence in the
dermis, and were not enriched in the upper dermis or lower
dermis. They were also not enriched around certain skin
structures such as hair follicles or blood vessels.
Myoﬁbroblasts have been reported to be increased and to be
essential cells for extracellular matrix production in ﬁbrotic
diseases3,6. To check the relationship between myoﬁbroblasts
and the mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts, we analyzed the expression of
ACTA2, a marker of myoﬁbroblasts3, in our single-cell data.
We found that the number of myoﬁbroblasts was increased in
keloids compared to normal scars (26.0% ± 4.3% vs 13.3% ±
6.4%) (Supplementary Fig. 4a). In keloids, myoﬁbroblasts were
enriched in the mesenchymal ﬁbroblast subpopulation (53.8%
± 9.2%) and existed in the other three ﬁbroblast subpopulations
(pro-inﬂammatory
ﬁbroblast:
29.7% ± 10.6%;
secretory-
papillary ﬁbroblast: 8.9% ± 1.2%; secretory-reticular ﬁbroblast:
7.6% ± 0.3%).
Only part
of
mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts was
positive for ACTA2 expression (36.6% ± 8.0%) (Supplementary
Fig. 4a). We also analyzed the expression of ADAM12 and α-
SMA (encoded by ACTA2) in keloid and normal scar tissues by
immunoﬂuorescence. The immunoﬂuorescence experiments
showed similar results that only part of ADAM12 positive
mesenchymal
ﬁbroblasts
were
α-SMA
positive
in
keloid
(Supplementary Fig. 4b). These results suggested that part of
mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts were myoﬁbroblasts, and most of the
myoﬁbroblasts were in the mesenchymal ﬁbroblast subpopula-
tion in keloid.
Potential ligand–receptor interactions analyses in mesenchy-
mal ﬁbroblast subpopulations. The single-cell dataset provided
us with a unique chance to analyze cell–cell communication
mediated
by
ligand–receptor
interactions.
To
deﬁne
the
cell–cell communication landscape between ﬁbroblast sub-
populations and other cells in keloid and normal scar, we
performed analysis using CellPhoneDB 2.027, which contains a
repository of ligand–receptor interactions and a statistical fra-
mework for predicting enriched interactions between two cell
types from single-cell transcriptomics data. We observed a
dense communication network among ﬁbroblasts and other
cells in both normal scar and keloid (Fig. 4a, b). Under both
conditions, the most abundant interactions occurred among the
four ﬁbroblast subpopulations, suggesting the importance of
ﬁbroblasts interaction signaling in the dermal. In normal scar,
interactions between secretory-reticular ﬁbroblasts and other
cells were most abundant (Fig. 4a), but in keloid, interactions
between mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts and other cells were most
abundant (Fig. 4b), suggesting the important role of mesench-
ymal ﬁbroblasts in keloid development.
We next identiﬁed ligand–receptor pairs between other cells
and ﬁbroblast subpopulations in keloid versus normal scar
(ﬁbroblast subpopulations express receptors and receive ligand
signals from other cells). Signiﬁcantly altered signals included
some ﬁbrosis-related signals, such as TGFβ1 signaling, VEGF
Fig. 1 Single-cell RNA-seq reveals heterogeneity of normal scar and ﬁbrotic skin disease dermis tissues. a Illustration of workﬂow of scRNA-seq in
human normal scar and ﬁbrotic skin disease dermis samples. b Unbiased clustering of 40655 cells reveals 21 cellular clusters. Clusters are distinguished by
different colors. The general identity of each cell cluster is shown on the right. c Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of average gene expression showing
relatedness of cell clusters (correlation distance metric, average linkage). d Heatmap of differentially expressed genes. For each cluster, the top 10 genes
and their relative expression levels in all sequenced cells are shown. Selected genes for each cluster are color-coded and shown on the right. e Feature plots
of expression distribution for selected cluster-speciﬁc genes. Expression levels for each cell are color-coded and overlaid onto the UMAP plot. f The
proportion of cell lineages in keloids (KL) and normal scars (NS). g Number of differentially expressed (DE) genes in each cell type with >100 cells available
in keloid and normal scars (two-sided Wilcoxon Rank Sum test, Bonferroni correction, log fold change (FC) cutoff of 0.5, and adjusted P-value of <0.05).
Red bars indicate upregulated genes, and blue bars indicate downregulated genes in keloid.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:3709 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
signaling, and POSTN signaling (Fig. 4c, left panel). Among
them, TGFβ1 signaling was most signiﬁcantly altered. The
interactions between TGFβ1 and its receptors, TGFβR1 and
TGFβR2, were markedly increased in keloid compared to normal
scar (Fig. 4c, left panel). Notably, POSTN signaling was only
altered in mesenchymal ﬁbroblast subpopulations (Fig. 4c, left
panel). In addition, we explored alterations in ligand signals
broadcasted by ﬁbroblasts (Fig. 4c, right panel). We found that
ﬁbroblasts may affect other cells in the keloid through alterations
in ligand–receptor interactions of TGFβ1 signaling. We also
found signiﬁcantly increased NOTCH signaling, such as JAG1-
NOTCH1, in keloid (Fig. 4c, right panel). Fibrosis inhibition
associated FGF2 ligand–receptor interactions were signiﬁcantly
decreased
in
keloid,
which
was
consistent
with
previous
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:3709 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5
reports28,29 (Fig. 4c, right panel). Representative ligand–receptor
circle ﬁgures also indicated that ﬁbrosis signaling interactions,
such as TGFβ, POSTN, and PDGF, were signiﬁcantly increased in
keloid compared to normal scar (Fig. 4d, e and Supplementary
Fig. 5).
Mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts promote the expression of collagens
in the keloid partially through POSTN. To explore the char-
acteristics and function of mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts in ﬁbrosis,
we developed a strategy to isolate these cells. Based on scRNA-
seq data, all of the ﬁbroblasts in keloid expressed CD90, a
well-known ﬁbroblast marker14. Most mesenchymal ﬁbro-
blasts were CD266 (encoded by TNFRSF12A) positive and
CD9 negative compared to other ﬁbroblasts (Fig. 3d). There-
fore, we ﬂow-sorted keloid ﬁbroblasts that were CD90+ and
CD266+/CD9−or CD90+ other cells (other ﬁbroblasts)
(Fig. 5a and Supplementary Fig. 6). qRT-PCR and western blot
validated that mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts marker genes were
signiﬁcantly enriched in CD266+/CD9−ﬁbroblasts compared
to other ﬁbroblasts (Fig. 5b and c).
To examine the characteristics of CD266+/CD9−in depth, we
performed RNA-seq to compare the gene expression of CD266+/
CD9−ﬁbroblasts and other ﬁbroblasts. The results showed that
POSTN, ASPN, COMP, and COL11A1 were increased in the
CD266+/CD9−group (Supplementary Data 3), which was
consistent with the scRNA-seq results. GO and GSEA analyses
showed that upregulated genes in CD266+/CD9−ﬁbroblasts were
associated with extracellular matrix organization, collagen ﬁbril
organization, skeletal system development, chondrocyte develop-
ment, and so on (Fig. 5d, e), which was also consistent with the
scRNA-seq results. Taken together, these results indicate that
CD266+/CD9−ﬁbroblasts had the mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts
identity.
POSTN, which encodes periostin, plays an important role in
keloid
formation
and
increases
collagen
expression
in
keloid8,30,31. Increased collagen expression is an important
characteristic of skin ﬁbrosis. Considering that one of the
primary features of mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts in keloid was
abnormal ECM proteins expression including POSTN, and that
POSTN-ITGAV;ITGB5 interactions between mesenchymal and
other ﬁbroblasts were signiﬁcantly increased in keloid com-
pared to normal scar, we next explored the function of
mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts on keloid ﬁbroblast collagen expres-
sion. We ﬁrst ﬂow-sorted CD266+/CD9−ﬁbroblasts or other
ﬁbroblasts and cultured them in dishes. We next collected the
supernatant of CD266+/CD9−or other ﬁbroblasts to treat
other ﬁbroblasts. We found that the expression of collagen I
and III was higher in the CD266+/CD9−supernatant treatment
group than that of other ﬁbroblasts group (Fig. 5f, g). To see
whether the increased expression of collagen I and III resulted
from POSTN, we next mixed the CD266+/CD9−supernatant
with a POSTN neutralizing antibody, OC-20, which blocks
POSTN and integrins interactions32,33. OC-20 inhibited the
increased expression of collagen I and III in ﬁbroblasts of
CD266+/CD9−supernatant treatment signiﬁcantly (Fig. 5h),
suggesting that the mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts promoted collagen
synthesis
of
the
other
ﬁbroblasts
in
keloid
partially
through POSTN.
sC4 ﬁbroblasts are more mesenchymal-like than sC1 ﬁbro-
blasts. The mesenchymal ﬁbroblast subpopulation included sC1
and sC4 subgroups. To further explore the relationships of the
mesenchymal ﬁbroblast subgroups in keloid, we performed
diffusion-pseudotime (DPT) analysis of sC1 and sC4 ﬁbroblasts
(Fig. 6a, b). Ordering of sC1 and sC4 cells in pseudotime arranged
them into a major trajectory. Fibroblasts from sC1 and sC4 were
distributed across the pseudotime space, with sC1 cells primarily
occupying the lower space of the major trajectory, and sC4 cells
primarily occupying the upper space (Fig. 6a). Furthermore,
mesenchymal progenitor marker genes such as POSTN and
COL11A1 primarily occupied the upper space (Fig. 6c and Sup-
plementary Fig. 7a).
We next performed RNA velocity analysis, which considers
both spliced and unspliced mRNA counts to predict potential
directionality and speed of cell state transitions. This analysis
distinguished about four sets of vectors, deﬁned as Paths. From
the Paths, we can see a branched trajectory with two major
branches, i.e., Path2 and Path3,4, and a “pre-branch” Path1,
which represents the initial states of ﬁbroblasts (Fig. 6d). sC4
ﬁbroblasts constituted the vast majority of the “pre-branch” and
Path2, and sC1 ﬁbroblasts constituted the majority of Path3 and 4
(Fig. 6d and Supplementary Fig. 7b). These analyses suggested
that sC4 ﬁbroblasts may be lower differentiated than sC1
ﬁbroblasts. GO analyses suggested that collagen ﬁbril organiza-
tion, bone development, ossiﬁcation, and so on were enriched in
Path2, and some pathways involved in immune response and
wound
healing
were
enriched
in
Path3,4
(Supplementary
Fig. 7c–e). We next analyzed expression trends along trajectories
for some transcription factors in Path2 and Path3,4. The
expression of SOX4 and JUN maintained high levels in Path2,
and the expression of ID2 and CARHSP1 maintained high levels
in Path3,4 (Supplementary Fig. 7f).
Pseudotime and RNA velocity analyses suggested that sC4
ﬁbroblasts may be lower differentiated than sC1 ﬁbroblasts.
Interestingly, the proportion of sC4 ﬁbroblasts was signiﬁcantly
increased in keloid compared to normal scar. Thus, we next
focused on sC4 ﬁbroblasts. Although both sC1 and sC4
ﬁbroblasts are mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts, their gene expression
exhibited some differences. Mesenchymal progenitor-associated
genes, such as POSTN, ADAM12, and COL11A1, were higher in
sC4 ﬁbroblasts than in sC1 ﬁbroblasts (Fig. 6e and Supplementary
Data 4). GO and GSEA analyses also suggested that extracellular
matrix organization, ossiﬁcation, chondrocyte development, and
so on were enriched in sC4 ﬁbroblasts compared to sC1
ﬁbroblasts (Fig. 6f, g). Taken together, these results indicate that
sC4 ﬁbroblasts are more mesenchymal-like, and maybe more
important in keloid development.
Fig. 2 Keloid and normal scar ﬁbroblasts subcluster into distinct cell populations. a, b Subclustering of keloid and normal scar ﬁbroblasts (cells from
clusters C2, C4, C8, C14, and C15 shown in Fig. 1) further identiﬁed 13 distinct subtypes. Color-coded UMAP plot is shown and each ﬁbroblast subcluster
(sC1 through sC13) is deﬁned on the right. KF: keloid ﬁbroblasts, NS: normal scar ﬁbroblasts. c Cell proportions of ﬁbroblast subclusters in keloids and
normal scars. Cells of sC4 were signiﬁcantly increased in keloid samples compared to normal scar samples. d Unsupervised hierarchical clustering showing
relatedness of ﬁbroblast subclusters (Euclidean distance metric, average linkage). e Keloid and normal scar ﬁbroblasts could be divided into
4 subpopulations: secretory-papillary, secretory-reticular, mesenchymal, and pro-inﬂammatory. f The proportions of 4 ﬁbroblast subpopulations in keloid
and normal scar. g Violin plots showing representative differentially expressed genes between keloid mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts and normal scar
mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts. h GO Biological Process enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes in mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts between keloid and
normal scars. i GSEA enrichment plots for representative signaling pathways upregulated in keloid mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts compared to normal scars.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:3709 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
Mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts are increased in scleroderma. To
examine the consistency of our ﬁndings in other ﬁbrotic skin
diseases, we investigated scRNA-seq data from a recent scler-
oderma research34. We compared ﬁbroblast data of scleroderma
with our No. 3 normal scar ﬁbroblast data because they had
similar ﬁbroblasts numbers. We performed unsupervised clus-
tering on all scleroderma and normal scar ﬁbroblasts and
observed heterogeneity with 9 subclusters (Fig. 7a, b). We found
that cluster 7 was increased in scleroderma compared to normal
scar
(Fig.
7c).
Mesenchymal
ﬁbroblast
markers
POSTN,
ADAM12, COMP, and NREP were extensively expressed in
scleroderma cluster 7 ﬁbroblasts (Fig. 7d). Correlation analysis
also suggested that scleroderma cluster 7 ﬁbroblasts were most
analogous to mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts in keloid (Fig. 7e).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:3709 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7
Immunoﬂuorescence staining results showed that the proportion
of ADAM12+/NREP+ cells was higher in scleroderma tissue than
in normal control tissue (Fig. 7f, g). Taken together, these results
indicated that increasing mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts may be a
universal mechanism in ﬁbrotic skin diseases.
Discussion
Although ﬁbrotic skin diseases have been extensively studied, key
mechanisms leading to the development of these diseases are still
not well understood2,4. In addition, treatments to prevent or treat
skin ﬁbrosis are scarce and not effective2,4. Fibrotic skin tissues
include multiple cell subpopulations with diverse genetic and
phenotypic characteristics. How this heterogeneity emerges in
developing ﬁbrosis remains unclear3. Herein, we built a single-cell
atlas of a representative human ﬁbrotic skin disease, keloid, and
explored the characteristics and key regulatory pathways of dis-
tinct ﬁbroblast subtypes. These ﬁndings will help us understand
skin ﬁbrotic pathogenesis in depth, and provide potential targets
for clinical therapies of these diseases.
Fibroblasts are increasingly recognized as central mediators of
diverse ﬁbrotic diseases, and here, we identiﬁed 13 ﬁbroblast
subgroups in human ﬁbrotic skin disease tissues by using scRNA-
seq (Fig. 2a, b). Further cluster analysis suggested that these
ﬁbroblast subgroups could be divided into 4 subpopulations:
secretory-papillary, secretory-reticular, mesenchymal, and pro-
inﬂammatory (Fig. 2e and Supplementary Fig. 2), which was
consistent with previous ﬁndings in normal human skin16. The
percentage of cells in the mesenchymal subpopulation was sig-
niﬁcantly increased in keloid compared to normal scar tissues
(Fig. 2e, f). Signiﬁcantly, we also found increasing mesenchymal
ﬁbroblast subpopulation in scleroderma (Fig. 7c–g), another
ﬁbrotic skin disease, suggesting that this may be a universal
mechanism in skin ﬁbrosis. According to our results and the
results from a previous study16, these mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts
expressed genes associated with skeletal system development,
ossiﬁcation, and osteoblast differentiation (Fig. 3c, d), suggesting
a stronger mesenchymal component in this cell subpopulation.
Some skeletal system development, tendon development, and
osteoblast differentiation-associated master TFs, such as SCX and
RUNX235,36, were also enriched in this subpopulation (Fig. 3e).
These TFs may play an important role in deciding the cell
identities of these ﬁbroblast subpopulations. Increases of these
mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts in keloid indicated that skin ﬁbrosis may
be associated with osteogenesis and chondrogenesis.
One of the characteristics of the mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts in
keloid is the high expression of secretory proteins such as
POSTN, COMP, COL11A1, ASPN, and COL5A2 (Fig. 3c and
Supplementary Data 2). Previous studies suggested that some of
these proteins such as POSTN were increased and could promote
collagens production in keloid31,37. However, these studies did
not explore which cells these proteins were derived from. We also
did not know whether the ECM proteins increase in all cells or
only in some cells. Our results indicated that these proteins were
primarily expressed in ﬁbroblasts of keloid, and only some
ﬁbroblasts expressed these proteins (Fig. 3c). Furthermore, our
functional study suggested that the supernatant of this group of
ﬁbroblasts increased the expression of collagens in other ﬁbro-
blasts
(Fig.
5f,
g).
By
analyzing
single-cell
data
from
scleroderma34, we also found an increased mesenchymal ﬁbro-
blast subpopulation highly expressing POSTN, COMP, ASPN,
and so on in ﬁbrosis tissues compared to normal tissues (Fig. 7d).
These results suggested that the mesenchymal ﬁbroblast sub-
population may have an important role in multiple skin ﬁbrosis
diseases, and may serve as target cells for ﬁbrosis treatment.
Myoﬁbroblasts have been reported to be signiﬁcantly increased
and contribute to collagen formation in ﬁbrotic diseases3,6. Our
results suggested that a small part of mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts
were myoﬁbroblasts, and most of the myoﬁbroblasts were in the
mesenchymal ﬁbroblast subpopulation in keloid (Supplementary
Fig. 4). Our discovery indicates that mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts play
an important role in collagen deposition in keloid, and most of
the myoﬁbroblasts were in the mesenchymal ﬁbroblast sub-
population and may have the same function as mesenchymal
ﬁbroblast.
Our
discovery
is
consistent
with
the
previous
hypothesis that myoﬁbroblasts contribute to collagen formation
in the scars but the difference is that our discovery might expand
the myoﬁbroblast hypothesis.
Fibroblasts are known to interact with other cell types in the
skin. scRNA-seq provides opportunities to identify communicating
pairs of cells based on the expression of cell-surface receptors and
their interacting ligands. The results showed that ﬁbroblasts
interacted with all cells we identiﬁed in our scRNA-seq (Fig. 4a).
Notably, in the normal scar, the most abundant interactions
occurred between secretory-reticular ﬁbroblasts and other cells.
However, in ﬁbrotic skin, the most abundant interactions occurred
between mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts and other cells (Fig. 4a). These
results suggest that these mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts play an impor-
tant role in skin ﬁbrosis development, which is consistent with
their increases in skin ﬁbrosis. We found a marked increase of
TGFβ-TGFβ receptor interactions in keloid compared to normal
scar (Fig. 4b), indicating the central roles of the TGFβ pathway in
ﬁbrosis development. We also identiﬁed some previously reported
ﬁbrosis-associated interactions, such as NOTCH and angiogenesis-
associated VEGF ligand–receptor interactions (Fig. 4b)6,38, which
were increased in skin ﬁbrosis. Interestingly, we found that the
POSTN-ITGAV;ITGB5 interactions between mesenchymal and
other ﬁbroblasts were signiﬁcantly increased in keloid compared to
normal scar (Fig. 4b, c). Blocking the interactions by using POSTN
Fig. 3 Characteristics of mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts in ﬁbrotic skin disease. a Feature plots of the expression distribution for POSTN and COL11A1 in keloid
ﬁbroblasts (KF) and normal scar ﬁbroblasts (NS). Expression levels for each cell are color-coded and overlaid onto the UMAP plot. The average cell
expression of each gene in mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts between KF and NS were shown in the right panel (Two-sided unpaired t-test). n = 3 biologically
independent samples. In box plots, lines in the middle of boxes correspond to median values. Lower and upper hinges correspond to the ﬁrst and third
quartiles, and the upper whisker extends from the hinge to the largest value no further than 1.5 × IQR (inter-quartile range) from the hinge. The lower
whisker extends from the hinge to the smallest value at most 1.5 × IQR of the hinge. b Heatmap of differentially expressed genes in each ﬁbroblast
subpopulations. MF: mesenchymal ﬁbroblast, PIF: pro-inﬂammatory ﬁbroblast, SRF: secretory-reticular ﬁbroblast, SPF: secretory-papillary ﬁbroblast.
c Violin plots illustrating the expression of some marker genes in each ﬁbroblast subpopulations. d Functional enrichment of upregulated genes in
mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts [Fisher exact-test, corrected for multiple comparisons using Benjamini and Hochberg method, adjusted P-value of <0.05]. e The
top 13 candidate master regulators for mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts identiﬁed by an algorithm for master regulator analysis algorithm (MARINa). Violin plots
showing the relative expression levels of each master regulator in the right panel. f Immunoﬂuorescence staining of NREP and ADAM12 in normal and
keloid tissues. Lower panels are the insets of upper panels. Arrowheads indicate NREP+/ADAM12+ cells. Scale bar = 200 μm. g Percentage of NREP
+/ADAM12+ cells in normal and keloid tissues. Data are presented as mean values ± SD (n = 5 images examined over 3 independent experiments). Two-
sided unpaired t-test, ***P = 0.00013.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:3709 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
Fig. 4 Potential ligand–receptor interactions analyses in ﬁbroblast subpopulations. a, b Heatmap showing the numbers of inter-populations
communications with each other in normal scars (a) and in keloid tissues (b). c The ligand–receptor pairs exhibit signiﬁcant changes in speciﬁcity between
any one of the population and any one type of ﬁbroblast in normal scars versus keloid. The left panel shows that one type of ﬁbroblast expresses receptors
and receives ligand signals from other populations. The right panel shows that one other population expresses receptors and receives ligand signals from
one type of ﬁbroblast. d, e Putative TGFβ and POSTN relative signaling within ﬁbroblasts and other cell populations in normal scars (d) and in keloid tissues
(e). All arrows are pointing to the receptors. Average expression levels for each ligand/receptor are presented as a heatmap plot. Black indicates maximum
relative expression and white indicates low or no expression of a particular gene.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:3709 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9
neutralizing antibodies inhibited the increase of collagens in other
ﬁbroblasts
treated
with
mesenchymal
ﬁbroblast
supernatant
(Fig. 5h), indicating that these interactions are important for keloid
collagen overexpression and may serve as therapeutic targets.
One of the most interesting ﬁndings in our study was that a
ﬁbroblast subgroup, sC4, was signiﬁcantly increased in ﬁbrotic
skin compared to normal scar (Fig. 2c), indicating its important
role in skin ﬁbrosis. The sC4 subgroup was almost absent in
NS1, and in NS2 and NS3, this subgroup was small (Fig. 2c).
Some osteogenesis and chondrogenesis associated secretory
proteins, such as POSTN and COL11A1, were higher in sC4
than in sC1 (Fig. 6e and Supplementary Data 4), the other
mesenchymal ﬁbroblast subgroup, suggesting that sC4 ﬁbro-
blasts may be more pluripotent. Pseudotime and RNA velocity
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:3709 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
analyses also suggested that sC4 ﬁbroblasts were at the early
stage of differentiation and could differentiate into sC1 ﬁbro-
blasts (Fig. 6a–d). Because of the similar expression levels of
membrane proteins between sC4 and sC1 subgroups (Supple-
mentary Data 4), we can not ﬂow-sorted them and compare
their functions in this study. One interesting question is where
did the sC4 ﬁbroblast subgroup comes from. These ﬁbroblasts
may come from dedifferentiation of the cells in normal skin or
from mesenchymal stem cells in the bone marrow. Our next
study will explore the origin of these ﬁbroblasts by using
transgenic mice and lineage tracing.
Surgical excision remains the mainstay for the treatment of
keloid, and multiple adjuvant therapies, such as pulsed-dye laser
ablation, radiation therapy, pressure therapy, CO2 laser ablation,
and intralesional steroids, have been used6,39,40. In most cases, the
patients are effectively treated with these non-targeted therapies,
but with varying degrees of recurrence6,39,40. Our studies indicate
that mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts are important for the over-
expression of collagens in keloid through POSTN. We may
develop some methods, such as using small molecule inhibitors of
POSTN, to target mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts. Inhibiting or elim-
inating mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts before or after non-targeted
therapies in keloid patients may improve the therapeutic effect of
keloid.
In conclusion, we provided a systematic analysis of ﬁbroblast
heterogeneity in ﬁbrotic skin diseases at single-cell resolution. In
addition, we identiﬁed an increased mesenchymal ﬁbroblast
subpopulation in ﬁbrotic skin diseases involved in collagen
overexpression. These ﬁndings will help to understand skin
ﬁbrotic pathogenesis in depth and identify potential targets for
ﬁbrotic disease treatment.
Methods
Sample preparation and tissue dissociation. This study was approved by the
Medical and Ethics Committees of Dermatology Hospital, Southern Medical
University (2019023), and each patient signed an informed consent before enrol-
ling in this study. All the patients in this research were Han nationality. Keloid
tissues were harvested during plastic surgery from three patients conﬁrmed to have
clinical evidence of keloid (Supplementary Table 1). All the keloids we used in this
study were mature. We used all contents of the keloid samples, including the center
and the edge of the samples, and mixed them for further analysis. No patient
received chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or intralesional steroids treatment prior to
surgery. Normal scar tissues were obtained from three patients who underwent
elective scar resection surgery (Supplementary Table 1). Keloids and normal scars
were diagnosed on the basis of their clinical appearance, history, anatomical
location, and pathology. Excised skin was immersed in physiological saline and
then immediately transferred to the lab. The skin tissue was washed twice in PBS.
After removal of the adipose tissue under the reticular dermis, samples were cut
into 5 mm diameter pieces and incubated with dispase II (Sigma) for 2 h at 37 °C.
The epidermis was peeled off and discarded and the dermis was minced into small
pieces and digested at 37 °C for 2 h using Collagenase IV (YEASEN, China). The
resulting cell suspension was ﬁltered through a 70 μm cell strainer (BD Falcon),
and centrifuged at 400 × g for 10 min. The supernatant was removed and the pellet
was washed once with PBS at 400 × g for 5 min. The pellet was then resuspended in
PBS + 1% FBS for ﬂow cytometry.
Single-cell cDNA and library preparation. Single-cell cDNA, library preparation,
and 3′-end single-cell RNA-sequencing were performed by Novogene (Beijing,
China). For experiments using the 10× Genomics platform, the Chromium Single
Cell 3′ Library & Gel Bead Kit v2 (PN-120237), Chromium Single Cell 3′ Chip kit
v2 (PN-120236), and Chromium i7 Multiplex Kit (PN-120262) were used
according to the manufacturer’s instructions in the Chromium Single Cell 3′
Reagents Kits v2 User Guide. The single-cell suspension was washed twice with 1×
PBS + 0.04% BSA. The cell number and concentration were conﬁrmed with a
TC20™Automated Cell Counter.
Approximately 8000 cells were immediately subjected to the 10× Genomics
Chromium Controller machine for Gel Beads-in-Emulsion (GEM) generation.
mRNA was prepared using 10× Genomics Chromium Single Cell 3′ reagent kit (V2
chemistry). During this step, cells were partitioned into the GEMs along with Gel
Beads coated with oligos. These oligos provide poly-dT sequences to capture
mRNAs released after cell lysis inside the droplets, as well as cell-speciﬁc and
transcript-speciﬁc barcodes (16 bp 10× Barcode and 10 bp Unique Molecular
Identiﬁer (UMI), respectively).
After RT-PCR, cDNA was recovered, puriﬁed, and ampliﬁed to generate
sufﬁcient quantities for library preparation. Library quality and concentration were
assessed using Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100.
3′-end single-cell RNA-sequencing. Libraries were run on the Hiseq X or
Novaseq for Illumina PE150 sequencing. Post-processing and quality control were
performed by Novogene using the 10× Cell Ranger package (v2.1.0, 10× Geno-
mics). Reads were aligned to GRCh38 reference assembly (v2.2.0, 10× Genomics).
Single-cell RNA-sequence data processing. The sequencing reads were exam-
ined by quality metrics, and transcripts were mapped to a reference human genome
(hg38) and assigned to individual cells of origin according to the cell-speciﬁc
barcodes, using the Cell Ranger pipeline (10× Genomics). To ensure that PCR
ampliﬁed transcripts were counted only once, only single UMIs were counted for
gene expression level analysis41. In this way, cell-gene UMI counting matrices were
generated for downstream analyses. From each sample, unwanted variations and
low-quality cells were ﬁltered by removing cells with high and low (>6000 and
<200) UMI-counts. Meanwhile, to avoid the effects of doublets, cells that were
identiﬁed as doublets using Doubletdetection (available from https://github.com/
JonathanShor/DoubletDetection) were removed from our data.
Gene expression levels for each cell were normalized by total expression,
multiplied by a scale factor (10,000), and log-transformed. Batches were then
regressed out, and scaled Z scored residuals of the model were used as normalized
expression values. We deﬁned the top 2000 most variable genes based on their
average expression and dispersion as highly variable genes (HVG). We reduced the
dimensionality of the data by performing the principal component analysis (PCA)
on HVG. To identify cell subpopulations, clustering was performed on PCA scores
using signiﬁcant PCs assigned by a randomization approach proposed by Chung
and Storey42,43. For those replicates (NS1, NS2, NS3 and KF1, KF2, KF3), the ﬁrst
15 PCs were selected for clustering. To cluster cells, a K-nearest neighbor (KNN)
graph constructed on a Euclidean distance matrix in PCA space was calculated and
then converted to a shared nearest neighbor (SNN) graph, in order to ﬁnd highly
interconnected communities of cells44. Cells were then clustered using the Louvain
method to maximize modularity45. To display data, the Unsupervised Uniform
Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) was applied to cell loadings of
selected PCs, and the cluster assignments from the graph-based clustering were
Fig. 5 The supernatant of mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts promotes collagen expression in keloid ﬁbroblasts. a Isolation of CD266+CD9−and other
ﬁbroblasts from keloid dermis by ﬂow cytometry. b qRT-PCR assay of some mesenchymal ﬁbroblast marker genes expression in CD266+/CD9−
ﬁbroblasts and other ﬁbroblasts from keloid dermis. Data are presented as mean values ± SD (n = 3 biologically independent experiments.). Two-sided
unpaired t-test, ***P < 0.001(ASPN:P = 0.00003, COL11A1:P = 0.00019, POSTN:P = 0.00004, ADAM12:P = 0.00015, P311:P = 0.00019, COMP:P =
0.00002). c Western blot assay of mesenchymal ﬁbroblast marker genes expression in CD266+/CD9−ﬁbroblasts and other ﬁbroblasts from keloid
dermis. The experiments were repeated three times with three different ﬁbroblast donors, and here a representative result was shown. d GO Biological
Process enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes between keloid CD266+/CD9−ﬁbroblasts and other ﬁbroblasts. e GSEA enrichment plots
for representative signaling pathways upregulated in keloid CD266+/CD9−ﬁbroblasts compared to other ﬁbroblasts. (NES normalized enrichment score,
corrected for multiple comparisons using FDR method, P-value were showed in plots). f, g Keloid other ﬁbroblasts were treated with the supernatant of
CD266+/CD9−or other ﬁbroblasts. The expression of collagen I and collagen III was analyzed by qRT-PCR (f) or western blot (g). Data are presented as
mean values ± SD (n = 3 biologically independent experiments). Two-sided unpaired t-test, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. (COL1A1: P = 0.000009 and P =
0.000015, respectively; COL3A1: P = 0.00006 and P = 0.00214, respectively). The experiments were repeated three times with three different ﬁbroblast
donors, and here a representative result was shown. h Keloid other ﬁbroblasts were treated as indicated in the ﬁgure. The expression of collagen I and
collagen III was analyzed by western blot. The POSTN antibody neutralizing experiments were repeated three times with three different ﬁbroblast donors,
and here a representative result was shown.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:3709 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11
used. For cluster numbers higher than two, cluster-speciﬁc marker genes were
identiﬁed by running the “ﬁnd_all_markers” Seurat function with parameters logfc.
threshold = 0.5 and test.use = “wilcox”. To identify differentially expressed genes
between two clusters, we used the “ﬁnd.markers” Seurat function with logfc.
threshold = 0.5 and test.use = “wilcox”. All analyses described in this section were
performed using Seurat R package version 3.0.1.
Gene sets enrichment analysis. Gene Ontology46 functional enrichment (over-
representation) of DEGs at P < 0.05 was analyzed using a R package clusterProﬁler
v3.12.047. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) also conducted using GSEA
desktop software, and collected gene sets and molecular signatures were obtained
from the Molecular Signatures Database48. Normalized enrichment scores were
acquired using gene set permutations 1000 times, and a cutoff P-value of 0.05 was
used to ﬁlter the signiﬁcant enrichment results.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:3709 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
Master transcriptional regulator analysis. ARACNe is widely used to accurately
reconstruct gene regulatory networks49,50. To infer the transcription factor reg-
ulatory network of this study, we used all 1665 human transcription factors of
Animal TFDB 3.051. We ﬁrst performed regulatory network analysis for four types
of ﬁbroblasts separately, each with corresponding expression data including one
type of ﬁbroblasts and the rest of ﬁbroblasts, using ARACNe-AP software52. Sec-
ond, we performed master regulator analysis using the ssmarina package (deposited
in https://ﬁgshare.com/articles/dataset/ssmarina_R_system_package/785718), a
modiﬁcation of the MARINa algorithm53. Enrichment of the predicted targets was
assessed by comparing the gene expression between two groups. Regulators with
FDR-corrected P-values below 0.01 were inferred as candidate master regulators
between two given groups.
Cell–cell communication analysis. To identify potential interactions between and
within ﬁbroblasts and other dermal cell populations, we used CellPhoneDB 2.0
with parameters threshold = 0.25 and iterations = 100027, which contains a cura-
ted repository of ligand–receptor interactions and a statistical framework for
inferring lineage-speciﬁc interactions. Custom R scripts and circos software were
used for analyses and to draw the interaction diagrams54.
Pseudotime analysis and RNA velocity analysis. Diffusion-pseudotime (DPT)
analysis was implemented, and diffusion maps were generated using the destiny
R package55. The number of nearest neighbors, k, was set to 100. Velocyto can
estimate the RNA velocities of single cells by distinguishing unspliced and
spliced mRNAs in standard single-cell RNA-sequencing data. We performed this
analysis on ﬁbroblast cells as described by La Manno et al.56. Based on velocyto
pipeline, annotation of spliced and unspliced reads was performed using the
Python script velocyto.py on the Cell Ranger output folder, then merged all
keloid data sets, and remain ﬁbroblasts based on the results of our previous cell
clustering analysis. PCA analysis was performed with Pagoda257 with spliced
expression matrix as input, and cell-to-cell distance matrix was calculated using
Euclidean distance based on the top 20 principal components. RNA velocity was
estimated using a gene-relative model with k-nearest neighbor cell pooling (k =
100). Velocity ﬁelds were projected onto the pseudotime space produced by
DPT. Arrows were plotted on an absolute scale. The pseudotime-dependent
genes were detected by differentialGeneTest function with fullModelFormulaStr
= “~sm.ns(Pseudotime)” in Monocle258, the statistically signiﬁcant threshold
was set to a q-value < 0.01.
Integration public data sets. All Seurat objects for our dataset’s individual
samples and the public data sets were processed through similar steps as described
above to generate a single combined object. Next, combined object was used to
perform canonical correlation analysis (CCA) between our dataset and public data
sets59. Then, CCA subspaces were aligned using 1:30 CCA dimensions, which was
followed by integrated UMAP visualization for all cells.
Immunoﬂuorescence staining. Immunoﬂuorescence staining was performed on
formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded human keloid and normal scar biopsies. Tissue
sections were deparafﬁnized and rehydrated followed by heat-induced antigen
retrieval in citrate buffer at pH 6.0 for ~10 min. Antibodies were applied, including
mouse anti-ADAM12 (sc293225, Santa Cruz) (1:50), rabbit anti-NREP (bs-0427R,
Bioss) (1:100), or rabbit anti-SMA (ab124964, Abcam) (1:300) were incubated
overnight at 4 °C. Sections were washed with PBS 3 times, and then labeled with
Alexa Fluor 488 (A-11029, ThermoFisher) and 555 (A32732, ThermoFisher)
labeled secondary antibodies (1:5000). Slides were coverslipped, using DAPI con-
taining aqueous mounting medium. Images were obtained using a Nikon A1 +
confocal laser-scanning microscope.
Flow cytometry. Disaggregated dermal cells were labeled with antibodies in PBS +
1% FBS for 30 min at 4 °C. Antibodies were applied, including PE anti-human
CD90 (328109, Biolegend) (1:200), FITC anti-human CD9 Antibody (312103,
Biolegend) (1:100) and APC anti-human CD266 Antibody (314107, Biolegend)
(1:100). DAPI was used to exclude dead cells. Following incubation, cells were
centrifuged at 400 × g for 5 min at 4 °C, and washed three times in PBS + 1% FBS.
Pellets were resuspended in PBS + 1% FBS and ﬁltered through a 50 μm cell
strainer. Cell sorting was performed on a BD FACSAria™III Fusion cell sorters. For
gate setting and compensation, unlabeled, single-labeled cells and compensation
beads (BD) were used as controls. Data analysis was performed using FlowJo
software.
Real-time quantitative PCR. Real-time quantitative PCR was performed as pre-
viously described60. Brieﬂy, Total RNA was isolated with TRIzol reagent (Invi-
trogen). First-strand cDNA was synthesized using a PrimeScript RT Reagent Kit
(Takara, Japan). Gene-speciﬁc primer pairs were designed with Primer Premier
5.0 software (Supplementary Table 2). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed
using SYBR Green Master (Takara, Japan) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol.
Western blot. Western blot was performed as previously described60. Brieﬂy, cells
were lysed in 1×SDS-PAGE loading buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl at pH 6.8, 2% (W/V)
SDS, 0.1% (W/V) BPB, 10% (V/V) glycerol) containing 50 mM β-glyceropho-
sphate, and the lysates were resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred to poly-
vinylidene diﬂuoride membranes for western blot using enhanced
chemiluminescence detection reagents (Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA). Antibody
recognizing collagen I (ab34710) (1:1000) and collagen III (ab7778) (1:1000) were
purchased from Abcam. The antibody recognizing GAPDH (60004-1-Ig) (1:5000)
was purchased from Proteintech.
CD266+CD9−and the other ﬁbroblasts supernatant treatment experiments.
Flow sorted CD266+CD9−and other ﬁbroblasts were maintained in DMEM
(Invitrogen) with 10% FBS (Invitrogen) at 37 °C and 5% CO2. After reaching about
80% conﬂuence, the culture mediums were changed to FBS-free DMEM. 24 h later,
the supernatants of CD266+CD9−and other ﬁbroblasts were collected to treat the
other ﬁbroblasts of keloid as indicated in the ﬁgures. After 48 h treatment, the RNA
and proteins of the cells were collected for qRT-PCR and western blot assays. The
POSTN neutralizing antibody OC-20 (2 μg/ml) and control lgM antibody (2 μg/ml)
were purchased from AdipoGen (AG-20B-6000PF for OC-20 and ANC-290-810
for lgM antibody), and the OC-20 neutralizing experiments were repeated three
times with three different ﬁbroblast donors.
Statistical analysis. All experiments were repeated at least three times. Statistical
analyses were performed using SPSS software, version 19.0. Data represent mean ±
standard deviation. A two-tailed, unpaired Student t-test or the Mann–Whitney U
test was employed to compare the values between subgroups for quantitative data.
P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically signiﬁcant.
Reporting summary. Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
RNA-seq and scRNA-seq data have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO) database under accession codes “GSE175866” and “GSE163973”, respectively. All
other relevant data supporting the key ﬁndings of this study are available within the
article and its Supplementary Information ﬁles or from the corresponding author upon
reasonable request. A reporting summary for this Article is available as a Supplementary
Information ﬁle. Source data are provided with this paper.
Code availability
Code to reproduce the analyses described in this manuscript can be accessed via: https://
github.com/HobartJoe/Human_Keloid_scRNAseq. Code for the analysis of scRNA-seq
data is also provided in a Zenodo repository with the identiﬁer (https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.4784648)61.
Fig. 6 sC4 ﬁbroblasts are more mesenchymal-like than sC1 ﬁbroblasts. a, b Results of diffusion-pseudotime analysis of keloid mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts,
colored by subcluster (a) and by keloid samples (b). c Diffusion map showing the expression levels of POSTN in keloid mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts. Red
indicates maximum relative expression, and gray indicates low or no expression of this gene. d RNA velocity analysis distinguished four sets of velocity
vectors across the diffusion-pseudotime: Path1 (orange), Path2 (red), Path3 (blue), and Path4 (green). e The difference in the expression levels of
mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts population-speciﬁc genes (n = 1047 cells in keloid sC1 cluster, n = 1048 cells in keloid sC4 cluster). In embedded box plots, the
white dot in the middle of boxes corresponds to median values. Lower and upper hinges correspond to the ﬁrst and third quartiles, and the upper whisker
extends from the hinge to the largest value no further than 1.5 × IQR (inter-quartile range) from the hinge. The lower whisker extends from the hinge to the
smallest value at most 1.5 × IQR of the hinge. f Heatmap showing differentially expressed genes among the subclusters in mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts, and
functional annotations of those dysregulated genes are shown in the right panel. g GSEA enrichment plots for representative signaling pathways
upregulated in the sC4 subcluster (NES normalized enrichment score, corrected for multiple comparisons using FDR method, P-value were showed in
plots).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:3709 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
13
Fig. 7 Mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts are increased in scleroderma. a UMAP visualization of dermal skin cell populations of patients with scleroderma (data from
NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GSE160536)) in the left panel, and a normal scar (NS3) sample from our data is showed on the right. b Integration analysis of
two sources of ﬁbroblasts, one from scleroderma, and the other one from a normal scar. c Divided UMAP visualization of the integration results. d Feature plots
of the expression distribution of mesenchymal signature genes in scleroderma and normal scar ﬁbroblasts. e Correlation analysis of the average expression level
of cluster 7 cells (scleroderma) and four types of ﬁbroblasts from keloid samples. f Immunoﬂuorescence staining of NREP and ADAM12 in normal and
scleroderma tissues. Arrowheads indicate NREP+/ADAM12+ cells. Scale bar = 200 μm. g Percentage of NREP+/ADAM12+ cells in normal and scleroderma
tissues. Data are presented as mean values ± SD (n = 5 images examined over 3 independent experiments). Two-sided unpaired t-test, ***P = 0.00013.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
14
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:3709 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
Received: 13 December 2020; Accepted: 2 June 2021;
References
1.
Wynn, T. A. & Ramalingam, T. R. Mechanisms of ﬁbrosis: therapeutic
translation for ﬁbrotic disease. Nat. Med. 18, 1028–1040 (2012).
2.
Zhao, X., Kwan, J. Y. Y., Yip, K., Liu, P. P. & Liu, F. F. Targeting metabolic
dysregulation for ﬁbrosis therapy. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 19, 57–75 (2020).
3.
Grifﬁn, M. F., desJardins-Park, H. E., Mascharak, S., Borrelli, M. R. &
Longaker, M. T. Understanding the impact of ﬁbroblast heterogeneity on skin
ﬁbrosis. Dis. Models Mech. 13, dmm044164 (2020).
4.
Do, N. N. & Eming, S. A. Skin ﬁbrosis: Models and mechanisms. Curr. Res.
Transl. Med. 64, 185–193 (2016).
5.
Bayat, A., McGrouther, D. A. & Ferguson, M. W. Skin scarring. BMJ 326,
88–92 (2003).
6.
Andrews, J. P., Marttala, J., Macarak, E., Rosenbloom, J. & Uitto, J.
Keloids: The paradigm of skin ﬁbrosis—pathomechanisms and treatment.
Matrix biology: journal of the International Society for. Matrix Biol. 51, 37–46
(2016).
7.
Rinkevich, Y. et al. Skin ﬁbrosis. Identiﬁcation and isolation of a dermal
lineage with intrinsic ﬁbrogenic potential. Science 348, aaa2151 (2015).
8.
Murota, H., Lingli, Y. & Katayama, I. Periostin in the pathogenesis of skin
diseases. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 74, 4321–4328 (2017).
9.
O’Dwyer, D. N. & Moore, B. B. The role of periostin in lung ﬁbrosis and
airway remodeling. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 74, 4305–4314 (2017).
10. Lynch, M. D. & Watt, F. M. Fibroblast heterogeneity: implications for human
disease. J. Clin. Investig. 128, 26–35 (2018).
11. Rognoni, E. & Watt, F. M. Skin cell heterogeneity in development, wound
healing, and cancer. Trends Cell Biol. 28, 709–722 (2018).
12. Driskell, R. R. et al. Distinct ﬁbroblast lineages determine dermal architecture
in skin development and repair. Nature 504, 277–281 (2013).
13. Tabib, T., Morse, C., Wang, T., Chen, W. & Lafyatis, R. SFRP2/DPP4 and
FMO1/LSP1 deﬁne major ﬁbroblast populations in human skin. J. Invest.
Dermatol. 138, 802–810 (2018).
14. Philippeos, C. et al. Spatial and single-cell transcriptional proﬁling identiﬁes
functionally distinct human dermal ﬁbroblast subpopulations. J. Invest.
Dermatol. 138, 811–825 (2018).
15. Vorstandlechner, V. et al. Deciphering the functional heterogeneity of skin
ﬁbroblasts using single-cell RNA sequencing. FASEB J. 34, 3677–3692 (2020).
16. Sole-Boldo, L. et al. Single-cell transcriptomes of the human skin reveal age-
related loss of ﬁbroblast priming. Commun. Biol. 3, 188 (2020).
17. Layton, T. B. et al. Cellular census of human ﬁbrosis deﬁnes functionally
distinct stromal cell types and states. Nat. Commun. 11, 2768 (2020).
18. Valenzi, E. et al. Single-cell analysis reveals ﬁbroblast heterogeneity and
myoﬁbroblasts in systemic sclerosis-associated interstitial lung disease. Ann.
Rheum. Dis. 78, 1379–1387 (2019).
19. Adams, T. S. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals ectopic and aberrant lung-
resident cell populations in idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Sci. Adv. 6,
eaba1983 (2020).
20. Macarak, E. J., Wermuth, P., Rosenbloom, J. & Uitto, J. Keloid disorder:
ﬁbroblast differentiation and gene expression proﬁle in ﬁbrotic skin diseases.
Exp. Dermatol. 30, 132–145 (2020).
21. Bonnet, N., Garnero, P. & Ferrari, S. Periostin action in bone. Mol. Cell.
Endocrinol. 432, 75–82 (2016).
22. Li, A., Wei, Y., Hung, C. & Vunjak-Novakovic, G. Chondrogenic properties of
collagen type XI, a component of cartilage extracellular matrix. Biomaterials
173, 47–57 (2018).
23. Peltonen, S. et al. A novel component of epidermal cell-matrix and cell-cell
contacts: transmembrane protein type XIII collagen. J. Invest Dermatol 113,
635–642 (1999).
24. D’Alessio, A. C. et al. A systematic approach to identify candidate
transcription factors that control cell identity. Stem Cell Rep. 5, 763–775
(2015).
25. Xu, J., Du, Y. & Deng, H. Direct lineage reprogramming: strategies,
mechanisms, and applications. Cell Stem Cell 16, 119–134 (2015).
26. Li, L. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq analysis maps development of human
germline cells and gonadal niche interactions. Cell Stem Cell 20, 891–892
(2017).
27. Efremova, M., Vento-Tormo, M., Teichmann, S. A. & Vento-Tormo, R.
CellPhoneDB: inferring cell-cell communication from combined expression of
multi-subunit ligand-receptor complexes. Nat. Protoc. 15, 1484–1506 (2020).
28. Koo, H. Y. et al. Fibroblast growth factor 2 decreases bleomycin-induced
pulmonary ﬁbrosis and inhibits ﬁbroblast collagen production and
myoﬁbroblast differentiation. J. Pathol. 246, 54–66 (2018).
29. Dolivo, D. M., Larson, S. A. & Dominko, T. FGF2-mediated attenuation of
myoﬁbroblast activation is modulated by distinct MAPK signaling pathways
in human dermal ﬁbroblasts. J. Dermatol. Sci. 88, 339–348 (2017).
30. Elliott, C. G. et al. Periostin modulates myoﬁbroblast differentiation during
full-thickness cutaneous wound repair. J. Cell Sci. 125, 121–132 (2012).
31. Zhang, Z. et al. Increased periostin expression affects the proliferation,
collagen synthesis, migration and invasion of keloid ﬁbroblasts under hypoxic
conditions. Int J. Mol. Med. 34, 253–261 (2014).
32. Orecchia, P. et al. Identiﬁcation of a novel cell binding site of periostin
involved in tumour growth. Eur. J. Cancer 47, 2221–2229 (2011).
33. Naik, P. K. et al. Periostin promotes ﬁbrosis and predicts progression in
patients with idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell. Mol.
Physiol. 303, L1046–1056 (2012).
34. Mirizio, E. et al. Single-cell transcriptome conservation in a comparative
analysis of fresh and cryopreserved human skin tissue: pilot in localized
scleroderma. Arthritis Res. Ther. 22, 263 (2020).
35. Dash, S. & Trainor, P. A. The development, patterning and evolution of neural
crest cell differentiation into cartilage and bone. Bone 137, 115409 (2020).
36. Liu, H. et al. Crucial transcription factors in tendon development and
differentiation: their potential for tendon regeneration. Cell Tissue Res. 356,
287–298 (2014).
37. Naitoh, M. et al. Gene expression in human keloids is altered from dermal to
chondrocytic and osteogenic lineage. Genes Cells 10, 1081–1091 (2005).
38. Hu, B. & Phan, S. H. Notch in ﬁbrosis and as a target of anti-ﬁbrotic therapy.
Pharmacol. Res. 108, 57–64 (2016).
39. Berman, B., Maderal, A. & Raphael, B. Keloids and hypertrophic scars:
pathophysiology, classiﬁcation, and treatment. Dermatol. Surg. 43, S3–S18
(2017).
40. Trace, A. P., Enos, C. W., Mantel, A. & Harvey, V. M. Keloids and
hypertrophic scars: a spectrum of clinical challenges. Am. J. Clin. Dermatol.
17, 201–223 (2016).
41. Islam, S. et al. Quantitative single-cell RNA-seq with unique molecular
identiﬁers. Nat. Methods 11, 163–166 (2014).
42. Chung, N. C. & Storey, J. D. Statistical signiﬁcance of variables driving
systematic variation in high-dimensional data. Bioinformatics 31, 545–554
(2015).
43. Macosko, E. Z. et al. Highly parallel genome-wide expression proﬁling of
individual cells using nanoliter droplets. Cell 161, 1202–1214 (2015).
44. Xu, C. & Su, Z. Identiﬁcation of cell types from single-cell transcriptomes
using a novel clustering method. Bioinformatics 31, 1974–1980 (2015).
45. Traag, V. A., Waltman, L. & van Eck, N. J. From Louvain to Leiden:
guaranteeing well-connected communities. Sci. Rep. 9, 5233 (2019).
46. Ashburner, M. et al. Gene ontology: tool for the uniﬁcation of biology. The
Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat. Genet. 25, 25–29 (2000).
47. Yu, G., Wang, L. G., Han, Y. & He, Q. Y. clusterProﬁler: an R package for
comparing biological themes among gene clusters. Omics 16, 284–287 (2012).
48. Subramanian, A. et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based
approach for interpreting genome-wide expression proﬁles. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 102, 15545–15550 (2005).
49. Basso, K., Margolin, A. A., Stolovitzky, G., Klein, U., Dalla-Favera, R. &
Califano, A. Reverse engineering of regulatory networks in human B cells. Nat.
Genet. 37, 382–390 (2005).
50. Margolin, A. A. et al. ARACNE: an algorithm for the reconstruction of gene
regulatory networks in a mammalian cellular context. BMC Bioinformatics 7,
S7 (2006).
51. Hu, H., Miao, Y. R., Jia, L. H., Yu, Q. Y., Zhang, Q. & Guo, A. Y. AnimalTFDB
3.0: a comprehensive resource for annotation and prediction of animal
transcription factors. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D33–D38 (2019).
52. Lachmann, A., Giorgi, F. M., Lopez, G. & Califano, A. ARACNe-AP: gene
network reverse engineering through adaptive partitioning inference of
mutual information. Bioinformatics 32, 2233–2235 (2016).
53. Lefebvre, C. et al. A human B-cell interactome identiﬁes MYB and FOXM1 as
master regulators of proliferation in germinal centers. Mol. Syst. Biol. 6, 377
(2010).
54. Krzywinski, M. et al. Circos: an information aesthetic for comparative
genomics. Genome Res. 19, 1639–1645 (2009).
55. Haghverdi, L., Büttner, M., Wolf, F. A., Buettner, F. & Theis, F. J. Diffusion
pseudotime robustly reconstructs lineage branching. Nat. Methods 13,
845–848 (2016).
56. La Manno, G. et al. RNA velocity of single cells. Nature 560, 494–498 (2018).
57. Fan, J. et al. Characterizing transcriptional heterogeneity through pathway and
gene set overdispersion analysis. Nat. Methods 13, 241–244 (2016).
58. Trapnell, C. et al. The dynamics and regulators of cell fate decisions are
revealed by pseudotemporal ordering of single cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 32,
381–386 (2014).
59. Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive integration of single-cell data. Cell 177,
1888–1902 (2019). e1821.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:3709 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
15
60. Deng, C. C. et al. TRAF4 promotes ﬁbroblast proliferation in keloids by
destabilizing p53 via interacting with the deubiquitinase USP10. J. Invest.
Dermatol. 139, 1925–1935 (2019). e1925.
61. Deng, C. C. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals ﬁbroblast heterogeneity and
increased mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts in human ﬁbrotic skin diseases. Zenodo
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4784648 (2021).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (82073418, 81903189) and the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Pro-
vince (2018A030310464).
Author contributions
Conceptualization: B.Y., Z.R., and C.-C.D.; methodology: B.Y., Z.R., D.W., Y.-P.X., Y.-F.H.,
and C.-C.D.; formal analysis: C.-C.D., Y.-F.H., and D.-H.Z.; investigation: C.-C.D., Y.-F.H.,
D.-H.Z., Q.C., Q.-L.F., J.-J.G., and L.-X.Z.; writing-original draft preparation: Z.R., C.-C.D.,
and Y.-F.H.; writing-review and editing: C.-C.D., Z.-R., and B.Y.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Z.R. or B.Y.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewer(s) for
their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2021
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
16
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:3709 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

===== Casanova2021_npjRegenMed_EV+Chondrogenesis+Nanofiber =====

ARTICLE
OPEN
Chondrogenic differentiation induced by extracellular vesicles
bound to a nanoﬁbrous substrate
Marta R. Casanova
1,2, Hugo Osório
3,4,5, Rui L. Reis1,2, Albino Martins
1,2 and Nuno M. Neves
1,2✉
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are being increasingly studied owing to its regenerative potential, namely EVs derived from human bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hBM-MSCs). Those can be used for controlling inﬂammation, repairing injury, and enhancing
tissue regeneration. Differently, the potential of EVs derived from human articular chondrocytes (hACs) to promote cartilage
regeneration has not been thoroughly investigated. This work aims to develop an EVs immobilization system capable of selectively
bind EVs present in conditioned medium obtained from cultures of hACs or hBM-MSC. For that, an anti-CD63 antibody was
immobilized at the surface of an activated and functionalized electrospun nanoﬁbrous mesh. The chondrogenic potential of bound
EVs was further assessed by culturing hBM-MSCs during 28 days under basal conditions. EVs derived from hACs cultured under
differentiation medium or from chondrogenically committed hBM-MSCs induced a chondrogenic phenotype characterized by
marked induction of SOX9, COMP, Aggrecan and Collagen type II, and matrix glycosaminoglycans synthesis. Indeed, both EVs
immobilization systems outperformed the currently used chondroinductive strategies. These data show that naturally secreted EVs
can guide the chondrogenic commitment of hBM-MSCs in the absence of any other chemical or genetic chondrogenic inductors
based in medium supplementation.
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021)6:79 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41536-021-00190-8
INTRODUCTION
Human articular cartilage is composed of an extensive extra-
cellular matrix (ECM) with a sparse distribution of specialized cells,
the chondrocytes. The chondrocytes are responsible to maintain
the cartilage matrix structure, composition and properties. In
adults, articular cartilage has limited or no potential of self-repair;
thus, damaged cartilage needs surgical interventions for either
repair or replacement of the joint1,2. The available treatments are
based on the transplantation of autologous cells (e.g., autologous
chondrocyte implantation (ACI))3,4 and ex vivo engineered tissue
implants (matrix-induced ACI (MACI))5–7.
Human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hBM-MSCs) are
attractive candidates for advanced cell therapies, including
cartilage regeneration8. hBM-MSCs can be induced to differentiate
into the chondrogenic lineage when exposed to speciﬁc cocktails
of growth factors8–10. The difﬁculty in obtaining a well-deﬁned
population and maintain a stable cartilaginous phenotype of the
differentiated MSCs, preventing them from progressing toward
osteogenesis11, leads to the investigation of approaches beyond
the standard chondrogenic medium12,13.
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are lipidic particles (exosomes with
30–100 nm or microvesicles with 50–2000 nm diamater) secreted by
cells which deliver biological signals, namely proteins, lipids and
nucleic acids (DNA, mRNA and microRNA and tRNAs), to target cells,
protecting them during traveling14–18. EVs can be isolated from
virtually all biological ﬂuids, namely blood, saliva, urine, synovial
ﬂuid, pleural effusions, ocular efﬂuent, aqueous humor, nasal
secretions, breast milk, amniotic ﬂuid, cerebrospinal ﬂuid, bile and
semen19. The major biomarkers related to EV biogenesis include the
tetraspanins (CD63, CD81, and CD9), ALIX and TSG101. Among
these, the transmembrane protein CD63 is usually used as a
representative exosomal protein marker20.
The regenerative potential of EVs has been described for a wide
range of tissues, including the heart and blood vessels, kidney,
liver, lung, skin, neural, and reproductive tissue21–23. Among the
different types, MSCs are one of the most widely used cell source
for generating EVs24–27. It is believed that the MSC-derived EVs
share the same anti-inﬂammatory and trophic properties of the
parental MSCs, exerting their therapeutic effects24,26–28. Indeed,
EVs are being recognized by its regenerative potential for
controlling inﬂammation, repairing injury, and enhancing tissue
regeneration18,21,28. However, their potential in promoting carti-
lage repair and slowing degeneration has not been thoroughly
investigated29,30. Moreover, the knowledge on the cartilage
regenerative potential of EVs derived from hBM-MSCs or even
from human articular chondrocytes (hACs) is very scarce in the
scientiﬁc literature.
Envisioning an EVs immobilization system, we herein report the
development of a nanoﬁbrous mesh (NFM) functionalized with an
anti-CD63 antibody able to speciﬁcally bind EVs derived from
hACs or hBM-MSCs. We hypothesized that the EVs derived from
hACs or chondrogenically differentiated hBM-MSCs can induce the
chondrogenic commitment of homotypic cells. The regenerative
potential of these EVs immobilization systems were investigated
by
assessing
their
capability
to
induce
the
chondrogenic
differentiation of hBM-MSCs without the need of any further
medium supplementation.
13B’s Research Group, I3Bs - Research Institute on Biomaterials, Biodegradables and Biomimetics of University of Minho, Headquarters of the European Institute of Excellence on
Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine, AvePark – Parque de Ciência e Tecnologia, Zona Industrial da Gandra, 4805-017 Barco/Guimarães, Portugal. 2ICVS/3B’s – PT
Government Associate Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, Portugal. 3i3S — Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal. 4Ipatimup
—Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto, University of Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal. 5Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Porto, 4200-319 Porto, Portugal. ✉email: nuno@i3bs.uminho.pt
www.nature.com/npjregenmed
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
1234567890():,;
RESULTS
Development and characterization of the EV immobilization
systems
To develop an immobilization system capable to selectively bind
EVs from conditioned medium, a method to generate functional
groups at the surface of electrospun polycaprolactone (PCL) NFMs
was implemented, which provide binding sites for the biomole-
cule immobilization. Speciﬁcally, an anti-CD63 antibody was
immobilized at the surface of activated and functionalized
nanoﬁbrous substrate capable to covalently and effectively bind
EVs. In order to determine the maximum immobilization capacity
of the system, a wide range of anti-CD63 antibody concentrations
(0–8 μg mL−1) were used. According to an indirect quantiﬁcation
method, the maximum antibody immobilization was achived
approximately at the concentration of 4 μg mL−1 (Fig. 1a). A
uniform distribution of anti-CD63 antibody immobilized at the
surface of the nanoﬁbrous substrate can be observed by
ﬂuorescence microscopy (Fig. 1b).
The EVs’ binding capacity of the immobilized anti-CD63
antibody was assessed by using conditioned media harvested
from hACs cultured under expansion or differentiation media, as
well as from hBM-MSCs cultured under basal or chondrogenic
media (i.e., ACEM, ACDM, MSCBM, and MSCCM, respectively). The
biological status of the EVs’ donor cells is reported in Supple-
mentary Fig. 1. Figure 1d shows the range of EVs’ concentrations
obtained from the four different conditioned media (from 6.8 to
11.2 × 108 particles mL−1). Those EVs were successfully bound at
the surface of the biofunctional nanoﬁbrous substrate on the
range of 5.6–6.9 × 108 particles mL−1.
Figure 2 presents the distribution of EVs bound at the surface of
the nanoﬁbrous substrate. In the scanning electron microscopic
(SEM) micrographs (Fig. 2A), bound EVs with diameters of
approximately 100 nm can be identiﬁed (Supplementary Table
1). Their presence can be also conﬁrmed by the energy-dispersive
spectroscopic (EDS), namely by the presence of the P element
from the phospholipids of EVs (Fig. 2B). To ascertain about the
phenotypic
proﬁle
of
bound
EVs,
the
expression
of
the
tetraspanins
CD63/CD81/CD9
was
analyzed
by
ﬂuorescence
microscopy (Fig. 2C), showing a uniform distribution at the
surface of the biofunctional nanoﬁbrous substrate.
A detailed analysis of the protein content of the different EVs’
sources revealed 10, 15, 20, and 5 proteins in the content of NFM/
EV-ACEM, NFM/EV-ACDM, NFM/EV-MSCBM, and NFM/EV-MSCCM sys-
tems, respectively. The Venn diagram analysis revealed ﬁve
common proteins, and three and four unique proteins on the
NFM/EV-ACEM and NFM/EV-MSCBM systems, respectively (Fig. 3A).
Gene Ontology (GO) analysis (Fig. 3B) showed that the molecular
function (in blue) of those proteins are related to protein binding,
structural molecule activity and enzyme regulator activity. More-
over, those proteins were mainly involved in biological processes
(in red) such as biological regulation and metabolic process. In
what concerns the cellular component (in green), the identiﬁed
proteins are related to the extracellular space, as well as vesicles.
Analyzing the expression of the different proteins in a heat map
(Fig. 3C), it was possible to observe a downregulation of most of
them in the NFM/EV-MSCCM system, although clustered with the
NFM/EV-MSCDM system still. Also, the most related condition was
the NFM/EV-ACEM.
EV immobilization systems elicit hBM-MSC chondrogenic
commitment
The ability of the EVs immobilization systems (NFM/EV-ACEM, NFM/
EV-ACDM, NFM/EV-MSCBM, NFM/EV-MSCCM) to promote the onset of
chondrogenesis of uncommitted homotypic cells was examined.
The differentiation process is known to impair cell proliferation,
due to an increase in the length of the cell cycle31, and to induce
changes in the protein synthesis rate32. Therefore, we evaluated
the biochemical proﬁle of hBM-MSC metabolism, proliferation, and
total protein synthesis. In terms of metabolic activity (Fig. 4a), on
the 14th day of culture, the hBM-MSCs cultured on the EVs
Fig. 1
Antibody immobilization and extracellular vesicle binding capacity. Immobilization capacity of anti-CD63 antibody at the surface of
activated and functionalized nanoﬁbrous substrates (a). The data are represented as mean ± standard deviation and analyzed by one-way
ANOVA test, followed by the Tukey’s HSD test (*p < 0.01; **p < 0.001; ***p < 0.0001): a denotes signiﬁcant differences compared to
concentration 0 μg mL−1; b denotes signiﬁcant differences compared to concentration 1 μg mL−1, and c denotes signiﬁcant differences
compared to concentration 2 μg mL−1. Spatial distribution of anti-CD63 immobilized at the surface of activated and functionalized
nanoﬁbrous substrates at 4 μg mL−1 (b). The negative control sample was not incubated with the primary antibody (c). Quantiﬁcation of
extracellular vesicles derived from hACs and hBM-MSCs and bound to the biofunctional nanoﬁbrous system (d).
M.R. Casanova et al.
2
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021) 79
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
1234567890():,;
immobilization systems (NFM/EV-ACEM, NFM/EV-ACDM, NFM/EV-
MSCBM, NFM/EV-MSCCM) displayed signiﬁcantly higher metabolism
than the hBM-MSC control conditions (NFM_Ctrl+ and NFM_Ctrl−)
(p < 0.0001). On the 28th day of culture, the hBM-MSC culture on
NFM/EV-ACEM and NFM/EV-MSCBM immobilization systems pre-
sented signiﬁcantly higher metabolic activity than hBM-MSCs
cultured in CM (NFM_Ctrl+) (p < 0.01). The EVs immobilization
systems were favorable for cell proliferation (Fig. 4b) and protein
synthesis (Fig. 4c), since their levels are comparable to those
observed on the control culture conditions over time.
The chondrogenic inductive potential of bound EVs was then
evaluated in terms of the extracellular matrix glycosaminoglycans
(GAG) content (Fig. 4d). Along the time, the hBM-MSCs cultured
under standard chondrogenic medium (NFM_Ctrl+) and EVs
immobilization systems, namely the NFM/EV-ACEM, NFM/EV-ACDM
and NFM/EV-MSCCM, displayed a signiﬁcantly higher GAG synthesis
than the hBM-MSCs cultured under basal medium (BM) (NFM_Ctrl−)
and the NFM/EV-MSCBM system. On the 21st day of hBM-MSC
culture, the NFM/EV-ACDM system presented signiﬁcantly high GAG
content when compared to the NFM/EV-ACEM system (p < 0.01).
To better deﬁne the chondrogenic commitment of the hBM-
MSCs induced by the EVs immobilization systems, the temporal
gene expression of chondrogenic markers was investigated (Fig.
5). The cartilage-related genes, namely Sox9, COMP, Aggrecan, and
Collagen type II, are all overexpressed in all testing conditions,
except on the NFM/EV-MSCBM system. Along culture time, a
signiﬁcantly
higher
cartilage-related
gene
expression
was
observed on the EVs immobilization systems (NFM/EV-ACEM,
NFM/EV-ACDM, NFM/EV-MSCBM, NFM/EV-MSCCM) (p < 0.01). On the
28th day of culture, a signiﬁcantly higher Sox9 and COMP
expression was observed in NFM/EV-ACEM and NFM/EV-ACDM
systems when compared to the non-biofunctionalized NFMs
under
standard
chondrogenic
differentiation
medium
(DM)
(NFM_Ctrl+) (p < 0.0001). Likewise, the NFM/EV-ACDM system
induced a signiﬁcantly higher Aggrecan and Collagen type II
expression than hBM-MSCs cultured under standard chondrogenic
DM (NFM_Ctrl+) and the NFM/EV-MSCCM system (p < 0.01). These
results
show
that
bound
EVs,
obtained
during
hBM-MSC
chondrogenic differentiation and from hACs cultured under DM,
provides guidance for chondrogenic lineage progression of
homotypic cells. Therefore, it is also crucial to conﬁrm that the
Fig. 2
Distribution of bound extracellular vesicles. Distribution of EVs bound at the surface of the biofunctional nanoﬁbrous system (A); EDS
spectrum of the EVs immobilization system surface (B); ﬂuorescence micrographs of the EVs markers CD63, CD81, and CD9 (C).
M.R. Casanova et al.
3
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021) 79
hBM-MSCs
were
not
undergoing
hypertrophy
and
further
differentiating
into
the
osteogenic
lineage.
The
lower
hypertrophy-related genes (i.e., Collagen type X, Collagen type Iα)
expression patterns were considerably similar in all the EVs
immobilization systems, inversely to the standard chondrogenic
DM (Fig. 5e, f). Moreover, those systems had signiﬁcantly lower
expression of the hypertrophy-related genes when compared with
the non-biofunctionalized NFMs under chondrogenic media
(NFM_Ctrl+) along the culture time.
The morphological changes of hBM-MSCs cultured on the
different EVs immobilization systems reﬂect their differentiation
stage (Fig. 6a). Alcian blue staining (Fig. 6b) conﬁrms the presence
of sulfated extracellular proteoglycans synthetized by hBM-MSCs
cultured for 28 days on the EVs immobilization systems (NFM/EV-
ACEM, NFM/EV-ACDM, NFM/EV-MSCCM), being more evident in the
NFM/EV-ACDM system. It is also possible to observe the absence of
proteoglycan staining on the NFM/EV-MSCBM system. Those results
are corroborated by the immunoexpression of Collagen type II,
which conﬁrms the deposition of a cartilaginous ECM on the EVs
immobilization systems (NFM/EV-ACEM, NFM/EV-ACDM, NFM/EV-
MSCCM), accompanied by the absence of Collagen type Iα
expression. These phenotypic observations were consistent with
previously obtained results for GAG synthesis, as well as for the
expression of cartilage-related genes.
DISCUSSION
EVs are small membrane-enclosed particles actively released by
many cell types, including immune cells (T cells, B cells, dendritic
cells, neutrophils, platelets), connective tissue cells (epithelial cells,
ﬁbroblasts), other specialized cells (endothelial cells, neuronal
cells, chondrocyte cells), and stem cells33,34. Their prominent role
in joint development and in the regulation of intra-articular
homeostasis leads to recognize EVs as potential biomarkers of
Fig. 3
Bioinformatic analysis of the protein content of EVs derived from different source (i.e., hACs under expansion medium [NFM/EV-
ACEM], hACs under differentiation medium [NFM/EV-ACDM], hBM-MSCs under basal medium [NFM/EV-MSCBM], and hBM-MSCs under
chondrogenic medium [NFM/EV-MSCCM]). Venn diagrams (A); Gene Ontology (GO) analysis (red: biological process, green: cellular
component, blue: molecular function) (B); and heat map (clusters are assembled by GO analysis using a distance function of Euclidean) (C).
M.R. Casanova et al.
4
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021) 79
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
joint disease21,23,35. Therefore, they have been seen as a new tool
to restore joint homeostasis and enhance articular cartilage
regeneration, since they provide a simpler and safer alternative
to current cell-based therapeutic options27,28,30. MSCs are one of
the most prominent cell sources of EVs, and it is thought that the
MSC-derived EVs mirror the content and fate of parent cells.
Furthermore, EVs derived from MSC have been demonstrated to
have positive effects over cell metabolism and proliferation36,37,
angiogenesis24,38, and immunomodulation39,40 in a wide range of
physiological systems. For example, in a clinical trial using MSC-
derived EVs as treatment, symptoms were considerably mitigated
in a patient with therapy-refractory graft-versus-host disease41.
Our experimental data showed that the culture conditions do
not affect the yield of EVs (Fig. 1d). Furthermore, we showed that
our biofunctional nanoﬁbrous substrate with immobilized anti-
CD63 antibody was able to bound those cell-derived EVs at the
range of 5.6–6.9 × 108 EVs mL−1, being the EVs’ binding capacity of
the system determined according to the EVs concentration
presented on the different conditioned medium (ACEM, ACDM,
MSCBM, and MSCCM). Consistent with MSCs expressing CD6342,
CD8143, and CD944, bound EVs also showed the presence of these
surface markers, suggesting that they are derived from endocy-
tosed lipid rafts45. Therefore, the parent cell source could affect
the EVs’ surface proteins, their glycosylation or lipid composition,
and their cargo.
The role of MSC-derived EVs as modulators of joint homeostasis
suggested that an EVs immobilization system may be an
interesting therapeutic alternative in cartilage repair. The devel-
oped EVs immobilization systems comprising EVs derived from
differentiated hACs or chondrogenically committed hBM-MSCs
outperformed the effect of current chondroinductive strategies, in
terms of the type and/or intensity of the signals. Speciﬁcally, the
early activation of key chondrogenic commitment genes such as
Sox9 and Aggrecan, are considered necessary and sufﬁcient to
induce cartilage formation46–49. In addition, EVs immobilization
systems (NFM/EV-ACEM, NFM/EV-ACDM, NFM/EV-MSCCM) induced a
transient upregulation of downstream matrix-associated genes
and proteins that may be required to promote cell–cell and
cell–matrix interactions and support long-term differentiation,
maintaining a stable cartilage phenotype of the differentiated
MSCs11. However, an in vivo study is necessary to fully validate this
strategy and conﬁrm that those bound EVs (NFM/EV-ACEM, NFM/
EV-ACDM, NFM/EV-MSCCM) are effective in promoting cartilage
regeneration.
Notably, slight differences were noted between the three EVs
immobilization systems (NFM/EV-ACEM, NFM/EV-ACDM, NFM/EV-
MSCCM), suggesting that the cargo of EVs derived from hACs
under DM (NFM/EV-ACDM) may also contributed to a stronger
effect. Indeed, these observations were corroborated by the
bioinformatics analysis of the EVs’ protein content. Articular
cartilage
vesicles
containing
RNA
can
be
transferred
into
chondrocytes leading to a phenotypic change50. Indeed, it is
reported that EVs are being constitutively released by normal
articular chondrocytes51, participating in non-classical protein
secretion, intercellular communication, and pathologic calciﬁca-
tion52,53. In order to protect nearby chondrocytes from damage,
articular chondrocyte vesicles provide extracellular matrix repair in
pericellular cartilage and act to sequester substances such as ATP,
calcium, and phosphate in toxic concentrations50,52,54.
Cell-derived EVs have similar biological functions to the parent
cells, presenting several advantages due to their small size, low
immunogenicity, and depletion of the common issues associated
with direct cell injection. However, achieving an effective and
controlled delivery of EVs at the target site is challenging, but is
paramount to the efﬁcient restoration of joint homeostasis and
sustained effect on the regenerative process. Therefore, the use of
our EVs immobilization system is expected to be more effective
than currently available therapeutics that use soluble proteins or
RNA molecules, which are usually prone to fast degradation after
injection55. Using the herein presented strategy, we can promote
a local delivery of bioactive molecules able to control the cellular
activity, with more prolonged effect due to the binding of EVs at
the surface of biofunctional nanoﬁbrous substrates, avoiding
degradation.
Envisioning
the
clinical
translation
of
the
different
EVs
immobilization systems herein reported, we foresee their potential
use as an autologous cartilage regeneration strategy. For example,
in the microfracture approach, the EVs immobilization system can
be implanted into the defect site, where uncommitted homotypic
cells migrating from the microperforations could be induced to
differentiate into the chondrogenic lineage by the bound EVs. In
an ex vivo attempt, both the ACs/MSCs and the bioactive factors
(e.g., EVs) isolated from the same patient can be cultured on a
biofunctional nanoﬁbrous substrate, which will be then implanted
Fig. 4
Biochemical performance of cultured hBM-MSCs. Metabolic activity (a), proliferation (DNA content) (b), total protein synthesis (c), and
sulfated glycosaminoglycan (GAGs) content normalized against DNA (d) of hBM-MSCs cultured on biofunctional nanoﬁbrous systems
comprising EVs derived from different sources (i.e., NFM/EV-ACEM, NFM/EV-ACDM, NFM/EV-MSCBM, and NFM/EV-MSCCM), under basal culture
conditions. hBM-MSCs cultured on non-biofunctionalized nanoﬁbrous substrates under basal medium (NFM_Ctrl−) or chondrogenic medium
(NFM_Ctrl+) were used as controls. Data are represented in box plot and analyzed by Kruskal–Wallis test, followed by the Tukey’s HSD test (*p <
0.01; **p < 0.001; ***p < 0.0001): a denotes signiﬁcant differences compared to NFM_Ctrl−; b denotes signiﬁcant differences compared to
NFM_Ctrl+; c denotes signiﬁcant differences compared to NFM/EV-ACEM; d denotes signiﬁcant differences compared to NFM/EV-ACDM; e denotes
signiﬁcant differences compared to NFM/EV-MSCBM.
M.R. Casanova et al.
5
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021) 79
into the defect site as a MACI approach. Both methods could
induce the regeneration of cartilage, envisioning a personalized
treatment of cartilage injuries.
This work shows the beneﬁcial effect of cell-secreted factors,
namely, EVs secreted by hACs and hBM-MSCs, playing an
important role in the modulation of cell fate. Those EVs were
successfully bound at the surface of biofunctional nanoﬁbrous
substrates, immobilizing the anti-CD63 antibody. The EVs immo-
bilization systems comprising EVs derived from differentiated
hACs and chondrogenically committed hBM-MSCs successfully
induce the chondrogenic differentiation of homotypic cells more
efﬁciently than the current chondroinductive strategies. Therefore,
EVs immobilization systems are potential highly effective cell-free/
secretome-based therapies for cartilage repair.
METHODS
Isolation and expansion of hACs
Human cartilage samples were collected under Informed Consent from
patients undergoing knee arthroplasty (female; aged 69 years) in the
Hospital Center of Alto Ave, Guimarães, Portugal, in accordance with the
established Protocol (67/CA). After the surgeries, a small part of the non-
compromised knee cartilage was sectioned and preserved in phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS) at 4 °C until the subsequent isolation procedure of the
hACs56. Brieﬂy, collected cartilage samples were dissected in small full-
depth pieces, washed, and digested with 0.25% w/v trypsin solution
(Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 37 °C under agitation. Then the solution was
removed, and the cartilage was washed and incubated overnight at 37 °C
with a 2 mg mL−1 collagenase type II solution (Sigma-Aldrich). In the
following day, the cells were washed, counted, and plated at a density of
2 × 106 cells. Cells were expanded in expansion medium [EM; Dulbecco’s
modiﬁed Eagle’s medium (Sigma-Aldrich) containing 10 mM Hepes buffer
(Sigma-Aldrich), L-alanyl-L-glutamine (Sigma-Aldrich), non-essential amino
acids (Sigma-Aldrich), 1% antibiotic–antimycotic solution, 10% fetal bovine
serum (FBS), and 10 ng mL−1 basic ﬁbroblast growth factor (bFGF;
PeproTech)] at 37 °C in a humidiﬁed atmosphere of 5% CO2.
Isolation and expansion of hBM-MSCs
Human bone marrow aspirates were collected, after obtaining informed
consent from patient undergoing knee arthroplasty (female; aged 55),
under the cooperation agreement established between the 3Bs Research
Group, University of Minho and the Hospital Center of Alto Ave, Guimarães,
Portugal. hBM-MSCs were isolated and characterized using our established
standard protocols57. Cells were expanded in BM [MEM alpha medium (α-
MEM; Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (Life
Technologies) and 1% antibiotic/antimycotic solution (ﬁnal concentration
of penicillin 100 units mL−1 and streptomycin 100 mg mL−1; Life Technol-
ogies)] at 37 °C in a humidiﬁed atmosphere of 5% CO2.
Conditioned media
Conditioned media harvested from the hACs and hBM-MSCs in culture
were used as a source of EVs, according to the schematic illustration of the
experimental design (Fig. 7). First, the hACs and hBM-MSCs were expanded
at passage 3 and a cell suspension containing of 3 × 103 cells cm−2 were
subcultured in T150 ﬂasks and cultured in EM and BM, respectively, at 37 °C
in a humidiﬁed atmosphere of 5% CO2. The conditioned media were
harvested when the cells reach the conﬂuence (in 7 days), pooled, ﬁltered
(pore size 0.22 μm) to remove cell debris, and stored at −80 °C until further
use. A cell suspension containing 2 × 105 cells/15 mL centrifuge tubes of
Fig. 5
Temporal gene expression of cultured hBM-MSCs. Relative expression of chondrogenic (i.e., Sox9 (a), COMP (b), Aggrecan (c), and
Collagen type II (d)) and hypertrophic (i.e., Collagen type Iα (e), Collagen type X (f)) transcripts by hBM-MSCs cultured on biofunctional
nanoﬁbrous systems comprising EVs derived from different sources (i.e., NFM/EV-ACEM, NFM/EV-ACDM, NFM/EV-MSCBM, and NFM/EV-MSCCM),
under basal culture conditions. hBM-MSCs cultured on non-biofunctionalized nanoﬁbrous substrates under basal medium (NFM_Ctrl-) or
chondrogenic medium (NFM_Ctrl+) were used as controls. Data are represented in box plot and analyzed by Kruskal–Wallis test, followed by
Tukey’s HSD test (*p < 0.01; **p < 0.001; ***p < 0.0001): a denotes signiﬁcant differences compared to NFM_Ctrl-; b denotes signiﬁcant
differences compared to NFM_Ctrl+; c denotes signiﬁcant differences compared to NFM/EV-ACEM; d denotes signiﬁcant differences compared
to NFM/EV-ACDM; e denotes signiﬁcant differences compared to NFM/EV-MSCBM.
M.R. Casanova et al.
6
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021) 79
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
hACs or hBM-MSCs were also prepared to assure obtaining conditioned
medium of chondrogenic lineage commitment. In order to form a spherical
aggregate or pellet cultures, the cell aliquots were centrifuged at 600 × g
for 5 min and incubated at 37 °C in a humidiﬁed atmosphere of 5% CO2 for
24 h incubation. The hACs and hBM-MSCs were cultures under DM [EM—
instead of adding bFGF, 1 mg mL−1 L-ascorbic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) and
1 mg mL−1 insulin (Sigma-Aldrich) were added] or standard chondrogenic
DM [CM; BM supplemented with Insulin-Transferrin-Selenium-G Supple-
ment (ITS; Invitrogen), 1 mM dexamethasone (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1 M
sodium pyruvate (Invitrogen), 17 mM ascorbic acid-2-phosphate (Sigma-
Aldrich), 35 mM L-proline (Sigma-Aldrich), and 10 ng mL−1 transforming
growth factor-β3 (PeproTech)], respectively. Those conditioned media (DM;
CM) were harvested at 21, 24, and 28 days of culture, pooled, ﬁltered (pore
size 0.22 μm) to remove cell debris, and stored at −80 °C until further use.
The amount of EVs presented on each conditioned medium was
quantiﬁed by the Exosome ELISA Complete Kit (CD63) (System Biosciences)
after EV isolation using a polymeric precipitation solution (ExoQuick-TC;
System
Biosciences,
BioCat
GmbH).
Those
assays
were
performed
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
The size of the isolated EVs was determined by dynamic light scattering
at an angle of 173° and at a wavelength of 633 nm, and the zeta-potential
was determined by laser Doppler electrophoresis using a Zetasizer Nano
ZS instrument (Malvern Instruments).
Preparation of activated and functionalized PCL NFMs
The production of electrospun PCL NFMs was performed as described in
detail elsewhere8. In brief, a polymeric solution of 15% (w/v) PCL (Mn
70,000–90,000 by GPC, Sigma-Aldrich) in chloroform (Sigma-Aldrich) and N,
N-dimethylformamide (7: 3 volume ratio; Sigma-Aldrich) was electrospun
at 12 kV, using a needle-to-ground collector distance of 20 cm, and a ﬂow
rate of 1.0 mL h−1. The electrospun NFM is composed of nanoﬁbers with
diameters in the micrometer range, from 0.4 to 1.4 μm, with an average
pore size of 7.267 ± 3.148 μm and a thickness range from 40 to 60 μm58.
Samples of electrospun PCL NFM (1 cm2) were activated in an ultraviolet
−ozone system (ProCleaner 220, Bioforce Nanoscience) by exposing both
sides for 2 min each. Incubation in 1 M 1,6-hexanediamine solution (Sigma-
Aldrich) for 1 h at 37 °C was performed, in order to graft amine groups
(-NH2) at the NFM surface.
Fig. 6
Morphology and extracellular matrix of cultured hBM-MSCs. Morphology of hBM-MSCs analyzed by scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) and by immunoﬂuorescence (red for actin and blue for nuclei) (a); Alcian blue staining of sulfated glycosaminoglycans (b); and
immunoexpression of collagen type II (in green) (c) and type Iα (in green) (d); nuclei in blue. hBM-MSCs were cultured during 28 days on
biofunctional nanoﬁbrous systems comprising EVs derived from different sources (i.e., NFM/EV-ACEM, NFM/EV-ACDM, NFM/EV-MSCBM, and NFM/
EV-MSCCM) under basal culture conditions. hBM-MSCs cultured on non-biofunctionalized nanoﬁbrous substrates under basal medium
(NFM_Ctrl−) or chondrogenic medium (NFM_Ctrl+) were used as controls.
M.R. Casanova et al.
7
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021) 79
Engineered EV immobilization systems
Since EVs, namely, exosomes, typically express the CD63 surface marker,
the human anti-CD63 antibody (E-12; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.) was
immobilized at the surface of NFMs by a covalent bond mediated by a
coupling
agent,
namely,
1-ethyl-3-(3-(dimethylamino)-propyl)carbodii-
mide/hydroxysuccinimide mixture (10 mM EDC + 40 mM NHS; Sigma-
Aldrich, S.L.). The antibody solution (1% (v/v)) was mixed for 15 min at
room temperature (RT), for the antibody activation, and incubated 2 h at RT
on the activated and functionalized nanoﬁbrous substrate.
The maximum immobilization capacity of the antibody over the
nanoﬁbrous substrate was determined by using a wide range of
concentrations (from 0 to 8 μg mL−1). After the anti-CD63 antibody
immobilization, a blocking step was performed by a 3% bovine serum
albumin (BSA; Sigma) for 1 h at RT, followed by the secondary antibody
(1:200 in PBS) incubation (1 h at RT). Alexa Fluor® 488 rabbit anti-mouse
(~495/517 nm; Life Technologies) was used as secondary antibody against
the anti-CD63 antibody. The unbound secondary antibody ﬂuorescence
was measured in a microplate reader (Synergy HT, Bio-TEK), as an indirect
method to determine the primary antibody immobilization efﬁciency. In
order to evaluate nonspeciﬁc immobilization, the activated and functio-
nalized NFM without primary antibody was used as a negative control. The
samples were further analyzed by ﬂuorescence microscopy (Axio Observer;
Zeiss) to detect the distribution of the anti-CD63 antibody at the surface of
the nanoﬁbrous substrate.
Biofunctionalization of NFMs with EVs was achieved by using an
antibody–antigen strategy, as described in detail elsewhere59. The
nanoﬁbrous substrate with immobilized anti-CD63 antibody, at the
antibody concentration previously optimized, was incubated with the
different conditioned medium previously harvested (i.e., ACEM, ACDM,
MSCBM, MSCCM) for 2 h at RT. The unbound EV solutions were collected and
quantiﬁed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA; Exosome ELISA
Complete Kit (CD63)), in order to deﬁne the binding capacity of the
engineered EV immobilization system. The negative control samples (i.e.,
non-biofunctionalized NFM) were performed by carrying out all the
biofunctionalization steps (including the incubation step with different
conditioned media) but substituting the anti-CD63 antibody solution by
the PBS solution.
The morphology of EVs bound at the surface of biofunctional
electrospun PCL NFM (i.e., NFM/EV-ACEM, NFM/EV-ACDM, NFM/EV-MSCBM,
NFM/EV-MSCCM) was analyzed by SEM (AURIGA Compact, Zeiss, Germany).
By EDS (INCAx-Act, PentaFET Precision, Oxford Instruments), an elemental
Fig. 7
Schematic illustration of the experimental design. Conditioned media preparation (A); development of EV immobilization systems
and characterization of bound EVs (B); assessment of the chondrogenic potential of EV immobilization systems (C).
M.R. Casanova et al.
8
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021) 79
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
analysis of the EV immobilization systems was performed to further
conﬁrm the presence of the EVs at the surface of the NFMs.
The distribution of EVs bound to the NFM biofunctionalized with anti-
CD63 antibody was performed by immunoﬂuorescence staining. First, a
blocking step (3% BSA for 30 min) was performed. In between each step,
the samples were rinsed three times in PBS buffer. For EVs’ surface marker
staining, samples were incubated with the primary antibodies CD63 (E-12;
1:500; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.), CD81 (1.3.3.22; 1:500; Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Inc.), and CD9 (C-4; 1:500; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.)
overnight and then with the corresponding secondary antibody [Alexa
Fluor® 488 rabbit anti-mouse (~495/517 nm; Life Technologies)] for 1 h at
RT. The non-biofunctionalized NFM was used as a negative control to
evaluate nonspeciﬁc immunodetection of EVs’ surface markers in the
biofunctionalized electrospun NFMs. The samples were further analyzed by
ﬂuorescence microscopy (Axio Observer; Zeiss).
Proteomic analysis of the bound EVs
The total protein content of EVs bound to the surface of biofunctional NFM
were prepared using RIPA buffer (Sigma) supplemented with protease
inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) for 1 h at 4 °C. The samples were subjected to
ultrasonic cracking, centrifuged for 15 min at 14,000 rpm at 4 °C, and the
supernatants were collected.
Protein extracts of 15 μg were solubilized with 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1%
sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 40 mM
chloroacetamide for 10 min at 95 °C at 1000 rpm (Thermomixer, Eppen-
dorf). Each sample was processed for proteomic analysis following the
solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol as described in
detail elsewhere60. Enzymatic digestion was performed with Trypsin/LysC
overnight at 37 °C at 1000 rpm.
Protein identiﬁcation and quantitation was performed by nanoLC-MS/
MS as described in detail elsewhere61. The raw data was processed using
the Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.400 software (Thermo Scientiﬁc) and
searched against the UniProt database for the Homo sapiens Proteome
(2020_05 with 75069 entries), the NIST human spectral library, and Bos
taurus Proteome (2020_05 with 37512 entries). A common protein
contaminant list from MaxQuant was also considered in the analysis. The
MSPepSearch and Sequest HT search engines were used to identify tryptic
peptides. The ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and
0.02 Da for fragmented ions in both softwares. Maximum allowed missing
cleavage sites was set to two. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was deﬁned
as constant modiﬁcation. Methionine oxidation, deamidation of glutamine
and asparagine, peptide terminus glutamine to pyroglutamate, and
protein N-terminus acetylation, Met-loss, and Met-loss+acetyl were
deﬁned as variable modiﬁcations. Peptide conﬁdence was set to high.
The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings:
maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target false discovery rate
1%, validation based on q-value. Protein label-free quantitation was
performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step.
Precursor ions quantiﬁcation was performed at the processing step with
the following parameters: peptides to use all peptides, precursor
abundance based on intensity, and normalization based on total peptide
amount. Protein ratio was based on protein abundance and an analysis of
variance (Individual Proteins) hypothesis test was performed.
Bioinformatic analysis
The identiﬁed proteins were analyzed using the Venny tool (v2.1.0, https://
bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/).
The
sequences
of
the
identiﬁed
proteins were mapped according to their GO to determine their biological
and functional properties, using InterProScan (v.5.14-53.0, http://www.ebi.
ac.uk/interpro/). Proteins were grouped with regard to the biological
process, cellular component, and molecular function using the categories
of the Panther Biological process (v.15.0, http://www.pantherdb.org/). The
GO analysis and heat map were obtained using the GraphPad PRISM v. 8.0.
Clusters heat map were assembled by GO analysis using an Euclidean
distance function.
Cell seeding and culture conditions
The effectiveness of the developed EV immobilization systems, as
chondrogenic lineage inducible systems, was assessed using hBM-MSCs
(Table 1). Conﬂuent hBM-MSCs at passage 4 were harvested for seeding on
top of the EV immobilization systems (NFM/EV-ACEM, NFM/EV-ACDM, NFM/
EV-MSCBM, NFM/EV-MSCCM) at a density of 2 × 105 cells per sample. These
constructs were cultured under BM, without further medium supplemen-
tation. The experimental control conditions comprise hBM-MSCs cultured
on top of the non-biofunctionalized NFMs under BM (NFM_Ctrl−) and
using the standard chondrogenic DM (NFM_Ctrl+). hACs were also seeded
on top of the non-biofunctionalized NFMs at a density of 2 × 105 cells per
sample and cultured under EM (NFM_EM) or DM (NFM_DM) (Supporting
Information section—Supplementary Figs. 4 and 5). The constructs were
retrieved for further analysis at predeﬁned culturing times, namely, 0, 7, 14,
21, and 28 days. All experiments were performed in triplicate and repeated
at least three times (n = 3), independently.
Cellular biochemistry analysis
The metabolism was evaluated by the MTS assay (CellTiter 96 AQueous One
Solution, Promega), the cell proliferation by DNA quantiﬁcation (Quant-
iTPicoGreen dsDNA assay, Invitrogen, Alfagene), and the protein synthesis
by the Micro BCA assay (Micro BCATM Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc), according to the manufacturers’ instructions. GAG quantiﬁcation
was performed according to our established standard colorimetric assay8.
Scanning electron microscopy
The constructs were collected after 28 days of culture and ﬁxed with 2.5%
glutaraldehyde. By increasing the alcohol concentrations, samples were
dehydrated, followed by sputter coating with Au/Pd. A scanning electron
microscope (JSM-6010 LV, JEOL, Japan) was used to observe the
distribution and morphology of the cells at ×3000 magniﬁcation.
Gene expression analysis
At each time point, the constructs were washed, immersed in Tri reagent®
(Life Science, VWR), and kept at −80 °C. Total RNA was isolated and reverse
transcribed into cDNA (qScript cDNA synthesis kit, Quanta Biosciences),
followed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR; PerfeCtaTM
SYBR® Green system; Quanta Biosciences), according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. The qPCR reactions were carried out in a Mastercycler® ep
Gradient S realplex® thermocycler (Eppendorf; Hamburg) for the target
genes described in Table 2. The transcript expression data were normalized
Table 1.
Experimental conditions used in the cell biology assays.
Condition
Description
Cells
Medium
NFM_Ctrl−
Non-biofunctionalized NFMs under BM
hBM-MSCs
BM
NFM_Ctrl+
Non-biofunctionalized NFMs under CM
CM
NFM/EV-ACEM
Biofunctional NFMs with EVs derived from hACs under EM
BM
NFM/EV-ACDM
Biofunctional NFMs with EVs derived from hACs under DM
NFM/EV-MSCBM
Biofunctional NFMs with EVs derived from hBM-MSCs under BM
NFM/EV-MSCCM
Biofunctional NFMs with EVs derived from hBM-MSCs under CM
NFM_EM
Non-biofunctionalized NFMs under EM
hACs
EM
NFM_DM
Non-biofunctionalized NFMs under DM
DM
EM expansion medium, DM differentiation medium, BM basal medium, CM chondrogenic medium.
M.R. Casanova et al.
9
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021) 79
against the housekeeping gene Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase
and the quantiﬁcation was performed according to the Livak method
(2−ΔΔCT method). For hBM-MSC samples, the BM condition (NFM_Ctrl-) was
used as calibrator, while the EM condition (NFM_EM) was used as calibrator
of the samples of hACs.
Histological analysis
Constructs were collected after 28 days of culture, ﬁxed in a 4%
paraformaldehyde solution, and kept at 4 °C until further used. The
staining procedures were performed on top of the samples. Alcian blue
staining, were performed as described elsewhere62. For immunohisto-
chemistry, the samples were permeabilized using 0.1% Triton X-100 in
PBS for 15 min, incubated with 3% BSA, and incubated with a deﬁned
primary antibody (collagens type I (COL1A1, clone C-18; Santa Cruz
Biotechnology) and type II (mouse anti-human type II collagen
monoclonal antibody; Millipore); actin (mouse anti-alpha smooth
muscle Actin antibody; Abcam)) overnight at 4 °C. The samples were
then washed with PBS and stained with the corresponding secondary
antibodies (Life Technologies). Nuclei were counter-stained with 4′,6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole (1 mg mL−1 in PBS for 15 min). Fluorescence
images from stained constructs were obtained using a confocal laser
scanning microscope (Leica TCS SP8).
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using the SPSS statistic software (release
24.0.0.0 for Mac). First, Shapiro–Wilk test was used to ascertain the data
normality and Levene test for the homogeneity of variances. Observing
this, the normality and variance homogeneity were rejected; non-
parametric tests were used (Kruskal–Wallis test followed by Tukey’s Honest
Signiﬁcant Difference test). The conﬁdence interval used was 99% and p ≤
0.01 were regarded as statistically signiﬁcant.
Ethical approval
All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in
accordance with the ethical standards of the University of Minho Life
Sciences Ethics Committee (SECVS 136/2015), the Hospital Center of Alto
Ave, Guimarães, Portugal (67/CA), and the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and its
later amendments or comparable ethical standards.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research
Reporting Summary linked to this article.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the corresponding
author upon reasonable request.
Received: 31 July 2020; Accepted: 11 October 2021;
Published online: 19 November 2021
REFERENCES
1. Urbanek, O., Kolbuk, D. & Wrobel, M. Articular cartilage: new directions and
barriers of scaffolds development - review. Int J. Polym. Mater. Polym. Biomater.
68, 396–410 (2019).
2. Mao, A. S. & Mooney, D. J. Regenerative medicine: current therapies and future
directions. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 14452–14459 (2015).
3. Armoiry, X. et al. Autologous chondrocyte implantation with chondrosphere for
treating articular cartilage defects in the knee: an evidence review group per-
spective of a NICE Single Technology Appraisal. Pharmacoeconomics 37, 879–886
(2019).
4. Choi, S. et al. Autologous bone marrow cell stimulation and allogenic chon-
drocyte implantation for the repair of full-thickness articular cartilage defects in a
rabbit model. Cartilage 9, 402–409 (2018).
5. Behrens, P., Bitter, T., Kurz, B. & Russlies, M. Matrix-associated autologous chon-
drocyte transplantation/implantation (MACT/MACI) - 5-year follow-up. Knee 13,
194–202 (2006).
6. Akgun, I. et al. Matrix-induced autologous mesenchymal stem cell implantation
versus matrix-induced autologous chondrocyte implantation in the treatment of
chondral defects of the knee: a 2-year randomized study. Arch. Orthop. Trauma
Surg. 135, 251–263 (2015).
7. Longoni, A. et al. The impact of immune response on endochondral bone
regeneration. Npj Regen. Med. 3, 22 (2018).
8. Casanova, M. R. et al. Chondrogenesis-inductive nanoﬁbrous substrate using both
biological ﬂuids and mesenchymal stem cells from an autologous source. Mat.
Sci. Eng. C. Mater. 98, 1169–1178 (2019).
9. Kaul, G. et al. Local stimulation of articular cartilage repair by transplantation of
encapsulated chondrocytes overexpressing human ﬁbroblast growth factor 2
(FGF-2) in vivo. J. Gene Med. 8, 100–111 (2006).
10. Pereira, R. C. et al. Novel injectable gel (system) as a vehicle for human articular
chondrocytes in cartilage tissue regeneration. J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 3, 97–106
(2009).
11. Dickhut, A. et al. Calciﬁcation or dedifferentiation: requirement to lock
mesenchymal stem cells in a desired differentiation stage. J. Cell Physiol. 219,
219–226 (2009).
12. Graceffa, V. et al. Chasing chimeras - the elusive stable chondrogenic phenotype.
Biomaterials 192, 199–225 (2019).
13. Casanova, M. R., Reis, R. L., Martins, A. & Neves, N. M. Fibronectin bound to a
ﬁbrous substrate has chondrogenic induction properties. Biomacromolecules 21,
1368–1378 (2020).
14. Maas, S. L. N., Breakeﬁeld, X. O. & Weaver, A. M. Extracellular vesicles: unique
intercellular delivery vehicles. Trends Cell Biol. 27, 172–188 (2017).
15. Raposo, G. & Stoorvogel, W. Extracellular vesicles: exosomes, microvesicles, and
friends. J. Cell Biol. 200, 373–383 (2013).
16. Ji, Y. H. et al. Multiplexed proﬁling of single-cell extracellular vesicles secretion.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 116, 5979–5984 (2019).
17. Yeh, Y. T. et al. Rapid size-based isolation of extracellular vesicles by three-
dimensional carbon nanotube arrays. Acs Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12, 13134–13139
(2020).
18. Cunnane, E. M. et al. Extracellular vesicles enhance the remodeling of cell-free silk
vascular scaffolds in rat aortae. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12, 26955–26965
(2020).
19. Witwer, K. W. et al. Standardization of sample collection, isolation and analysis
methods in extracellular vesicle research. J. Extracell. Vesicles https://doi.org/
10.3402/jev.v2i0.20360 (2013).
Table 2.
Primer sequences used for RT-PCR procedures.
Gene
Forward (5′−3′)
Reverse (5′−3′)
Ref.
GAPDH
AGCCTCAAGATCATCAGCAA
GTCATGAGTCCTTCCACGAT
Chondrogenic
Sox9
TTCATGAAGATGACCGACGC
GTCCAGTCGTAGCCCTTGAG
Aggrecan
TGAGTCCTCAAGCCTCCTGT
TGGTCTGCAGCAGTTGATTC
COMP
AGGGATGGAGACGGACATCAG
TCTGCATCAAAGTCGTCCTG
COL II
CGGTGAGAAGGGAGAAGTTG
GACCGGTCACTCCAGTAGGA
Hypertrophic
COL Iα
AAGAACCCCAAGGACAAGAG
GTAGGTGATGTTCTGGGAGG
COL X
CAGGCATAAAAGGCCCACTA
AGGACTTCCGTAGCCTGGTT
GAPDH glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, Sox9 Sry-type high mobility group box 9, COMP cartilage oligomeric matrix protein, COL II collagen type II,
COL Iα collagen type I alpha, COL X collagen type X.
M.R. Casanova et al.
10
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021) 79
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
20. Thery, C. et al. Minimal information for studies of extracellular vesicles 2018
(MISEV2018): a position statement of the International Society for Extracellular
Vesicles and update of the MISEV2014 guidelines. J. Extracell. Vesicles 7, 1535750
(2018).
21. Bjorge, I. M., Kim, S. Y., Mano, J. F., Kalionis, B. & Chrzanowski, W. Extracellular
vesicles, exosomes and shedding vesicles in regenerative medicine - a new
paradigm for tissue repair. Biomater. Sci. 6, 60–78 (2017).
22. Jay, S. M. & Vunjak-Novakovic, G. Extracellular vesicles and their versatile roles in
tissue engineering. Tissue Eng. Pt. A 23, 1210–1211 (2017).
23. Lamichhane, T. N. et al. Emerging roles for extracellular vesicles in tissue engi-
neering and regenerative medicine. Tissue Eng. Pt. B Rev. 21, 45–54 (2015).
24. Bian, S. Y. et al. Extracellular vesicles derived from human bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells promote angiogenesis in a rat myocardial infarction
model. J. Mol. Med. 92, 387–397 (2014).
25. Bruno, S. et al. Microvesicles derived from human bone marrow mesenchymal
stem cells inhibit tumor growth. Stem Cells Dev. https://doi.org/10.1089/
scd.2012.0304 (2013).
26. Martins, M., Ribeiro, D., Martins, A., Reis, R. L. & Neves, N. M. Extracellular vesicles
derived from osteogenically induced human bone marrow mesenchymal stem
cells can modulate lineage commitment. Stem Cell Rep. 6, 284–291 (2016).
27. Ruiz, M. et al. TGFBI secreted by mesenchymal stromal cells ameliorates osteoar-
thritis and is detected in extracellular vesicles. Biomaterials 226, 119544 (2020).
28. Zhang, S. P. et al. MSC exosomes alleviate temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis
by attenuating inﬂammation and restoring matrix homeostasis. Biomaterials 200,
35–47 (2019).
29. Malda, J., Boere, J., van de Lest, C. H. A., van Weeren, P. R. & Wauben, A. H. M.
Extracellular vesicles - new tool for joint repair and regeneration. Nat. Rev.
Rheumatol. 12, 243–249 (2016).
30. Kim, M., Steinberg, D. R., Burdick, J. A. & Mauck, R. L. Extracellular vesicles mediate
improved functional outcomes in engineered cartilage produced from MSC/
chondrocyte cocultures. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 116, 1569–1578 (2019).
31. Roccio, M. et al. Predicting stem cell fate changes by differential cell cycle pro-
gression patterns. Development 140, 459–470 (2013).
32. Kristensen, A. R., Gsponer, J. & Foster, L. J. Protein synthesis rate is the pre-
dominant regulator of protein expression during differentiation. Mol. Syst. Biol. 9,
689 (2013).
33. Berckmans, R. J. et al. Cell-derived microparticles in synovial ﬂuid from inﬂamed
arthritic joints support coagulation exclusively via a factor VII-dependent
mechanism. Arthritis Rheum. 46, 2857–2866 (2002).
34. Rani, S., Ryan, A. E., Grifﬁn, M. D. & Ritter, T. Mesenchymal stem cell-derived
extracellular vesicles: toward cell-free therapeutic applications. Mol. Ther. 23,
812–823 (2015).
35. Buzas, E. I., Gyorgy, B., Nagy, G., Falus, A. & Gay, S. Emerging role of extracellular
vesicles in inﬂammatory diseases. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 10, 356–364 (2014).
36. Lai, R. C. et al. Exosome secreted by MSC reduces myocardial ischemia/reperfu-
sion injury. Stem Cell Res. 4, 214–222 (2010).
37. Zhou, Y. et al. Exosomes released by human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem
cells protect against cisplatin-induced renal oxidative stress and apoptosis in vivo
and in vitro. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 4, 34 (2013).
38. Zhang, H. C. et al. Microvesicles derived from human umbilical cord mesenchy-
mal stem cells stimulated by hypoxia promote angiogenesis both in vitro and
in vivo. Stem Cells Dev. 21, 3289–3297 (2012).
39. Zhang, B. et al. Mesenchymal stem cells secrete immunologically active exo-
somes. Stem Cells Dev. 23, 1233–1244 (2014).
40. Lee, C. et al. Exosomes mediate the cytoprotective action of mesenchymal
stromal cells on hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension. Circulation 126, 2601
(2012).
41. Kordelas, L. et al. MSC-derived exosomes: a novel tool to treat therapy-refractory
graft-versus-host disease. Leukemia 28, 970–973 (2014).
42. Stewart, K. et al. STRO-1, HOP-26 (CD63), CD49a and SB-10 (CD166) as markers of
primitive human marrow stromal cells and their more differentiated progeny: a
comparative investigation in vitro. Cell Tissue Res. 313, 281–290 (2003).
43. Lee, H. J., Choi, B. H., Min, B. H. & Park, S. R. Changes in surface markers of human
mesenchymal stem cells during the chondrogenic differentiation and dediffer-
entiation processes in vitro. Arthritis Rheum. 60, 2325–2332 (2009).
44. Chen, T. S. et al. Mesenchymal stem cell secretes microparticles enriched in pre-
microRNAs. Nucleic Acids Res. 38, 215–224 (2010).
45. Tan, S. S. et al. Therapeutic MSC exosomes are derived from lipid raft micro-
domains in the plasma membrane. J. Extracell. Vesicles. https://doi.org/10.3402/
jev.v2i0.22614 (2013).
46. Wang, C. et al. Sox9-induced chondrogenesis in mesenchymal stem cells was
mediated by ERK5 signal pathway. Cell Mol. Biol. 62, 1–7 (2016).
47. Pan, Q. H. et al. Sox9, a key transcription factor of bone morphogenetic protein-2-
induced chondrogenesis, is activated through BMP pathway and a CCAAT box in
the proximal promoter. J. Cell Physiol. 217, 228–241 (2008).
48. Hardingham, T. E., Oldershaw, R. A. & Tew, S. R. Cartilage, SOX9 and notch signals
in chondrogenesis. J. Anat. 209, 469–480 (2006).
49. Gutierrez, M. L., Guevara, J. M., Echeverri, O. Y., Garzon-Alvarado, D. & Barrera, L. A.
Aggrecan catabolism during mesenchymal stromal cell in vitro chondrogenesis.
Anim. Cells Syst. 17, 243–249 (2013).
50. Mitton, E., Gohr, C. M., McNally, M. T. & Rosenthal, A. K. Articular cartilage vesicles
contain RNA. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 388, 533–538 (2009).
51. Derfus, B. A. et al. Transforming growth factor beta-1 stimulates articular chon-
drocyte elaboration of matrix vesicles capable of greater calcium pyrophosphate
precipitation. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 9, 189–194 (2001).
52. Rosenthal, A. K., Gohr, C. M., Ninomiya, J. & Wakim, B. T. Proteomic analysis of
articular cartilage vesicles from normal and osteoarthritic cartilage. Arthritis
Rheum. 63, 401–411 (2011).
53. Zhang, M. & Schekman, R. Cell biology. Unconventional secretion, unconven-
tional solutions. Science 340, 559–561 (2013).
54. Rosenthal, A. K. et al. Autophagy modulates articular cartilage vesicle formation in
primary articular chondrocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 290, 13028–13038 (2015).
55. Casanova, M. R., Reis, R. L., Martins, A. & Neves, N. M. Surface biofunctionalization
to improve the efﬁcacy of biomaterial substrates to be used in regenerative
medicine. Mater. Horiz. 7, 2258–2275 (2020).
56. da Silva, M. L. A. et al. Conditioned medium as a strategy for human stem cells
chondrogenic differentiation. J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 9, 714–723 (2015).
57. da Silva, M. L. A. et al. Cartilage tissue engineering using electrospun PCL
nanoﬁber meshes and MSCs. Biomacromolecules 11, 3228–3236 (2010).
58. da Silva, M. A. et al. Evaluation of extracellular matrix formation in poly-
caprolactone and starch-compounded polycaprolactone nanoﬁber meshes when
seeded with bovine articular chondrocytes. Tissue Eng. Pt. A 15, 377–385 (2009).
59. Oliveira, C., Costa-Pinto, A. R., Reis, R. L., Martins, A. & Neves, N. M. Biofunctional
anoﬁbrous substrate comprising immobilized antibodies and selective binding of
autologous growth factors. Biomacromolecules 15, 2196–2205 (2014).
60. Hughes, C. S. et al. Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation for
proteomics experiments. Nat. Protoc. 14, 68–85 (2019).
61. Osorio, H. et al. Proteomics analysis of gastric cancer patients with diabetes
mellitus. J. Clin. Med. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm10030407 (2021).
62. da Silva, M. A., Martins, A., Teixeira, A. A., Reis, R. L. & Neves, N. M. Impact of
biological agents and tissue engineering approaches on the treatment of rheu-
matic diseases. Tissue Eng. Pt. B Rev. 16, 331–339 (2010).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge the Portuguese Foundation for Science and
Technology (FCT) for the PhD grant to M.R.C. (PD/BD/113797/2015) ﬁnanced by the
Doctoral Program on Advanced Therapies for Health (PATH) (FSE/POCH/PD/169/
2013) and the project POCI-01-0145-FEDER-028882 (PTDC/BTM-SAL/28882/2017)
co-ﬁnanciado pelo Fundo Europeu de Desenvolvimento Regional - FEDER, através do
Programa Operacional Competitividade e Internacionalização e pelo Orçamento de
Estado, através da FCT. This work was also ﬁnanced by the Portuguese Mass
Spectrometry Network, integrated in the National Roadmap of Research Infrastruc-
tures of Strategic Relevance (ROTEIRO/0028/2013; LISBOA-01-0145-FEDER-022125).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors participated in the conception of this study. M.R.C., H.O., and A.M.
performed the investigation and data curation, analysis, and validation. R.L.R., A.M.,
and N.M.N. were responsible for the work supervision and administration, the
resources, and funding acquisition. All authors contribute to the editing, revision, and
approval of the ﬁnal version of the manuscript.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41536-021-00190-8.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Nuno M. Neves.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
M.R. Casanova et al.
11
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021) 79
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2021, corrected publication 2023
M.R. Casanova et al.
12
npj Regenerative Medicine (2021) 79
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute

===== Buechler2021_Nature_Fibroblast+CrossTissueAtlas =====

Nature  |  Vol 593  |  27 May 2021  |  575
Article
Cross-tissue organization of the fibroblast 
lineage
Matthew B. Buechler1,2, Rachana N. Pradhan1,2, Akshay T. Krishnamurty1, Christian Cox1, 
Aslihan Karabacak Calviello1, Amber W. Wang1, Yeqing Angela Yang1, Lucinda Tam1, 
Roger Caothien1, Merone Roose-Girma1, Zora Modrusan1, Joseph R. Arron1, Richard Bourgon1 ✉, 
Sören Müller1 ✉ & Shannon. J. Turley1 ✉
Fibroblasts are non-haematopoietic structural cells that define the architecture of 
organs, support the homeostasis of tissue-resident cells and have key roles in 
fibrosis, cancer, autoimmunity and wound healing1. Recent studies have described 
fibroblast heterogeneity within individual tissues1. However, the field lacks a 
characterization of fibroblasts at single-cell resolution across tissues in healthy and 
diseased organs. Here we constructed fibroblast atlases by integrating single-cell 
transcriptomic data from about 230,000 fibroblasts across 17 tissues, 50 datasets, 11 
disease states and 2 species. Mouse fibroblast atlases and a DptIRESCreERT2 knock-in 
mouse identified two universal fibroblast transcriptional subtypes across tissues. 
Our analysis suggests that these cells can serve as a reservoir that can yield 
specialized fibroblasts across a broad range of steady-state tissues and activated 
fibroblasts in disease. Comparison to an atlas of human fibroblasts from perturbed 
states showed that fibroblast transcriptional states are conserved between mice and 
humans, including universal fibroblasts and activated phenotypes associated with 
pathogenicity in human cancer, fibrosis, arthritis and inflammation. In summary, a 
cross-species and pan-tissue approach to transcriptomics at single-cell resolution 
has identified key organizing principles of the fibroblast lineage in health and 
disease.
Fibroblasts populate all tissues, delineate the topography of organs by 
producing and remodelling extracellular matrix proteins (ECMs)2 and 
support other tissue-resident cell types1,3. Fibroblasts perform func-
tions associated with their lineage and specialized programs suited to 
the needs of specific tissue contexts to maintain organ homeostasis. 
Macrophages achieve generalized function and specialization via a 
lineage-wide core transcriptomic signature and tissue-specific pro-
gramming driven by microenvironmental cues4–6. It is unclear how 
fibroblasts execute functions both common to their lineage and 
required by their organ of residence.
Technologies such as single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) 
have revealed intra-tissue fibroblast heterogeneity1. Elucidating the 
inter-tissue population structure of fibroblasts has clinical relevance, as 
subtypes of fibroblasts drive disease in arthritis7–9, cancer10–12 and fibrotic 
indications such as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF)2. Emerging para-
digms7,10,13,14 suggest that discrete fibroblast subtypes within tissues 
govern distinct aspects of tissue homeostasis and disease. Understanding 
whether fibroblast phenotypes across indications are context-specific 
or more broadly conserved may inform therapeutic approaches. We 
hypothesized that fibroblast heterogeneity was promoted by tissue type 
in the steady-state and disease context during perturbation.
Fibroblasts in steady-state mouse tissues
To investigate this hypothesis, we first performed bulk RNA-seq and 
assay for transposase-accessible chromatin with sequencing (ATAC–
seq) on fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)-sorted fibroblasts 
from multiple mouse tissues15. These data identified regions of open 
chromatin and transcriptional networks driven by tissue type, similar to 
recent reports15,16 (Extended Data Figs. 1, 2, Supplementary Tables 1, 2). 
However, bulk sequencing cannot discriminate gene signatures that 
represent a single, homogeneous cell population from those that reflect 
the average of heterogeneous populations. To resolve this issue, we 
collected mouse scRNA-seq datasets enriched for non-haematopoietic 
cells from our laboratory and from public repositories. We removed 
non-fibroblast cells and corrected for cross-laboratory batch effects to 
produce a fibroblast-specific single-cell atlas composed of 28 datasets 
across 16 unperturbed tissues (n = 120,583 cells; Fig. 1a, b, Extended 
Data Fig. 3a–c, Supplementary Table 3). An interactive data browser 
for the atlases is publicly available (see ‘Data availability’). Notably, 
our bulk RNA-seq and single-cell data were highly concordant, which 
indicates that our single-cell analytical approach did not introduce 
technical bias (Extended Data Fig. 3d).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03549-5
Received: 22 September 2020
Accepted: 13 April 2021
Published online: 12 May 2021
 Check for updates
1Genentech, South San Francisco, CA, USA. 2These authors contributed equally: Matthew B. Buechler, Rachana N. Pradhan. ✉e-mail: rbourgon@gmail.com; muller.soren@gene.com;  
turley.shannon@gene.com
576  |  Nature  |  Vol 593  |  27 May 2021
Article
In the steady-state atlas, ten clusters were identified on the basis of 
differential gene expression (Fig. 1b, c). The exact number of clusters in 
analyses of this type is data-driven but still somewhat subjective; some 
clusters were well-separated from others, while in other instances it is 
likely that an expression continuum, with intermediate states, exists. 
We identified more than 200 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) 
for each cluster and annotated clusters according to the dominant 
cluster-specific gene: Pi16+, Col15a1+, Ccl19+, Coch+, Comp+, Cxcl12+, 
Fbln1+, Bmp4+, Npnt+ and Hhip+ (Supplementary Table 4, Extended Data 
Fig. 3e). Known fibroblast-associated genes showed distinct expression 
across the clusters, confirming heterogeneity within the fibroblast 
lineage (Extended Data Fig. 3f). We were able to use tissue-distribution 
patterns and hallmark genes to ascribe functional identities to most 
clusters, including Ccl19+ fibroblastic reticular cells (FRCs)3, Coch+ red 
pulp fibroblasts17, Cxcl12+ mesenchymal stromal cells and osteolineage 
cells18, Fbln1+ and Bmp4+ intestinal fibroblasts19, Comp+ fibroblasts20, 
Npnt+ alveolar fibroblasts and Hhip+ peribronchial fibroblasts21 (Fig. 1c, 
Extended Data Figs. 3g, 4a–p). The specialization of these clusters was 
reflected in differential enrichment of gene expression in core signal-
ling pathways, including NFκB and TNF in the Ccl19+ cluster and WNT 
signalling in the Fbln1+ and Bmp4+ clusters19 (Extended Data Fig. 3h).
Notably, nearly all tissues contributed to the Pi16+ and Col15a1+ clus-
ters, which suggests that these clusters are universal (Fig. 1c, Extended 
Data Fig. 3g). Genes that defined these two clusters differentiated fibro-
blasts from mesothelial cells in bulk RNA-seq data (Extended Data 
Fig. 4r–t). DEGs in the Pi16+ cluster (Pi16, Dpp4 and Ly6c1) suggested 
an identity similar to adventitial stromal cells22, which are found in 
vascular niches and can produce ECMs and acquire gene expression 
profiles consistent with specialized fibroblasts23,24. The Col15a1+ cluster 
exhibited an association with the basement membrane, evidenced by 
expression of Col4a1, Hspg2 and Col15a1 (Extended Data Fig. 3i, Sup-
plementary Table 4). The ubiquity of the universal Pi16+ and Col15a1+ 
subtypes across tissues and the elevated level of stemness-associated 
genes (Cd34 and Ly6a (which encodes SCA1), Extended Data Fig. 3j), 
led us to investigate the potential for a developmental relationship 
among clusters. Slingshot lineage inference identified trajectories that 
emerged from the Pi16+ cluster, passed through the Col15a1+ cluster, 
and ended at specialized clusters (Fig. 1d).
Collectively, our analysis showed that in steady-state mouse tissues, 
universal (Pi16+ and Col15a1+) and specialized fibroblast subtypes exist, 
and that these may be developmentally linked. The roles of universal 
fibroblasts include ECM secretion, with Col15a1+ universal fibroblasts 
exhibiting the capacity to secrete basement membrane proteins and 
the Pi16+ subtype potentially serving as a resource cell that can develop 
into specialized fibroblasts.
DptIRESCreERT2 mouse validates scRNA-seq
To validate our scRNA-seq analysis, we used the surface markers SCA1 
and LY6C (encoded by Ly6c1) to distinguish Pi16+ (LY6C+SCA1+) and 
Col15a1+ (LY6C−SCA1+) universal fibroblasts from specialized fibroblasts 
(LY6C−SCA1−; Extended Data Figs. 5a, 6a). Flow cytometry revealed that 
PDGFRα+ fibroblasts could be sorted into these three groups across 11 
tissues (Extended Data Fig. 6b, c). This approach confirmed the exist-
ence of bona fide universal and specialized phenotypes: expression of 
Pi16 was enriched in LY6C+SCA1+ fibroblasts, whereas markers of more 
specialized fibroblasts such as Ccl19 (lymph node) and Npnt (lung) were 
enriched in LY6C− fibroblasts. Expression of dermatopontin (Dpt) was 
inversely correlated with specialization (Extended Data Fig. 6d, e). Dpt 
was diffusely expressed across the steady-state fibroblast atlas but was 
significantly enriched in Pi16+ and Col15a1+ universal fibroblasts, with 
highest expression in the Pi16+ cluster. The intestine-specific Fbln1+ 
cluster also showed Dpt expression at a level similar to the Col15a1+ 
cluster (Extended Data Fig. 6e, Supplementary Table 4). Expression of 
Dpt and Pi16 RNA in lung and small intestine was assayed histologically 
using RNAscope. Dpt+Pi16+ cells were enriched near vascular structures 
in both tissues, as expected22. Dpt+Pi16− cells were observed in the lung 
parenchyma, in alignment with our predicted distribution of Col15a1+ 
cells, and at the base of the villi in the small intestine, consistent with a 
lack of functional specialization19 (Extended Data Fig. 6f).
We generated a genetically modified mouse model for track-
ing Dpt-expressing cells to test whether Dpt preferentially marked 
universal fibroblasts. An IresCreERT2 cassette, which requires the 
oestrogen receptor modulator tamoxifen for activity, was inserted 
downstream of the stop codon in exon 4 of Dpt. We crossed this strain 
with the Rosa26LSLYFP mouse line. The resulting DptIresCreERT2Rosa26LSLYFP 
mouse irreversibly marks DptIresCreERT2-positive cells and their progeny 
with yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) after tamoxifen administration 
(Extended Data Fig. 6g).
DptIresCreERT2Rosa26LSLYFP mice were given tamoxifen in their chow 
for 14 days. In the 11 tissues examined, PDGFRα+ fibroblasts robustly 
expressed YFP (Fig. 2a, Extended Data Fig. 6h). Recombination effi-
ciency varied across tissues: lymph nodes exhibited the lowest propor-
tion of YFP+ fibroblasts (28.7 ± 5.5% (mean ± s.e.m.)) whereas the heart 
exhibited the highest (83.7 ± 3.1%; Fig. 2b). Other cell types expressed 
little or no YFP (Extended Data Fig. 6i, j). FACS-sorted YFP-positive 
fibroblasts (sorted 14 days after DptIresCreERT2 recombination) expressed 
higher levels of Pi16 and Col15a1 and lower levels of Ccl19 and Npnt in 
the lymph node and lung, respectively, than YFP-negative fibroblasts. 
This suggests that Dpt-expressing cells are transcriptionally distinct 
from lymph node FRCs and lung alveolar fibroblasts (Extended Data 
Fig. 6k). YFP+ and YFP− fibroblasts expressed equivalent levels of Csf1, 
−10
−5
0
5
−5
UMAP_1
UMAP_2
5
0
a
c
b
Artery
Lymph 
node
Pancreas
Skin
Muscle
Tendon
Omentum
Adipose 
Bone
Heart
Intestine
Mesentery
Lung
Liver
Spleen
28 scRNA-seq datasets integrated from 16 tissues
PDGFRα+ clusters in steady-state ﬁbroblast atlas
Pi16+
Col15a1+
Ccl19+
Cxcl12+
Coch+
Npnt+
n = 120,583 cells
Col15a1
Penk
Pi16
Dpp4
Ly6c1
Cxcl12
Lepr
Sp7
Comp
Fmod
Ccl19
Ccl21a
Bst1
Fbln1
Sfrp1
Coch
Wt1
Comp+
Fbln1+
Bmp4+
Hhip+
Npnt
Ces1d
Hhip
Aspn
Bmp4
Pdgfra
317
n
280
409
295
771
509
220
778
467
470
Key
genes
Function
Tissues
Adventitial
Paren-
chymal
FRC 
MSC
OLC
Alveolar
Fibroblast 2
Red pulp
PDGFRαlo
Peribronchial
PDGFRαhi
Pan-
tissue
Pan-
tissue
Lymph node
Spleen
Artery
Tendon
Bone
Lung
Spleen
Liver
Intestine
Lung
Intestine
2
0
–2
d
UMAP_1
UMAP_2
Fig. 1 | Steady-state mouse fibroblast atlas. a, Twenty-eight datasets for 
steady-state fibroblast atlas from 16 mouse tissues. b, Uniform manifold 
approximation and projection (UMAP) embedding of 120,583 single cells in the 
steady-state atlas. Ten clusters identified through graph-based clustering are 
indicated by colour. c, Heat map of the relative average expression of the most 
strongly enriched genes for each cluster (log(fold change) of one cluster versus 
all others, z-score by row) with key genes, functional annotation and tissue 
distributions listed. MSC, mesenchymal lineage cell; OLC, osteolineage cell.  
d, Pseudotime(s) visualized using principal curves representing trajectories of 
fibroblast differentiation across steady-state atlas with Pi16+ cluster set as root.
Nature  |  Vol 593  |  27 May 2021  |  577
suggesting that both Dpt+ and Dpt− fibroblasts are involved in mac-
rophage homeostasis25 (Extended Data Fig. 6l).
The distinction between universal and specialized fibroblasts 
was also observed at the protein level via YFP expression in Ccl19YFP 
(ref. 26) and Gremlin1CreERT2Rosa26LSLYFP mice27. Here, the fraction of 
YFP-expressing cells (denoting an FRC phenotype) increased from 
LY6C+SCA1+ (Pi16+) fibroblasts to LY6C−SCA1+ (Col15a1+) fibroblasts 
and further to SCA1− (specialized) fibroblasts (Fig. 2c, d, Extended 
Data Fig. 5b, c). YFP expression in DptIresCreERT2;Rosa26LSLYFP mice showed 
the opposite trend in lymph node, lung, and other tissues (Fig. 2e, 
Extended Data Fig. 5d). This evidence suggested that Dpt expression 
encompassed both of the universal fibroblast subtypes identified by 
scRNA-seq; therefore, we refer to these as Dpt+Pi16+ and Dpt+Col15a1+ 
universal fibroblasts.
Fibroblasts in perturbed mouse tissues
We next investigated how fibroblasts are affected by infection, injury, 
cancer, fibrosis, metabolic changes and arthritis (Fig. 3a). We inte-
grated 17 publicly available scRNA-seq datasets across 13 tissues to 
generate a perturbed-state fibroblast atlas (n = 99,596 cells; Fig. 3b, 
c, Extended Data Fig. 7a–c, Supplementary Table 3). This approach 
showed ten clusters: Pi16+, Col15a1+, Ccl19+, Cxcl12+, Comp+, Npnt+, 
Hhip+, Adamdec1+, Cxcl5+ and Lrrc15+ (Fig. 3b, c, Extended Data Fig. 7d, 
Supplementary Table 5). Clusters in the perturbed-state atlas dis-
played heterogeneous expression of common fibroblast-associated 
genes (Extended Data Fig. 7e). In nearly all perturbed tissues and for all 
types of inflammation, some fibroblasts occupied the universal Pi16+ 
and Col15a1+ clusters, and these clusters expressed the highest levels 
of Dpt (Extended Data Figs. 7f, 8a–o, r). The Cxcl12+, Ccl19+, Comp+, 
Npnt+, and Hhip+ clusters were similar to the analogous steady-state 
clusters with respect to gene expression and tissue distribution 
(Fig. 3b, c, Extended Data Fig. 7g). Conversely, the Cxcl5+, Adamdec1+ 
and Lrrc15+ clusters appeared to represent perturbation-specific, 
a
YFP (Dpt)
c
b
0
20
40
60
80
100
Per cent YFP+ (Ccl19YFP)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Per cent YFP+
(Grem1CreERT2Rosa26LSLYFP)
e
0
20
40
60
80
100
Per cent YFP+
(DptIresCreERT2Rosa26LSLYFP)
+
–
–
LY6C
SCA1
+
+
–
Lymph
node
Omentum
Lung
Subcut.
Pancreas
Skin (ﬂank)
0
102
103
104
105
0
20
40
60
80
100
88
0
d
Lymph
node
Omentum
Thymus
Lung
Epididymal
Subcut.
Brown
Pancreas
Skin (ear)
Skin (ﬂank)
Heart
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
2
4
10
Per cent YFP+ (Dpt of PDGFRα+)
Counts per mg (×103) of 
PDGFRα+YFP+ (Dpt))
20
Fig. 2 | DptIRESCreERT2 marks universal fibroblasts. a, Representative gating for 
YFP (Dpt) in pancreatic fibroblasts (live, EpCAM−CD45−CD31−PDPN+PDGFRα+). 
Red, DptIRESCreERT2ki/kiRosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP; grey, DptIRESCreERT2wt/wtRosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP 
mouse. Horizontal bar denotes the percentage of positive cells. b, 
Quantification of YFP+ (Dpt+) cells. Frequency (blue dots with mean, top x-axis) 
and cell number per milligram tissue (red boxplots, bottom x-axis). Percentage 
YFP+ determined by subtracting fluorescence in DptIRESCreERT2ki/kiRosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP 
mice from fluorescence in DptIRESCreERT2wt/wtRosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP mice. c, YFP 
expression in LY6C+SCA1+, LY6C−SCA1+ and SCA1− fibroblasts from the lymph 
node in Ccl19YFP mice. d, YFP expression in LY6C+SCA1+, LY6C−SCA1+ and SCA1− 
fibroblasts from lymph node in Grem1CreERT2wt/ki Rosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP mice treated 
with tamoxifen via intraperitoneal injection for 5 consecutive days, assayed on 
days 14–16 after first injection. Bars in c, d represent mean. e, YFP expression in 
LY6C+SCA1+, LY6C−SCA1+ and SCA1− fibroblasts from lymph node, omentum, lung, 
inguinal adipose, pancreas and skin (flank) in DptIRESCreERT2ki/kiRosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP  
animals. Mean ± s.e.m. n = 4 (b) or 3 (c–e) or representative of 4 (a) biologically 
independent experiments with 4 (b), 7 (c), 10 (d) or 3 (e) mice. In b, centre lines 
in boxplots show median; box spans interquartile range, whiskers denote10th–
90th percentile. Each dot represents one mouse; mice received tamoxifen 
chow for 14 days and were analysed on days 14–16 (b–d). Subcut., subcutaneous 
adipose.
a
b
c
−1
0
2
Artery
(high-fat
diet)
Bone
(cancer)
Heart
(injury)
Lung
(parasitic and viral 
infection, ﬁbrosis)
Liver
(NASH,
ﬁbrosis)
Pancreas
(cancer)
Skin
(wound)
Muscle
(injury)
Adipose
(β-adrenergic
treatment) 
Joint
(arthritis)
Lrrc15
aSMA
Comp
Thbs4
Cxcl5, Ccl2
Pdpn, Ccl7
Hhip
Aspn
Adamdec1
Grem1, Il11
17 scRNA-seq datasets integrated from 13 tissues
PDGFRα+ clusters in perturbed-state ﬁbroblast atlas
Lymph 
node
(viral infection)
382
n
192
437
554
361
Key
genes
Function
Primary
indication
Col15a1
Penk
Pi16
Dpp4
Ly6c1
Ccl19
Ccl21a
Bst1
Cxcl12
Lepr
Npnt
Ces1d
421
260
733
312
10
−5
0
5
−5
UMAP_1
UMAP_2
5
0
d
YFP (Dpt)
LRRC15-PE 
PDPN-APC
48.3
0
10–3
103
104 105
0
10–3
103
104 105
0
10–3
103
104
105
0
10–3
103
104
105
72.8
376
Myoﬁbro-
blast
Adventitial
Paren-
chymal
FRC 
MSC
OLC
Lymph node
Bone
Alveolar
Lung
Peri-
bronchial
Lung
Pan-tissue
and indication
Pan-tissue and
indication
PDAC, arthritis,
ﬁbrosis, wound
Arthritis, HFD,
muscle injury
Early muscle
injury
Colitis
Intestine
(colitis)
Fibro-
blast 2
n = 99,596 cells
Pi16+
Col15a1+
Ccl19+
Cxcl12+
Npnt+
Comp+
Lrrc15+
Cxcl5+
Hhip+
Adamdec1+
Fig. 3 | Perturbed-state mouse fibroblast atlas. a, Seventeen datasets for 
perturbed atlas from 13 perturbed mouse tissues. b, UMAP embedding of 
99,596 cells in the perturbed-state atlas. Ten clusters identified through 
graph-based clustering are indicated by colour. Coloured clusters are universal 
(bold) or perturbation-specific; grey clusters have steady-state analogues.  
c, Heat map of the relative average expression of the most strongly enriched 
genes for each cluster (log(fold change) of one cluster versus all others, z-score 
by row). d, Representative flow cytometry plots showing frequency of YFP+ 
cells in LRRC15+ fibroblasts from KPR3070 subcutaneous tumour at day 21 
post-inoculation in DptIRESCreERT2ki/kiRosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP mouse (representative of 
two biologically independent experiments).
578  |  Nature  |  Vol 593  |  27 May 2021
Article
activated fibroblast states that were not observed in the steady-state 
atlas.
Fibroblasts from early muscle injury contributed the majority of cells 
to the Cxcl5+ cluster and expressed chemokine genes such as Ccl2 and 
Ccl7 (Fig. 3c, Extended Data Fig. 8j, p). Analysis of co-regulated genes 
suggested that this cluster was driven by PI3K, TNF and NFκB signalling 
(Extended Data Fig. 8v). Cells in the Adamdec1+ cluster were from colitis 
and showed upregulation of Il11 and Grem1 (Extended Data Figs. 7f, 8e, q). 
Gene expression in these cells was associated with MAPK signalling 
(Extended Data Fig. 8v). We subjected mice to DSS-induced colitis 
and found increased expression of Grem1 in lesions as compared to 
healthy areas of the colon by RNAscope, validating the colitis-specific 
expression of Grem1 in the mouse perturbed-state atlas (Extended 
Data Fig. 8w). The Lrrc15+ cluster was composed of cells from arthritis, 
skin wound, fibrosis and small and large pancreatic ductal adenocarci-
noma (PDAC; Extended Data Figs. 7f, 8a–o). This cluster showed high 
expression of Cthrc1, Acta2, Postn and Adam12, and of collagens, which 
suggests that these cells represented myofibroblasts (Extended Data 
Fig. 8p–u). The increase in collagens and TGFβ signalling is consistent 
with previous reports10 (Extended Data Fig. 8v).
In perturbed tissues, universal Dpt+Pi16+ fibroblasts maintained 
the highest expression of stemness-associated genes (Extended Data 
Fig. 8x). Lineage inference identified trajectories from Dpt+Pi16+ through 
Dpt+Col15a1+ and then on to perturbation-specific, activated Cxcl5+ and 
Lrrc15+ clusters or the Adamdec1+ cluster (Extended Data Fig. 8y). We 
tested whether universal fibroblasts give rise to LRRC15+ myofibroblasts 
using a subcutaneous tumour model in the DptIresCreERT2;Rosa26LSLYFP 
mouse. We found that 52 ± 7% of LRRC15+ myofibroblasts were YFP+ in 
DptIresCreERT2ki/ki mice (Fig. 3d, Extended Data Fig. 8z–b′). This indicates 
that Dpt-expressing cells marked before tumour implantation can 
differentiate into LRRC15+ myofibroblasts.
Single-cell RNA-seq of human fibroblasts
We hypothesized that mice may exhibit some parity to humans in terms 
of steady- and perturbed-state fibroblast subtypes. We performed 
scRNA-seq on tumour and normal adjacent tissue (NAT) samples from 
three patients with pancreatic cancer and identified two subsets of 
fibroblasts (n = 21,262 cells; Extended Data Fig. 9a–c, Supplementary 
Tables 6, 7). Clusters c3 and c8 were annotated as cancer-associated 
fibroblasts (CAFs) and normal fibroblasts, respectively. Twelve of 
the 20 most upregulated genes in c8 were significantly upregulated 
in mouse steady-state Dpt+Pi16+ (DPT, IGFBP5, IGFBP6, C3, APOD) or 
Dpt+Col15a1+ (CXCL12, SMOC2, C7, FBLN5, MFAP4, LUM, FMO2) clusters 
(Supplementary Tables 4, 7). These 20 upregulated genes defined our 
human universal fibroblast expression module. To test whether c8 rep-
resented universal fibroblasts in humans, we inferred the abundance 
of these cells across tissues from the GTEx database (n = 5,961 samples, 
Extended Data Fig. 9d, e). We found strong (r > 0.5) co-expression of 
universal module genes in 12 human tissues, including normal pancreas 
(Extended Data Fig. 9f, g). At the single-cell level, the human univer-
sal module was observed in c8 pancreas and human adipose tissue 
(Extended Data Fig. 9h, i). We next scored samples from 122 patients 
with pancreatic cancer28 for the human universal module as well as a 
human fibroblast activation program (20 most enriched genes in c3 ver-
sus c8; Extended Data Fig. 10a). There was a strong negative correlation 
between the universal and activated gene programs (r = −0.54), which 
suggests that activation in human fibroblasts may be associated with 
loss of universal fibroblast gene expression (Extended Data Fig. 10b), 
reminiscent of the lineage relationship we observed in mice.
We investigated whether the transcriptional fibroblast subtypes we 
observed in humans had mouse orthologues and observed that the 
human c3 signature was enriched in the mouse Lrrc15+ myofibroblast 
cluster (Extended Data Fig. 10c). This was not restricted to pancre-
atic cancer14: fibroblast signatures from human rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA)7,9, interstitial lung diseases29, IPF30 and ulcerative colitis31 also 
showed localized gene expression in the mouse Lrrc15+ myofibroblast 
cluster (Extended Data Fig. 10c, Supplementary Table 8). We found 
evidence of universal fibroblasts in samples from patients with inter-
stitial lung disease29 and ulcerative colitis31 (Extended Data Fig. 10d). 
Cells described as inflammatory fibroblasts across human samples 
and indications predominantly aligned with the universal clusters of 
the mouse perturbed-state atlas7,9,11 (Extended Data Fig. 10e). We also 
observed that mouse IL-1+ CAFs10 localized to universal clusters in the 
mouse perturbed-state atlas (Extended Data Fig. 10f), suggesting that 
cells described as inflammatory fibroblasts may represent universal 
fibroblasts that have not undergone sufficient transcriptional change 
to constitute a new cell state.
Last, we composed a human perturbed-state fibroblast atlas by 
integrating c3 PDAC CAFs, colon fibroblasts from patients with coli-
tis and lung fibroblasts from individuals with non-small cell lung can-
cer (NSCLC), IPF or COVID-19 (Fig. 4a). This human perturbed-state 
atlas (n = 10,355 cells) exhibited six clusters (Fig. 4b, c, Supplementary 
Table 9). We observed expected clusters, including NPNT+ alveolar 
fibroblasts21 derived from individuals with lung disease, ADAMDEC1+ 
and CCL19+31 clusters primarily from colitis samples, and a PI16+ cluster, 
in which the human universal signature was most enriched (Fig. 4b, c, 
Extended Data Fig. 10g). We observed two myofibroblast clusters 
defined by LRRC15+ and COL3A1+ expression. LRRC15+ myofibroblasts 
were enriched in cells from individuals with pancreatic and lung cancer, 
whereas the COL3A1+ cluster was enriched in cells from patients with 
COVID-19 (Fig. 4d). Both myofibroblast subsets expressed high levels 
of collagens and ECM-modifying genes, including CTHRC1 (Extended 
Data Fig. 10h, i). The human perturbed-state atlas validated aspects 
of the mouse perturbed-state atlas, including LRRC15+ myofibroblasts 
a
b
PI16, CD34
HAS1, PLIN2
COL3A1
POSTN
CTHRC1
LRRC15
COL11A1
CTHRC1
ADAMDEC1
CXCL14
NPNT, CES1
ADH1B, FGFR4
CCL19, GREM1
TNFSF13B
UMAP_1
0
–5
5
–5
0
5
UMAP_2
n
2
0
–1
779
434
472
778
72
400
PI16+
Adventital
COL3A1+
Myoﬁbroblast
LRRC15+
Myoﬁbroblast
NPNT+
Alveolar
ADAMDEC1+
Colitis
CCL19+
Colitis
n = 10,355 cells
COVID-19
IPF
NSCLC
PDAC
Ulcerative colitis
PI16+ 
LRRC15+
ADAMDEC1+
NPNT+
CCL19+
0
0.25
0.50
0.75
COL3A1+
1.00
Five scRNA-seq datasets integrated
after selecting ﬁbroblasts (LUM+)
Lung
(COVID-19, NSCLC and IPF)
Pancreas
(cancer)
Intestine
(ulcerative colitis)
Key
genes
Primary
indication
Lung
c
PDAC
NSCLC
Colitis
Lung
COVID-19
Colitis
d
Fig. 4 | Perturbed-state human fibroblast atlas. a, Datasets for perturbation 
atlas from three perturbed human tissues. b, UMAP embedding of 10,355 cells 
in the perturbed-state human fibroblast atlas. Six clusters identified through 
graph-based clustering are indicated by colour. c, Heat map of relative average 
expression of the most strongly enriched genes for each cluster (log(fold 
change) of one cluster versus all others, z-score by row). d, Relative abundance 
of each disease in UMAP clusters.
Nature  |  Vol 593  |  27 May 2021  |  579
and ADAMDEC1+ fibroblasts, but also suggested that indication-specific 
stimuli or signal duration may drive additional myofibroblast popula-
tions in humans that were not seen in our mouse atlas.
Discussion
Fibroblasts have emerged as nexus cells that define the architecture 
of tissues, augment the function and positioning of other cell types, 
and have key roles in many diseases. We initially hypothesized that 
fibroblasts accomplish these diverse tasks through tissue-specific tran-
scriptional programming. While our initial hypothesis was supported 
by bulk sequencing modalities, scRNA-seq across mouse tissues and 
perturbations led to a different conclusion—that the fibroblast lineage 
was compartmentalized into universal and specialized (steady-state) 
or activated (perturbed-state) subtypes. It is possible that fibroblast 
subsets may exhibit additional imprinting by their tissue of residence. 
Our scRNA-seq observations were supported experimentally by the 
DptIresCreERT2 knock-in mouse. Our data suggest a paradigm in which Dpt+ 
universal fibroblasts give rise to distinct subsets of fibroblasts across 
tissues, enabling this cell lineage to give rise to phenotypes that can 
execute the myriad functions ascribed to fibroblasts in the steady-state 
and in disease. In this paradigm, diverse tissues harbour Dpt+ univer-
sal fibroblasts that can differentiate into activated fibroblasts during 
inflammation and, we speculate, into specialized fibroblasts during 
development. In this way, Dpt+ universal fibroblasts operate as resource 
cells, providing functional plasticity to the fibroblast lineage.
Our data suggest concordance between fibroblast phenotypes in 
mice and humans. We confirmed that a subset of fibroblasts in human 
tissues has transcriptional similarities to mouse universal fibroblasts. 
Examination of human datasets representing an array of diseases 
identified mouse fibroblast orthologues, suggesting that our mouse 
perturbed-state atlas provides a basis for understanding fibroblast 
subtypes in human disease states. However, we observed a unique 
myofibroblast population that was enriched in patients with COVID-19, 
relative to the other human indications we analysed, which suggests 
that important inter-species or perturbation-specific differences may 
exist as well.
Our approach to understanding fibroblasts across tissues has iden-
tified both broad similarities and essential differences. Exposing the 
contours of fibroblast gene expression across tissues and activation 
states may help to clarify fibroblast subtyping and nomenclature. Open 
questions still remain about the spatial dynamics among fibroblast 
subtypes, the existence of other subtypes not captured in these data-
sets, and the structural or immune cells that promote specialization in 
the steady-state or activation during inflammation. It remains unclear 
why two universal Dpt+ fibroblast subtypes exist, though we speculate 
that this may represent a necessary division of labour within the line-
age. Overall, the organizing principles described here may enable a 
deeper understanding of the development, evolution and behaviour 
of universal, specialized and activated fibroblasts, which may in turn 
yield dividends for human medicine.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting summa-
ries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowl-
edgements, peer review information; details of author contributions 
and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability 
are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03549-5.
1.	
Koliaraki, V., Prados, A., Armaka, M. & Kollias, G. The mesenchymal context in 
inflammation, immunity and cancer. Nat. Immunol. 21, 974–982 (2020).
2.	
Hinz, B. & Lagares, D. Evasion of apoptosis by myofibroblasts: a hallmark of fibrotic 
diseases. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 16, 11–31 (2020).
3.	
Buechler, M. B. & Turley, S. J. A short field guide to fibroblast function in immunity. Semin. 
Immunol. 35, 48–58 (2018).
4.	
Gautier, E. L. et al. Gene-expression profiles and transcriptional regulatory pathways that 
underlie the identity and diversity of mouse tissue macrophages. Nat. Immunol. 13,  
1118–1128 (2012).
5.	
Gosselin, D. et al. Environment drives selection and function of enhancers controlling 
tissue-specific macrophage identities. Cell 159, 1327–1340 (2014).
6.	
Lavin, Y. et al. Tissue-resident macrophage enhancer landscapes are shaped by the local 
microenvironment. Cell 159, 1312–1326 (2014).
7.	
Croft, A. P. et al. Distinct fibroblast subsets drive inflammation and damage in arthritis. 
Nature 570, 246–251 (2019).
8.	
Wei, K. et al. Notch signalling drives synovial fibroblast identity and arthritis pathology. 
Nature 582, 259–264 (2020).
9.	
Zhang, F. et al. Defining inflammatory cell states in rheumatoid arthritis joint synovial 
tissues by integrating single-cell transcriptomics and mass cytometry. Nat. Immunol. 20, 
928–942 (2019).
10.	
Dominguez, C. X. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals stromal evolution into 
LRRC15+ myofibroblasts as a determinant of patient response to cancer immunotherapy. 
Cancer Discov. 10, 232–253 (2020).
11.	
Elyada, E. et al. Cross-species single-cell analysis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma 
reveals antigen-presenting cancer-associated fibroblasts. Cancer Discov. 9, 1102–1123 
(2019).
12.	
Lambrechts, D. et al. Phenotype molding of stromal cells in the lung tumor 
microenvironment. Nat. Med. 24, 1277–1289 (2018).
13.	
Öhlund, D. et al. Distinct populations of inflammatory fibroblasts and myofibroblasts in 
pancreatic cancer. J. Exp. Med. 214, 579–596 (2017).
14.	
Rinkevich, Y. et al. Identification and isolation of a dermal lineage with intrinsic fibrogenic 
potential. Science 348, aaa2151 (2015).
15.	
Buechler, M. B. et al. A stromal niche defined by expression of the transcription factor 
WT1 mediates programming and homeostasis of cavity-resident macrophages. Immunity 
51, 119–130.e5 (2019).
16.	
Krausgruber, T. et al. Structural cells are key regulators of organ-specific immune 
responses. Nature 583, 296–302 (2020).
17.	
Bellomo, A. et al. Reticular fibroblasts expressing the transcription factor WT1 define a 
stromal niche that maintains and replenishes splenic red pulp macrophages. Immunity 
53, 127–142.e7 (2020).
18.	
Baryawno, N. et al. A cellular taxonomy of the bone marrow stroma in homeostasis and 
leukemia. Cell 177, 1915–1932.e16 (2019).
19.	
McCarthy, N. et al. Distinct mesenchymal cell populations generate the essential 
intestinal BMP signaling gradient. Cell Stem Cell 26, 391–402.e5 (2020).
20.	 Wirka, R. C. et al. Atheroprotective roles of smooth muscle cell phenotypic modulation 
and the TCF21 disease gene as revealed by single-cell analysis. Nat. Med. 25, 1280–1289 
(2019).
21.	
Tsukui, T. et al. Collagen-producing lung cell atlas identifies multiple subsets with distinct 
localization and relevance to fibrosis. Nat. Commun. 11, 1920 (2020).
22.	 Dahlgren, M. W. & Molofsky, A. B. Adventitial cuffs: regional hubs for tissue immunity. 
Trends Immunol. 40, 877–887 (2019).
23.	 Sitnik, K. M. et al. Context-dependent development of lymphoid stroma from adult CD34+ 
adventitial progenitors. Cell Rep. 14, 2375–2388 (2016).
24.	 Merrick, D. et al. Identification of a mesenchymal progenitor cell hierarchy in adipose 
tissue. Science 364, eaav2501 (2019).
25.	
Zhou, X. et al. Circuit design features of a stable two-cell system. Cell 172, 744–757.e17 (2018).
26.	 Chai, Q. et al. Maturation of lymph node fibroblastic reticular cells from myofibroblastic 
precursors is critical for antiviral immunity. Immunity 38, 1013–1024 (2013).
27.	
Kapoor et al.
28.	 Maurer, C. et al. Experimental microdissection enables functional harmonisation of 
pancreatic cancer subtypes. Gut 68, 1034–1043 (2019).
29.	 Habermann, A. C. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals profibrotic roles of distinct 
epithelial and mesenchymal lineages in pulmonary fibrosis. Sci. Adv. 6, eaba1972 (2020).
30.	 Emblom-Callahan, M. C. et al. Genomic phenotype of non-cultured pulmonary 
fibroblasts in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Genomics 96, 134–145 (2010).
31.	
Kinchen, J. et al. Structural remodeling of the human colonic mesenchyme in 
inflammatory bowel disease. Cell 175, 372–386.e17 (2018).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2021
Article
Methods
Mice
Wild-type mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratory (JAX; colony 
00064) and maintained at Genentech. Ccl19YFP (ref. 32), Grem1CreERT2 
(ref. 27) and Rosa26LSLYFP mice were bred at Genentech. DptIresCreERT2 mice 
were designed, generated and bred at Genentech. Male and female mice 
aged 6–12 weeks were used for all studies. For tamoxifen-induced cre 
expression, mice were injected with 2 mg tamoxifen (Sigma, cat. T5648) 
diluted in sunflower seed oil (Sigma, cat. 88921) for 5 consecutive days 
intraperitoneally or were fed chow containing tamoxifen (Envigo, cat. 
TD.130859). All experiments were performed under protocols approved 
by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Genentech. 
Other genotypes listed in Supplementary Table 3 were not bred in 
our facility but used in the integrated single-cell RNA-seq fibroblast 
atlases. No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. 
The experiments were not randomized and the investigators were not 
blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.
Mouse tissue digestion and stromal cell isolation or 
identification by FACS
Tissues were isolated and fibroblasts and mesothelial cells were isolated 
as previously described15. In brief, tissues were obtained and minced, 
aside from the LN, omentum (neither minced) and bone (decapped, 
marrow removed and crushed). To isolate flank skin, hair was shaved, 
adipose tissue was removed and tissue was minced. Next, tissues were 
placed in a 15-ml conical tube with 5 ml digestion medium (RPMI + 2% 
FBS with 100 mg/ml Dispase (Life Tech., cat. 17105041), 100–200 mg/ml 
collagenase P (Roche, cat. 11249002001), and 50 mg/ml DNase I 
(Roche, cat. 10104159001)) and agitated. Tubes were placed in a 37 °C 
water bath for 15 min, and 5-ml fractions were removed and filtered 
(70 μm) into RPMI supplemented with 2% FCS (VWR) three times. 
For skin fibroblast scRNA-seq, skin was minced and digested in the 
enzymatic cocktail described above for 60 min. We used 200mg/ml 
collagenase P to isolate cells from dense tissues such as the spleen, 
liver, inguinal adipose, brown adipose and pancreas. After a single-cell 
suspension was obtained, the cells were layered on top of a 26% opti-
prep (Sigma, cat. D1556; diluted in phosphate buffered saline (PBS)) 
gradient in 15-ml conical tubes and spun at 1,500g for 15 min with slow 
acceleration and the brake off. Cells in suspension were isolated with 
a transfer pipette. After digestion, the preparations were incubated 
with Ack for 2–5 min to remove red blood cells.
Cells were labelled with the following monoclonal antibodies pur-
chased from eBioscience, BioLegend, or BD Biosciences at 1:200 for 
20–30 min, unless otherwise noted. Prior to cell surface staining with 
the following fluorescently labelled antibodies, cells were blocked 
with Fc block (2.4G2; 1:500–1:1,000, cat #553142). Surface staining for 
experiments was performed as below, unless otherwise noted: CD45 
(30-F11, cat. 564279), EPCAM (G8.8, cat. 118216), CD31 (390, cat. 612802 
or 102524), PDGFRα (AP5, cat. 135906), PDPN (8.1.1; 1:800, cat. 127410), 
LY6C (HK1.4; 1:200, cat. 45-5932-82), SCA1 (D7; 1:200, cat. 108131), CD24 
(M1/69; 1:200, cat. 612832) or LRRC1510 (1:200, in-house). Live cells were 
identified by washing after Fc block and incubation with Fixable Viabil-
ity Dye Violet (Invitrogen, cat. L34955, 1:1,000) before surface staining 
or incubation with calcein blue (Invitrogen, cat. C1429, 1:1,000) after 
surface staining. Data were acquired on a Fortessa, Symphony or LSRII 
(BD Biosciences) and analysed using FlowJo (Tree Star, v9.9.6) or cells 
were sorted on a Fusion or Aria (BD Biosciences). Data were presented 
using Prism (Graphpad, v9).
qPCR, RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis
For each qPCR experiment, organs from 3–5 mice were pooled, digested 
and sorted by FACS. Total RNA was extracted from FACS-sorted cells 
using a QIACube HT with the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (QIAGEN, cat. 
74134). cDNA were synthesized using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse 
Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems, cat. 4368814) with an RNase 
Inhibitor (Applied Biosystems, cat. N8080119). Each cDNA sample 
was diluted 1:200–1:300 in RNase-free water before use in qPCR. 
qPCR was conducted using TaqMan Gene Expression Assay Probes 
for the genes Pi16 (Mm00470084_m1), Col15a1 (Mm00456551_m1), Dpt 
(Mm01273496_m1), Npnt (Mm00473794_m1), Ccl19 (Mm00839967_g1), 
Csf1 (Mm00432686_m1) and Gapdh (Mm99999915_g1). Each TaqMan 
probe was diluted 1:10 in TaqMan Fast Advanced Master Mix (Ther-
moFisher, cat. 4444557) to create a TaqMan probe working solution. 
All qPCR reactions were carried out in a MicroAmp optical 384-well 
reaction plate. qPCR was performed using the QuantStudio 5 (Applied 
Biosystems) under the following cycling conditions: 1 cycle of 50 °C for 
2 min and 95 °C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s and 
60 °C for 1 min. The relative expression values were determined by: 
1) subtracting the average Ct value of the gene of interest (GOI) from 
Gapdh (Gapdh − GOI) for each sample and 2) raising 2 to the power 
of (Gapdh − GOI). Data were presented using Prism (Graphpad, v9). 
Data points were called non-detectable if Ct values were over 36 or if 
replicates had a standard deviation greater than 1.
Mouse scRNA-seq and cell hashing
Cells hashtagged with unique barcoded antibodies (Biolegend) were 
processed using Chromium Single Cell Gene Expression 3′ v3 Library 
and Gel Bead Kit following the manufacturer’s instructions (10X Genom-
ics, Cat. PN-1000075). Cells were counted and checked for viability 
using Vi-CELL XR cell counter (Beckman Coulter), and then injected 
into microfluidic chips to form Gel Beads-in-Emulsion (GEMs) in the 
10X Chromium instrument. Reverse transcription (RT) was performed 
on the GEMs, and RT products were purified and amplified. DNA from 
antibody-derived tags (ADTs) was separated from cDNA based on size 
selection using SPRIselect beads (Beckman Coulter, cat. B23318). 
Expression libraries and ADT libraries were generated and profiled 
using the Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity DNA kit (Agilent Technologies, 
cat. 5067-4626) and quantified with Kapa Library Quantification Kit 
(Roche, cat. 07960255001). Illumina HiSeq and NovaSeq (Illumina) 
were used to sequence the libraries.
Tissue processing for histology
The small intestine or colon was removed, flushed with 10% neutral 
buffered formalin, and then cut into 1-inch-long strips from the duo-
denum, jejunum, ileum, and colon. The lung was removed and flushed 
with 10% neutral buffered formalin to inflate the tissue. A suture was 
then tied to the trachea to ensure the tissue stayed inflated while fix-
ing in 10% neutral buffered formalin for 24 h. After fixation, the sam-
ples were transferred to 70% ethanol for 24 h and then processed for 
paraffin embedding. Once embedded, the blocks were trimmed on 
a Leica RM-2245 microtome until the centre of tissue was reached. 
Five-micrometre-thick sections were then collected for downstream 
analysis.
RNAscope in situ hybridization
In situ hybridization (ISH) was performed using reagents and protocols 
from Advanced Cell Diagnostics (ACD). After sectioning, the slides 
were allowed to dry for 24 h before baking in an oven at 60 °C for 1 h. 
Sections were then rehydrated in two washes of xylene for 5 min each 
followed by two washes in 100% ethanol for 1 min each. After rehydra-
tion, endogenous peroxidase activity was quenched with hydrogen 
peroxide before the sections were boiled in antigen retrieval buffer 
(ACD, cat. 322500) for 15 min. After antigen retrieval, the sections were 
digested with proteinase (ACD, cat. 322330) for 25 min at 40 °C. After 
digestion, slides were washed twice for 1 min with ISH wash buffer 
(ACD, cat. 310091) then hybridized with probes of interest (Grem1-C1, 
cat. 314741; Dpt-C1 probe, 451311; Pi16-C1 and C2 probe; 451311 (C1) 
and 451318 (C2)) for 2 h at 40 °C. After hybridization, amplification 
steps were completed according to the ACD protocol. After the final 
amplification incubation, signal was detected with HRP-conjugated 
DAB (ACD, cat. 322360 and 322500), counterstained with haematoxylin 
for 30 s, then baked in an oven at 60 °C for 15 min before mounting with 
non-aqueous mounting medium.
DSS-induced colitis
We added 3% (w/w) colitis-grade DSS (MP Biosciences, cat. 9011-18-1) to 
the drinking water for 7 days and then euthanized the animals and pro-
cessed tissues for histology. The water was weighed daily to determine 
the average water consumption per cage. Mouse bodyweights were 
recorded daily and mice that lost 20% or more of their body weights 
were euthanized following IACUC standards
Generation of DptIresCreERT2 knock-in mouse
Homologous recombination and mouse embryonic stem (ES) cell tech-
nology33–35 were used to generate a genetically modified mouse strain 
with a DptIresCreERT2 knock-in. A gene-targeting vector was constructed 
with a 1,928-bp 5′ arm of homology corresponding to GRCm38/mm10 
chr1: 164,821,309–164,823,236 and a 1,810-bp arm of 3′ homology 
corresponding to chr1: 164,823,237–164,825,046. IRES-CREERT2-SV
40-FRT-pgk-neo-FRT was inserted immediately after the STOP codon 
(TAG) of exon 4. The final vector was confirmed by DNA sequencing, 
linearized and used to target C2 (C57BL/6N) ES cells using standard 
methods (G418 positive and ganciclovir negative selection)36.
C57BL/6N C2 ES cells37 were electroporated with 20 μg linearized 
targeting vector DNA and cultured under drug selection essentially 
as described38. Positive clones were identified using long-range PCR 
followed by sequence confirmation. Correctly targeted ES cells were 
subjected to karyotyping. Euploid gene-targeted ES cell clones were 
treated with Adeno-FLP to remove PGK neomycin, ES cell clones were 
tested to identify clones with no copies of the PGK neomycin cassette, 
and the correct sequence of the targeted allele was verified. The pres-
ence of the Y chromosome was verified before microinjection into 
albino BALB/c embryos. Germline transmission was obtained after 
crossing the resulting chimaeras with C57BL/6N females. Genomic 
DNA from pups born was screened by long-range PCR to verify the 
desired gene targeted structure before mouse colony expansion. For 
genotyping, the following primers were used: 5′-CGCCAGTGGAAGTTCA 
-3′, 5′-TATAGGAACTTCGCTCGC -3′ and 5′-GTGCTGTGCAAGGAAG-3′ 
amplified 329-bp wild-type and 278-bp knock-in DNA fragments.
Tumour inoculation
Age-matched 6–10-week-old DptIresCreERT2wt/wtRosa26LSLYFP and DptIresCreERT2ki/ki 
Rosa26LSLYFP mice received tamoxifen injections for 5 days, rested for 
13–14 days and were inoculated subcutaneously in the right unilateral 
flank with 1 × 105 KPR3070 tumour cells suspended in Hanks’s buffered 
saline solution and phenol-red-free Matrigel (Corning, cat. 356237). 
Tumours were removed 21 days after implantation.
Human patient information
Pancreatic cancer sample collection was approved by the Ethics Com-
mittee of Beijing Cancer Hospital. All patients in this study provided 
written informed consent.
Human tissue digestion and stromal cell isolation
Samples were obtained and sequenced by Analytical Biosciences. Single 
cells were dissociated from tumour and adjacent non-cancer tissues as 
described previously39. In brief, tumours and adjacent non-cancer tis-
sues were cut into approximately 1–2-mm3 pieces in RPMI-1640 medium 
(Gibco) and enzymatically digested with gentleMACS (Miltenyi) for 60 
min on a rotor at 37 °C, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 
The dissociated cells were subsequently passed through a 100-μm 
SmartStrainer and centrifuged at 400g for 5 min. After the supernatant 
was removed, the pelleted cells were suspended in red blood cell lysis 
buffer (TIANDZ) and incubated on ice for 1–2 min to lyse red blood 
cells. After being washed twice with 1 × PBS (Gibco), the cell pellets 
were re-suspended in sorting buffer (PBS supplemented with 1% fetal 
bovine serum (FBS, Gibco)).
Single-cell suspensions were stained with antibodies against CD45 
and 7AAD for FACS sorting, performed on a BD Aria SORP instrument. 
Based on FACS analysis, single cells were sorted into 1.5-ml tubes 
(Eppendorf) and counted manually under the microscope. The con-
centration of single cell suspensions was adjusted to 500–1,200 cells 
per μl. Cells were loaded at between 7,000 and 15,000 cells per chip 
position using the 10X Chromium Single cell 5′ Library, Gel Bead & 
Multiplex Kit and Chip Kit (10X Genomics, V1.0 barcoding chemistry) 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All the subsequent steps 
were performed following the standard manufacturer’s protocols. Puri-
fied libraries were analysed using an Illumina Hiseq X Ten sequencer 
with 150-bp paired-end reads.
Mouse bulk RNA-seq analysis
For ex vivo bulk RNA-seq, cells were isolated and stained as described 
above. Each tissue was represented by 2–3 individual replicates that 
were each derived by pooling tissues from 3–5 mice and FACS sorting 
cells directly into Trizol (Invitrogen, cat. 15596026). In some cases, lysed 
cells from at least three independent experiments were pooled for one 
replicate. In total, RNA was generated from an average of 35,195 ± 7,357 
(mean ± s.e.m.) fibroblasts and 17,318 ± 7,618 mesothelial cells. RNA was 
isolated as described40 or at Expression Analysis, Inc.
Paired-end RNA-seq libraries were constructed from at least 747 pg 
of RNA using the SMART-Seq v4 ULTRA Low Input RNA Kit for Sequenc-
ing (Takara, cat. 634891) and NexteraXT kits (Illumina, cats. FC-131-
1096 and FC-131-2001) for Low Input RNA Kits. Libraries were then 
sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq yielding, on average, 35 million read 
pairs (2 × 50 bp) per sample. Reads were aligned to the GENCODE basic 
mouse transcriptome index (M14) and transcript levels quantified using 
salmon with parameters --type quasi -k 25. Subsequently, counts were 
transformed into gene-level counts in R using the tximport (https://
bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/tximport.html) pack-
age. Differential expression analysis taking batches into account was 
carried out on the gene by sample count matrix with DESeq241, using 
a design of ~0 + condition + batch having a coefficient for each level of 
condition. For principal component analysis (PCA), log-transformed 
normalized counts (lengthScaledTPM) were batch corrected using 
Combat42 and PCA was performed in the space of variable genes (coef-
ficient of variation >0.3). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) using 
the fgsea method43 was performed on genes ranked by their principal 
component 1 loadings using the top 20 marker genes for Pi16+ and 
Col15a1+ clusters from the steady-state fibroblast atlas.
Mouse bulk ATAC–seq analysis
For ex vivo bulk ATAC–seq, cells were isolated and stained as described 
above. Each tissue was represented by 2–4 individual replicates that 
were each derived by pooling tissues from 3–5 mice and FACS-sorting 
fibroblasts. On average, 28,455 cells (± 5,325 (s.e.m.)) were sorted per 
tissue. These cells were then frozen in Gibco Recovery Cell Culture 
Freezing Medium (ThermoFisher, cat. 12648010). The cells were then 
thawed in a 37 °C water bath, pelleted, washed with cold PBS, and tag-
mented as previously described44, with some modifications45. In brief, 
cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer, pelleted, and tagmented 
using the enzyme and buffer provided in the Nextera Library Prep Kit 
(Illumina, cat. FC-121-1031). Tagmented DNA was then purified using 
the MinElute PCR purification kit (Qiagen, cat. 28004), amplified with 
10 cycles of PCR, and purified using Agencourt AMPure SPRI beads 
(Beckman Coulter, cat. A63882). The resulting material was quanti-
fied using the KAPA Library Quantification Kit for Illumina platforms 
(Roche, 07960255001), and sequenced with PE42 sequencing on the 
NextSeq 500 sequencer (Illumina), with 42-bp paired-end reads. Library 
preparation and sequencing was performed by ActiveMotif, Inc.
Article
Reads were aligned to the GRCm38/mm10 build of the mouse genome 
using GSNAP46 with parameters -M 2 -n 10 -B 2 -i 1 --pairmax-dna = 1000 
--terminal-threshold = 1000 --gmap-mode = none --clip-overlap. Read 
pairs that aligned concordantly and uniquely to a single genomic 
location were retained for downstream analysis. PCR duplicates were 
removed using Picard MarkDuplicates (http://broadinstitute.github. 
io/picard/). Library depth-corrected coverage bigwig files were 
obtained to visualize the regions of interest.
OCR identification
Open chromatin regions (OCRs) were identified as peaks on individual 
replicates and pooled samples combining the replicates of a given tissue 
using MACS247, with parameters macs2 callpeak -f BAM --call-summits 
--nomodel–shift -95 --extsize 199 --keep-dup all -p 0.1 --call-summits 
(these choices of the shift and extsize parameters correct for the 
+5/−4 bp transposase insertion offset). The irreproducible discovery 
rate (IDR) pipeline48 was used to assess peak concordance between the 
individual replicates of a given tissue, and these IDR estimates were 
subsequently appended to the associated pooled peaks. Robust peaks 
per tissue were defined as pooled peaks that overlapped at least 50% 
of a peak from at least two individual replicates and that passed an IDR 
threshold of 0.1. All robust peaks across all tissues were first centred 
on their summits (summit ± 199 bp) and then those that overlapped 
mitochondrial and noncanonical chromosomes were removed. Finally, 
all remaining peaks were merged to obtain the final set of all accessible 
regions (n = 207,803). Per sample, reads that overlapped each region in 
the atlas were counted using the bedtools command multiBamCov49. 
To find tissue-specific OCRs, differential accessibility analysis was 
conducted on the count matrix using DESeq241, where the accessibil-
ity (that is, overlapping read count) of a given region in each tissue 
was compared against the count for that region in all other tissues. In 
this setting, the tissue-specific OCRs were defined according to the 
following criteria: log2(fold change) ≥ 2, adjusted P value ≤ 0.01. In 
addition, for each tissue a nondifferential/insignificant OCR set was 
defined according to: −0.585 ≤ log2(fold change) ≤ 0.585, q value > 0.05.
Motif enrichment analysis
For motif enrichment analysis, for each tissue-specific OCR set, an 
equally sized matched background set was selected on the basis of 
region length and GC content from among the nondifferential/insig-
nificant OCRs, using MatchIt50. AME51 from the MEME suite was used 
with default settings to assess the enrichment of a set of 321 position 
weight matrices (PWMs) from Homer (http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/) 
in the tissue-specific OCR sets versus the background sets. Specifi-
cally, Fisher’s exact test was used to compare the number of matches 
to a given PWM in the specific set versus the background set, and to 
assess statistical significance. Enriched PWMs were reported based on 
an adjusted P value threshold of 0.05.
ATAC–seq and RNA-seq concordance
To compute the correlation of log2(fold changes) inferred from the 
ATAC–seq and RNA-seq differential analyses, the ATAC–seq final atlas 
peaks were assigned to the gene with the closest transcription start site 
(TSS), using Gencode mouse M14 annotations and a distance threshold 
of 50 kb. Following the assignment, genes and atlas peaks with absolute 
log2(fold change) ≥ 1 and q value ≤ 0.05 in a given tissue were used in 
the correlation calculation.
An additional analysis to infer concordance between ATAC–seq and 
RNA-seq datasets was the BETA52 analysis, which takes a set of peaks 
(tissue-specific OCRs from ATAC–seq) and differential gene expression 
results from RNA-seq. In short, BETA calculates a regulatory poten-
tial score based on the number of peaks in a fixed window (100 kb by 
default) around each gene TSS and ranks the genes on the basis of this 
score. For each top gene set based on that rank, it calculates the percent-
age of the total up- and downregulated genes, as well as unregulated 
background genes, to provide P values for the overall up- or downregu-
lation potential of the whole peak set. BETA was used with parameters 
-k BSF -g mm10 -n basic --df 0.1, for all pairwise tissue combinations, so 
for both matching and non-matching tissues.
Mouse scRNA-seq meta-analysis
The steady-state fibroblast atlas was composed of 28 datasets10,18–21,31,53–70 
and the perturbed-state fibroblast atlas was composed of 17 data-
sets10,18,21,31,53–58,61,69–71. Integrated fibroblast atlases at steady and per-
turbed states were generated and analysed using the following steps: 
(1) processing and filtering individual scRNA-seq datasets from healthy 
and diseased tissues; (2) integrating healthy and diseased datasets 
separately to generate steady- and perturbed-state atlases; (3) cluster-
ing and annotation; and (4) trajectory inference. The aforementioned 
steps are described in detail in the following sections.
(1) Processing and filtering individual scRNA-seq datasets. Single 
cell transcriptomics datasets, enriched in non-haematopoietic cells, 
generated using 10X Genomics and available as processed CellRanger 
files, were collected from public repositories and in-house lab datasets 
(Supplementary Table 3). For public datasets where processed files 
were not made available, we analysed raw data using cellranger count 
(CellRanger 2.1.0, 10X Genomics) using a custom reference package 
based on mouse reference genome GRCm38. A total of 32 scRNA-seq 
datasets representing multiple tissues and perturbations were analysed 
individually. In order to ensure comparability, for every individual 
dataset, we retained genes found in the Ensembl mouse (GRCm38) 
gene model, followed by implementing the Seurat single-cell analysis 
pipeline (version 3.9.9.9010)72,73 in R (version 4.0.0). Specifically, for 
each dataset we filtered low quality cells with <500 measured genes and 
a high percentage of mitochondrial contamination (>~5–20%, depend-
ing on the dataset). After filtering, data in each cell were normalized to 
log(CPM/100+1), the 2,000 most variable genes were identified, and 
the expression levels of these genes were scaled before performing 
PCA in variable gene space. Next, 20 principal components were used 
for graph-based clustering (resolution = 0.1) and UMAP dimensionality 
reduction was computed. All steps were performed using functions 
implemented in the Seurat package (NormalizeData, FindVariableFea-
tures, ScaleData, RunPCA, FindNeighbours, FindClusters, RunUMAP) 
with default parameters, except where mentioned. Cell clusters marked 
by the canonical marker gene for immune cells, Ptprc (Cd45), were 
discarded. All individual datasets devoid of Cd45+ cells were then used 
for integration to create two main atlases: (1) a steady-state fibroblast 
atlas comprising data from healthy tissues; and (2) a perturbed-state 
fibroblast atlas comprising data from diseased and inflamed tissues.
(2) Dataset integration for steady- and perturbed-state atlases. 
Before dataset integration, we imported the aforementioned filtered, 
non-processed Seurat objects (not scaled) of healthy and diseased 
datasets, and determined a common gene space by retaining only 
those genes that were measured across all datasets (21,087 genes). 
Next, individual healthy and diseased Seurat objects were merged 
separately into two different steady- and perturbed-state objects, re-
spectively. Each of these merged objects was normalized (function 
NormalizeData, method = ‘LogNormalize’, scale.factor = 10,000), and 
scaled to regress out the stress gene signature (computed using Seurat’s 
AddModuleScore) of subpopulations affected by tissue dissociation 
methods74 before we performed PCA for the most variable genes. These 
processed, merged objects were next used for batch effect correction 
and integration using Harmony75 (version 1.0). We adjusted the diversity 
clustering penalty parameter, theta, to 1. We then provided the top 20 
harmony dimensions as an input for UMAP and visualized the first two 
UMAP dimensions at a clustering resolution of 0.1 for the Cd45− atlases. 
Next, we identified distinct cell types using canonical marker genes 
such as Sparc, Col3a1, Dcn (fibroblasts), Epcam (epithelial cells), Alb 
(hepatocytes), Pecam1 (endothelial cells), Msln (mesothelial cells), Rgs5 
(mural cells: pericytes), Myh11 (mural cells: smooth muscle cells), Top2a 
and Mki67 (proliferating cells), and Cd24a (remnant immune cell popu-
lations) (Extended Data Figs. 3a–c, 7a–c). The computational pipeline 
for integration was iterated twice to generate the fibroblast atlases.
Specifically, at each of the following steps non-relevant or 
unwanted cell types were filtered followed by recalculation of the 
variable gene space, batch-effect correction and clustering to gener-
ate fibroblast-specific atlas for steady- and perturbed state: (1) a Cd45− 
steady- and perturbed-state atlas comprising 180,922 and 182,609 cells, 
respectively, and (2) a fibroblast-specific steady- and perturbed-state 
atlas comprising 120,697 and 99,596 cells, respectively, after selecting 
for Dpt+Pdgfra+ fibroblast clusters from Cd45− atlases and discarding 
other stromal cells including endothelial and mesothelial cells, peri-
cytes, smooth muscle cells and clusters with <1,000 cells.
(3) Clustering and annotation of steady- and perturbed-state 
fibroblast atlases. Each fibroblast atlas was constructed from its Cd45− 
counterpart, in which the top 40 harmony dimensions were provided 
as an input for UMAP and visualized at a clustering resolution of 0.2. 
Differential gene expression was computed using the Seurat function 
FindAllMarkers using a Wilcoxon rank sum test and corrected for mul-
tiple testing using the Bonferroni method.
Gene expression scores were computed using Seurat’s AddModuleS-
core function, visualized using VlnPlot or DotPlot. To determine mark-
ers for specialized or activated clusters relative to universal fibroblasts 
we used the Seurat function FindMarkers with default parameters. Next, 
we scored bulk tissue-specific signatures in the steady-state atlas, com-
puted average scores per tissue signature across tissues represented in 
the steady-state atlas and visualized them using the ComplexHeatmap 
function Heatmap. We implemented the ClusterMap76 algorithm using 
default parameters to identify matching steady- and perturbed-state 
clusters. ClusterMap compares clusters among two or more datasets 
via hierarchical clustering based on the binary expression patterns of 
marker genes. Next, similarity scores of matched clusters are deter-
mined from the clustering results.
To infer the activity of signalling pathways that govern different fibro-
blastic cells at steady state and after perturbation, we implemented the 
Bioconductor package PROGENy (1.10.0)77. For both fibroblast atlases, 
we implemented the same strategy. First, we down-sampled each atlas 
using the Seurat function subset with parameters ‘WhichCells(object, 
downsample, seed = 1)’ followed by implementing the function progeny 
with default parameters ‘scale = TRUE, organism = “Mouse”, top = 100, 
perm = 1, return.assay = TRUE’. We then summarized the progeny scores 
by cell population and visualized them as a heatmap using the func-
tion pheatmap.
(4) Pseudotime reconstruction and trajectory inference. Single-cell 
pseudotime trajectories for both steady and perturbed state maps 
were computed using the algorithm slingshot (version 1.6.1), which 
enables computation of lineage structures in a low-dimensional space78. 
Specifically, slingshot was implemented in the analysis pipeline after 
dimensionality reduction and clustering of the integrated object. Each 
fibroblast object was first downsampled before trajectory inference. 
Pre-computed cell embeddings and clusters from the Seurat pipeline 
served as an input to the function slingshot (reducedDim = ‘UMAP’, 
clusterlabels = object$ RNA_snn_res.0.2, start.clus = “Pi16”, extend = 'n', 
stretch = 0). The start cluster was chosen using prior biological knowl-
edge and the expression of genes such as Cd34 and Ly6a, known markers 
of progenitor-like cells. The wrapper function slingshot then performed 
lineage inference by treating clusters as nodes and constructing a mini-
mum spanning tree (MST) between the nodes. Next, lineages or trajec-
tories were defined by ordering clusters via tracing paths through the 
MST. Finally, individual pseudotime(s) were visualized using principal 
curves on the full fibroblast object.
Human scRNA-seq meta-analysis
A human perturbed-state fibroblast atlas was constructed using 
scRNA-seq datasets generated with the 10X technology, from dis-
ease indications such as PDAC, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis(IPF)29, 
COVID-1979 and ulcerative colitis31 or SMART-seq2 technology in 
non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC)80. Individual datasets were 
processed according to the description provided in ‘(1) Processing 
and filtering individual scRNA-seq datasets’, with the exception that 
LUM+ fibroblasts were retained per dataset before final integration. 
Specifically, for COVID-19 we used data from individuals who had died 
from severe COVID-19-associated pneumonia. Next, we down-sampled 
the COVID-19 dataset to 2,500 cells, in order to mitigate the effects of 
over-representation of a dataset due to high cell number contribu-
tion. We then aggregated all the datasets, chose a common gene space 
(~17,000) and implemented the same pipeline as described in the sec-
tion ‘(2) Dataset integration for steady- and perturbed-state atlases’. 
We adjusted the diversity clustering penalty parameter, theta, to 1, 
provided the top 30 harmony dimensions as an input for UMAP, and 
visualized the first two UMAP dimensions at a clustering resolution of 
0.2. Differential gene expression analyses and visualization of markers 
were performed using Seurat functions described above. Note, in this 
meta-analysis we used datasets generated using 10X and SMART-seq2 
technologies across a common cell type, fibroblasts. This is because 
a benchmarking study demonstrated the superior performance of 
Harmony batch-effect correction using single-cell data generated on 
different platforms for an identical cell type81.
Bioinformatics data processing of human data
For the human pancreatic cancer single-cell data generated in our 
laboratory, raw sequencing data were transformed into FASTQ for-
mat with CellRanger’s (v2.1) mkfastq command, mapped to the human 
genome (GRCh38), and quantified with CellRanger count using default 
parameters. Quantified UMI count matrices from each patient were 
merged in R and analysed with the Seurat package (v 3.1.4). First, cells 
with <500 measured genes, or <2,700 UMIs, or >10% mitochondrial 
counts were removed from the dataset. In the resulting filtered data-
set, data in each cell were normalized to log(CPM/100 + 1), the 2,000 
most variable genes were identified, and the expression levels of these 
genes were scaled before PCA in the space of the most variable genes. 
Subsequently, 30 principal components were used for graph-based 
clustering (resolution = 0.1) and UMAP dimensionality reduction. All 
steps were performed with the methods implemented in the Seurat 
package (NormalizeData, FindVariableFeatures, ScaleData, RunPCA, 
FindNeighbours, FindClusters, RunUMAP) and default parameters, 
except for parameters mentioned above. Markers for each cluster 
were identified using the FindAllMarkers function, limiting the maxi-
mum number of cells per cluster to 1,000 for runtime improvement. 
Genes that were differentially expressed between clusters 3 and 8 were 
detected using the FindMarkers function and default parameters. To 
map human expression signatures onto the mouse perturbed state 
map, human gene symbols were translated to their mouse orthologues 
and an enrichment score for the gene signature was calculated using 
Seurat’s AddModuleScore function. Gene sets were identified within 
referenced papers (Supplementary Table 8).
Pseudo-bulk samples for co-expression analysis were generated from 
the human single-cell dataset using the following strategy: we randomly 
sampled 10% of cells from the pancreatic cancer single-cell dataset and 
pooled their reads into a bulk profile, which was subsequently normal-
ized to log2(CPM). Using this strategy, we generated 100 bulk RNA-seq 
profiles with known proportions of cells from individual single-cell clus-
ters. This allowed us to compare the expression of individual cluster 
8 marker genes across pseudo-bulk samples both pairwise between genes 
and to the known cell type proportion of cluster 8 in the pseudo-bulks. 
Next, we generated similar bulk samples, but this time excluding cells 
Article
from cluster 8 in the sampling process. On these samples we again cal-
culated gene-by-gene correlation coefficients for C8 marker genes and 
compared the distributions of pairwise correlation coefficients to the 
distributions in the pseudo-bulk containing cells from cluster 8.
GTEx bulk RNA-seq data for normal tissues were obtained as 
batch-corrected, log-normalized counts from the UCSC Xenabrowser82. 
Pairwise correlations were visualized with the corrplot (https://
cran.r-project.org/web/packages/corrplot/) package. For cross-tissue 
correlation analyses, only tissues with a median DPT expression >7.5 
were considered. In this analysis, the top 20 marker genes for cluster 8 
of the single-cell dataset ordered by log(fold change), which were found 
in fewer than 15% of other cells, were used. For deconvolution of micro-
dissected PDAC stromal samples, raw expression counts per sample 
(n = 122) were downloaded from GEO (GSE93326). Data were normalized 
to log2(CPM + 1). Scores for cluster 8- and cluster 3-derived expression 
signatures (described above) in these bulk samples were calculated 
based on the average expression of the 20 most upregulated genes 
from the respective single-cell cluster (ordered by log(fold change), 
only genes expressed in at most 30% of other cells were considered).
Pseudo-bulk analytical strategy
We first generated 100 pseudo-bulk RNA-seq profiles from our single-cell 
dataset with varying numbers of cells from individual single-cell clusters 
(Extended Data Fig. 9d, top). We observed that the expression of marker 
genes for fibroblast cluster 8 co-varied depending on the number of cells 
from cluster 8 in the bulks. As a consequence, their expression profiles 
were strongly correlated, but only if cells from cluster 8 were added to 
the pseudo-bulk. Leaving cells from cluster 8 out resulted in an extensive 
drop in gene-wise correlations to close to 0. Therefore, co-expression of 
a single-cell-derived marker gene set can be used to infer the presence 
or absence of a particular cell population in bulk RNA-seq.
Projection of human gene sets onto mouse perturbed-state atlas
Gene expression signatures from human scRNA-seq datasets (Sup-
plementary Table 7) corresponding to different fibroblast types were 
scored on the perturbed state atlas using the Seurat function AddMod-
uleScore. The density of cells with the highest activation score (top 
25th percentile for all clusters except in the Comp cluster (where we 
visualized the top 5th percentile)) was visualized using the function 
LSD::Heatscatter.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature 
Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
Data availability
Raw and processed RNA-seq, ATAC–seq and mouse healthy skin 
scRNA-seq datasets are available from the ArrayExpress repository 
under the accession numbers E-MTAB-10324, E-MTAB-10316 and 
E-MTAB-10315, respectively. Supplementary Table 3 lists the studies 
used to generate the Cd45− maps and fibroblast atlases. These inte-
grated scRNA-seq objects used for analysis are provided in an online 
resource that can be accessed at https://fibroXplorer.com. Human 
pancreatic cancer single-cell data are available in the EGA database 
under accession EGAD00001005365. Source data are provided with 
this paper.
Code availability
No new algorithms were developed for this manuscript. All code gener-
ated for analysis is available from the authors upon request.
 
32.	 Cremasco, V. et al. B cell homeostasis and follicle confines are governed by fibroblastic 
reticular cells. Nat. Immunol. 15, 973–981 (2014).
33.	 Kuehn, M. R., Bradley, A., Robertson, E. J. & Evans, M. J. A potential animal model for 
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome through introduction of HPRT mutations into mice. Nature 326, 
295–298 (1987).
34.	 Smithies, O., Gregg, R. G., Boggs, S. S., Koralewski, M. A. & Kucherlapati, R. S. Insertion of 
DNA sequences into the human chromosomal β-globin locus by homologous 
recombination. Nature 317, 230–234 (1985).
35.	 Thomas, K. R., Folger, K. R. & Capecchi, M. R. High frequency targeting of genes to 
specific sites in the mammalian genome. Cell 44, 419–428 (1986).
36.	 Newman, R. J., Roose-Girma, M. & Warming, S. Efficient conditional knockout targeting 
vector construction using co-selection BAC recombineering (CoSBR). Nucleic Acids Res. 
43, e124 (2015).
37.	
Gertsenstein, M. et al. Efficient generation of germ line transmitting chimeras from 
C57BL/6N ES cells by aggregation with outbred host embryos. PLoS ONE 5, e11260 
(2010).
38.	 Hughes, E. D. & Saunders, T. L. Advanced Protocols for Animal Transgenesis, An ISTT 
Manual 291–325 (Springer, 2011).
39.	 Zhang, L. et al. Single-cell analyses inform mechanisms of myeloid-targeted therapies in 
colon cancer. Cell 181, 442–459.e29 (2020).
40.	 Painter, M. W. et al. Transcriptomes of the B and T lineages compared by multiplatform 
microarray profiling. J. Immunol. 186, 3047–3057 (2011).
41.	
Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion 
for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550 (2014).
42.	 Johnson, W. E., Li, C. & Rabinovic, A. Adjusting batch effects in microarray expression 
data using empirical Bayes methods. Biostatistics 8, 118–127 (2007).
43.	 Korotkevich, G., Sukhov, V. & Sergushichev, A. Fast gene set enrichment analysis. Preprint 
at https://doi.org/10.1101/060012 (2021).
44.	 Buenrostro, J. D., Giresi, P. G., Zaba, L. C., Chang, H. Y. & Greenleaf, W. J. Transposition of 
native chromatin for fast and sensitive epigenomic profiling of open chromatin, 
DNA-binding proteins and nucleosome position. Nat. Methods 10, 1213–1218 (2013).
45.	 Corces, M. R. et al. An improved ATAC-seq protocol reduces background and enables 
interrogation of frozen tissues. Nat. Methods 14, 959–962 (2017).
46.	 Wu, T. D. & Nacu, S. Fast and SNP-tolerant detection of complex variants and splicing in 
short reads. Bioinformatics 26, 873–881 (2010).
47.	
Zhang, Y. et al. Model-based analysis of ChIP-seq (MACS). Genome Biol. 9, R137  
(2008).
48.	 Li, Q., Brown, J. B., Huang, H. & Bickel, P. J. Measuring reproducibility of high-throughput 
experiments. Ann. Appl. Stat. 5, 1752–1779 (2011).
49.	 Quinlan, A. R. & Hall, I. M. BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic 
features. Bioinformatics 26, 841–842 (2010).
50.	 Ho, D. E., Imai, K., King, G. & Stuart, E. A. MatchIt: nonparametric preprocessing for 
parametric causal inference. J. Stat. Softw. 42, 1–28 (2011).
51.	
McLeay, R. C. & Bailey, T. L. Motif enrichment analysis: a unified framework and an 
evaluation on ChIP data. BMC Bioinformatics 11, 165 (2010).
52.	 Wang, S. et al. Target analysis by integration of transcriptome and ChIP–seq data with 
BETA. Nat. Protoc. 8, 2502–2515 (2013).
53.	 Soliman, H. et al. Pathogenic potential of Hic1-expressing cardiac stromal progenitors. 
Cell Stem Cell 26, 205–220.e8 (2020).
54.	 Dobie, R. et al. Single-cell transcriptomics uncovers zonation of function in the 
mesenchyme during liver fibrosis. Cell Rep. 29, 1832–1847.e8 (2019).
55.	 Xiong, X. et al. Landscape of intercellular crosstalk in healthy and NASH liver revealed by 
single-cell secretome gene analysis. Mol. Cell 75, 644–660.e5 (2019).
56.	 Dahlgren, M. W. et al. Adventitial stromal cells define group 2 innate lymphoid cell tissue 
niches. Immunity 50, 707–722.e6 (2019).
57.	
Peyser, R. et al. Defining the activated fibroblast population in lung fibrosis using 
single-cell sequencing. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 61, 74–85 (2019).
58.	 Xie, T. et al. Single-cell deconvolution of fibroblast heterogeneity in mouse pulmonary 
fibrosis. Cell Rep. 22, 3625–3640 (2018).
59.	 Koga, S. et al. Peripheral PDGFRα+ gp38+ mesenchymal cells support the differentiation of 
fetal liver–derived ILC2. J. Exp. Med. 278, jem.20172310-23 (2018).
60.	 Dell’Orso, S. et al. Single cell analysis of adult mouse skeletal muscle stem cells in 
homeostatic and regenerative conditions. Development 146, dev181743 (2019).
61.	
Scott, R. W., Arostegui, M., Schweitzer, R., Rossi, F. M. V. & Underhill, T. M. Hic1 defines 
quiescent mesenchymal progenitor subpopulations with distinct functions and fates in 
skeletal muscle regeneration. Cell Stem Cell 25, 797–813.e9 (2019).
62.	 Buechler, M. B. & Turley, S. J. Neutrophils follow stromal omens to limit peritoneal 
inflammation. Immunity 52, 578–580 (2020).
63.	 Davidson, S. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals a dynamic stromal niche that 
supports tumor growth. Cell Rep. 31, 107628 (2020).
64.	 Cheng, H.-W. et al. Origin and differentiation trajectories of fibroblastic reticular cells in 
the splenic white pulp. Nat. Commun. 10, 1739 (2019).
65.	 Burl, R. B. et al. Deconstructing adipogenesis induced by β3-adrenergic receptor 
activation with single-cell expression profiling. Cell Metab. 28, 300–309.e4 (2018).
66.	 Schwalie, P. C. et al. A stromal cell population that inhibits adipogenesis in mammalian 
fat depots. Nature 559, 103–108 (2018).
67.	
Micheli, A. J. D. et al. Single-cell transcriptomics identify extensive heterogeneity in the 
cellular composition of mouse achilles tendons. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1101/801266  
(2020).
68.	 Hepler, C. et al. Identification of functionally distinct fibro-inflammatory and adipogenic 
stromal subpopulations in visceral adipose tissue of adult mice. eLife 7, 771 (2018).
69.	 Boyd, D. F. et al. Exuberant fibroblast activity compromises lung function via ADAMTS4. 
Nature 587, 466–471 (2020).
70.	 Perez-Shibayama, C. et al. Type I interferon signaling in fibroblastic reticular cells 
prevents exhaustive activation of antiviral CD8+ T cells. Sci. Immunol. 5, eabb7066 
(2020).
71.	
Guerrero-Juarez, C. F. et al. Single-cell analysis reveals fibroblast heterogeneity and 
myeloid-derived adipocyte progenitors in murine skin wounds. Nat. Commun. 10, 650 
(2019).
72.	 Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E. & Satija, R. Integrating single-cell 
transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and species. Nat. 
Biotechnol. 36, 411–420 (2018).
73.	 Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive integration of single-cell data. Cell 177, 1888–1902.e21 
(2019).
74.	 van den Brink, S. C. et al. Single-cell sequencing reveals dissociation-induced gene 
expression in tissue subpopulations. Nat. Methods 14, 935–936 (2017).
75.	 Korsunsky, I. et al. Fast, sensitive and accurate integration of single-cell data with 
Harmony. Nat. Methods 16, 1289–1296 (2019).
76.	 Gao, X., Hu, D., Gogol, M. & Li, H. ClusterMap: compare multiple single cell RNA-seq 
datasets across different experimental conditions. Bioinformatics 35, 3038–3045 (2019).
77.	
Schubert, M. et al. Perturbation-response genes reveal signaling footprints in cancer 
gene expression. Nat. Commun. 9, 20 (2018).
78.	 Street, K. et al. Slingshot: cell lineage and pseudotime inference for single-cell 
transcriptomics. BMC Genomics 19, 477 (2018).
79.	 Bharat, A. et al. Lung transplantation for patients with severe COVID-19. Sci. Transl. Med. 
12, eabe4282 (2020).
80.	 Maynard, A. et al. Therapy-induced evolution of human lung cancer revealed by 
single-cell RNA sequencing. Cell 182, 1232–1251.e22 (2020).
81.	
Tran, H. T. N. et al. A benchmark of batch-effect correction methods for single-cell RNA 
sequencing data. Genome Biol. 21, 12 (2020).
82.	 Goldman, M. J. et al. Visualizing and interpreting cancer genomics data via the Xena 
platform. Nat. Biotechnol. 38, 675–678 (2020).
Acknowledgements We thank members of the Turley laboratory and individuals in the 
bioinformatics department for discussions; C. Dominguez for experimental assistance;  
S. Lianoglou, Y. Senbabaoglu and N. Lounsbury for bioinformatics assistance; facility staff  
at Genentech for vivarium maintenance and core facility assistance; and Turley laboratory 
members and A. Berkley for their careful review of this manuscript. This work was supported 
by Genentech.
Author contributions Conceptualization: M.B.B., R.N.P., S.M., R.B. and S.J.T. Methodology: 
M.B.B., R.N.P., S.M., R.B. and S.J.T. Software, formal analysis and data curation: R.N.P., S.M., 
M.B.B. and A.K.C. Investigation: M.B.B., R.N.P., A.T.K., C.C., A.W.W., Y.A.Y., L.T., R.C. and A.K.C. 
Writing: M.B.B., R.N.P., S.M., R.B. and S.J.T. Visualization: M.B.B., R.N.P., A.T.K., C.C., S.M. 
Supervision: M.R.-G., Z.M., J.R.A., S.M., R.B. and S.J.T.
Competing interests All authors except for R.B. are employees of Genentech. R.B. is an 
employee of Freenome.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03549-5.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to R.B., S.M. or S.J.T.
Peer review information Nature thanks Christopher Buckley, Neil Henderson and the other, 
anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Mouse fibroblast bulk RNA-seq and ATAC–seq.  
a, Diagram of tissues isolated for bulk RNA-seq and ATAC–seq (adipose tissue 
(brown, subcutaneous, epididymal), bone, liver, lung, lymph node, mesentery, 
omentum and pancreas) and experimental scheme. b, Correlation plot of bulk 
RNA sequencing samples based on top 1,000 most differentially expressed 
genes. c, Fraction of ATAC–seq reads identified as PCR duplicates, 
mitochondrial DNA, or unique non-duplicate non-mitochondrial DNA based on 
genomic mapping. d, Fragment lengths of ATAC–seq samples. e, Number of 
called peaks across ATAC–seq samples. Atlas describes the universe of all 
peaks. f, Distribution of ATAC–seq peaks across genomic regions. g, Aggregate 
signal around the TSS. SLN_2 samples shown, representative of all other 
samples. h, Heatmap of pairwise correlation coefficients of ATAC–seq 
samples. Ing, subcutaneous adipose; Epi, epididymal adipose; Panc, pancreas; 
Om, omentum; SLN, lymph node.
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Bulk gene expression and open chromatin. a, Heat 
map depicting enriched genes per tissue by bulk RNA-seq. Adjusted P ≤ 0.05, 
log2(fold change) ≥ 2 (DESeq2, two-sided). Row z-scored. Top, bar plot 
depicting number of signature genes per tissue. b, Heat map depicting regions 
of open chromatin per tissue by bulk ATAC–seq. Adjusted P ≤ 0.01, log2(fold 
change) ≥ 2 (DESeq2, two-sided). Row z-scored. Top, bar plot depicting number 
of open chromatin regions per tissue. c, Correlation (top) and BETA analysis 
(bottom) of bulk RNA-seq and ATAC–seq samples. d, BETA analysis of SLN 
evaluating enriched gene expression compared to enriched SLN OCRs. These 
data are representative of the rest of the dataset. e, Number of transcription 
factor binding motifs in signature OCRs per tissue. f, Statistical inference of 
transcription factor motif enrichment in fibroblasts. Bar colours denote RNA 
expression of transcription factor. Subcut., subcutaneous adipose; LN, lymph 
node.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 3 | See next page for caption.
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Steady-state fibroblast and Cd45− atlases. a, UMAP 
embedding of 180,922 single cells in steady-state Cd45− atlas. Fourteen clusters 
identified through graph-based clustering are indicated by colour. b, Relative 
abundance of each tissue in steady-state Cd45− UMAP clusters. The sizes of 
bubbles indicate the contributions of cells from each tissue to a cluster, and 
grey bubbles indicate lack of contribution (number of cells <0.02% of tissue)  
of that tissue to the corresponding cluster. Graph to be read column-wise.  
c, Fibroblast- and other lineage-associated genes (in grey) in steady-state Cd45− 
atlas. The sizes of circles denote the percentages of cells from each cluster, and 
colour encodes the average expression across all cells within a cluster. The 
colour scale shows the expression level based on row z-score. d, Average bulk 
tissue-specific fibroblast gene signature scores across tissues represented in 
the steady-state atlas. Mean-centred values shown. e, Expression of cluster 
hallmark genes in steady-state fibroblast atlas. The sizes of circles denote the 
percentages of cells from each cluster, and colour encodes the average 
expression across all cells within a cluster. The colour scale shows the 
expression level based on row z-score. f, Expression of fibroblast- and other 
lineage-associated genes (in grey). Circle sizes denote percentages of cells 
from each cluster, and colour encodes average expression across all cells 
within cluster. Colour scale shows expression level (z-score by row). g, Relative 
abundance of each tissue in steady-state fibroblast UMAP clusters. The sizes of 
bubbles indicate the contributions of cells from each tissue to a cluster, and 
grey bubbles indicate lack of contribution (number of cells <0.02% of tissue)  
of that tissue to the corresponding cluster. Graph to be read column-wise.  
h, Expression of pathway-responsive genes in perturbed-state atlas clusters as 
assessed by PROGEN(y) analysis (z-scored per row). i, Volcano plot comparing 
genes enriched in Pi16+ cluster (left; blue) to Col15a1+ cluster (right; red). Select 
genes are labelled. Dots labelled in red or blue were determined as having a 
log2(fold change) of greater than 1 or less than −1 and an adjusted P value less 
than or equal to 0.05 (Bonferroni correction). j, Expression of Ly6a and Cd34 in 
steady-state clusters. Wilcoxon’s rank sum test P < 0.05.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Bulk sequencing validates single-cell atlas.  
a–p, UMAPs highlighting distribution of cells from individual tissues in the 
steady-state fibroblast atlas. q, PCA of FACS-sorted bulk RNA-seq of fibroblasts 
and mesothelial cells, calculated for the 1,000 genes with the highest 
interquartile range. Circles represent fibroblasts and triangles are mesothelial 
cells. Each colour denotes a different tissue. r, Heatmap depicting top 20 Pi16+ 
(fibroblast) and Col15a1+ genes from steady-state fibroblast atlas in bulk 
RNA-seq data. Rows are z-scored. s, Gene enrichment analysis of top genes 
(log(fold change) > 0.5) from Pi16+ cluster and Col15a1+ cluster in loadings of 
PC1, which discriminates between mesothelial cells and fibroblasts (test: 
FGSEA, Benjamini–Hochberg correction). t, ATAC–seq traces of select genes 
from Pi16+ and Col15a1+ clusters genes, Ptprc (encoding CD45) and Hprt at ±2 kb 
of the TSS.
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Supplementary FACS gating. a, Representative FACS 
gating of live EpCAM−CD45−CD31−PDPN+PDGFRα+ fibroblasts in Figs. 2, 3, 
Extended Data Figs. 8, 9. b, c, Representative FACS gating on LY6C+SCA1+ (red), 
LY6C+SCA1− (blue) and LY6C−SCA1− (green) PDGFRα+ cells (as gated in Extended 
Data Fig. 7a) in lymph node of Ccl19YFP mice (b) and lymph node of Grem1creERT2 
Rosa26LSLYFP mice (c). Grem1creERT2Rosa26LSLYFP mice received tamoxifen via 
intraperitoneal injection for five consecutive days and were analysed on days 
14–16 after first injection. d, Representative FACS gating on LY6C+SCA1+ (red), 
LY6C+SCA1− (blue) and LY6C−SCA1− (green) PDGFRα+ cells (as gated in Extended 
Data Fig. 7a) in tissues from DptIRESCreERT2Rosa26LSLYFP mice. Mice received 
tamoxifen chow for 14 days and were analysed on days 14–16. n = representative 
of 3 or more biologically independent experiments.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 6 | See next page for caption.
Extended Data Fig. 6 | DptIRESCreERT2 marks universal fibroblasts.  
a, Expression of Ly6c and Ly6a in the mouse steady-state fibroblast atlas.  
b, Representative gating for LY6C+SCA1+, LY6C−SCA1+ and SCA1− fibroblasts 
across indicated tissues. c, Quantification of LY6C+SCA1+, LY6C−SCA1+ and 
SCA1− fibroblasts across indicated tissues. Frequency (top), cell number per mg 
of tissue (bottom). d, Abundance of Pi16, Ccl19, Npnt, and Dpt transcripts in 
LY6C+SCA1+, LY6C−SCA1+ and SCA1− fibroblasts from lymph node (black) and 
lung (red). e, Expression of Pi16, Ccl19, Npnt and Dpt in mouse steady-state 
fibroblast atlas. f, RNAscope for Dpt (blue) and Pi16 (red) on lung (left) and 
small intestine (right). Scale bar, 50 μm. g, Schematic of generation of 
DptIRESCreERT2Rosa26LSLYFP mouse. YFP expression is achieved in Dpt-expressing 
cells following cre-mediated excision of a loxP-flanked transcriptional stop 
sequence. h, Representative gating for YFP (Dpt) in fibroblasts (live, 
EpCAM−CD45−CD31−PDPN+PDGFRα+) across indicated tissues. Red, shaded 
histogram is DptIRESCreERT2ki/kiRosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP and black is DptIRESCreERT2wt/
wtRosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP. i, Representative gating for YFP (Dpt) in CD45+ cells (live, 
EpCAM−CD45+), EpCAM+ cells (live, EpCAM+), and endothelial cells (live, 
EpCAM−CD45−CD31+) from the pancreas. Red line is DptIRESCreERT2ki/ki 
Rosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP and grey, shaded histogram is DptIRESCreERT2wt/wtRosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP. 
j, Quantification of YFP+ cells in DptIRESCreERT2ki/kiRosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP animals in 
indicated cell types across tissues. Percentage YFP+ was determined by 
subtracting fluorescence in DptIRESCreERT2ki/kiRosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP animals from 
DptIRESCreERT2wt/wtRosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP animals. k, Abundance of Pi16, Ccl19, Npnt, and 
Dpt transcripts in FACS-sorted YFP+ and YFP− cells from DptIRESCreERT2ki/ki 
Rosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP and DptIRESCreERT2wt/kiRosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP animals 14–16 days after 
tamoxifen chow, in lymph node (top) and lung (bottom). l, Abundance of Csf1 
transcripts in FACS-sorted YFP+ and YFP− cells from DptIRESCreERT2ki/kiRosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP  
and DptIRESCreERT2wt/kiRosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP animals 14–16 days after tamoxifen chow in 
lymph node and lung. n = 3 (c, d, k, l) or representative of 3 or more biologically 
independent experiments (b, f, h, i). Dot represents each mouse with bar at 
mean (c, j), plots show minimum and maximum (whiskers) and median (centre 
line). (d, k, l). h–l, Mice received tamoxifen chow for 14 days and were analysed 
on days 14–16.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 7 | See next page for caption.
Extended Data Fig. 7 | Perturbed-state fibroblast and Cd45− atlases.  
a, UMAP embedding of 182,609 cells in perturbed-state Cd45− atlas. Twelve 
clusters identified through graph-based clustering are indicated by colour.  
b, Relative abundance of each tissue in perturbed-state Cd45− UMAP clusters. 
The sizes of bubbles indicate the contributions of cells from each tissue to a 
cluster, and grey bubbles indicate lack of contribution (number of cells <0.02% 
of tissue) of that tissue to the corresponding cluster. Graph to be read column-
wise. c, Fibroblast- and other lineage-associated genes (in grey) in Cd45− 
perturbed-state map. The sizes of circles denote the percentages of cells from 
each cluster, and colour encodes the average expression across all cells within a 
cluster. The colour scale shows the expression level based on row z-score.  
d, Expression of cluster hallmark genes in perturbed-state fibroblast atlas. The 
sizes of circles denote the percentages of cells from each cluster, and colour 
encodes the average expression across all cells within a cluster. The colour 
scale shows the expression level based on row z-score. e, Fibroblast- and other 
lineage-associated genes (in grey) in mouse perturbed-state fibroblast atlas. 
Circle sizes denote percentages of cells from each cluster; colour encodes 
average expression across all cells within cluster. Colour scale shows 
expression level (z-score by row). f, Relative abundance of each tissue in 
perturbed-state fibroblast UMAP clusters. The sizes of bubbles indicate the 
contributions of cells from each tissue to a cluster, and grey bubbles indicate 
lack of contribution (number of cells <0.02% of tissue) of that tissue to the 
corresponding cluster. Graph to be read column-wise. Clusters with analogues 
in steady state are depicted in grey, irrespective of the tissue contribution.  
g, Dendrogram representation of the hierarchical clustering of steady-state 
(blue) and perturbed-state (red) cluster marker genes. Similarity scores are 
indicated at the bottom of matching clusters from steady-state and perturbed-
state tissues.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 8 | See next page for caption.
Extended Data Fig. 8 | Validation of perturbed-state atlas. a–o, UMAP 
representations of the distribution of fibroblasts across tissues and 
perturbations. p–u, Heat maps showing average relative gene expression in 
Pi16+, Col15a1+, Adamdec1+, Cxcl5+, and Lrrc15+ clusters (z-scored per row) in the 
following categories. p, Cytokines and chemokines. q, Wnt-associated genes.  
r, ECM-associated genes. s, Collagens and laminins. t, Matrix metalloproteases 
and cathepsins. u, Receptors and surface molecules. v, Expression of pathway-
responsive genes in perturbed-state atlas clusters as assessed by PROGEN(y) 
analysis (z-scored per row). w, RNAscope for Dpt (blue) and Grem1 (red) in non-
lesional colon (top) and lesional colon (bottom) on day 7 after induction of DSS 
colitis. Data are representative of three experiments. Scale bars, 50 μm (top) 
and 250 μm (bottom). x, Ly6a and Cd34 expression in perturbed-state clusters. 
Wilcoxon’s rank sum test, P < 0.05. y, Pseudotime(s) visualized using principal 
curves representing trajectories of fibroblast differentiation across 
perturbed-state fibroblast object. Blue lines show trajectory to activated 
clusters, grey lines show trajectory to clusters with a steady-state analogue. 
Pi16+ cluster set as root. z, Representative FACS strategy for subcutaneous 
tumour experiments. a′, Representative flow cytometry plots showing 
frequency of YFP+ cells in LRRC15+ fibroblasts from KPR3070 subcutaneous 
tumour at day 21 post-inoculation in DptIRESCreERT2wt/wtRosa26LSLYFPwt/loxP animals. 
b′, Quantification of FACS data (Fig. 3d, Extended Data Fig. 8z, a′). Data are from 
b′ or representative of 2 (z–a′) or 3 (w) experiments. Each dot represents one 
mouse (b′). n = 2 (b′) or representative of 2 (z–a′) or 3 (w) biologically 
independent experiments.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 9 | See next page for caption.
Extended Data Fig. 9 | Human universal fibroblasts. a, Top, UMAP 
embeddings of human pancreatic cancer tumour and normal adjacent tissue 
(n = 21,626 cells). Bottom, percentage of cells in each cluster coming from 
tumour or NAT. b, UMAP as in a, coloured by expression of indicated genes.  
c, Relative average expression of top 10 marker genes (sorted by log(fold 
change)) for each cluster in the pancreatic cancer single-cell dataset. Two 
representative genes highlighted per cluster. DEGs across clusters. d, Top, 
expression level of indicated marker genes (colour, y-axis) across 100 pseudo-
bulk samples (x-axis) generated from human pancreatic cancer scRNA-seq 
data. The known percentage of cells from cluster 8 in each pseudo-bulk is 
shown by the dotted blue line. Bottom, boxplots representing the distributions 
of pairwise correlation coefficients of the top 20 marker genes for cluster 8 in 
pseudo-bulk samples containing (left) and not containing cells from cluster 8 
(right). e, Boxplots summarizing DPT expression distributions across tissues 
from the GTEx portal. Tissues with mean above horizontal black line were 
included in correlation analysis (f). n = 7,851 biologically independent samples. 
f, Co-expression as in d, results from the gene-by-gene correlation matrices are 
summarized as boxplots for each individual tissue from GTEx. n = 5,957 
biologically independent samples. g, Gene-by-gene correlation matrix of 
pairwise correlations in 205 normal pancreas bulk RNA-seq samples from 
GTEx. Blue indicates Pi16+ cluster signature gene, red indicates Col15a1+ 
signature gene. h, Human universal fibroblast score projected onto human 
pancreatic cancer samples. i, Human universal fibroblast score projected onto 
human subcutaneous adipose. d–f, Box and whisker plots show minimum and 
maximum (whiskers), interquartile range (box) and median (centre line).
Article
Extended Data Fig. 10 | Perturbed-state human fibroblasts. a, Volcano plot 
visualizing log(fold change) (x-axis) and adjusted P value (y-axis) comparing 
fibroblasts from cluster 3 in Extended Data Fig. 9a compared to fibroblasts 
from cluster 8 (Wilcoxon’s rank sum test). b, Scatterplot visualizing the scores 
for a NAT (cluster 3) fibroblast expression gene set (y-axis) compared to scores 
for a CAF (cluster 8) expression gene set (x-axis) in 122 bulk RNA-seq samples of 
microdissected PDAC tissue. Each dot represents a sample, the regression line 
is given in blue. Error band, 95% confidence interval. c–f, UMAP representation 
of cells from the mouse perturbed-state atlas, each cell coloured by their score 
for gene sets corresponding to the following. c, Lrrc15+ myofibroblasts from 
human pancreatic cancer (cluster 3 CAF, ‘MyCAF’11), rheumatoid arthritis 
(‘Human RA F2’7), lung disease (‘Myofibroblast’29), IPF30 and ulcerative colitis 
(‘S2’31). d, Universal fibroblasts from human pancreatic cancer (cluster 8 NAT), 
lung disease (‘PLIN2+ fibroblast’29) and ulcerative colitis (‘S1’31). e, Inflammatory 
fibroblasts from pancreatic cancer (‘iCAF’11) and rheumatoid arthritis (‘Human 
RA F5’7). f, UMAP of IL-1 CAF cells derived from ref. 10, projected onto perturbed- 
state fibroblast atlas. g, Expression of human universal fibroblast module 
across human perturbed-state atlas clusters. h, Abundance of LRRC15 and 
CTHRC1 expression in human perturbed-state atlas. i, Heat maps showing 
average relative gene expression in human perturbed-state atlas (z-scored by row).

===== Vinod2021_SciRep_MigratoryChondroprogenitors+CartilageRepair =====

1
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2021) 11:23685  
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-03082-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Migratory chondroprogenitors 
retain superior intrinsic 
chondrogenic potential 
for regenerative cartilage repair 
as compared to human fibronectin 
derived chondroprogenitors
Elizabeth Vinod1,2*, Noel Naveen Johnson1, Sanjay Kumar2, Soosai Manickam Amirtham1, 
Jithu Varghese James3, Abel Livingston4, Grace Rebekah5, Alfred Job Daniel4, 
Boopalan Ramasamy6,7* & Solomon Sathishkumar1*
Cell-based therapy for articular hyaline cartilage regeneration predominantly involves the use of 
mesenchymal stem cells and chondrocytes. However, the regenerated repair tissue is suboptimal 
due to the formation of mixed hyaline and fibrocartilage, resulting in inferior long-term functional 
outcomes. Current preclinical research points towards the potential use of cartilage-derived 
chondroprogenitors as a viable option for cartilage healing. Fibronectin adhesion assay-derived 
chondroprogenitors (FAA-CP) and migratory chondroprogenitors (MCP) exhibit features suitable 
for neocartilage formation but are isolated using distinct protocols. In order to assess superiority 
between the two cell groups, this study was the first attempt to compare human FAA-CPs with MCPs 
in normoxic and hypoxic culture conditions, investigating their growth characteristics, surface marker 
profile and trilineage potency. Their chondrogenic potential was assessed using mRNA expression 
for markers of chondrogenesis and hypertrophy, glycosaminoglycan content (GAG), and histological 
staining. MCPs displayed lower levels of hypertrophy markers (RUNX2 and COL1A1), with normoxia-
MCP exhibiting significantly higher levels of chondrogenic markers (Aggrecan and COL2A1/COL1A1 
ratio), thus showing superior potential towards cartilage repair. Upon chondrogenic induction, 
normoxia-MCPs also showed significantly higher levels of GAG/DNA with stronger staining. Focused 
research using MCPs is required as they can be suitable contenders for the generation of hyaline-like 
repair tissue.
Articular cartilage, a specialized tissue, plays a vital role in ensuring frictionless movement between the articu-
lating bone ­surfaces1. Cartilage loss following trauma, disease, or age-related wear and tear often progress to 
arthritis, eventually necessitating joint replacement. Current pharmacological and surgical therapies enable 
attenuation of symptoms but fail to provide a long-standing solution towards the restoration of hyaline articular 
cartilage. In recent years, cartilage repair using cellular therapeutics for regeneration of hyaline-like cartilage 
tissue has gained prominence. The commonly employed cells are autologous chondrocytes and mesenchymal 
stem cells (MSCs)2. Even though various reports show their therapeutic efficacy, the major limitation is that the 
OPEN
1Department of Physiology, Christian Medical College, Vellore, India. 2Centre for Stem Cell Research, (A Unit of 
InStem, Bengaluru), Christian Medical College, Vellore, India. 3Department of Diabetes, School of Life Course 
Sciences, King’s College London, London, UK. 4Department of Orthopaedics, Christian Medical College and 
Hospital, Vellore, India. 5Department of Biostatistics, Christian Medical College, Vellore, India. 6Department of 
Orthopaedics and Trauma, Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, Australia. 7Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. *email: elsyclarence@cmcvellore.ac.in; jpboopy@gmail.com; 
solomon@cmcvellore.ac.in
2
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2021) 11:23685  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-03082-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
generation of repair tissue consists of mixed hyaline/fibrocartilage, which results in inferior biomechanical and 
functional ­outcomes3–6.
Circumstantial evidence supporting the presence of precursors, and studies to understand their role in appo-
sitional growth led to the discovery and isolation of cartilage resident ­progenitors7–9. The potential of articular 
cartilage-derived chondroprogenitors has recently gained interest due to their phenotypic predisposition for 
chondrogenesis and reduced hypertrophic proclivity. As compared to chondrocytes and bone marrow-derived 
MSCs, chondroprogenitors demonstrate supremacy in terms of higher chondrogenic potential and lower expres-
sion of fibrocartilage/hypertrophy markers such as Collagen type I and ­RUNX210–13. As a result, these cells open 
up new possibilities and strategies for cartilage regeneration and tissue engineering.
Isolation of these progenitors commonly employs loading of chondrocytes on fibronectin adhesion ­assay14,15 
or sorting based on putative surface ­markers16,17. Another standard method to obtain progenitors is based on 
their migratory potential from cartilage explants in ­culture8,18. Both fibronectin adhesion assay ­derived19,20 and 
migratory ­chondroprogenitors8,21 have been likened to MSCs as delineated by the International Society for Cel-
lular Therapy (ISCT) ­200622, demonstrating plastic adherence, similar surface marker expression, and trilineage 
differentiation potential. Extensive work on these progenitors has provided information on their growth char-
acteristics, where fibronectin-derived cells displayed clonal growth and required additional growth factors for 
expansion, unlike migratory ­progenitors23. As compared to bone marrow-MSCs, independent in- vivo animal 
studies using these progenitors show that they are more effective in repairing chondral ­defects11,24. Despite the 
fact that both types of progenitor cells, though isolated using different protocols, have features that are suitable 
for neocartilage formation, a direct comparison of the two cell groups may aid in determining which one dem-
onstrates the better potential for cartilage tissue engineering.
Chondrogenesis involves a complex multiparametric differentiation process that is influenced by the cellular 
microenvironment. Multiple reports show that successful chondrogenic differentiation of MSCs depends on 
the three-dimensional culture ­environment25, a cocktail of chondrogenic growth ­factors26, and ­hypoxia27. In an 
in-vitro setting, standard culture conditions use 21% oxygen ­(O2), which is hyperoxic when compared to the 
in-vivo cartilage microenvironment. Oxygen tension within the cartilage, proximal to the subchondral bone, is 
estimated to be as low as 1%28. Consequently, investigations on the effects of hypoxia on chondrocytes have shown 
to promote chondrogenesis, redifferentiation, and hinder the expression of hypertrophic markers in both non-
diseased and osteoarthritic ­cells29–31. Though there have been a few studies demonstrating a beneficial outcome 
of hypoxia in terms of mechanical properties, collagen content, and downregulation of hypertrophy genes on 
fibronectin assay-derived ­chondroprogenitors32,33 relative to normoxia culture conditions, to our knowledge, no 
studies have reported the effects of hypoxia on migratory chondroprogenitor chondrogenesis.
This study aimed to compare the chondrogenic potential of fibronectin adhesion assay and migratory pro-
genitors isolated from human osteoarthritic knee joints, to evaluate differences in their biological characteristics 
and potential for cartilage repair. In addition, the study also investigated whether chondroprogenitors, grown 
in sustained hypoxic conditions (mimicking the natural environment), could display enhanced intrinsic chon-
drogenic potential.
Methods
Study design. 
All experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Review Board (Research and 
Ethics Committee) of the Christian Medical College, Vellore. All methods were carried out in accordance with 
relevant guidelines and regulations.
After obtaining written informed consent from all subjects, human cartilage samples were harvested from 
three osteoarthritic (OA) knee joints of patients [age (mean ± SD): 55 ± 4 years], undergoing total knee replace-
ment. These patients had high-grade osteoarthritis (Kellgren-Lawrence radiological score of 4). Patients whose 
knee joints had tumors, inflammation, or infection were excluded from the study. The cartilage slices were 
subjected to two different methods of isolation to obtain the individual chondroprogenitor subsets. Following 
enzymatic digestion, the released chondrocytes were subjected to selective adhesion assay using fibronectin to 
obtain progenitors. These subsets will hereon be referred to as fibronectin adhesion assay-derived chondropro-
genitors (FAA-CP). Standard explant cultures were performed using cartilage slices taken from the surface of 
the knee joints. After 12 days of culture, outgrown cells were harvested and further cultured to obtain migra-
tory chondroprogenitors (MCP). Both FAA-CP and MCP were expanded either under normoxia (21% ­O2 and 
5% ­CO2) and hypoxia (1% ­O2 and 5% ­CO2). This study involved four groups for comparison, where FAA-CP 
and MCP were maintained in either normoxia or hypoxia culture conditions from their time of isolation to 
expansion and evaluation. The cells were expanded to passage 1 and subjected to characterization using fluores-
cence-activated cell sorting (FACS) for surface marker expression, studies using cell cycle analysis, quantitative 
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) for markers of chondrogenesis and hypertrophy, 
biochemical analysis of chondrogenic differentiated pellets for total GAG (glycosaminoglycan)/DNA content, 
and trilineage differentiation with confirmatory staining (Fig. 1). The experiments were conducted with three 
biological samples (n = 3).
Isolation and culture of FAA‑CP. 
Cartilage slices from OA knee joints were washed and minced to a 
size of 1–2 mm. The FAA-CPs were isolated as per protocol previously described by Nelson et al.15 In brief, the 
minced cartilage was subjected to sequential cellular digestion using pronase (12 IU, Roche) for 3 h followed 
by overnight incubation with collagenase type II (100 IU, Worthington) at 37 °C. The released cells were loaded 
on fibronectin-coated plates (10 µg/ml, Sigma) at a concentration of 4000 cells per well for 20 min. Following 
this, the non-adherent cells and medium were removed and replaced with stromal medium containing DMEM/
F12 (Sigma), 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, GIBCO, Thermo Fischer Scientific), ascorbic acid (0.1 mM, Sigma), 
3
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2021) 11:23685  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-03082-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
L-glutamine (2.4 mM/L, Sigma), antibiotics, and antimycotics. The adherent cells were maintained as previously 
described in either normoxic or hypoxic culture conditions for 12 days to obtain clones of > 32 cells (minimum 
population doubling of 5). The clones were isolated and replated at a ratio of 1 clone/cm2. Further expansion 
of enriched polyclonal chondroprogenitor cultures to passage 1 was done as per previously reported ­protocol15. 
The cells were expanded in a stromal medium containing human recombinant transforming growth factor beta2 
(TGFβ2, Biovision) at 1 ng/ml, and human recombinant fibroblastic growth factor (FGF2, Biovision) at 5 ng/ml, 
as per standard established protocol.
Isolation and culture of migratory chondroprogenitors (MCP). 
Cartilage slices of 8–10 mm were 
harvested and placed in DMEM/F12 containing 10% FBS, 0.1 mM ascorbic acid, 10 mM Glutamine, antibiotics, 
and antimycotics (Fig. 2). Isolation was performed as per the protocol described by Koelling et al. and Wang 
et al8,24. In brief, following equilibration for a minimum period of 48 h the cartilage explants were placed in 0.1% 
collagenase type II (Worthington) for a period of 2 h at 37 °C. Further, the cartilage slices, devoid of any released 
cells were washed, and placed in a culture plate containing to stromal medium in a culture plate and observed 
for the outgrowth of cells. After 10 days, the migrated cells were harvested and further expanded to passage 1 
for further characterization.
For all cultures, the medium was changed once every three days, and at sub-confluence (85–90%), cell harvest 
was carried out using 0.125% Trypsin-EDTA (GIBCO, Thermo Fischer Scientific). It was ensured that the cul-
ture, expansion, and differentiation of the four groups (FAA-CP vs MCP, normoxia vs hypoxia) were performed 
under their specified culture conditions. Since the standardized culture conditions recommend the requirement 
of additional growth factors for FAA-CPs14,15,32 but not for ­MCPs8,34,35, the two types of chondroprogenitors were 
cultured accordingly.
Cell diameter and cell cycle analysis. 
The percentage of cells in different phases of the cell cycle was ana-
lyzed using DAPI (4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole). At a confluence of 60–70% and a day after medium change, 
the cells were trypsinized. Cell size estimation was done using an automated counter (Countess, Invitrogen). 
Passage 1 chondroprogenitors at a concentration of 1 × ­106 cells were washed with phosphate buffer solution 
(PBS) and fixed with cold 70% ethanol for 1 h. Following a wash, DAPI at a concentration of 1 µg/ml (in PBS 
containing 0.1% TritonX100) was used for incubation for a duration of 30 min. The washed cells were resus-
Figure 1.   Study algorithm depicting the four groups used for comparison and their evaluation parameters. The 
four groups were fibronectin adhesion assay-derived chondroprogenitors cultured under normoxia (FAA-CP-N) 
and hypoxia (FAA-CP-H), migratory chondroprogenitors cultured under normoxia (MCP-N), and hypoxia 
(MCP-H). OA: osteoarthritis, CD: cluster of differentiation, SOX-9:(sex-determining region Y)-box 9, ACAN: 
aggrecan, COL: collagen, RUNX2: Runt-related transcription factor-2, MMP-13: matrix metalloproteinase-13, 
GAG: glycosaminoglycans. The experiments were conducted with three biological samples (n = 3).
4
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2021) 11:23685  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-03082-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
pended in PBS and subjected to flow analysis. The Dean Jett algorithm was used to analyze the percentage of cells 
in various phases using Flo-Jo software. The experiments were conducted with three biological samples (n = 3).
Surface marker expression using FACS. 
At sub confluence (< 90%), passage 1 chondroprogenitors 
(biological replicates, n = 3) were trypsinized, washed with PBS and processed for FACS. The staining method 
followed was as per the instruction manual provided with the individual antibodies. Since chondroprogenitors 
have been likened to MSCs, the first group of surface markers considered for comparison included markers of 
positive expression: CD105-FITC, CD73-PE, CD90-PE, and markers of negative expression: CD34-APC, CD45-
FITC, and CD14-FITC. The second group for comparison included integrin markers: CD 49e-PE, CD29-APC, 
and CD49b-FITC. The third group for comparison included CD markers which are reported to be potential 
markers of enhanced chondrogenesis: CD166-BB51513,36, CD146-PE17,37, and Podoplanin-BV42138. The final 
group included human leucocyte antigen class I (HLA-ABC-PE), HLA class II (HLA-DR V500), and their co-
stimulatory molecules, CD80-BB515 and CD86-BV421. In brief, cells were washed in PBS and stained accord-
ing to the manufacturer’s instructions for individual antibodies (Supplementary Table S1). Data acquisition was 
done using BD FACS Cytoflex cytexpert. Unstained controls were run in parallel, and data were analyzed using 
BD FACS Diva v 8.0.1.1 and Flo Jo software.
Quantitative reverse transcriptase‑polymerase chain reaction (qRT‑PCR). 
The harvested cells 
were washed in PBS and subjected for total RNA extraction using Qiagen RNeasy Mini Kit as per the manufac-
turer’s instruction. The absorbance at 260 nm and 280 nm (A260/A280) was used to determine the RNA con-
centration using a nanodrop spectrophotometer. Complementary DNA was synthesized with 280 ng of RNA, 
using the Takara Bio First-Strand synthesis system. PCR assays were carried out using Takyon Low Rox SYBR 
Master Mix Dttp Blue (Eurogentec, Belgium) on a QuantStudio 6 K Flex thermocycler (Applied Biosystem). The 
expression of chondrogenic marker genes (SOX-9, ACAN, and COL2A1), fibrocartilage marker gene COL1A1, 
and hypertrophic chondrocyte marker genes (COL10A1, RUNX2, and MMP-13) was measured. The relative 
mRNA expression for all target genes was normalized to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) 
to obtain the ΔCt. GAPDH was utilized as the housekeeping gene as it demonstrated high and stable expression 
under varying conditions (data not shown). The obtained ΔCt values were compared to the normoxia FAA-CP 
group (ΔΔCt), from which 2^− ΔΔCt was calculated. In addition, the ratio of COL2A1 to COL1A1 was calcu-
lated to evaluate their hyaline cartilage forming potential. The experiments were conducted with three biological 
samples (n = 3) in two technical replicates. Specific primer sequence (5’-3’ and 3’-5’), accession code, gene identi-
fier, and base-pair length for the eight genes are listed in Supplementary Table S2.
Multilineage differentiation and confirmatory staining. 
Induction towards adipogenic, osteogenic, 
and chondrogenic lineage was performed using StemPro differentiation kits (Thermo Fischer, Cat no: A1007201, 
Figure 2.   Representative images of FAA-CPs and MCPs during monolayer expansion culture under normoxic 
and hypoxic conditions. Microscopic analysis observed using phase-contrast microscopy showed that both 
normoxia and hypoxia FAA-CPs (a,b, passage 0) demonstrated clonal growth. Migration of chondroprogenitors 
from the cartilage explants was seen by the 7th day (c,d, passage 0) in both the microenvironments. Monolayer 
expanded passage 0 cells in all four groups displayed a comparable spindle-shaped morphology with a typical 
honeycomb pattern of growth, Magnification 10x (e–h).
5
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2021) 11:23685  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-03082-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
A1007001, and A1007101). Before adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation, cells were seeded at a concentra-
tion of 5000 cells/cm2 in 24 well culture dishes and expanded to sub confluence. Then, the stromal media was 
replaced with the differentiation media. The control arm included cells grown in a stromal medium for the same 
period. For three-dimensional pellet cultures, 0.5 × ­106 cells were loaded into Eppendorfs, centrifuged at 400 g 
for 12 min, and left uninterrupted for 24 h. Following this, StemPro chondrogenic medium was added to the 
pellets. The medium was changed every three days for a period of three weeks.
Adipogenic and osteogenic staining. 
Differentiated adipocytes were fixed for 1 h with 10% formalde-
hyde, washed, and stained with Oil Red O (Sigma), while differentiated osteocytes were fixed for 1 h with 70% 
ethanol, washed, and stained with Alizarin Red (Sigma). Parallel controls were also subjected to staining and 
imaging using the Olympus virtual slide system.
Chondrogenic staining. 
Following differentiation, the pellets were washed and fixed with 4% paraform-
aldehyde for a period of 15 min. The cassettes containing the pellets were dehydrated for 10 min in a series of 
ethanol solutions of increasing concentration (70 to 100%). This was followed by ethanol clearance using xylene, 
wax infiltration, and paraffin embedding into mold cassettes. Paraffin sections (4 µm) were obtained using a 
microtome on poly-L lysine (PLL) coated slides and kept at 65 °C for 2 h. The sections were hydrated with 
descending grades of alcohol (100% to 70%) and washed prior to processing. For confirmation of differentiation 
the PLL sections were washed and stained with Alcian Blue dye, pH:2.5 (Cat no: J60122, Alfa Aesar, US) for 
15 min, and counterstained using neutral red for 1 min. For Toluidine blue staining, the sections were stained 
with 0.1% Toluidine blue (C.I No-52040 Qualigens) solution for 5 min, washed, and dipped in 95% alcohol. For 
Picrosirius red staining, the sections were treated with 0.1% Picrosirius red (C.I.35782) for 1 h and counter-
stained with Hematoxylin for 7 min. Following staining, all slides were dehydrated with a series of graded alco-
hol and cleared in xylene before mounting with glycerol. Cell pellets cultured with stromal expansion medium, 
not subjected to chondrogenic differentiation served as controls (Supplementary Fig. S1).
Immunofluorescence (IF) staining: Collagen type II. 
Paraffin slides were kept at 65 °C for 2 h. Fol-
lowing treatment with xylene, the pellets were hydrated with descending grades of alcohol, washed, and treated 
with 0.1% PBST (0.1% TritonX100). Antigen binding sites were retrieved using 1 mg/mL pronase and 5 mg/
ml hyaluronidase incubation at 37 °C for 30 min each. The slides were subjected to protein block [1% bovine 
serum albumin (BSA) and 6% FCS] for 30 min, following which primary mouse monoclonal Anti-Collagen 
type II antibody [DSHB Hybridoma Product II-II6B3] was added at a concentration of 5 µg/mL and incu-
bated overnight at 4 °C. Following the protein block, the sections were incubated with 1:100 secondary antibody 
[IgG (H + L) highly cross-adsorbed Goat anti-Mouse, Alexa Fluor 594, Invitrogen (Catalogue no: A11032)] for 
30 min. Counterstaining was performed with 10 µg/ml DAPI (Sigma) for 5 min and mounted with 90% glycerol.
The images of Alizarin red S and Oil red O were acquired using Leica DMIL microscope, routine histologi-
cal stains with Olympus bx43f. microscope, and Collagen type II with Olympus fv1000 laser scanning confocal 
microscope.
Biochemical analysis: total GAG/DNA content of chondrogenic pellets. 
For quantification of 
GAGs and DNA, pellets were collected 3 weeks after chondrogenic induction and digested with 120 µg/ml 
papain at 65 °C for 16 h. DNA content was measured by Quant-iT Picogreen dsDNA reagent, and Lambda DNA 
was used for the generation of the standard curve. Fluorescence intensity was measured using the SpectraMax 
i3x Reader (Norwalk, CT, USA) at an excitation wavelength of 480 nm and an emission wavelength of 520 nm. 
GAG content was then quantified using the dimethyl methylene blue dye method according to the manufactur-
er’s instructions (Chondrex, Cat No: 6022). Chondroitin 6-sulfate was used as a standard. The optical density was 
measured at 525 nm and total GAG content was calculated. For comparison of GAG production, GAG content 
was normalized to DNA content (GAG/DNA).
Statistical analysis. 
Data analysis was performed using SPSS version 21.0 (SPSS Inc, Chicago, USA) and 
graphical presentation using Prism v6 (GraphPad). The One-way ANOVA with post hoc LSD correction was 
used to assess the significance of differences between the four groups. Numerical values were expressed as 
mean ± standard error mean. A P value of < 0.05 was considered to be significant.
Results
Cell diameter and cell cycle analysis. 
Both normoxia and hypoxia FAA-CPs demonstrated clonal 
growth, achieving a population doubling of 5 by day 12 (Fig. 2a,b). Concerning MCPs, migration of chondro-
progenitors from cartilage explants was observed as early as day 7 (Fig. 2d). On further expansion, both the 
cell groups displayed spindle-shaped morphology with a honeycomb pattern of growth, a hallmark of the MSC 
population (Fig. 2e–h). When the average cell diameter (µm) of passage 1 cells (n = 3) were compared, there was 
no significant difference observed between the groups (Fig. 3a). Analysis of the different phases in cell cycle dis-
tribution between the groups showed that both FAA-CPs and MCPs expanded under hypoxia displayed a greater 
percentage at G1 interphase and lower percentage at G2M interphase as compared to their normoxic counter-
parts. However, when the DNA synthetic S phase was compared the highest values were observed with normoxia 
FAA-CPs. The observed differences were not significant, though the MCPs were expanded in a stromal medium 
devoid of additional growth factors (Fig. 3b).
6
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2021) 11:23685  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-03082-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Surface marker expression using FACS. 
Flow cytometric analysis of the two populations was performed 
to study surface marker expression based on the mentioned categories. When MSC markers were compared, all 
the groups (n = 3) displayed a high expression of positive markers CD105, CD73, and CD90, and a low expres-
sion of negative markers CD34, CD45, and CD14 (Table 1). There was no significant difference between the 
groups except for CD105, which was higher in normoxia MCP when compared to both normoxia and hypoxia 
FAA-CP (P < 0.01, Fig. 3c). Regarding the integrin markers, all the groups showed a high expression of CD49e 
and CD29, with no significant difference, except for CD49b, which was higher in the normoxia MCP group as 
compared to FAA-CPs (P < 0.05, Fig. 3d). The hypoxia MCP showed higher levels of CD49b when compared to 
the hypoxia FAA-CP group alone (P = 0.036). When potential markers of chondrogenesis were assessed, all the 
groups demonstrated high and comparable levels of expression (Table 1). Concerning the immunogenic mark-
ers, all the groups displayed a comparable and positive expression of HLA-ABC, with a low expression of MHC 
II and its co-stimulatory molecules.
Figure 3.   (a) Analysis of the average cell diameter (µm) of passage 1 chondroprogenitors showed that hypoxia 
MCPs and normoxia FAA-CPs displayed greater diameter than their counterparts although not statistically 
significant. (b) Analysis of the different phases in cell cycle distribution between the groups showed that both 
FAA-CPs and MCPs grown under hypoxia displayed a greater percentage at G1 interphase and lower percentage 
at G2M interphase as compared to their normoxic counterparts. However, when the DNA synthetic S phase 
was compared the highest values were observed with normoxia FAA-CPs. (c) To characterize the surface 
marker expression profile, FAA-CPs and MCPs cultured under normoxia and hypoxia were subjected to 
fluorescence-activated cell sorting. All groups revealed comparable expression of CD markers (Table 1) except 
for CD105 and CD49b (c and d: staggered plot). MCP-Normoxia expressed significantly higher levels of both 
CD105 and CD49b when compared to both FAA-CP-Normoxia and FAA-CP-Hypoxia (P < 0.01). In addition, 
MCP-Hypoxia also displayed a higher expression of the integrin marker CD49b when compared to the FAA-
CP-Hypoxia cell group. Data presented are expressed as Mean ± standard error mean. All experiments were 
conducted with three biological samples (n = 3).
7
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2021) 11:23685  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-03082-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
qRT‑PCR. 
With reference to markers of chondrogenesis, a high mRNA expression of ACAN and a moder-
ate expression of SOX-9 and COL2A1 was seen in all the groups with no significant difference between them, 
except for ACAN (Fig. 4). Normoxia MCP displayed a stronger expression of the gene ACAN when compared 
to normoxia FAA-CP (P = 0.027). An analysis of the markers of hypertrophy showed differences between the 
two chondroprogenitor groups. A moderate to low expression of COL10A1, RUNX2, and MMP13 was observed 
in all the groups (Fig. 4). An intergroup comparison revealed that the MCPs showed remarkably lower levels of 
COL1A1 (fibrocartilage marker) and RUNX2 (key transcription factor for the genesis of osteoblast) when com-
pared with FAA-CPs [(a) COL1A1: normoxia MCP Vs FAA-CPs, P = 0.000, hypoxia MCP vs FAA-CPs, P < 0.005, 
(b) RUNX2: normoxia MCP Vs FAA-CPs, P = 0.024, hypoxia MCP vs FAA-CPs, P = 0.009]. Only hypoxia MCPs 
exhibited significantly lower levels of COL10A1, another marker of osteogenesis and hypertrophy, as compared 
to normoxia FAA-CPs (P = 0.002). A comparison of normoxia FAA-CPs and MCPs to their hypoxia counterparts 
showed that hypoxic conditions reduced the expression of COL10A1 in both groups (P = 0.030 and P = 0.014 
for FAA-CP and MCP respectively). Additionally, normoxia MCPs showed decreased levels of COL1A1 than 
hypoxia MCPs (P = 0.013). Although there was no difference seen with the expression of the mature type II col-
lagen between the groups, the functional COL2A1/COL1A1 ratio was significantly increased in normoxia MCPs 
as compared to the other three groups (P < 0.05). Overall, we observed that normoxia MCPs showed higher 
levels of chondrogenic genes and lower levels of hypertrophic markers. As described in the methods section, the 
FAA-CPs and MCPs were cultured using standard culture media recommended and reported for these cells in 
previous studies.
Multilineage differentiation, confirmatory staining, and total GAG/DNA content. 
All the study 
groups demonstrated trilineage differentiation potential. When adipogenic and osteogenic potentials were qual-
itatively assessed using Oil Red O (lipid droplet accumulation) and Alizarin red S (calcified matrix deposition) 
respectively, all groups displayed positive staining (Fig. 5). Routine histological analyses of the pellets follow-
ing chondrogenic differentiation showed that all the groups displayed comparable staining for Picrosirius red 
(Fig. 6e–h), except for normoxia MCPs, which displayed a stronger uptake for Alcian blue and Toluidine blue 
(Fig. 6a–d, i–l). Immunohistochemical staining for Collagen type II protein showed positive expression inten-
sity in all the groups, with no apparent difference between them (Fig. 6m–p). When the chondrogenic induced 
pellets were digested and the DNA and GAG contents were measured, the normoxia MCPs demonstrated sig-
nificantly higher levels of GAG/DNA as compared to the normoxia FAA-CP (P = 0.001), the hypoxia FAA-CP 
(P = 0.002), and the hypoxia MCP (P = 0.009) (Fig. 7, Supplementary Table S3). The higher levels of extracellu-
lar matrix (ECM) synthesis, observed with normoxia MCP, corroborated with the gene expression analysis for 
chondrogenesis.
Table 1.   Fluorescence-activated cell sorting data for positive and negative MSC markers, potential markers 
of enhanced chondrogenesis, and immunogenic markers of the four cell groups. When MSC markers were 
compared, all groups displayed a high expression of positive markers CD105, CD73, and CD90, and a low 
expression of negative markers CD34, CD45, and CD14. With regard to potential markers of enhanced 
chondrogenesis, all groups showed comparable levels of CD166 and Podoplanin, with the MCPs expressing 
considerably higher levels of CD146. Comparison of the integrin markers showed significantly higher levels 
of CD49b with MCPs, but comparable levels of CD49e and CD29 between the groups. Concerning the 
immunogenic markers, all groups displayed a comparable and positive expression of HLA-ABC, with a low 
expression of MHC II (HLA-DR) and its co-stimulatory molecules (CD80 and CD86). Data are expressed as 
percentage mean ± standard error mean (n = 3).
Groups
FAA Normoxia
FAA Hypoxia
MCP Normoxia
MCP Hypoxia
Positive MSC markers
CD105
94.37 ± 1.61
95.02 ± 0.83
98.07 ± 1.48
96.31 ± 0.73
CD73
99.92 ± 0.05
99.80 ± 0.07
99.88 ± 0.12
99.92 ± 0.06
CD90
99.99 ± 0.02
99.99 ± 0.02
99.92 ± 0.14
99.40 ± 1.03
Negative MSC markers
CD34
1.52 ± 0.55
1.32 ± 0.42
1.89 ± 1.23
0.96 ± 0.6
CD45
0.53 ± 0.31
0.25 ± 0.25
1.00 ± 0.49
0.65 ± 0.58
Integrin markers
CD49e
99.92 ± 0.01
99.74 ± 0.27
99.96 ± 0.04
99.97 ± 0.02
CD49b
1.78 ± 0.24
0.60 ± 0.60
19.01 ± 11.02
12.07 ± 1.73
CD29
99.85 ± 0.04
99.65 ± 0.35
99.94 ± 0.04
99.90 ± 0.06
Potential markers of chondrogenesis
CD166
99.51 ± 0.28
99.64 ± 0.25
99.76 ± 0.24
99.85 ± 0.12
CD146
67.92 ± 22.31
70.68 ± 22.60
89.92 ± 4.59
88.69 ± 5.98
Podoplanin
90.66 ± 0.84
95.02 ± 4.22
76.67 ± 13.16
82.61 ± 19.5
Immunogenic markers
HLA-ABC
99.91 ± 0.15
99.80 ± 0.27
99.67 ± 0.28
99.88 ± 0.15
HLADR
2.54 ± 1.51
3.45 ± 1.39
1.64 ± 0.69
2.37 ± 2.45
CD80
3.27 ± 1.48
2.83 ± 2.29
3.04 ± 0.48
2.20 ± 1.26
CD86
0.94 ± 0.35
0.54 ± 0.13
1.68 ± 0.86
0.88 ± 0.42
CD14
1.28 ± 0.84
0.57 ± 0.69
2.05 ± 0.97
1.59 ± 1.17
8
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2021) 11:23685  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-03082-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Discussion
The clinical goal of cartilage repair strategies is to produce a repair tissue that has identical functional and 
mechanical qualities as the hyaline articular cartilage. Though a multitude of reports using cell-based therapy 
has demonstrated therapeutic efficiency, the ensuing fibrocartilage tissue tends to be a poor substitute for long-
term ­subsistence39. The discovery of cartilage resident progenitors, displaying superior chondrogenic potential 
and lower hypertrophic tendencies, has led to the evaluation of their use for tissue engineering ­applications23. 
However, clarification of their biological properties is warranted before their therapeutic use can be considered.
The main goal of this study was to compare the biological properties of resident cartilage progenitors which 
were derived using two distinct, but standard methods of isolation and expansion, focusing on their prospects 
for cartilage repair. We compared FAA-CPs and MCPs and evaluated their properties based on growth kinetics, 
immunophenotyping, and multilineage differentiation capacity under normoxic and hypoxic culture condi-
tions. Further, the chondrogenic commitment was also compared, by analyzing the matrix deposition and gene 
expression of common chondrogenic and hypertrophic markers.
There exists a positive correlation between morphological cellular changes and ­chondrogenesis40. Spindle-
shaped and fibroblast-like chondroprogenitors transform into spherical chondrocyte-like ­cells41. The changes 
that occur at the cellular level are the result of events that occur at the molecular level. Our results show that 
MCPs displayed similar morphological features and cell cycle patterns as FAA-CPs, even in the absence of addi-
tional exogenous growth factors. The isolation of chondroprogenitors in both groups required only a minimal 
quantity of starting cartilage material. The antigen expression pattern showed that both chondroprogenitor 
groups complied with the minimal ISCT criteria for MSCs with normoxia MCPs displaying significantly higher 
Figure 4.   Relative mRNA expression encoding chondrogenic markers (SOX-9, ACAN, COL2A1), 
fibrocartilage marker (COL1A1), and hypertrophic markers (COL10A1, RUNX2, and MMP-13) were 
determined by qRT-PCR. All results were normalized to the housekeeping gene, GAPDH(ΔCt), and ΔΔCt was 
obtained in comparison to the FAA-CP Normoxia group. 2^− ΔΔCt values are expressed as mean ± standard 
error mean (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01). The FAA-CP normoxia levels are represented as dotted lines. The experiments 
were conducted with three biological samples (n = 3) in two technical replicates. Overall, MCP-N showed 
considerably higher levels of chondrogenic markers with significantly higher expression of ACAN. When 
the functional COL2A1/COLA1 ratio was derived, MCP-Normoxia showed the highest ratio as compared to 
the other groups. Comparison of the fibrocartilage and hypertrophic markers showed that MCP-Normoxia 
expressed significantly lower levels of COL1A1 and RUNX2 as compared to FAA-CP-Normoxia and FAA-
CP-Hypoxia. Both FAA-CP-Hypoxia and MCP-Hypoxia showed significantly lower levels of COL10A1 when 
compared to their normoxic counterparts.
9
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2021) 11:23685  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-03082-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
levels of CD105. CD105, in addition to being a marker for MSC, has also been reported to be a predictive 
marker for ­chondrogenesis42–45. With regard to the integrin markers, the MCPs displayed comparable levels of 
the heterodimeric fibronectin receptor (CD49e/CD29), even without treatment to the fibronectin surface. This 
result corroborated with a recent report that questioned the specificity of the integrin as a distinctive marker 
for migratory ­chondroprogenitors46. However, the expression of CD49b was higher in MCPs, similar to a recent 
Figure 5.   Representative microscopic images of Alizarin red (a–d) and Oil Red O (e–h) staining to confirm 
osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation respectively. Magnification: 20X. All groups showed comparable stain 
uptake confirming the presence of calcium deposition and lipid-droplet formation. Controls did not show any 
uptake of stain.
Figure 6.   Representative image of the three independent experiments. Histological staining of chondrogenic 
differentiated chondroprogenitor pellets under normoxic and hypoxic culture conditions: FAA-CP-Normoxia, 
FAA-CP-Hypoxia, MCP-Normoxia, MCP-Hypoxia. The formed pellets (5 × ­105) were grown in StemPro 
chondrogenic medium for a period of 3 weeks. Greater uptake of Alcian Blue (a–d) and Toluidine blue (i–l) 
was observed with the MCP-Normoxia pellets. All groups displayed comparable Picrosirius red uptake (e–h). 
Immunofluorescence imaging of the pellets for collagen type II (m-p) showed similar intensity with all groups. 
Magnification: scale bar (50 µm or 20 µm).
10
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2021) 11:23685  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-03082-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
report categorizing them to be distinctive for ­MCPs47. CD146, a known marker of enhanced chondrogenesis, was 
notably higher with the MCP groups, though not significant due to a single donor variance. Cell proliferation in 
eukaryotic cells is controlled by the precise transition from G1 to S phases of the cell ­cycle48. We observed that 
hypoxia groups displayed higher G1 percentages than their normoxia counterparts, however, only normoxia 
FAA-CPs presented the highest occurrence at the S phase. Concerning G2M phase ­occurrence49, hypoxia reduced 
the arrest in this phase indicating their preponderance for increased cell proliferation. These finding though not 
statistically significant necessitates further in-depth evaluation to understand the complex mechanisms that 
regulate the temporal order of transcription activation and inactivation for the distinct groups.
SOX-9 and RUNX2 are the principal regulators of chondrogenesis with different functional roles. SOX-9 plays 
a vital role in articular cartilage formation, while RUNX2 is primarily involved in the hypertrophic maturation 
of ­cells50. Both transcription factors are expressed through the entire process of chondrogenesis, starting from 
mesenchymal condensation and ending with terminal chondrocyte hypertrophy. Aggrecan and type II collagen 
protein, being the major components of the articular cartilage ECM, have also been categorized as markers of 
chondrocyte phenotype for in-vitro ­studies51. Thus, when considering FAA-CPs and MCPs for their distinct use 
in cartilage regeneration, a number of variations were observed between the two cell populations. The molecular 
analysis of normoxia MCPs showed greater expression of the chondrogenic markers SOX-9 and COL2A1, with a 
significantly higher expression with ACAN and COL2A1/COL1A1 ratio. These findings corroborate with other 
studies reporting higher expression of primary chondrogenic transcription factor SOX9 and stemness marker 
namely KLF4 in adipose-derived ­MSCs52 and increased proliferation of ­MSCs53 grown under normoxia as com-
pared to hypoxic cultures. The RT-PCR comparison should be viewed in light of the fact that the undifferentiated 
cells were grown with their recommended standard media with growth factors as per their requirement, and not 
under a single formulation. Furthermore, an analysis of the GAG/DNA ratio obtained from chondrogenically 
differentiated pellets showed that normoxia MCPs outperformed the other cell groups, additionally displaying 
stronger uptake for glycosaminoglycans with Alcian blue and Toluidine blue.
Among the several molecular transcription factors reported to induce hypertrophy of chondrocytes leading to 
cell apoptosis and endo-vascularization, RUNX2 plays a major ­role54,55. Additionally, hypoxia has been reported 
to suppress terminal differentiation of chondrocytes with evidence of hypoxia-inducible factor-α repressing the 
expression of RUNX2. An evaluation of the limitation to hypertrophic commitment showed that, regardless 
of the microenvironment, both normoxia and hypoxia MCPs showed significantly lower levels of RUNX2 and 
COL1A1. Although hypoxic conditions did not induce a significant difference in the expression of chondrogenic 
genes, it favoured a significant decrease of ­COL10A156, a known biomarker of terminally differentiated and 
hypertrophic chondrocytes, within the FAA-CP and MCP groups respectively. In accordance with our findings, 
a recent study demonstrated that equine MSCs isolated from synovial membrane and bone marrow showed 
reduced levels of COL10A1 when cultured under hypoxic conditions without any effect on chondrogenesis 
­markers57. When results for trilineage differentiation were compared, a positive uptake with a similar pattern of 
staining was observed among all the groups, showing comparable differentiation potential.
The work reported in this study provides the first comprehensive comparison of the chondrogenic potential 
of human FAA-CPs and MCPs, in addition to investigating the effect of hypoxia on chondrogenesis. This study 
is also the first attempt to evaluate the properties of two types of progenitors derived from the same source of 
cartilage, and also utilizing human biological tissue. Although our results suggest that migratory chondroprogeni-
tors cultured under normoxic conditions demonstrate higher chondrogenic potential and limited commitment to 
hypertrophy, hypoxia cultures display lower levels of collagen type 10, a finding that merits further evaluation to 
Figure 7.   (a) Estimation of GAG, (b) DNA and (c) total GAG/DNA content in the chondrogenic differentiated 
pellet was performed following papain digestion and quantified using the dimethyl methylene blue dye method. 
One way-ANNOVA for GAG: 0.084, DNA: 0.25 and GAG/DNA: 0.0047. MCP-Normoxia demonstrated 
significantly higher levels of GAG/DNA when compared to normoxia FAA-CP (P = 0.001), hypoxia FAA-CP 
(P = 0.002), and hypoxia MCP (P = 0.01). All values are expressed as Mean ± standard error mean (*P < 0.05, 
**P < 0.01), from three biological samples (n = 3). GAG: glycosaminoglycan.
11
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2021) 11:23685  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-03082-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
understand their additional implications for chondrogenesis. Thus, further in-depth surfaceome and proteomic 
analysis would help understand the beneficial effect of varying culture conditions on chondrogenesis. Since the 
chondroprogenitors were isolated from osteoarthritic samples, the inflammatory microenvironment could have 
influenced their biological properties. Further evaluation using cells obtained from non-diseased joints, using 
similar media formulations, and revalidation using in-vivo study models would merit further understanding of 
their potential therapeutic application in the field of cartilage repair.
Received: 10 July 2021; Accepted: 16 November 2021
References
	 1.	 Sophia Fox, A. J., Bedi, A. & Rodeo, S. A. The basic science of articular cartilage. Sports Health 1, 461–468 (2009).
	 2.	 Martín, A. R., Patel, J. M., Zlotnick, H. M., Carey, J. L. & Mauck, R. L. Emerging therapies for cartilage regeneration in currently 
excluded ‘red knee’ populations. NPJ Regen. Med. 4, 12 (2019).
	 3.	 Harris, J. D. et al. Failures, re-operations, and complications after autologous chondrocyte implantation—A systematic review. 
Osteoarthr. Cartil. 19, 779–791 (2011).
	 4.	 Pareek, A. et al. Long-term outcomes after autologous chondrocyte implantation. Cartilage 7, 298–308 (2016).
	 5.	 Freitag, J. et al. Mesenchymal stem cell therapy in the treatment of osteoarthritis: reparative pathways, safety and efficacy – a review. 
BMC Musculoskelet Disord 17, (2016).
	 6.	 Liu, X. et al. High osteogenic potential of adipose- and muscle-derived mesenchymal stem cells in spinal-ossification model mice. 
Spine 42, E1342–E1349 (2017).
	 7.	 Dowthwaite, G. P. et al. The surface of articular cartilage contains a progenitor cell population. J. Cell. Sci. 117, 889–897 (2004).
	 8.	 Koelling, S. et al. Migratory chondrogenic progenitor cells from repair tissue during the later stages of human osteoarthritis. Cell 
Stem Cell 4, 324–335 (2009).
	 9.	 Hayes, A. J., Tudor, D., Nowell, M. A., Caterson, B. & Hughes, C. E. Chondroitin sulfate sulfation motifs as putative biomarkers 
for isolation of articular cartilage progenitor cells. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 56, 125–138 (2008).
	10.	 McCarthy, H. E., Bara, J. J., Brakspear, K., Singhrao, S. K. & Archer, C. W. The comparison of equine articular cartilage progenitor 
cells and bone marrow-derived stromal cells as potential cell sources for cartilage repair in the horse. Vet. J. 192, 345–351 (2012).
	11.	 Xue, K. et al. Cartilage progenitor cells combined with PHBV in cartilage tissue engineering. J. Transl. Med. 17, 104 (2019).
	12.	 Vinod, E., Parameswaran, R., Amirtham, S. M., Rebekah, G. & Kachroo, U. Comparative analysis of human bone marrow mes-
enchymal stem cells, articular cartilage derived chondroprogenitors and chondrocytes to determine cell superiority for cartilage 
regeneration. Acta Histochem 123, 151713 (2021).
	13.	 Vinod, E., Kachroo, U., Rebekah, G., Yadav, B. K. & Ramasamy, B. Characterization of human articular chondrocytes and chondro-
progenitors derived from non-diseased and osteoarthritic knee joints to assess superiority for cell-based therapy. Acta Histochem. 
122, 151588 (2020).
	14.	 Williams, R. et al. Identification and clonal characterisation of a progenitor cell sub-population in normal human articular cartilage. 
PLoS ONE 5, e12346 (2010).
	15.	 Nelson, L., McCarthy, H. E., Fairclough, J., Williams, R. & Archer, C. W. Evidence of a viable pool of stem cells within human 
osteoarthritic cartilage. Cartilage 5, 203–214 (2014).
	16.	 Yu, Y., Zheng, H., Buckwalter, J. A. & Martin, J. A. Single cell sorting identifies progenitor cell population from full thickness bovine 
articular cartilage. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 22, 1318–1326 (2014).
	17.	 Su, X. et al. CD146 as a new marker for an increased chondroprogenitor cell sub-population in the later stages of osteoarthritis. J. 
Orthop. Res. 33, 84–91 (2015).
	18.	 Seol, D. et al. Chondrogenic progenitor cells respond to cartilage injury. Arthritis Rheum. 64, 3626–3637 (2012).
	19.	 Levato, R. et al. The bio in the ink: Cartilage regeneration with bioprintable hydrogels and articular cartilage-derived progenitor 
cells. Acta Biomater. 61, 41–53 (2017).
	20.	 Kachroo, U. et al. Comparison of human platelet lysate versus fetal bovine serum for expansion of human articular cartilage-derived 
chondroprogenitors. Cartilage https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​19476​03520​918635 (2020).
	21.	 Elsaesser, A. F. et al. Characterization of a migrative subpopulation of adult human nasoseptal chondrocytes with progenitor cell 
features and their potential for in vivo cartilage regeneration strategies. Cell Biosci 6, (2016).
	22.	 Dominici, M. et al. Minimal criteria for defining multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells. The International Society for Cellular 
Therapy position statement. Cytotherapy 8, 315–317 (2006).
	23.	 Vinod, E., Parameswaran, R., Ramasamy, B. & Kachroo, U. Pondering the potential of hyaline cartilage-derived chondroprogeni-
tors for tissue regeneration: A systematic review. CARTILAGE https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​19476​03520​951631.​(2020) (2020).
	24.	 Wang, K. et al. Chondrogenic progenitor cells exhibit superiority over mesenchymal stem cells and chondrocytes in platelet-rich 
plasma scaffold-based cartilage regeneration. Am. J. Sports Med. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​03635​46519​854219 (2019).
	25.	 Ghone, N. V. & Grayson, W. L. Recapitulation of mesenchymal condensation enhances in vitro chondrogenesis of human mesen-
chymal stem cells. J. Cell. Physiol. 227, 3701–3708 (2012).
	26.	 Handorf, A. M. & Li, W.-J. Induction of mesenchymal stem cell chondrogenesis through sequential administration of growth 
factors within specific temporal windows. J. Cell Physiol. 229, 162–171 (2014).
	27.	 Lee, H.-H. et al. Hypoxia enhances chondrogenesis and prevents terminal differentiation through PI3K/Akt/FoxO dependent 
anti-apoptotic effect. Sci. Rep. 3, 2683 (2013).
	28.	 Fermor, B. et al. Oxygen, nitric oxide and articular cartilage. Eur. Cell Mater. 13, 56–65 (2007) (discussion 65).
	29.	 Meretoja, V. V., Dahlin, R. L., Wright, S., Kasper, F. K. & Mikos, A. G. The effect of hypoxia on the chondrogenic differentiation of 
co-cultured articular chondrocytes and mesenchymal stem cells in scaffolds. Biomaterials 34, 4266–4273 (2013).
	30.	 Schrobback, K. et al. Effects of oxygen and culture system on in vitro propagation and redifferentiation of osteoarthritic human 
articular chondrocytes. Cell Tissue Res. 347, 649–663 (2012).
	31.	 Coyle, C. H., Izzo, N. J. & Chu, C. R. Sustained hypoxia enhances chondrocyte matrix synthesis. J. Orthop. Res. 27, 793–799 (2009).
	32.	 Anderson, D. E., Markway, B. D., Weekes, K. J., McCarthy, H. E. & Johnstone, B. Physioxia promotes the articular chondrocyte-like 
phenotype in human chondroprogenitor-derived self-organized tissue. Tissue Eng. Part A 24, 264–274 (2018).
	33.	 Anderson, D. E., Markway, B. D., Bond, D., McCarthy, H. E. & Johnstone, B. Responses to altered oxygen tension are distinct 
between human stem cells of high and low chondrogenic capacity. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 7, 154 (2016).
	34.	 Joos, H., Wildner, A., Hogrefe, C., Reichel, H. & Brenner, R. E. Interleukin-1 beta and tumor necrosis factor alpha inhibit migration 
activity of chondrogenic progenitor cells from non-fibrillated osteoarthritic cartilage. Arthritis Res. Ther. 15, R119 (2013).
	35.	 Matta, C. et al. Purinergic signalling is required for calcium oscillations in migratory chondrogenic progenitor cells. Pflugers Arch. 
467, 429–442 (2015).
12
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2021) 11:23685  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-03082-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
	36.	 Swart, G. W. M. Activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (CD166/ALCAM): Developmental and mechanistic aspects of cell 
clustering and cell migration. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 81, 313–321 (2002).
	37.	 Dicks, A. et al. Prospective isolation of chondroprogenitors from human iPSCs based on cell surface markers identified using a 
CRISPR-Cas9-generated reporter. bioRxiv 675983 (2019) https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​675983.
	38.	 Chan, C. K. F. et al. Identification of the human skeletal stem cell. Cell 175, 43-56.e21 (2018).
	39.	 Armiento, A. R., Alini, M. & Stoddart, M. J. Articular fibrocartilage—why does hyaline cartilage fail to repair?. Adv. Drug Deliv. 
Rev. 146, 289–305 (2019).
	40.	 Augustyniak, E., Trzeciak, T., Richter, M., Kaczmarczyk, J. & Suchorska, W. The role of growth factors in stem cell-directed chon-
drogenesis: a real hope for damaged cartilage regeneration. Int. Orthop. (SICOT) 39, 995–1003 (2015).
	41.	 Matta, C. & Mobasheri, A. Regulation of chondrogenesis by protein kinase C: Emerging new roles in calcium signalling. Cell Signal 
26, 979–1000 (2014).
	42.	 Bernstein, P., Sperling, I., Corbeil, D., Hempel, U. & Fickert, S. Progenitor cells from cartilage–no osteoarthritis-grade-specific 
differences in stem cell marker expression. Biotechnol. Prog. 29, 206–212 (2013).
	43.	 Fan, W. et al. CD105 promotes chondrogenesis of synovium-derived mesenchymal stem cells through Smad2 signaling. Biochem. 
Biophys. Res. Commun. 474, 338–344 (2016).
	44.	 Ozbey, O., Sahin, Z., Acar, N. & Ustunel, I. Distribution of CD105 and CD166 positive cells in the proximal epiphysis of developing 
rat humerus. Histol. Histopathol. 25, 1437–1445 (2010).
	45.	 Wang, M. et al. Experimental study on CD105+/CD166+ cells and its chondrogenic potential in early osteoarthritis cartilage. 
Zhongguo Xiu Fu Chong Jian Wai Ke Za Zhi 27, 793–799 (2013).
	46.	 Benz, K., Stippich, C., Freudigmann, C., Mollenhauer, J. A. & Aicher, W. K. Maintenance of ‘stem cell’ features of cartilage cell 
sub-populations during in vitro propagation. J. Transl. Med. 11, 27 (2013).
	47.	 Matta, C. et al. Molecular phenotyping of the surfaceome of migratory chondroprogenitors and mesenchymal stem cells using 
biotinylation, glycocapture and quantitative LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis. Sci. Rep. 9, 9018 (2019).
	48.	 Bertoli, C., Skotheim, J. M. & de Bruin, R. A. M. Control of cell cycle transcription during G1 and S phases. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. 
Biol. 14, 518–528 (2013).
	49.	 Stark, G. R. & Taylor, W. R. Analyzing the G2/M checkpoint. Methods Mol. Biol. 280, 51–82 (2004).
	50.	 Goldring, M. B. Chondrogenesis, chondrocyte differentiation, and articular cartilage metabolism in health and osteoarthritis. 
Ther. Adv. Musculoskelet. Dis. 4, 269–285 (2012).
	51.	 Frazer, A., Bunning, R. A., Thavarajah, M., Seid, J. M. & Russell, R. G. Studies on type II collagen and aggrecan production in 
human articular chondrocytes in vitro and effects of transforming growth factor-beta and interleukin-1beta. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 2, 
235–245 (1994).
	52.	 Zhao, A. G., Shah, K., Freitag, J., Cromer, B. & Sumer, H. Differentiation potential of early- and late-passage adipose-derived 
mesenchymal stem cells cultured under hypoxia and normoxia. Stem Cells Int. 2020, e8898221 (2020).
	53.	 Holzwarth, C. et al. Low physiologic oxygen tensions reduce proliferation and differentiation of human multipotent mesenchymal 
stromal cells. BMC Cell Biol. 11, 11 (2010).
	54.	 Eames, B. F., Sharpe, P. T. & Helms, J. A. Hierarchy revealed in the specification of three skeletal fates by Sox9 and Runx2. Dev. 
Biol. 274, 188–200 (2004).
	55.	 Wang, G. L., Jiang, B. H., Rue, E. A. & Semenza, G. L. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 is a basic-helix-loop-helix-PAS heterodimer 
regulated by cellular O2 tension. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 92, 5510–5514 (1995).
	56.	 Shen, G. The role of type X collagen in facilitating and regulating endochondral ossification of articular cartilage. Orthod. Crani-
ofac. Res. 8, 11–17 (2005).
	57.	 Gale, A. L., Mammone, R. M., Dodson, M. E., Linardi, R. L. & Ortved, K. F. The effect of hypoxia on chondrogenesis of equine 
synovial membrane-derived and bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells. BMC Vet. Res. 15, 201 (2019).
	58.	 Teixeira, F. G. et al. Do hypoxia/normoxia culturing conditions change the neuroregulatory profile of Wharton Jelly mesenchymal 
stem cell secretome?. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 6, 133 (2015).
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Upasana Kachroo and Dr. Pippa Deodhar for their valuable sugges-
tions for this article, Mr. Abdul Muthallib, Ms. Immani Job, Dr. Sandya Rani, Ms. Esther Rani, and Mr. Ashok 
Kumar for technical support, and the Centre for Stem Cell Research (A unit of inStem Bengaluru), Christian 
Medical College, Vellore for infrastructural support. The research work presented in this manuscript is a part of 
a proposed Ph.D. Thesis of The Tamil Nadu Dr.M.G.R. Medical University.
Author contributions
E.V., S.S., B.R., and S.K. were involved in the study conception and design. E.V., N.N.J., S.M.A., A.L. were involved 
performed the experiments and were involved in data collection. E.V., J.V.J., S.S., B.R., G.R., S.K., N.N.J., and 
A.J.D. were involved in data analysis and interpretation. E.V. and B.R. provided financial support. All authors 
were involved in the preparation of the final version of the manuscript.
Funding
This project was supported by the Department of Biotechnology (BT/PR32777/MED/31/415/2019), Govt. of 
India, and AO Trauma Asia Pacific (AOTAP 16–19) of the AO Foundation.
Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1038/​s41598-​021-​03082-5.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to E.V., B.R. or S.S.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
13
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2021) 11:23685  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-03082-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the 
Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
© The Author(s) 2021

===== Danalache2021_SciRep_ChondrocyteSpatialOrganization+OA =====

1
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2021) 11:9783  
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-89582-w
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Exploration of changes in spatial 
chondrocyte organisation in human 
osteoarthritic cartilage by means 
of 3D imaging
Marina Danalache1,8, Kevin Ralf Beutler2,6,8*, Bernd Rolauffs3, Julius Michael Wolfgart2, 
Florian Christof Bonnaire1, Stefan Fischer4,7, Imke Greving5 & Ulf Krister Hofmann1
Using two-dimensional top-down view microscopy, researchers have recently described chondrocytes 
as being spatially arranged in distinct patterns such as strings, double strings, and small and large 
clusters. Because of the seeming association of these changes with tissue degeneration, they have 
been proposed as an image-based biomarker for early osteoarthritis (OA) staging. The aim of our 
study was to investigate the spatial arrangement of chondrocytes in human articular cartilage in a 3D 
fashion and to evaluate the 3D changes of these patterns in the context of local tissue destruction. 
Decalcified femoral condyle resections from the load-bearing area were analysed in 3D for their 
spatial chondrocyte organisation by means of fluorescence microscopy and synchrotron-radiation 
micro-computed tomography (SR-µCT). In intact cartilage chondrocyte strings can be found in 
the superficial, transitional and deep zones. The proposed pattern changes accompanying tissue 
destruction could be located not just along the surface but also through all layers of cartilage. Each 
spatial pattern was characterised by a different cellular density (the only exception being between 
single and double strings with p = 0.062), with cellular density significantly increasing alongside the 
increase in local tissue degeneration as defined by the chondrocyte patterns. We can thus corroborate 
that the proposed cellular spatial changes are a three-dimensional function of local tissue 
degeneration, underlining their relevance as an image-based biomarker for the early diagnosis and 
description of OA.
Clinical trial registration number: Project number of the ethics committee of the University of 
Tübingen:171/2014BO2.
Abbreviations
DS	
Double strings
ECM	
Extracellular matrix
Em	
Emission
Ex	
Excitation
LC	
Large clusters
µCT	
Micro-computed tomography
OA	
Osteoarthritis
SC	
Small clusters
SS	
Single strings
OPEN
1Department 
of 
Orthopaedic 
Surgery, 
University 
Hospital 
of 
Tübingen, 
Hoppe‑Seyler‑Strasse 
3, 72076  Tübingen, Germany. 
2Medical Faculty of the University of Tübingen, 72076  Tübingen, 
Germany. 3G.E.R.N. Tissue Replacement, Regeneration and Neogenesis, Department of Orthopedics and Trauma 
Surgery, Medical Center ‑ Albert‑Ludwigs‑University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Albert-Ludwigs-University 
of Freiburg, 79108  Freiburg, Germany. 4Department of Evolutionary Biology of Invertebrates, University 
of Tübingen, 72076  Tübingen, Germany. 5Institute of Materials Research, Helmholtz-Zentrum Geesthacht, 
Geesthacht, Germany. 6Present address: Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Traumatology, Spital Thurgau 
AG, Spitalcampus 1, 8596  Münsterlingen, Switzerland. 7Present address: Tübingen Structural Microscopy 
(TSM), Center for Applied Geoscience (ZAG), University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. 8These authors 
contributed equally: Marina Danalache and Kevin Ralf Beutler. *email: kevin.beutler@kbeutler.com
2
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2021) 11:9783  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-89582-w
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
SZ	
Superficial zone
PBS	
Phosphate buffered saline
FDR	
False discovery rate
3D	
Three-dimensional
Osteoarthritis (OA) as degenerative joint disease is one of the leading causes of pain and disability in adults 
worldwide. It is characterised by an irreversible complete destruction of the articular cartilage. On a microscopic 
level, articular cartilage is composed of sparsely scattered chondrocytes embedded in an expansive extracellular 
matrix (ECM). This matrix is morphologically subdivided into the superficial, transitional and deep zone and, 
at the interface to the subchondral bone, the calcified tide ­mark1. With OA initiation and progression the tissue 
surface becomes macroscopically roughened as fissuring and fibrillation of its collagen matrix take ­place2–4.
Recent studies have indicated that at its surface, articular cartilage contains characteristic spatial chondrocyte 
patterns that are specific for each layer and ­joint5–7. The exact orientation of the patterns seems to depend on the 
joint-specific mechanical loading ­mechanism6,8. How this spatial organisation is established is still ­unknown9. In 
the femoral condyle, with initiation and progression of OA, the chondrocytes’ spatial organisation at the cartilage 
surface changes from strings to double ­strings10, then to small or even large ­clusters7 (Supplementary Figure 1). 
Strings are defined as chondrocytes aligned in a line, double strings as two parallel strings and clusters as a cir-
cular arrangement of ­chondrocytes6. Due to a seeming association of superficial chondrocyte arrangement and 
OA changes of the cartilage, it had been suggested that chondrocyte arrangement may act as an image-based bio-
marker for OA-triggered events and thus be used to diagnose early ­OA11. Recent studies could even demonstrate 
the functional relevance of these spatial patterns establishing a strong correlation between local tissue elasticity 
and the locally predominant spatial ­pattern12,13. Analysing the cartilage surface in a top-down view only might, 
however, lead to perceived changes of cellular organisation already as a result of deeper tissue layers made visible 
to top-down observation by superficial erosion. An ascending string following the collagen arcades might, for 
example, be perceived as a single cell or a pair of cells. A full understanding of the changes in spatial chondrocyte 
arrangement in OA cartilage therefore requires a three-dimensional (3D) approach that examines the tissue 
throughout all tissue layers. Using healthy bovine cartilage, Zehbe et al. had already demonstrated the feasibil-
ity of identifying single chondrocytes using synchrotron radiation micro-computed tomography (SR-µCT)14,15.
The aim of our study was to investigate the spatial arrangement of chondrocytes in human articular cartilage 
in a 3D fashion and to evaluate the 3D changes of these patterns in the context of local tissue destruction. Since 
cellular organisation had been shown and validated in the topmost layer of articular cartilage as a 2D phenom-
enon, we hypothesised that it is in fact a 3D feature of cartilage destruction during OA pathogenesis (Fig. 1).
Results
Histologic 2D analysis of spatial chondrocyte patterns. 
To illustrate spatial chondrocyte organisa-
tion in cartilage not affected by OA or trauma, one healthy cartilage sample was analysed in the top-down view 
(Fig. 2A) and the side-view (Fig. 2B,C) showing all cartilage layers intact with mostly single strings following 
the arciform architecture of the cartilage. When analysing the samples obtained from patients with OA, all 
predescribed cellular patterns were visible already in all of the histologic top-down views at the surface of the 
specimens (Figs. 3A, 4A, 5A). Looking at these samples in the side-view, the arciform architecture could clearly 
be identified also in the osteoarthritic cartilage samples in areas with macroscopically intact cartilage (Figs. 3B, 
4B, 5B). Of note, all described cell patterns could not just be identified in the surface area but in all cartilage lay-
ers thus being not layer specific (Figs. 3B, 4B, 5B).
SR‑µCT: 3D analysis of spatial chondrocyte patterns. 
The SR-µCT imaging of the osteoarthritic car-
tilage samples allowed to clearly identify individual chondrocytes. Performing the segmentation and rendering 
techniques described above, all histologically predescribed chondrocyte spatial patterns could be reidentified, 
isolated, and interactive 3D-models could be generated (Fig. 1, Supplementary Figure 2&3) thus demonstrating 
the aptitude of the technique for the study question.
When analysing the side-view sections with the colour-coding of the different patterns (Figs. 3, 4, 5C) and the 
corresponding colour-coded SR-µCT renderings (Figs. 3, 4, 5D) a clear picture presented itself: When looking 
at macroscopically highly disrupted cartilage, the predominant patterns were small and large clusters. When 
the cartilage was eroded well down into the deep zone, it was in the remaining fissured tissue that these patterns 
could be observed (Figs. 3, 4). Large clusters could thereby contain up to several hundreds of chondrocytes. 
Interestingly, in one cartilage sample with a major tissue lesion in the transitional and deep zones, the organi-
sational changes could be found surrounding the lesion not just along the surface in the horizontal plane, but 
also through all cartilage layers in the vertical plane (Fig. 5). With a diffuse chondrocyte tissue lump as a plug 
or a scar in the defect zone, large clusters were found at the heart of the damaged tissue, surrounded by smaller 
clusters. Encompassing this zone, double strings were the dominant cellular pattern, and strings were found only 
farther away from the lesion in macroscopically intact cartilage. The cellular changes could thus be observed as 
3D and not just 2D tissue changes with respect to local cartilage damage.
Cellular density—a distinctive feature of chondrocyte spatial patterns and cartilage degenera-
tion. 
When counting the cells in representative areas for the different patterns (Supplementary Figure 5), 
each specific zone was characterised by a distinct cellular density (Fig. 6, Table 1): the highest physiological 
values were found in the superficial zone in both the healthy and the osteoarthritic samples, and the lowest 
values were seen in cartilage areas other than the superficial zone in regions presenting with single strings. With 
increasing pathological spatial cellular organisation, cellular density also increased from double strings to small 
3
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2021) 11:9783  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-89582-w
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 1.   Spatial chondrocyte patterns imaged by µCT. Nuclei are depicted in purple (1), the extranuclear 
space within the lacuna/chondron is shown in light blue (2). (3) Showing the merged spatial patterns, and (4) 
the interactive 3D reconstructions of the different spatial patterns. In case of a diffuse cellular distribution, no 
lacuna/chondron is present any longer but instead the extracellular matrix is depicted. This figure was created 
using Amira 6.0 (https://​www.​therm​ofish​er.​com/​ch/​en/​home/​indus​trial/​elect​ron-​micro​scopy/​elect​ron-​micro​
scopy-​instr​uments-​workf​low-​solut​ions/​3d-​visua​lizat​ion-​analy​sis-​softw​are/​amira-​life-​scien​ces-​biome​dical.​
html), MeVisLab (https://​www.​mevis​lab.​de/​mevis​lab) and Adobe Illustrator CS6 (https://​www.​adobe.​com/​ch_​
de/​produ​cts/​illus​trator.​html).
4
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2021) 11:9783  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-89582-w
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
clusters and finally to large clusters. Considering the different values obtained from the different spatial patterns 
of osteoarthritic specimens in an ordinal sense, all differences were statistically significant on the basis of an 
FDR-adjusted alpha, the exception being between single and double strings (p = 0.062).
Discussion
As chondrocytes are key players for normal articular cartilage homeostasis, functional cell loss or change of their 
normal organisation and distribution could be a primary trigger that leads to cartilage failure in OA. In the pre-
sent study, we investigated chondrocyte spatial organisation within the articular cartilage from human femoral 
condyles, with a special focus on the 3D distribution of the predescribed cellular patterns across all cartilage 
layers. We observed these pattern changes not just in the horizontal topmost layer but also in the vertical plane 
as a 3D-function around cartilage lesions.
As previously described in ­2D6,10 and corroborated now in a 3D approach, we found strings of cells lying 
horizontally in the intact superficial zone and ascending vertically along the arcades in the deep zone in micro-
scopically intact cartilage areas. On the other end, in highly disrupted cartilage areas, large clusters were observed 
surrounded by small clusters and further away from the lesion by double strings. These large clusters were located 
mainly in the heart of cartilage injuries, often between extensive ECM ­fissures16. Interestingly, cluster formation 
never occurred in the superficial zone itself, but only in deeper tissue layers. This might be as the superficial zone 
is eroded during degeneration prior to such cluster formation.
An interesting observation in our study was the presence and location of double strings: These were present 
at the transition from intact cartilage to beginning cartilage degradation but they were also frequently found at 
the transition from the tide mark to the deep zone. This observation raises the hypothesis that there might be 
two types of double strings: one as previously ­described10 a result of cellular remodelling present in the adjacent 
tissue surrounding OA lesions, and one that arises from the base of the cartilage. It has already been described 
that the deep zone can act as a possible reservoir of chondroprogenitor ­cells17. These double strings arising from 
the base of the cartilage might thus be the structuro-morphological manifestation of regenerative cell prolifera-
tion and cartilage rebuilding.
Interestingly, in one sample, an additional spatial pattern was identified that seemingly acted as a plug or 
scar above an injured cartilage area where the chondrocytes lose higher spatial organisation but are found as 
densely disorganised diffuse cells. This diffuse cellular organisation has previously been proposed as end-stage 
OA with subsequent gradual cell ­loss7,10. The predominant pattern in regions of advanced tissue degeneration is 
that of large clusters. Although it is possible that they represent an effort of the cartilage to repair and maintain 
Figure 2.   Top-down (A) and side view (B,C) of a healthy cartilage sample. (C) Zonal colour labelling of the 
predominant spatial chondrocyte arrangement: blue—superficial zone, green—single strings, yellow—double 
strings, grey—subchondral bone. The sample still shows an intact superficial zone. Underlying is a thick layer 
of healthy cartilage composed of single strings. Only at the transition to the subchondral bone some isolated 
double strings can be detected. The black wedges are a digital artefact of straightening the image. This figure was 
created using Adobe Photoshop CS6 (https://​www.​adobe.​com/​ch_​de/​produ​cts/​photo​shop.​html) and Adobe 
Illustrator CS6 (https://​www.​adobe.​com/​ch_​de/​produ​cts/​illus​trator.​html).
5
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2021) 11:9783  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-89582-w
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
the remaining ­tissue18 it is generally believed that clusters contribute to OA progression and degradation of the 
­joint19,20. In an inflammatory condition for example, too many cells in association with an altered phenotype 
might lead to excessive levels of inflammatory cytokines and catabolic enzymes, thus further disrupting the 
tissue or possibly leading to a self-perpetuating loop to promote further cell ­division21. This would explain the 
monstrous clusters containing several hundreds of cells that can sometimes be found. The extent or point in the 
cellular organisational pattern where the cartilage functionally still benefits from this increase in cells thus needs 
to be evaluated and will be the object of our future research.
Even though the exact reasons for the pattern changes have not yet been elucidated, several processes such 
as cell proliferation, apoptosis, matrix remodelling due to catabolic activity and pro-inflammatory effects, and 
directed cell ­migration22–27 have been suggested to be involved in this dynamic process. The distinct spatial pat-
terns that the chondrocytes form and their distribution throughout articular cartilage may thus also reflect their 
functional interaction within a remodelling ECM. An interesting approach proposed by Kouri et al. in 1996 sug-
gests that cells that are initially dispersed within the matrix can migrate towards one another and ­aggregate28. In 
fact, several in vitro studies showed that chondrocytes are capable of migrating under the stimulation of various 
­chemoattractants29–32. It can, therefore, be speculated that OA-associated matrix degradation facilitates cellular 
migration allowing the rapid change of the cellular patterns.
Cellular density of the articular cartilage decreases sharply during growth and maturation of the skeleton, 
staying then relatively constant during adult ­life33,34. Interstingly, the OA associated changes accompanying cel-
lular rearrangement appear to be accompanied by a change in local cellular density: We found high numbers of 
chondrocytes present in the superficial zone and the lowest cell numbers in microscopically intact deeper carti-
lage layers composed of single strings, which is consistent with the ­literature33,35,36. Of note, the more pathological 
Figure 3.   Top-down (A) and side view (B,C) of cartilage specimen I and the corresponding SR-µCT image 
rendering (D). (C,D) Zonal colour labelling of the predominant spatial chondrocyte arrangement: blue—
superficial zone, green—single strings, yellow—double strings, orange—small clusters, red—large clusters, 
purple—diffuse, grey—subchondral bone. On the left side, in macroscopically intact cartilage, an intact 
superficial zone with underlying single strings with few areas of double strings can be seen. On the right side, 
the eroded remaining cartilage shows large clusters in the defect area. Small clusters surrounded by double 
strings are embedded in the fissure that cuts deep at the transition between these two extrema. The µCT-image 
confirms these findings throughout all tissue layers also in the full width of the analysed sample. The black 
wedges are a digital artefact of straightening the image. This figure was created using MeVisLab (https://​www.​
mevis​lab.​de/​mevis​lab), Adobe Photoshop CS6 (https://​www.​adobe.​com/​ch_​de/​produ​cts/​photo​shop.​html) and 
Adobe Illustrator CS6 (https://​www.​adobe.​com/​ch_​de/​produ​cts/​illus​trator.​html).
6
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2021) 11:9783  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-89582-w
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
the spatial pattern, the higher the cell count, which highlights the role of cell proliferation in the process of 
changing spatial chondrocyte patterns during OA.
With our three-dimensional approach we were thus able to support the physiopathological model suggested 
by Rolauffs for the superficial ­zone6–8,10 as a 3D-function of tissue degradation throughout all layers of articular 
cartilage. We also identified two different spatial presences of doubles strings raising the possibility that there 
might actually be two types of double strings—one as a result of cellular remodelling in the course of OA and 
one arising from the base of the cartilage as a possible structuro-morphological manifestation of regenerative 
proliferation and cartilage rebuilding.
Study limitations. 
While SR-µCT offers a highly interesting and new perspective to OA analysis, the 
method is still hard to come by and with the presently available techniques it is very time consuming. For 
these reasons, only three osteoarthritic specimens were finally analysed. This should be borne in mind when 
interpreting the statistical results. Our findings are, however, highly consistent with the previous publications 
that analysed the presence, distribution and functional relevance of cellular rearrangement in osteoarthritic 
­cartilage6–10,12,13. Dehydrating the cartilage samples may have distorted the morphology of the specimens. For 
this reason, we meticulously performed our immunohistochemical analyses on the same samples that were 
subjected to SR-µCT. We were thus able to match the wet fluorescence microscopy images with the dry SR-µCT-
images to cross-validate that no major distortion had occurred during the dehydration. To allow a direct com-
parison, both techniques are presented in the same figure for each sample. Since cellular density analyses were 
performed on histological sections the numbers obtained are not volume-based and thus could be affected by 
different penetration depths of the microscope and overlapping of cells. Performing cell counting and cellular 
density assessment in the SR-µCT data would, however, also be prone to error in dehydrated samples due to 
tissue processing artefacts that in some cases lead to hyperdense areas where cell segmentation is not unambigu-
ous. Phase-contrast SR-µCT imaging in entirely native samples might provide a solution to these yet unsolved 
obstacles.
Conclusion
Performing 3D-analyses of spatial chondrocyte organisation by means of fluorescence microscopy and SR-µCT 
imaging, we were able to corroborate that changes in spatial chondrocyte organisation and its associated cellular 
density are hallmarks of OA-related tissue changes. The observed spatial changes appear to not just exist in the 
Figure 4.   Top-down (A) and side view (B,C) of cartilage specimen II and the corresponding SR-µCT image 
rendering (D). (C,D) Zonal colour labelling of the predominant spatial chondrocyte arrangement: blue—
superficial zone, green—single strings, yellow—double strings, orange—small clusters, red—large clusters, 
purple—diffuse, grey—subchondral bone. On the left side, in macroscopically intact cartilage, single strings are 
predominant in the deep zone underlying an intact superficial zone. On the right side, the eroded remaining 
cartilage shows large clusters in the defect area, with smaller clusters at the transition to the underlying double 
strings in the tide mark. Due to the thinned-out cartilage layer some subchondral bone had to be left in place 
to ensure the stability of the specimen. The black wedges are a digital artefact of straightening the image. This 
figure was created using MeVisLab (https://​www.​mevis​lab.​de/​mevis​lab), Adobe Photoshop CS6 (https://​www.​
adobe.​com/​ch_​de/​produ​cts/​photo​shop.​html) and Adobe Illustrator CS6 (https://​www.​adobe.​com/​ch_​de/​produ​
cts/​illus​trator.​html).
7
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2021) 11:9783  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-89582-w
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
horizontal but also the vertical plane—thus having a 3D-function around cartilage lesions. They thus represent 
the “fingerprints” of the 3D-function of tissue destruction in OA.
Materials and methods
Cartilage samples. 
Tissue was obtained from patients who received total knee arthroplasty for symptomatic 
end-stage OA of the knee as radiologically judged by a Kellgren-Lawrence grade of 3 or ­437 in the Department 
of Orthopaedic Surgery of the University Hospital of Tübingen, Germany; in the BG Trauma Centre Tübingen, 
Germany; and in the Winghofer Clinic, Rottenburg, Germany. Additionally, one sample serving as healthy car-
tilage sample was analysed obtained from a 14-year-old patient receiving proximal tibial resection and joint 
replacement due to an osteosarcoma. Full departmental, institutional and local ethical committee approval were 
obtained before commencement of the study (project number of the ethics committee of the Medical Faculty/
University of Tübingen 171/2014BO2). Written informed consent was received from all patients before partici-
pation. In case of the 14-year old patient, informed consent was obtained from both, the patient and the parents. 
All methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations. This study was per-
formed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Tissue preparation. 
Femoral condyle resections from the load-bearing area were selected according to 
their macroscopic degeneration pattern and washed in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) to remove remaining 
debris and blood cells. Cartilage-bone cuboids about 3.5 mm in width and 20 mm in length were cut from the 
condyles along the kinematic uniaxial movement direction of the knee. Cuboids were fixed in 4% paraformal-
dehyde/PBS (pH 7.0) for 24 h at 6 °C. Decalcification was performed in 20% (w/v) ethylenediaminetetraacetic 
Figure 5.   Top-down (A) and side view (B,C) of cartilage specimen III and the corresponding µCT image 
rendering (D). (C,D) Zonal colour labelling of the predominant spatial chondrocyte arrangement: blue—
superficial zone, green—single strings, yellow—double strings, orange—small clusters, red—large clusters, 
purple—diffuse, grey—subchondral bone. The intact cartilage shows the superficial zone, with single strings 
in the underlying area in the superficially deep zone and double strings deeper down. In the centre is a 
macroscopic cartilage lesion from the superficial zone to the transitional zone, also partly including the deep 
zone. The centre of the lesion is composed of large clusters surrounded by small clusters. Around this area, 
double strings can be found. Single strings are farther away in macroscopically intact cartilage. Interestingly, the 
superficial centre of the defect is covered with a scar-like plug of densely packed and highly disorganised cells. 
In the µCT 3D segmentation it can be clearly recognised how the different patterns arrange themselves in their 
corresponding order in a concentric fashion. The black wedge is a digital artefact of straightening the image. 
This figure was created using MeVisLab (https://​www.​mevis​lab.​de/​mevis​lab), Adobe Photoshop CS6 (https://​
www.​adobe.​com/​ch_​de/​produ​cts/​photo​shop.​html) and Adobe Illustrator CS6 (https://​www.​adobe.​com/​ch_​de/​
produ​cts/​illus​trator.​html).
8
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2021) 11:9783  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-89582-w
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
acid/PBS at 37 °C for several days with solution changes every 2 days. Sufficient decalcification was determined 
by easy needle penetration of the bone. Final decision as to inclusion of the samples for the study including 
histologic and SR-µCT analysis was made using a Carl Zeiss Observer Z1 fluorescence microscope with the 
Axio Vision Release 4.8 software (Carl Zeiss Microscopy) after DAPI (Exmax 358 nm, Emmax 461 nm, Life 
Technologies) staining 0.1% (v/v)/PBS for 5 min. Tissue samples were considered to be suitable for the study if 
on a sample—within a distance of 2 cm—areas were contained that still had both intact cartilage surface as well 
as focal cartilage lesions.
Section preparation and microscope image acquisition. 
Sectioning for side-view images of the car-
tilage was performed with a Leica cryotome, type CM3050S (Leica Biosystems, Wetzlar, Germany), at 70 µm 
thickness. For top-down view analyses, the remaining tissue block was processed as a whole. Mosaic fluorescent 
Figure 6.   Cellular density in healthy (A) and osteoarthritic (B) cartilage as a function of cellular organisation. 
P-values are listed in (C) with significant p-values denoted in bold. Significance was determined on an FDR-
adjusted alpha (for absolute cell count values, see Table 1; for exact FDR-adjusted alphas, see supplementary 
Table 1). Abbreviations: SZH—superficial zone healthy cartilage; SSH—single strings healthy cartilage; SZ—
superfical zone; SS—single strings; DS—double strings; SC—small clusters; LC—large clusters. Significant 
differences are listed in the table below. For zonal labelling according to the predominant regional pattern, see 
also supplementary Figure 5. This figure was created using SPSS Statistics 23 (https://​www.​ibm.​com/​ch-​de/​
produ​cts/​spss-​stati​stics), Microsoft Office Word (https://​www.​micro​soft.​com/​de-​ch/​micro​soft-​365/​word) and 
Adobe Illustrator CS6 (https://​www.​adobe.​com/​ch_​de/​produ​cts/​illus​trator.​html).
Table 1.   Cellular density as a function of cellular organisation.
Cellular organisational pattern
Median (interquartile range) (cells/mm2)
Superficial zone healthy cartilage
4363 (590)
Single strings healthy cartilage
1252 (823)
Superficial zone
1622 (126)
Single strings
628 (157)
Double strings
918 (124)
Small clusters
1646 (188)
Large clusters
3798 (2393)
9
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2021) 11:9783  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-89582-w
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
images were created with the AxioVision Release 4.8 software, including the MosaiX image acquisition software 
(Carl Zeiss Microscopy, Jena, Germany). Post-imaging processing of the images was performed with Adobe 
Illustrator and Adobe Photoshop (Adobe, San Jose, CA, USA). The side views of the cartilage were mapped in 
colour according to their locally predominant spatial pattern in order to visualise the connection between spatial 
organisation and tissue damage.
SR‑µCT measurements via absorption contrast and  image rendering post‑tomography. 
A 
detailed description of the imaging technique can be found in Supplementary File 1. In short, samples selected 
for SR-µCT were stained with propidium-iodide for better cellular contrast and then dehydrated. SR-µCT meas-
urements were performed at the DESY (Deutsches Elektronen Synchrotron) IBL P05 imaging beamline Ham-
burg, Germany, operated by Helmholtz Zentrum Geesthacht. The final field of view was 3.7 × 3.7 ­mm2 with a 
beam height of 2 mm. The effective pixel size was 1.3 µm. Tomography was performed with 1200 angular steps 
at 180° rotation at 12 keV with an exposure time of 250 ms. Due to the limited beam height in combination with 
the length of the specimens, images were taken at subsequent height steps of 1.8 mm increments. The flat-field 
corrected scans were reconstructed using the filtered-back projection method applying a binning of two, result-
ing in a voxel size of 2.6 × 2.6 × 2.6 µm3. The final 8 bit format led to a total of 256 different possible grey values 
for each pixel. Data segmentation and 3D rendering was performed using Amira 6.0 (ThermoFisher Scientific, 
Waltham, MA, USA). Using the segmentation editor, the different spatial chondrocyte patterns were identified 
and selected. Selection was performed both manually by directly selecting the cells from their surrounding ECM 
and by means of applying a grey-value threshold, selecting the hyperdense cells (interval 39–255) and saving 
them into separate labels. The grey values from 0 to 38 were then defined as matrix-label. Artefact reduction and 
slight smoothing of the mesh surfaces were carried out using the ’smooth label’ function in the segmentation 
editor of Amira and using unconstrained smoothing (kernel filter size set to 1 and minimal edge length set to 
zero). Surfaces were exported as Wavefront .obj file. Utilising the plugin ’Scientific3DFigurePDFApp’38 in the 
software package MeVisLab (MeVis Medical Solutions AG, Bremen, Germany) the corresponding .obj files were 
combined and colour coded and saved in U3D format. The latter was used to import the 3D-visualisations into 
a PDF file within the same Mevislab plugin. The CT-images of the cartilage were also mapped in colour accord-
ing to their locally predominant spatial pattern in order to visualise the connection between spatial organisation 
and tissue damage.
Statistical analysis of the histologic sections. 
To analyse cellular density per organisational pattern, 
three independent rectangles were plotted in each pattern-specific area in each of the four side-view sections for 
cell counting. These rectangles were distributed evenly in the targeted tissue areas available for each predomi-
nant spatial pattern. Due to the high heterogeneity of the cartilage surface and structure especially in areas with 
advanced tissue destruction, these rectangles could not be made of identical sizes. The rectangles were, however, 
only plotted once and then read out in a blinded fashion. Normality of the data was assessed by means of his-
tograms. Because results were non-normally distributed, values are presented as median (interquartile range). 
Comparison between the different cell densities was performed by using the Kruskal–Wallis test. Post-hoc test-
ing was performed with the Mann–Whitney U test. All reported p-values are two sided. A significance level of 
α = 0.05 was adjusted to the false discovery rate (FDR) by using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure. Graphic 
illustration was performed by using boxplots. Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS Statistics 22 (IBM 
Corp., Armonk, NY, USA).
Data availability
Most data generated or analysed during this study are included in this published article (and its Supplementary 
Information files). The unedited raw data generated during and/or analysed during the current study are avail-
able from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Received: 7 October 2020; Accepted: 28 April 2021
References
	 1.	 Buckwalter, J. A. & Mankin, H. J. Articular cartilage: tissue design and chondrocyte-matrix interactions. Instr. Course Lect. 47, 
477–486 (1998).
	 2.	 Guilak, F., Ratcliffe, A., Lane, N., Rosenwasser, M. P. & Mow, V. C. Mechanical and biochemical changes in the superficial zone 
of articular cartilage in canine experimental osteoarthritis. J. Orthop. Res. 12, 474–484. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​jor.​11001​20404 
(1994).
	 3.	 David-Vaudey, E. et al. Fourier transform infrared imaging of focal lesions in human osteoarthritic cartilage. Eur. Cell Mater. 10, 
51–60. https://​doi.​org/​10.​22203/​ecm.​v010a​06 (2005).
	 4.	 Arokoski, J. P., Jurvelin, J. S., Vaatainen, U. & Helminen, H. J. Normal and pathological adaptations of articular cartilage to joint 
loading. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 10, 186–198. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1034/j.​1600-​0838.​2000.​01000​4186.x (2000).
	 5.	 Schumacher, B. L., Su, J. L., Lindley, K. M., Kuettner, K. E. & Cole, A. A. Horizontally oriented clusters of multiple chondrons in 
the superficial zone of ankle, but not knee articular cartilage. Anat. Rec. 266, 241–248. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​ar.​10063 (2002).
	 6.	 Rolauffs, B., Williams, J. M., Grodzinsky, A. J., Kuettner, K. E. & Cole, A. A. Distinct horizontal patterns in the spatial organization 
of superficial zone chondrocytes of human joints. J. Struct. Biol. 162, 335–344. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jsb.​2008.​01.​010 (2008).
	 7.	 Felka, T. et al. Loss of spatial organization and destruction of the pericellular matrix in early osteoarthritis in vivo and in a novel 
in vitro methodology. Osteoarthr. Cartil. OARS Osteoarthr. Res. Soc. 24, 1200–1209. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​joca.​2016.​02.​001 
(2016).
	 8.	 Aicher, W. K. & Rolauffs, B. The spatial organisation of joint surface chondrocytes: review of its potential roles in tissue functioning, 
disease and early, preclinical diagnosis of osteoarthritis. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 73, 645–653. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​annrh​eumdis-​
2013-​204308 (2014).
10
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2021) 11:9783  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-89582-w
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
	 9.	 Decker, R. S., Koyama, E. & Pacifici, M. Genesis and morphogenesis of limb synovial joints and articular cartilage. Matrix Biol. 
39, 5–10. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​matbio.​2014.​08.​006 (2014).
	10.	 Rolauffs, B. et al. Proliferative remodeling of the spatial organization of human superficial chondrocytes distant from focal early 
osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 62, 489–498. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​art.​27217 (2010).
	11.	 Rolauffs, B. et al. Onset of preclinical osteoarthritis: the angular spatial organization permits early diagnosis. Arthritis Rheum. 63, 
1637–1647 (2011).
	12.	 Danalache, M., Jacobi, L. F., Schwitalle, M. & Hofmann, U. K. Assessment of biomechanical properties of the extracellular and 
pericellular matrix and their interconnection throughout the course of osteoarthritis. J. Biomech. 97, 109409. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​jbiom​ech.​2019.​109409 (2019).
	13.	 Danalache, M. et al. Changes in stiffness and biochemical composition of the pericellular matrix as a function of spatial chondrocyte 
organisation in osteoarthritic cartilage. Osteoarthr. Cartil. OARS Osteoarthr. Res. Soc. 27, 823–832. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​joca.​
2019.​01.​008 (2019).
	14.	 Zehbe, R. et al. Going beyond histology. Synchrotron micro-computed tomography as a methodology for biological tissue charac-
terization: from tissue morphology to individual cells. J. R. Soc. Interface 7, 49–59. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rsif.​2008.​0539 (2010).
	15.	 Zehbe, R., Riesemeier, H., Kirkpatrick, C. J. & Brochhausen, C. Imaging of articular cartilage–data matching using X-ray tomog-
raphy, SEM, FIB slicing and conventional histology. Micron 43, 1060–1067. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​micron.​2012.​05.​001 (2012).
	16.	 Lotz, M. K. et al. Cartilage cell clusters. Arthritis Rheum. 62, 2206–2218. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​art.​27528 (2010).
	17.	 Bos, P. K., Kops, N., Verhaar, J. A. & van Osch, G. J. Cellular origin of neocartilage formed at wound edges of articular cartilage in 
a tissue culture experiment. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 16, 204–211. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​joca.​2007.​06.​007 (2008).
	18.	 Poole, C. A., Matsuoka, A. & Schofield, J. R. Chondrons from articular cartilage. III. Morphologic changes in the cellular micro-
environment of chondrons isolated from osteoarthritic cartilage. Arthritis Rheum. 34, 22–35. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​art.​17803​
40105 (1991).
	19.	 von der Mark, K. et al. Type X collagen synthesis in human osteoarthritic cartilage. Indication of chondrocyte hypertrophy. Arthritis 
Rheum. 35, 806–811. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​art.​17803​50715 (1992).
	20.	 Pullig, O., Weseloh, G., Ronneberger, D., Kakonen, S. & Swoboda, B. Chondrocyte differentiation in human osteoarthritis: expres-
sion of osteocalcin in normal and osteoarthritic cartilage and bone. Calcif. Tissue Int. 67, 230–240. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s0022​
30001​108 (2000).
	21.	 Pfander, D., Körtje, D., Weseloh, G. & Swoboda, B. Cell proliferation in human arthrotic joint cartilage. Z. Orthop. Ihre Grenzgeb. 
139, 375–381. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1055/s-​2001-​17977 (2001).
	22.	 Boehme, A. & Rolauffs, B. Onset and progression of human osteoarthritis-can growth factors, inflammatory cytokines, or dif-
ferential miRNA expression concomitantly induce proliferation, ECM degradation, and inflammation in articular cartilage?. Int. 
J. Mol. Sci. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​ijms1​90822​82 (2018).
	23.	 Mankin, H. J. & Lippiello, L. Biochemical and metabolic abnormalities in articular cartilage from osteo-arthritic human hips. J. 
Bone Jt. Surg. Am. 52, 424–434 (1970).
	24.	 van der Kraan, P. M. & van den Berg, W. B. Chondrocyte hypertrophy and osteoarthritis: role in initiation and progression of 
cartilage degeneration?. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 20, 223–232. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​joca.​2011.​12.​003 (2012).
	25.	 Mankin, H. J., Dorfman, H., Lippiello, L. & Zarins, A. Biochemical and metabolic abnormalities in articular cartilage from osteo-
arthritic human hips. II. Correlation of morphology with biochemical and metabolic data. J. Bone Jt. Surg. Am. 53, 523–537 (1971).
	26.	 Goldring, M. B. & Otero, M. Inflammation in osteoarthritis. Curr. Opin. Rheumatol. 23, 471–478. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​BOR.​
0b013​e3283​49c2b1 (2011).
	27.	 Radin, E. L. et al. Effects of mechanical loading on the tissues of the rabbit knee. J. Orthop. Res. 2, 221–234. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1002/​jor.​11000​20303 (1984).
	28.	 Kouri, J. B., Jimenez, S. A., Quintero, M. & Chico, A. Ultrastructural study of chondrocytes from fibrillated and non-fibrillated 
human osteoarthritic cartilage. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 4, 111–125. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​s1063-​4584(05)​80320-6 (1996).
	29.	 Chang, C., Lauffenburger, D. A. & Morales, T. I. Motile chondrocytes from newborn calf: migration properties and synthesis of 
collagen II. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 11, 603–612. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​s1063-​4584(03)​00087-6 (2003).
	30.	 Maniwa, S. et al. Effects of hyaluronic acid and basic fibroblast growth factor on motility of chondrocytes and synovial cells in 
culture. Acta Orthop. Scand. 72, 299–303. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​00016​47015​28466​64 (2001).
	31.	 Takebayashi, T. et al. Hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor modulates cell motility, proliferation, and proteoglycan synthesis of 
chondrocytes. J. Cell Biol. 129, 1411–1419. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1083/​jcb.​129.5.​1411 (1995).
	32.	 Fujita, T. et al. Runx2 induces osteoblast and chondrocyte differentiation and enhances their migration by coupling with PI3K-Akt 
signaling. J. Cell Biol. 166, 85–95. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1083/​jcb.​20040​1138 (2004).
	33.	 Stockwell, R. A. The cell density of human articular and costal cartilage. J. Anat. 101, 753–763 (1967).
	34.	 Huch, K. Knee and ankle: human joints with different susceptibility to osteoarthritis reveal different cartilage cellularity and matrix 
synthesis in vitro. Arch. Orthop. Trauma Surg. 121, 301–306. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s0040​20000​225 (2001).
	35.	 Gilmore, R. S. & Palfrey, A. J. Chondrocyte distribution in the articular cartilage of human femoral condyles. J. Anat. 157, 23–31 
(1988).
	36.	 Hunziker, E. B., Quinn, T. M. & Häuselmann, H. J. Quantitative structural organization of normal adult human articular cartilage. 
Osteoarthr. Cartil. 10, 564–572. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1053/​joca.​2002.​0814 (2002).
	37.	 Kellgren, J. H. & Lawrence, J. S. Radiological assessment of osteo-arthrosis. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 16, 494–502 (1957).
	38.	 Newe, A. Enriching scientific publications with interactive 3D PDF: an integrated toolbox for creating ready-to-publish figures. 
PeerJ Comput. Sci. 2, e64 (2016).
Acknowledgements
For removal of the tissue samples, we thank the orthopaedic surgeons from the Department of Orthopaedic Sur-
gery of the University Hospital of Tübingen; from the BG Trauma Centre Tübingen; and from Winghofer Clinic, 
Rottenburg. We thank Jörg Hammel of the Helmholtz-Zentrum Geesthacht for helping with the segmentation 
and data reconstruction. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the from the Helmholtz Foundation 
for the measurements at the DESY. We acknowledge support by Open Access Publishing Fund of University of 
Tübingen. All figures and tables were created by the authors themselves.
Author contributions
M.D. helped to interpret the data and wrote the manuscript; K.R.B. performed the experiments and data acquisi-
tion, did the segmentation and rendering of the µCT images and co-wrote the manuscript; I.G. performed the 
µCT experiments and helped to write the manuscript; S.F. assisted with the µCT segmentation and rendering 
and helped to write the manuscript; J.W. helped with the experiments and to write the manuscript; F.B. helped 
with the µCT experiments and with the statistical analyses, B.R. oversaw the study and co-wrote the manuscript; 
U.K.H. designed the study, supervised the experiments and wrote the manuscript.
11
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2021) 11:9783  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-89582-w
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Funding
Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1038/​s41598-​021-​89582-w.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to K.R.B.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the 
Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
© The Author(s) 2021

===== SegarraQueralt2022_SciRep_ChondrocyteRegulatoryNetwork+OA =====

1
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:3856  
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07776-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Regulatory network‑based model 
to simulate the biochemical 
regulation of chondrocytes 
in healthy and osteoarthritic 
environments
Maria Segarra‑Queralt1, Michael Neidlin2, Laura Tio3, Jordi Monfort3,4, Joan Carles Monllau3,5, 
Miguel Á. González Ballester1,6, Leonidas G. Alexopoulos2, Gemma Piella1 & 
Jérôme Noailly1*
In osteoarthritis (OA), chondrocyte metabolism dysregulation increases relative catabolic activity, 
which leads to cartilage degradation. To enable the semiquantitative interpretation of the intricate 
mechanisms of OA progression, we propose a network-based model at the chondrocyte level that 
incorporates the complex ways in which inflammatory factors affect structural protein and protease 
expression and nociceptive signals. Understanding such interactions will leverage the identification 
of new potential therapeutic targets that could improve current pharmacological treatments. Our 
computational model arises from a combination of knowledge-based and data-driven approaches that 
includes in-depth analyses of evidence reported in the specialized literature and targeted network 
enrichment. We achieved a mechanistic network of molecular interactions that represent both 
biosynthetic, inflammatory and degradative chondrocyte activity. The network is calibrated against 
experimental data through a genetic algorithm, and 81% of the responses tested have a normalized 
root squared error lower than 0.15. The model captures chondrocyte-reported behaviors with 95% 
accuracy, and it correctly predicts the main outcomes of OA treatment based on blood-derived 
biologics. The proposed methodology allows us to model an optimal regulatory network that controls 
chondrocyte metabolism based on measurable soluble molecules. Further research should target the 
incorporation of mechanical signals.
Abbreviations
OA	
Osteoarthritis
SS	
Steady states
GA	
Genetic algorithm
NMAD	
Normalized mean absolute deviation
NRSE	
Normalized root squared error
LIT	
Literature-based network
AMD	
Absolute mean deviation
ENR	
Enriched network
OPT	
Optimized network
ACS	
Autologous conditioned serum
IL-1β	
Interleukin 1 β
TNF-α	
Tumor necrosis factor-alpha
IL-6	
Interleukin 6
LIF	
Leukemia inhibitory factor
OPEN
1BCN MedTech, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. 2Department of Mechanical Engineering, National 
Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece. 3IMIM, Barcelona, Spain. 4Rheumatology Department, Hospital 
del Mar, Barcelona, Spain. 5Orthopedic Surgery and Traumatology, Department, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, 
Spain. 6ICREA, Barcelona, Spain. *email: jerome.noailly@upf.edu
2
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:3856  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07776-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
IL-17	
Interleukin 17
IL-18	
Interleukin 18
IL-8	
Interleukin 8
IFN-γ	
Interferon gamma
TGF-β	
Transforming growth factor beta
FGF2	
Fibroblast growth factor-2
BMP2	
Bone morphogenic protein-2
MMPs	
Matrix metalloproteinases
ADAMTs	
A desintegrin-like and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin
COL2A	
Collagen type II
ACAN	
Aggrecan
VEGF	
Vascular endothelial growth factor
PEG2	
Prostaglandin E2
Osteoarthritis (OA) appears from a combination of risk factors, among which aging and obesity are the most 
important. It affects approximately 22% of men and 31% of women over 55 years of age in 2019 according to the 
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, provoking substantial morbidity and diminished quality of ­life1,2. 
The main hallmarks of OA are the degradation of articular cartilage and inflammation, which can cause intense 
pain and disability.
Several guidelines for OA treatment have been developed, mainly targeting pain reduction and functional 
restoration. They include conservative interventions, mostly based on painkillers, but total knee arthroplasty 
might eventually be ­required3,4. Disease-modifying drugs are not yet available because the mechanisms that alter 
homeostasis and pathophysiology of the articular cartilage involve complex and poorly understood interactions 
among genetic, biochemical, and mechanical ­factors5. Consequently, no interventions to repair degraded cartilage 
or decelerate the progression of OA are currently ­available6.
Despite the multietiology of OA, it is suggested that secreted inflammatory mediators are critical players in 
OA pathophysiology, at least in early idiopathic ­OA7 (see Fig. 1). To better understand how chondrocytes stop 
working adequately to ensure the maintenance of joint cartilage, we should first apprehend the key biochemical 
interactions that control the balance between catabolic and anabolic processes.
Multiple in vivo or in vitro experiments have been performed to analyze the role of inflammatory media-
tors in the context of OA (see Additional Material 1 A1 Table 1 in the Additional Material 1 with referenced 
bibliography). Nevertheless, researchers have not reached a clear consensus about any systematic chains of 
molecular mechanisms that explain chondrocyte dysregulation, and the complex interplay among the involved 
signaling pathways makes the challenge even larger. In this context, computational systems biology models offer 
integrative frameworks to analyze the interactions among complex sets of proteins, and directed protein–protein 
interaction networks/graphs that map the interactions among key cell regulators are particularly appealing. In 
such networks, the nodes are molecules (in the current study, mainly secreted proteins), and the edges or links 
represent the relationships among nodes and have specific directions. One of the main challenges is to integrate 
the most relevant nodes and acquire a proper network topology that might help understand how chondrocytes 
process signals, generate hypotheses and test causative cell responses to microenvironmental ­simulation8,9.
Soluble molecules, i.e. cytokines and chemokines, act as high-level cellular regulators of chondrocyte metabo-
lism. The interactions between these proteins can be modeled as a network in the form of a continuous dynami-
cal system. Dynamic models predict how a static protein-protein network may behave according to different 
initial nodal perturbations that may represent different measurable cartilage microenvironments through the 
analysis of the steady states (SS). In a dynamical system, SS are an example of an attractor that can be achieved 
with a given set of initial conditions. In cell biology, we compare the attractors or SS with long-term cell activity 
or ­phenotypes9,10.
There are different approaches to designing a static directed graph (i.e., a set of nodes connected by one-way 
edges or links): knowledge- or data-driven11. We hereby propose a combination of both approaches. When 
designing the knowledge-driven network, we did not consider intermediate metabolites. We assumed that such 
high-level modeling would allow calibration and direct comparison against experimental measurements of the 
chondrocyte secretome (data-driven approach)12,13. Eventually, we validated the ability of the model to predict 
semi-quantitatively reasonable changes in chondrocyte activity depending on the cell biochemical environment.
Results
An initial prior knowledge network model was built by manual biocuration in the form of a literature-based 
protein interactome specific to articular cartilage and chondrocytes and, to some extent, to OA. Anabolic and 
catabolic generic interactions were further included by enriching the interactome with the protein–protein 
interaction database ­STRING14. The enriched network was then calibrated against experimental data through a 
genetic algorithm, leading to a new optimized network. Genetic algorithm is an optimization method that mimics 
the Darwinian theory of evolution. Based on an objective function, the algorithm chooses the best individuals 
(the most adapted) within each generation until the optimized solution is found (when a stopping criterion, 
defined by the user, is fulfilled). Each of the three protein interactomes was tested qualitatively and quantitatively 
by perturbating the model, according to independent experiments (quantitative test) and literature knowledge 
(qualitative test). For the qualitative test, we checked whether the model could replicate well-established chondro-
cyte behaviors in OA (see Additional Material 1 A1 Table 2 in the Additional Material). An extensive quantitative 
assessment was performed by computing (i) the normalized mean absolute deviation (NMAD) to measure the 
cumulative error between the predicted and the experimental datasets, and (ii) the normalized root squared error 
3
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:3856  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07776-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
(NRSE) for each simulated data. To sum up, a 3-step methodology (reading-enriching-optimizing) is developed 
to establish a first immunomodulatory network-based model that can control chondrocyte metabolism under 
different biochemical environments, in a context of early idiopathic OA.
Literature based network (LIT) model. 
The conducted search allowed us to select a total of 63 arti-
cles. Data from these works were used to design the literature-based network (LIT) depicted in Fig. 2. Figure 3 
A (blue bars) shows that the basal steady states (SS) of the network converged to a catabolic state: proinflam-
matory-related nodes and degrading enzymes have a final expression close to 1. The LIT network stimulation 
with the main proinflammatory cytokines involved in OA (IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-6, IL-8, IL-17 and IL-18) led to a 
catabolic-like SS. Therefore, no significant changes were observed between them (t-test, α = 0.05). Qualitative 
evaluation further shows that the LIT network can only predict 75% of the reported behaviors summarized in 
the additional material section Additional Material A1 Table 2. Finally, this network yields an absolute mean 
deviation (AMD) value of 0.1660 (i.e., approximately 16.5155% of cumulative error expressed as normalized 
mean absolute deviation, NMAD) when used to reproduce the experiments by the Melas et al.12 experimental 
data set. When calculated against Neidlin et al.13, the cumulative error was 6.5412%.
Enriched network (ENR) model. 
Network enrichment with high-throughput tools allowed us to intro-
duce interactions never reported before in chondrocytes, as well as missing links not found manually in the 
literature-based network model (Fig. 2), such as the inhibition of TGF-β by IL-1β and TNF-α (see Additional 
Material A1 Table 3 in the additional material section). In Fig. 4 it can be seen the enriched directed graph. The 
t-test showed that enrichment led to significant differences between the basal and perturbed SS after proinflam-
matory node stimulation (Fig. 3 B (orange bars)). In the basal state, nodes corresponding to anti-inflammatory 
cytokines (interleukin 10 (IL-10), interleukin 13 (IL-13) and interleukin (IL-4)), structural proteins (COL2A 
and ACAN) and TIMP were activated. In contrast, after proinflammatory stimulation, degrading enzymes and 
nociceptive cytokines (PEG2 and VEGF) reached maximum expression, among other catabolic nodes. Fur-
thermore, COL2A and ACAN became inhibited, as well as growth factors such as ­IGF1 and TFG-β. Qualitative 
evaluation showed that the ENR model predicted 57% of the reported chondrocyte metabolic characteristics 
well. The value of objective function when compared to the Melas et al.12 data (training set) is 0.0812 (approxi-
mately 13% in terms of cumulative error). When computed against Neidlin et al.13 (test data set), the cumulative 
error was 10.6024% expressed as a normalized mean absolute deviation (NMAD) value.
Figure 1.   Involvement of regulatory proteins in chondrocyte and articular cartilage metabolism and 
homeostasis. In a healthy state, the predominant proteins are those that have a pro-anabolic nature, whereas 
for different reasons, when OA starts, pro-inflammatory cytokines increase and disrupt the balance between 
catabolic and anabolic molecules. In healthy articular cartilage (AC), chondrocytes remain in a quiescent state 
with very low turnover, and a balance between anabolic and catabolic cell processes is reached. In contrast, 
in OA, chondrocytes become dysregulated and start proliferating, increasing the production of inflammatory 
mediators and matrix-degrading enzymes, which causes mechanical weakness. Then, the basal activity of 
chondrocytes shifts into a more catabolic phenotype, and articular cartilage degrades as chondrocytes lose their 
ability to repair any damage in the surrounding extracellular matrix. Created with BioRender.com (2021).
4
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:3856  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07776-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Optimized network (OPT) model. 
After topology optimization (see directed graph in Fig. 5), the nor-
malized mean absolute deviation (NMAD) further decreased from around 13 to 12%. The optimized network 
(OPT) could integrate well pro-inflammatory stimuli that lead to a significant change in the steady state. Fig-
ure 3 C shows that when a catabolic stimulus (orange bars) was applied, the network went from a healthy state 
to a catabolic steady state: degrading enzymes and proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-17 or IL-6) had high 
expression rates, and anabolic factors were no longer expressed (structural proteins and almost every growth 
factor). Independent validation calculations revealed that OPT had a higher capacity than the ENR to reproduce 
independent experimental data by Neidlin et al.13 from 10.6024 to 7.9420% of NMAD. Moreover, qualitative 
evaluation showed that the optimized network could reproduce 95% of the expected chondrocyte activity, as 
reported in the literature. Figure 6 shows the decrease in the Normalized Root Mean Squared Error (NRSE) for 
each data point before (on the left) and after (on the right) the optimization step. Then, in Fig. 6, it can be seen 
NRSE for the validation data set, with an 81% accuracy in the OPT model.
Figure 2.   Literature-based network (LIT). Nodes of the network correspond to the most relevant osteoarthritis-
related molecules. Nodes are interconnected with each other with a set of activating (green) and inhibiting (red) 
links or edges. The summarized connectivity can be seen in Additional Material 1 A1 Table 3.
5
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:3856  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07776-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Proof of concept. 
We replicated Frizziero et al.14 treatment with our OPT model with the three different 
initial conditions described in the Methods. The t-test (α = 0.05) indicated whether the simulated scenarios sig-
nificantly changed the catabolic steady states (SS) of the OPT model to a more anabolic SS.
•	 Scenario 1: Autologous conditioned serum (ACS) molecules clamped at 1. Figure 7A shows that catabolic 
nodes and pain-related nodes ­(PEG2 and VEGF) reduced their expression, and pro-anabolic and structural 
proteins recovered with significant differences compared to the initial catabolic SS.
•	 Scenario 2: Both proinflammatory cytokines and anabolic factors from ACS clamped at 1. Figure 7B shows 
that MMPs and pain-related molecules were reduced, but the expression of structural proteins was not 
restored. No significant differences with catabolic SS could be appreciated according to the t-test.
•	 Scenario 3: Anabolic nodes from the ACS clamped at 1; catabolic cytokines clamped at 50% of their poten-
tial. Figure 7I shows that the perturbed model could restore the levels of COL2A but not ACAN. MMPs and 
pain-associated nodes (VEGF and PEG2) were reduced. Significant differences were calculated compared 
to the initial catabolic SS.
Discussion
In osteoarthritis (OA), cellular and matrix changes occur because biochemical stimuli alter chondrocyte func-
tion, eventually leading to articular cartilage composition and architecture changes. Experimental measurements 
provide a wealth of information about the influence of single anti- or proinflammatory mediators or growth 
factors on chondrocyte protein expression. To date, the comprehensive integration of such information govern-
ing OA development remains ­limited15. Systems modeling approaches can, however, complement experimental 
work, and computational models have been widely used in the fields of cancer, cardiovascular diseases, and 
neurodegeneration but are not so widely exploited in OA ­research16.
In this study, a new in silico network model was developed to represent biochemical interactions at the cell 
level, and it successfully replicated known chondrocyte behaviors in healthy and OA environments. Our com-
putational model is interpretable in the sense that it represents current biological knowledge about chondrocyte 
immunogenicity in the context of early idiopathic OA. Although our model can predict early molecular markers 
of hypertrophy, it does not target advanced events of OA progression, such as the switch from healthy to hyper-
trophic chondrocyte, or fibrotic remodeling of ­cartilage17.
Several examples in the literature further corroborate the potential of computational systems biology models 
and simulations to support the combat against knee OA: Proctor et al.16 developed a computational model of 
the intracellular regulatory network that controls the synthesis/degradation of collagen by chondrocytes; Hui 
et al.18 exploited the impact of age-related molecules on the development of OA; and Kerkhofs et al.19 studied the 
ACAN
ADAMTs
BMP2
CASP8
COL2A
CYCS
FGF2
IFNG
IGF1
IL10
IL13
IL17
IL18
IL1b
IL4
IL6
IL8
LIF
MMP1
MMP13
MMP14
MMP3
NO
PEG2
PGA
TGFb
TIMP
TNFa
VEGF
0
0.5
1
ACAN
ADAMTs
BMP2
CASP8
COL2A
CYCS
FGF2
IFNG
IGF1
IL10
IL13
IL17
IL18
IL1b
IL4
IL6
IL8
LIF
MMP1
MMP13
MMP14
MMP3
NO
PEG2
PGA
TGFb
TIMP
TNFa
VEGF
0
0.5
1
ACAN
ADAMTs
BMP2
CASP8
COL2A
CYCS
IFNG
IGF1
IL10
IL13
IL17
IL18
IL1b
IL4
IL6
IL8
LIF
MMP1
MMP13
MMP14
MMP3
NO
PEG2
PGA
TGFb
TIMP
TNFa
VEGF
0
0.5
1
Baseline
Inflammatory stimuli
Standard deviation
A
B
C
Figure 3.   Final steady states of the baseline (blue) and proinflammatory stimulations (orange). The three 
networks developed are represented: (A) the literature-based network; (B) the enriched network; and (C) the 
optimized network.
6
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:3856  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07776-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
dynamic behavior of a regulatory network that governs chondrocyte hypertrophy from a resting chondrocyte. 
However, current regulatory networks reported for chondrocytes do not exactly target the effects of cytokine 
dynamics in the onset of idiopathic OA. Rather, they focus on intracellular regulation details. To our knowledge, 
our regulatory network is the first to integrate the respective effects of different microenvironmental cell signals 
on effective cell activities, admitting soluble cytokine information as model inputs. Simulations captured the 
expected normalized influence of different regimens on the capacity of chondrocytes to retain full anabolic 
activity or provoke extracellular matrix degradation.
We show hereby that high-level semiquantitative regulatory networks can be built and summarize the molecu-
lar regulation of articular chondrocytes in a variety of measurable biochemical environments. The literature-
based network model was catabolic by default, pointing out the bias possibly induced through a knowledge-
driven modeling approach due to the large quantity of information related to catabolism compared to anabolism 
Figure 4.   Enriched network (ENR). It was performed with the help of a protein–protein public database 
­STRING21. The summarized connectivity can be seen in Additional Material 1 A1 Table 3.
7
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:3856  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07776-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
regarding cartilage biology and OA. Both semiquantitative and qualitative assessments of the simulations revealed 
that this shortcoming impaired the capacity to develop reliable knowledge-driven models.
However, we could successfully improve the literature-based network (LIT) model out of public databases. 
The enrichment used mining of both chondrocyte-specific and nonspecific literature and allowed the enriched 
network (ENR) model to reflect the biosynthetic activity of a normal chondrocyte in terms of aggrecans and type 
II collagen, in contrast to the LIT model. Anabolic information has never been reported before for chondrocytes, 
such as the activation of IL-10 and IL-13 by IL-4. These reactions are commonly associated with these cytokines, 
as this information derives from curated pathways. However, to the best of our knowledge, this cell type has 
never been stated before. In addition, we included OA interactions that were not identified through manual 
curation of the specific OA literature. For example, the inhibition of TGF-β by TNF-α and IL-1β seemed to be 
Figure 5.   Optimized network (OPT). It was achieved by an optimization process based on a genetic algorithm. 
The dotted lines are the ones that the GA has eliminated. The summarized interactions can be found in 
Additional Material 1 A1 Table 4.
8
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:3856  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07776-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
cornerstone for the anabolic-catabolic switch of the networks when a pro-catabolic environment was simulated. 
Interestingly, Roman-Blas et al. reported a similar behavior in bovine chondrocytes, highlighting the potential 
of the model to generate relevant information and hypothesis for the experimental exploration of the regulation 
of cartilage ­metabolism20. Actually, the optimization process eliminated the inhibition by IL-1β and preserved 
the inhibition by TNF-α, highlighting the key role of this molecule which is often pointed out as an important 
marker of low-grade inflammation. This suggests that anti-TNF-α treatments might be promising in terms of 
cartilage regeneration approaches, rather than the usually tested anti-IL-1β drugs.
Node-edge graphs are collected in several public databases and aim to represent the current knowledge 
of the scientific literature about the entire interactome (i.e., ­STRING21, ­KEGG22, ­REACTOME23). Despite an 
improvement of the enriched network (ENR) model compared to the literature-based (LIT) network, several 
limitations remain and are difficult to identify and control in network modelling. On the one hand, biases might 
still be present (e.g., the proteins supposed to be more relevant are better studied). On the other hand, ambivalent 
behaviors, i.e., conflicting opinions in the literature, can lead to problems in decision making from the perspec-
tive of the model developer. But, they can be used as an initial step to create a knowledge-derived network or to 
enrich the interactions manually retrieved from a set of specialized articles. However, it has biases. To overcome 
this, we fitted the enriched network (ENR) model with metabolomics data, which come from cytokine release 
measurements after stimulation of biological samples, through a genetic algorithm (GA) using absolute mean 
deviation (AMD) as a fitness function. We chose the AMD over other conventional fitness functions because it 
seemed to provide the GA with improved flexibility for the adjustment of node connectivity and led to the most 
robust solutions in terms of biological interpretability. Indeed, the AMD allowed us to achieve excellent qualita-
tive and relatively good quantitative assessments against independent data. However, one must be cautious with 
error compensations due to possible opposite signs of nodal errors, e.g., potentially leading to extremely low 
error descriptors. Here, we used the normalized mean absolute deviation (NMAD), which reflected the absolute 
cumulative error over 67 individual node responses and led to a mean global error of 8% for the whole optimized 
network (OPT) model, which was deemed accepted in light of the qualitative assessment results. The Normalized 
CYCS
FGF2
IFNG
IL10
IL13
IL17
IL4
IL8
TNFa
Node
BMP2
FGF2
IL10
IL13
IL1b
IL4
IL6
IL8
TGFb
TNFa
Stimuli
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
CYCS
IFNG
IL10
IL13
IL17
IL4
IL8
TNFa
Node
BMP2
IL10
IL13
IL1b
IL4
IL6
IL8
TGFb
TNFa
Stimuli
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 6.   Normalized root squared error (NRSE) data point by data point before (at left) and after (at right) 
the optimization for the test set. Black squares are not considered when calculating the NRSE because the same 
protein used to perturb the model was then measured.
Figure 7.   Proof of Concept steady states for each scenario. (A) First scenario: optimized network simulated 
with autologous conditioned serum (ACS). (B) Second scenario: Proinflammatory nodes of the optimized 
stimulation at their maximum capacity along with ACS stimulation to simulate an osteoarthritic joint or 
environment. (C) Third condition: proinflammatory nodes of the optimized stimulation at half of their 
maximum capacity along with ACS stimulation to simulate an osteoarthritic joint or environment with partial 
modulation of proinflammatory cytokines.
9
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:3856  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07776-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Root Squared Error was calculated in addition to the NMAD to deeply examine the error cancelation effects in 
the OPT model, and 81% of the predicted responses had an error below 13%.
The improvement of the response of the data-driven optimized network (OPT) model compared to the 
enriched network (ENR) model reveals that knowledge-driven network approaches benefit from experimental 
data, possibly decreasing information bias. However, in data-driven approaches, it is difficult to infer biologically 
relevant outcomes beyond the influence of the reduced set of specific data available for quantitative calibration 
and validation. In fact, the literature-based network (LIT) network led to lower normalized mean absolute devia-
tion (NMAD) values than the ENR and OPT models when evaluated against the independent data by Neidlin 
et al.13, but the qualitative validation of this network failed completely. For this reason, fluxomics is being increas-
ingly used to enhance model interpretability in data-based metabolic ­modeling24. Provided such quantitative 
assessments are also considered, the results of our qualitative evaluation, with up to 95% accuracy and sound 
predictions of the outcome of autologous conditioned serum (ACS) treatment, support that the use of steady 
states information is helpful to develop biomedically relevant hypotheses for computational and systems biology 
models. A remarkable novelty is the prediction of biologically interpretable and contrastable steady states for 
articular chondrocyte metabolic activity under normal conditions and in a plurality of catabolic, anabolic and 
mixed biochemical environments based on measurable soluble factors. Our evaluation supports that our model 
can predict a wide range of chondrocyte response to biochemical perturbations, according to both knowledge 
(see qualitative evaluation in the “Results” section) and data (see quantitative validation in the “Results” sec-
tion), independent of the network design and calibration processes. Besides, it is possible to include the possible 
regulation effects by the extracellular matrix (see Additional Material 3).
Regulation networks can be modeled with various mathematical approaches. The most commonly used 
models are Boolean and ordinary differential equation models. We are interested in the second one since it 
can describe transient and (semi) quantitative cell responses. However, the cost is a high number of reaction 
parameters that are difficult to define. Different methodologies are presented to extract dynamical behavior 
(i.e., Mendoza et al.25 or Krumised et al.26) from nonspecific information to translate discrete node-edge graphs 
into continuous systems. Dynamic analysis can simulate the temporal evolution of the different nodes under 
specific conditions and to study the possible outcomes (steady states, SS) of the established network. In fact, 
our optimized network (OPT) model reaches the appropriate SSs under pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine 
stimulations, so it can properly integrate the most studied cytokines involved in OA: IL-1β perturbation in the 
OPT model can strongly activate MMP13 and decrease structural proteins (ACAN and COL2A). These biochemi-
cal events are major hallmarks of OA chondrocytes. Another interesting feature of our model is the multiple 
ability of NO to induce apoptosis-related proteins (CYCS and CASP8), IL-18 (a proinflammatory cytokine) and 
degrading enzymes, even though no current experimental data were available for ROS. Qualitative results show 
that the outcome of our OPT network following NO perturbation is in accordance with what is expected in 
­chondrocytes27,28. NO in cartilage cells is closely related to increasing the expression of proinflammatory nodes, 
especially IL-18. Our OPT model mimicked this behavior, as it increased the expression rate of IL-18 after NO 
stimulation. This type of behavior, as far as we are concerned, has only been attributed to ­chondrocytes27,29. It is 
true that we have found several interactions concerning secretome chondrocyte information based on cytokine 
perturbations. However, not all them have been checked directly in chondrocytes without scanning the effect of 
signaling pathways. This approach has therefore highlighted the need for experimental data in this field.
There are other viable approaches to fit experimental data, such as ­CellNopt30, SigNetTrainer of the CellNe-
tAnalyzer ­toolbox31, ­DoRoTHea32 or ­ANIMO33. We choose a genetic algorithm (GA) process over such tools 
for several reasons. First, CellNopt’s fitness function is based on Boolean logic models, and we were interested 
in continuous network models. Additionally, it does not ensure global error minimization, as we did by using 
the absolute mean deviation (AMD) in a GA. Second, CellNetAnalyzer was built for microorganism engineer-
ing purposes. DoRoThea was meant to predict transcription factor activities from the gene expression of their 
targets (we hereby focused on higher regulation processes). Finally, with ANIMO, it is possible to determine 
how fast one edge influences a node with respect to others, for intracellular networks (network kinetics). As we 
work with a high-level cell activity model, it is difficult to establish edge’s kinetics. In contrast, the methodology 
in Mendoza et al. ensures that reaction kinematics does not affect the steady states of the system through the 
distribution of α and β parameters [see Eqs. (6) and (7)], being the latter uniquely defined by the knowledge- 
and/or data-driven topology. Then, our own optimization process led to the prediction of basal activation of 
growth factors, i.e., TGF-β and ­IGF1, that are important for the anabolic activity of healthy chondrocytes and 
cartilage ­homeostasis34,35. The GA used for the optimization of the enriched network (ENR) model drastically 
reduced the AMD between experimental and predicted data and, as discussed before, led to a positive independ-
ent quantitative validation of the eventual optimized network (OPT) model when assessed against multiplexed 
protein measurements by Neidlin et al.13 (Fig. 6). On the one hand, our OPT model can reproduce experimental 
cytokine release data better than the ENR model when independently validated. On the other hand, independ-
ent validation showed that the training step did not generate any overfitting. The OPT model has the ability to 
predict a wide range of biochemical stimulations, which was confirmed by the 95% accuracy achieved during 
the qualitative evaluation against 69 expected cell behaviors (Additional Material A1 Table 2).
The selection of the final optimized network (OPT) model network required a trade-off between quantita-
tive fit and interpretability. We explored 1800 networks with different objective functions and carefully analyzed 
the best networks according to experimental outcomes and/or literature-based behaviors. As shown in the 
Additional Material 2, the genetic algorithm (GA) often found a solution that had a low fitting error but lacked 
biological plausibility. As our model was based on knowledge, it is hard to think that the network is not working 
for the purpose for which it was designed, i.e., integrate the current knowledge in chondrocyte metabolism in a 
network-based model. We found networks that were able to represent almost every individual response in the 
dataset used for the independent quantitative validation (with 88% accuracy). However, these networks could 
10
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:3856  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07776-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
only reproduce 50% of the knowledge-based responses, with some of the predictions that were simply nonsense, 
biologically speaking. In contrast, we also found networks with excellent qualitative evaluation (at least 90% 
accuracy), but they were catabolic per se and/or led to poor quantitative independent validation and/or were 
unable to replicate autologous conditioned serum (ACS) treatment outcomes. Our selected OPT model offered 
excellent interpretability (it could represent 95% of the knowledge-based responses tested) with a notorious 
ability to represent experimental responses, and 81% of the responses quantitatively tested had an error lower 
than 13%. Remarkably, the quantitative simulation-experimental mismatches could be explained in terms of 
biological features. For example, high errors involving the CYCS node are likely due to the intracellular nature 
of the ­protein36, whereas we were working mainly with secreted proteins. Second, the network response in terms 
of IL-13 and IL-10 activation upon IL-4 stimulation can be associated with the lack of mechanotransduction 
pathways, which is further discussed below.
Controversially, in the baseline of our optimized network (OPT) model, the expression rate of IL-4 was 0, i.e., 
the same as in a pro-inflammatory situation, whereas several studies report that IL-4 is synthesized by healthy 
chondrocytes, and expression is reduced when OA ­appears37. Our model could not capture these changes in 
IL-4 expression. One possible explanation is that the generation of the model targeted information strictly 
limited to biochemical cell regulation, whereas IL-4 expression in normal chondrocytes is strongly associated 
with mechanotransduction pathways. Additionally, in the validation set by Neidlin et al.13, healthy cartilage 
explants were cultured under static conditions, and IL-4 production was not significant. Arguably, the authors 
also simulated OA cartilage explants through biochemical degradation of the healthy samples, and the produc-
tion of IL-4 was activated by IL-1β stimulation. However, because enzymatic degradation modifies the turgence 
of the tissue structure, it is not clear whether mechanotranduction would not have initiated such a response. 
The experiments from Sadler et al.38,39 demonstrated the relationship between integrin signaling and the release 
of IL-4 when chondrocytes were exposed to mechanical ­pressure40. IL-4 is a major active autocrine/paracrine 
signaling molecule able to induce an anabolic response of normal chondrocytes, which appears to be impaired 
in OA ­cartilage37. Accordingly, when our optimized model is initialized with the IL-4 node set to its maximum 
expression (i.e., 1), proanabolic ­(IGF1, TGF-β, TIMP), anti-inflammatory (IL-13, IL-10), and tissue structural 
nodes (COL2A and ACAN) involved in cartilage preservation achieve their maximum activation. However, 
the development of new models should explore the possible primary regulation of IL-4 and its effects through 
specific mechanotransduction pathways.
To see how our model could replicate an  in vivo independent situation for chondrocytes, we reproduced a 
treatment explained by Frizziero et al.14 based on autologous conditioned serum (ACS). Coherent results were 
obtained even though it is difficult to know exactly which should be the effect of the treatment on the initial 
conditions of the model in terms of inflammation, i.e., conditions largely controlled by the synovium, a priori. 
Therefore, we propose three different situations.
•	 The first scenario, with no stimulation of pro-catabolic nodes, could completely repair the protein expression 
profile of healthy chondrocytes with significant differences. No inflammatory mediators (principally TNF-α, 
since IL-1β was blocked) were expressed, but pain-associated molecules ­(PEG2 and VEGF) were expressed, 
and structural proteins were re-expressed, suggesting that ACS might have the capacity to restore degraded 
cartilage. However, according to Frizziero et al.14, no restoration of the articular cartilage could be seen. 
Hence, assuming that pro-catabolic nodes would simply shut down is probably too optimistic, since it sug-
gests that synovitis, low-grade inflammation or the effect of undue mechanical loads on degraded cartilage 
would be fully stopped.
•	 The second scenario, when trying to simulate a more catabolic environment (as expected in an OA situa-
tion), was consistent with the reported treatment by Frizziero et al.14: our model suggested that VEGF and 
­PEG2 were not re-expressed (i.e., pain reduction) and that no recovery of structural proteins can be observed 
(neither ACAN nor COL2A were re-expressed), which explains the lack of cartilage restoration observed 
clinically. However, the differences between the compared steady states of the model were not statistically 
relevant.
•	 The third scenario, with proinflammatory nodes clamped at 50% of its potential, showed a significant dif-
ference between steady states. In this case, COL2A was recovered, but not ACAN. Inflammatory nodes in 
the network had higher expression rates, but the inhibitory inputs from ACS reduced both the expression 
of MMPs and the activation of pain-associated nodes. In addition, when IL-1β had no restrictions, COL2A 
had higher expression rates. These results were consistent with the reported results of the treatment in vivo: 
pain was reduced, but the treatment failed to repair the damage from ECM.
Overall, the proof of concept shows that the outcome of the system (in terms of the expression of the nodes) 
depends on the initial states of the nodes. The mathematical model, generated by combining previous knowledge 
and specific experimental data, is able to replicate independent sets of both experimental data and literature-
based behaviors, beyond the specific data used for the development. Furthermore, the predicted molecule regu-
lations can qualitatively explain the outcome of a clinical treatment based on biologics. The results of our case 
study simulations also indicate that anti-IL1β therapies might not be sufficient to cope with OA in clinical trials, 
as highlighted in the ­literature41. And might be focused on anti TNF-α therapies, as the optimization process 
suggests. From a methodological point of view, this outcome reveals the importance of the baseline for network-
based models. Furthermore, given the nature of its nodes (i.e., soluble extracellular molecules), our network can 
easily be patient-specifically initialized with data from synovial fluid analyses.
Our model is designed to explore early idiopathic OA through cytokine stimulation. Such framework shall 
also be useful to explore the effect of metabolic syndromes on the triggering of OA, as those syndromes are also 
11
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:3856  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07776-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
related to the release of pro-catabolic cytokines in the synovium. Metabolism-specific nodes such as lipopoly-
saccharide, leptin and adiponectin would nicely complement the capacity to target metabolic origins of OA as 
they have been identified with ­inflammation42. Yet, as discussed before, a first priority is to complement the 
model by adding mechanotransduction pathways and combine the latter with the current cytokine signaling, 
which would also pave the way to explore traumatic origins of OA (secondary OA). In the meantime, the current 
model to describe the influence of immunogenicity in early OA is cornerstone for these developments towards 
the prediction of third causes of OA.
Further developments should tackle the dynamic stimulation of chondrocytes cytokine diffusion from the 
synovium, bone and the possible communication among chondrocytes (cell–cell signaling) at tissue level in 
longer terms through an agent-based model. But how autocrine and endocrine signaling might affect chondrocyte 
metabolism will be dictated by this network modelling approach, as it can integrate the action of soluble factors 
no matter its source tissue. Besides, in this work, we used the data in Neidlin et al. for validation, which involves 
samples from only two patients. In these experiments, no batch effects due to patient-to-patient variability were 
observed, and all experiments proved to be repeatable (quadruple tests). Hence, while the data are deemed of 
good quality, including more data from different patients shall support future developments of statistical model-
ling to address the important question of uncertainty associated to inter-subject variability.
In conclusion, an interpretable network-based model able to explain nontrivial interactions among the main 
biochemical factors involved in early idiopathic OA was developed, which eventually leads to specific regula-
tion of articular cartilage structural proteins. But, this cell-level model cannot readily capture changes at tissue 
level, which would require a description of the communication both among chondrocytes and adjacent cartilage 
tissues. Indeed, it could stand the basic rules of a chondrocyte behavior (when used as an agent) in an agent-
based solver to control tissue volume responses. However, our model is the first, to our knowledge, to readily 
incorporate soluble cytokines that are directly measurable in the synovium. Then, it might be a powerful tool to 
better understand and anticipate the effect of OA-modifying drugs.
Methodology
Overview. 
The first interactome was built from a corpus of peer reviewed articles. As the results suggested 
that the network was catabolically deviated, ­STRING21 was used to enrich the network with interactions from 
general ­knowledge21 leading to the enriched network (ENR) model. Finally, the ENR network was calibrated 
against experimental data with a genetic algorithm (GA); the resulting network was called the optimized net-
work (OPT) model (see Fig. 8A). Then, network was validated against experimental and knowledge based data.
Each of the three protein interactomes (LIT, ENR, OPT) was tested qualitatively and quantitatively. For the 
qualitative test, we checked whether the model could replicate well-established chondrocyte behaviors in OA 
(Additional Material 1 A1 Table 2). An extensive quantitative assessment was performed by computing the nor-
malized mean absolute deviation (NMAD)
To measure the cumulative error between the predicted (x), and the experimental datasets (y) and the Nor-
malized Root Squared Error (NRSE)
between each data point. The multiplexed phosphoproteomics measurements by Melas et al.12 and Neidlin et al.13 
were used for calibration and independent validation purposes, respectively. Finally, to evaluate how our model 
could integrate/assimilate metabolism changes, we assessed the ability to predict significantly different SSs under 
different initial conditions through a t-test (α = 0.05).
Literature‑based (LIT) network. 
First, we collected OA- and chondrocyte-related protein–protein inter-
actions based on the careful examination of a corpus of 63 expert journal articles (information summarized in 
Additional Material A1 Table 3). As a result, a first chondrocyte-specific model was developed based on the liter-
ature. We gathered information from different databases by using the keywords “osteoarthritis” AND “chondro-
cyte” AND “the molecule/node studied”. Only peer-reviewed articles from indexed journals were retained. We 
considered the action of important proinflammatory cytokines (interleukin 1 beta (IL-1β), tumor necrosis fac-
tor-alpha (TNF-α), interleukin 6 (IL-6), leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), interleukin 17 (IL-17) and interleukin 
18 (IL-18)), chemokines (interleukin 8 (IL-8)) and interferon gamma (IFN-γ). Proanabolic growth factors were 
also included: transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), fibroblast growth factor ­(FGF2) and bone morphogenic 
protein-2. ­(BMP2). They were studied at the cellular level with respect to the self-expression of matrix degrading 
enzymes (matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and a desintegrin-like and metalloproteinase with thrombospon-
din (ADAMTs)), structural proteins (collagen type II (COL2A) and aggrecan (ACAN)), pain-related factors, 
such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMP). Inter-
mediate metabolites were not included to facilitate model comparisons with cell/tissue culture experimental 
data. Based on Additional Material A1 Table 3 information, the LIT model was represented as a directed static 
graph, where a set of nodes, i.e., molecules, were related to each other through activating and inhibiting edges. To 
understand their directionality, the role of each node in the context of chondrocyte metabolism is summarized 
in Additional Material A1 Table 1 in the additional material.
(1)
NMAD =
N
n
 xn−yn
2

N
(2)
NRSEn =

(xn −yn)2
MAX.RSE
12
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:3856  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07776-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Network solving: the stable steady states. 
The activation of each node depends on the initial condi-
tions imposed on the system of ordinary differential equations. To calculate the final expression rate of each 
node, the static graph was mathematically translated into a semiquantitative model through a set of ordinary 
differential equations. For a given topology, the network state, S, at time t is the set of all node activation values 
at time t:
which can be considered a point in the (N-dimensional) state space of the system. If the state changes with time, 
the model is dynamic, and the time-varying components of the state can be defined as ­xn(t) with n = {1, . . . , N} . 
Then, the future state given an initial past state can be expressed as:
where f is a function that encodes the topology and the kinetics of the interactions among the components of 
the system and depends on the current state of the network as well as on the time-independent parameters, p. If 
the normalized concentration of each node, ­xn, is the unique continuous time-dependent variable of the system, 
(3)
S(t) = {x1(t), x2(t), . . . , xN(t)},
(4)
S(t2)f =
{S(t}1); p

,
t2 > t1
Figure 8.   Summarized methodology. (A) Workflow for the network design. The literature-based (LIT) 
network was built from available biological knowledge from specialized journals. Then, ­STRING21 was used 
to complement interactions, obtaining the enriched (ENR) network. Finally, a genetic algorithm (GA) and 
experimental data were used to tune the node interactions, leading to the optimized (OPT) network. (B) 
Illustration of how the steady state of the system is extracted from the dynamic information provided by the 
network calculations. (M&X is an acronym for the Mendoza et al.25 methodology).
13
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:3856  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07776-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
ordinary differential equations (ODEs) can be used to define the rates of change of the system components and, 
therefore, the future states of the network:
Generally, f in biochemical reactions follows Michaelis–Menten ­law43. However, it requires the complete 
signaling route and its reaction rate constants. Since this information is hard to find, f was defined following the 
method developed by Mendoza et al.25, which allows the modeling of key molecular player interactions in the 
midst of complex regulatory processes without taking into account the governing biochemical reactions. For 
node n, let xn ∈ [0, 1] denote its (normalized) activation level; let { xa
np }, p = 1, …, ­Pn, and {xi
nk }, k = 1,…,Kn, be the 
(levels of the) set of activators and inhibitors, respectively. Then, the total input ωn to the node is a combination 
of activation and inhibitory inputs:
where αnp > 0 and βnk > 0 are the weights of the corresponding activators and inhibitors, respectively. Note 
that ωn ∈ [0, 1] since xn ∈ [0, 1] and the activator and inhibitor weights are positive. The regulatory network can 
then be described by
where the first term of the right-hand side of Eq. (5) represents an activation function (i.e., a sigmoid function, 
with gain ­hn, of the total input ωn) and the second term is the decay, which is proportional to the activation level 
of the node by a factor γn > 0.
As proposed by Mendoza et al.25, we set the activator and inhibitor weights to 1, i.e., αnp = βnk = 1 for all n, 
p, k, and chose ­hn = 10 and γn = 1 for all n. These values were confirmed by Feher et al.44 to be a suitable choice, 
since they ensure a smooth sigmoidal response that better reproduces the biological response of a cell to an 
external stimulus.
The system was solved through the Runge–Kutta (order 4) method in MATLAB 2018b (The MathWorks, Inc, 
Massachusetts, USA) with the ode45 solver to find a global attractor or an steady state (SS) (see Fig. 8B). SS shall 
correspond to patterns of cell expression that can stand for systematic descriptions of chondrocyte regulation 
by microenvironmental chemokines. This theoretical information can be directly compared to experimental 
measurements from chondrocyte cultures and cartilage tissue explants.
Baseline calculations. 
A Steady State (SS) baseline was calculated for each network by a random initial 
condition based on Mersenne Twistter 0 seeds. To assess the effects of the imposed perturbations, the SS base-
line was compared to the perturbed SS through t-test calculations. Furthermore, the subtraction of the basal SS 
to the perturbed SS for quantitative network calibrations and validations made our theoretical node data range 
between − 1 and 1, which was extremely convenient for direct comparisons with the experimental data.
Enriched (ENR) network. 
For network enrichment, we used STRING (version 11.0)21 to complement 
the network with new interactions that could not be found in the literature review. First, we looked for the 
UniProt identification number of the human type of each protein in the literature-based (LIT) interactome. 
Then, in ­STRING21, we used the following list downloaded directly from UniProt as input to the multiple pro-
teins section: P02458, P10145, P05231, Q14116, P16112, O75173, P01137, P50281, P45452, P03956, P01375, 
Q16552, P22301, P35225, P05112, P12643, P05019, P09038, P99999, Q14790, P01033, P15692, P01584, P08254. 
We selected Homo sapiens as the organism. In the setting section, we selected text mining, experiments and 
databases with a minimum required interaction score with a medium confidence of 0.400. As the latter ensured 
inclusiveness, the automated data retrieval was followed by a second step of manual curation, to eliminate irrel-
evant or unrelated data. The stable SS of the ENR model was solved by using the system of Eq. (4), which was 
also used for the LIT network.
(5)
dxn
dt (t) = f
{xn(t)}, p

(6)
ωn =









 1+ αnp
 αnp

 αnpxa
np
1+ αnpxanp

1 −

1+ βnk
 βnk

 βnkxi
nk
1+ βnkxi
nk

J
 1+ αnp
 αnp

 αnpxa
np
1+ αnpxanp

JJ

1 −

1+ βnk
 βnk

 βnkxi
nk
1+ βnkxi
nk

JJJ
0 ≤xn ≤1
0 ≤ωn ≤1
hn, αnp, βnk, γn > 0
xa
np is the set of activators of xn
xi
nk is the set of inhibitors of xn
J is used if xn has activators and inhibitors
JJ is used if xn has only activators
JJJ is used if xn has only inhibitors
(7)
dxn
dt =
−e0.5hn + e−hn(ωn−0.5)

1 −e0.5hn
1 + e−h(ωn−0.5) −γnxn
14
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:3856  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07776-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Optimized (OPT) network. 
Experimental information from Melas et al.12 was used to optimize the topol-
ogy of the ENR model. Data consisted of cytokine release measurements with a Luminex assay (normalized 
between − 1 and 1) after different biochemical OA-related perturbations of monolayer chondrocyte cultures. 
We established the absolute mean difference (AMD) between the log-normalized data sets as fitness functions:
where the data shift by 2 ensures that the range of the logarithm starts at 0 (avoiding negative and asymptotic 
values) between the predicted (x) and the experimental (y) data sets. We chose to log-normalize the data to 
penalize higher percentual differences.
Function (6) was minimized through a genetic algorithm (GA) configured with default parameters in the 
MATLAB-GA ­toolbox45 except for the vectorization option, which was enabled. GA is a method for solving 
optimization problems based on a natural selection process that mimics biological evolution. At each step or 
generation, the algorithm selects individuals based on their efficiency (defined by an objective function that will 
define the best adapted individuals within a population) and a random component that replicates the random-
ness in genetic mutations in species. GA will use the selected individuals as parents to produce the children for 
the next generation. Over successive generations, the population “evolves” toward an optimal solution. The best 
point in the population in terms of the objective function approaches an optimal solution.
The solution found by the genetic algorithm (GA) led to a new network topology, i.e., the OPT network. Since 
GA’s random component, we repeated the optimization step 100 times, so we have generated 100 optimized 
networks. The selected final optimized network was chosen based on a careful examination of both the quali-
tative and quantitative results (see supplementary material) reviewed in the “Discussion” section. In addition 
to Function (6), we evaluated seven fitness functions (see Additional Material 2) with and without additional 
qualitative-based constraints. This constraint aims to penalize those with a catabolic baseline. Overall, a total of 
1800 networks were explored.
Qualitative assessment. 
We would like to assess the capacity of our model to represent current biological 
knowledge, not common assessed by computational models that are mainly focused on quantitative validations. 
Then, two evaluations has been done:
Simulation of expected anabolic/catabolic responses.  The OPT, ENR and LIT models were qualitatively eval-
uated against their capacity to converge toward an anabolic SS without any imposed initial conditions (this 
could be understood as the capacity to represent a healthy chondrocyte by our network model). Then, we tested 
their ability to replicate literature-established behaviors of chondrocytes under different pro-catabolic/anabolic 
microenvironments: we looked whether our model could reproduce reported chondrocyte behaviors in articular 
cartilage in the presence of single pro- or anti-inflammatory perturbations (summarized in Additional Material 
A1 Table 2 of the additional material).
Treatment simulation.  Many hemoderivative treatments for OA have high potential to modulate OA progres-
sion. We have selected Frizziero et al.14 study due to its high number of patients involved (n = 376), i.e., the largest 
number of participants implicated for this type of OA treatment as far as we are aware. Authors described that 
the injection of autologous conditioned serum (ACS), enriched with TGF-β, ­IGF1, IL-4, IL-10 and IL-1β antago-
nist, can significantly reduce pain in OA compared to placebo patients (p < 0.001).
Treatment simulations were combined with the definition of three different possible scenarios for concur-
rent synovitis. First, the OPT network was properly preconditioned to simulate an OA joint to achieve OA-like 
SS: proinflammatory cytokine stimulation (IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-6, IL-8, IL-17 and IL-18). Then, the three different 
scenarios were:
•	 Scenario 1: Catabolic nodes (but IL-1β) were free to be regulated by the network calculations. This scenario 
simulated the full potential of ACS molecules to regulate the inflammation that comes from the synovium.
•	 Scenario 2: In a persistent OA environment because of sustained synovitis, we clamped the pro-catabolic 
nodes at 1, in addition to the fixed activation of the ACS nodes and inhibition of IL-1β. The subjacent assump-
tion is that the synovium continues to send catabolic signals to chondrocytes.
•	 Scenario 3: Proanabolic molecules from the ACS were clamped at 1, and the catabolic nodes (but IL-1β) 
were clamped at 50% of their potential. This scenario assumed that the ACS molecules would mitigate the 
inflammation of the synovium and that their boundary concentrations would be higher than those of the 
pro-catabolic molecules.
t-tests (α = 0.05) were applied to check whether there was a significant difference between the OA-like SS state 
and the resulting state after the virtual administration of the ACS.
Received: 6 October 2021; Accepted: 18 February 2022
(6)
AMD =

N
n (ln(xn + 2)) −ln(yn + 2))
N

15
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:3856  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07776-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
References
	 1.	 Michael, J. W. P., Schlüter-Brust, K. U. & Eysel, P. Epidemiologie, ätiologie, diagnostik und therapie der gonarthrose. Deutsches 
Arzteblatt. 107(9), 152–162. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3238/​arzte​bl.​2010.​0152 (2010).
	 2.	 Nelson, A. E. Osteoarthritis year in review 2017: Clinical. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 26(3), 319–325. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​joca.​2017.​
11.​014 (2018).
	 3.	 Guilak, F. Biomechanical factors in osteoarthritis. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Rheumatol. 25(6), 815–823. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​berh.​
2011.​11.​013 (2011).
	 4.	 Loeser, R. F., Goldring, S. R., Scanzello, C. R. & Goldring, M. B. Osteoarthritis: A disease of the joint as an organ. Arthritis Rheum. 
64(6), 1697–1707. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​art.​34453 (2012).
	 5.	 Mueller, M. B. & Tuan, R. S. Anabolic/catabolic balance in pathogenesis of osteoarthritis: Identifying molecular targets. PM & R 
J. Injury Funct. Rehabil. 3(6 Suppl 1), S3–S11. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/J.​PMRJ.​2011.​05.​009 (2011).
	 6.	 Chen, D. et al. Osteoarthritis: Toward a comprehensive understanding of pathological mechanism. Bone Res. 5, 1–13. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1038/​boner​es.​2016.​44 (2017).
	 7.	 Kapoor, M., Martel-Pelletier, J., Lajeunesse, D., Pelletier, J. P. & Fahmi, H. Role of proinflammatory cytokines in the pathophysiol-
ogy of osteoarthritis. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 7(1), 33–42. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​nrrhe​um.​2010.​196 (2011).
	 8.	 Tsongalis, G. J. Integrative systems biology. In Molecular Pathology: The Molecular Basis of Human Disease (eds Coleman, W. B. & 
Tsongalis, G. J.) 205–215 (Elsevier Inc., 2018). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​B978-0-​12-​802761-​5.​00010-9.
	 9.	 Sobie, E. A. An introduction to dynamical systems. Sci. Signal. 4, tr6. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​scisi​gnal.​20019​82 (2011).
	10.	 Strogatz S. H. (Steven H. Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos: With Applications to Physics, Biology, Chemistry and Engineering/Steven 
H. Strogatz) (Perseus, 1994, accessed 20 April 2021); https://​upfin​der.​upf.​edu/​iii/​encore/​record/​C__​Rb124​9127__​Sstro​gatz__​Origh​
tresu​lt__​U__​X4;​jsess​ionid=​B9408​D53F3​BDE7F​324DF​51D48​D0AEC​DC?​lang=​cat.
	11.	 Lesage, R., Kerkhofs, J. & Geris, L. Computational modeling and reverse engineering to reveal dominant regulatory interactions 
controlling osteochondral differentiation: Potential for regenerative medicine. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 6, 165. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​3389/​fbioe.​2018.​00165 (2018).
	12.	 Melas, I. N. et al. Modeling of signaling pathways in chondrocytes based on phosphoproteomic and cytokine release data. Osteo-
arthr. Cartil. 22(3), 509–518. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​joca.​2014.​01.​001 (2014).
	13.	 Neidlin, M., Chantzi, E., Macheras, G., Gustafsson, M. G. & Alexopoulos, L. G. An ex vivo tissue model of cartilage degradation 
suggests that cartilage state can be determined from secreted key protein patterns. PLoS ONE 14(10), e0224231. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​02242​31 (2019).
	14.	 Frizziero, A., Giannotti, E., Oliva, F., Masiero, S. & Maffulli, N. Autologous conditioned serum for the treatment of osteoarthritis 
and other possible applications in musculoskeletal disorders. Br. Med. Bull. 105(1), 169–184. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​bmb/​lds016 
(2013).
	15.	 James, C. G., Appleton, C. T. G., Ulici, V., Michael Underhill, T. & Beier, F. Microarray analyses of gene expression during chon-
drocyte differentiation identifies novel regulators of hypertrophy. Mol. Biol. Cell 16(11), 5316–5333. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1091/​mbc.​
E05-​01-​0084 (2005).
	16.	 Proctor, C. J., Macdonald, C., Milner, J. M., Rowan, A. D. & Cawston, T. E. A computer simulation approach to assessing therapeutic 
intervention points for the prevention of cytokine-induced cartilage breakdown. Arthritis Rheumatol. 66(4), 979–989. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1002/​art.​38297 (2014).
	17.	 Rim, Y. A. & Ju, J. H. The role of fibrosis in osteoarthritis progression. Life 2021 11(1), 3. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​LIFE1​10100​03 
(2020).
	18.	 Hui, W. et al. Oxidative changes and signalling pathways are pivotal in initiating age-related changes in articular cartilage. Ann. 
Rheum. Dis. 75(2), 449–458. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​annrh​eumdis-​2014-​206295 (2016).
	19.	 Kerkhofs, J. et al. A qualitative model of the differentiation network in chondrocyte maturation: A holistic view of chondrocyte 
hypertrophy. PLoS ONE 11(8), e0162052. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​01620​52 (2016).
	20.	 Roman-Blas, J. A., Stokes, D. G. & Jimenez, S. A. Modulation of TGF-b signaling by proinflammatory cytokines in articular chon-
drocytes. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 15, 1367–1377. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​joca.​2007.​04.​011 (2007).
	21.	 Jensen, L. J. et al. STRING 8—A global view on proteins and their functional interactions in 630 organisms. Nucleic Acids Res. 
37(SUPPL. 1), D412–D416. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​nar/​gkn760 (2009).
	22.	 Kanehisa, M., Furumichi, M., Sato, Y., Ishiguro-Watanabe, M. & Tanabe, M. KEGG: Integrating viruses and cellular organisms. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 49(D1), D545–D551. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​NAR/​GKAA9​70 (2021).
	23.	 Zaragoza, C., Balbín, M., López-Otín, C. & Lamas, S. Nitric oxide regulates matrix metalloprotease-13 expression and activity in 
endothelium. Kidney Int. 61(3), 804–808. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1046/j.​1523-​1755.​2002.​00224.x (2002).
	24.	 Culley, C., Vijayakumar, S., Zampieri, G. & Angione, C. A mechanism-aware and multiomic machine-learning pipeline charac-
terizes yeast cell growth. Syst. Biol. Biophys. Comput. Biol. 117, 18869–18879. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1073/​pnas.​20029​59117/-/​DCSup​
pleme​ntal.y (2020).
	25.	 Mendoza, L. & Xenarios, I. A method for the generation of standardized qualitative dynamical systems of regulatory networks. 
Theor. Biol. Med. Model. 3(1), 13. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​1742-​4682-3-​13 (2006).
	26.	 Krumsiek, J., Pölsterl, S., Wittmann, D. M. & Theis, F. J. Odefy—From discrete to continuous models. BMC Bioinform. 11(1), 233. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​1471-​2105-​11-​233 (2010).
	27.	 Abramson, S. B. Osteoarthritis and nitric oxide. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 16(Suppl 2), S15-20. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S1063-​4584(08)​
60008-4 (2008).
	28.	 Zahan, O. M., Serban, O., Gherman, C. & Fodor, D. The evaluation of oxidative stress in osteoarthritis. Med. Pharm. Rep. 93(1), 
12–22. https://​doi.​org/​10.​15386/​mpr-​1422 (2020).
	29.	 Boileau, C. et al. The in situ up-regulation of chondrocyte interleukin-1-converting enzyme and interleukin-18 levels in experi-
mental osteoarthritis is mediated by nitric oxide. Arthritis Rheum. 46(10), 2637–2647. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​art.​10518 (2002).
	30.	 Terfve, C. et al. CellNOptR: A flexible toolkit to train protein signaling networks to data using multiple logic formalisms. BMC 
Syst. Biol. 6(1), 133. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​1752-​0509-6-​133 (2012).
	31.	 von Kamp, A., Thiele, S., Hädicke, O. & Klamt, S. Use of Cell NetAnalyzer in biotechnology and metabolic engineering. J. Biotechnol. 
261, 221–228. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jbiot​ec.​2017.​05.​001 (2017).
	32.	 Garcia-Alonso, L., Holland, C. H., Ibrahim, M. M., Turei, D. & Saez-Rodriguez, J. Benchmark and integration of resources for the 
estimation of human transcription factor activities. Genome Res. 29(8), 1363–1375. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​gr.​240663.​118 (2019).
	33.	 Schivo, S. et al. Modelling with ANIMO: Between fuzzy logic and differential equations. BMC Syst. Biol. 10(1), 1–15. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1186/​S12918-​016-​0286-Z/​FIGUR​ES/8 (2016).
	34.	 van der Kraan, P. M. Differential role of transforming growth factor-beta in an osteoarthritic or a healthy joint. J. Bone Metab. 
25(2), 65. https://​doi.​org/​10.​11005/​jbm.​2018.​25.2.​65 (2018).
	35.	 Wei, F.-Y., Lee, J. K., Wei, L., Qu, F. & Zhang, J.-Z. Correlation of insulin-like growth factor 1 and osteoarthritic cartilage degrada-
tion: A spontaneous osteoarthritis in guinea-pig. Eur. Rev. Med. Pharmacol. Sci. 21(20), 4493–4500 (2017) (accessed 2 July 2019); 
http://​www.​ncbi.​nlm.​nih.​gov/​pubmed/​29131​268.
	36.	 CYCS—Cytochrome c—Homo sapiens (Human)—CYCS gene & protein (accessed 29 July 2021); https://​www.​unipr​ot.​org/​unipr​
ot/​P99999.
16
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |         (2022) 12:3856  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07776-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
	37.	 Assirelli, E. et al. Human osteoarthritic cartilage shows reduced in vivo expression of IL-4, a chondroprotective cytokine that dif-
ferentially modulates IL-1b-stimulated production of chemokines and matrix-degrading enzymes in vitro. PLoS ONE 9, e96925. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​00969​25 (2014).
	38.	 Millward-Sadler, S. J., Wright, M. O., Davies, L. W., Nuki, G. & Salter, D. M. Mechanotransduction via integrins and interleukin-4 
results in altered aggrecan and matrix metalloproteinase 3 gene expression in normal, but not osteoarthritic, human articular 
chondrocytes. Arthritis Rheum. 43(9), 2091–2099. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​1529-​0131(200009)​43:9%​lt;​2091::​AID-​ANR21​>3.​0.​
CO;2-C (2000).
	39.	 Millward-Sadler, S. J. et al. Integrin-regulated secretion of interleukin 4: A novel pathway of mechanotransduction in human 
articular chondrocytes. J. Cell Biol. 145(1), 183–189. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1083/​jcb.​145.1.​183 (1999).
	40.	 Wong, M. & Carter, D. R. Articular cartilage functional histomorphology and mechanobiology: A research perspective. Bone 
33(1), 1–13. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S8756-​3282(03)​00083-8 (2003).
	41.	 Robinson, W. H. et al. Low-grade inflammation as a key mediator of the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 12(10), 
580–592. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​nrrhe​um.​2016.​136 (2016).
	42.	 Berenbaum, F., Griffin, T. M. & Liu-Bryan, R. Review: Metabolic regulation of inflammation in osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheumatol. 
69(1), 9–21. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​ART.​39842 (2017).
	43.	 Middleton, A. M., Farcot, E., Owen, M. R. & Vernoux, T. Modeling regulatory networks to understand plant development: Small 
is beautiful. Plant Cell 24, 3876–3891. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1105/​tpc.​112.​101840 (2012).
	44.	 Feher, J. General principles of endocrinology. In Quantitative Human Physiology (ed. Feher, J.) 853–869 (Academic Press, 2017). 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​B978-0-​12-​800883-​6.​00084-7.
	45.	 Find minimum of function using genetic algorithm—MATLAB GA (accessed 20 April 2021); https://​www.​mathw​orks.​com/​help/​
gads/​ga.​html.
Acknowledgements
Funding was provided by Generalitat de Catalunya (Grant No. 2020 FI_B 00680), European Commission (Grant 
No. MSCA-2020-ITN-ETN GA: 955735) and Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Universidades (Grant No. 
HOLOA-DPI2016- 80283-C2-1/2-R).
Author contributions
M.S., J.N. and G.P. wrote the main manuscript. M.N., G.P., M.S. and J.N. developed methods. M.S. prepared the 
figures. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1038/​s41598-​022-​07776-2.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.N.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the 
Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
© The Author(s) 2022

===== Jacho2022_SciRep_Fibroblast-Myofibroblast+MechanicalStrain =====

1
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2022) 12:16832  
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20383-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Mechanoresponsive regulation 
of fibroblast‑to‑myofibroblast 
transition in three‑dimensional 
tissue analogues: mechanical strain 
amplitude dependency of fibrosis
Diego Jacho1, Agustin Rabino2, Rafael Garcia‑Mata2 & Eda Yildirim‑Ayan1*
The spatiotemporal interaction and constant iterative feedback between fibroblasts, extracellular 
matrix, and environmental cues are central for investigating the fibroblast-induced musculoskeletal 
tissue regeneration and fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition (FMT). In this study, we created a 
fibroblast-laden 3D tissue analogue to study (1) how mechanical loading exerted on three-dimensional 
(3D) tissues affected the residing fibroblast phenotype and (2) to identify the ideal mechanical strain 
amplitude for promoting tissue regeneration without initiating myofibroblast differentiation. We 
applied uniaxial tensile strain (0, 4, 8, and 12%) to the cell-laden 3D tissue analogues to understand 
the interrelation between the degree of applied mechanical loading amplitudes and FMT. Our data 
demonstrated that 4% mechanical strain created an anabolic effect toward tissue regeneration, 
but higher strain amplitudes over-stimulated the cells and initiated fibrotic tissue formation. Under 
increased mechanical strain amplitudes, fibroblasts were activated from a homeostatic state to 
a proto-myofibroblast state which resulted in increased cellularity accompanied by increased 
expressions of extracellular matrix (ECM) components, activation stressors (TGF-β1 and TGF-βR1), 
and profibrotic markers. This further transformed fibroblasts into α-smooth muscle actin expressing 
myofibroblasts. Understanding the interplay between the applied degree of mechanical loading 
exerted on 3D tissues and residing fibroblast phenotypic response is important to identify specific 
mechanomodulatory approaches for tissue regeneration and the informed mechanotherapy-guided 
tissue healing strategies.
Musculoskeletal tissue injuries account for 65% of all occupational-related injuries in the United States and have 
become the fastest-growing injury ­type1. Prior to surgical intervention, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs)2,3 and physical ­therapy4–6 are commonly used as initial treatment options in clinical settings for many 
musculoskeletal injuries, which often fail to repair and restore the native tissue function. The musculoskeletal tis-
sue repair process can have two distinct paths: regenerative path and fibroplasia or fibrosis ­path7. In the regenera-
tive path, the cells at the injury site differentiate or are replaced by the cells with the same phenotype for normal 
parenchymal tissue. In the fibrosis path, the pathogenic repair process is initiated by the phenotypic changes of 
cells at the injury site where cells continuously secrete fibrogenic cytokines and deposit an excessive amount of 
extracellular matrix (ECM) components such as collagen and fibronectin which further turn into permanent 
scar ­tissue8,9. The fibrotic tissue with inferior properties such as lower mechanical strength with lower load trans-
mitting capacity compared to normal tissue inhibit musculoskeletal tissue functions and restricts locomotion.
Fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition (FMT) is a key cellular mediator in the development of fibrotic tissue 
during tissue healing and regeneration processes. Considering the fact that fibroblasts are often utilized in numer-
ous musculoskeletal tissue regeneration applications, efforts have been put into creating models to understand the 
factors modulating the homeostatic fibroblasts’ phenotypes and push them towards myofibroblast differentiation. 
The wound healing response includes different intracellular and extracellular events. These events initiate from 
inflammation, epithelialization, cell proliferation, and cell migration to fibroblast proliferation, collagen synthesis, 
OPEN
1Department of Bioengineering, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, USA. 2Department of Biological Sciences, 
University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, USA. *email: eda.yildirimayan@utoledo.edu
2
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2022) 12:16832  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20383-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
wound contraction, and finally tissue remodeling. During the last phase of tissue remodeling, a systematic degra-
dation of granulation tissue occurs and is replaced with a more organized and elastic ECM. This process may be 
induced by the secretion of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) during mechanical ­stimulation10,11. Furthermore, 
mechanical stimulus directly applied to the site of injury has been shown to facilitate scar healing by decreasing 
blood flow and edema and increasing collagen turnover and ECM ­remodeling12.
The reductionist two-dimensional (2D) membrane models, in which mechanical strain is applied to a fibro-
blast monolayer have been instrumental in understanding the mechano-responsiveness of ­FMT13–17. Additionally, 
2D in vitro models studying the role of mechanical strain and stiffness on cell behavior provides the ability to 
quantify traction forces using time-lapse microscopy. However, these models fail to accurately mimic the inter-
stitial feedback conditions from the surrounding ECM and adhesion fields experienced by the cells in vivo18. 
Moreover, fibroblast culture in 2D models tends to resemble a pancake shape, spreading to cellular extensions 
and constraining its migration as compared to the spindle or stellate shape as observed in 3D or in vivo models. 
Thus, failing to accurately replicate cell migration, adhesion, proliferation, and further differentiation response 
to mechanical forces compared to models grown in 3D tissue ­analogues19.
Currently, 3D floated cell-encapsulated collagen lattices are the most utilized in vitro model to understand 
the interaction between fibroblast cells and the ECM and whether this interaction promotes myofibroblast 
­differentiation20–22. In the collagen lattice model, cells within the collagen create small tractional forces during the 
attachment and migration within the matrix which leads to a reduction in floated collagen lattice ­diameter20–22. 
Besides collagen lattice models, other prominent studies created a 3D matrix model to investigate the role of 
changing ECM mechanical stiffness on fibrotic tissue formation and myofibroblast ­differentiation23–26. Although 
these models enable fibroblast cells to interact with 3D ECM to study FMT, they ignore the extracellular mechani-
cal loading exerted on the ECM and the residing cells. Yet, in clinical settings, the importance of extracellular 
mechanical loading on fibrotic tissue formation has been recognized for fibrosis-associated disorders. Mechanical 
loading-induced reorientation of the wound and pressure therapy are commonly used in the treatment of fibrotic 
tissue ­formation10,27,28. Thus, understanding the pathophysiology of mechanical loading mediated fibroblast-to-
myoblast transition is crucial for creating efficient therapies for musculoskeletal tissues operating under constant 
mechanical loading conditions. There remains an unanswered question regarding how the degree of mechanical 
loading applied to a fibroblast-laden 3D matrix and associated changes in structural and mechanical properties 
of the matrix affect the shift from normal tissue repair to fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition.
To this end, in this study, our objective was to investigate the dose–response relationship between various 
mechanical strain amplitudes applied to a 3D tissue analogue, subsequent structural changes within the tissue, 
and the molecular changes in residing fibroblasts that regulate the fibroblast transition from the homeostatic 
state to differentiated myofibroblasts.
Methods and materials
Synthesizing of fibroblast‑laden three‑dimensional tissue analogue and mechanical load‑
ing. 
The three-dimensional (3D) tissue analogue material was prepared using the most important structural 
extracellular matrix proteins of collagen and elastin. The elastin component of the tissue was prepared by dis-
solving 375 mg of human soluble elastin (ES12, Elastin Production USA) in 75 mL Tris Buffer 1 M at a pH of 7.6 
and then incubating it in a shaker water bath at 37 °C for 24 h. The functionalized elastin solution was further 
diluted to 0.4 mg/mL to admix with 4 mg/mL neutralized collagen solution. The neutralized collagen solution 
was prepared from 8.9 mg/mL collagen Type-I solution (Corning, USA) with a pH of ~ 3.4 through mixing 
with 1 M sodium hydroxide, phosphate buffer solution (PBS), and deionized water using our well-established 
­protocols29–31. Then, the human dermal fibroblasts (ATCC, HFF1; USA) were cultured in a complete media of 
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (ATCC; USA) supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum (FBS) 
(Corning; USA), and 1% penicillin–streptomycin (Corning; USA) were encapsulated within the composite bio-
material with a cell density of ­106 cells/mL.
The fibroblast-laden 3D tissue analogue was then deposited inside the mechanical loading chamber and 
incubated at 37 °C and 5% ­CO2 for 2 h for polymerization. After polymerization, 1 mL of complete media was 
added to the loading chambers and incubated for 24 h before the mechanical loading. The next day, fibroblast-
laden tissue analogues were exposed to various uniaxial tensile strains (4, 8, and 12%) with 0.1 Hz frequency 
using a custom-built validated Uniaxial Strain ­Bioreactor31,32. The 4%, 8%, and 12% uniaxial tensile strain at 
0.1 Hz frequency was applied to the tissue analogues to mimic the dynamic physiological environment of mus-
culoskeletal tissues such as tendon, ligament, and muscle for 2 h per day throughout the 7-day culture period. 
The different uniaxial tensile strains represent the stress experienced by skeletal tissues, reaching as much as 
12.5 times body weight during exercise, a 5–9% change in length during moderate physical activities, and up 
to 12% during high-intensity ­activity12,33–36. Unstrained (0%) cell-laden tissue analogue was used as the control 
group. After 7 days of mechanical loading, the 3D tissue analogues were harvested for characterization assays, 
including cell viability, matrix organization, and gene expression profiles. Figure 1 illustrates the steps followed 
during the cell-laden 3D tissue synthesis and mechanical loading.
Assessing the cellularity and fibroblast morphology within 3D tissue analogue with mechanical 
loading. 
The presence of cells within the 3D tissue analogue was assessed using Calcein-AM and ethidium 
homodimer-1 Live-Dead Assay (Life Technologies, USA). On characterization day, the samples were washed with 
dPBS and incubated for 2 h with a 1: 4 ratio of calcein-AM and ethidium homodimer-1 dyes in DMEM at 37 °C. 
Subsequently, the samples were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma, US) for 30 min at RT and washed with 
dPBS and 0.2% Tween (ThermoFisher. USA) solution. The samples were then mounted on a u-slide 8-well glass 
bottom (Ibidi, USA) with 200 μL of mounting media (Paramount, USA) for confocal imaging.
3
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2022) 12:16832  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20383-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Samples were imaged using a 63× oil, 1.4 NA or 20× dry, 0.75 NA objective with an Andor Dragonfly 200 
spinning disk Confocal Microscope mounted to a Leica DMi8 microscope and Fusion software. Image acquisi-
tion was made at 490/545 nm and 590/685 nm excitation/emission wavelengths to visualize live (green) and 
dead (red) cells, respectively. For quantitative analysis, at least three fields of view per condition from each 
biological replicate were analyzed using ImageJ (n = 3). The acquired z-stacks corresponding to 50 µm (stack 
size = 600 nm) were processed for background removal and quantification. In brief, to account for the loss of 
signal due to penetrance of the laser in the 3D analogues, the 50 um stack was divided into two subgroups, and 
background removal was carried out relative to the signal in each subgroup. Particle analysis was carried out in 
each channel, and live/dead quantification was expressed as a percentage of total cells in the field of view. Lastly, 
the total number of cells in each z-stack was used to extrapolate the number of cells/mL in a sample. Cell viability 
quantification was expressed as a percentage of live cells per total number of cells for each sample.
The effects of uniaxial loading on the fibroblast morphology were assessed by the amount of elongation of 
the cells within the 3D tissue analogues. The cell elongation index (EI) was obtained as the ratio of the long axis 
to the short axis of the cell, based on a 3D rendering of serial optical slices collected by confocal microscopy 
stained with F-actin. Individual cells within each image were analyzed using Fiji/ImageJ (NIH, USA) software. A 
cell elongation index of 1.0 represents a spheroidal cell, while an elongation index greater than 2.0 represents an 
elongated cell. For this analysis, three samples per experimental group were analyzed, with n = 25 cells per sample.
Changes in matrix remodeling within 3D tissue analogue with mechanical loading. 
The 
changes in the fibrous proteins’ density (collagen and elastin) and porosity of 3D tissue analogue with various 
mechanical loading magnitudes were examined using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) (Hitachi, USA). 
Briefly, on characterization day, the 3D analogues were cut in the sagittal plane and fixed with 4% paraformal-
dehyde in PBS for 30 min. After fixation, the samples were dehydrated first in sequential ethanol solutions with 
increasing concentrations from 30 to 100% for 15 min each. Dehydration was then continued by submerging 
samples into sequential ethanol/hexamethyldisilane (HMDS) solutions from 30 to 100% for 10 min each for 
image quality enhancement. The samples were then air-dried overnight. The dried samples were then gold-
sputter coated and imaged vertically (parallel) to the direction of the uniaxial tensile strain applied. For matrix 
porosity quantification, the SEM images (n = 3) were processed using Fiji/Image J (NIH, US). The ND plugin 
calculated the total area of pores and fibers in the ­matrices37. The threshold was adjusted to a level of measure-
ment up to the grey density of the collagen and elastin ­fibers38. Then, % porosity was calculated by the ratio 
between total area and area of pores present in the matrix. The collagen fiber alignment was assessed using the 
SEM images. The directionality of the collagen fibers was plotted and calculated by directionality histograms 
(n = 3) using Fiji/ImageJ Directionality plugin (NIH, US)32.
Changes in cytoskeletal component and of residing cells within 3D tissue analogue upon 
mechanical loading. 
F-actin and α-SMA changes in cells residing in the 3D tissue analogues were eval-
uated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) after the mechanical loading. On characterization day, the 3D tissue 
analogues exposed to 0% (control), 4%, 8%, and 12% mechanical strains were fixed in 10% paraformaldehyde, 
dehydrated using an ethanol gradient, and cleared with xylene before being embedded in paraffin. Then, paraf-
fin-embedded samples were sectioned into ~ 40 μm thick slices using a microtome, mounted on glass slides, and 
cleared using a xylene/ethanol rehydration protocol before staining.
Figure 1.   Schematic representation of cell-laden 3D tissue analogue synthesis and mechanical loading platform 
of cell-laden construct. “Created with www.​Biore​nder.​com”.
4
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2022) 12:16832  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20383-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
For immunostaining, samples were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton x-100 in PBS. Then, sections were washed 
and blocked in 2.5% goat serum and 0.2% Tween in PBS for 20 min, followed by 20 min blocking in 0.4% BSA 
and 0.2% Tween in PBS. After blocking, slides were incubated overnight at 4 °C in mouse anti-Smooth Muscle 
Actin (1:50) (AB262054, Santa Cruz). The next day, slides were washed with PBS and 0.2% Tween solution and 
blocked in 0.4% BSA and 0.2% Tween solution for 20 min at RT. After blocking, samples were incubated for 
2–3 h at RT with Alexa fluor 594-Goat anti-mouse IgG (1:50) (A32730, ThermoFisher, USA) and Alexa Flour 
488 Phalloidin (1:50) (ThermoFisher, A12379). Hoechst dye (1:100) was used to stain for nuclei. Finally, samples 
were washed with 0.2% Tween and mounted in Permount mounting media (Permount, USA) with glass cover 
slides. The samples were left in the dark overnight at 4 °C before imaging.
Slides were imaged using a 63× oil or 20× airy objective with a Leica Stellaris 5 confocal system equipped 
with HyD detectors and the LASX software. The acquired images were then post-processed and analyzed using 
ImageJ. Briefly, confocal images from at least three fields of view from each experiment were processed to measure 
F-actin intensity from each cell. The segmentation of cells was achieved using both signals (Hoechst and F-actin), 
and the mask obtained was used to measure F-actin intensity. The integrated density values obtained were then 
corrected by subtracting the background signal.
Changes in molecular blueprint of the residing cells within 3D tissue analogue upon mechani‑
cal loading. 
To understand the changes in profibrotic and extracellular matrix markers with increased 
mechanical strain amplitudes, the gene expression analysis was carried out using a quantitative real-time pol-
ymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). Briefly, on characterization day, the 3D tissue analogues were mechani-
cally disrupted, then the RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent (ThermoFisher, USA). The isolated RNA was 
reverse transcribed to cDNA using Superscript IV kit (Invitrogen, USA) per the manufacturer’s protocols. RT-
PCR was performed using TaqMan SYBR (Bio-Rad, USA) in the iCycler iQ detection system (Bio-Rad, USA). 
The relative gene expression for fold difference between strained samples and non-loaded control samples was 
obtained using the ∆∆Ct method. In the ∆∆Ct method, Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) 
was used as the housekeeping normalizing gene. The primer sequences for each gene were designed using NCBI 
primer blast software and synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT, USA). The list of genes and associ-
ated primer sequences are listed in Supplementary Table 1 and provided as a Supplementary Document.
Statistics. 
Statistical analysis was conducted using RStudio. Statistical significance was analyzed using one-
way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and post-hoc analysis (Tukey test) or Student’s t-test where appropriate. The 
data is reported as the mean ± standard deviation. The sample size is indicated within the corresponding figures. 
Asterisks (*) indicate a significant difference with respect to the 0% mechanical strain group (control). Pound 
signs (#) represent a significant difference between 4 and 8% mechanical strain groups, § represent a signifi-
cant difference between 8 and 12% mechanical strain groups, and crosses (†) represent a significant difference 
between 4 and 12% mechanical strain groups, each with P < 0.05.
Results
Hyper‑mechanical strain increased cellularity within 3D tissue analogues. 
3D tissue analogues 
were prepared using rat-tail type I collagen and human elastin and seeded with human dermal fibroblasts at ­106 
cells/mL density. After 1 day of culture, 3D analogues were exposed to uniaxial tensile loading of 4%, 8%, and 
12% strain at 0.1 Hz frequency for 2 h/day for 7 days. The 3D tissue analogue exposed to various mechanical 
strain amplitudes was analyzed to assess changes in cellularity. As seen in Fig. 2, the number of live cells increases 
according to the mechanical strain, 12% being the most drastic increase (Fig. 2A). Then, we extrapolated the 
number of cells per ml, and the results are shown in Fig. 2C. The results indicate that 12% mechanical strain 
increased the number of cells per ml by almost twofold (12 × ­106 ± 1.78) compared to the 3D tissue analogue 
exposed to 0, 4, and 8% mechanical strain. There was no significant difference observed between cell numbers 
for the tissues exposed to 0, 4, and 8% mechanical strain. Figure 2B shows the percentage of cell viability of all 
groups after mechanical stimulation. 4% and 8% groups show an approx. 85% cell viability, while 0% and 12% 
show an approx. 92% cell viability. Additionally, looking at the morphology of fibroblasts subjected to mechani-
cal loading, a prominent change is evident in the sample loaded with 12% strain at 0.1 Hz frequency, where the 
cells are elongated, appear to have spindle-shaped cytoplasmic extensions, and are in the process of orienting 
themselves within the matrix (Fig. 2, 63×). Cells from the other groups have a rounded appearance like those of 
the nonloaded control samples.
Hyper‑mechanical strain reduced tissue porosity of 3D tissue analogues. 
Mechanical stimula-
tion had a profound effect on the extracellular fibrous protein (collagen and elastin) thicknesses and matrix 
porosity of the 3D tissue analogues. Figure 3A,D demonstrate the changes in matrix fibrous protein with the 
increased mechanical strain at the micro and tissue level using SEM and histology images, respectively. The 
SEM images of control (0%) and uniaxial tensile-loaded constructs at 0.1 Hz indicate that matrix organization 
is visible in the 3D analogues loaded at 8% and 12% uniaxial tensile strains, while control and 4% demonstrate 
random collagen fiber distribution. The SEM images (Fig. 3A) displayed denser de novo collagen fiber forma-
tions for the tissue exposed to 12% mechanical strain. As the percent strain increased, the fiber diameter started 
to increase, accompanied by the decrease in matrix porosity (Fig. 3C). While the porosity was 84.5 ± 0.23% for 
the control group, it was reduced to 57.4 ± 0.31% for the 12% mechanical strain group. Additionally, the align-
ment of collagen and elastin fibers increased as the mechanical strain increased. As seen in Fig. 3A, collagen 
and elastin fibers aligned parallel to the uniaxial tensile strain applied, with a higher alignment in the 12% 
group compared to all other groups. The histology images (Fig. 3D) further confirmed that matrix fiber density 
5
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2022) 12:16832  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20383-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
and thickness increased with the increased mechanical strain. The matrix thickness and fiber content increased 
25 ± 0.9% in the 12% strain group compared to the counterparts within the control group. Comparing the SEM, 
histology images, and porosity results of the 0% and 12% strain groups show that the higher strain magnitude 
of 12% corresponding to the pathophysiological loading of musculoskeletal tissues depicts a significant increase 
in matrix organization and fibrous protein composition. These results demonstrate that such changes are most 
likely affected by mechanical stimulation-induced environments.
Hyper‑mechanical strain altered fibroblast morphology and fiber alignment within 3D tissue 
analogues. 
The matrix organization induced in the 3D tissue analogues due to the uniaxial tensile loading 
at different strains was visualized through SEM. The representative SEM images of samples loaded at 0%, 4%, 
8%, and 12% at 0.1 Hz are shown in Fig. 3A. The SEM images of 0% (non-loaded) and loaded groups indicate 
that fiber alignment is clearly visible in the scaffolds loaded at 8% and 12% uniaxial tensile strains. In compari-
son, 0% demonstrate random collagen fiber distribution. To quantify the degree of fiber alignment and total 
matrix organization of each sample, directionality histograms were generated using Fiji/ImageJ. Figure 3B shows 
representative histograms for all mechanically loaded groups. The histogram data for the control group (0%) 
shows no definitive peak in the histogram, which indicates a random distribution of collagen/elastin fibers with 
a directionality amount of 0.012. With the increased applied mechanical strain to the cell-laden construct, the 
directionality increased significantly. While the directionality was 0.018 for the 4% strain group, it was 0.028 for 
8% and 0.035 for the 12% mechanically loaded construct. Compared to the control group (0%), the directionality 
in the 12% group increased almost threefold. It is also observed that the peak in each loaded sample occurs at a 
Figure 2.   Mechanical loading increases cellularity within 3D tissue analogues. (A) Live/dead images of residing 
cells within 0%, 4%, 8%, and 12% mechanical strain 3D tissue analogues. (B) Percentage cell viability within 3D 
tissue analogue, and (C) total number of cells within 3D tissue analogue. Live cells were stained with Calcein 
AM (green). The scale bar represents 10 μm (n = 3). *Indicates a significant difference with respect to the 0% 
strain group (control). §Represents a significant difference between 8 and 12% mechanical strain groups, and 
†represents a significant difference between 4 and 12% mechanical strain groups, each with P < 0.05.
6
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2022) 12:16832  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20383-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 3.   Effects of mechanical strain on fibrous protein remodeling and porosity within 3D tissue analogues. (A) SEM images of 0%, 4%, 8% and 12% mechanical strain 3D tissue analogues, 
scale bar represents 20 μm. (B) Directionality histograms of 3D tissue analogues subjected to 7 days of uniaxial loading, (C) %porosity graph, (D) H&E histological images of 0% and 12% 
mechanical strain 3D tissue analogues, scale bar represents 100 μm (n = 3). *Indicates significant difference with respect to 0% mechanical strain group (control). #Represents a significant 
difference between 4 and 8% mechanical strain groups, §represents a significant difference between 8 and 12% strain groups, and †represents a significant difference between 4 and 12% strain 
groups, each with p < 0.05.
7
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2022) 12:16832  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20383-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
definite angle, which implies that the fiber orientation of the tissue analogues is in the direction of the uniaxial 
tensile load application.
To determine whether the changes in the extent of matrix directionality have any effects on the cells residing 
within the 3D tissue analogues, a cell elongation index (EI) was obtained from confocal images stained with 
F-actin (Phalloidin). Figure 4B demonstrates the cell EI for each group, where EI = 1 designates an amoeboid 
cell, and EI ≥ 2 is designated as an elongated cell. The black line represents the cell EI mean. Similarly, stained 
images (Fig. 4A) exhibit an amoeboid cell shape for 0%, 4%, and 8% uniaxially loaded groups, while the 12% 
strain loaded group exhibits a more cell elongated morphology with fibers extending in one direction out from 
the cell. Figure 4 demonstrates that the loaded samples at 12% strains show significant increases in residing cell 
morphology accompanied by a fiber alignment (Fig. 3A,B) compared to the control group.
Hyper‑mechanical strain upregulated profibrotic gene expressions for the cells within 3D tis‑
sue analogues. 
The phenotypic changes of cells within the 3D tissue analogues upon various mechani-
cal loading strains (0, 4, 8, and 12%) were assessed using gene expression analysis. Before conducting a thor-
ough  gene expression  analysis, first, we studied whether mechanical strain applied to 3D tissue analogue 
would be translated into a cellular response. C-Jun is an immediate early mechanoresponsive gene expressed if 
mechanical perturbation is exerted on the ­tissue39. Following a 7-day mechanical loading, the c-jun expression 
increased almost sevenfold for the 12% strain group, and it was significantly different from the control (0%), 4, 
and 8% mechanical strain groups (Fig. 5).
The increased expression of extracellular markers is a hallmark of fibrogenesis. Figure 6 demonstrates the rela-
tive fold change in mRNA expression of ECM fibrous proteins (collagen and elastin) and glycoprotein (fibronec-
tin). The gene expression data demonstrated that expression of collagen type-IV, fibronectin, and collagen type-I 
increased with the increased applied mechanical strain amplitudes. A statistically significant increase in these 
markers was observed for cells exposed to 12% mechanical strain. The expression of collagen type-IV, fibronec-
tin, and collagen type-I increased almost fourfold, sevenfold, and 13-fold, respectively, for the 12% mechanical 
strain group. The elastin expression demonstrated an increasing trend with increased mechanical strain until 
12% mechanical strain. The elastin expression increased overall across all experimental groups; however, the 
highest expression was seen in the 8% group (threefold). In Fig. 6, the polar graph compiled and demonstrated 
the changes in expressions of ECM markers with the mechanical strain. The polar graph confirmed that col-
lagen type-I and fibronectin expression increased substantially for 12% mechanical strain 3D tissue analogues.
Since tissue fibrosis results from dysregulation between the synthesis and degradation of ECM ­molecules40, 
the expression of important matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) was also assessed upon mechanical strain appli-
cation. Figure 7 demonstrates the changes in MMP 1,2, and 3 gene expressions  with varying mechanical strain 
amplitudes. The data indicated a trend of increased MMPs expression following increased mechanical strain 
stimulation. The increment was substantially significant for 12% mechanical strain 3D tissue analogue since 
MMP1, MMP2, and MMP3 expressions elevated around threefold, sixfold, and 30-fold, respectively.
Following assessing ECM markers and MMPs, the expressions of fibroblast activation stressors and profi-
brotic cytokine, and chemokines were analyzed as a function of mechanical strain amplitudes (Fig. 8). The 
expression of fibroblast activation stressors, TGF-β1 and TGF-βR1, increased almost 2.5-fold and 11-fold for the 
12% mechanical strain group compared to control groups, respectively. On the other hand, TGF-β1 expression 
decreased significantly for the 4% and 8% mechanical strain groups. The profibrotic cytokine and chemokines 
expressions of CD206, CCL18, and TRPV4 demonstrated a similar trend. The CD206 is upregulated 16-fold in the 
12% mechanical strain group, while CCL18 and TRPV4’s expressions increased tenfold and 12-fold, respectively. 
For fibroblast activation stressors and profibrotic markers, their expressions are significantly (P < 0.05) higher 
in 12% mechanical strain groups compared to the counterparts in the 4% and 8% mechanical strain groups.
Hyper‑mechanical strain‑induced FMT within 3D tissue analogues. 
After confirming that fibro-
blast activation stressors and profibrotic markers expressions were upregulated with the increased mechanical 
strain amplitude, the full fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition was confirmed by analyzing the myofibroblast 
marker for α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA). α-SMA is one of the most prominent and widely accepted mark-
ers for fully differentiated ­myofibroblasts41. Figure 9B demonstrates the changes in α-SMA mRNA expression 
as a function of applied mechanical strain. The α-SMA expression elevated significantly (P < 0.05) for 8% and 
12% mechanical strain groups by 1.7 ± 0.3 and 13.2 ± 0.2-folds, respectively, compared to the control group (0% 
mechanical strain). On the other hand, no α-SMA expression was detected for the 4% mechanical strain group. 
To visualize the changes in pro-fibrotic markers’ expressions as a function of mechanical loading, the gene expres-
sion data was translated into a heatmap graph in which markers that were upregulated were highlighted in green, 
and downregulated were highlighted in red. The compiled gene expression data in the heatmap graph further 
demonstrated that fibrogenesis within 3D tissue analogue initiated with higher mechanical strain applications. 
While some of the profibrotic markers started to express relatively low in the 8% mechanical strain group, all 
hallmark fibrogenesis markers, including fibroblast activation stressors, pro-fibrotic markers, and myofibroblast 
markers, upregulated significantly for the 12% mechanical strain group (Fig. 8). To further confirm the effects 
of mechanical loading on FMT behavior, IHC staining (Fig. 9A) of α-SMA on 0% and 12% strain groups were 
obtained. Figure 9A showed the expression of α-SMA in the 12% strain group, while 0% (control) did not show 
any expression of α-SMA at the protein level. Another important myofibroblast marker is the formation of fila-
mentous F-actin stress fibers, which can provide a measure of myofibroblast ­activation42. To this end, we stained 
for F-actin (Fig. 9A) and calculated the intensity relative to control (0% mechanical strain) within the 3D tissue 
analogue (Fig. 9C). Tissue analogues exposed to 12% strain showed a 3.6-fold increase in F-actin expression.
8
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2022) 12:16832  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20383-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Discussion
It is accepted that mechanical loading plays an integral role in musculoskeletal tissue regeneration and rehabili-
tation. There is an overwhelming amount of evidence suggesting that the mechanical environment around the 
musculoskeletal tissues affects the homeostasis, regeneration, and disease state of the tissues. In the absence of 
mechanical loading, musculoskeletal tissues lose their strength, modulus, toughness, and collagen ­alignment43–53. 
While insufficient mechanical loading creates stress-shielding for musculoskeletal tissues, the hyper mechanical 
loading causes deterioration of tissue structure and promotes ­degeneration54–56. Thus, in this study, we investi-
gated how changes in mechanical strain amplitudes applied to cell-laden 3D tissue analogue modulated tissue 
regeneration and fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition, which is an indicator fibrotic pathway.
Quantification of tissue cellularity demonstrated an increase in the cell number with the higher mechanical 
strain amplitudes (Fig. 2). 3D tissue analogues subjected to 12% mechanical strain demonstrated an almost 2.5-
fold increase in cells over 7 days of stimulation compared to the non-loaded samples (0% strain). The spatial 
growth of cells in relation to the mechanical strain was increased. As shown in Fig. 2A, the cell morphology in 
the 12% group changed and aligned parallel to the direction of the uniaxial tensile strain applied, while cells in 
the unstimulated group (control) demonstrated a more rounded shape, with no changes in its morphology. These 
changes in cell morphology, shape, and elongation follow the expected cell behavior under ­FMT57–59. There was a 
slight increase in the cell numbers for the 4% and 8% mechanical strain groups; however, it was not significantly 
different from the control group (0%) (Fig. 2C). The increase in the total number of cells shown in the 12% 
group is solely due to cell proliferation since the cell viability across all mechanically stimulated groups, and the 
control group is statistically the same (Fig. 2B). The substantial increase in cellularity for 12% mechanical strain 
tissue was accompanied by an increase in de novo collagen deposition, as confirmed with SEM and histology 
images (Fig. 3A,D). Both SEM and histology images and their analyses further suggested that the porosity of 3D 
analogue decreased with increased mechanical strain amplitudes (Fig. 3C) which can be attributed to densely 
synthesized collagen fibers.
The cell morphology demonstrated significant changes under hyper mechanical strain (12%) condition. The 
cells within 0%, 4% and 8% loaded matrix demonstrated more spherical-like morphology (Fig. 4A) with similar 
elongation index values (Fig. 4B). Yet, the fibroblast residing in the 12% mechanical strain group demonstrated 
notably elongated cell structure with the presence of cytoplasmic extensions along the collagen fibers. The cells 
within the 12% group were reoriented within the matrix as the matrix itself aligned with the increased mechani-
cal loading (Fig. 3A,B). SEM images of loaded tissue analogues showed increased collagen fiber alignment with 
the increased strain, while the control group demonstrated a highly random matrix organization (Fig. 3A). Our 
previous studies have shown that the degree of matrix organization and fiber alignment can vary significantly 
Figure 4.   Cell elongation index (EI) analysis for HFF1 cells within the 3D tissue analogues after uniaxial 
loading. The gradient scale to the right designates the spectrum of cell measurements, with corresponding 
representative images of cell morphologies. *Indicates significant difference with respect to 0% mechanical strain 
group (control). #Represents a significant difference between 4 and 8% mechanical strain groups, §represents a 
significant difference between 8 and 12% strain groups, and †represents a significant difference between 4 and 
12% strain groups, each with P < 0.05.
9
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2022) 12:16832  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20383-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
based on the type of cells encapsulated and the stimulation ­regime30,32,60. As shown in Figs. 2 and 3, higher cell 
densities within the tissue analogues increase the extent of matrix arrangement and increase the diameter of 
collagen fibers. Thus, this matrix organization and fiber alignment is attributed to the combinational effect of 
uniaxial tensile loads and cell proliferation within the analogues.
While the structural changes were prominent towards fibrotic tissue formation with increased mechanical 
strain amplitudes, the changes in cellular level were also important to assess the FMT. The changes in c-jun 
expression were assessed as a function of mechanical strain amplitudes because the elevated expression of c-jun 
indicates that cells residing within the tissue sense the external mechanical stimuli and trigger mechanical 
strain-activated ­responses61,62. The c-jun gene expression result (Fig. 5) demonstrated a significant increase in its 
expression for the residing cells within the tissue exposed to 12% mechanical strain compared to counterparts 
in control groups (0% mechanical strain). This suggested that the higher mechanical strain amplitude applied 
Figure 5.   Effect of mechanical strain on the gene expression of early mechanoresponsive c-jun. *Indicate 
significant difference with respect to 0% strain group (control) with P < 0.05. #Represent significant difference 
between 4 and 8% mechanical strain groups, §represent a significant difference between 8 and 12% mechanical 
strain groups, and †represent a significant difference between 4 and 12% strain groups, each with a 0.05 P-value.
Figure 6.   Effect of mechanical strain on the gene expression profiles of the native ECM markers. The polar 
graph illustrates the overall changes in ECM gene expression. *Indicate significant difference with respect to 0% 
strain group (control) with P < 0.05. §Represent a significant difference between 8 and 12% mechanical strain 
groups, and †represent a significant difference between 4 and 12% mechanical strain groups, each with a 0.05 
P-value.
10
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2022) 12:16832  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20383-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
to the cell-laden 3D tissue analogue was effectively transferred to the cellular level and initiated the molecular 
changes. For lower mechanical strain amplitudes (4 and 8% strain), there was not a significant increase in c-jun 
expression, which may suggest that longer mechanical stimulation time and/or higher frequency were required 
to translate the applied mechanical loading into the cell with similar efficiency as in 12% mechanical strain.
The expressions of specific matrix proteins are also a major regulator of fibroblast-to-myofibroblast 
­transition63. In this study, we assessed how fibrous ECM markers and glycol ECM markers change with the vari-
ous mechanical strain amplitudes. The cells within the 3D tissue exposed to 12% mechanical strain displayed a 
significantly greater ability to express fibrous ECM markers (collagen type-I, collagen type IV, elastin) along with 
glycol ECM markers like fibronectin (Fig. 6). This data suggested that the higher mechanical strain (12%) induced 
hypercellularity and was accompanied by an increase in de novo synthesis of ECM markers, both of which are 
the early signs of fibroblast transition from the homeostatic state to activated (or proto-myofibroblast) state. Our 
data agree with the literature since prominent studies also demonstrated that increased mechanical stimulation 
promotes native ECM protein expressions and tissue secretion. This overexpression of ECM proteins is often 
seen in the development of fibroproliferative diseases such as keloid, cardiovascular fibrosis, glomerulosclerosis, 
and idiopathic pulmonary ­fibrosis64–66. For instance, Booth et al.67 demonstrated that the ECM composition 
was completely different in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IDF) compared to normal lung tissue. Several ECM 
proteins including collagen type-I and collagen type IV only expressed in the IDF tissue but not in healthy tissue. 
Overexpression of ECM markers further changes the cell activity and further promotes fibrosis ­progression68.
Upon initiation of FMT, there is a dysregulation of tissue remodeling machinery which results in an excessive 
ECM ­deposition69. To overcome the ECM accumulation, the cells start to express MMPs to degrade superim-
posed collagens, elastin, and proteoglycans within the ­ECM14. Thus, in this study, to understand whether over-
expressed ECM markers due to increased mechanical loading affect the MMPs expressions, we measured the 
expressions of MMPs 1, 2 and 3 as a function of mechanical strain amplitudes (Fig. 7). Our data demonstrated a 
statistically significant increase in the expression of MMPs 1, 2, and 3, following the trend of increased mechanical 
strain amplitudes. The highest intensification in MMP expression was observed for the 12% mechanical strain 
group with almost threefold, 6.5-fold, and 30-fold changes compared to the control group for MMPs 1, 2, and 3, 
respectively. While the MMP expressions were also increased for 4 and 8% mechanical strain groups compared 
to the control group, they were significantly less than the 12% mechanical strain group. These data can be attrib-
uted to the orchestrated expression of MMPs and ECM proteins in homeostatic tissue. The increased expres-
sion of MMPs (Fig. 7) and ECM (Fig. 6) suggest that there is an imbalance in matrix turnover, which is another 
significant hallmark of FMT leading to fibrotic tissue formation. MMPs primarily digest the ECM proteins and 
Figure 7.   Effect of mechanical strain on the gene expression of MMPs. The polar graph illustrates the overall 
changes in MMPs gene expression. *Indicate significant difference with respect to 0% strain group (control) with 
P < 0.05. #Represent significant difference between 4 and 8% strain groups, §represent a significant difference 
between 8 and 12% mechanical strain groups, and †represent a significant difference between 4 and 12% 
mechanical strain groups, each with a 0.05 P-value.
11
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2022) 12:16832  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20383-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
fibers; however, they also trigger the signaling pathways responsible for secreting bioactive mediators, including 
growth factors, cytokines, chemokines, and cell-surface ­receptors70,71. In fibrogenesis, several MMPs, including 
MMP1 and 3, are up-regulated, which subsequently promote a vicious cycle of excessive ECM deposition and 
hyper scar tissue ­formation70.
The cellular and structural characterization data (Figs. 2, 3, 4) so far indicated the initiation of proto-myofi-
broblast phenotype and myofibroblast differentiation from the homeostatic fibroblasts under various mechani-
cal loading amplitudes. To confirm the pro-fibrotic differentiation of fibroblasts, the expression of activation 
stressors and pro-fibrotic markers were assessed. The relative gene expression data (Fig. 8) demonstrated that 
expressions of the fibroblast activation stressors, TGF-β1, and its receptor, TGF-βR1, increased 2.5-fold and 
tenfold, respectively, for the 12% mechanical strain group compared to control groups. This suggested that hyper-
mechanical loading initiated the first crucial step of the fibrotic process: proto-myofibroblasts differentiation. It is 
well-established that fibrosis is initiated with the activation of fibroblasts through activation stressors, including 
TGF-β1 and its receptor TGF-βR172,73. Following the stressor-induced activation of fibroblasts, these can secrete 
profibrotic cytokines and chemokines, further promoting myofibroblast ­differentiation13,74. The gene expression 
Figure 8.   Effect of mechanical strain on the gene expression of activation stressors markers and profibrotic 
markers within 3D tissue analogues. The heatmap represents a color-coding of average z-scores obtained from 
mRNA fold changes. Green indicates an expression greater than the mean; red indicates an expression lower 
than the mean, and black indicates a quantity close to the mean (n = 3). *Indicate significant difference with 
respect to 0% mechanical strain group (control) with P < 0.05. #Represent significant difference between 4 and 
8% mechanical strain groups, §represent a significant difference between 8 and 12% mechanical strain groups, 
and †represent a significant difference between 4 and 12% strain groups, each with a 0.05 P-value.
12
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2022) 12:16832  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20383-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
results in Fig. 8 agreed with the literature since upregulation of TGF-β1 and TGF-βR1 further promoted the 
expression of the profibrotic markers, including mannose receptor (CD206), CCL18, and transient vanilloid 
receptor type-4 (TRPV4). Numerous in vitro and in vivo studies demonstrated that CD206 and CCL18, a well-
established anti-inflammatory cytokine and chemokine, promote fibroblast transition to myofibroblasts and 
collagen synthesis, resulting in ­fibrosis75,76. In addition, TRPV4 involves increased cellularity, ECM synthesis, 
and fibroblast to myofibroblast ­differentiation76. The TRPV4 expressions are upregulated in the later stage of 
myocardial, pulmonary, and skin ­fibrosis77. The heatmap in Fig. 8 demonstrated that with higher mechanical 
strain (12%) the expressions of profibrotic markers are upregulated with the increased stress activators expres-
sion, which confirmed the complete fibroblast to myofibroblast transformation.
The fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition is described as a multifactorial process that involves enhanced force 
generation with enlarged focal adhesions and incorporation of α-SMA into stress ­fibers78,79. The myofibroblast 
differentiation is accompanied by upregulated α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) and a formation of pronounced 
actin stress ­fibers80. While the proto-myofibroblasts exist in healthy tissue structures such as a wall of pulmonary 
alveoli, they do not express α-SMA. In contrast, well-developed or fully differentiated myofibroblasts are rich 
in α-SMA and are observed in fibrotic ­lesions81. The α-SMA gene expression results (Fig. 9B) show that, com-
pared to the control group (0% mechanical strain), α-SMA expression increased significantly (P < 0.05) for 8% 
and 12% mechanical strain groups with almost twofold change and 13-fold, change respectively. Furthermore, 
Fig. 9A confirmed the protein expression of a-SMA in the 12% compared to the 0% (control). No expression of 
a-SMA at the protein level was seen in any other group but the 12% mechanically stimulated group. In particular, 
the cells exposed to hyper-mechanical strain (12%) demonstrated a dramatic increase in α-SMA expression. 
However, increased α-SMA could be due to the increase in soluble α-SMA monomers (G-actin) without being 
incorporated into stress ­fibers82–85. Thus, we immuno-stained the filamentous α-SMA monomers (F-actin) to 
understand whether the dramatically increased α-SMA expression in the 12% strain group was due to the increase 
in filament formation. F-actin immunostaining and its quantification confirmed higher levels of F-actin in the 
Figure 9.   Mechanical strain induces FMT in 3D tissue analogues. (A) α-SMA IHC staining of 0% (control) 
and 12% strain group, (B) relative gene expression of α-SMA, (C) F-actin immunostaining (green), and nucleus 
staining (blue) within 3D tissue analogues. Scale bar represents 10 μm. (C) Relative F-actin fluorescence 
intensity within 3D tissue analogues. *Indicate significant difference with respect to 0% mechanical strain group 
(control) with P < 0.05. §Represent a significant difference between 8 and 12% mechanical strain groups, and 
†represent a significant difference between 4 and 12% mechanical strain groups, each with a 0.05 P-value.
13
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2022) 12:16832  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20383-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
12% mechanical strain group compared to the control (0%), with an almost 25% increase (Fig. 9C). This result 
further confirmed the full myofibroblast differentiation under high mechanical strain exposure since F-actin 
does express in low-level in fibroblast in the homeostatic stage and starts to be visible during proto-myofibroblast 
­differentiation42.
In summary, the mechanical loading exerted on fibroblast-laden 3D tissue analogue can initiate autocrine 
and paracrine tissue healing via mechanical strain amplitude-dependent manner. The encapsulated fibroblast 
demonstrated proliferative, contractile, and matrix synthetic states in response to increased mechanical strain 
amplitude. Supplementary Figure 1, provided as a Supplementary Document, demonstrated the schematic rep-
resentation of the results. While up to 8% mechanical strain (uniaxial tensile load) applied to the tissue promoted 
tissue regeneration without triggering the stress activators and fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition (FMT). 
The mechanical strain beyond 8% in particular 12% mechanical strain, pushed the fibroblast into full myofi-
broblast differentiation with pronounced α-SMA expression and stress fiber formation. For tissue function in a 
mechanically active tissue environment in which the tissue and residing cells are exposed to myriad mechanical 
strains, a better understanding of FMT and associated changes in cellular and tissue levels are crucial for targeted 
approaches to halting fibrosis and hypertrophic scarring.
Data availability
The datasets generated during the current study are not publicly available due to the pending patent application 
but are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Received: 13 December 2021; Accepted: 13 September 2022
References
	 1.	 Quint, J. P. et al. In vivo printing of nanoenabled scaffolds for the treatment of skeletal muscle injuries. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 10, 
e2002152. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​adhm.​20200​2152 (2021).
	 2.	 Su, B. & O’Connor, J. P. NSAID therapy effects on healing of bone, tendon, and the enthesis. J. Appl. Physiol. 115, 892–899. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1152/​jappl​physi​ol.​00053.​2013 (2013).
	 3.	 Fowler, C. Do nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs impair tissue healing? JAAPA 31, 1–5. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​01.​JAA.​00005​
41488.​41149.​95 (2018).
	 4.	 Khan, K. M. & Scott, A. Mechanotherapy: How physical therapists’ prescription of exercise promotes tissue repair. Br. J. Sports 
Med. 43, 247–251 (2009).
	 5.	 Sallis, R. E. Exercise is medicine and physicians need to prescribe it!. Med. Sport 62, 517–520 (2009).
	 6.	 Ohberg, L., Lorentzon, R. & Alfredson, H. Eccentric training in patients with chronic Achilles tendinosis: Normalised tendon 
structure and decreased thickness at follow up. Br. J. Sports Med. 38, 8–11 (2004).
	 7.	 Wynn, T. A. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of fibrosis. J. Pathol. 214, 199–210. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​path.​2277 (2008).
	 8.	 Weiskirchen, R., Weiskirchen, S. & Tacke, F. Organ and tissue fibrosis: Molecular signals, cellular mechanisms and translational 
implications. Mol. Asp. Med. 65, 2–15. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​mam.​2018.​06.​003 (2019).
	 9.	 Wynn, T. A. & Ramalingam, T. R. Mechanisms of fibrosis: Therapeutic translation for fibrotic disease. Nat. Med. 18, 1028–1040. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​nm.​2807 (2012).
	10.	 Reno, F. et al. In vitro mechanical compression induces apoptosis and regulates cytokines release in hypertrophic scars. Wound 
Repair Regen. 11, 331–336. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1046/j.​1524-​475x.​2003.​11504.x (2003).
	11.	 Arumugam, S., Jang, Y. C., Chen-Jensen, C., Gibran, N. S. & Isik, F. F. Temporal activity of plasminogen activators and matrix 
metalloproteinases during cutaneous wound repair. Surgery 125, 587–593 (1999).
	12.	 Trumbull, A., Subramanian, G. & Yildirim-Ayan, E. Mechanoresponsive musculoskeletal tissue differentiation of adipose-derived 
stem cells. Biomed. Eng Online 15, 43. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s12938-​016-​0150-9 (2016).
	13.	 Blaauboer, M. E., Smit, T. H., Hanemaaijer, R., Stoop, R. & Everts, V. Cyclic mechanical stretch reduces myofibroblast differentia-
tion of primary lung fibroblasts. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 404, 23–27. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​bbrc.​2010.​11.​033 (2011).
	14.	 Manuyakorn, W. et al. Mechanical strain causes adaptive change in bronchial fibroblasts enhancing profibrotic and inflammatory 
responses. PLoS ONE 11, e0153926. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​01539​26 (2016).
	15.	 Chen, G. et al. Mechanical loading modulates heterotopic ossification in calcific tendinopathy through the mTORC1 signaling 
pathway. Mol. Med. Rep. 16, 5901–5907. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3892/​mmr.​2017.​7380 (2017).
	16.	 Xie, Y., Qian, Y., Wang, Y., Liu, K. & Li, X. Mechanical stretch and LPS affect the proliferation, extracellular matrix remodeling 
and viscoelasticity of lung fibroblasts. Exp. Ther. Med. 20, 5. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3892/​etm.​2020.​9133 (2020).
	17.	 Zhao, H. et al. Microengineered in vitro model of cardiac fibrosis through modulating myofibroblast mechanotransduction. 
Biofabrication 6, 045009. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1088/​1758-​5082/6/​4/​045009 (2014).
	18.	 Discher, D. E., Janmey, P. & Wang, Y. L. Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate. Science 310, 1139–1143. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​scien​ce.​11169​95 (2005).
	19.	 Pedersen, J. A. & Swartz, M. A. Mechanobiology in the third dimension. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 33, 1469–1490. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1007/​s10439-​005-​8159-4 (2005).
	20.	 Bell, E., Ivarsson, B. & Merrill, C. Production of a tissue-like structure by contraction of collagen lattices by human fibroblasts of 
different proliferative potential in vitro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 76, 1274–1278. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1073/​pnas.​76.3.​1274 (1979).
	21.	 Grinnell, F. Fibroblasts, myofibroblasts, and wound contraction. J. Cell Biol. 124, 401–404 (1994).
	22.	 Elsdale, T. & Bard, J. Collagen substrata for studies on cell behavior. J. Cell Biol. 54, 626–637. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1083/​jcb.​54.3.​626 
(1972).
	23.	 John, J., Quinlan, A. T., Silvestri, C. & Billiar, K. Boundary stiffness regulates fibroblast behavior in collagen gels. Ann. Biomed. 
Eng. 38, 658–673. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10439-​009-​9856-1 (2010).
	24.	 Caliari, S. R. et al. Stiffening hydrogels for investigating the dynamics of hepatic stellate cell mechanotransduction during myofi-
broblast activation. Sci. Rep. 6, 21387. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​srep2​1387 (2016).
	25.	 Marinkovic, A., Mih, J. D., Park, J. A., Liu, F. & Tschumperlin, D. J. Improved throughput traction microscopy reveals pivotal role 
for matrix stiffness in fibroblast contractility and TGF-beta responsiveness. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol. 303, 169–180. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1152/​ajplu​ng.​00108.​2012 (2012).
	26.	 Goffin, J. M. et al. Focal adhesion size controls tension-dependent recruitment of alpha-smooth muscle actin to stress fibers. J. 
Cell Biol. 172, 259–268. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1083/​jcb.​20050​6179 (2006).
	27.	 Edlich, R. F. & Carl, B. A. Predicting scar formation: From ritual practice (Langer’s lines) to scientific discipline (static and dynamic 
skin tensions). J. Emerg. Med. 16, 759–760. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​s0736-​4679(98)​00070-5 (1998).
14
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2022) 12:16832  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20383-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
	28.	 Costa, A. M. et al. Mechanical forces induce scar remodeling. Study in non-pressure-treated versus pressure-treated hypertrophic 
scars. Am. J. Pathol. 155, 1671–1679. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0002-​9440(10)​65482-X (1999).
	29.	 Bialorucki, C., Subramanian, G., Elsaadany, M. & Yildirim-Ayan, E. In situ osteoblast mineralization mediates post-injection 
mechanical properties of osteoconductive material. J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 38, 143–153. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jmbbm.​
2014.​06.​018 (2014).
	30.	 Elsaadany, M. et al. Equiaxial strain modulates adipose-derived stem cell differentiation within 3D biphasic scaffolds towards 
annulus fibrosus. Sci. Rep. 7, 12868. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41598-​017-​13240-3 (2017).
	31.	 Subramanian, G., Elsaadany, M., Bialorucki, C. & Yildirim-Ayan, E. Creating homogenous strain distribution within 3D cell-
encapsulated constructs using a simple and cost-effective uniaxial tensile bioreactor: Design and validation study. Biotechnol. 
Bioeng. 114, 1878–1887. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​bit.​26304 (2017).
	32.	 Subramanian, G., Stasuk, A., Elsaadany, M. & Yildirim-Ayan, E. Effect of uniaxial tensile cyclic loading regimes on matrix organi-
zation and tenogenic differentiation of adipose-derived stem cells encapsulated within 3D collagen scaffolds. Stem Cells Int. 2017, 
6072406. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1155/​2017/​60724​06 (2017).
	33.	 Bramson, M. T. K., Van Houten, S. K. & Corr, D. T. Mechanobiology in tendon, ligament, and skeletal muscle tissue engineering. 
J. Biomech. Eng. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1115/1.​40500​35 (2021).
	34.	 Wang, J. H. Mechanobiology of tendon. J. Biomech. 39, 1563–1582. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jbiom​ech.​2005.​05.​011 (2006).
	35.	 Fukunaga, T. et al. In vivo behaviour of human muscle tendon during walking. Proc. Biol. Sci. 268, 229–233. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1098/​rspb.​2000.​1361 (2001).
	36.	 Schache, A. G., Dorn, T. W., Blanch, P. D., Brown, N. A. & Pandy, M. G. Mechanics of the human hamstring muscles during sprint-
ing. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 44, 647–658. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1249/​MSS.​0b013​e3182​36a3d2 (2012).
	37.	 Haeri, M. & Haeri, M. ImageJ plugin for analysis of porous scaffolds used in tissue engineering. J. Open Res. Softw. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​5334/​jors.​bn (2015).
	38.	 Schindelin, J. et al. Fiji: An open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 676–682. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​
nmeth.​2019 (2012).
	39.	 Codelia, V. A., Sun, G. & Irvine, K. D. Regulation of YAP by mechanical strain through Jnk and Hippo signaling. Curr. Biol. 24, 
2012–2017. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​cub.​2014.​07.​034 (2014).
	40.	 Basset, F. et al. Intraluminal fibrosis in interstitial lung disorders. Am. J. Pathol. 122, 443–461 (1986).
	41.	 Hinz, B. Formation and function of the myofibroblast during tissue repair. J. Investig. Dermatol. 127, 526–537. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1038/​sj.​jid.​57006​13 (2007).
	42.	 Hinz, B., Mastrangelo, D., Iselin, C. E., Chaponnier, C. & Gabbiani, G. Mechanical tension controls granulation tissue contractile 
activity and myofibroblast differentiation. Am. J. Pathol. 159, 1009–1020. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0002-​9440(10)​61776-2 (2001).
	43.	 Leigh, D. R., Abreu, E. L. & Derwin, K. A. Changes in gene expression of individual matrix metalloproteinases differ in response 
to mechanical unloading of tendon fascicles in explant culture. J. Orthop. Res. 26, 1306–1312. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​jor.​20650 
(2008).
	44.	 Abreu, E. L., Leigh, D. & Derwin, K. A. Effect of altered mechanical load conditions on the structure and function of cultured 
tendon fascicles. J. Orthop. Res. 26, 364–373. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​jor.​20520 (2008).
	45.	 Khayyeri, H. et al. Achilles tendon compositional and structural properties are altered after unloading by botox. Sci. Rep. 7, 13067. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41598-​017-​13107-7 (2017).
	46.	 Mutsuzaki, H., Nakajima, H., Wadano, Y., Takahashi, H. & Sakane, M. Influence of mechanical unloading on histological changes 
of the patellar tendon insertion in rabbits. Knee 22, 469–474. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​knee.​2015.​03.​004 (2015).
	47.	 Killian, M. L. et al. The effects of chronic unloading and gap formation on tendon-to-bone healing in a rat model of massive rotator 
cuff tears. J. Orthop. Res. 32, 439–447. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​jor.​22519 (2014).
	48.	 Killian, M. L. et al. The effect of unloading on gene expression of healthy and injured rotator cuffs. J. Orthop. Res. 31, 1240–1248. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​jor.​22345 (2013).
	49.	 Heinemeier, K. M. et al. Effect of unloading followed by reloading on expression of collagen and related growth factors in rat 
tendon and muscle. J. Appl. Physiol. 106, 178–186. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1152/​jappl​physi​ol.​91092.​2008 (2009).
	50.	 Chen, K., Hu, X., Blemker, S. S. & Holmes, J. W. Multiscale computational model of Achilles tendon wound healing: Untangling 
the effects of repair and loading. PLoS Comput. Biol. 14, e1006652. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pcbi.​10066​52 (2018).
	51.	 Kinugasa, R., Yamamura, N., Sinha, S. & Takagi, S. Influence of intramuscular fiber orientation on the Achilles tendon curvature 
using three-dimensional finite element modeling of contracting skeletal muscle. J. Biomech. 49, 3592–3595. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​jbiom​ech.​2016.​09.​014 (2016).
	52.	 Tatara, A. M. et al. The role of muscle loading on bone (re)modeling at the developing enthesis. PLoS ONE 9, e97375. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​00973​75 (2014).
	53.	 Thomopoulos, S. et al. Decreased muscle loading delays maturation of the tendon enthesis during postnatal development. J. Orthop. 
Res. 25, 1154–1163. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​jor.​20418 (2007).
	54.	 Glasgow, P., Phillips, N. & Bleakley, C. Optimal loading: Key variables and mechanisms. Br. J. Sports Med. 49, 278–279. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1136/​bjspo​rts-​2014-​094443 (2015).
	55.	 Glasgow, P., Bleakley, C. M. & Phillips, N. Being able to adapt to variable stimuli: The key driver in injury and illness prevention? 
Br. J. Sports Med. 47, 64–65. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​bjspo​rts-​2012-​091960 (2013).
	56.	 Cook, J. L. & Purdam, C. R. Is tendon pathology a continuum? A pathology model to explain the clinical presentation of load-
induced tendinopathy. Br. J. Sports Med. 43, 409–416. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​bjsm.​2008.​051193 (2009).
	57.	 Berk, B. C., Fujiwara, K. & Lehoux, S. ECM remodeling in hypertensive heart disease. J. Clin. Investig. 117, 568–575. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1172/​JCI31​044 (2007).
	58.	 Chen, H. et al. Silencing COX-2 blocks PDK1/TRAF4-induced AKT activation to inhibit fibrogenesis during skeletal muscle 
atrophy. Redox Biol. 38, 101774. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​redox.​2020.​101774 (2021).
	59.	 van Caam, A., Vonk, M., van den Hoogen, F., van Lent, P. & van der Kraan, P. Unraveling SSc pathophysiology; the myofibroblast. 
Front. Immunol. 9, 2452. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fimmu.​2018.​02452 (2018).
	60.	 Subramanian, G., Bialorucki, C. & Yildirim-Ayan, E. Nanofibrous yet injectable polycaprolactone-collagen bone tissue scaffold 
with osteoprogenitor cells and controlled release of bone morphogenetic protein-2. Mater. Sci. Eng. C Mater. Biol. Appl. 51, 16–27. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​msec.​2015.​02.​030 (2015).
	61.	 Muller-Deubert, S. et al. Phosphodiesterase 10A is a mediator of osteogenic differentiation and mechanotransduction in bone 
marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells. Stem Cells Int. 2020, 7865484. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1155/​2020/​78654​84 (2020).
	62.	 Yao, Q. P. et al. Profiles of long noncoding RNAs in hypertensive rats: Long noncoding RNA XR007793 regulates cyclic strain-
induced proliferation and migration of vascular smooth muscle cells. J. Hypertens. 35, 1195–1203. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​HJH.​
00000​00000​001304 (2017).
	63.	 Bjoraker, J. A. et al. Prognostic significance of histopathologic subsets in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care 
Med. 157, 199–203. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1164/​ajrccm.​157.1.​97041​30 (1998).
	64.	 Dohi, T. et al. The interplay of mechanical stress, strain, and stiffness at the keloid periphery correlates with increased caveolin-1/
ROCK signaling and scar progression. Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 144, 58–67. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​PRS.​00000​00000​005717 (2019).
15
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2022) 12:16832  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-20383-5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
	65.	 Bisson, M. A., Beckett, K. S., McGrouther, D. A., Grobbelaar, A. O. & Mudera, V. Transforming growth factor-beta1 stimulation 
enhances Dupuytren’s fibroblast contraction in response to uniaxial mechanical load within a 3-dimensional collagen gel. J. Hand 
Surg. Am. 34, 1102–1110. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jhsa.​2009.​02.​008 (2009).
	66.	 Ogawa, R. Keloid and hypertrophic scarring may result from a mechanoreceptor or mechanosensitive nociceptor disorder. Med. 
Hypotheses 71, 493–500. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​mehy.​2008.​05.​020 (2008).
	67.	 Booth, A. J. et al. Acellular normal and fibrotic human lung matrices as a culture system for in vitro investigation. Am. J. Respir. 
Crit. Care Med. 186, 866–876. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1164/​rccm.​201204-​0754OC (2012).
	68.	 Hinz, B. et al. The myofibroblast: One function, multiple origins. Am. J. Pathol. 170, 1807–1816. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2353/​ajpath.​
2007.​070112 (2007).
	69.	 D’Urso, M. & Kurniawan, N. A. Mechanical and physical regulation of fibroblast-myofibroblast transition: From cellular mecha-
noresponse to tissue pathology. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 8, 609653. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fbioe.​2020.​609653 (2020).
	70.	 Pardo, A. & Selman, M. Matrix metalloproteases in aberrant fibrotic tissue remodeling. Proc. Am. Thorac. Soc. 3, 383–388. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1513/​pats.​200601-​012TK (2006).
	71.	 Farhat, Y. M. et al. Gene expression analysis of the pleiotropic effects of TGF-beta1 in an in vitro model of flexor tendon healing. 
PLoS ONE 7, e51411. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​00514​11 (2012).
	72.	 Kollmannsberger, P., Bidan, C. M., Dunlop, J. W. C., Fratzl, P. & Vogel, V. Tensile forces drive a reversible fibroblast-to-myofibroblast 
transition during tissue growth in engineered clefts. Sci. Adv. 4, 4881. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​sciadv.​aao48​81 (2018).
	73.	 Liu, L. et al. Matrix-transmitted paratensile signaling enables myofibroblast-fibroblast cross talk in fibrosis expansion. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 10832–10838. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1073/​pnas.​19106​50117 (2020).
	74.	 Davidson, M. D. et al. Engineered fibrous networks to investigate the influence of fiber mechanics on myofibroblast differentiation. 
ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 5, 3899–3908. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1021/​acsbi​omate​rials.​8b012​76 (2019).
	75.	 Zhu, A. S., Mustafa, T., Connell, J. P. & Grande-Allen, K. J. Tumor necrosis factor alpha and interleukin 1 beta suppress myofi-
broblast activation via nuclear factor kappa B signaling in 3D-cultured mitral valve interstitial cells. Acta Biomater. 127, 159–168. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​actbio.​2021.​03.​075 (2021).
	76.	 Theiss, A. L., Simmons, J. G., Jobin, C. & Lund, P. K. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha increases collagen accumulation and 
proliferation in intestinal myofibroblasts via TNF receptor 2. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 36099–36109. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1074/​jbc.​M5052​
91200 (2005).
	77.	 Kaden, J. J. et al. Interleukin-1 beta promotes matrix metalloproteinase expression and cell proliferation in calcific aortic valve 
stenosis. Atherosclerosis 170, 205–211. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​s0021-​9150(03)​00284-3 (2003).
	78.	 Ahn, M. S. et al. Transient receptor potential channel TRPV4 mediates TGF-beta1-induced differentiation of human ventricular 
fibroblasts. Cardiol. J. 27, 162–170. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5603/​CJ.​a2019.​0050 (2020).
	79.	 Michalick, L. & Kuebler, W. M. TRPV4-A missing link between mechanosensation and immunity. Front. Immunol. 11, 413. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fimmu.​2020.​00413 (2020).
	80.	 Ansorge, M. et al. Mimicking paracrine TGFbeta1 signals during myofibroblast differentiation in 3D collagen networks. Sci. Rep. 
7, 5664. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41598-​017-​05912-x (2017).
	81.	 Boris Hinz, D. L. Myofibroblast: Methods and Protocols (Springer, 2021).
	82.	 Adapala, R. K. et al. TRPV4 channels mediate cardiac fibroblast differentiation by integrating mechanical and soluble signals. J. 
Mol. Cell Cardiol. 54, 45–52. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​yjmcc.​2012.​10.​016 (2013).
	83.	 Grove, L. M. et al. Translocation of TRPV4-PI3Kgamma complexes to the plasma membrane drives myofibroblast transdifferentia-
tion. Sci. Signal 12, 1533. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​scisi​gnal.​aau15​33 (2019).
	84.	 Rahaman, S. O. et al. TRPV4 mediates myofibroblast differentiation and pulmonary fibrosis in mice. J. Clin. Investig. 124, 5225–
5238. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1172/​JCI75​331 (2014).
	85.	 Zhan, L. & Li, J. The role of TRPV4 in fibrosis. Gene 642, 1–8. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​gene.​2017.​10.​067 (2018).
Author contributions
D.J. and E.Y.A. conceived and plan the experiments. D.J. carried out the experiments. D.J. and E.Y.A. analyzed 
and interpreted the data. A.R. and R.G.M. contributed with confocal image acquisition. A.R. contributed with 
image data analysis. E.Y.A. and D.J. wrote the main manuscript text. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1038/​s41598-​022-​20383-5.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to E.Y.-A.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the 
Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
© The Author(s) 2022

===== Clarke2025_SciRep_Chondrocyte-Fibroblast+Electrophysiology =====

Tracking chondrocyte-to-fibroblast 
transformation via changes in cell 
electrophysiology
Krista S. P. Clarke
1, Rebecca Lewis
2, Michael Pycraft Hughes
1,3 & 
Fatima H. Labeed
1,4
Cultured chondrocytes have potential for cartilage regeneration to treat degenerative diseases. 
However, when explanted chondrocytes are cultured in monolayer, they are known to dedifferentiate 
over time, adopting a more fibroblastic phenotype. This greatly impacts both research and potential 
clinical applications; cell-based cartilage repair therapies require significant in vitro expansion to 
obtain sufficient chondrocyte numbers for reimplantation, as chondrocytes adopt a more fibroblastic 
phenotype causing up to 70% of patients to develop fibrocartilaginous fill. We used dielectrophoresis 
(DEP) to observe changes in the electrophysiological properties of primary bovine chondrocytes 
over time. Using a multi-conductivity approach, we demonstrate that monitoring the cytoplasmic 
conductivity is a reliable method of observing cell changes over 100 days in culture. Results show 
statistically significant changes in both membrane capacitance (p = 0.0039) and cytoplasm conductivity 
(p =  < 0.0001) when tested at multiple conductivities. Analysis of cytoplasmic vs. medium conductivity 
allowed simple tracking of chondrocyte membrane potential, which exhibited transitions between 
three stable values of Vm which correspond to patch-clamp-derived literature values as they transition 
from chondrocytes (− 13 to − 18 mV) to proliferating fibroblasts (− 32 to − 43 mV) and ultimately to non-
proliferating fibroblasts (− 55 to − 71 mV), transitions occurring around days 40 and 80 respectively.
Keywords  Biomarker, Dedifferentiation, Electrome, Dielectrophoresis, Membrane potential
Over a quarter of a billion people worldwide are affected by cartilage injury and degradation1. Due to the 
avascularity of cartilage, the absence of mesenchymal cells, and the reduced migration ability of chondrocytes 
to travel to the site of injury, articular cartilage has very limited regenerative capabilities2,3. Cartilage tissue-
engineering based on autologous chondrocytes can be used to repair cartilage lesions. To perform autologous 
chondrocyte implantation (ACI), a biopsy is taken from a small non-bearing site of a joint, the extracellular 
matrix (ECM) is enzymatically digested, and chondrocytes are isolated2. Significant in vitro expansion of isolated 
chondrocytes is required to obtain a sufficient cell number before re-implantation3—a workable number of 
chondrocytes requires at least 2–3 weeks of chondrocyte expansion1. However, during standard monolayer cell 
culture protocols, chondrocytes rapidly dedifferentiate and change phenotype to become more fibroblastic3–7, 
and senescent8. Changes in the relative gene expressions of collagen type I and II, and superficial zone protein 
have been shown to occur as early as passage one using quantitative real-time PCR in monolayer-passaged 
articular chondrocytes9. Past passage four, chondrocytes no longer produce cartilage-specific matrix proteins 
including collagen type II and cartilage-specific proteoglycans10, and increase their expression of collagen type 
I, indicating chondrocyte dedifferentiation11. Dedifferentiated chondrocytes possess a flattened cell morphology 
and increased formation of stress fibres7. As passage number increases, chondrocyte growth rate and viability 
decrease, and cell death increases11. Dedifferentiation is thought to be attributable to epigenetic factors such as 
DNA methylation12,13, senescence14, the microenvironment, and oxidative stress1.
Dedifferentiation of chondrocytes during the required in vitro expansion for ACI contributes to suboptimal 
clinical outcomes3, as cells adopt a fibroblast-like morphology and an abnormal ECM. Only 15–30% of defects 
show hyaline-like repair tissue following treatment, with the remaining cohort developing fibrocartilaginous 
fill15,16. As the hyaline chondrocyte phenotype is lost, the efficacy of ACI is much reduced12 as the response 
of chondrocytes to stretching and mechanical loading is altered in vivo after reimplantation17. To overcome 
1Centre for Biomedical Engineering, School of Mechanical Engineering, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 
7XH, UK. 2Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Surrey, 
Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, UK. 3Department of Biomedical Engineering and Biotechnology, Khalifa University, 
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. 4Department of Biology, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab 
Emirates. email: f.labeed@uaeu.ac.ae
OPEN
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:15865 
1
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-98958-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports
chondrocyte dedifferentiation, three-dimensional culture aggregate systems16,18,19, high-density culture10, use of 
different media supplementations20, chemical inhibitors1, and sustained hypoxia21 have been assessed. However, 
phenotypic changes in chondrocytes following passage three are still recognised to limit their applications in 
research and clinical use22. Characterised chondrocyte implantation (CCI) is licensed in Europe to assess the 
chondrocyte phenotype prior to reimplantation to optimise patient outcomes23,24. Other methods which can be 
used to monitor chondrocyte dedifferentiation include changes in gene expression25, although Stenberg et al.26 
found no significant differences in gene expression between patients with a successful outcome and failures. 
Chen et al.1 investigated the use of single-cell RNA sequencing, live-cell metabolic assays, transpose-accessible 
chromatin with high-throughput sequencing (ATAC-seq) and developed an image-based approach of predicting 
chondrocyte plasticity. Additional methods of assessing changes in chondrocytes during cell culture would prove 
very beneficial for research and clinical applications.
Research on the electrophysiological properties of chondrocytes over time in cell culture is limited, although 
some evidence has demonstrated that the electrical properties of chondrocytes are affected by the duration 
in cell culture and passage number. Hdud et al.27 quantified the expression of TRPV4, TRPV5, and TRPV6 
ion channels using western blotting in passage 0 to passage 3 monolayer-cultured chondrocytes. Expression 
of TRPV5 and TRPV6 increased with passage number and time, suggesting changes in phenotype alter the 
expression of these channels27.
The electrical properties of chondrocytes in healthy and osteoarthritic states have also been evaluated by 
patch clamp, for example by Sánchez and López-Zapata28 who observed membrane potential depolarisation by 
33% in human osteoarthritic cells compared with healthy human cells. Similar work was published by Abdallat 
et al.29 in 2021 where bovine chondrocytes were treated to simulate osteoarthritis29. These were measured 
using the phenomenon dielectrophoresis30, abbreviated DEP. This is the induced motion of suspended particles 
(in this case, cells) in non-uniform AC electric fields; by observing the magnitude and direction of motion 
across multiple frequencies, it is possible to determine the mean cellular electrical state; this has been applied 
to a number of cell types, including blood cells31,32 and stem cells33,34 and for cancer detection35,36. Abdallat 
et al.29 observed statistically significant changes in membrane conductance, with the latter dropping by 31% 
after treatment, which is comparable to the 33% decrease observed by Sánchez and López-Zapata, and is in 
line with recent studies indicating proportionality between membrane potential and cell surface conductance37. 
Both groups suggested that on the basis of their results, that electrophysiology could be used as a potential 
biomarker, and that the study of chondrocyte electrophysiology could bring better understanding of the role of 
the chondrocyte channelome being important for the development of future interventions38.
In this paper, we investigate changes in the dielectric properties and membrane potential of chondrocytes 
during monolayer cell culture over time, with a goal of providing deeper insight into chondrocyte dedifferentiation 
at the electrical level. This work acts to provide a foundation for future experiments which can relate changes 
in electrical properties to changes in chondrocyte phenotype, in the hope of identifying a low-cost, easily 
adoptable, and high throughput technique which could assess chondrocyte quality control for research and 
clinical applications.
Methods
Primary bovine chondrocyte cell culture
Bovine articular cartilage was harvested from the metacarpophalangeal joints of cows sourced from a local 
abattoir. Chondrocytes were then enzymatically isolated, following the protocol described previously39. The 
primary bovine chondrocytes were then cultured in vented T75 flasks in Gibco Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle 
Medium (DMEM) (low glucose, 4 mM L-glutamine, sodium bicarbonate; Sigma-Aldrich, UK) supplemented 
with 10% heat-inactivated foetal bovine serum (FBS; Sigma-Aldrich, UK), 2% penicillin–streptomycin (Sigma-
Aldrich, UK), 1% amphotericin B solution (Sigma-Aldrich, UK) and 80 mM sucrose (Sigma-Aldrich, UK). 
Chondrocytes were incubated at 37 °C, 5% CO2, 95% humidity, and passaged when 70–80% confluent. Culture 
medium was aspirated from the culture flask, after which cells were washed in culture medium without FBS. 
1.5 mL trypsin–EDTA (0.25%) (ThermoFisher, UK) was added to dissociate cells from the flask, and incubated 
for 5 min. To ensure cells were no longer adhered, the flask was gently tapped. DMEM was added to quench the 
trypsinization reaction, and the solution was centrifuged at 285 g for 10 min. After the supernatant was removed, 
the pellet was resuspended in cell culture media to passage at a split ratio of approximately 1:3. The remaining 
cells were used for DEP measurements. The number of passages conducted for each biological repeat (n = 5 cell 
samples taken from different cows) depended on the passage number the primary cell line was obtained at, 
and after what passage the primary cells became unviable or when they were disposed of. Electrophysiological 
measurements were taken whilst in suspension of different ratios of saline:DEP media to adjust the σmed.
Following isolation from cell culture, aliquots of chondrocytes were each re-suspended at 1 × 106 cells/mL 
in a solution of different ionic conductivity for one five-minute wash step after which they were immediately 
characterised (acute suspension). A high-strength physiological ionic stock solution of 1.34 ± 0.08 S/m consisting 
of 145 mM NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich, UK) and 7.5 mM KCl (Sigma-Aldrich, UK) in DI H2O was used to prepare 
solutions of five different conductivities (described in Table 1). Solutions consisted of 0%, 1%, 3%, 10% and 33%, 
stock solution, diluted in DEP medium containing 8.5% w/v sucrose (Sigma-Aldrich, UK), 0.3% w/v dextrose 
(Sigma-Aldrich, UK), 250 µM MgCl2 (ThermoFisher, UK) and 100 µM CaCl2 (ThermoFisher, UK).
All media were filter sterilised using a 0.22 µm filter (Millex Syringe-driven filter 0.22 µm (Sigma-Aldrich, 
UK) or Bottle Top Filtration Unit 0.22 µm (StarLab, UK) depending on media volume). σmed was measured using 
the Hanna Instruments HI-99301 EC/TDS/Temperature Meter–High Range (Hanna Instruments, # HI-99301). 
Values of medium osmolarity and conductivity were measured before commencing each experiment to ensure 
that media maintained acceptable similarity to physiological conditions, (Table 1). Medium osmolarity was 
measured using the Gonotec® Osmomat Freezing Point Osmometer Model 3000 Basic (Wolflabs, UK, #32.B).
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:15865 
2
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-98958-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
and medium pH measured using the Hanna Instruments 9811-51 pH/EC/TDS/°C meter (Hanna Instruments, 
#HI-9811-51). Measurements for cell culture medium were measured at 37 °C, and all media were measured at 
room temperature (18–22 °C) as this was the temperature the media were used at. All equipment was calibrated 
prior to measurement and three technical repeats obtained before each experiment.
Data collection and analysis
Chondrocyte cell suspensions underwent one wash-step prior to data collection to wash-off remnant high 
conductivity cell culture media—the cell suspension aliquot underwent centrifugation at 300 g for five minutes, 
the supernatant was discarded, and the pellet resuspended in the same respective DEP medium at a cell 
concentration of 1 × 106 cells/mL. Ensemble cell electrical properties were measured using dielectrophoresis 
(DEP)30. Simultaneously, the chondrocyte suspension was injected into a haemocytometer (Labtech, UK), 
and analysed under the Nikon TS100 inverted phase contrast microscope using Vimba Viewer (V2.4.0, Allied 
Vision). The haemocytometer was analysed using ImageJ (National Institute of Health, Maryland) to measure 
cell radius, and count cell population, after which cell concentration was adjusted to 1.15 × 106 cells/ml (± 15%). 
Trypan blue staining (1:1) was performed, to ensure the proportion of dead cells was below the threshold 
where it would make an impact on the DEP spectrum. Cell suspensions were then analysed using a 3DEP 
reader (Heathfield, UK)40 for 30 s at five points per decade (10 kHz–20 MHz). Membrane conductance Geff, 
membrane capacitance Ceff, and cytoplasm conductivity σcyto were determined in 1%, 3%, and 10% solutions by 
fitting DEP spectra to the standard Clausius–Mossotti model using MATLAB (Mathworks, Natick, USA), with 
consideration to the low frequency dispersion41. The conductivities were selected in line with prior work in this 
area, and represent approximately equal spacing between the points on a logarithm scale. Measurements were 
taken at regular intervals for 100 days post-collection. Cells were modelled using a spherical approximation, 
where an estimated cell was determined using ImageJ (National Institute of Health, Maryland) to measure the 
radius along the major axis of 100 cells per sample.
Vm was calculated from DEP data using Eq. (1)42:
	
Vm = RT
F ln
(
δσmed
δσcyto
)
+ Ψext
(1)
where R is the gas constant (8.314 J K−1 mol−1), T is temperature in Kelvin, F is the Faraday constant, δσcyto is the 
measured change in cytoplasm conductivity for a range of medium conductivity values δσmed, and Ψext is the 
external surface potential of the cell, measured at − 12 mV across a wide range of cell types. This was shown42 to 
be effective at reporting values of Vm similar (within 2 mV) of reported values of Vm across a panel of seven cells 
and following three chemical interventions.
Statistical analysis
D’Agostino & Pearson omnibus test for normality identified measurements of Geff, Ceff, and σcyto were not 
normally distributed (p < 0.05), whereas cell radius was normally distributed (p > 0.05). As such, non-parametric 
Friedman tests followed by Dunn’s multiple comparisons (*p < 0.05) were used to determine how Geff, Ceff, and 
σcyto changed with σmed (matched), and repeated-measures one-way ANOVAs followed by Tukey’s multiple 
comparisons with Geisser-Greenhouse correction (*p < 0.05) were used to assess how cell radius changed with 
σmed. Repeated-measures and matched statistical tests were used to compare electrical values with σmed to account 
for any variability between bovine donors, or due to passage number.
Results
Analysis as a function of medium conductivity
To first determine which media conductivity (σmed) the electrophysiological properties of chondrocytes can be 
reliably measured at using DEP, DEP spectra were analysed from of chondrocytes suspended in five different σmed 
. Figure 1 shows representative DEP spectra of chondrocytes measured at passage 2 following acute suspension 
in media of 0%, 1%, 3%, 10% and 33% physiological ionic stock solution: DEP medium, which corresponded to 
conductivities 8 mS/m, 21 mS/m, 50 mS/m, 150 mS/m, and 447 mS/m respectively.
The DEP models fitted to the DEP spectra data points using the MATLAB code are shown, with their 
goodness-of-fit denoted by the r2 values43. In accordance with the results by Hoettges et al.40, the DEP spectra 
Medium
Conductivity (mS/m)
Osmolarity (mOsm)
Cell culture medium
1370 ± 20
324 ± 16
0% saline: DEP medium
8 ± 0
292 ± 21
1% saline: DEP medium
21 ± 2
286 ± 19
3% saline: DEP medium
50 ± 6
275 ± 9
10% saline: DEP medium
150 ± 5
279 ± 10
10% saline: DEP medium + TEA
200 ± 18
309 ± 15
33% saline: DEP medium
447 ± 21
274 ± 7
100% saline: DEP medium
1324 ± 83
283 ± 8
Table 1.  Mean (± SD) values of σmed (mS/m) and osmolarity (mOsm).
 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:15865 
3
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-98958-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
in Fig. 1d,f demonstrate that even at σmed of 150 mS/m, the spectra are relatively noise-free and modellable, 
possessing an r2 value of 0.92. On the basis of these analyses, it was decided to focus on 21 mS/m, 50 mS/m and 
150 mS/m, as modelling at 8mS/m added little benefit over the spectrum at 21 mS/m, and the spectrum at 447 
mS/m was hard to model.
Fig. 1.  Average DEP spectra of primary chondrocytes (passage 2 of the first biological repeat) in five different 
σmed including (a) 8 mS/m (black circles) (b) 21 mS/m (pink squares) (c) 50 mS/m (teal triangles) (d) 150 
mS/m (dark purple inverted triangles) (e) 447 mS/m (lilac diamond). (f) The corresponding MATLAB-fitted 
DEP models of DEP spectra in 8 mS/m (black line), 21 mS/m (pink line), 50 mS/m (teal line), 150 mS/m (dark 
purple line) and 447 mS/m (lilac line). r2 values denote the goodness-of-fit of the DEP models to the DEP 
spectra P.
 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:15865 
4
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-98958-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Values of Geff, Ceff, and σcyto obtained from MATLAB-fitted models of DEP spectra which fitted data with an 
r2 value of over 0.8 (n = 4), were measured for each cell passage following acute suspension in DEP: saline media 
at conductivities of 21 mS/m, 50 mS/m, and 150 mS/m. The mean values of all passages for each biological repeat 
(each flask) are shown in Table 2 and plotted in Fig. 2. A D’Agostino & Pearson omnibus test for normality 
Fig. 2.  Values of (a) Geff (b) Ceff (c) σcyto (d) cell radius in chondrocytes (n = 14) suspended in σmed of 21 mS/m 
(pink squares), 50 mS/m (teal triangles), and 150 mS/m (purple inverted triangles) shown in Table 2. Each 
datapoint is a separate passage from a biological repeat (n = 4 biological repeats Geff, Ceff, and σcyto), and cell 
radius (n = 5 biological repeats). Values of Geff, Ceff, and σcyto were obtained from MATLAB-fitted models of 
DEP spectra with an r2 value of 0.8. Changes in values of Geff, Ceff, and σcyto with σmed were compared using 
non-parametric Friedman tests followed by Dunn’s multiple comparisons (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ****p < 0.0001). 
Changes in values of cell radius with σmed were compared using repeated-measures one-way ANOVA.
 
Geff (kSm−2)
Ceff (mFm−2)
σcyto (Sm−1)
Radius (µm)
21 mS/m
0.465 (± 0.09)
4.64 (± 0.47)
0.26 (± 0.02)
10.48 (± 0.26)
50 mS/m
0.722 (± 0.19)
5.32 (± 1.02)
0.41 (± 0.04)
10.44 (± 0.20)
150 mS/m
1.817 (± 0.65)
1.88 (± 0.46)
0.68 (± 0.06)
10.28 (± 0.20)
Table 2.  Electrophysiological properties of chondrocytes (n = 14) following acute suspension in DEP media of 
21 mS/m, 50 mS/m, and 150 mS/m (mean ± SEM) as plotted in Fig. 2.
 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:15865 
5
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-98958-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
identified that measurements of Geff, Ceff, and σcyto were not normally distributed (p < 0.05). As such, non-
parametric Friedman tests followed by Dunn’s multiple comparisons (*p < 0.05) were used to determine how 
Geff, Ceff, and σcyto changed with σmed (matched). Repeated-measures one-way ANOVA was used to determine the 
effect of σmed on cell radius. Matched statistical tests were used to compare electrical values with σmed to account 
for any variability between bovine donors, or due to passage number.
No statistical difference was seen in values of Geff with increasing σmed, although the mean value of Geff in 150 
mS/m was greater than both 21 mS/m and 50 mS/m. However, mean values of Ceff decreased as σmed increased, 
with values of Ceff significantly less in 150 mS/m (1.88 ± 0.46 mFm−2) compared with 50 mS/m (5.32 ± 1.02 
mFm−2, adjusted p = 0.0039**) and 21 mS/m (4.64 ± 0.47 mFm−2, adjusted p = 0.0421*). In contrast to Ceff, mean 
values of σcyto increased as σmed increased, with σcyto significantly greater in 150 mS/m (0.68 ± 0.055 Sm−1) than 
in 21 mS/m (0.26 ± 0.019 Sm−1, adjusted p =  < 0.0001****). A significant increase was also seen between acute 
suspension in 21 mSm−1 and 50 mSm−1 (adjusted p = 0.0138*). Given the rapid change in the electrophysiological 
properties of chondrocytes following acute incubation in low σmed, it is worth considering that the electrical 
characterisation of cells by DEP requires measurements in low σmed as opposed to physiological media. The low 
σmed should be taken into consideration when characterising the electrical properties of cells in research and 
when considering their properties when incubated in different extracellular media. As the osmolarity and pH 
did not change between the different media (Table 2), the significant differences observed in Ceff and σcyto with 
σmed must be attributable to the differences in ionic concentrations between each medium.
Changes in properties as a function of time in culture
Methods of tracking the age of cells in culture include passage number, doubling time, generation number, 
and the number of days in cell culture. Passage number refers to the number of times a cell culture has been 
subcultured into ‘daughter’ cell flasks44. However, using passage number to refer to cellular age is imprecise 
because it depends on the initial cell seeding densities and split ratios which can vary in different laboratories—
affecting the number of times cells divide in culture44. In contrast, the population doubling number refers to the 
approximate number times the population has doubled since isolation and is a better estimate of defining the 
age of a finite cell line44. The number of days in cell culture was chosen as the way to track the age of the cells in 
culture in a simple and clear way as opposed to passage number.
Figure 3 shows the values of Geff, Ceff and σcyto against the number of days in cell culture for cells suspended 
in σmed of 21 mS/m, 50 mS/m, and 150 mS/m to assess how chondrocytes change as a function of time. As cells 
in different flasks reached confluence and required passaging at different times, the biological repeats are plotted 
together to show a trend over time. Simple linear regression was used to model how the electrical properties of 
chondrocytes change over duration in cell culture, using the assumption that trends followed a linear pattern. 
The coefficient and the 95% CI of the slope is quoted in Table 3, in addition to the p-value which determines 
whether the gradient of the slope is significantly greater than zero (p < 0.05, t-test) and the r2 value denoting the 
goodness-of-fit of the linear regression line.
Over time in cell culture, values of σcyto increased in 150 mS/m, with the gradient of the linear regression 
model significantly non-zero (p < 0.05). However, the r2 values of the linear regression models was low at 0.55, 
indicating values of σcyto cannot be reliably predicted based on time in cell culture. A similar trend was observed 
in Geff, where a significant (p=0.012) gradient was observed at 150 mS/m, albeit with another low value of r2.  No 
significant trends were observed in  Ceff over time as the coefficients of the linear regression model were not 
statistically greater than zero (p > 0.05). Different trends were observed in Geff, Ceff, and σcyto against time and 
σmed; Geff and σcyto showed a greater increase in higher σmed compared to lower σmed at later time points, whilst 
Ceff showed a lower increase.
DEP-derived variation in Vm
The increase in σcyto with σmed over time has been proposed to be related to changes in Vm
42. Values of Vm were 
calculated for chondrocytes over duration of cell culture using Eq. (1) and the data presented in Fig. 4; the values 
of Vm were calculated for each repeat using the gradient of σcyto of chondrocytes at σmed of 50 mS/m and 150 
mS/m. Vm was calculated at − 16.6 mV at day 30 and decreased over time. However, examination of change in 
derived Vm suggests that membrane potential alters in three stages. Prior to day 40, Vm ranges between − 13 mV 
and − 18 mV. After this, the values are seen to hyperpolarise to between − 32 and − 43 mV until day 80, when a 
second hyperpolarisation occurs to between − 55 mV and − 71 mV.
Reported measurements of resting Vm in literature for chondrocytes have widely varied in literature, 
from values of − 6.7  mV in canines39, − 12  mV in sheep45, to − 20.2  mV in a human chondrosarcoma cell 
line46,  − 39 ± 4 mV in human chondrocytes from healthy cartilage28, − 41 ± 7 mV in rabbits47, − 42.7 mV in rats48, 
and − 46 mV in mice49. The resting Vm of bovine chondrocytes using patch-clamp is − 24.26 ± 3.63 mV50, which 
compares to the resting Vm measured in these experiments using DEP.
Figure 4 shows that the value of Vm becomes more negative as the number of days in cell culture increases. 
This could correspond with dedifferentiation to a fibroblastic phenotype; literature reports chondrocyte 
dedifferentiation from passage four, as the expression of collagen type II and cartilage-specific proteoglycans 
ceases10, and the expression of collagen type I increases11.
Proliferating fibroblasts have a resting Vm of between − 20 and − 30 mV51,52. Non-proliferating fibroblasts 
have a Vm of − 68 mV52. Primary cell cultures have a limited life span, following a certain number of subcultures 
they stop dividing and become senescent44. Measuring Vm has also been shown to be indicative of cell viability53. 
Trypan blue staining has long been considered the gold-standard of cell viability analysis and did not show any 
indication of changes in cell viability over time.
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:15865 
6
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-98958-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Discussion
During cell culture, primary chondrocytes lose their phenotype as they become more fibroblastic, whilst 
differential gene expression occurs, such as an increase in type I and type III collagen expression and a decrease 
in type II collagen expression5,54,55. By passage 7, chondrocytes are typically highly dedifferentiated16. However, 
chondrocyte dedifferentiation causes problems in both research and clinical applications. For example, 
reimplantation of chondrocytes which have developed a more fibroblastic phenotype reduces the efficacy and 
success of ACI3,15. Moreover, it may impact research into diseases such as osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis is a 
debilitating painful disease characterized by the progressive loss and destruction of articular cartilage involving 
the participation of chondrocytes, matrix metalloproteinases and a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with 
thrombospondin repeats (ADAMTS) families of proteases56,57. Sanchez et al.28 reported chondrocytes in 
osteoarthritic cartilage have a more depolarised Vm compared with healthy cartilage. Furthermore, osteoarthritis-
induced chondrocytes have decreased values of Geff and higher whole cell capacitance compared with healthy 
chondrocytes29. In studies such as these which compare healthy chondrocytes with osteoarthritic chondrocytes, 
it is important that chondrocyte dedifferentiation has not occurred.
Currently, changes in morphological appearance such as monitoring the transition from spherical to a 
more flattened cell morphology, changes in the expression of markers such as type II collagen quantified by 
immunocytochemistry, western blotting and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction can be used 
to assess chondrocyte dedifferentiation54. Until now, changes in the cellular electrome over the duration of 
cell culture was unexplored, but could pave the way towards an easy, quick, and adoptable tool of tracking 
chondrocyte dedifferentiation. For example, changes in dielectric properties such as membrane capacitance have 
Fig. 3.  Mean values of (a) Geff (b) Ceff (c) σcyto (d) cell radius of primary bovine chondrocytes suspended in 
media of different conductivities including 21 mS/m (squares), 50 mS/m (triangles) and 150 mS/m (inverted 
triangles), against the number of days in cell culture. Values obtained from MATLAB-fitted models of DEP 
spectra which possessed an r2 value of over 0.8. Simple linear regression models fitted to the graphs denote 
the goodness-of-fit of the trend line to the plotted data. r2 values indicate the goodness-of-fit of the linear 
regression model by determining the variance in each parameter attributable to the number of days in cell 
culture.
 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:15865 
7
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-98958-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
been observed in stem cell populations as they differentiate to a certain fate33,58. Changes in Geff, Ceff, σcyto, and 
cell radius of chondrocytes over duration in cell culture was thus investigated.
Between 21 mS/m and 150 mS/m, concentrations of both K+ and Na+ increased. K+ is important in 
chondrocyte signalling, with K+ and Ca2+ channels linked in positive feedback loops to augment Ca2+ influx—
regulating gene transcription and cytokine secretion59. Inhibition of K+ channels by tetraethylammonium (TEA) 
have been shown to increase Vm
60 and inhibition with the K+ channel blocker 4-aminopyridine (4-AP) suppresses 
chondrocyte proliferation61. Furthermore, TEA treatment has been shown to reduce KV currents, cartilage-
specific gene expression, cartilage formation, and cell proliferation62. Given the importance of K+ channels 
in chondrocyte function, differences in the transmembrane transport of K+ due to changes in expression or 
function of K+ ion channels over cell culture duration may contribute to the trends seen in Geff and σcyto following 
acute suspension in 150 mS/m medium.
The data in Fig. 4 suggests that mean cellular Vm becomes more negative as the time in cell culture increases. 
Previous studies with patch clamp have suggested that proliferating fibroblasts have a resting Vm of between − 20 
and − 30 mV51,52. Non-proliferating fibroblasts have a Vm of − 68 mV52, whilst chondrocytes analysed immediately 
after expansion show Vm near − 24 mV50. It is known that primary cell cultures have a limited life span, and 
following a certain number of subcultures they stop dividing and become senescent44.
Examination of the alteration of derived Vm shown in Fig. 4 suggests that Vm alters in three stages. Prior to 
day 40, Vm ranges between − 13 mV and − 18 mV. After this, the values are seen to hyperpolarise to between − 32 
Fig. 4.  Calculated values of Vm (from four separate culture flasks) plotted against the number of days in cell 
culture. The data appears to be groupable into three phases, with transitions at days 40 and 80, with phase 1 
having Vm >  − 17 mV; phase 2, − 25 < Vm <  − 42 mV; and phase 3, Vm <  − 54 mV.
 
σmed (mS/m)
Coefficient
95% CI
P-value
r2 value
Geff
21
0.0022
− 0.0098 to 0.014
0.68
0.023
50
0.017
− 0.0021 to 0.036
0.077
0.24
150
0.057
0.015 to 0.098
0.012
0.45
Ceff
21
0.013
− 0.086 to 0.11
0.77
0.011
50
− 0.0090
− 0.14 to 0.13
0.89
0.0018
150
0.0067
− 0.018 to 0.032
0.57
0.030
σcyto
21
− 0.00037
− 0.0023 to 0.0015
0.67
0.025
50
6.1e−005
− 0.0051 to 0.0053
0.98
5.4e−005
150
0.0076
0.0031 to 0.012
0.0036
0.55
Cell radius
21
0.014
− 0.017 to 0.044
0.36
0.065
50
0.014
− 0.010 to 0.038
0.24
0.11
150
0.023
− 9.9e−005 to 0.046
0.051
0.26
Table 3.  Simple linear regression models fitted to indicate the trend in the change of electrical parameters 
over the number of days in cell culture. Coefficient denotes the gradient of the slope, and the 95% CI. p-value 
determines whether the slope is significantly greater than zero (* < 0.05). r2 value indicates the goodness-of-fit 
of the regression model by determining the variance attributable to the number of days in cell culture.
 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:15865 
8
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-98958-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
and − 43  mV until day 80, when a second hyperpolarisation occurs to between − 55  mV and − 71  mV. This 
suggests that the populations may collectively transition between chondrocitic, proliferating fibroblastic and 
non-proliferating fibroblastic, rather than variation being continuous over time. The time at which this occurs 
is somewhat later than that reported by Marlovits et al.54 in 2004 where they observed changes in ratios of 
collagen I and collagen II began at day 21 and was complete at day 28, in line with observed changes in cell 
shape. Whilst we did not analyse cell shape or volume directly, in our study we measured cell radius in order to 
fit the DEP data and determine DEP parameters. It can be noted that cell radii we observed would give rise to 
larger cell volumes than those measured in situ chondrocyte studies63–65. This could be due to the difficulties 
in determining the cell edge on the 2D images from which radii were measured. The measurement method 
of the cell radii, however, remained consistent throughout this study. In our case, the last measurement of Vm 
associated with the chondrocitic phenotype was day 38. The difference between the timing of the changes may 
reflect the different sources of the cells (human in their study54, bovine in the present study).
This suggests that DEP may be a suitable adjunct method for the study of chondrocyte-to-fibroblast 
transformation (and other cell differentiations). Other methods have recently come to the fore, looking at 
genetic factors and epigenetic factors13. These focus on the transcriptional components orchestrating the change 
through alteration of transcription and translation, but do not provide information about the intracellular ionic 
state. Combining methods such as these, together with conventional microscopy and gold-standard methods 
such as Western blotting, will provide much more detailed information about the interaction of all the cellular 
components in driving the transformation process.
Conclusion
Chondrocyte cell culture is used extensively in both research and clinical applications, such as cell-based 
therapies for cartilage repair and in the characterisation and research of osteoarthritis. However, as chondrocyte 
dedifferentiation occurs during cell culture, with phenotypic changes reported as early as passage one, this has 
significant repercussions. For example, ACI requires significant expansion in vitro to obtain sufficient numbers 
for reimplantation. Changes to a more fibroblastic phenotype during this time reduces the efficacy and success 
of surgery as up to 70% of patients develop fibrocartilaginous fill, which alters cartilage stretch and mechanical 
loading. Here we have presented new tools for the analysis of chondrocytes during expansion. Significant 
changes in Geff and σcyto were observed over time. Moreover, Vm was found to hyperpolarise over duration in cell 
culture. Whilst effective, routine translation of chondrocyte replacement for cartilage regeneration remains at 
a preclinical stage and future development remains uncertain, the electrophysiological changes in chondrocyte 
properties over time identified in this work illustrate that DEP has the potential in the future to contributing a 
new tool to assess chondrocyte dedifferentiation for potential clinical applications.
Data availability
Data are available from the corresponding author Fatima Labeed on request.
Received: 10 September 2024; Accepted: 16 April 2025
References
	 1.	 Chen, Y. et al. A high-resolution route map reveals distinct stages of chondrocyte dedifferentiation for cartilage regeneration. Bone 
Res. 10, 38. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41413-022-00209-w (2022).
	 2.	 Costa, E., González-García, C., Gómez Ribelles, J. L. & Salmerón-Sánchez, M. Maintenance of chondrocyte phenotype during 
expansion on PLLA microtopographies. J. Tissue Eng. 9, 2041731418789829. https://doi.org/10.1177/2041731418789829 (2018).
	 3.	 Mao, Y. et al. Extracellular matrix derived from chondrocytes promotes rapid expansion of human primary chondrocytes in vitro 
with reduced dedifferentiation. Acta Biomater. 85, 75–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2018.12.006 (2019).
	 4.	 Layman, D. L., Sokoloff, L. & Miller, E. J. Collagen synthesis by articular in monolayer culture. Exp. Cell Res. 73, 107–112. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​
d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​0​0​1​4​-​4​8​2​7​(​7​2​)​9​0​1​0​7​-​3​ (1972).
	 5.	 Lin, Z. et al. Gene expression profiles of human chondrocytes during passaged monolayer cultivation. J. Orthop. Res. 26, 1230–
1237. https://doi.org/10.1002/jor.20523 (2008).
	 6.	 Schulze-Tanzil, G. Activation and dedifferentiation of chondrocytes: Implications in cartilage injury and repair. Ann. Anat. 191, 
325–338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aanat.2009.05.003 (2009).
	 7.	 Ghosh, S. et al. Dedifferentiation Alters Chondrocyte Nuclear Mechanics During in Vitro Culture and Expansion (Cold Spring Harbor 
Laboratory, 2021).
	 8.	 Piñeiro-Ramil, M. et al. Generation of human immortalized chondrocytes from osteoarthritic and healthy cartilage. Bone Joint Res. 
12, 46–57. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​3​0​2​/​2​0​4​6​-​3​7​5​8​.​1​2​1​.​b​j​r​-​2​0​2​2​-​0​2​0​7​.​r​1 (2023).
	 9.	 Darling, E. M. & Athanasiou, K. A. Rapid phenotypic changes in passaged articular chondrocyte subpopulations. J. Orthop. Res. 
23(2), 425–432. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orthres.2004.08.008 (2005).
	10.	 Schulze-Tanzil, G. et al. Redifferentiation of dedifferentiated human chondrocytes in high-density cultures. Cell Tissue Res. 308, 
371–379. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00441-002-0562-7 (2002).
	11.	 Kang, S. W., Yoo, S. P. & Kim, B. S. Effect of chondrocyte passage number on histological aspects of tissue-engineered cartilage. 
Bio-Med. Mater. Eng. 17, 269–276 (2007).
	12.	 Duan, L., Liang, Y., Ma, B., Zhu, W. & Wang, D. Epigenetic regulation in chondrocyte phenotype maintenance for cell-based 
cartilage repair. Am. J. Transl. Res. 7(11), 2127–2140 (2015).
	13.	 Duan, L. et al. DNA methylation profiling in chondrocyte dedifferentiation in vitro. J. Cell. Physiol. 232, 1708–1716. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​
g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​2​/​j​c​p​.​2​5​4​8​6​ (2017).
	14.	 Ashraf, S. et al. Regulation of senescence associated signaling mechanisms in chondrocytes for cartilage tissue regeneration. 
Osteoarthr. Cartil. 24(2), 196–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2015.07.008 (2016).
	15.	 Bartlett, W. et al. Autologous chondrocyte implantation versus matrix-induced autologous chondrocyte implantation for 
osteochondral defects of the knee: A prospective, randomised study. J. Bone Joint Surg. Br. Vol. 87(5), 640–645. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​
1​3​0​2​/​0​3​0​1​-​6​2​0​x​.​8​7​b​5​.​1​5​9​0​5​ (2005).
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:15865 
9
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-98958-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
	16.	 Huang, B. J., Hu, J. C. & Athanasiou, K. A. Effects of passage number and post-expansion aggregate culture on tissue engineered, 
self-assembled neocartilage. Acta Biomater. 43, 150–159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2016.07.044 (2016).
	17.	 Das, R. H. J. et al. In vitro expansion affects the response of chondrocytes to mechanical stimulation. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 16(2), 
385–391. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2007.07.014 (2008).
	18.	 Wolf, F. et al. Cartilage tissue engineering using pre-aggregated human articular chondrocytes. Eur. Cell. Mater. 16, 92–99. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​
/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​2​2​2​0​3​/​e​c​m​.​v​0​1​6​a​1​0​ (2008).
	19.	 Caron, M. M. et al. Redifferentiation of dedifferentiated human articular chondrocytes: comparison of 2D and 3D cultures. 
Osteoarthr. Cartil. 20(10), 1170–1178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2012.06.016 (2012).
	20.	 Jakob, M. et al. Specific growth factors during the expansion and redifferentiation of adult human articular chondrocytes enhance 
chondrogenesis and cartilaginous tissue formation in vitro. J. Cell. Biochem. 81, 368–377. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​2​/​1​0​9​7​-​4​6​4​4​(​2​0​0​1​
0​5​0​1​)​8​1​:​2​%​3​c​3​6​8​:​:​a​i​d​-​j​c​b​1​0​5​1​%​3​e​3​.​0​.​c​o​;​2​-​j (2001).
	21.	 Mennan, C. et al. Human articular chondrocytes retain their phenotype in sustained hypoxia while normoxia promotes their 
immunomodulatory potential. Cartilage 10, 467–479. https://doi.org/10.1177/1947603518769714 (2019).
	22.	 Kwon, H., Brown, W. E., O’Leary, S. A., Hu, J. C. & Athanasiou, K. A. Rejuvenation of extensively passaged human chondrocytes 
to engineer functional articular cartilage. Biofabrication 13, 035002. https://doi.org/10.1088/1758-5090/abd9d9 (2021).
	23.	 Saris, D. B. et al. Characterized chondrocyte implantation results in better structural repair when treating symptomatic cartilage 
defects of the knee in a randomized controlled trial versus microfracture. Am. J. Sports Med. 36, 235–246. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​7​7​
/​0​3​6​3​5​4​6​5​0​7​3​1​1​0​9​5​ (2008).
	24.	 Vanlauwe, J. et al. Five-year outcome of characterized chondrocyte implantation versus microfracture for symptomatic cartilage 
defects of the knee: Early treatment matters. Am. J. Sports Med. 39, 2566–2574. https://doi.org/10.1177/0363546511422220 (2011).
	25.	 Ma, B. et al. Gene expression profiling of dedifferentiated human articular chondrocytes in monolayer culture. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 
21, 599–603. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2013.01.014 (2013).
	26.	 Stenberg, J. et al. Clinical outcome 3 years after autologous chondrocyte implantation does not correlate with the expression of 
a predefined gene marker set in chondrocytes prior to implantation but is associated with critical signaling pathways. Orthop. J. 
Sports Med. 2, 2325967114550781. https://doi.org/10.1177/2325967114550781 (2014).
	27.	 Hdud, I. M., El-Shafei, A. A., Loughna, P., Barrett-Jolley, R. & Mobasheri, A. Expression of transient receptor potential vanilloid 
(TRPV) channels in different passages of articular chondrocytes. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 13, 4433–4445 (2012).
	28.	 Sánchez, J. C. & López-Zapata, D. F. Effects of osmotic challenges on membrane potential in human articular chondrocytes from 
healthy and osteoarthritic cartilage. Biorheology 47, 321–331. https://doi.org/10.3233/bir-2010-0577 (2010).
	29.	 Abdallat, R., Kruchek, E., Matta, C., Lewis, R. & Labeed, F. H. Dielectrophoresis as a tool to reveal the potential role of ion channels 
and early electrophysiological changes in osteoarthritis. Micromachines 12(8), 949. https://doi.org/10.3390/mi12080949 (2021).
	30.	 Pethig, R. Dielectrophoresis: Theory, Methodology and Biological Applications. 1st edn, 15, 39, 41, 213–221, 397 (Wiley, 2017).
	31.	 Beale, A. D. et al. Casein kinase 1 underlies temperature compensation of circadian rhythms in human red blood cells. J. Biol. 
Rhythms 34(2), 144–153. https://doi.org/10.1177/0748730419836370 (2019).
	32.	 Lavi, E. D., Crivellari, F. & Gagnon, Z. Dielectrophoretic detection of electrical property changes of stored human red blood cells. 
Electrophoresis 43, 1297–1308. https://doi.org/10.1002/elps.202100241 (2022).
	33.	 Flanagan, L. A. et al. Unique dielectric properties distinguish stem cells and their differentiated progeny. Stem Cells 26, 656–665. 
https://doi.org/10.1634/stemcells.2007-0810 (2008).
	34.	 Ismail, A., Hughes, M. P., Mulhall, H. J., Oreffo, R. O. & Labeed, F. H. Characterization of human skeletal stem and bone cell 
populations using dielectrophoresis. J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 9, 162–168. https://doi.org/10.1002/term.1629 (2015).
	35.	 Graham, K. A. et al. A dielectrophoretic method of discrimination between normal oral epithelium, and oral and oropharyngeal 
cancer in a clinical setting. Analyst 14, 5198–5524. https://doi.org/10.1039/c5an00796h (2015).
	36.	 Gascoyne, P. R. C. & Shim, S. Isolation of circulating tumor cells by dielectrophoresis. Cancers 6, 545–579 (2014).
	37.	 Hughes, M. P. The surface conductance of red blood cells and platelets is modulated by the cell membrane potential. Electrophoresis 
44, 845–853. https://doi.org/10.1002/elps.202200289 (2023).
	38.	 Barrett-Jolley, R., Lewis, R., Fallman, R. & Mobasheri, A. The emerging chondrocyte channelome. Front. Physiol. 1, 135. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​
i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​3​3​8​9​/​f​p​h​y​s​.​2​0​1​0​.​0​0​1​3​5​ (2010).
	39.	 Lewis, R. et al. The role of the membrane potential in chondrocyte volume regulation. J. Cell. Physiol. 226, 2979–2986. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​
o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​2​/​j​c​p​.​2​2​6​4​6​ (2011).
	40.	 Hoettges, K. et al. Ten–second electrophysiology: Evaluation of the 3DEP platform for high-speed, high-accuracy cell analysis. Sci. 
Rep. 9, 19153. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-55579-9 (2019).
	41.	 Hughes, M. P. et al. On the low-frequency dispersion observed in dielectrophoresis spectra. Electrophoresis 45, 1080–1087. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​
/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​2​/​e​l​p​s​.​2​0​2​3​0​0​2​1​1​ (2024).
	42.	 Hughes, M. P. et al. Label-free, non-contact determination of resting membrane potential using dielectrophoresis. Sci. Rep. 14, 
18477. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-69000-7 (2024).
	43.	 Martin, C., Johnston, J. D., Henslee, E. A., van der Veen, D. R. & Labeed, F. H. In vitro characterisation of murine pre-adipose 
nucleated cells reveals electrophysiological cycles associated with biological clocks. Electrophoresis 43, 1337–1346. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​
1​0​.​1​0​0​2​/​e​l​p​s​.​2​0​2​1​0​0​3​0​8​ (2022).
	44.	 ECACC. Passage numbers explained. (2017). <​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​c​u​l​t​u​r​e​c​o​l​l​e​c​t​i​o​n​s​.​o​r​g​.​u​k​/​m​e​d​i​a​/​1​1​4​5​6​5​/​m​2​1​9​_​p​a​s​s​a​g​e​-​n​u​m​b​e​r​s​-​e​x​p​
l​a​i​n​e​d​.​p​d​f>.
	45.	 Wright, M. O., Stockwell, R. A. & Nuki, G. Response of plasma membrane to applied hydrostatic pressure in chondrocytes and 
fibroblasts. Connect. Tissue Res. 28, 49–70. https://doi.org/10.3109/03008209209014227 (1992).
	46.	 Funabashi, K. et al. Accelerated Ca2+ entry by membrane hyperpolarization due to Ca2+-activated K+ channel activation in 
response to histamine in chondrocytes. Am. J. Phys. Cell Physiol. 298, 786–797. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00469.2009 (2010).
	47.	 Sugimoto, T., Yoshino, M., Nagao, M., Ishii, S. & Yabu, H. Voltage-gated ionic channels in cultured rabbit articular chondrocytes. 
Comp. Biochem. Physiol. C Toxicol. Pharmacol. 115, 223–232. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0742-8413(96)00091-6 (1996).
	48.	 Ponce, A. Expression of voltage dependent potassium currents in freshly dissociated rat articular chondrocytes. Cell. Physiol. 
Biochem. 18, 35–46. https://doi.org/10.1159/000095134 (2006).
	49.	 Clark, R. B. et al. Voltage-gated K+ currents in mouse articular chondrocytes regulate membrane potential. Channels 4(3), 179–
191. https://doi.org/10.4161/chan.4.3.11629 (2010).
	50.	 Natesan, V. Effect of Hydrogen Sulphide (H2S) on the Electrophysiological Properties of Bovine Articular Chondrocytes, (2018).
	51.	 Chilton, L. et al. K+ currents regulate the resting membrane potential, proliferation, and contractile responses in ventricular 
fibroblasts and myofibroblasts. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 288(6), 2931–2939. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.01220.2004 
(2005).
	52.	 Yang, M. & Brackenbury, W. J. Membrane potential and cancer progression. Front. Physiol. 4, 185–185. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​3​3​8​9​/​f​p​
h​y​s​.​2​0​1​3​.​0​0​1​8​5​ (2013).
	53.	 Madorran, E., Stožer, A., Arsov, Z., Maver, U. & Rožanc, J. A promising method for the determination of cell viability: The 
membrane potential cell viability assay. Cells 11, 2314. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11152314 (2022).
	54.	 Marlovits, S., Hombauer, M., Truppe, M., Vècsei, V. & Schlegel, W. Changes in the ratio of type-I and type-II collagen expression 
during monolayer culture of human chondrocytes. J. Bone Joint Surg. Br. 86-B, 286–295. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​3​0​2​/​0​3​0​1​-​6​2​0​x​.​8​6​b​2​.​
1​4​9​1​8​ (2004).
	55.	 Goldring, M. B. in Human Cell Culture Protocols. Vol. 107, 069–096 (Humana Press, 2005).
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:15865 
10
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-98958-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
	56.	 Xu, J., Wang, W., Clark, C. C. & Brighton, C. T. Signal transduction in electrically stimulated articular chondrocytes involves 
translocation of extracellular calcium through voltage-gated channels. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 17, 397–405. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​j​o​
c​a​.​2​0​0​8​.​0​7​.​0​0​1​ (2009).
	57.	 Chen, D. et al. Osteoarthritis: Toward a comprehensive understanding of pathological mechanism. Bone Res. 5, 16044. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​
.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​3​8​/​b​o​n​e​r​e​s​.​2​0​1​6​.​4​4​ (2017).
	58.	 Adams, T. N. G., Jiang, A. Y. L., Vyas, P. D. & Flanagan, L. A. Separation of neural stem cells by whole cell membrane capacitance 
using dielectrophoresis. Methods 133, 91–103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymeth.2017.08.016 (2018).
	59.	 Suzuki, Y., Yamamura, H., Imaizumi, Y., Clark, R. B. & Giles, W. R. K+ and Ca2+ channels regulate Ca2+ signaling in chondrocytes: 
An illustrated review. Cells 9, 1577. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells9071577 (2020).
	60.	 Wohlrab, D., Wohlrab, J., Reichel, H. & Hein, W. Is the proliferation of human chondrocytes regulated by ionic channels?. J. Orthop. 
Sci. 6, 155–159. https://doi.org/10.1007/s007760100064 (2001).
	61.	 Wohlrab, D., Vocke, M., Klapperstück, T. & Hein, W. Effects of potassium and anion channel blockers on the cellular response of 
human osteoarthritic chondrocytes. J. Orthop. Sci. 9, 364–371. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00776-004-0789-0 (2004).
	62.	 Takács, R. et al. Ca2+-activated K+ channels in progenitor cells of musculoskeletal tissues: A narrative review. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24, 
6796. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24076796 (2023).
	63.	 Turunen, S. M. et al. The effect of collagen degradation on chondrocyte volume and morphology in bovine articular cartilage 
following a hypotonic challenge. Biomech. Modell. Mechanobiol. 12, 417–429. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10237-012-0409-4 (2013).
	64.	 Bush, P. G. & Hall, A. C. The volume and morphology of chondrocytes within non-degenerate and degenerate human articular 
cartilage. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 11(4), 242–251. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1063-4584(02)00369-2 (2003).
	65.	 Wong, M., Wuethrich, P., Buschmann, M. D., Eggli, P. & Hunziker, E. Chondrocyte biosynthesis correlates with local tissue strain 
in statically compressed adult articular cartilage. J. Orthop. Res. 15, 189–196. https://doi.org/10.1002/jor.1100150206 (1997).
Author contributions
KSPC performed the experiments and data analysis. FHL, RL and MPH supervised the work. KSPC wrote the 
main manuscript text and figures. All authors contributed to writing and editing the paper.
Funding
This work was funded in part by Deparator Ltd, the University of Surrey, Khalifa University Grant KU-2022-020 
and partly funded by UAEU Grant G00004633.
Declarations
Competing interests
Author MPH is co-inventor of the 3DEP instrument used in this work and a director of the company that 
manufactures it. The remaining authors declare no other conflicts of interest.
Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to F.H.L.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 
4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in 
any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide 
a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have 
permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or 
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence 
and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to 
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​t​t​p​:​/​/​c​r​e​a​t​i​v​e​c​o​m​m​o​
n​s​.​o​r​g​/​l​i​c​e​n​s​e​s​/​b​y​-​n​c​-​n​d​/​4​.​0​/​.​
© The Author(s) 2025 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:15865 
11
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-98958-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

===== Zhang2025_CommBiol_Keloid+Fibroblast =====

communications biology
Article
A Nature Portfolio journal
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Uncovering a ﬁbroblast differentiation-
based keloid classiﬁcation by integration
of single-cell and bulk RNA sequencing
Check for updates
Wei Zhang1,2,7, Jianyu Lu1,2,7, Xirui Tong1,2,7, Sujie Xie1,2, Shuyuan Xian1,2, Yifan Liu3, Jiale Yan4, Weijin Qian5,
Hanlin Sun1,2, Yushu Zhu1,2, Luofeng Jiang1,2, Xinya Guo1,2, Xinran Ding1,2, Yixu Li1,2, Chenguang Bai
6
,
Runzhi Huang
1,2,7
, Zhaofan Xia1,2
& Shizhao Ji
1,2
Keloids are dermal ﬁbroproliferative skin disorders caused by abnormal wound healing, resulting in
impaired skin function and aesthetic defects. Abnormal ﬁbroblast proliferation and excessive collagen
deposition are involved in keloid formation. This study investigated the role of ﬁbroblast differentiation
in keloid development. Single-cell and bulk RNA sequencing data of keloids were comprehensively
analyzed, and 25 clinically relevant differentially expressed ﬁbroblast-differentiation-related genes
(DEFDRGs) were identiﬁed. Based on DEFDRGs, a keloid diagnostic classiﬁcation system comprising
three subtypes was constructed, indicating that DEFDRGs could serve as therapeutic targets.
Additionally, multiple microarray datasets, protein sequencing data, and immunohistochemical
analyses of key markers in clinical keloid samples were used for further veriﬁcation. In conclusion, this
study established a molecular classiﬁcation of keloids based on ﬁbroblast differentiation, contributing
to the further understanding of keloid pathogenesis and providing new insights for diagnosis and
treatment.
Keloids are dermal ﬁbroproliferative skin disorders caused by abnormal
wound healing, affecting approximately 4.5% to 16% of the population1.
Keloids belong to benign skin tumors and manifest clinically as raised
amorphous scars that typically extend beyond the original wound boundary
and invade adjacent normal skin tissues2. These lesions mainly occur in the
earlobe, face, chest, and upper back, causing impaired skin function and
aesthetic defects3. Additionally, keloids are often accompanied by pruritus
and pain, which seriously affect patients’ physical and mental health2.
Currently, various therapeutic approaches for keloids have been
developed, including intralesional corticosteroid injection, cryotherapy,
surgical resection, radiotherapy, and laser therapy4. Nevertheless, keloids
still have a high recurrence rate, ranging from 70% to 100% after surgical
resection alone5. Moreover, some of these treatments are associated with
unavoidable side effects, such as pain and atrophy of surrounding normal
tissues4. As genetic, endocrine, and local tissue factors (such as wound
tension or infection) are all closely related to keloid formation, signiﬁcant
differences exist in the phenotype and prognosis of interlesional and
intralesional keloids6. Thus, keloids should not be regarded or treated as
homogenous growths. To date, the pathogenesis of keloids has not been
clearly elucidated, and radical treatments remain lacking. Based on these
clinical dilemmas, exploring the complex cellular and molecular mechan-
isms and decoding a precise molecular classiﬁcation of keloids may help
uncover their pathogenesis and potential treatments. However, few studies
have focused on constructing a diagnostic classiﬁcation of keloids. A pre-
vious study found that the downregulated cytotoxic CD8 + T-cells regu-
latedbytheNKG2A-solubleHLA-Eaxismayserveaspredictivebiomarkers
and potential therapeutic targets in keloids, and subsequently proposed the
H/N classiﬁcation7. Additionally, another study proposed a keloid classiﬁ-
cation based on glycosphingolipid metabolism-related genes8.
Fibroblasts are vital cells that promote keloid formation. Abnormal
ﬁbroblast proliferation and excessive collagen deposition constitute the
histopathological characteristics of keloids4. With the development of
single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), analyzing the transcriptome
landscapes, heterogeneity, and regulatory networks of ﬁbroblasts under
1Department of Burn Surgery, the First Afﬁliated Hospital of Naval Medical University, Shanghai, People’s Republic of China. 2Research Unit of key techniques for
treatment of burns and combined burns and trauma injury, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Shanghai, China. 3Department of Urology, Xinhua Hospital
Afﬁliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. 4Department of Gynecology, Shanghai First Maternity and Infant Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. 5Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. 6Department of Pathology, Changhai
Hospital, Shanghai, China. 7These authors contributed equally: Wei Zhang, Jianyu Lu, Xirui Tong, Runzhi Huang.
e-mail: bcg709@126.com;
runzhihuang2022@163.com; xiazhaofan_smmu@163.com; shizhaoji2022@163.com
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
both homeostatic and pathological conditions at a single-cell level is
feasible9. The latest scRNA-seq studies revealed that ﬁbroblasts in the
normaldermiscould bedivided into differentsubgroupsand playedvarious
roles in skin development and injury repair10–13. Research showed that
ﬁbroblasts in keloids were signiﬁcantly increased and could be divided into
four subsets: secretory-papillary, secretory-reticular, mesenchymal, and
pro-inﬂammatory cells. Among these, mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts were
expanding and played an essential role in excessive collagen deposition14.
The results have also been validated in scleroderma, another ﬁbrotic skin
disease14. Additionally, a study combining scRNA-seq with spatial tran-
scriptomics data found that co-localization of ﬁbroblasts and endothelial
cells, together with enhanced intercellular communication, may promote
keloid development15.
Considering the importance of ﬁbroblasts, the study reconstructed the
de novo differentiation trajectory of keloid ﬁbroblasts and identiﬁed 25
differentially expressed ﬁbroblast-differentiation-related genes (DEFDRGs)
associated with keloid development. Using integrated bioinformatics ana-
lysis of data from scRNA-seq (3 keloids and 3 normal scars) and RNA-seq
(37 keloids, 27 healthy skins), the study ﬁnally developed a keloid classiﬁ-
cation based on multi-dimensional analyses and experimental validation.
This approach deepens our understanding of new mechanisms underlying
keloid pathogenesis and contributes to a theoretical basis for clinical pre-
cision treatments of keloid patients.
Results
Single-Cell Atlas Reveals Dominant Cellular Composition in
Keloids
After stringent quality control (QC) ﬁltering, a total of 44,463 single cells
(keloids:23,638;normalscars:20,825)fromscRNA-seqdatametthecriteria
and were included for downstream analyses. The experimental workﬂow is
detailed in Fig. 1A and Supplementary Fig. 1. Uniform Manifold Approx-
imation and Projection (UMAP) -based clustering identiﬁed 18 distinct cell
clusters, which were annotated as 9 major cell types: endothelial cells,
ﬁbroblasts, glandular cells, immune cells, keratinocytes, lymphatic endo-
thelial cells, melanocytes, smooth muscle cells, and neural cells (Fig. 1B).
Spatial distribution patterns of these cell populations between keloid and
normal scar tissues are visualized in Fig. 1B. Feature plots demonstrate the
expression levels and cellular distribution of canonical biomarkers retrieved
from the CellMarker database across all annotated cell types (Supplemen-
taryFig.2A).SupplementaryFig.2Bfurthervalidatesthecellularannotation
accuracy through marker gene expression patterns. The Cleveland dot plot
was used to describe expression levels of typical marker genes (DCN, KRT1,
PTPRC, and VWF) and the proportions of the 9 cell types in different
samples (Supplementary Fig. 2C). Figure 1C illustrates the number and
proportion of each cell type. The results indicate that endothelial cells and
ﬁbroblastsarepredominantacrossallsamples,whichisinlinewithprevious
research16.
Fibroblasts emerge as central hubs in cell communication
networks
Cell communication analysis demonstrated ﬁbroblasts as the predominant
cellular interactors, exhibiting the highest communication frequency across
all cell types (Fig. 1D, E). Quantitative evaluation revealed signiﬁcantly
enhanced global communication activity in keloids compared to normal
scar tissues (Fig. 1F). Notably, ﬁbroblasts exhibited the strongest outgoing
interaction strength in both keloids and normal scars (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 2D).
Single-cell proﬁling unveils ﬁbroblast heterogeneity in keloids
A total of 13,925 ﬁbroblasts were extracted only for further analysis.
Through unsupervised clustering, 6 distinct clusters were identiﬁed and
annotated as ﬁbroblast 1-6 (Fig. 2A). Among them, ﬁbroblast 1 and 2
predominated in normal scars, while ﬁbroblast 3 occupied most of the
keloids (Fig. 2B). The expression levels of typical marker genes (ACTA2,
COL1A1, TGFBI, and TOP2A) were used to validate the accuracy of the
ﬁbroblast screening (Fig. 2C). The proportion of each ﬁbroblast cluster in
keloids and normal scars was visualized by a bar plot, further conﬁrming
that ﬁbroblast 3 is predominantly present in keloids (Fig. 2C). Fibroblast 3
highlyexpressesPOSTN,ASPN,andCOMP,whichhavebeenreportedtobe
involved in keloid formation (Fig. 2D)14. Extensive cell communication
existed among different ﬁbroblast subtypes. Particularly, ﬁbroblast 3
interacted most frequently with other subtypes, and COL1A1 and COL1A2
served as key intercellular association genes (Fig. 2E-F). Enriched hallmark
signaling pathways in ﬁbroblast 3 included collagen formation and extra-
cellular matrix (ECM) receptor interaction (Supplementary Fig. 3A). Sup-
plementary Fig. 3B, C demonstrates distinct cell cycle phases among
ﬁbroblast subpopulations.
Trajectory analysis decodes differentiation fates and expression
dynamics in keloid ﬁbroblasts
To delineate the differentiation hierarchy of keloid ﬁbroblasts, we employed
Monocle 2 for single-cell pseudotemporal ordering analysis. This compu-
tational framework reconstructed lineage trajectories through dimension-
ality reduction (DDRTree algorithm), revealing 7 distinct cellular states
along ﬁbroblast maturation paths (Fig. 3A–C). Furthermore, the pseudo-
time and cell lineage trajectory of each ﬁbroblast cluster were illustrated
separately in Fig. 3D. Notably, ﬁbroblast 3 predominantly occupied
intermediate-late pseudotime positions (States 3–6). Through trajectory
analysis, differentially expressed genes (DEGs) associated with ﬁbroblast
differentiation were identiﬁed and named as ﬁbroblast-differentiation-
related genes (FDRGs). The top 100 FDRGs were visualized in a heat-
map (Fig. 3E).
Integrated trajectory-clinical analysis identiﬁes core fate-
determining regulators in keloid ﬁbroblasts
Through the aforementioned analyses, we mapped the transcriptomes of all
ﬁbroblast states and used Monocle 2 to identify 14,467 FDRGs (Monocle-
sig, P < 0.05), which are the genes determining cell fate. Subsequent inte-
gration of RNA-seq proﬁles with clinical metadata from the SAR database
through univariate Cox regression revealed 32 diagnosis-associated (Diag-
nosis-sig, P < 0.05) and 137 time-signiﬁcant (Time-sig, P < 0.05) DEGs.
Intersectional analysis of these three gene sets identiﬁed 25 core FDRGs,
named DEFDRGs, exhibiting both differentiation-dependent expression
patterns and clinical relevance (Fig. 3F and Supplementary Fig. 4A). To
elucidate clinical correlations, a co-expression network of DEFDRGs was
constructed using nonparametric tests and Pearson correlation (Supple-
mentary Fig. 4B). Labels in various colors represented genes from different
Monocle states. Different colored curves represented positive or negative
correlations. The DEFDRGs showed tight associations, indicating under-
lying regulatory mechanisms of clinical outcomes and ﬁbroblast fates. Most
geneswerepositivelycorrelated,whileKallikreinRelatedPeptidase6(KLK6)
and Tryptase Beta 2 (TPSB2) were mostly negatively correlated with the
others. Boxplot validation conﬁrmed differential expression patterns across
diagnosis and time (Supplementary Fig. 4C).
Construct ﬁbroblast differentiation-based keloid classiﬁcation
(FDBKC) based on DEFDRGs
Through consensus clustering analysis of 25 ﬁbroblast differentiation-
regulated genes, we established the FDBKC system to stratify patients into
three molecular subtypes (k = 3, Supplementary Fig. 5A). Delta-area ana-
lysis conﬁrmed optimal clustering stability via minimal cumulative dis-
tributionfunction(CDF)deviations(SupplementaryFig.5B).Wevisualized
the expression of DEFDRGs across multiple dimensions: consensus cluster,
cellstate,sex,age,anddiagnosis(Fig.4A).Geneexpressionlevelsinthethree
consensus clusters were associated with clinicopathological characteristics.
Strikingly, strong connections between ﬁbroblast states and consensus
clusters were observed. The overall expression levels of ﬁbroblast fate-
determining genes were higher in cluster 1 and lower in cluster 2 and 3,
which exhibited distinct expression patterns, demonstrating obvious het-
erogeneity among the clusters (Fig. 4A).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
2
Fig. 1 | Comprehensive scRNA-seq analysis reveals cellular heterogeneity in
keloids and normal scars. A Schematic workﬂow of the study design and analytical
pipeline. B UMAP dimensionality reduction clustering 44,463 cells into nine cell
types, with color-coding depicting their distribution in keloid and normal scar
tissues. C Quantitative analysis of cell number and proportional distribution of the
nine cell types across samples, highlighting the predominant abundance of ﬁbro-
blasts and endothelial cells. D, E Cell communications networks among cell types,
demonstrating that ﬁbroblasts participate in the most extensive signaling
interactions. F Left: Comparison of interaction counts between keloids and normal
scars; right: Weighted analysis of cell-type-speciﬁc interaction strengths in the two
groups. LFDC low ﬁbroblast differentiation classiﬁcation, MFDC moderate ﬁbro-
blast differentiation classiﬁcation, HFDC high ﬁbroblast differentiation classiﬁca-
tion, PCA principal component analysis, DEFDRGs differentially expressed
ﬁbroblast-differentiation-related genes, KL keloid, NS normal skin, CC cell com-
munication, UMAP Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
3
Fig. 2 | Identiﬁcation of ﬁbroblast subtypes and cell communication networks.
A UMAP dimensionality reduction reveals six distinct ﬁbroblast subtypes across
keloid and normal scar tissues. B Quantitative analysis of cell number and pro-
portional distribution of ﬁbroblast subtypes across samples. Fibroblast 3 is pre-
dominant in keloids, whereas Fibroblast 2 constitutes the major population in
normal scars. C The Cleveland dot plot depicts expression of classical markers
(ACTA2, COL1A1, TGFBI, TOP2A) in ﬁbroblast subsets, with bar plots illustrating
the proportional distribution of each cluster in keloid and normal scar samples.
D Marker gene expression proﬁles highlight elevated ASPN, COMP, and POSTN
expression in Fibroblast 3. E, F Cell communication between ﬁbroblast subtypes.
Fibroblast 3 engages in more extensive signaling interactions compared to other
subtypes. KL keloid, NS normal skin, CC cell communication, UMAP Uniform
Manifold Approximation and Projection.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
4
Fig. 3 | Pseudotime trajectory analysis and identiﬁcation of DEFDRGs.
A Pseudotime plot depicts the potential ﬁbroblast differentiation sequence.
B Identiﬁcation of seven distinct differentiation states. C, D) Visualization of
ﬁbroblast subtypes mapped onto differentiation trajectories. E Expression of the top
100 fate-determining genes differentially expressed across differentiation states.
F Schematic workﬂow for identifying DEFDRGs, deﬁned by the overlap of ﬁbroblast
differentiation-associated DEGs and clinical diagnosis/time-related DEGs.
DEFDRGs differentially expressed ﬁbroblast-differentiation-related genes, DEGs
differentially expressed genes.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
5
Fig. 4 | Consensus clustering and clinical correlation analysis. A Heatmap
depicting the expression proﬁle of 25 DEFDRGs across three consensus clusters.
B Distribution of keloid and healthy diagnoses across the three clusters, showing
signiﬁcant diagnostic composition differences. C Proportional representation of
healthy samples and keloid tissues at different time points within each cluster.
D PCA score plot illustrating sample segregation based on DEFDRG expression
patterns. E Fibroblast score distribution across clusters, with Cluster 1 exhibiting the
lowest score and Cluster 3 the highest. F Association analysis of high/low ﬁbroblast
score with consensus clusters, diagnosis, and time. G Differential expression of 25
DEFDRGs in three clusters. Many genes were highly expressed in Cluster 1, while
TPSB2 and KLK6 were highly expressed in Cluster 3. LFDC low ﬁbroblast differ-
entiation classiﬁcation, MFDC moderate ﬁbroblast differentiation classiﬁcation,
HFDC high ﬁbroblast differentiation classiﬁcation, PCA principal component
analysis, DEFDRGs differentially expressed ﬁbroblast-differentiation-related genes.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
6
Furthermore,chi-square testsconﬁrmedthatFDBKCwassigniﬁcantly
associated with keloid diagnosis and time (P < 0.001) (Fig. 4B, C). Keloid
time represented day 0 and day 42 after injury of keloid-prone patients. The
stacked bar chart showed that healthy samples were predominantly in
cluster 1, while keloid samples (including day 0 and day 42) were mostly in
cluster 3, indicating that cluster 3 was associated with a more severe
pathological state.
In addition, to further clarify the molecular pathological features of
ﬁbroblasts in each FDBKC cluster and minimize bias introduced by cate-
gorical variable analysis, principal component analysis (PCA) was per-
formed based on DEFDRGs to calculate the ﬁbroblast score (FS) of each
sample (Fig. 4D). We then tested the ability of PCA-based FS to distinguish
different FDBKC clusters and found signiﬁcant differences (Fig. 4E). In
FDBKC, PCA FS was highest in cluster 3, lowest in cluster 1, and inter-
mediate in cluster 2. Therefore, we named the three clusters of FDBKC as
follows: cluster 1 (Low Fibroblast Differentiation Classiﬁcation, LFDC),
cluster 2 (Moderate Fibroblast Differentiation Classiﬁcation, MFDC), and
cluster 3 (High Fibroblast Differentiation Classiﬁcation, HFDC). Samples
were divided into high and low PCA FS groups using the median as the
cutoff. The Sankey diagram illustrates the proportion of high and low PCA
FS in each cluster and their association with diagnosis and time (Fig. 4F).
The expression of 25 DEFDRGs across three FDBKC clusters was
analyzed using the ssGSEA algorithm, revealing signiﬁcant differences in
gene expression levels among clusters (Fig. 4G). Almost all DEFDRGs were
highly expressed in cluster 1, which was consistent with the above results
(Fig. 4A). In addition, protein sequencing results of clinical keloids,
hypertrophic scars, and normal skin identiﬁed 15 protein expressions of 25
DEFDRGs, among which 4 proteins showed obvious expression differences
(Supplementary Fig. 5C). Baseline patient information is provided in Sup-
plementary Table 1. To strengthen the robustness of our ﬁndings, we
additionally validated our results using three public datasets, including
GSE188952, GSE7890, and GSE4427017,18. Almost all DEFDRGs were
identiﬁed in these gene sets, and many genes showed statistically signiﬁcant
differences (Supplementary Fig. 5D–F and Supplementary Table 2).
Immune inﬁltration characteristics of FDBKC
ThecorrelationbetweenimmunecellsorimmunefunctionandPCAFSwas
demonstrated in Supplementary Fig. 6A. Additionally, we investigated the
characteristicsofimmuneinﬁltrationfor23immunecelltypesinallsamples
from the high- and low-risk groups. The percentage of each immune cell
subtype in each sample is shown in Supplementary Fig. 6B. The differences
in immune cell inﬁltration and function between high- and low-risk groups
are also displayed in Supplementary Fig. 6C, D. The above results suggested
little difference in the immune inﬁltration patterns between the high- and
low-risk groups. The result was not consistent with previous studies, which
found that mast cell heterogeneity was associated with keloid activity status1
9. This discrepancy may be attributed to the limited sample size and indi-
vidual variations.
Identify DEGs, differentially expressed transcription factors
(DETFs), and signaling pathways of bulk transcriptomics
In the Bulk-RNA seq analysis of 37 keloids and 27 healthy samples, we
found that 1828 genes satisﬁed P value < 0.05 and were considered DEGs
(Supplementary Fig. 7A). Meanwhile, heatmaps and volcano plots were
used to visualize the differential expression of DEFDRGs (Supplementary
Fig. 7B), among which 22 genes met a P value < 0.05. The results showed
that the expression of these key genes was lower in keloid patients than in
healthy controls, which was consistent with previous results based on
FDBKC.Furthermore,fourDETFswerescreened:HomeoboxC9(HOXC9),
LIM Domain Only 2 (LMO2), Pancreatic and Duodenal Homeobox 1
(PDX1), and RUNX Family Transcription Factor 1 (RUNX1) (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 7C). Eventually, we used the Gene Set Variation Analysis (GSVA)
algorithm to analyze the top 50 Hallmark signaling pathways in all samples
and visualized the results via heatmaps and bar charts (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 7D).
DEFGDRs demonstrate signiﬁcant clinical relevance
To clarify the clinical relevance of DEFDRGs, PCA analysis and LASSO
regression were ﬁnally used to establish a multivariable logistic regression
model. The LASSO regression was applied to prevent overﬁtting of the
model. Then, 11 DEFDRGs were extracted for subsequent analyses
(Fig. 5A). These DEFDRGs were highly expressed in healthy individuals,
consistent with previous results of FDBKC (Fig. 5B). A total of 64 skin
samples (37 keloids, 27 healthy skins) were randomly assigned to train and
test sets. The train set included 39 samples (21 keloids and 18 healthy skins),
while the test set comprised 16 keloids and 9 healthy skins. We tested the
expression levels of 11 key genes in high- and low-risk groups across the
total, train, and test sets and found signiﬁcant differential expression. The
high-risk group showed high expression levels of TPSB2 and KLK6 genes
(Fig. 5C). Both are signiﬁcantly correlated with inﬂammation response.
TPSB2 is also closely related to ﬁbrosis and acts as a pro-ﬁbrosis factor.
Clinical correlation analysis showed that the risk score was asso-
ciated with age, sex, diagnosis, and time. Patients under 30 years old,
female sex, prolonged time, and keloid diagnosis were associated with
high risk (Fig. 5D). The receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve of
the PCA model showed an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.995 in the
train set and 0.868 in the test set, indicating excellent predictive value for
keloid diagnosis (Fig. 5E). Finally, downstream pathways were analyzed
in the high- and low-risk groups, respectively, and the results are pre-
sented in Fig. 5F.
Construct regulatory networks and identify corresponding spe-
ciﬁc drugs for FDBKC
The subtype-speciﬁc and DEFDRG-centered regulatory network contain-
ing upstream DETFs, downstream signaling pathways, and potential reg-
ulation abilities of immune cells/immune functions was constructed in
LFDC, MFDC, and HFDC, respectively (Fig. 6A). RUNX1 was a common
TF in all subtypes of FDBKC. RUNX1 has been reported to be associated
with ﬁbrosis invarious diseases20–22.However,thereisa lackof research on it
in skin ﬁbrosis. This study indicated that RUNX1 might play a crucialrole in
keloid formation. Additionally, we illustrated the speciﬁc correlation coef-
ﬁcients from correlation analysis in each regulatory network using co-
expression heatmaps (Fig. 6B).
In LFDC, the key DEFDRGs were C-Type Lectin Domain Containing
11A (CLEC11A) and Midkine (MDK). The upstream DETF highly corre-
lated to CLEC11A was RUNX1 (R = 0.42), while both LMO2 (R = 0.36) and
HOXC9 (R = 0.35) were closely related to MDK. For downstream pathways,
bile acid metabolism (R = 0.42) showed a strong association with CLEC11A.
For MDK, three related signaling pathways were identiﬁed, including TGF-
beta signaling (R = −0.41) and mTORC1 signaling (R = 0.4).
In MFDC, Platelet and Endothelial Cell Adhesion Molecule 1
(PECAM1)andLIMDomainOnly2(LMO2)occupiedthecentralpositions.
The upstream DETF strongly correlated with PECAM1 was RUNX1
(R = 0.55). The DETF highly correlated with LMO2 was HOXC9 (R = 0.35).
DownstreampathwayshighlycorrelatedwithPECAM1wereMyctargetsv2
(R = 0.61),
Interferon-alpha
response
(R = −0.55),
and
IL-2/
STAT5 signaling (R = 0.52). Similarly, the downstream pathway highly
correlated with LMO2 was hypoxia (R = 0.46).
In HFDC, KLK6 and Coagulation Factor XIII A Chain (F13A1)
occupied the core positions, determining the correlations between
DEFDRGs and other components. The upstream DETF with intense cor-
relation with both KLK6 and F13A1 was RUNX1 (KLK6: R = −0.62; F13A1:
R = 0.57). The downstream pathway highly correlated with KLK6 was E2F-
targets (R = 0.53). For F13A1, the highly correlated downstream pathways
were
Wnt/β-Catenin
signaling
(R = 0.59)
and
Estrogen
response
late (R = 0.51).
Considering that PECAM1 is primarily a marker gene for endothelial
cells and TPSB2 serves as a marker gene for mast cells, we performed RNA
ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (RNA-FISH) staining (PECAM1 +
COL1A1 + VIM; TPSB2 + COL1A1 + VIM) to further validate that keloid
ﬁbroblasts express these two genes. Staining results revealed co-stained cells
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
7
Fig. 5 | Multivariable logistic regression analysis of DEFDRGs for keloid classi-
ﬁcation. A Cross-validation plot depicting binomial deviance as a function of log(λ)
during Lasso regression model selection. B Heatmap illustrating expression proﬁles
of DEFDRGs in keloid and healthy samples. C Differential expression of DEFDRGs
in high- vs. low-risk groups across total, train, and test sets. D Clinical correlation
analysis showing associations between risk scores and demographic/clinical para-
meters (age, sex, diagnosis, and time). E The ROC curve of the train and test sets
demonstrating the predictive performance of the DEFDRG-based model for keloid
classiﬁcation (train set AUC = 0.995, test set AUC = 0.868). F GSEA enrichment
plots for representative signaling pathways enriched in high- and low-risk groups.
DEFDRGs differentially expressed ﬁbroblast-differentiation-related genes, ROC
receiver operator characteristic, AUC area under the curve, GSEA gene set enrich-
ment analysis.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
8
Fig. 6 | Regulatory network construction for keloid molecular subtypes and
candidate drug identiﬁcation. A Subtype-speciﬁc regulatory networks centered on
DEFDRGs, integrating upstream DETFs, downstream signaling pathways, and
immune cell/function regulatory potential across LFDC, MFDC, and HFDC. B Co-
expression patterns and correlation heatmaps of network components (DEFDRGs,
DETFs, pathways) in LFDC, MFDC, and HFDC. C RNA-FISH results of COL1A1,
VIM, TPSB2/PECAM1, and DAPI in human keloid samples. The white arrows
indicate co-stained cells. Scale bars = 50 μm. D Expression proﬁles of core DEFDRGs
and DETFs in LFDC, MFDC, and HFDC. E Candidate inhibitors predicted by
Connectivity Map analysis in LFDC, MFDC, and HFDC. LFDC low ﬁbroblast dif-
ferentiation classiﬁcation, MFDC moderate ﬁbroblast differentiation classiﬁcation;
HFDC high ﬁbroblast differentiation classiﬁcation, PCA principal component
analysis, DEFDRGs differentially expressed ﬁbroblast-differentiation-related genes,
DETFs differentially expressed transcription factors, RNA-FISH RNA ﬂuorescence
in situ hybridization.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
9
in keloids, demonstrating that ﬁbroblasts express PECAM1 and TPSB2
transcripts (Fig. 6C).
Furthermore, the marker genes for each FDBKC classiﬁcation were
identiﬁed based on high expression levels, role in the regulatory network,
and relevant biological function: LFDC (cluster 1, markers: MMP1, F13A1),
MFDC (cluster 2, markers: FOXC2, MDK), and HFDC (cluster 3, markers:
KLK6, TPSB2).
The differential expression of keyTFs and genes in the aforementioned
regulatory network is shown in Fig. 6D. Eventually, through the Con-
nectivity Map (CMap) algorithm, we identiﬁed small molecule drugs tar-
geting DEFDRGs and TFs in regulatory network of each FDBKC subtype.
The top 10 drugs with the lowest P values were visualized in the dot heat-
map, aiming to discover potential therapeutics and provide a theoretical
basis for precision treatment of keloids (Fig. 6E).
Pathological manifestations of different clinical subtypes of
keloids
Informed consent from 19 keloid patients was obtained before collecting
discarded samples and relevant clinical information. A representative
marker from each FDBKC type was selected for Immunohistochemistry
(IHC). Given that HFDC is associated with more severe pathological
manifestations and its identiﬁcation is more informative for clinical treat-
ment, two HFDC markers were chosen. Then, IHC for MMP1, FOXC2,
KLK6, and TPSB2 was performed on keloid tissues, and professional
pathologists were invited to score the expression of related marker genes in
keloidstodetermineclinicalsubtypes.Thebaselineinformation,Vancouver
Scar Scale (VSS) scores, and IHC scores are displayed in Table1. Among the
19 patients, 12 were classiﬁed as HFDC, 3 as MFDC, and the remaining 4 as
LFDC. IHC results are presented in Fig. 7A. The LFDC group had the
highest expression of MMP1, the MFDC group showed peak expression of
FOXC2, and the HFDC group exhibited the highest expression levels of
KLK6 and TPSB2.
According to the clinical manifestations of patients with different
subtypes, the average VSS score in the HFDC group was signiﬁcantly higher
thanthat in the other two groups(Fig.7B). Keloids in the HFDCgroup were
observed to be thicker than those in the other two groups, with nearly 83%
measuring over 2 mm (Fig. 7C). Furthermore, keloids in the HFDC group
were also found to be harder, potentially attributed to the disordered dis-
tribution of ﬁbroblasts and collagen (Fig. 7D). The proportions of keloids
with pain, itching, and vascular abnormalities were signiﬁcantly higher in
the HFDC group (Fig. 7E–G), reﬂecting moresevereclinical manifestations.
These ﬁndings were consistent with scRNA-seq and bulk-RNA seq results,
validating the effectiveness of our keloid classiﬁcation system.
Discussion
Keloid is a dermal ﬁbroproliferative disease characterized by abnormal
deposition of collagen and ECM, affecting patients’ life quality due to cos-
metic and functional impairments and the consequent psychological
disorders23,24. The speciﬁc mechanisms of keloid pathogenesis remain
unclear; and current prevention and treatment strategies are unsatisfactory
due to the high postoperative recurrence rate23,24. Fibroblasts play a central
role in tissue repair and ﬁbrosis because of their ability to produce, deposit,
andremodelECMproteins25.However,whenwound-derivedcytokinesand
inﬂammatory signals trigger profound ﬁbroblast activation and excessive
ECM deposition, ﬁbrosis and scars will appear26,27. Therefore, ﬁbroblasts, as
key downstream mediators of scar formation and ﬁbrosis, represent pro-
misingresearchtargetsforimprovingwoundhealingandﬁbrosisoutcomes.
In this study, 44,463 cells from 3 keloids and 3 normal scars were
clustered into 9 cell types. Then, 13,925 ﬁbroblasts were clustered into 6
ﬁbroblastsubpopulations,withﬁbroblast3showingenricheddistributionin
keloids. Cell lineage trajectories were reconstructed using Monocle 2, and
FDRGs were identiﬁed. Furthermore, we integrated FDRGs with genes
signiﬁcantlyassociatedwithclinicaloutcomes(diagnosisandtime)toderive
25 clinical-related FDRGs, termed DEFDRGs. To address the lack of an
effective genotyping system for keloids with distinct molecular expression
patterns and differentiation states, we developed a consensus-based clus-
tering system, FDBKC, and proposed a keloid classiﬁcation based on
DEFDRGs. The FDBKC comprised 3 clusters: LFDC (cluster 1, markers:
MMP1, F13A1), MFDC (cluster 2, markers: FOXC2, MDK), and HFDC
(cluster 3, markers: KLK6, TPSB2). The three molecular subtypes differed
signiﬁcantly in keloid development risk. Subsequently, we performed
comprehensive bioinformatics analysis to verify the clinical relevance of
FDBKCandclarifyitsmedicalrationale.ResultsshowedthatLFDCpatients
had a lower risk of keloid development, whereas the HFDC patients
exhibitedahigherrisk.IHCof clinicalkeloid samplesveriﬁed theexpression
of classiﬁcation markers. Further clinical correlation analysis showed that
HFDC keloids were harder, thicker, with vascular abnormalities and higher
VSS scores, and were associated with a higher incidence of pain and itching,
reﬂecting a more severe pathological phenotype in the HFDC group.
LFDC
In the study, many DEFDRGs are highly expressed in LFDC, such as
MMP1 and F13A1. Keloids are characterized by excessive ECM
deposition, which is determined by the dynamic balance among matrix
synthesis, accumulation, and degradation. Matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs) are a family of enzymes capable of degrading ECM compo-
nents. MMP1, a zinc-dependent neutral endopeptidase, is a typical
representative28. MMP1 is involved in different physiological processes
(development, tissue morphogenesis, and wound repair) and various
human diseases (cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, emphysema, and ﬁbrotic
diseases)29. In the wound repair process, MMP1 can cleave type I col-
lagen, alleviating collagen-induced restriction of cell motility, thereby
promoting re-epithelialization30 and reducing scar formation31. In keloid
ﬁbroblasts, knockdown of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1
(TIMP-1) promotes MMP1 release and enhances collagen degrada-
tion, suggesting potential therapeutic strategies for keloid32.
F13A1, encoding Factor XIII-A transglutaminase (FXIII-A), plays a
crucial role in the coagulation process33,34. Recent studies have shown that
F13A1isinvolvedinnotonlyhemostaticprocessesbutalsotissuerepairand
ﬁbrosis. FXIII-A can participate in multiple stages of wound repair,
including regulation of ﬁbroblast function, stabilization of ﬁbrin clots and
ECM, and promotion of angiogenesis35,36. FXIII-A deﬁciency is associated
with impaired tissue repair37,38. Additionally, FXIII could reduce collagen
synthesis in progressive systemic sclerosis ﬁbroblasts to levels comparable
withnormalﬁbroblasts39.Moreover,FXIII-Acouldpreventvascularleakage
and decrease proﬁbrotic stimuli, thereby mitigating myocardial ﬁbrosis40.
Particularly, FXIII-A is beneﬁcial in scleroderma. Decreased skin stiffness
and improved musculoskeletal symptoms were observed after systemic
application of recombinant FXIII-A, demonstrating the therapeutic
potential of FXIII-A regulation in ﬁbrosis41.
MFDC
In MFDC, MDK and FOXC2 are highly expressed. MDK is a heparin-
binding molecule and a recognized multifunctional protein involved in
various biological processes, including development, inﬂammation, and
oncogenesis42. MDK promotes ECM production, including type I and III
collagens and glycosaminoglycans, in a dose- and time-dependent manner
in dermal ﬁbroblasts43. MDK may also contribute to pulmonary ﬁbrosis by
regulating inﬂammatory cell migration, promoting inﬂammatory cytokine
expression, and mediating epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)44,45.
However, MDK exhibits protective effects in certain contexts. It has been
shown to alleviate ventricular dysfunction and ﬁbrosis after myocardial
infarction by activating the Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein
kinase B (Akt) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways46.
FOXC2, a member of the Forkhead transcription factor family, is
involved in angiogenesis and mesenchymal-epithelial transformation
(MET)/EMT, critical processes for embryonic development and wound
healing. It is commonly accepted that abnormal angiogenesis and dysre-
gulation of EMT/MET processes contribute to ﬁbrosis and even keloid
formation16,47.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
10
Table 1 | Baseline information of keloid patients, clinical-pathological feature of keloids, and immunohistochemical scores of each marker (MMP1, FOXC2, TPSB2,
and KLK6)
Patient
Sex
Age
Location
Color
Blood vessel
Softness
Thickness
Pain
Itch
VSS score
Recurrence
FDBKC
KLK6
TPSB2
FOXC2
MMP1
1
Male
50
Limb
Normal
Normal
Normal
<2 mm
No
No
4
–
LFDC
4
6
0
4
2
Male
25
Limb
Abnormal
Normal
Abnormal
<2 mm
Yes
No
5
–
HFDC
6
6
0
2
3
Male
45
Ear
Abnormal
Abnormal
Abnormal
>2 mm
Yes
Yes
8
Yes
HFDC
3
3
0
0
4
Male
32
Ear
Abnormal
Abnormal
Abnormal
>2 mm
Yes
Yes
8.5
Yes
HFDC
3
3
1
0
5
Female
29
Ear
Normal
Normal
Abnormal
>2 mm
Yes
No
4
No
HFDC
3
3
0
0
6
Female
5
Ear
Normal
Normal
Normal
<2 mm
No
No
4
No
HFDC
3
9
0
0
7
Female
55
Limb
Abnormal
Normal
Normal
<2 mm
No
No
5.5
No
MFDC
3
0
2
2
8
Female
35
Ear
Normal
Normal
Abnormal
>2 mm
Yes
Yes
6
–
HFDC
3
3
0
0
9
Male
34
Ear
Abnormal
Abnormal
Abnormal
>2 mm
Yes
Yes
7.5
Yes
HFDC
3
3
0
0
10
Male
26
Ear
Abnormal
Abnormal
Abnormal
>2 mm
Yes
Yes
8.5
Yes
HFDC
3
3
1
4
11
Female
27
Ear
Normal
Normal
Normal
<2 mm
No
No
5
No
LFDC
3
3
0
0
12
Male
21
Ear
Abnormal
Abnormal
Abnormal
>2 mm
Yes
Yes
8.5
Yes
HFDC
3
6
0
1
13
Female
76
Ear
Normal
Normal
Normal
<2 mm
No
No
6
–
LFDC
3
3
0
3
14
Female
45
Faciocervical region
Normal
Normal
Normal
<2 mm
Yes
No
5.5
No
MFDC
3
3
1
0
15
Female
22
Ear
Normal
Normal
Normal
<2 mm
No
No
4
–
LFDC
3
6
0
0
16
Female
43
Trunk
Normal
Abnormal
Normal
>2 mm
Yes
No
7
–
HFDC
3
3
1
2
17
Female
15
Ear
Normal
Normal
Normal
<2 mm
No
No
5
–
MFDC
3
6
3
3
18
Female
56
Trunk
Abnormal
Abnormal
Abnormal
>2 mm
Yes
No
8.5
No
HFDC
3
9
0
0
19
Male
70
Faciocervical region
Normal
Normal
Abnormal
>2 mm
Yes
Yes
7.5
No
HFDC
6
6
0
1
The symbol “-” represents loss to follow-up.
VSS Vancouver Scar Scale
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
11
Fig. 7 | IHC validation in clinical samples and clinical phenotype correlation
analysis. A IHC staining depicts expression and semi-quantitative scoring of keloid
subtype-speciﬁc markers in clinical keloid tissues (n = 3 independent samples per
group; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001; one-way ANOVA).
Scale bars = 100 μm. Data are presented as mean ± SD. B–G Correlation analyses
illustrate associations between keloid molecular subtypes and clinical phenotypic
metrics: (B) VSS score, (C) lesion thickness, (D) tissue softness, (E) pain intensity,
(F) itch severity, and (G) blood vessels. IHC immunohistochemistry, VSS Van-
couver Scar Scale.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
12
In summary, MDK and FOXC2 exhibit dual properties. They promote
wound repair via angiogenesis and EMT, yet also drive excessive vascular
proliferation and ECM deposition, thereby promoting ﬁbrosis and scar
formation.
HFDC
ThekeloidsintheHFDCgroup showed moresevereclinicalmanifestations.
Gene expression analysis revealed elevated expression of KLK6 and TPSB2
in the HFDC group. Keloids are characterized by persistent local inﬂam-
mation and excessive collagen deposition. Many studies have shown that
inﬂammation regulats collagen synthesis, and the intensity of inﬂammation
is positively correlated with ﬁnal scar size48–50.
KLK6 belongs to the family of serine proteases and is emerging as a
universal biomarker of inﬂammation. It may promote inﬂammation and
autoimmunity by cleaving protease-activated receptors (PARs) 1 and 251,52.
KLK6 was up-regulated in psoriasis patients’ skin compared to normal skin,
suggesting its involvement in psoriasis development53. This may be attrib-
uted to the enhanced inﬂammatory response induced by KLK654. Addi-
tionally, KLK6 could stimulate immune cells to secrete pro-inﬂammatory
factors and decrease anti-inﬂammatory factor levels, biasing the immune
system toward a pro-inﬂammatory state and exacerbating neuroin-
ﬂammation and paralytic neurological impairment in multiple sclerosis
patients55. These ﬁndings suggest that KLK6 may promote inﬂammatory
responses and contribute to keloid pathogenesis.
Tryptase, a serine protease mainly produced by tissue mast cells, is
stored in secretory granules alongside other pre-formed mediators like
histamine and chemokines. Interestingly, our ﬁndings indicate that TPSB2
may be involved in ﬁbroblast differentiation and keloid progression. Recent
studies have veriﬁed that TPSB2 enhances collagen synthesis in ﬁbroblasts
and leads to peritoneal adhesion56. TPSB2 could also stimulate lung ﬁbro-
blast proliferation via cleavage and activation of PAR2, promoting ECM
deposition and pulmonary ﬁbrosis57. Through the PAR2 pathway, TPSB2
could also maintain liver ﬁbrosis and interstitial ﬁbrosis in IGA nephro-
pathybyactivatingTGF-βsignalinginhepaticstellatecellsandrenaltubular
cells, respectively58–60.
To date, there remains a lack of precision therapies targeting keloid
pathophysiology molecular mechanisms. Computational in silico analyses
are widely used to develop and evaluate pharmacological hypotheses, and
are suitable for identifying and optimizing small molecules with speciﬁc
target afﬁnity61. Based on comprehensive CMap analysis, we identiﬁed
speciﬁc inhibitors for FDBKC, especially for HFDC, which may reverse
aberrant gene expression patterns.Amongthe top 10 predicted inhibitors of
HFDC, Ouabain may be a drug worthy of future research. As a selective
inhibitor of Na⁺/K⁺-ATPase, Ouabain is clinically used primarily for heart
failure. Studies have shown that Ouabain also exhibits anti-ﬁbrotic prop-
erties. Ouabain can ameliorate pulmonary ﬁbrosis by inhibiting TGF-β-
induced ﬁbrotic signaling, myoﬁbroblast differentiation, and the expression
of smooth muscle α-actin (α-SMA), collagen-1, and ﬁbronectin62. More-
over,Ouabaincouldalsoalleviatebleomycin-inducedpulmonaryﬁbrosisby
directly inhibiting the proliferation and promoting the apoptosis of lung
ﬁbroblasts63. Therefore, assessing the efﬁcacy and safety of Ouabain repre-
sents a promising future direction for this research.
This study differs from previous studies identifying biomarkers for
keloids. Firstly, we classiﬁed keloids into three subtypes based on ﬁbroblast
differentiation-related genes and identiﬁed marker genes with potentially
therapeutic value. These markers are endogenously expressed in their cell of
origin, as opposed to free-ﬂoating molecules in blood or cerebrospinal ﬂuid.
Secondly, unlike studies preselecting candidate biomarkers, we performed
unbiased high-throughput analyses of transcripts from 44,463 single cells
isolatedfromkeloidsandnormalscars.Meanwhile,wequantiﬁedthetyping
markers by IHC. All results proved that the DEFDRGs-based keloid clas-
siﬁcation had high diagnostic value, as it better reﬂected clinical reality and
distinguished keloid patients from healthy controls.
However, this study has limitations. Mast cells and endothelial cells
havealsobeenreportedtobecloselyassociatedwithkeloidpathogenesisand
activity16,19. However, in this study, in this study, to facilitate clinical trans-
lation, keloid classiﬁcation was only conducted based on ﬁbroblast differ-
entiation. Moreover, pure bioinformatics analysis may have limitations in
fully recapitulating ﬁbroblast lineage trajectories and cell differentiation
states due to inherent biases. Further cellular and animal experiments are
needed to validate the correlation between identiﬁed DEFDRGs and phe-
notypes and to verify the clinical relevance of the keloid classiﬁcation.
Furthermore, the absence of keloid prognosis-related sequencing data
(especially for recurrence) in public databases restricts this keloid classiﬁ-
cation to interpreting keloid development rather than predicting prognosis,
thereby limiting its clinical application.
In conclusion, this study elucidated the mechanisms of ﬁbroblast dif-
ferentiation in keloid pathogenesis, identiﬁed stage-dependent diagnostic
gaps in keloids, and predicted new diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic
targets. Our research is of great signiﬁcance for exploring keloid patho-
physiological mechanisms and resolving clinical dilemmas in keloid
management.
Methods
Data collection
Keloid and normal scar tissues were obtained from patients with conﬁrmed
clinical diagnoses, and scRNA-seq was performed using the 10x genomics
platform. The scRNA-seq data used in this study were derived from a
previous publication (accession code: GSE163973) (https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE163973)14. No new scRNA-seq analyses
were performed on patient-derived tissues in this study. RNA-seq data of
64 samples were obtained by the HiSeq2500 and HiSeq3000 sequencers
(Illumina, Cambridge), which were available in the Sequence Read Archive
(SRA ID: SRP137071) or the NCBI-GEO database (accession code:
GSE113619)64.Ofthese,37sampleswerefromkeloid-prone individualsand
27 from healthy matched controls. Samples were labeled as “keloid” or
“healthy” based on their patient origin, and keloid samples further cate-
gorized as DAY 0 or DAY42 according to sampling time points. The Cis-
trome database (http://cistrome.org/)65 was used to construct TF regulatory
network. Immunologically relevant gene expression proﬁles were obtained
from the Import database (http://www.import.org/)66, and gene sets and
molecular signatures were downloaded from the Molecular Signatures
Database (MSigDB, Version 7.1) (https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/
msigdb/index.jsp)67. Biorender (https://biorender.com/) was used to build
study ﬂow chart.
ScRNA-seq data processing
Sample procession and scRNA-seq were conducted using 10x Genomics
Chromium
(https://www.10xgenomics.com/instruments/chromium-x-
series). Following demultiplexing, paired-end reads were trimmed to
remove template switch oligo (TSO) and poly-A tail sequences. Clean reads
were aligned to the GRCh38 (Version: 100) reference assembly and quan-
tiﬁed using Cell Ranger Software (Version 5.0.0) (http://10xgenomics.
com/).
Then, gene expression matrices were analyzed with the Seurat pipeline
(Version:5.1.0)68.Onlycellswithtranscriptexpressiongreaterthan100,000,
mitochondrial gene proportion less than 10%, and genes expressed in at
least three cells could be included for subsequent analyses. Following QC,
keloid and normal scar samples were mergedinto a single Seurat object. The
data were scaled and standardized using “ScaleData” function. Besides, the
top 2000 highly variable genes (HVGs) were identiﬁed via the “vst” method.
PCA was performed on HVGs for dimensionality reduction. To mitigate
batch effects, Harmony (default parameters) was used to integrate samples
while preserving biological variation68. DoubletFinder was applied to detect
doublets during the analytical process. The ﬁrst 20 harmonized principal
components (PCs) were utilized for UMAP visualization.
RNA-seq data processing
Firstly, we used fastQC and Trimmomatic software to ensure and control
the quality of raw fastq ﬁles; the ﬂanking and low-quality sequences were
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
13
processed
to
get
clean
data
without
redundancy
(http://www.
bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/). The following analyses
were all based on the above clean data. We then mapped clean data to the
human reference genome using hierarchical indexing for spliced alignment
of transcripts 2 (HISAT2, Version: Ensembl GRCh38) and obtained
SequenceAlignment/Map (SAM) Formatﬁlescontainingoutput alignment
information. Next, we used SAMtools (Version: 1.8) to remove the
redundancy of the obtained SAM ﬁles, and then the Binary Alignment/Map
Format (BAM) ﬁles would be printed69. Finally, we used the FeatureCounts
software package to quantify gene expression levels in all BAM ﬁles to
evaluate gene transcription count in each sample70. Integrating the count of
every sample, we could get a gene expression matrix with rows representing
gene names and columns meaning sample IDs, and subsequent analyses
were all based on the matrix.
DEGs analysis
Using the “FindAllMarkers” function and “Wilcox” method, the scRNA-
seq DEGs between keloids and normal scars were identiﬁed from HVGs
onlywhenthegenesatisﬁed theconditionof|log2FoldChange(FC)|>0.5as
well as false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05. These DEGs were then used as
potential marker genes for downstream cell type annotations.
Cell type annotation
To identify the cell type of each unsupervised cluster, we integrated the
above DEGs in all sub-clusters with known speciﬁc biomarkers of a parti-
cular cell type from CellMarker71 for the comprehensive cell type
annotation.
Considering the variability of gene expression patterns in keloids, we
used a speciﬁc cellular annotation method. Firstly, the known cell types in
keloids included endothelial cells (SELE, PECAM1), ﬁbroblasts (DCN,
COL1A1), glandular cells (SCGB2A2, DCD), immune cells (LYZ, PTPRC),
keratinocytes(KRT5, KRT1), lymphatic endothelial cells (LYVE1, PROX1),
melanocytes (MLANA,DCT), smooth muscle cells (MYH11, ACTA2), and
neural cells (S100B, MPZ). The marker genes for these cell types were also
known (in parentheses), which were used to annotate corresponding cell
types. Besides, we also used the Seurat R package (Version: 3.2.2) and
SCANPY module (Version: 1.7.1) in Python (Version 3.6) to display the
cellular feature plots and violin plots72,73.
Fibroblast subtype analysis
Toassessthedistributionofdifferentsubtypesin ﬁbroblasts,weextractedall
ﬁbroblasts from the integrated dataset, constructed a Seurat object, and
performed subgroup clustering analysis. We then used RunUMAP, the
FindAllMarkers function, and the Wilcoxon test method to identify DEGs
ofdifferentﬁbroblastsubgroups.Ultimately,theexpressionsignaturesofthe
top DEGs between different ﬁbroblast subsets were shown by violin plots.
Cell communication analysis
To explore potential interactions and ligand-receptor pairs among different
cell types in keloids, we used the iTALK R package (Version: 0.1.0) (https://
github.com/Coolgenome/iTALK) to analyze cellular communication74.The
top 1,500 HVGs were processed through the “rawParse” function to gen-
erate an expression matrix, which served as input for the iTALK object.
Signiﬁcant cell communication patterns were identiﬁed using the Wilcoxon
rank-sum test (FDR < 0.05). The top 200 ligand-receptor interactions were
visualized by ligand-receptor diagrams and iTALK networks using the
edgebundleR
package
(https://github.com/garthtarr/edgebundleR)75.
Besides, we analyzed 50 hallmark signaling pathways that were downloaded
from the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) (Version 7.1) (https://
www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb/index.jsp) and quantiﬁed their activity
scores across all samples by GSVA (Version: 1.38.0)76,77.
Trajectory analysis
To analyze pseudotime trajectories of keloid ﬁbroblast lineages, we per-
formed trajectory inference using the Monocle R package (Version:
2.18.0)78. Differentiation sequences of ﬁbroblast subtypes were determined
based on gene expression proﬁles. A matrix of Unique Molecular Identiﬁers
(UMI) expression from all ﬁbroblasts was used as input data for unsu-
pervised pseudotime ordering. Then, the pseudotime valuesof each subtype
in different samples were calculated via the “reduceDimension” function
with the “DDRTree” method, and the results were visualized as trajectory
plots78. Genes related todifferentiation, named FDRGs, were extractedfrom
the top variable genes among ﬁbroblast clusters by Differential GeneTest
function. To validate the robustness of pseudotime ordering and char-
acterize dynamic gene expression patterns, DEG clusters were analyzed
using the plot_pseudotime_heatmap function in Monocle 2.
ConsensusClusterPlus analysis and construction of FDBKC
Firstly, we took the intersection of keloid-related DEGs and FDRGs, which
was deﬁned as DEFDRGs. Then, ConsensusClusterPlus analysis was con-
ducted to cluster all included samples based on their internal characteristics
of DEFDRGs and construct the FDBKC using ConsensusClusterPlus R
package79,80. Based on the expression matrix of DEFDRGs, 80% of samples
were randomly subsampled with replacement over 100 iterations. Each
subsampled dataset was partitioned into k clusters (k = 2–10) via agglom-
erative hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, Ward’s linkage). Pair-
wise co-clustering frequencies across iterations were calculated as
Consensus Values (CV), which were aggregated into a Consensus Matrix
(CM) for each k. A distance matrix (1 – CV) was subsequently generated,
and samples were re-clustered into k consensus subtypes using the same
hierarchical method. Additionally, we evaluated the clustering results on
account of quantitative and visual ‘stability’ evidence so as to evaluate the
number of clusters and the conﬁdence of the clustering results and then
select the optimal k value79,80.
PCA and clinical correlation analysis
Since the consensus clustering results were categorical variables, PCA
was used to calculate the FS of each cluster according to the expression
patterns of DEFDRGs to further explore the molecular pathological
characteristics of ﬁbroblasts and reduce bias81. To illustrate the rela-
tionship between ﬁbroblast differentiation and keloid development, we
conducted a clinical correlation analysis integrating three data mod-
alities, including categorical variables (FDBKC subtypes), continuous
variables (FS), and clinical parameters (age, sex, diagnosis, time, and
other relevant factors). This analysis aimed to validate the clinical
relevance and translational potential of FDBKC while elucidating
ﬁbroblast-driven pathological mechanisms. The results were visualized
through box plots, bar plots, violin plots, and heatmaps.
DEGs identiﬁcation of RNA-seq data
We utilized the “limma” R package to recognize DEGs between 37 keloid
and 27 healthy samples based on RNA-seq data of patients82. Genes satis-
fying the screening criteria of |Log2 FC| > 1.0 and FDR < 0.05 were selected,
and these genes were displayed by heatmaps and volcano plots. Similarly,
keloid-related DETFs were determined with the same threshold and
method as above.
Quantiﬁcation of Hallmark signaling pathways by GSVA
We used GSVA to detect the absolute quantiﬁcation of differentially
expressed signaling pathways between keloids and normal scars from 50
hallmark signaling pathways downloaded from MSigDB76.
Functional enrichment analysis
To detect the important downstream signaling pathways, the Gene
Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
enrichment analyses were both performed83,84. The GO analysis investigated
DEG-associated biological processes (BPs), cellular components (CCs), and
molecular functions (MFs), whereas the KEGG analysis focused on map-
ping signaling pathways. The screening thresholds of both GO and KEGG
analyses were P < 0.01 and FDR < 0.05.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
14
Immune Cell Inﬁltration Patterns in Keloids
As a method to estimate the cell composition of complex tissues based on
gene expression characteristics, the cell type identiﬁcation by estimating
relative subsets of RNA transcripts (CIBERSORT) algorithm was generally
used to explore immune cell inﬁltrating85. To determine the relationship
between identiﬁed ﬁbroblast clusters and immune cells in keloids, we
uploaded RNA-seq gene expression matrix data to the CIBERSORT data-
base (https://cibersort.stanford.edu/) to obtain the percentage of 22 puriﬁed
immune cell clusters in each sample85. Genes and immune cells satisfying
P < 0.05 would be considered for the following analyses. The association
between ﬁbroblast clusters and 22 kinds of immune cells was identiﬁed by
nonparametric tests. Besides, a correlation analysis of the above immune
cells was performed to evaluate the communication among each immune
cell. We also estimated and quantiﬁed the enrichment of immune-related
pathways in keloid samples using Single-Sample Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis (ssGSEA)86. Besides, the correlations between DEGs and immune
genes or immune-related pathways were analyzed with Pearson correlation
analysis. P < 0.05 was considered to have statistical signiﬁcance.
Construction of the FDBKC subtypes regulatory network
To further explore the potential key regulatory mechanisms of FDBKC
subtypes, Pearson’s correlation analysis was carried out on account of
DETFs,DEFDRGs,immunecells,andhallmarkpathwayswithacorrelation
coefﬁcient R > 0.300 and P < 0.001. The complex regulatory network rea-
lized data visualization using the igraph package in R87.
CMap analysis
The CMap database (https://portals.broadinstitute.org/cmap/), which
contains expression proﬁles from more than 7,000 cell culture systems
and 1,309 small-molecule compounds approved by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), was leveraged to identify correlations between
bioactive drugs and target genes88. As a result, we could get some speciﬁc
inhibitors targeting DETFs and DEFDRGs and establish a drug-target
gene-disease network. P < 0.05 was the screening criterion. Eventually,
we identiﬁed the top 10 candidate drugs for each FDBKC subtype based
on minimal P-values and visualized them with dot heatmaps, hoping to
provide some theoretical basis for the precise treatment of keloid
patients.
Patients
Formalin-ﬁxedparafﬁn-embeddedhumankeloidtissueswereusedforIHC.
Keloid, hypertrophic scar, and normal skin samples from patients were
collected for protein sequencing. This study was approved by the Ethics
Committees of the Shanghai Changhai Hospital (CHEC2023-088).
Informed consent for sample collection was acquired from all participating
patients prior to study commencement. All ethical regulations relevant to
human research participants were followed.
IHC
IHC was performed on formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded human keloid
tissues. 4μm parafﬁn sections were deparafﬁnized, hydrated in ethanol, and
subjected to heat-mediated antigen retrieval with citrate buffer (pH 6.0) or
Tris/EDTA buffer (pH 9.0). Sections were blocked with a blocking solution
for 30 min at room temperature and then incubated with primary antibody
overnight at 4 °C, followed by incubated with species-matched biotinylated
secondary antibody. 3,3′-Diaminobenzidine was used as the chromogen,
and cell nuclei were counterstained with hematoxylin. The primary anti-
bodies were as follows: anti-MMP1 (ab52631; Abcam; 1:500), anti-KLK6
(ab190924; Abcam; 1:1000), anti-TPSB2 (K007207P; Solarbio; 1:500), and
anti-FOXC2 (PA5-24588; Invitrogen; 1:50). The images were obtained
using an Olympus light microscope (Japan).
Protein sequencing
Keloid, hypertrophic scar, and normal skin samples were collected. The
BCA kit was employed to measure the protein concentration after protein
extraction. Equal amounts of proteins from each sample were subjected to
enzymatic digestion to obtain peptides. The peptides were dissolved and
then loaded onto Evotip Pure columns according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Subsequently, the Evosep One ultra-high-performance liquid
system was utilized for separation. After that, the peptides were ionized via
the capillary ion source and then analyzed by the timsTOF Pro 2 mass
spectrometer.
RNA-FISH
For RNA-FISH on tissue sections, start with antigen retrieval using an
EDTA buffer (pH 9.0), followed by three PBS washes. Block endogenous
peroxidase with 3% hydrogen peroxide at room temperature in the dark
for 25 min. Rehydrate sections in DEPC water and DEPC-PBS, then
digest with 20 μg/mL protease K at 37 °C for 20 min. After pre-
hybridizing with prehybridization solution for 2 h at 37 °C, dilute probes
in prehybridization buffer, denature at 85 °C, chill on ice, and incubate at
42 °C. Apply the probe mixture for overnight hybridization at 37 °C in a
humidiﬁed chamber. Perform sequential washes with SSC buffers,
incubate with a biotin-conjugated secondary antibody for 1 h, and
conduct TSA signal ampliﬁcation. Finally, counterstain nuclei with
DAPI and incubate for 10 min in the dark at room temperature. Images
were captured using a ﬂuorescence microscope. The probes used in the
experiment were designed and synthesized by Genomeditech (Shang-
hai, China).
The probe sequences were as follows (from 5’ to 3’):
VIM: TTTGAGTGGGTATCAACCAGAGGGAGT;
COL1A1: TTTCCACACGTCTCGGTCATGGTACCT;
PECAM1: AGGAAGATTCCAGTTCGGGCTTGGAAA;
TPSB2: TTTTGAACAGCAGGGGCTGGCTCTCC.
Statistics and reproducibility
Statistical analysis was performed using R version 4.0.3 (Institute for Sta-
tistics and Mathematics, Vienna, Austria, www.r-project.org), Python ver-
sion 3.6 (https://www.python.org/), Strawberry Perl version 5.30.0.1
(https://www.perl.org/),and GraphPadPrism9.Forcontinuousvariablesin
descriptivestatistics,themean ± standarddeviation(SD)wasusedwhenthe
distribution was normal, while the median (range) was used when the
distribution was non-normal. Only P < 0.05 and FDR < 0.05 were con-
sidered
statistically
signiﬁcant
(*P < 0.05;
**P < 0.01;
***P < 0.001;
****P < 0.0001).
Ethics approval
This study was approved by the Ethics Committees of the Shanghai
Changhai Hospital (CHEC2023-088).
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio
Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The datasets generated and/or analyzed during the current study are
available in the NCBI-GEO database, including GSE163973 (DOI: 10.1038/
s41467-021-24110-y), GSE113619 (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jid.2018.05.
017)64, GSE188952, GSE7890 (https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jid.5701149)17,
GSE44270
(https://doi.org/10.1111/wrr.12060)18,
and
supplementary
materials. The raw data for IHC statistical analysis are provided in Sup-
plementary Data 1. Data of protein sequencing are available via Proteo-
meXchangewithidentiﬁerPXD066833.Allotherdataareavailablefromthe
corresponding author on reasonable request.
Code availability
The code for expressing matrix quantiﬁcation can be found at http://
10xgenomics.com/. We used existing code for expression matrix analysis
and visualization, which can be found in the original articles corresponding
to each analytical method or software used in the respective sections.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
15
Received: 5 April 2024; Accepted: 19 August 2025;
References
1.
Glass, D. A. Current understanding of the genetic causes of keloid
formation. J. Investig. Dermatol Symp. Proc. 18, S50–S53 (2017).
2.
Zhang, T. et al. Current potential therapeutic strategies targeting the
TGF-β/Smad signaling pathway to attenuate keloid and hypertrophic
scar formation. Biomed. Pharmacother. 129, 110287 (2020).
3.
Macarak, E. J., Wermuth, P. J., Rosenbloom, J. & Uitto, J. Keloid
disorder: ﬁbroblast differentiation and gene expression proﬁle in
ﬁbrotic skin diseases. Exp. Dermatol. 30, 132–145 (2021).
4.
Kim, H. J. & Kim, Y. H. Comprehensive insights into keloid
pathogenesis and advanced therapeutic strategies. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
25, 8776 (2024).
5.
Gauglitz, G. G., Korting, H. C., Pavicic, T., Ruzicka, T. & Jeschke, M. G.
Hypertrophic scarring and keloids: pathomechanisms and current
and emerging treatment strategies. Mol. Med. 17, 113–125 (2011).
6.
Limandjaja, G. C., Niessen, F. B., Scheper, R. J. & Gibbs, S. The Keloid
Disorder: Heterogeneity, Histopathology, Mechanisms and Models.
Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 8, 360 (2020).
7.
Xu, H. et al. Downregulated cytotoxic CD8+ T-cell identiﬁes with the
NKG2A-soluble HLA-E axis as a predictive biomarker and potential
therapeutic target in keloids. Cell Mol. Immunol. 19, 527–539 (2022).
8.
Song, B. et al. Revealing the roles of glycosphingolipid metabolism
pathwayinthe development of keloid:a conjointanalysisof single-cell
and machine learning. Front. Immunol. 14, 1139775 (2023).
9.
Kulkarni, A., Anderson, A. G., Merullo, D. P. & Konopka, G. Beyond
bulk: a review of single cell transcriptomics methodologies and
applications. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 58, 129–136 (2019).
10. Tabib, T., Morse, C., Wang, T., Chen, W. & Lafyatis, R. SFRP2/DPP4
and FMO1/LSP1 deﬁne major ﬁbroblast populations in human skin. J.
Invest. Dermatol. 138, 802–810 (2018).
11. Philippeos, C. et al. Spatial and single-cell transcriptional proﬁling
identiﬁes functionally distinct human dermal ﬁbroblast
subpopulations. J. Invest. Dermatol. 138, 811–825 (2018).
12. Solé-Boldo, L. et al. Single-cell transcriptomes of the human skin
reveal age-related loss of ﬁbroblast priming. Commun. Biol. 3, 188
(2020).
13. Vorstandlechner, V. et al. Deciphering the functional heterogeneity of
skin ﬁbroblasts using single-cell RNA sequencing. FASEB J. 34,
3677–3692 (2020).
14. Deng, C.-C. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals ﬁbroblast
heterogeneity and increased mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts in human
ﬁbrotic skin diseases. Nat. Commun. 12, 3709 (2021).
15. Shim, J. et al. Integrated analysis of single-cell and spatial
transcriptomics in keloids: highlights on ﬁbrovascular interactions in
keloid pathogenesis. J. Invest. Dermatol. 142, 2128–2139.e11
(2022).
16. Liu, X. et al. Single-cell RNA-sequencing reveals lineage-speciﬁc
regulatory changes of ﬁbroblasts and vascular endothelial cells in
keloids. J. Invest. Dermatol. 142, 124–135.e11 (2022).
17. Smith, J. C., Boone, B. E., Opalenik, S. R., Williams, S. M. & Russell, S.
B. Gene proﬁling of keloid ﬁbroblasts shows altered expression in
multiple ﬁbrosis-associated pathways. J. Investig. Dermatol. 128
(2008).
18. Hahn, J. M. et al. Keloid-derived keratinocytes exhibit an abnormal
gene expression proﬁle consistent with a distinct causal role in keloid
pathology. Wound Repair Regener. 21 (2013).
19. Yeo, E. et al. Revisiting roles of mast cells and neural cells in keloid:
exploring their connection to disease activity. Front. Immunol. 15,
1339336 (2024).
20. Razavi-Mohseni, M. et al. Machine learning identiﬁes activation of
RUNX/AP-1 as drivers of mesenchymal and ﬁbrotic regulatory
programs in gastric cancer. Genome Res. 34, 680–695 (2024).
21. Wang, D.-X. et al. FTO-mediated m6A mRNA demethylation
aggravates renal ﬁbrosis by targeting RUNX1 and further enhancing
PI3K/AKT pathway. FASEB J. 38, e23436 (2024).
22. Koth, J. et al. Runx1 promotes scar deposition and inhibits myocardial
proliferation and survival during zebraﬁsh heart regeneration.
Development 147, dev186569 (2020).
23. Lee, H. J. & Jang, Y. J. Recent understandings of biology, prophylaxis
and treatment strategies for hypertrophic scars and keloids. Int J. Mol.
Sci. 19, 711 (2018).
24. Naik, P. P. Novel targets and therapies for keloid. Clin. Exp. Dermatol.
47, 507–515 (2022).
25. Lynch, M. D. & Watt, F. M. Fibroblast heterogeneity: implications for
human disease. J. Clin. Invest. 128, 26–35 (2018).
26. Seki, E. et al. TLR4 enhances TGF-beta signaling and hepatic ﬁbrosis.
Nat. Med 13, 1324–1332 (2007).
27. Szabo, G., Mandrekar, P. & Dolganiuc, A. Innate immune response
and hepatic inﬂammation. Semin. Liver Dis. 27, 339–350 (2007).
28. Sternlicht, M. D. & Werb, Z. How matrix metalloproteinases regulate
cell behavior. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 17, 463–516 (2001).
29. Pardo, A. & Selman, M. MMP-1: the elder of the family. Int J. Biochem.
Cell Biol. 37, 283–288 (2005).
30. Rohani, M. G. & Parks, W. C. Matrix remodeling by MMPs during
wound repair. Matrix Biol. 44–46, 113–121 (2015).
31. Keskin, E. S., Keskin, E. R., Öztürk, M. B. & Çakan, D. The effect of
MMP-1 on wound healing and scar formation. Aesthetic Plast. Surg.
45, 2973–2979 (2021).
32. Aoki, M. et al. siRNA knockdown of tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase-1 in keloid ﬁbroblasts leads to degradation of
collagen type I. J. Invest. Dermatol. 134, 818–826 (2014).
33. Eckert, R. L. et al. Transglutaminase regulation of cell function.
Physiol. Rev. 94, 383–417 (2014).
34. Mitchell, J. L. & Mutch, N. J. Let’s cross-link: diverse functions of the
promiscuous cellular transglutaminase factor XIII-A. J. Thromb.
Haemost. 17, 19–30 (2019).
35. Dardik, R., Krapp, T., Rosenthal, E., Loscalzo, J. & Inbal, A. Effect of
FXIII on monocyte and ﬁbroblast function. Cell Physiol. Biochem. 19,
113–120 (2007).
36. Inbal, A. et al. Impaired wound healing in factor XIII deﬁcient mice.
Thromb. Haemost. 94, 432–437 (2005).
37. Anwar, R. & Miloszewski, K. J. Factor XIII deﬁciency. Br. J. Haematol.
107, 468–484 (1999).
38. Board, P. G., Losowsky, M. S. & Miloszewski, K. J. Factor XIII:
inherited and acquired deﬁciency. Blood Rev. 7, 229–242 (1993).
39. Paye, M., Read, D., Nusgens, B. & Lapiere, C. M. Factor XIII in
scleroderma: in vitro studies. Br. J. Dermatol 122, 371–382 (1990).
40. Grifﬁn, K. J. et al. Transglutaminase 2 limits the extravasation and the
resultant myocardial ﬁbrosis associated with factor XIII-A deﬁciency.
Atherosclerosis 294, 1–9 (2020).
41. Jullien, D., Souillet, A. L., Faure, M. & Claudy, A. Coagulation factor XIII
in scleroderma. Eur. J. Dermatol. 8, 231–234 (1998).
42. Muramatsu, T. Midkine andpleiotrophin: two related proteinsinvolved
in development, survival, inﬂammation and tumorigenesis. J.
Biochem 132, 359–371 (2002).
43. Yamada, H., Inazumi, T., Tajima, S., Muramatsu, H. & Muramatsu, T.
Stimulation of collagen expression and glycosaminoglycan synthesis
by midkine in human skin ﬁbroblasts. Arch. Dermatol. Res. 289,
429–433 (1997).
44. Misa, K. et al. Involvement of midkine in the development of
pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Physiol. Rep. 5, e13383 (2017).
45. Zhang, R. et al. Mechanical stress and the induction of lung ﬁbrosis via
the midkine signaling pathway. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 192,
315–323 (2015).
46. Takenaka, H. et al. Midkine prevents ventricular remodeling and
improves long-term survival after myocardial infarction. Am. J.
Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 296, H462–H469 (2009).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
16
47. Lee, Y. I. et al. WNT5A drives interleukin-6-dependent epithelial-
mesenchymal transition via the JAK/STAT pathway in keloid
pathogenesis. Burns Trauma 10, tkac023 (2022).
48. Mak, K. et al. Scarless healing of oral mucosa is characterized by
faster resolution of inﬂammation and control of myoﬁbroblast action
comparedto skinwounds in thered Durocpig model. J. Dermatol.Sci.
56, 168–180 (2009).
49. Ogawa, R. Keloid and hypertrophic scars are the result of chronic
inﬂammation in the reticular dermis. Int J. Mol. Sci. 18, 606 (2017).
50. Huang, C., Akaishi, S., Hyakusoku, H. & Ogawa, R. Are keloid and
hypertrophic scar different forms of the same disorder? A
ﬁbroproliferative skin disorder hypothesis based on keloid ﬁndings.
Int. Wound J. 11, 517–522 (2014).
51. Oikonomopoulou, K. et al. Kallikrein-mediated cell signalling:
targeting proteinase-activated receptors (PARs). Biol. Chem. 387,
817–824 (2006).
52. Radulovic, M. et al. Genetic targeting of protease activated receptor 2
reduces inﬂammatory astrogliosis and improves recovery of function
after spinal cord injury. Neurobiol. Dis. 83, 75–89 (2015).
53. Lundberg, K. C. et al. Proteomics of skin proteins in psoriasis: from
discovery and veriﬁcation in a mouse model to conﬁrmation in
humans. Mol. Cell Proteom. 14, 109–119 (2015).
54. Billi, A. C. et al. KLK6 expression in skin induces PAR1-mediated
psoriasiform dermatitis and inﬂammatory joint disease. J. Clin. Invest.
130, 3151–3157 (2020).
55. Yoon,H. & Scarisbrick,I.A. Kallikrein-relatedpeptidase6 exacerbates
disease in an autoimmune model of multiple sclerosis. Biol. Chem.
397, 1277–1286 (2016).
56. Xu, X., Rivkind, A., Pappo, O., Pikarsky, A. & Levi-Schaffer, F. Role of
mast cells and myoﬁbroblasts in human peritoneal adhesion
formation. Ann. Surg. 236, 593–601 (2002).
57. Akers, I. A. et al. Mast cell tryptase stimulates human lung ﬁbroblast
proliferation via protease-activated receptor-2. Am. J. Physiol. Lung
Cell Mol. Physiol. 278, L193–L201 (2000).
58. Knight, V., Tchongue, J., Lourensz, D., Tipping, P. & Sievert, W.
Protease-activated receptor 2 promotes experimental liver ﬁbrosis in
mice and activates human hepatic stellate cells. Hepatology 55,
879–887 (2012).
59. Gaça, M. D. A., Zhou, X. & Benyon, R. C. Regulation of hepatic stellate
cell proliferation and collagen synthesis by proteinase-activated
receptors. J. Hepatol. 36, 362–369 (2002).
60. Grandaliano, G. et al. Protease-activated receptor-2 expression in IgA
nephropathy: a potentialrolein thepathogenesisof interstitialﬁbrosis.
J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 14, 2072–2083 (2003).
61. Ekins, S., Mestres, J. & Testa, B. In silico pharmacology for drug
discovery: applications to targets and beyond. Br. J. Pharm. 152,
21–37 (2007).
62. La, J. et al. Regulation of myoﬁbroblast differentiation by cardiac
glycosides. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol. 310, L815–L823
(2016).
63. Li, B. et al. Ouabain ameliorates bleomycin induced pulmonary
ﬁbrosis by inhibiting proliferation and promoting apoptosis of lung
ﬁbroblasts. Am. J. Transl. Res. 10, 2967–2974 (2018).
64. Onoufriadis, A. et al. Time series integrative analysis of RNA
sequencing and MicroRNA expression data reveals key biologic
wound healing pathways in keloid-prone individuals. J. Invest.
Dermatol. 138 (2018).
65. Zheng, R. et al. Cistrome Data Browser: expanded datasets and new
tools for gene regulatory analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 47, D729–D735
(2019).
66. Bhattacharya, S. et al. ImmPort: disseminating data to the public for
the future of immunology. Immunol. Res. 58, 234–239 (2014).
67. Subramanian, A. et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-
based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression proﬁles.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 15545–15550 (2005).
68. Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive integration of single-cell data. Cell
177, 1888–1902.e21 (2019).
69. Li, H. et al. The sequence alignment/map format and SAMtools.
Bioinformatics 25, 2078–2079 (2009).
70. Liao, Y., Smyth, G. K. & Shi, W. featureCounts: an efﬁcient general
purpose program for assigning sequence reads to genomic features.
Bioinformatics 30, 923–930 (2014).
71. Zhang, X. et al. CellMarker: a manually curated resource of cell
markers in human and mouse. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D721–D728
(2019).
72. Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E. & Satija, R. Integrating
single-cell transcriptomic data across different conditions,
technologies, and species. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 411–420 (2018).
73. Wolf, F. A., Angerer, P. & Theis, F. J. SCANPY: large-scale single-cell
gene expression data analysis. Genome Biol. 19, 15 (2018).
74. Wang, Y. et al. iTALK: an R package to characterize and illustrate
intercellular communication. 507871 https://doi.org/10.1101/507871
(2019).
75. Zhou, H., Xu, P., Yuan, X. & Qu, H. Edge bundling in information
visualization. Tsinghua Sci. Technol. 18, 145–156 (2013).
76. Liberzon, A. et al. The Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB)
hallmark gene set collection. Cell Syst. 1 (2015).
77. Hänzelmann, S., Castelo, R. & Guinney, J. GSVA: gene set variation
analysis for microarray and RNA-seq data. BMC Bioinform. 14, 7
(2013).
78. Qiu, X. et al. Reversed graph embedding resolves complex single-cell
trajectories. Nat. Methods 14, 979–982 (2017).
79. Reich, M. et al. GenePattern 2.0. Nat. Genet. 38, 500–501 (2006).
80. Wilkerson, M. D. & Hayes, D. N. ConsensusClusterPlus: a class
discovery tool with conﬁdence assessments and item tracking.
Bioinformatics 26, 1572–1573 (2010).
81. Ringnér, M. What is principal component analysis?. Nat. Biotechnol.
26, 303–304 (2008).
82. Varet,H., Brillet-Guéguen,L., Coppée,J.-Y. &Dillies,M.-A.SARTools:
A DESeq2- and EdgeR-Based R pipeline for comprehensive
differential analysis of RNA-seq data. PLoS ONE 11, e0157022(2016).
83. Ashburner, M. et al. Gene ontology: tool for the uniﬁcation of biology.
The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat. Genet. 25, 25–29 (2000).
84. Kanehisa, M. & Goto, S. KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and
genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 27–30 (2000).
85. Newman, A. M. et al. Robust enumeration of cell subsets from tissue
expression proﬁles. Nat. Methods 12, 453–457 (2015).
86. Xiao, B. et al. Identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation of immune-related gene
prognostic signature based on ssGSEA for osteosarcoma. Front.
Oncol. 10, 607622 (2020).
87. Mora, A. & Donaldson, I. M. iRefR: an R package to manipulate the
iRefIndex consolidated protein interaction database. BMC Bioinform.
12, 455 (2011).
88. Lamb, J. et al. The Connectivity Map: using gene-expression
signatures to connect small molecules, genes, and disease. Science
313, 1929–1935 (2006).
Acknowledgements
The authors thank teams of the NCBI-GEO (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
gds/) for using their data. This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (82472546); CAMS Innovation Fund for
Medical Sciences (2019-I2M-5-076); Clinical Key Discipline Project of
Shanghai; Shanghai Top Priority Research Center Project (2023ZZ02013);
the Excellent Academic Leader Project of Shanghai Science and Technol-
ogy Committee (23XD1425000); Deep Blue Talent Project of Naval Medical
University; National Key Research and Development Program
(2024YFA1108405); Postdoctoral Fellowship Program of CPSF
(GZC20242278); Shanghai Rising-Star Program (Sailing Special Program)
(No. 23YF1458400). The funders had no role in study design, data collection
and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
17
Author contributions
Conception/design: Wei Zhang, Jianyu Lu, Xirui Tong, Chenguang Bai,
Runzhi Huang, Zhaofan Xia, Shizhao Ji. Collection and/or assembly of data:
Wei Zhang, Jianyu Lu, Xirui Tong, Sujie Xie, Shuyuan Xian, Yifan Liu, Jiale
Yan, Weijin Qian, Hanlin Sun, Yushu Zhu, Luofeng Jiang, Xinya Guo, Xinran
Ding, Yixu Li, Chenguang Bai, Runzhi Huang, Zhaofan Xia, Shizhao Ji. Data
analysis and interpretation: Wei Zhang, Jianyu Lu, Xirui Tong, Chenguang
Bai, Runzhi Huang, Zhaofan Xia, Shizhao Ji. Manuscript writing: Wei Zhang,
Jianyu Lu, Xirui Tong, Chenguang Bai, Runzhi Huang, Zhaofan Xia, Shizhao
Ji. Final approval of manuscript: Wei Zhang, Jianyu Lu, Xirui Tong, Sujie Xie,
Shuyuan Xian, Yifan Liu, Jiale Yan, Weijin Qian, Hanlin Sun, Yushu Zhu,
Luofeng Jiang, Xinya Guo, Xinran Ding, Yixu Li, Chenguang Bai, Runzhi
Huang, Zhaofan Xia, Shizhao Ji.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Chenguang Bai, Runzhi Huang, Zhaofan Xia or Shizhao Ji.
Peer review information Communications Biology thanks Pingping Lin,
Joonho Shim and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to
the peer review of this work. Primary Handling Editors: Aylin Bircan,
Johannes Stortz. A peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed material. You
do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material
derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
isnot includedin thearticle’s CreativeCommons licenceandyour intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To
view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08741-1
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:1387 
18

===== Huang2014_OsteoarthritisCartilage_BMP2+EctopicBone+Inflammation =====

Exaggerated inﬂammatory environment decreases BMP-2/ACS-
induced ectopic bone mass in a rat model: implications for clinical use
of BMP-2
R.-L. Huang y z, Y. Yuan y z, J. Tu y z, G.-M. Zou x **, Q. Li y *
y Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 639 Zhizaoju Road,
Shanghai 200011, China
z Shanghai Key Laboratory of Orthopaedic Implants, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 639 Zhizaoju Road,
Shanghai 200011, China
x Shanghai Cancer Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dong Chuan Road, Wenxuan Medicine Bldg, Room 442, Shanghai 200240, China
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 7 November 2013
Accepted 13 June 2014
Keywords:
Inﬂammation
Lipopolysaccharide
BMP-2
Bone regeneration
Bone resorption
s u m m a r y
Objective: Numerous recent reports have observed a low osteoinductive efﬁcacy property of bone
morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) and disappointing long-term outcomes in clinical cases. An alternative
hypothesis, that these observations are caused by an exaggerated inﬂammatory environment, needs
experimental evidence.
Method: Thirty-seven Sprague Dawley (SD) rats were administrated with Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
injections and BMP-2/absorbable collagen sponge (ACS) implantation to respectively mimic pre-
operative and post-operative inﬂammatory responses. Blood samples and BMP-2/ACS implants were
analyzed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
micro-computed tomography (mCT) and histological examination.
Results: LPS injections and BMP-2/ACS implantation provoked a signiﬁcant elevation of inﬂammatory
cytokines in serum and an obvious inﬁltration of inﬂammatory cells around BMP-2/ACS implants. The
bone volume, mineral content and mineral density of the BMP-2/ACS implants from LPS-injected rats
were signiﬁcantly decreased, indicating that attenuated BMP-2-induced bone mass might be associated
with down-regulated bone formation activity and up-regulated bone resorption activity. Furthermore,
histological examination of the rhBMP-2/ACS implants showed a decreased expression of osteocalcin
(OCN) and an increased number of osteoclasts in LPS-injected rats at 8 weeks; the expression level of
bone turnover markers in serum and BMP-2/ACS implants revealed inhibited osteoblastogenesis activity
and activated osteoclastogenesis activity in LPS-injected rats. Among the top three elevated pro-
inﬂammatory cytokines, tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and interleukin-1b (IL-1b) showed a suppres-
sive effect on BMP-2-induced osteoblastic differentiation in vitro.
Conclusion: These data indicate that an exaggerated inﬂammatory environment may decrease BMP-2/
ACS-induced bone mass in vivo by suppressing BMP-2-induced osteoblastic differentiation and by
increasing the number or activity of osteoclasts. The negative role of exaggerated inﬂammation deserves
consideration for future clinical use of BMP-2 in inducing bone regeneration.
© 2014 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Introduction
Bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) is a powerful differen-
tiation factor that is capable of recruiting stem cells from sur-
rounding muscle, bone marrow, or blood vessels and then inducing
these cells to differentiate into osteoblastic cells to create bone1.
Preclinical and clinical research have also clearly shown the potent
osteoinductive properties of recombinant human bone morpho-
genetic protein-2 (rhBMP-2) in vivo, making it a potential agent for
* Address correspondence and reprint requests to: Q. Li, Department of Plastic
and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, 639 Zhizaoju Road, Shanghai 200011, China. Tel: 86-
15821950669.
** Address correspondence and reprint requests to: G.-M. Zou, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dong Chuan Road, Wenxuan Medicine
Bldg, Room 442, Shanghai 200240, China.
E-mail addresses: gzou2003@yahoo.com (G.-M. Zou), dr.liqingfeng@shsmu.edu.
cn (Q. Li).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2014.06.017
1063-4584/© 2014 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 22 (2014) 1186e1196
stimulating new bone growth in bone fractures and defects appli-
cations2,3. Since 2002, the INFUSE® Bone Graft, which contains
rhBMP-2 at a concentration of 1.5 mg/cc delivered on an absorbable
collagen sponge (ACS), has been approved in the United States for
clinical use in speciﬁc clinical scenarios, including anterior and
lumbar interbody spine fusion, open tibial fractures, sinus aug-
mentations, and alveolar ridge defects4,5. Early studies of BMP-2/
ACS demonstrated its safety proﬁle and relatively signiﬁcant re-
sults at the site of implantation. However, extended clinical use of
BMP-2/ACS
has
revealed
increasing
concerns
regarding
inﬂammation-related adverse events such as soft-tissue swelling6,7,
seroma8,9, bone resorption10 and particularly the low osteoinduc-
tive efﬁcacy of BMP-2. These complications have resulted in un-
satisfactory long-term outcomes in clinical applications11e13.
The possible causes of low osteoinductive efﬁcacy of BMP-2 and
disappointing long-term outcomes remain unclear. Recently, clin-
ical and experimental investigators have observed exaggerated
inﬂammation responses after BMP-2/ACS implantation14e19. The
effects of inﬂammation on bone regeneration are complex and
biphasic. It is recognized that an initial and proper inﬂammatory
response is required to initiate and guide the subsequent processes
of bone regeneration. In contrast, deﬁcient or excessive inﬂam-
mation can inhibit or delay bone tissue regeneration20,21. Further-
more,
the
use
of
anti-inﬂammatory
drugs
such
as
bone
morphogenetic protein-binding peptide (BBP)22, triptolide-mi-
celles23, and corticosteroids17,24 was proved to reduce inﬂamma-
tory responses and subsequently enhances the osteoinductive
capacity of BMP-2. These results indicate that the low osteoinduc-
tive efﬁcacy of BMP-2 in vivo may be a result of the exaggerated
inﬂammatory environment. However, only limited works investi-
gated the effects of an inﬂammatory environment on the osteoin-
ductive efﬁcacy of BMP-2. In vitro, our previous study demonstrated
that LPS-induced inﬂammation inhibits BMP-2-induced osteo-
blastic differentiation of bone mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs)25.
Inﬂammatory cytokines such as TNF-a also have been found to
suppress BMP-2-induced osteoblastogenesis in vitro26,27. However,
the in vivo inﬂammatory environment is more complex than the
in vitro inﬂammation models mimicked by pro-inﬂammatory
cytokine or agonist treatment, and the exact effects of an exag-
gerated inﬂammatory environment on BMP-2-induced bone for-
mation in vivo need support from data.
The goal of the current study was to further characterize an
exaggerated inﬂammatory environment's role on BMP-2/ACS-
induced bone formation. We hypothesized that the exaggerated
inﬂammatory environment would decrease BMP-2/ACS-induced
bone mass. We artiﬁcially mimicked an exaggerated inﬂamma-
tory model using LPS injections and BMP-2/ACS implantation in
rats. Then, we analyzed several bone turnover markers and the
bone mass of the newly formed bone nodules. Finally, we tested the
effects of the major pro-inﬂammatory cytokines on BMP-2-induced
osteoblastic differentiation.
Materials and methods
Experimental design
Thirty-seven
10-week-old
male
Lewis
rats
(body
weight
267.6 ± 10.8 g, Shanghai Experimental Animal Center, China) were
used in this experiment and were randomly allocated to three
groups: the LPS-injected group (n ¼ 16), the saline-injected group
(n ¼ 16), and the sham-operated group (n ¼ 5). The experimental
protocol is shown in Fig. 1(A and B); 5 mg/kg of LPS (Sigma, USA) or
equal volume of saline was injected subcutaneously each day over 4
days to mimic a pre-operative inﬂammatory environment, and the
rats then accepted BMP-2/ACS implants on the last day of LPS
injection to mimic a post-operative inﬂammatory environment.
The sham-operated group was taken as controls to evaluate the
inﬂammatory environment. Specimens of BMP-2/ACS implants
were harvested on days 3, 8, 28, and 56 after implantation. The
experimental procedures were approved by our institution's Ani-
mal Research Committee.
Preparation of rhBMP-2/ACS complex
Absorbable type I bovine collagen sponges (ACS, Integra Life
Sciences, USA), which are used as carriers for rhBMP-2, were
tailored in dimensions of 10  10  5 mm. Each sponge was loaded
with 200 mL of solution containing 4 mg of rhBMP-2 (PeproTech,
USA) under sterile conditions. After 1 h at room temperature, the
rhBMP-2/ACS implants were stored overnight in tissue culture
plates at 4C and were implanted the next day.
Animal model of ectopic bone formation
The
rats
were
anesthetized
with ketamine
hydrochloride
(100 mg/kg, i.m.) and xylazine hydrochloride (5 mg/kg, i.m.). The
surgical site was exposed through a sterile drape. Aseptic techniques
were used for all of the surgical procedures. Two 25-mm-long pos-
terior longitudinal incision (1 cm from the midline, and thus 2 cm
from each other) was made to expose the subcutaneous space for
insertionofsponges.Bluntdissectionwasusedto createtwo separate
pockets at each incision site. Sixty-four rhBMP-2/ACS implants were
placed into the pockets in 32 rats (each rat received two sponges).
Biochemical assays
Blood serum was collected on days 3 (the ﬁrst day of LPS in-
jection), 2, 0 (before BMP-2/ACS implantation), 2, 4, 7, 10, 13, 16,
and 18. Serum specimens obtained on days 0 and days 4 (4 days after
BMP-2/ACS implantation) were used for pro-inﬂammatory and
anti-inﬂammatory cytokines expression proﬁle (including IL-1a, IL-
1b, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12p70, IL-13, granulocyte-macro-
phage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), interferon-g, and TNF-a)
analysis using a Bio-Plex Pro™Rat Cytokine Th1/Th2 Assay kit (Bio-
Rad Laboratories, USA). Then, the levels of the three most elevated
pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, including TNF-a, IL-1b, and IL-6, the
bone turnover markers, including C-terminal fragment of collagen I
(CTX-1), tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 5b (TRACP-5b), OCN,
and the exogenous BMP-2 in serum were analyzed using enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits (all from R&D, USA) ac-
cording to the manufacturer's instructions. The blood samples from
the sham-operated rats were used to measure the basal levels of
these pro-inﬂammatory and anti-inﬂammatory cytokines.
Histological and histomorphometry
The BMP-2/ACS implants harvested at days 3 and 8 were used
for inﬂammation analysis (n ¼ 6) and the implants harvested at
days 28 and 56 were used for bone mass analysis (n ¼ 10). The
specimens were rinsing in sterile saline and ﬁxed in 4% para-
formaldehyde for 2 days. After rinsing in water, the specimens were
decalciﬁed in 20% ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) for 30
days and embedded in parafﬁn (for inﬂammation analysis, the
specimens were directly embedded in parafﬁn). Serial sections,
5 mm thick, were prepared at intervals of 80 mm, stained with he-
matoxylin and eosin (H&E), Van Gieson (VG), and tartrate-resistant
acid phosphatase (TRAP) for the evaluation of inﬂammation, bone
structures, and osteoclasts, respectively. For quantitative analysis of
the osteoclasts, TRAP-positive cells were counted under the mi-
croscope at a 40 magniﬁcation in a blinded fashion.
R.-L. Huang et al. / Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 22 (2014) 1186e1196
1187
Immunohistochemical procedures were performed on sections
in which bone formation could be observed histologically. For
immunohistochemical staining, the sections were deparafﬁnized
through xylene, rehydrated through a descending ethanol series
and washed in distilled water. Endogenous peroxidase was blocked
by incubating the sections with 0.3% hydrogen peroxide. After
washed with phosphate buffer solution (PBS) (pH 7.4), the sections
were treated with normal horse serum for 30 min and subse-
quently incubated with anti-OCN antibody (1:50, Epitomics, USA)
overnight at 4C. Then, the sections were washed with PBS and
incubated with horseradish peroxidase streptavidin conjugate for
30 min. Isotype-matched control immunoglobulin G (IgG)s and
primary antibody omission showed no background staining. The
rate of OCN-positive area was evaluated by Image-Pro Plus ver. 6.0
software in a blinded fashion (Media Cybernetics, MD, USA).
Micro-computed tomographic (mCT) scanning
The specimens harvested at days 28 and 56 were mCT scanned
(SkyScan1176, Skyscan, Belgium) for quantitative evaluation of new
bone. The resulting images were 2000  1048-pixel square images
with an aluminumecopper ﬁlter used to produce optimized
images. Reconstructions and analyses were performed using NRe-
con reconstruction and CTAn 1.8 software, respectively. To measure
newly formed bone, a circular area of pre-deﬁned size was selected
as the region of interest (ROI) in two-dimensional images. The pixel
zone representing ossiﬁcation in the deﬁned ROI was then recon-
structed in 3D by creating a volume of interest (VOI) in the lower
and upper ranges of the threshold using grayscale units. After using
CTAn 1.8 on each reconstructed BMP ﬁle, bone volume (BV), bone
mineral density (BMD), trabecular thickness (TbTh), trabecular
number (TbN), and trabecular separation (TbSp) were obtained
using a CT-analyzer in direct 3D based on a surface-rendered vol-
ume model according to the manufacturer's instructions. In addi-
tion,
total
bone
mineral
content
(BMC)
was
calculated
by
multiplying BV and BMD.
In vitro differentiation of osteoblasts
Primary BMSCs were isolated from the bone marrow of 4-week-
old Lewis rats as previously described25. All of the cells were
cultured in Dulbecco's Modiﬁed Eagle's Medium (DMEM), supple-
mented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco, USA). The
cultured medium was changed every 3 days. Only BMSCs from early
Fig. 1. Experimental protocol of this study. (A) Time course of the experimental protocol with times of LPS injections, BMP-2/ACS transplantation and sacriﬁce. (B) Experimental
grouping and related experimental examination of this study.
R.-L. Huang et al. / Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 22 (2014) 1186e1196
1188
passages (2 and 3) were utilized for this experiment. BMP-2
(200 ng/mL) and the cytokines TNF-a (50 ng/mL), IL-6 (20 ng/
mL), and IL-1b (20 ng/mL) (all from PeproTech, USA) were added to
the culture medium in the following osteoblastic differentiation
experiments.
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) staining, Alizarin red staining, and ALP
activity measurement
Prior to staining, the BMSCs were washed with PBS and were
ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min. For ALP staining, the cells
were stained with naphthol AS-BI alkaline solution for 45 min to
visualize ALPase activity. For Alizarin red staining, the cells were
stained with 40 mM Alizarin red S (Sigma, USA) solution (pH 4.1)
for 10 min to visualize matrix calcium deposition. For quantitative
measurement of ALP activity, the BMSCs were exposed to BMP-2
and pro-inﬂammatory cytokines at the indicated concentrations
and times. The cells were lysed, and cellular ALPase activity was
measured using an alkaline phosphatase detection kit (Nanjing
Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute, China). The amount of ALP in
the cells was normalized against the total protein content.
RNA extraction and quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) analysis
Total RNA was isolated from bone tissue and BMSCs using Trizol
reagent (Invitrogen, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol.
Two micrograms of total RNA were used for reverse transcription,
Table I
List of oligonucleotides used for quantitative real-time PCR
Target gene
Sequence
Reference
OCN
F: 50-GACCCTCTCTCTGCTCACTCTG-30
F: 50-CCGGAGTCTATTCACCACCTTA-30
NM_013414.1
Col 1A1
F: 50-GCTTGATCTGTATCTGCCACAAT-30
F: 50-GACTCCTATGACTTCTGCGTCTG-30
NM_053304.1
Runx2
F: 50-CCATAACGGTCTTCACAAATCC-30
F: 50-GCGGGACACCTACTCTCATACT-30
NM_053470.2
OPN
F: 50-AGGAAGCCAGCCAAGGTAAG-30
F: 50-AACCACTGCCAGTCTCATGG-30
M99252.1
OPG
F: 50-GGACGTCAGCTCTTGTGTGA-30
R: 50-GTAGTCAGGGCAAGGGACAC-30
NM_012870.2
RANKL
F: 50-AGGCTGGGCCAAGATCTCTA-30
R: 50-GATAGTCCGCAGGTACGCTC-30
NM_057149.1
GAPDH
F: 50-CTCAGTTGCTGAGGAGTCCC-30
R: 50-ATTCGAGAGAAGGGAGGGCT-30
NM_017008.4
Abbreviations: F, forward primer; R, reverse primer.
Fig. 2. The elevation of exogenous cytokines BMP-2 and the expression proﬁle of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines and anti-inﬂammatory cytokines in blood serum after BMP-2/ACS
implantation. (A) Changes in body weight observed during the experimental period, as displayed by days 32 after BMP-2/ACS implantation (ANOVA test). (BeD) The blood
serum specimens were collected at days 3, 2, 0, 2, 4, 7, 10, 13, 16, and 18; changes in the serum levels of TNF-a (B), IL-6 (C), and IL-1b (D) after LPS injections and BMP-2/ACS
implantation during the experimental period (ANOVA test: P < 0.01 at days 0, 2, 4, and 7). (E) Fold changes of BMP-2, pro-inﬂammatory cytokines (IL-1a, IL-1b, IL-2, IL-6, IL-12p70,
IFN-g, GM-CSF, TNF-a), and anti-inﬂammatory cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, IL-13) at days 0 and days 4 after implantation of BMP-2/ACS, compared with the serum from sham-
operated rats (ANOVA test: P < 0.01). Data shown are means ± 95% CI (n ¼ 10 per time point in the LPS-injected group and the saline-injected group, n ¼ 5 per time point in
the sham-operated group).
R.-L. Huang et al. / Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 22 (2014) 1186e1196
1189
and the product was then used for real-time PCR. The quantiﬁcation
levels of osteogenic genes were analyzed using the ABI 7500 real-
time PCR System. PCR primer pairs were selected from different
exons of the corresponding genes, as shown in Table I. All of the PCR
procedures were performed with initial denaturation at 95C for
30 s, followed by 40 cycles at 95C for 5 s, 60C for 34 s, a melting
curve at 95C for 15 s, and 60C for 60 s continuously.
Statistical analysis
Every experiment was performed at least in triplicate technical
replicates. All of the data are presented as mean ± 95% conﬁdence
intervals (CI) from at least three independent assays. One-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) test and Tukey's post-test multiple
comparison tests were used to determine signiﬁcance between
experimental groups [Fig. 2(AeE)]. Student's t test was used to
determine signiﬁcance between two groups [Figs. 4(CeH), 5(B, D,
EeL), 6(CeG)]. P values <0.05 were considered statistically signif-
icant, IBM SPSS statistics ver. 20 was used for statistical analysis.
Results
LPS injections and BMP-2/ACS implantation induced signiﬁcant
elevation of TNF-a, IL-6 and IL-1b in blood serum
In the clinic, trauma, possible contamination, degradation of ACS,
and underlying diseases can induce an acute or chronic inﬂamma-
tory environment before BMP-2/ACS implantation. With these fac-
tors in mind, we supplemented LPS injections with BMP-2/ACS
implantation to mimic the exaggerated inﬂammatory environment
under clinical conditions (Fig. 1). Before the study, we measured the
body weights of the rats to assess whether LPS injections had any
inﬂuence on rat growth during the experimental period. Initially, we
observed a small ﬂuctuation in body weight after LPS injections,
which stabilized after a few days [Fig. 2(A)]. To evaluate the charac-
teristics of inﬂammatory environment after LPS injections and BMP-
2/ACS implantation, we analyzed the expression proﬁle of inﬂam-
matory cytokines in serum. Firstly, we used the serum specimens
from days 0 (the day before BMP-2/ACS implantation) and 4 (4 days
after BMP-2/ACS implantation) to detect and compare the level of
BMP-2 and inﬂammatory cytokines. As shown in Fig. 2(E), compared
with the serum from sham-operated rats, regardless of whether in-
jection of LPS or saline, there was nearly a 200-fold rise of BMP-2
level in serum 4 days after BMP-2/ACS implantation, that indicate a
high-concentration and persistent elevation of exogenous BMP-2
after BMP-2/ACS implantation. Most importantly, the cytokines
analysis showed multiple elevations of the pro-inﬂammatory and
anti-inﬂammatory cytokines after LPS injections and BMP-2/ACS
implantation, but TNF-a, IL-6, and IL-1b were the most extensively
elevated inﬂammatorycytokines [Fig.2(E)]. Then, we chose thethree
mostelevated pro-inﬂammatorycytokines (TNF-a, IL-6, andIL-1b) to
perform a time course study of these cytokines. Compared with the
sham-operative group, these cytokines in the LPS-injected group
beganto increase1 dayafter LPSinjection andreached themaximum
levels on days 2 to days 7 after implantation [Fig. 2(BeD)]. Moreover,
these cytokines in the saline-injected group were also elevated after
BMP-2/ACS implantation, but signiﬁcantly lower in expression level
and shorter in maintaining time than those in LPS-injected rats.
Fig. 3. LPS injections and BMP-2/ACS implantation triggered signiﬁcant inﬂammatory inﬁltration surrounding ASC implants. Microscopic ﬁndings showed the inﬂammatory zone in
H&E stained specimens from LPS-injected rats and saline-injected rats, harvested at 3 days (A) and 8 days after BMP-2/ACS implantation (B). The right panels showed the merged
images of implants and the left panels showed the large images of implants (100 magniﬁcation) (n ¼ 6 per time point and group).
R.-L. Huang et al. / Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 22 (2014) 1186e1196
1190
LPS injections and BMP-2/ACS implantation triggered signiﬁcant
inﬂammatory inﬁltration surrounding ASC implants
To estimate the inﬂammatory response after LPS injections and
BMP-2/ACS implantation, we examined the inﬂammatory zones
surrounding the BMP-2/ACS implants. As shown in Fig. 3(A and B),
from days 3 to days 8 after implantation, the volume of the im-
plants shrank, and the inﬂammatory cells inﬁltration area extended
from the outer sphere to entire implant. The data indicate that LPS
injections and BMP-2/ACS implantation provoked an exaggerated
inﬂammatory response surrounding ACS implants.
Inﬂammatory environment decreased BMP-2/ACS-induced bone
mass
To explore the effects of an exaggerated inﬂammatory envi-
ronment on BMP-2/ACS-induced osteogenesis in vivo, we analyzed
the ectopically formed bone nodules. The representative gross view
and 3D reconstructive images demonstrated that the mineral
nodules from the LPS-injected rats were obviously smaller than
those from the saline-injected rats [Fig. 4(A and B)]. Histologically,
newly induced woven bone was observed in the implants at 8
weeks from LPS and saline-injected rats, however, the TbTh, TbN,
and TbSp seem different in H&E and VG staining images [Fig. 4(B)].
To quantitatively evaluate these differences, we analyzed the data
from mCT scanning. The values of these indicators presented in
Fig. 4(CeE), revealed that LPS injections resulted in a signiﬁcant
decrease in new bone formation, compared with the saline injec-
tion. The volume and content of new bone from LPS-injected rats
showed the same tendency with these bone mass indicators shown
by consistently lower than saline-injected rats at both 4 and 8
weeks [Fig. 4(F and G)]. These results indicate that an exaggerated
inﬂammatory environment signiﬁcantly inhibited BMP-2/ACS-
induced bone formation. Furthermore, we also observed that the
BMD of the LPS-treated BMP-2/ACS implants was signiﬁcantly
lower at 4 weeks and was slightly lower at 8 weeks [Fig. 4(H)],
indicating that the exaggerated inﬂammatory environment also
activated bone resorption.
Exaggerated inﬂammatory environment changed the expression of
bone turnover markers
It has been well established that several pro-inﬂammatory cy-
tokines, including TNF-a and IL-1b, could stimulate osteoclasto-
genesis
and
inhibit
osteoblastogenesis
under
pathological
conditions in vivo28e30. To further clarify the effects of exaggerated
inﬂammatory environment on BMP-2/ACS-induced bone forma-
tion, we measured the changes of several bone turnover markers at
4 weeks after implantation. Immunohistochemical staining of OCN
was also detected in the implants from both LPS and saline-injected
rats at 8 weeks [Fig. 5(A)]; however, the positive expression area of
OCN from LPS-injected group was smaller than that from saline-
injected group [Fig. 5(B)]. The mRNA and cytokine levels of bone
formation markers, including the bone mineralization marker OCN
Fig. 4. Inﬂammatory environment decreased BMP-2-induced bone mass. (A) Gross view of BMP-2/ACS implant specimens from LPS-injected rats and saline-injected rats, harvested
at 4 weeks and 8 weeks after implantation, scale bar ¼ 1 mm. (B) Representative mCT, H&E staining, and VG staining images of BMP-2/ACS implants at 8 weeks from LPS-injected
and saline-injected groups, scale bar ¼ 1 mm, 200 magniﬁcation. (CeH) TbTh (C), TbN (D), TbSp (E), BV (F), BMC (G), and BMD (H) of the newly formed bone nodules, measured by
mCT. Data shown are means ± 95% CI (NB, new bone; ST, soft tissue; MT, mesenchymal tissue; Student's t test, n ¼ 10 per time point and group).
R.-L. Huang et al. / Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 22 (2014) 1186e1196
1191
and the osteoblastic transcription factor Runx2, were signiﬁcantly
decreased in the mineral nodules from LPS-injected rats, but not in
those from saline-injected rats [Fig. 5(EeG)]. These results indicate
that the exaggerated inﬂammation inhibited the BMP-2-induced
osteoblastic differentiation of stem cells.
Bone resorption was mainly mediated by osteoclasts which
could be identiﬁed by TRAP positivity, to investigate the role of
exaggerated inﬂammation on osteoclastogenesis, we stained the
osteoclasts in the implants by TRAP staining and counted the TRAP-
positive cells under microscope, we found that the number of
TRAP-positive cells in regenerated bony nodules was signiﬁcantly
decreased in LPS-injected rats [Fig. 5(C and D)]. Furthermore,
another osteoclast marker in serum TRAcP-5b also decreased in
LPS-injected rats [Fig. 5(H)]. We also measured the cytokine levels
of the bone resorption marker CTX-1 in serum, and the data
showed a signiﬁcant increase in serum CTX-1 in LPS-injected rats
[Fig. 5(I)]. Furthermore, receptor activator of NF-kB ligand (RANKL),
which is a key cytokine in bone resorption, showed an increased
mRNA expression in mineral nodules from LPS-injected rats
[Fig. 5(J)]. The mRNA level of osteoprotegerin (OPG), which is a
RANKL decoy receptor, remained unchanged [Fig. 5(K)]. Thus, the
RANKL/OPG ratio was increased in LPS-injected rats [Fig. 5(L)].
Fig. 5. Exaggerated inﬂammatory environment changed expression of bone turnover markers. (A) Immunohistochemical staining of OCN in BMP-2/ACS implants from LPS-injected
rats and saline-injected rats at 8 weeks. (B) Quantitation analysis of OCN expression in 200 magniﬁcation. (C) TRAP staining of osteoclasts in BMP-2/ACS implants at 8 weeks
in 400 magniﬁcation. (D) Number of TRAP-positive cells per ﬁeld of tissue in 400 magniﬁcation. (E and F) Expression of OCN as a bone formation-related marker at mRNA level in
implants and protein level in serum at 4 weeks, mRNA level normalized vs GAPDH. (G) Expression of Runx2 as a bone formation-related marker at protein level in serum at 4 weeks.
(H) Secretion of TRAcP-5b as an osteoclast-related marker in serum in serum at 4 weeks. (I) Secretion of CTX-1 as a bone resorption-related marker in serum at 4 weeks. (J and K)
Expression of RANKL (J) and OPG (K) in mRNA levels as bone resorption-related markers in implants at 4 weeks, normalized vs GAPDH. (L) RANKL/OPG ratio. Data shown are
means ± 95% CI (NB, new bone; MT, mesenchymal tissue; OC, osteoclast; Student's t test, n ¼ 10 per time point and group for tissue specimens, and n ¼ 5 per time point and group
for serum specimens).
R.-L. Huang et al. / Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 22 (2014) 1186e1196
1192
These results indicate up-regulation of bone resorption activity.
Therefore, the reduction in the BMD of LPS-treated implants could
have partly been caused by osteoclast-mediated bone resorption.
TNF-a and IL-1b, but not IL-6, inhibited BMP-2-induced osteoblastic
differentiation in BMSCs
Therefore, to conﬁrm further the hypothesis that exaggerated
inﬂammation
decreased
BMP-2-induced
osteogenesis
partly
through inhibition of osteoblastogenesis, we examined the effects
of the pro-inﬂammatory cytokines TNF-a, IL-6, and IL-1b, all of
which were elevated in this inﬂammation model, on BMP-2-
induced osteoblastic differentiation of BMCSs. In this study, TNF-a
and IL-1b, but not IL-6, showed remarkable inhibitory effects on
BMP-2-induced ALP expression [Fig. 6(A)]. These ﬁndings were
further conﬁrmed by the quantiﬁcation of ALP activity, which was
characterized by dose-dependent inhibitory effects of TNF-a and IL-
1b on BMP-2-upregualted ALP activity [Fig. 6(C)]. Similarly, Alizarin
red staining and quantiﬁcation showed that TNF-a and IL-1b
inhibited BMP-2-induced mineralization, whereas IL-6 did not
affect BMP-2-induced mineralization [Fig. 6(BeD)]. Moreover, we
further veriﬁed these ﬁndings by quantiﬁcation of osteogenic
markers in mRNA levels, such as collagen type 1 (COL1A1), OCN,
and osteopontin (OPN). The data demonstrated that the presence of
TNF-a or IL-1b could inhibit BMP-2-induced COL1A1, OCN, and OPN
expression. In contrast, no signiﬁcant changes were observed after
IL-6 treatment [Fig. 6(EeG)]. These results showed that among the
major pro-inﬂammatory cytokines elevated in our model, TNF-a
and IL-1b inhibited BMP-2-induced osteoblastic differentiation and
mineralization of BMSCs, indicating that those cytokines might play
a crucial role in inﬂammation-mediated negative effects on BMP-2-
induced osteogenesis.
Discussion
Despite BMP-2's well-established functions in promoting oste-
oblast development and their widespread clinical use in promoting
localized bone growth and healing in orthopedic and maxillofacial
Fig. 6. TNF-a and IL-1b, but not IL-6, attenuated BMP-2-induced osteoblastic differentiation of BMSCs. (A and B) BMSCs were treated with BMP-2 in the presence or absence of TNF-
a, IL-6, and IL-1b respectively, ALP staining assay of ALPase activity on day 7 (A) and Alizarin red staining assay of calcium deposition on day 21 (B). (C) BMSCs were treated with
BMP-2 in the presence or absence of TNF-a, IL-6, and IL-1b respectively in a dose-dependent experiment. Quantiﬁcation assay of ALPase activity, normalized with total protein and
compared with the saline-treated well. (D) Quantitative analysis of Alizarin red staining, compared with the saline-treated wells. (EeG) BMSCs were treated with BMP-2 in the
presence or absence of TNF-a, IL-6, and IL-1b respectively for 48 h, real-time PCR and relative quantiﬁcation of COL1A1 (E), OCN (F), and OPN (G), normalized vs GAPDH. Data shown
are means ± 95% CI (Student's t test, n ¼ 4 per group).
R.-L. Huang et al. / Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 22 (2014) 1186e1196
1193
applications, the recent emergence of adverse events and contro-
versies regarding the osteoinductive properties of BMP-2 in clinical
setting
continues
to
mount7,11,12,
particularly
the
concerns
regarding the effects of exaggerated inﬂammation on the osteoin-
ductive efﬁcacy of BMP-2 in vivo22e24. In this study, we found that
exaggerated inﬂammation, triggered by LPS injections and BMP-2/
ACS implantation, exhibited a signiﬁcant inhibitory effect on BMP-
2/ACS-induced ectopic bone formation. More importantly, we
observed that exaggerated inﬂammation may exert this inhibitory
effect through inhibition of BMP-2-induced osteoblastogenesis and
activation of osteoclastogenesis (Fig. 7).
A robust literature has described an exaggerated inﬂammatory
response after implantation of BMP-2/ACS in animal models or
clinical settings. Several major factors could be responsible for this
phenomenon. Before BMP-2/ACS implantation, trauma, possible
contamination, basic diseases, or other environmental stresses
could induce an exaggerated inﬂammatory response. Furthermore,
after BMP-2/ACS implantation, surgical trauma, degradation of
ACS31,32, even the exogenous BMP-214e16 could trigger an exag-
gerated
inﬂammatory
response.
A
pre-existing
inﬂammatory
environment could change the microenvironment in the injury site
and the biological properties of stem cells that may affect the
osteoinductive efﬁcacy of BMP-233,34. With these points under
consideration, we treated rats with LPS injections before BMP-2/
ACS implantation to stimulate a pre-operative inﬂammatory envi-
ronment to mimic as much as possible the real exaggerated in-
ﬂammatory environment under clinical conditions (Fig. 1). The
elevation of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines including TNF-a, IL-6, and
IL-1b in serum and the inﬁltration of inﬂammatory cells around
BMP-2/ACS implants conﬁrmed that an exaggerated inﬂammatory
environment was artiﬁcially provoked after LPS injections and
BMP-2/ACS implantation. The expression proﬁle of inﬂammatory
cytokines was consistent with several previous studies18,19,35,
particularly with a clinical case study that found that TNF-a and IL-
6 were impressively elevated in the seroma ﬂuid obtained from a
BMP-2/ACS implant site9. Meanwhile, we also conﬁrmed signiﬁcant
elevation of exogenous BMP-2 after BMP-2/ACS implantation,
suggesting that the exaggerated inﬂammatory response does not
affect the release of rhBMP-2 from ACS.
The effects of inﬂammation on bone regeneration are complex
and biphasic. It is highly conceivable that a very ﬁne balance be-
tween the inﬂammation and osteogenesis processes is key to the
ﬁnal results of bone regeneration. Numerous studies have proved
that clinical use of BMP-2/ACS is safe and productive2e5, however,
emerging concerns regarding the safety and osteoinductive efﬁcacy
of BMP-2 in vivo have continued to mount recently11,36e38. In this
study, the changes in bone mass parameters showed signiﬁcant
inhibition of bone formation in LPS-injected rats. We hypothesize
that this inconsistency might have resulted from the exaggerated
inﬂammatory response. To conﬁrm this hypothesis further, we
detected several bone formation markers in mRNA, cytokine and
protein levels in serum and bone nodules. The results showed that
Runx2, OCN, and OPN were signiﬁcantly decreased, indicating the
exaggerated inﬂammatory environment may inhibit the differen-
tiation process of osteoblasts in vivo.
TNF-a has been reported to inhibit BMP-2-induced osteoblastic
differentiation by stimulation of several signaling pathways in os-
teoblasts26,27. However, the in vivo inﬂammatory environment,
characterized by elevation of a series of pro-inﬂammatory cyto-
kines such as TNF-a, IL-1b and IL-6, is more complex than the
in vitro inﬂammation model triggered by inﬂammatory cytokines
or agonist treatment, and limited research has been focused on the
effects of IL-6 and IL-1b on BMP-2-induced osteoblastic differen-
tiation. To understand more clearly the inhibitory effects of exag-
gerated inﬂammation on BMP-2-induced bone formation, we co-
treated BMSCs with BMP-2 and pro-inﬂammatory cytokines. Our
data showed that TNF-a and IL-1b could inhibit BMP-2-induced
osteoblastic differentiation, while IL-6 showed no inﬂuence on
this capacity. Combined with our previous study which showed LPS
inhibited BMP-2-induced osteoblastic differentiation in vivo25,
these data suggest that the exaggerated inﬂammatory environment
decreases BMP-2/ACS-induced bone formation through the inhi-
bition of BMP-2-induced osteoblastic differentiation.
More interestingly, we also observed a remarkably decreased
BMD and increased osteoclastogenic activity in the implants from
LPS-injected rats. The data indicate that the decreased bone mass
might also have resulted in bone resorption. Two major factors
could have been involved in the bone resorption in this model. On
the one hand, pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, such as TNF-a, IL-1b, IL-
6, IL-11, and IL-17, can directly stimulate osteoclastogenesis and
then result in osteoclastic bone resorption28,39,40. In particular, TNF-
a and IL-1b can synergize with RANKL to potentiate bone
Fig. 7. Cartoon describing the possible mechanism for inﬂammatory environment
decreasing BMP-2/ACSeinduced ectopic bone mass. In this study, LPS injections and
BMP-2/ACS implantation trigger an exaggerated inﬂammatory environment, which
characterized by secretion of inﬂammatory cytokines and inﬁltration of inﬂammatory
cells. Then, the exaggerated inﬂammatory environment inhibits BMP-2/ACS-induced
osteoblastic differentiation of stem cells, and subsequently suppressed BMP-2/ACS-
induced bone formation. However, the exaggerated inﬂammatory environment also
activates osteoclastic-related bone resorption in this model. Taken together, the
exaggerated inﬂammatory environment decreases BMP-2/ACS-induced bone mass
through
inhibition
of
osteoblastic-related
bone
formation
and
activation
of
osteoclastic-related bone resorption.
R.-L. Huang et al. / Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 22 (2014) 1186e1196
1194
resorption directly by osteoclasts41e43. This point is not only
consistent with our results representing elevation of the RANKL/
OPG ratio, but it was complementally conﬁrmed by the up-regu-
lated osteoclast number and TRAcP-5b level. On the other hand,
high concentrations of exogenous BMP-2 also have been proved to
induce bone resorption through activation of osteoclastogenesis in
clinical cases and experimental observations10,44e46. The data
suggest that an exaggerated inﬂammatory environment also
decreased BMP-2/ACS-induced bone mass through activation of
bone resorption by increasing the number or activity of osteoclasts.
Conclusion
Collectively, our study demonstrated that the exaggerated in-
ﬂammatory environment may decrease BMP-2-induced bone mass
by suppressing osteoblastogenesis-mediated bone formation and
activating osteoclastogenesis-mediated bone resorption. These
data might therefore provide an explanation for the transient and
low osteoinductive capacity of BMP-2 in clinical cases. Thus, in the
future, suppression of the inﬂammatory response should be care-
fully considered around the period of BMP-2/ACS implantation to
enhance the osteoinductive efﬁcacy of BMP-2.
Author contributions
RL Huang, GM Zou, and Qing Li designed the experiments. RL
Huang, J Tu, and Y Yuan performed the experiments. RL Huang
performed the statistical analysis. RL Huang and Y Yuan wrote the
manuscript. All authors read, critically revised and approved the
ﬁnal manuscript.
Role of the funding source
This research was supported by grants from the National Key
Project of Scientiﬁc and Technical Supporting Programs funded by
the
Ministry
of
Science
and
Technology
of
China
(no.
2012BAI11B03) and from the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (no. 81230042).
Competing interest statement
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
We thank Lawrence Zhang for critical reading of the manuscript.
References
1. Rosen V. BMP2 signaling in bone development and repair.
Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 2009;20:475e80.
2. Garrison KR, Shemilt I, Donell S, Ryder JJ, Mugford M, Harvey I,
et al. Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) for fracture healing in
adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010:CD006950.
3. Axelrad TW, Einhorn TA. Bone morphogenetic proteins in or-
thopaedic surgery. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 2009;20:
481e8.
4. McKay WF, Peckham SM, Badura JM. A comprehensive clinical
review of recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2
(INFUSE Bone Graft). Int Orthop 2007;31:729e34.
5. Benglis D, Wang MY, Levi AD. A comprehensive review of the
safety proﬁle of bone morphogenetic protein in spine surgery.
Neurosurgery 2008;62:ONS423e31. discussion ONS431.
6. Tumialan LM, Rodts GE. Adverse swelling associated with use
of rh-BMP-2 in anterior cervical discectomy and fusion. Spine J
2007;7:509e10.
7. Smucker JD, Rhee JM, Singh K, Yoon ST, Heller JG. Increased
swelling complications associated with off-label usage of
rhBMP-2 in the anterior cervical spine. Spine 2006;31:2813e9.
8. Taher F, Lebl DR, Hughes AP, Girardi FP. Contralateral psoas
seroma after transpsoas lumbar interbody fusion with bone
morphogenetic protein-2 implantation. Spine J 2013;13:e1e5.
9. Robin BN, Chaput CD, Zeitouni S, Rahm MD, Zerris VA,
Sampson
HW.
Cytokine-mediated
inﬂammatory
reaction
following posterior cervical decompression and fusion asso-
ciated with recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-
2: a case study. Spine 2010;35:E1350e4.
10. McClellan JW, Mulconrey DS, Forbes RJ, Fullmer N. Vertebral
bone resorption after transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion
with bone morphogenetic protein (rhBMP-2). J Spinal Disord
Tech 2006;19:483e6.
11. Carragee EJ, Hurwitz EL, Weiner BK. A critical review of re-
combinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 trials in
spinal surgery: emerging safety concerns and lessons learned.
Spine J 2011;11:471e91.
12. Hoffmann MF, Jones CB, Sietsema DL. Recombinant human
Bone Morphogenetic Protein-2 (rhBMP-2) in posterolateral
lumbar spine fusion: complications in the elderly. J Orthop
Surg Res 2013;8:1.
13. Cahill KS, Chi JH, Day A, Claus EB. Prevalence, complications,
and
hospital
charges
associated
with
use
of
bone-
morphogenetic proteins in spinal fusion procedures. JAMA
2009;302:58e66.
14. Ritting AW, Weber EW, Lee MC. Exaggerated inﬂammatory
response and bony resorption from BMP-2 use in a pediatric
forearm nonunion. J Hand Surg Am 2012;37:316e21.
15. MacDonald KM, Swanstrom MM, McCarthy JJ, Nemeth BA,
Guliani TA, Noonan KJ. Exaggerated inﬂammatory response
after use of recombinant bone morphogenetic protein in
recurrent unicameral bone cysts. J Pediatr Orthop 2010;30:
199e205.
16. Wang M, Abbah SA, Hu T, Toh SY, Lam RW, Goh JC, et al.
Minimizing the severity of rhBMP-2-induced inﬂammation
and heterotopic ossiﬁcation with a polyelectrolyte carrier
incorporating
heparin
on
microbead
templates.
Spine
2013;38:1452e8.
17. Xiong C, Daubs MD, Montgomery SR, Aghdasi B, Inoue H,
Tian H, et al. BMP-2 adverse reactions treated with human
dose equivalent dexamethasone in a rodent model of soft-
tissue inﬂammation. Spine 2013;38:1640e7.
18. Lee KB, Taghavi CE, Song KJ, Sintuu C, Yoo JH, Keorochana G,
et al. Inﬂammatory characteristics of rhBMP-2 in vitro and in
an in vivo rodent model. Spine 2011;36:E149e54.
19. Lee KB, Taghavi CE, Murray SS, Song KJ, Keorochana G,
Wang JC. BMP induced inﬂammation: a comparison of rhBMP-
7 and rhBMP-2. J Orthop Res 2012;30:1985e94.
20. Hardy R, Cooper MS. Bone loss in inﬂammatory disorders.
J Endocrinol 2009;201:309e20.
21. Lacey
DC,
Simmons
PJ,
Graves
SE,
Hamilton JA.
Proin-
ﬂammatory cytokines inhibit osteogenic differentiation from
stem cells: implications for bone repair during inﬂammation.
Osteoarthr Cartil 2009;17:735e42.
22. Lee KB, Murray SS, Taghavi CE, Song KJ, Brochmann EJ,
Johnson JS, et al. Bone morphogenetic protein-binding peptide
reduces the inﬂammatory response to recombinant human
bone morphogenetic protein-2 and recombinant human bone
morphogenetic protein-7 in a rodent model of soft-tissue
inﬂammation. Spine J 2011;11:568e76.
23. Ratanavaraporn J, Furuya H, Tabata Y. Local suppression of
pro-inﬂammatory cytokines and the effects in BMP-2-induced
bone regeneration. Biomaterials 2012;33:304e16.
R.-L. Huang et al. / Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 22 (2014) 1186e1196
1195
24. Tan Y, Montgomery SR, Aghdasi BG, Inoue H, Kaner T, Tian H,
et al. The effect of corticosteroid administration on soft-tissue
inﬂammation associated with rhBMP-2 use in a rodent model
of inﬂammation. Spine 2013;38:806e13.
25. Huang RL, Yuan Y, Zou GM, Liu G, Tu J, Li Q. LPS-stimulated
inﬂammatory environment inhibits BMP-2-induced osteo-
blastic
differentiation
through
crosstalk
between
TLR4/
MyD88/NF-kappaB and BMP/Smad signaling. Stem Cells Dev
2014;23:277e89.
26. Yamazaki
M,
Fukushima H, Shin
M,
Katagiri
T,
Doi
T,
Takahashi T, et al. Tumor necrosis factor alpha represses bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling by interfering with the
DNA binding of Smads through the activation of NF-kappaB.
J Biol Chem 2009;284:35987e95.
27. Tang Y, Xie H, Chen J, Geng L, Chen H, Li X, et al. Activated NF-
kB in bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells from systemic
lupus erythematosus patients inhibits osteogenic differentia-
tion through downregulating Smad signaling. Stem Cells Dev
2013;22:668e78.
28. Zhao L, Huang J, Zhang H, Wang Y, Matesic LE, Takahata M,
et al. Tumor necrosis factor inhibits mesenchymal stem cell
differentiation into osteoblasts via the ubiquitin E3 ligase
Wwp1. Stem Cells 2011;29:1601e10.
29. Zhao B, Grimes SN, Li S, Hu X, Ivashkiv LB. TNF-induced
osteoclastogenesis and inﬂammatory bone resorption are
inhibited by transcription factor RBP-J. J Exp Med 2012;209:
319e34.
30. Jurado S, Garcia-Giralt N, Diez-Perez A, Esbrit P, Yoskovitz G,
Agueda L, et al. Effect of IL-1beta, PGE(2), and TGF-beta1 on the
expression of OPG and RANKL in normal and osteoporotic
primary human osteoblasts. J Cell Biochem 2010;110:304e10.
31. Thomas MV, Puleo DA. Infection, inﬂammation, and bone
regeneration: a paradoxical relationship. J Dent Res 2011;90:
1052e61.
32. Mountziaris PM, Mikos AG. Modulation of the inﬂammatory
response for enhanced bone tissue regeneration. Tissue Eng
Part B Rev 2008;14:179e86.
33. Crop MJ, Baan CC, Korevaar SS, Ijzermans JN, Pescatori M,
Stubbs AP, et al. Inﬂammatory conditions affect gene expres-
sion and function of human adipose tissue-derived mesen-
chymal stem cells. Clin Exp Immunol 2010;162:474e86.
34. Lepperdinger G. Inﬂammation and mesenchymal stem cell
aging. Curr Opin Immunol 2011;23:518e24.
35. Hsu W, Polavarapu M, Riaz R, Larson A, Jared JD, Ghodasra J,
et al. Characterizing the host response to rhBMP-2 in a rat
spinal arthrodesis model. Spine 2013. [Epub ahead of print].
36. XuR,BydonM,SciubbaDM,WithamTF,WolinskyJP,GokaslanZL,
et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of rhBMP2 in posterior cervical spinal
fusion for subaxial degenerative spine disease: analysis of out-
comes in 204 patients. Surg Neurol Int 2011;2:109.
37. Fu R, Selph S, McDonagh M, Peterson K, Tiwari A, Chou R, et al.
Effectiveness
and
harms
of
recombinant
human
bone
morphogenetic protein-2 in spine fusion: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 2013;158:890e902.
38. Lissenberg-Thunnissen SN, de Gorter DJ, Sier CF, Schipper IB.
Use and efﬁcacy of bone morphogenetic proteins in fracture
healing. Int Orthop 2011;35:1271e80.
39. Lorenzo J, Horowitz M, Choi Y. Osteoimmunology: interactions
of the bone and immune system. Endocr Rev 2008;29:403e40.
40. Walsh NC, Gravallese EM. Bone remodeling in rheumatic dis-
ease: a question of balance. Immunol Rev 2010;233:301e12.
41. Schett G, Teitelbaum SL. Osteoclasts and arthritis. J Bone Miner
Res 2009;24:1142e6.
42. Ignatius A, Schoengraf P, Kreja L, Liedert A, Recknagel S,
Kandert S, et al. Complement C3a and C5a modulate osteoclast
formation and inﬂammatory response of osteoblasts in syn-
ergism with IL-1beta. J Cell Biochem 2011;112:2594e605.
43. Teitelbaum SL. Osteoclasts; culprits in inﬂammatory osteol-
ysis. Arthritis Res Ther 2006;8:201.
44. Seeherman HJ, Li XJ, Bouxsein ML, Wozney JM. rhBMP-2 in-
duces transient bone resorption followed by bone formation in
a nonhuman primate core-defect model. J Bone Jt Surg Am
2010;92:411e26.
45. Toth JM, Boden SD, Burkus JK, Badura JM, Peckham SM,
McKay WF. Short-term osteoclastic activity induced by locally
high concentrations of recombinant human bone morphoge-
netic protein-2 in a cancellous bone environment. Spine
2009;34:539e50.
46. Jensen ED, Pham L, Billington Jr CJ, Espe K, Carlson AE,
Westendorf JJ, et al. Bone morphogenic protein 2 directly en-
hances differentiation of murine osteoclast precursors. J Cell
Biochem 2010;109:672e82.
R.-L. Huang et al. / Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 22 (2014) 1186e1196
1196

===== Ayturk2020_JBMR_scRNAseq+Calvaria+LongBone =====

ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Single-Cell RNA Sequencing of Calvarial and Long-Bone
Endocortical Cells
Ugur M Ayturk,1,2,3
Joseph P Scollan,4 Didem Goz Ayturk,1 Eun Sung Suh,1 Alexander Vesprey,1
Christina M Jacobsen,3,5,6 Paola Divieti Pajevic,7
and Matthew L Warman3,8
1Musculoskeletal Integrity Program, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, NY, USA
2Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA
3Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
4Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH, USA
5Divisions of Endocrinology and Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
6Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
7Department of Translational Dental Medicine, Boston University Goldman School of Dental Medicine, Boston, MA, USA
8Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
ABSTRACT
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-Seq) is emerging as a powerful technology to examine transcriptomes of individual cells.
We determined whether scRNA-Seq could be used to detect the effect of environmental and pharmacologic perturbations
on osteoblasts. We began with a commonly used in vitro system in which freshly isolated neonatal mouse calvarial cells are
expanded and induced to produce a mineralized matrix. We used scRNA-Seq to compare the relative cell type abundances
and the transcriptomes of freshly isolated cells to those that had been cultured for 12 days in vitro. We observed that the per-
centage of macrophage-like cells increased from 6% in freshly isolated calvarial cells to 34% in cultured cells. We also found
that Bglap transcripts were abundant in freshly isolated osteoblasts but nearly undetectable in the cultured calvarial cells.
Thus, scRNA-Seq revealed signiﬁcant differences between heterogeneity of cells in vivo and in vitro. We next performed
scRNA-Seq on freshly recovered long bone endocortical cells from mice that received either vehicle or sclerostin-neutralizing
antibody for 1 week. We were unable to detect signiﬁcant changes in bone anabolism–associated transcripts in immature
and mature osteoblasts recovered from mice treated with sclerostin-neutralizing antibody; this might be a consequence
of being underpowered to detect modest changes in gene expression, because only 7% of the sequenced endocortical cells
were osteoblasts and a limited portion of their transcriptomes were sampled. We conclude that scRNA-Seq can detect
changes in cell abundance, identity, and gene expression in skeletally derived cells. In order to detect modest changes in oste-
oblast gene expression at the single-cell level in the appendicular skeleton, larger numbers of osteoblasts from endocortical
bone are required. © 2020 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.
KEY WORDS: OSTEOBLASTS; STROMAL/STEM CELLS; ANIMAL MODELS; STATISTICAL METHODS; CELLS OF BONE
Introduction
N
ew technologies enable investigators to characterize the
transcriptomes of thousands of individual cells in a single
experiment.(1–3) These technologies are collectively referred to
as single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-Seq) and have been used
to determine
the diversity
of cell types
in a complex
tissue,(1,4–7) identify novel cell types,(8,9) and identify cells at dif-
ferent stages of differentiation.(10–13) We determined the utility
of using scRNA-Seq to detect changes in the abundance, differ-
entiation, and transcriptional activity of cells recovered from
neonatal mouse calvarium and adult mouse long bone
endosteum.
The neonatal mouse calvarium is enriched for bone-forming
osteoblasts and their progenitors. A traditional approach in
studying osteoblast biology has therefore been to harvest and
culture calvarial cells. When supplemented with pro-osteogenic
media containing ascorbic acid and β-glycerophosphate, these
cells follow a well-deﬁned differentiation cascade toward a
mature osteoblast phenotype in vitro.(14–16) We performed
scRNA-Seq on freshly isolated calvarial cells that had been cul-
tured and induced to mineralize in vitro to identify similarities
and differences between calvarial cells in vivo and in vitro.
Received in original form November 19, 2019; revised form May 4, 2020; accepted May 13, 2020. Accepted manuscript online May 19, 2020.
Address correspondence to: Ugur M Ayturk, PhD, Hospital for Special Surgery, 535 East 70th Street, S Building 4th ﬂoor, New York, NY 10021, USA.
E-mail: ayturku@hss.edu
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research, Vol. 35, No. 10, October 2020, pp 1981–1991.
DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.4052
© 2020 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research
1981 n
Sclerostin (encoded by the gene SOST) is highly expressed by
osteocytes and inhibits WNT-signaling by binding to the recep-
tors low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5)
and LRP6.(17,18) In humans, SOST deﬁciency causes two high bone
mass disorders sclerosteosis and Van Buchem disease,(19,20)
which are recapitulated by Sost-null mice.(21) The administration
of an antibody that neutralizes sclerostin induces new bone for-
mation in multiple species, including humans.(22–26) Conse-
quently, an anti-sclerostin monoclonal antibody has recently
been approved by U.S. Food and Drug Administration to treat
patients with osteoporosis.(27) By performing bulk RNA sequenc-
ing on mRNA recovered from mouse cortical long bone, we
observed that mice with deﬁcient WNT-signaling (ie, Lrp5−/−)
had a lower abundance of transcripts associated with bone
anabolism (eg, Col1a1, Col1a2, and Bglap) compared to controls.
Conversely, we observed increased bone anabolic transcripts in
bulk RNA recovered from the cortical long bones of mice that
received sclerostin-neutralizing antibody (SclAbIII).(28,29) Because
bulk RNA sequencing cannot determine if a difference in tran-
script abundance is caused by a change in the number of osteo-
blasts or a change in the activity of individual osteoblasts, we
investigated whether scRNA-Seq could detect a change in the
number of osteoblasts and/or a change in an osteoblasts’
activity.
Subjects and Methods
Animals
All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Ani-
mal Care and Use Committees at Boston Children’s Hospital,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Weill Cornell Medical Col-
lege. The experimental design is depicted in Fig. 1. For calvarial
cell isolation (Fig. 1A), 12 postnatal day 4 (P4) pups born to a
CD-1 dam (Charles River Laboratories, Worcester, MA, USA; CRL
stock #2200) were euthanized by hypothermia and decapitation.
For long bone endocortical cell isolation, 11-week-old male
C57Bl/6J mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory
(Bar Harbor, ME, USA; Stock # 000664) and acclimatized for
1 week under standard housing conditions. Four mice were then
given two subcutaneous injections, 3 days apart, of PBS, and four
mice were similarly given subcutaneous injections of SclAbIII
(Amgen, Thousand Oaks, CA, USA; 25 mg/kg in PBS). Four days
after the second injection the animals were euthanized by CO2
inhalation. (Fig. 1B).
Calvarial cell isolation
Calvaria were recovered from P4 pups immediately after decap-
itation. Two biological replicates, each consisting of calvaria from
six pups were digested in 10 mL collagenase solution (1 mg/mL
Collagenase type I and type II (1:3 ratio; Worthington Biochemi-
cal Corp., Lakewood, NJ, USA), 1mM CaCl2, 0.1% bovine serum
albumin [BSA], 25mM HEPES in α-MEM) with gentle agitation at
37C inside a 5% CO2 incubator. The collagenase was replaced
every 15 min for ﬁve cycles, followed by 5mM EDTA (with 0.1%
BSA in PBS) treatment for one cycle, collagenase for one cycle,
and 5mM EDTA for the ﬁnal cycle. Cells released into the medium
during the ﬁnal collagenase cycle and EDTA cycle were com-
bined, mixed with an equal volume of cell culture medium
(α-MEM +10% FBS + 1% anti-mycotic) and centrifuged at 500g
for 10 min at 4C. Pelleted cells were resuspended in cell culture
medium and an aliquot from each sample was used to create an
scRNA-Seq library. The remaining cells in each sample were
seeded in six-well plates at 50,000 cells/well and allowed to reach
conﬂuence, while changing the media every 1 to 2 days.
Cells reached conﬂuence at day 5, and were then washed with
PBS, separated from the plate via trypsin treatment, transferred
to collagen-coated plates (Corning, Corning, NY, USA), and
supplemented
with
50 μg/mL
ascorbic
acid
and
1mM
β-glycerophosphate for another 7 days in order to initiate osteo-
genic differentiation. After a total of 12 days in culture, cells were
recovered by collagenase digestion for 30 min at 37C, pelleted
and resuspended in cell culture medium, and used to create
scRNA-Seq libraries. Biological replicates comprised originally
of calvaria from six pups each were used to create n = 2 freshly
isolated calvarial cell and n = 2 cultured calvarial cell scRNA-
Seq libraries.
Endosteal cell isolation
Femurs and tibias were collected immediately after euthanasia.
The distal and proximal epiphyses were cut away with a scalpel
and bones were centrifuged at >15,000 g for 1 min at room
temperature to remove bone marrow (Supplementary Fig. S1).
Periosteum was aseptically removed with a scalpel and the bone
was bisected lengthwise to expose the endosteum. Tibias and
femurs from each mouse were combined and incubated with
4 mL of collagenase solution (3 mg/mL Collagenase Type IV in
PBS; Worthington Biochemical Corp.) inside a 5% CO2 chamber
at 37C for 15 min under continuous agitation. Cells recovered
from this initial digestion were discarded because they con-
tained a large fraction of red blood cells (Supplementary Fig. S2).
The long bones were digested in two additional 4-mL collage-
nase solutions for 30 min each, and the cells recovered with each
digestion were mixed with an equal volume of α-MEM (w/10%
FBS + 1% anti-mycotic) and combined. After pelleting the cells
at 2000g for 5 min, the pellet was resuspended in 0.7 mL of
PBS (with 0.04% BSA) and then used to prepare scRNA-Seq librar-
ies. To verify that collagenase digestion efﬁciently removed cells
from the endosteal bone surface, the bones were ﬁxed in 10%
formalin, decalciﬁed with 10% EDTA, processed and embedded
in parafﬁn, sectioned and stained with hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E), and compared to similar sections from bones that had
been placed in PBS (Supplementary Fig. S3).
Single-cell capture and RNA-Seq library preparation
We used the Chromium Single Cell 30 system (v1 for the endos-
teal cells and v2 for the calvarial cells; 10X Genomics, Pleasanton,
CA, USA) to capture and sequence single cell mRNA, following
the manufacturer’s instructions. We loaded ~10,000 cells per
endosteal specimen and ~6000 cells per calvarial specimen. Indi-
vidual cells were captured inside oil droplets along with barcod-
ing beads, such that the mRNA contents of each cell were ligated
with
cell-speciﬁc
oligonucleotide-barcodes
(Supplementary
Fig. S1). Following single-cell capture, barcoded mRNA and
reverse-transcription solutions were immediately transferred to
a thermal cycler, wherein barcoded cDNA was generated. The
pooled cDNAs were then chemically fragmented, ligated with
sequencing adapters, ampliﬁed, and puriﬁed with magnetic
beads (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA). Quality checks for librar-
ies were performed with gel electrophoresis and TapeStation
analysis (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA).
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
n 1982
AYTURK ET AL.
Sequencing and data analysis
Single-cell RNA-Seq libraries were pooled and run on the Illu-
mina NextSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Data anal-
ysis was performed using the Cellranger pipeline (10X Genomics)
and Seurat pipeline.(30) Brieﬂy, raw sequence data were demulti-
plexed into specimen-speciﬁc bins, and mapped to the mouse
genome (mm10) with Spliced Transcripts Alignment to a Refer-
ence (STAR) aligner.(31) The mapped sequence data and the asso-
ciated unique molecular identiﬁers (UMIs) were used to
determine the number of captured cells, and the transcriptome
of each cell. We utilized the aggr function of the Cellranger pipe-
line to combine data from biological replicates prior to down-
stream analysis with Seurat.
We excluded cells that had higher-than-expected mitochon-
drial transcripts and transcriptional diversity (indicated by
the number of unique transcripts per cell). We combined
the fresh calvarial cell and cultured calvarial cell datasets, per-
formed t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE)
analysis,(1,30) and used the unbiased cluster-detection algorithm
of Seurat(30) to identify transcriptionally distinct cell populations.
We performed similar analyses with the SclAbIII-treated and PBS-
treated endocortical cell datasets. We regressed cell-cycle–
associated transcriptional signals from our data, because cells
going through mitotic division might be registered as distinct
populations. We then identiﬁed the transcripts that set each cell
population apart from the others. We quantiﬁed the number of
cells in each cell population, in a sample-speciﬁc manner. We
also quantiﬁed the mRNA expression levels in each cell popula-
tion with respect to their sample of origin, and ultimately the
treatment group of origin. We utilized the Monocle trajectory
analysis algorithm (v2) to infer potential lineage-relationships
between distinct clusters of cells with a semi-supervised
approach.(32)
Differential gene expression analysis between long-bone
endocortical cell specimens
We performed differential expression analysis between the
SclAbIII-treated and PBS-treated groups, in a cell cluster–speciﬁc
manner, using edgeR.(33) We determined signiﬁcance with
p < .05 after correction for multiple hypothesis testing. Because
scRNA-Seq can detect a limited portion of each cell’s transcrip-
tome, we imposed an additional detectability threshold, such
that >50% of the cells in either group had to have >0 expression
of the tested gene.
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting
We quantiﬁed macrophages among the retrieved calvarial cells
by ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). Following diges-
tion, live cells were counted, pelleted, and resuspended and
blocked (1:100 dilution; BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA;
#553142) in FACS buffer (PBS + 2% FBS + 2mM EDTA). Cells were
then incubated in the dark and on ice for 30 min, with an anti-
body cocktail containing primary antibodies for CD45 (1:100
dilution; BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA; #103128) and F4/80
(1:100 dilution; BioLegend; #123110), as well as 4,6-diamidino-
2-phenylindole (DAPI). Cells were then washed with FACS
buffer, resuspended, and analyzed using the BD FACSCanto
Fig 1 Single-cell RNA-Seq study design. (A) Two sets of biologic replicates, each composed of cells that had been isolated from CD-1 neonatal mouse
calvarium by collagenase-digestion and EDTA treatment (six calvaria/sample), were collected. An aliquot from each sample was immediately subjected
to single-cell RNA-Seq; the remaining cells were plated, allowed to reach conﬂuence, and cultured under osteogenic conditions for 12 days prior to under-
going single-cell RNA-Seq. (B) Twelve-week-old C57Bl/6J male mice received two SclAbIII (n = 4) or two PBS (n = 4) injections, 3 days apart. Four days later,
tibial and femoral diaphyses were collected from each mouse and the endocortical cells were recovered by collagenase digestion.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
SINGLE-CELL RNA SEQUENCING OF CALVARIAL 1983 n
system (BD Biosciences). Compensation was determined with
control beads (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA;
#01–2222-42) and gating was determined based on unstained
negative controls. Live single cells were evaluated to quantify
the proportion of CD45+ and F4/80+ cells. At each time-point
of interest, n = 3 replicates were tested with at least 100,000
events recorded per replicate.
Immunocytochemistry
Calvarial cells seeded in 48-well plates were used for the immu-
nocytochemistry protocol 7 days after conﬂuency. Brieﬂy, follow-
ing aspiration of medium, cells were rinsed twice with PBS at
room temperature. Cells were ﬁxed with cold 4% paraformalde-
hyde in PBS for 20 min and then washed with PBS three times.
Cells were blocked and permeabilized at room temperature for
30 min with 10% normal donkey serum (Jackson ImmunoRe-
search Laboratories, Inc., West Grove, PA, USA; 017-000-121)
and 0.3% Triton-X 100 in PBS. Rat anti-F4/80 antibody (1:500 dilu-
tion; Novus Biologicals, Littleton, CO, USA; NB600-404SS) was
then added to each well and plates were incubated in the dark
overnight at 4C. Negative-control wells were incubated with
only the block solution. Next day, each well was rinsed with 1×
PBS and donkey anti-rat A488 secondary antibody (1:200 dilu-
tion; Jackson ImmunoResearch; 712–545-150) was added to
each well. Following a 1-hour incubation at room temperature,
each well was again washed three times with PBS and DAPI
was added to the second wash as a nuclear counterstain. Sam-
ples were immediately imaged using an inverted microscope
(Zeiss Axio Observer 7; Zeiss, Inc., Thornwood, NY, USA)
equipped with a Zeiss Axiocam 506 camera at magniﬁcations
of ×10 and ×20 using the Zen Blue software (Zeiss). Collected
images were adjusted for brightness and contrast using Fiji soft-
ware (http://ﬁji.sc/).
Results
Calvarial cell recovery and sequencing
We collected ~3 million cells from each sample of six pooled
calvaria, aliquots of which were used to generate scRNA-Seq
libraries. We obtained an average of ~194 million reads from
the fresh and cultured calvarial single-cell libraries, which repre-
sented ~75,000 reads/cell, and ~ 2522 cells per library following
preprocessing and ﬁltering.
Seurat’s unbiased cluster detection algorithm detected 11 dis-
tinct cell populations within the freshly collected calvarial cells
and eight distinct cell populations within the cultured calvarial
cells (Fig. 2A). The majority of the fresh calvarial cell population
consisted of mesenchymal cells (clusters #3, #4, #7, #10, and
#17, which represented >75% of all cells in each sample). Clusters
#3, #4, and #7 exhibited transcriptional gradients in osteoblast
markers (e.g., Col1a1, Bglap, and Dmp1), suggesting they repre-
sent osteoblasts at different stages of differentiation. Consistent
with this inference, 18 transcription factors had a signiﬁcant
change in expression (p < .05, absolute fold change >2) between
clusters #3, #4, or #7, including Mef2c, Satb2, and Sp7
(Supplementary Fig. S4). Clusters #10 and #17 exhibited tran-
scriptional proﬁles compatible with chondrocytes and alpha
smooth muscle actin-expressing (αSMA+) smooth muscle cells,
respectively (Fig. 2B and 2C). The remaining fresh calvarial cell clus-
ters expressed transcripts found in endothelial cells (Pecam1/Cd31,
#18), red-blood-cells (Hbb-bs, #12 and #15), granulocytes (#14),
B-cells (#16), and myeloid cells (#13). A trajectory analysis of mes-
enchymal cells (#3, #4, #7, #10, and #17) suggested that the cells
constituting clusters #10 (chondrocytes) and #3 (osteoblast pre-
cursors) represent two separate branches of primitive cells at
the beginning of differentiation timeline, whereas cells constitut-
ing clusters #4 and #7 (osteoblasts) represent two branches of
differentiated cells at the end of pseudotime (a measure of
how far a cell has moved through biological progress)
(Supplementary Fig. S5).
scRNA-Seq indicates that calvarial cell populations and
transcriptomes change in vitro
Cultured calvarial cells clustered separately from freshly isolated
cells (Fig. 2B and 2C). Within the cultured calvarial cell popula-
tions, clusters #1, #2, #5, and #9 grouped near one another and
expressed transcripts (eg, Col1a1, Runx2, Sp7, and Alpl) that sug-
gest they are mesenchymal cells differentiating along the osteo-
blast lineage. However, in contrast to the freshly isolated calvarial
cells, cultured calvarial cells did not express transcripts typically
associated with mature osteoblasts, such as Bglap, Dmp1, or
Iﬁtm5, at a level detectable by single-cell RNA-Seq. These cluster-
ing patterns were not altered when we performed the t-SNE
analysis on freshly isolated and cultured cells separately
(Supplementary Fig. S6). Also, whereas only 10% and 12% of
freshly isolated calvarial cells appeared hematopoietic in ori-
gin (clusters #12 to #16, as indicated by the expression of tran-
scripts including Csf1r and Ptprc), these percentages increased
to 45% and 48% in the cultured cells (clusters #0 and #6),
respectively. We did not observe cell death or Casp3 expres-
sion in mesenchymal cells in culture. Instead, 6% of mesen-
chymal cells and 10% of hematopoietic cells expressed the
cell proliferation-associated transcript Mki67, suggesting both
cell types proliferated in culture.
In order to verify the increase in hematopoietic cells (macro-
phages in particular) in culture found by scRNA-Seq, we per-
formed FACS analysis of freshly retrieved and cultured calvarial
cells (Fig. 3). Consistent with the scRNA-Seq data, we found
CD45+, F4/80+ macrophages represent 2% of all cells prior to cul-
ture and ~51% of all cells 12 days later (Fig. 3A). We additionally
veriﬁed the increased presence of macrophages after in vitro cul-
ture by immunostaining calvarial cells with a F4/80-recognizing
antibody (Fig. 3B).
Long-bone endocortical cell recovery and sequencing
H&E staining indicated that our collagenase cell recovery
method removed nearly all endosteal surface cells, but did not
remove embedded osteoblasts or osteocytes (Supplementary
Fig. S3). We recovered ~1 million cells from the pooled tibias
and femurs of individual mice. We generated ~65 million reads
per scRNA-Seq library, which after deconvolution, alignment,
and cell-speciﬁc gene expression represented an average of
~47,000 reads/cell, and 1053 cells/mouse following ﬁltering for
outlier cells based on mitochondrial and unique transcript
content.
Seurat’s unbiased cluster detection algorithm deﬁned 22
cell populations within the long-bone endocortical samples of
PBS-treated and SclAbIII-treated mice (Fig. 4A). We used the
single-cell transcriptome database (speciﬁcally bone marrow
scRNA-Seq data) developed by the Tabula Muris Consortium(34)
to assign identities to these populations. Three cell clusters (#6,
#7, and #14) from the long-bone endocortical cell libraries,
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
n 1984
AYTURK ET AL.
representing ~13% of the cells, had transcriptional proﬁles con-
sistent with their being mesenchymal cells and osteoblasts
(Fig. 4B,C). The most abundant cell population among these,
cluster #6 contains periarteriolar stromal cells (also known as
PαS cells(35)), which express Col1a1, Pdgfra, and Ly6a/Sca1.
Clusters #7 and #14, representing ~7% of the sequenced endo-
cortical cells in each animal, are contiguous and express
osteoblast-associated transcripts (eg, Bglap, Iﬁtm5, and Dmp1).
Differences in expression between these two clusters suggest
cluster #14 comprises more mature osteoblasts (Fig. 4B,C).
In marked contrast to freshly recovered calvarial cells, the
majority of cells (>80%) that we recovered from cortical long
bone were hematopoietic in origin. Four clusters, representing
~40%
of
the
cells,
express
transcripts
associated
with
Fig 2 Cell clusters identiﬁed among cultured and fresh calvarial cells. (A) t-SNE plot wherein each dot represents a single cell, and cells sharing the same
color code indicate discrete populations of transcriptionally similar cells. Cultured and freshly isolated cells form separate clusters (dashed line). Of note,
cells in cluster #8 express transcripts associated with mesenchymal (eg, Col1a1, Acta2) and hematopoietic (Ptprc and Csf1r) lineages, have higher than
expected UMI counts, and likely represent artifact due to two cell types being captured in a single droplet. (B) Top 10 transcript markers corresponding
to each cell cluster as determined by Seurat. (C) Heat maps of gene expression (left) and associated violin plots (right) indicate cluster-speciﬁc expression
of representative genes. Osteoblast-lineage cells among freshly isolated calvarial cells are distinctly marked by the expression of Mfap4 (#3), Postn (#4), and
Bglap (#7). Similarly, cultured osteoblast-lineage cells express Acta2 and Col1a1 (#1, #2, #5, and #9), whereas hematopoietic cells express Csf1r and Ptprc
(#0, #6, and #8). OB = osteoblast.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
SINGLE-CELL RNA SEQUENCING OF CALVARIAL 1985 n
granulocytes and pro-granulocytes. Six clusters, representing
~30% of the cells express transcripts associated with T cells, B
cells, neutrophils, basophils, dendritic cells, and macrophages.
Two clusters, representing ~12% of the cells, express transcripts
associated with erythroblasts and erythrocytes.
Two other previously described cell types, Cxcl12-Abundant-
Reticular (CAR) cells(36) and αSMA+ smooth muscle cells(37) com-
prise clusters #21 and #19, respectively (Fig. 4C). Interestingly,
cells in cluster #21 express transcripts seen in mature osteoblasts
(eg, Ibsp, Serpinh1/Hsp47, Gja1/Connexin43, Pcolce), but they do
not express Col1a1 or Bglap at a level detectable by scRNA-Seq
(Supplementary Table S1).
No discernible effect of SclAbIII treatment on endocortical
cells measured by scRNA-Seq
There was no discernible difference in the relative proportions of
the different cell clusters from the long bones of PBS and
SclAbIII-treated mice (Fig. 5A). We did not identify mesenchymal
cells undergoing cell-cycling in either group. We also did not
observe a signiﬁcant difference in the single-cell expression
levels of osteoblast-associated transcripts such as Col1a1, Bglap,
and Cpz in clusters #7 or #14 between PBS-treated and SclAbIII-
treated mice (Fig. 5B). Instead, we only detected signiﬁcantly
altered expression of nine protein-coding, non-ribosomal, tran-
scripts in cluster #7 (Hint1, Oaz1, Fos, H3f3b, Cst3, Tceb2, Sep15,
Dynll1, and Omd) and ﬁve protein-coding, non-ribosomal, tran-
scripts in cluster #14 (Cst3, Fau, Ftl1, Gpx3, and Loxl2) following
SclAbIII treatment.
Osteoblasts freshly isolated from calvaria and cortical long
bone have similar transcriptomes
In contrast to the scRNA-Seq data that indicated freshly iso-
lated calvarial osteoblasts had different transcriptomes from
those of cultured calvarial osteoblasts (Fig. 2A), we found
strong concordance when we compared the transcriptomes
of freshly isolated osteoblasts from calvaria and long bone
(Fig. 6A and 6B).
Robustness of bone-derived sc RNA-Seq data
Obtaining endocortical cells from eight individual mice allowed us
to assess the consistency with which we recovered different cell
types and to determine whether gene expression within a cell
type correlated between animals. We observed that the relative
proportions of cell types were similar across all animals and there
was a high Pearson correlation coefﬁcient between the transcrip-
tomes of each cluster across animals (Supplementary Fig. S7).
The only exceptions to these observations are for clusters #19
and #21 where lower correlations across replicates were
observed (R2 range, 0.37–0.79), likely due to the low number
Fig 3 FACS and immunocytochemistry analyses detect macrophages among cultured calvarial cells. (A) Representative FACS plots indicate a signiﬁcant
expansion of CD45+, F4/80+ macrophages in calvarial cell culture. (B) Fluorescent imaging of cultured calvarial cells at magniﬁcation ×10 (left) and ×20
(right) depict a substantial number of macrophages stained with the F4/80-recognizing antibody. Scale bar = 50 μm. FACS = ﬂuorescence-activated cell
sorting.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
n 1986
AYTURK ET AL.
of cells (<90 cells) that were contained in these clusters.
Although we only had two biologic replicates to compare for
the freshly obtained calvarial cells, these specimens also were
closely matched, and we calculated high Pearson correlation
coefﬁcients when transcriptomes of each cluster were com-
pared between samples. (Supplementary Fig. S8). Importantly,
we did not control for sex when collecting and culturing cal-
varial cells. However, we did not observe a clustering bias by
sex, as measured by Xist-expression which appears uniform
across the calvarial cells.
Using whole-tissue RNA-Seq, we had previously identiﬁed
a set of transcripts, whose abundances were dramatically ele-
vated when long-bone tissue was exposed to collagenase.(28)
These transcripts included Fos, Fosb, Jun, and Il6, possibly indicat-
ing a stress response. When we interrogated our scRNA-Seq data,
we found that these stress response transcripts were at low or
Fig 4 Endosteal cell clusters detected by scRNA-Seq. (A) t-SNE plot wherein each dot represents a single cell, and cells sharing the same color code indi-
cate discrete populations of transcriptionally similar cells. Five clusters of cells (highlighted inside the dashed line) represent mesenchymal progenitors
and osteoblasts at different stages of differentiation, as indicated by their individual expression proﬁles depicted in B and C. (B) Top 10 transcript markers
corresponding to each of the mesenchymal and endothelial cell clusters as determined by Seurat. (C) Heat maps of gene expression (left) and associated
violin plots (right) indicate cluster-speciﬁc expression of representative genes. Increasing expression of Col1a1 and Bglap across clusters #7 and #14 sug-
gest that these clusters represent osteoblasts. Cells in cluster #6 are marked by Pdgfra and Ly6a/Sca1 expression, cluster #21 is marked by Lepr and high
levels of Cxcl12 expression, cluster #12 is marked by Ly6a/Sca1 expression, and cluster #19 is marked by Acta2/αSMA expression. Ob = osteoblast.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
SINGLE-CELL RNA SEQUENCING OF CALVARIAL 1987 n
undetectable levels (Supplementary Figs. S9 and S10, Supple-
mentary Table S1). We infer that the cells expressing these
stress-response transcripts were not sampled by scRNA-Seq,
most likely because cells that remained embedded express these
transcripts.
Discussion
Single-cell RNA-Seq can identify discrete cell types in cultured
cells and in complex tissues, based on each individual cell’s tran-
scriptome. The ability to interrogate the transcriptomes of large
numbers of individual cells has led to the discovery of previously
unrecognized cell types(8,9) and has detected changes in
cellular diversity in response to genetic or environmental
perturbation.(38–40) Recovering individual cells from skeletal tis-
sue is more challenging than from cultured cells or from other
tissues whose cells can be easily separated by brief digestion
and/or physical disruption. For this reason, in vitro studies of
osteoblast differentiation and mineralization typically expand
cells in culture and then chemically induce matrix mineraliza-
tion.(15,16) In order to study freshly isolated osteoblasts or their
precursors, skeletal tissues need to be subjected to sequential
enzymatic digestions for an hour or longer.(14,15,41)
We used scRNA-Seq to assess similarities and differences
between osteoblasts that were freshly obtained from calvaria
versus long-bone endocortices, between fresh calvarial cells
and those that had been expanded in culture, and between
long-bone endocortical cells from PBS-treated and SclAbIII-
treated animals. We observed greater enrichment for osteoblasts
that had been freshly isolated from calvaria compared to those
that had been freshly isolated from long-bone endocortices.
More than 40% of calvarial cells had transcriptomes expected
of osteoblasts, but only 7% of endocortical cells exhibited these
proﬁles (Figs. 2A, 4A). Reassuringly, however, the transcriptomes
of freshly isolated calvarial and endocortical osteoblasts were
highly similar, suggesting that osteoblast precursors converge
to a shared transcriptional phenotype during differentiation,
regardless of their origin (Fig. 6). Although we cannot exclude
the possibility that many of these similarities are solely due to
collagenase-induced transcription, we think this is unlikely
because most of the transcripts used to deﬁne these cells as oste-
oblasts are present in cortical bone bulk RNA-Seq data and are
seen in osteoblasts in situ.(28) Consistent with our ﬁndings, other
recent studies on bone marrow stromal cells have identiﬁed cell
populations that are highly similar to those we observed, includ-
ing multiple osteoblast populations (Bglap-high, Iﬁtm5+, Dmp1+,
and Bglap-low, Postn+, Col3a1+ populations), smooth muscle
cells (Acta2+, Tagln+), CAR cells (Lepr+, Cxcl12+, Kitl+, Gdpd2+)
and PαS cells (Pdgfra+, Ly6a+).(4,6) Finally, we observed high
Pearson correlation coefﬁcients within individual cell popula-
tions from two freshly collected or cultured calvarial specimens
and eight endocortical specimens, indicating that we are repro-
ducibly recovering cells (Supplementary Figs. S7, S8, S11, and
S12). Calvarial cells collected after 120 min (ie, eight cycles) of
enzymatic digestion from P4 mice are enriched for chondro-
cytes, osteoblasts, and their precursors. Although the primary
mechanism of mineralization in calvaria is intramembranous
ossiﬁcation, cartilage has previously been observed in parietal
bones,(42,43) which is likely the source of chondrocytes in our
Fig 5 Reproducibility of endocortical scRNA-Seq data across biologic replicates. (A) Dot plots depict the percentage of cells in each cluster across endo-
cortical cells collected from eight mice (n = 4 SclAbIII-treated and n = 4 PBS-treated), suggesting high reproducibility in the quantiﬁcation of transcription-
ally distinct cells. (B) Violin plots show no signiﬁcant difference in the expression of three genes associated with osteoblast anabolism (Col1a1, Bglap, and
Cpz) due to SclAbIII treatment in the mesenchymal or osteoblast cell clusters.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
n 1988
AYTURK ET AL.
dataset. In our hands, ~6% of the freshly isolated cells are macro-
phages (cluster #13, Fig. 2A), based on the expression of genes
such as Ptprc/Cd45, Adgre1 (also known as F4/80), Cd68, and Csf1r.
However, after we expanded the calvarial cells in culture and
began to induce differentiation, we found that 34% of the cells
were macrophages (clusters #0 and #6). Our results are consis-
tent with those of Chang et al.,(44) who describe a population
of cells they termed osteomacs, which accounted for ~16% of
freshly collected calvarial cells and proliferated in culture. Colony
stimulating factor 1 (CSF1) had previously been proposed as a medi-
ator of signaling between osteoblasts and osteomacs(45,46); consis-
tent with this model, Csf1 and Csf1r expression distinctly mark
cells we transcriptionally identiﬁed as osteoblasts and macro-
phages, respectively. Moreover, our scRNA-Seq data identiﬁes
other cell type–speciﬁc transcripts (such as Cd68, Cd14, Ccl9) that
may also be involved in paracrine signaling. We did not detect
Bglap-expressing cells among the calvarial osteoblasts that had
been expanded in culture and induced to differentiate. This con-
trasts with freshly isolated calvarial cells that exhibited abundant
Bglap expression. These data are consistent with previous
studies that indicate freshly isolated calvarial osteoblasts initially
dedifferentiate in vitro.(14,47,48)
Although we previously used bulk RNA-Seq of cortical bone
to observe signiﬁcant increases in transcripts associated with
bone anabolism in mice given a short course of SclAbIII,(29) we
did not observe an increase using scRNA-Seq in our long-bone
endocortical samples. Several factors may account for this dis-
cordance. First, we administered four doses of neutralizing anti-
body for our bulk RNA-Seq studies but only two doses for the
scRNA-Seq study. Second, our scRNA-Seq data were derived
from osteoblasts, whereas our earlier bulk RNA-Seq data were
enriched for osteocytes. However, other investigators have
reported changes following short-term treatment with SclAbIII
and the effects of SclAbIII on osteoblasts.(49) Therefore, the most
likely explanation for our ﬁndings is that our endosteal cell
recovery
protocol
was
underpowered
to
detect
modest
increases in gene expression. Bulk RNA-Seq sampled millions
of cells per mouse and detected the expression of ~10,000
genes. In contrast, our scRNA-Seq data indicated we recovered
an average of only 75 osteoblasts/mouse (6% of all recovered
Fig 6 High concordance between the transcriptomes of freshly isolated calvarial and long bone endocortical osteoblasts. (A) Heat map depicts the mean
expression levels of the top 40 gene markers for calvarial osteoblast cluster #7, across the osteoblast-lineage cells in endosteal and calvarial biological
replicates. (B) Violin plots depict the changes in the expression of top osteoblast markers Bglap, Ibsp, Dmp1, and Iﬁtm5 across the long bone endosteal
(left) and calvarial (right) cell clusters.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
SINGLE-CELL RNA SEQUENCING OF CALVARIAL 1989 n
cells) with each cell expressing ~1500 genes (Supplementary
Fig. S13). Therefore, with only 75 osteoblasts/mouse and four
biologic replicates/treatment group, modest changes in gene
expression (eg, ~1.2-fold change in Bglap, Bglap2, Col1a1, and
Col1a2 expression) did not reach statistical signiﬁcance. How-
ever, if the scRNA-Seq data remained consistent and we had
sampled 250 osteoblasts/mouse, then these data would have
become statistically signiﬁcant, even after controlling for multi-
ple hypothesis testing. Therefore, more efﬁcient osteoblast
enrichment protocols will be needed to make scRNA-Seq sensi-
tive for detecting modest gene expression changes in response
to genetic, pharmacologic, or environmental perturbations. One
possible approach to this could be to utilize existing reporter
mouse strains (such as Bglap.eGFP(50) or 2.3ColGFP(51)) and
enrich for ﬂuorescently-labeled osteoblasts with ﬂow cytometry
following enzymatic digestion of bone tissue.
Increasing sample size also needs to be considered when
employing scRNA-Seq to identify changes in the distribution
of cell types following genetic, pharmacologic, or environmen-
tal perturbations. For example, reactivation of bone-lining cells
to become active osteoblasts has previously been reported fol-
lowing SclAbIII administration in mice.(49) Assuming these cells
are represented by cluster #14 in our endocortical bone scRNA-
Seq datasets, one-way ANOVA analyses of our existing data
indicate we would need 18 mice/treatment group to observe
a signiﬁcant difference after controlling for multiple hypothesis
testing.
In conclusion, we describe the use of scRNA-Seq to show
that freshly recovered osteoblasts from newborn calvaria and
adult endocortical long bone have highly correlated transcrip-
tomes, and that freshly isolated calvarial cells undergo changes
in
their
relative
abundances
and
transcriptomes
when
expanded and differentiated in vitro. We found that scRNA-
Seq is not yet sensitive for detecting changes in osteoblast
gene expression as bulk RNA-Seq. However, as better methods
for recovering and enriching for osteoblasts from endocortical
samples are developed, and greater depths of coverage for
transcripts from individual cells are obtained, we anticipate
scRNA-Seq will become a useful tool for monitoring the effects
of genetic, environmental, and pharmacologic perturbations
on endocortical bone cells.
Disclosures
RW was senior scientist to Medimaps during conducting this
investigation. The authors have no conﬂicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the NIH (National Institute
of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases [NIAMS] P30
AR066261, R01 AR053237, R01 AR064231, and R21AR067388), Hos-
pital for Special Surgery institutional funds and additional support
from The Tow Foundation for the David Z. Rosenzweig Genomics
Center at HSS.
Authors’ roles: Study design: UMA, PDP and MLW. Study con-
duct and data collection: UMA, JPS, DGA, ESS, AV and CMJ. Data
analysis: UMA, DGA and ESS. Data interpretation: UMA, DGA, PDP
and MLW. Drafting manuscript: UMA and MLW. Approving ﬁnal
version of manuscript: UMA, JPS, DGA, ESS, AV, CMJ, PDP and
MLW. UMA takes responsibility for the integrity of the data
analysis.
Peer Review
The peer review history for this article is available at https://
publons.com/publon/10.1002/jbmr.4052.
References
1. Macosko EZ, Basu A, Satija R, et al. Highly parallel genome-wide
expression proﬁling of individual cells using nanoliter droplets. Cell.
2015;161(5):1202–14.
2. Zheng GXY, Terry JM, Belgrader P, et al. Massively parallel digital tran-
scriptional proﬁling of single cells. Nat Commun. 2017;8:14049.
3. Zilionis R, Nainys J, Veres A, et al. Single-cell barcoding and sequenc-
ing using droplet microﬂuidics. Nat Protoc. 2017;12(1):44–73.
4. Baryawno N, Przybylski D, Kowalczyk MS, et al. A cellular taxonomy of
the bone marrow stroma in homeostasis and leukemia. Cell. 2019;
177(7):1915–32.e16.
5. Shekhar K, Lapan SW, Whitney IE, et al. Comprehensive classiﬁcation
of retinal bipolar neurons by single-cell transcriptomics. Cell. 2016;
166(5):1308–23.e30.
6. Tikhonova AN, Dolgalev I, Hu H, et al. The bone marrow microenvi-
ronment at single-cell resolution. Nature. 2019;569(7755):222–8.
7. Wolock SL, Krishnan I, Tenen DE, et al. Mapping distinct bone marrow
niche populations and their differentiation paths. Cell Rep. 2019;28
(2):302–11.e5.
8. Debnath S, Yallowitz AR, McCormick J, et al. Discovery of a periosteal
stem cell mediating intramembranous bone formation. Nature. 2018;
562(7725):133–9.
9. Plasschaert LW, Žilionis R, Choo-Wing R, et al. A single-cell atlas of the
airway epithelium reveals the CFTR-rich pulmonary ionocyte. Nature.
2018;560(7718):377–81.
10. Chan MM, Smith ZD, Grosswendt S, et al. Molecular recording of
mammalian embryogenesis. Nature. 2019;570(7759):77–82.
11. Kanton S, Boyle MJ, He Z, et al. Organoid single-cell genomic atlas
uncovers human-speciﬁc features of brain development. Nature.
2019;574(7778):418–22.
12. Pijuan-Sala B, Grifﬁths JA, Guibentif C, et al. A single-cell molecular
map of mouse gastrulation and early organogenesis. Nature. 2019;
566(7745):490–5.
13. Popescu DM, Botting RA, Stephenson E, et al. Decoding human fetal
liver haematopoiesis. Nature. 2019;574(7778):365–71.
14. Zhong ZA, Ethen NJ, Williams BO. Use of primary calvarial osteoblasts
to evaluate the function of Wnt signaling in osteogenesis. Methods
Mol Biol. 2016;1481:119–25.
15. Lian JB, Stein GS. Development of the osteoblast phenotype: molec-
ular mechanisms mediating osteoblast growth and differentiation.
Iowa Orthop J. 1995;15:118–40.
16. Lynch MP, Stein JL, Stein GS, Lian GS. The inﬂuence of type I collagen
on the development and maintenance of the osteoblast phenotype
in primary and passaged rat calvarial osteoblasts: modiﬁcation of
expression of genes supporting cell growth, adhesion, and extracel-
lular matrix mineralization. Exp Cell Res. 1995;216(1):35–45.
17. Li X, Zhang Y, Kang H, et al. Sclerostin binds to LRP5/6 and antago-
nizes canonical Wnt signaling. J Biol Chem. 2005;280(20):19883–7.
18. Semenov M, Tamai K, He X. SOST is a ligand for LRP5/LRP6 and a Wnt
signaling inhibitor. J Biol Chem. 2005;280(29):26770–5.
19. Balemans W, Ebeling M, Patel A, et al. Increased bone density in scler-
osteosis is due to the deﬁciency of a novel secreted protein (SOST).
Hum Mol Genet. 2001;10(5):537–43.
20. Brunkow ME, Gardner JC, Van Ness A, et al. Bone dysplasia sclerosteo-
sis results from loss of the SOST gene product, a novel cystine knot-
containing protein. Am J Hum Genet. 2001;68(3):577–89.
21. Li X, Ominsky MS, Niu QT, et al. Targeted deletion of the sclerostin
gene in mice results in increased bone formation and bone strength.
J Bone Miner Res. 2008;23(6):860–9.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
n 1990
AYTURK ET AL.
22. Li X, et al. Sclerostin antibody treatment increases bone formation,
bone mass, and bone strength in a rat model of postmenopausal
osteoporosis. J Bone Miner Res. 2009;24(4):578–88.
23. Li X, et al. Inhibition of sclerostin by monoclonal antibody increases
bone formation, bone mass, and bone strength in aged male rats.
J Bone Miner Res. 2010;25(12):2647–56.
24. Marenzana M, Greenslade K, Eddleston A, et al. Sclerostin antibody
treatment enhances bone strength but does not prevent growth
retardation in young mice treated with dexamethasone. Arthritis
Rheum. 2011;63(8):2385–95.
25. Ominsky MS, Vlasseros F, Jolette J, et al. Two doses of sclerostin anti-
body in cynomolgus monkeys increases bone formation, bone min-
eral density, and bone strength. J Bone Miner Res. 2010;25(5):948–59.
26. Padhi D, Jang G, Stouch B, Fang L, Posvar E. Single-dose, placebo-
controlled, randomized study of AMG 785, a sclerostin monoclonal
antibody. J Bone Miner Res. 2011;26(1):19–26.
27. Markham A. Romosozumab: ﬁrst global approval. Drugs. 2019;79(4):
471–6.
28. Ayturk UM, Jacobsen CM, Christodoulou DC, et al. An RNA-seq proto-
col to identify mRNA expression changes in mouse diaphyseal bone:
applications in mice with bone property altering Lrp5 mutations.
J Bone Miner Res. 2013;28(10):2081–93.
29. Kedlaya R, Veera S, Horan DJ, et al. Sclerostin inhibition reverses skel-
etal fragility in an Lrp5-deﬁcient mouse model of OPPG syndrome.
Sci Transl Med. 2013;5(211):211ra158.
30. Butler A, Hoffman P, Smibert P, Papalexi E, Satija R. Integrating single-
cell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies,
and species. Nat Biotechnol. 2018;36(5):411–20.
31. Dobin A, Davis CA, Schlesinger F, et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-
seq aligner. Bioinformatics. 2013;29(1):15–21.
32. Qiu X, Mao Q, Tang Y, et al. Reversed graph embedding resolves com-
plex single-cell trajectories. Nat Methods. 2017;14(10):979–82.
33. Robinson MD, McCarthy DJ, Smyth GK. edgeR: a bioconductor pack-
age for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression
data. Bioinformatics. 2010;26(1):139–40.
34. Tabula Muris Consortium. Single-cell transcriptomics of 20 mouse
organs creates a Tabula Muris. Nature. 2018;562(7727):367–72.
35. Morikawa S, Mabuchi Y, Kubota Y, et al. Prospective identiﬁcation,
isolation, and systemic transplantation of multipotent mesenchymal
stem cells in murine bone marrow. J Exp Med. 2009;206(11):2483–96.
36. Zhou BO, Yue R, Murphy MM, Peyer JG, Morrison SJ. Leptin-receptor-
expressing mesenchymal stromal cells represent the main source of
bone formed by adult bone marrow. Cell Stem Cell. 2014;15(2):
154–68.
37. Matthews BG, Torreggiani E, Roeder E, Matic I, Grcevic D, Kalajzic I.
Osteogenic potential of alpha smooth muscle actin expressing mus-
cle resident progenitor cells. Bone. 2016;84:69–77.
38. Klaus J, Kanton S, Kyrousi C, et al. Altered neuronal migratory trajec-
tories in human cerebral organoids derived from individuals with
neuronal heterotopia. Nat Med. 2019;25(4):561–8.
39. Sharir A, Marangoni P, Zilionis R, et al. A large pool of actively cycling
progenitors orchestrates self-renewal and injury repair of an ectoder-
mal appendage. Nat Cell Biol. 2019;21(9):1102–12.
40. Szczerba BM, Castro-Giner F, Vetter M, et al. Neutrophils escort circu-
lating tumour cells to enable cell cycle progression. Nature. 2019;566
(7745):553–7.
41. Greenblatt MB, Ono N, Ayturk UM, Debnath S, Lalani S. The unmixing
problem: a guide to applying single-cell RNA sequencing to bone.
J Bone Miner Res. 2019;34(7):1207–19.
42. Holmbeck K, et al. MT1-MMP-deﬁcient mice develop dwarﬁsm,
osteopenia, arthritis, and connective tissue disease due to inade-
quate collagen turnover. Cell. 1999;99(1):81–92.
43. Zhou H, Mak W, Kalak R, et al. Glucocorticoid-dependent Wnt signal-
ing by mature osteoblasts is a key regulator of cranial skeletal devel-
opment in mice. Development. 2009;136(3):427–36.
44. Chang MK, Raggatt LJ, Alexander KA, et al. Osteal tissue macro-
phages are intercalated throughout human and mouse bone lining
tissues and regulate osteoblast function in vitro and in vivo.
J Immunol. 2008;181(2):1232–44.
45. Alexander KA, Chang MK, Maylin ER, et al. Osteal macrophages pro-
mote in vivo intramembranous bone healing in a mouse tibial injury
model. J Bone Miner Res. 2011;26(7):1517–32.
46. Winkler IG, Sims NA, Pettit AR, et al. Bone marrow macrophages
maintain hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) niches and their depletion
mobilizes HSCs. Blood. 2010;116(23):4815–28.
47. Jonason JH, O’Keefe RJ. Isolation and culture of neonatal mouse cal-
varial osteoblasts. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1130:295–305.
48. Aubin JE, Liu F, Malaval L, Gupta AK. Osteoblast and chondroblast dif-
ferentiation. Bone. 1995;17(2 Suppl):77S–83S.
49. Kim SW, Lu Y, Williams EA, et al. Sclerostin antibody administration
converts bone lining cells into active osteoblasts. J Bone Miner Res.
2017;32(5):892–901.
50. Bilic-Curcic I, Kronenberg M, Jiang X, et al. Visualizing levels of osteoblast
differentiation by a two-color promoter-GFP strategy: type I collagen-
GFPcyan and osteocalcin-GFPtpz. Genesis. 2005;43(2):87–98.
51. Kalajzic I, Kalajzic Z, Kaliterna M, et al. Use of type I collagen green
ﬂuorescent protein transgenes to identify subpopulations of cells
at different stages of the osteoblast lineage. J Bone Miner Res.
2002;17(1):15–25.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
SINGLE-CELL RNA SEQUENCING OF CALVARIAL 1991 n

===== Jeong2019_SciRep_lncRNA+VascularCalcification =====

1
Scientific Reports |          (2019) 9:5848  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-42283-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Long noncoding RNAs in vascular 
smooth muscle cells regulate 
vascular calcification
Geon Jeong1,2,3, Duk-Hwa Kwon1,4, Sera Shin1,4, Nakwon Choe1,4, Juhee Ryu1,2,3,4, 
 Yeong-Hwan Lim1,2,3, Jaetaek Kim1,5, Woo Jin Park1,6, Hyun Kook1,3,4 & Young-Kook Kim   1,2,3
Vascular calcification is characterized by the accumulation of hydroxyapatite crystals, which is a result 
of aberrant mineral metabolism. Although many clinical studies have reported its adverse effects on 
cardiovascular morbidity, the molecular mechanism of vascular calcification, especially the involvement 
of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), is not yet reported. From the transcriptomic analysis, we discovered 
hundreds of lncRNAs differentially expressed in rat vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) treated with 
inorganic phosphate, which mimics vascular calcification. We focused on Lrrc75a-as1 and elucidated 
its transcript structure and confirmed its cytoplasmic localization. Our results showed that calcium 
deposition was elevated after knockdown of Lrrc75a-as1, while its overexpression inhibited calcium 
accumulation in A10 cells. In addition, Lrrc75a-as1 attenuated VSMCs calcification by decreasing 
the expression of osteoblast-related factors. These findings suggest that Lrrc75a-as1 acts as a 
negative regulator of vascular calcification, and may serve as a possible therapeutic target in vascular 
calcification.
Vascular calcification is caused by an imbalance of mineral metabolism, especially calcium phosphate metabo-
lism1. It decreases vessel wall tension and increases vascular stiffness, thereby increasing the risk of myocardial 
ischemia, heart failure, arrhythmias, and other cardiovascular diseases2. Vascular calcification includes several 
major types including medial arterial calcification, intimal atherosclerosis, and arterial calcification of chronic 
kidney diseases3. Medial arterial calcification is characterized by extensive calcium precipitation in the arterial 
tunica media, which increases vessel stiffness. Intimal atherosclerosis is initiated by production of eccentric ath-
erosclerosis plaque, followed by hyperplasia of the intimal smooth muscle cells that leads to reduction of the 
lumen area. Arterial calcification of chronic kidney diseases exhibits features of both medial calcification and 
intimal atherosclerosis. Commonly, vascular calcification results in loss of vessel elasticity and negatively affects 
cardiovascular hemodynamics3,4. Accordingly, a detailed understanding of the regulatory mechanism of vascular 
calcification is crucial for the treatment of diverse cardiovascular diseases.
Previously, vascular calcification was regarded as a passive consequence of degenerative diseases, but recent 
studies have demonstrated that as an active process, vascular calcification shares several features of bone forma-
tion5. Among the osteoblast-related factors, Runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), bone morphogenetic 
proteins (BMPs), and msh homeobox 2 (Msx2) have been shown to be upregulated in calcified vessels. On the 
contrary, contractile markers, such as smooth muscle 22 alpha and alpha smooth muscle actin, which retain the 
myofilament structure, are downregulated in calcified vessels6. This indicates that mature vascular smooth muscle 
cells (VSMCs) can alter their phenotype from a contractile to an osteoblastic/chondrogenic phenotype, a phe-
nomenon called as ‘phenotype switching’7.
1Basic Research Laboratory for Cardiac Remodeling Research Laboratory, Chonnam National University 
Medical School, Jeollanam-do, Republic of Korea. 2Department of Biochemistry, Chonnam National University 
Medical School, Hwasun, Jeollanam-do, 58128, Republic of Korea. 3Center for Creative Biomedical Scientists, 
Chonnam National University Medical School, Hwasun, Jeollanam-do, 58128, Republic of Korea. 4Department of 
Pharmacology, Chonnam National University Medical School, Hwasun, Jeollanam-do, 58128, Republic of Korea. 
5Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Chung-Ang 
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 6College of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), 
Gwangju, Republic of Korea. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to H.K. (email: 
kookhyun@jnu.ac.kr) or Y.-K.K. (email: ykk@jnu.ac.kr)
Received: 21 November 2018
Accepted: 27 March 2019
Published: xx xx xxxx
OPEN
2
Scientific Reports |          (2019) 9:5848  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-42283-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
The importance of noncoding RNA was emphasized in the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) 
project, where it was revealed that the majority of the human genome consists of noncoding regions; however, 
diverse transcripts are produced from this region8,9. Recent studies have demonstrated that a variety of noncoding 
RNAs are involved in developmental processes, cellular physiology, and in the progression of various diseases10–12. 
Noncoding RNAs are classified into small or long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) depending on their nucleotide 
(nt) length. LncRNAs are longer than 200 nt and share many features of mRNAs, except for their protein-coding 
potential. Most lncRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II, capped, and spliced, and some of them are pol-
yadenylated11,13. The functions of lncRNAs are poorly understood compared to those of small noncoding RNAs 
due to their diverse and complex working mechanism14. The main working mechanism of lncRNAs is through 
interaction with diverse proteins and microRNAs (miRNAs). Especially, it has been suggested that lncRNAs are 
efficient regulators of protein functions11,15. One protein consisting of 100 amino acids was predicted to capture 
one or two proteins, while a 100 nt-long RNA would trap around five to ten proteins at the same time, suggesting 
that lncRNAs are efficient regulator of proteins. Moreover, in the cytoplasm, lncRNAs can capture many miRNAs 
at the same time due to their long sequences. Since a number of lncRNAs have been found that are comparable to 
a number of mRNA genes, it can be expected that lncRNAs may have important roles in diverse cellular processes 
and many diseases.
While many studies have identified the function of miRNAs in cardiovascular diseases, the role of lncRNAs 
in cardiovascular diseases, including vascular calcification is less understood16,17. Until now, there is no lncRNA 
that has been reported to be involved in vascular calcification. It was reported that smooth muscle and endothe-
lial cell enriched migration/differentiation-associated lncRNA (SENCR) and myocardin-induced smooth muscle 
lncRNA, inducer of differentiation (MYOSLID) lncRNAs control the phenotypic switching of VSMCs to main-
tain their contractile phenotype18,19. Another lncRNA, taurine up-regulated gene 1, was shown to upregulate 
the expression of Runx2 through sponging miR-204-5p, and increase osteoblast differentiation of aortic valve 
interstitial cells20. However, the lncRNA that is directly involved in the regulation of vascular calcification is not 
yet identified.
In this study, we identified diverse lncRNAs that are differentially expressed in VSMCs during vascular cal-
cification through RNA sequencing. Subsequent functional studies showed that among the selected lncRNAs, 
Lrrc75a-as1 regulated calcium deposition in VSMCs. Hence, our study revealed that Lrrc75a-as1 can be consid-
ered as a possible therapeutic target for the treatment of diverse diseases related with vascular calcification.
Results
Identification of candidate lncRNAs involved in vascular calcification. 
To identify the lncRNAs 
involved in vascular calcification, we utilized primary-cultured VSMCs. VSMCs were treated with 2 mM Pi for 
different time periods (Fig. 1A). Treatment of the cells with high concentration of Pi efficiently recapitulates 
vascular calcification, as shown in our previous study21. We extracted total RNA from the samples, depleted the 
ribosomal RNAs, and performed total RNA sequencing (Fig. 1B). The pathway analysis for the decreased mRNAs 
after Pi treatment showed that the genes involved in the VSMC contractions were most highly decreased22,23, sug-
gesting that the phenotype of VSMCs was successfully changed in our experimental condition (Supplementary 
Fig. 1). There is no representative annotation for rat lncRNAs. Therefore, we collected the annotations from two 
public databases, Ensembl and RefSeq, for quantification of the expression level of lncRNAs24,25. These annota-
tions were merged, which resulted in a new reference annotation with 8,357 lncRNA genes (Fig. 1B). Using this 
annotation, we analyzed the RNA sequencing data, and discovered 1,201 novel lncRNA genes expressed in rat 
VSMCs. We quantified the expression level of known and novel lncRNAs in our samples, and calculated their 
expression change after induction of vascular calcification (Supplementary Table 1).
We used the following three criteria for the selection of candidate lncRNAs for further studies: (1) differential 
expression of lncRNAs in Pi-treated samples compared to that in untreated control samples, (2) conservation of 
the locus of lncRNA genes in the genome across rat, mouse, and human with respect to nearby protein-coding 
genes, and (3) the existence of a previous study for the neighboring genes, wherein their function in calcification, 
calcium regulation, or related processes has been reported (Fig. 1C). We included this third criterion because 
there is a higher tendency for the closely located genes to be regulated by common regulatory factors. These cri-
teria resulted in the selection of four lncRNA candidates. Because the gene structure of lncRNAs in rat is poorly 
annotated, we first used the most similar expressed sequence tag (EST) as the name of each candidate lncRNA, 
which include FM045041, BG663343, BQ204485, and CR471446.
We examined the genomic information of these four candidate lncRNAs in human. Our candidates, 
FM045041, BG663343, BQ204485, and CR471446 were already named as Snhg1, Linc00116, Snhg16, and 
Lrrc75a-as1 in human, respectively. Therefore, we used these annotated names in the following description. 
Snhg1 is located adjacent to Slc3a2, which produces the heavy chain of CD98 (CD98hc). CD98hc is connected 
with integrin, which influences VSMC proliferation and survival26. St6galnac2, a neighboring gene of Snhg16, 
mediates the transfer of sialic acid from CMP-Neu5Ac to O-linked oligosaccharides of fetuin, which is a known 
inhibitor of vascular calcification27,28. Linc00116 was detected near nephrocystin 1 (Nphp1). Nphp1 is involved 
in the regulation of renal phosphate excretion29. Increased serum phosphate levels tend to accelerate vascular 
calcification in patients with chronic renal failure30. Finally, Lrrc75a-as1 has Trpv2 as its neighboring gene in the 
genomic context. Trpv2 is an important membrane protein that forms the non-selective cation channel, which 
is stimulated by hypotonic solution-induced cell swelling in VSMCs, and ascends calcium influx in VSMCs31.
We next validated the expression level of the four candidate lncRNAs by qRT-PCR, and compared these lev-
els to those from RNA sequencing data (Fig. 2). Growth arrest-specific 5 (Gas5) and metastasis associated lung 
adenocarcinoma transcript 1 (Malat1), which were previously shown to have functional roles in vascular smooth 
muscles, were selected as control lncRNAs32,33. The expression level of all lncRNA candidates was consistent with 
RNA sequencing results. Therefore, we focused on these four candidate lncRNAs for the following experiments.
3
Scientific Reports |          (2019) 9:5848  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-42283-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Analysis of gene structure and localization of candidate lncRNAs. 
The sequences of lncRNAs are 
poorly defined, especially in rat. Therefore, we performed 5′ and 3′ RACE experiments to identify the full-length 
sequences and transcript structures of the selected lncRNAs (Fig. 3A and Supplementary Table 2). From the 
A
: Treatment of 2mM Pi
RNA
preparation
6 hr-treated
3 day-treated
6 day-treated
B
C
3,070 lncRNAs
from Ensembl
7,260 lncRNAs
from RefSeq
RNA-seq using
ribozero-treated RNA
Pre-processing by
Trimmomatic
8,357 reference
lncRNAs
Alignment by
STAR
Reference-guided
assembly by Cufflinks
Discovery of
novel transcripts
Calculation of
coding potential
Quantitation of known
and novel lncRNAs
1,201 novel lncRNAs
identified
Near gene
related with
vascular calcification
Conserved in
mouse and
human
Differentially
expressed
Manual inspection
Four lncRNA candidates
Control
Split of
rat VSMCs
Figure 1.  Identification of lncRNAs involved in vascular calcification. (A) Experiment scheme. After splitting 
the primary-cultured rat VSMCs into four dishes, they were treated with 2 mM Pi for different time periods. 
Time point of Pi treatment was adjusted such that all cells had the same growth period. (B) Schematic 
representation of lncRNA analysis. RNA sequencing and its following analyses steps are illustrated. Refer to 
the Materials and methods section for details. (C) Three criteria to select the candidate lncRNAs: differential 
expression of lncRNAs among the samples, conservation among species, and existence of near gene in genomic 
context with known function related with vascular calcification. Refer to the main text for details.
4
Scientific Reports |          (2019) 9:5848  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-42283-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
analysis, we obtained the transcript structure of full-length lncRNAs, including the transcription start site, termi-
nation site, and splicing sites.
The localization of lncRNAs in cells give us an indication of their possible working mechanism34. Therefore, 
we analyzed the subcellular localization of lncRNAs in A10 cells, a cell line derived from vascular smooth mus-
cle, through cell fractionation and transcript measurement. We included control marker transcripts, which 
were known to reside in the nucleus or cytoplasm exclusively. For the nucleus-residing transcripts, Malat135 and 
pre-Gapdh were selected. Conversely, mature Gapdh and Actb were selected as the representative cytoplasm 
transcripts. Our data demonstrated that Linc00116, Lrrc75a-as1, and Snhg16 predominantly resided in the cyto-
plasm, while Snhg1 resided in the nucleus (Fig. 3B).
To identify the candidate lncRNA with a possible coding sequence, we assessed their protein-coding potential 
using Coding Potential Calculator (CPC)36 and Coding Potential Assessment Tool (CPAT)37. Lrrc75a-as1, Snhg1, 
and Snhg16 showed low coding potential in both bioinformatics tools (Fig. 3C). Because a moderate coding 
potential was observed for Linc00116 from CPAT algorithm, we excluded this lncRNA from all further analyses.
Lrrc75a-as1 reduces calcium deposition in the cells. 
To find the lncRNAs involved in vascular cal-
cification, we cloned the sequences of three selected lncRNAs into a plasmid based on the full-length sequence 
identified from RACE experiments (Fig. 3A). Since the expression of three candidate lncRNAs was decreased 
after Pi treatment (Fig. 2), we hypothesized that overexpression of these lncRNAs decreases the accumulation 
of calcium in cells. We compared the calcium content in A10 cells under calcification medium between the con-
trol and lncRNA-overexpressing samples. Our results demonstrated that the lncRNAs, Lrrc75a-as1 and Snhg16, 
diminished calcium deposition in A10 cells (Fig. 4A). Because Lrrc75a-as1 reduced the calcium content more 
than Snhg16, we selected this lncRNA for further studies. We also found that overexpression of Lrrc75a-as1 
markedly reduced the mRNA expression levels of the osteoblast-related factors, Runx2, Msx2, and Bmp2. This 
result suggests that Lrrc75a-as1 is involved in the regulation of VSMC calcification by decreasing the expression 
of osteoblast-related factors (Fig. 4B).
To reinforce the possible role of Lrrc75a-as1 in vascular calcification, we also performed an RNA interference 
experiment to deplete Lrrc75a-as1. We designed two different siRNAs targeting different regions of Lrrc75a-as1 
and confirmed efficient depletion of Lrrc75a-as1 by both siRNAs (Supplementary Fig. 2). We found that knock-
down of Lrrc75a-as1 augmented calcium deposition in A10 cells (Fig. 4C). Moreover, staining of the cells with 
Alizarin red S showed that the calcium deposits increased when the Lrrc75a-as1 was depleted (Fig. 4D). Taken 
together, our results suggest that Lrrc75a-as1 inhibits vascular calcification through regulation of VSMC pheno-
type switching (Fig. 4E).
The loci of human and mouse orthologs of Lrrc75a-as1 contain the small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) sequences 
for Snord49a, Snord49b, and Snord65 (Supplementary Fig. 3). Therefore, it is plausible that Lrrc75a-as1 might 
be a host gene to produce these snoRNAs, which might play a role in vascular calcification. Until now, there are 
no functional studies for these snoRNAs; hence, future studies are needed to investigate their role in vascular 
calcification.
A
B
0.0
1.5
Pi 6 day
Pi 3 day
Pi 6 hr
Control
Relative value of FPKM
0.5
1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Pi 6 day
Pi 3 day
Pi 6 hr
Control
Relative expression
(Normalized to Gapdh)
Gas5
Malat1
Linc00116 Lrrc75a-as1
Snhg1
Snhg16
Gas5
Malat1
Linc00116 Lrrc75a-as1
Snhg1
Snhg16
r=0.97
r=0.88
r=0.69
r=1.0
r=1.0
r=0.99
Figure 2.  Confirmation of the expression change of lncRNAs. (A) Fold change of lncRNA expression from 
RNA sequencing data. The average FPKM values from duplicate samples were obtained and fold changes 
compared to control were calculated. (B) Validation of the expression level of lncRNAs by qRT-PCR. The 
correlation coefficients r between relative expression levels measured by RNA sequencing and by qRT-PCR were 
calculated.
5
Scientific Reports |          (2019) 9:5848  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-42283-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Analysis of the regulatory network of Lrrc75-as1. 
Cytoplasmic lncRNA generally acts as a miRNA 
sponge. Therefore, we hypothesized the possible working mechanism of Lrrc75a-as1 as a miRNA regulator. We 
analyzed the putative target miRNAs for Lrrc75a-as1 using the miRNA target prediction tool, miRNA_targets, 
which analyzes thermodynamic stability and complementarity between noncoding RNA and miRNAs38. From 
this analysis, 47 miRNAs were discovered to interact with Lrrc75a-as1 in a sequence-specific manner. To select 
the miRNAs that show an inverse correlation profile with Lrrc75a-as1, we utilized the expression profiles of 
miRNAs during the calcification of rat VSMCs (manuscript in preparation). Moreover, we only selected miRNAs 
that have been reported in previous studies involving vascular calcification or other related functions. Based on 
this, we selected two miRNAs, miR-29a-3p and miR-24-3p, which have binding sites on Lrrc75a-as1 (Fig. 5A,B). 
Among these target miRNAs of Lrrc75a-as1, miR-29a-3p has been identified to regulate VSMC calcification by 
targeting ADAMTS-739, while the miR-24 family members have been reported to have significant function in 
cardiovascular diseases40. Especially, miR-24-3p regulates the phenotype transition of VSMCs from a synthetic to 
a contractile phenotype by targeting Tribbles homolog 341. Thus, increased activity of miR-24-3p resulting from 
a decrease in Lrrc75a-as1 level may facilitate vascular calcification. We thereby propose that Lrrc75a-as1 may 
regulate vascular calcification through interaction with these miRNAs.
Because the level of Lrrc75a-as1 transcripts decreases during vascular calcification, we expected that any tran-
scription factor related with vascular calcification might bind to the promoter of Lrrc75a-as1 and regulate its 
transcription. We utilized the chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (ChIP-seq) data published 
in the ENCODE project9. Because the ChIP-seq data was mainly obtained from human cells, we analyzed the 
promoter of human homolog of Lrrc75a-as1 (Supplementary Fig. 3). Among the various transcription factors, we 
only selected the transcription factors whose regulatory roles in VSMCs have been reported. We found that many 
factors related with VSMCs directly bind to the promoter of Lrrc75a-as1 (Fig. 5C). Strikingly, these transcription 
factors, including serum response factor (SRF), cAMP responsive element binding protein 1 (CREB1), signal 
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) have been previously shown to be associated with vascular 
calcification42–44. Thus, our findings revealed that during vascular calcification, the amount or activity of these 
transcription factors changes, and this in turn decreases the expression of Lrrc75a-as1.
A
B
lncRNA Linc00116 
Nphp1
Bub1
Chr3: 120,372,665 ~ 120,373,395
Cygb
St6galnac2
lncRNA Snhg16
Chr10: 105,645,713 ~ 105,649,943 
Slc3a2
Wdr74
lncRNA Snhg1
Chr1: 224,921,301 ~ 224,924,589
Trpv2
Mmgt2
Chr10: 48,927,525 ~ 48,929,450 
lncRNA Lrrc75a-as1
C
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Actb
Gapdh
pre-Gapdh
Malat1
Snhg16
Snhg1
Lrrc75a-as1
Linc00116 
Relative percentage
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
CPC
CPAT
0.08469
(Weak)
0.62079
(Yes)
-0.2265
(Weak)
0.13083
(No)
0.4749
(Weak)
0.01426
(No)
-0.9539
(Weak)
0.00752
(No)
Snhg16
Snhg1
Lrrc75a-as1
Linc00116 
Figure 3.  Characterization of candidate lncRNAs. (A) Genomic information of selected lncRNAs. By 
performing 5′ and 3′ RACE experiments and subsequent sequencing, the transcription start and end positions, 
and splice junctions were identified. The nucleotide position is based on rn6 (July 2014) genome assembly. 
Yellow boxes represent the exons of lncRNAs. Blue boxes represent the locus of nearby protein-coding genes. 
(B) The subcellular distribution of lncRNAs. LncRNA levels were measured in the nuclear and cytoplasmic 
fractions of A10 cells. Results showed that Linc00116, Lrrc75a-as1, and Snhg16 were mainly localized in the 
cytoplasm. Snhg1 was localized in the nucleus. Malat1 and pre-Gapdh were used as nuclear controls, while 
mature Gapdh and Actb were used as cytoplasmic markers. The error bars indicate standard error of triplicate 
measurements (n = 3). (C) Protein-coding potential of lncRNAs. The protein-coding potential of candidate 
lncRNAs was evaluated by CPC36 and CPAT37.
6
Scientific Reports |          (2019) 9:5848  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-42283-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Discussion
In this study, we observed that the expression levels of numerous lncRNAs were changed during vascular calcifi-
cation, as evidenced by the RNA sequencing data. Compared to human or mouse, the sequence and structure of 
rat lncRNAs are less identified. Therefore, we merged two most highly used annotations for rat genes. In RefSeq 
and Ensembl annotations, there were 7,260 and 3,070 annotated lncRNA genes, respectively (Fig. 1B). Moreover, 
Figure 4.  Lrrc75a-as1 inhibits vascular calcification. (A) Measurement of calcium deposition after 
overexpression of candidate lncRNAs. Compared to other lncRNAs, overexpression of Lrrc75a-as1 most 
significantly changed the calcium content. Error bars indicate standard error between four independent 
experiments with triplicates in each experiment. P value was calculated by a two-sided paired t-test. (B) 
Expression change of the osteoblast-related factors after Lrrc75a-as1 overexpression. The expression of 
osteoblast-related factors, including Runx2, Msx2, and Bmp2 was measured. Error bars indicate standard 
error between three independent experiments. (C) Measurement of calcium deposition after knockdown 
of Lrrc75a-as1. Six independent experiments were performed, and the P value was calculated by a two-
sided paired t-test. (D) Determination of calcification with Alizarin red S staining. After the knockdown of 
Lrrc75a-as1, the calcium deposits were measured with Alizarin red S dye. The pictures of cell culture dishes and 
microscopic images (50×) were shown. The amounts of Alizarin red S-stained mineralization were quantified 
from three cell culture dishes and error bars indicate the standard errors. (E) Working model. The expression 
level of Lrrc75a-as1 is reduced during vascular calcification in VSMCs. Upregulation of Lrrc75a-as1 expression 
may switch the VSMC phenotype from an osteoblastic/chondrogenic to a contractile phenotype, and mitigate 
calcium accumulation.
7
Scientific Reports |          (2019) 9:5848  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-42283-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
the integration of annotations from these two databases resulted in the annotation for 8,357 lncRNA genes, sug-
gesting that the annotations of many lncRNAs only exist in one database exclusively. The huge difference in 
lncRNA numbers between the two major databases, and less overlap of annotations between them suggests that 
the annotation of lncRNAs in organisms other than human and mouse is poorly established. As a result, from our 
rat VSMCs samples, we identified 1,201 novel lncRNAs, which accounts for one-seventh of the reference database 
that we used for analysis (Supplementary Table 1). This suggests that for the analysis of lncRNAs in organisms 
other than human or mouse, there are many lncRNAs yet to be identified, and RNA sequencing rather than 
microarray is a more suitable method to discover novel lncRNA candidates.
From the RNA sequencing data, we selected four candidate lncRNAs whose expression levels were decreased 
during vascular calcification. Among these candidates, changes in the expression level of Lrrc75a-as1 influenced 
calcium deposition in VSMCs. In previous studies, Lrrc75a-as1 was shown to be expressed in normal villous 
maturation, human osteosarcoma, breast cancer, and gastric cancer tissues45–48. Lrrc75a-as1 was also predicted as 
a prognostic factor in acute myeloid leukemia based on statistical analysis49. However, an experimental study of 
the role of Lrrc75a-as1 in VSMCs has not yet been reported. In this study, we found that Lrrc75a-as1 suppresses 
calcium accumulation in VSMCs, suggesting that it functions as an inhibitor of vascular calcification. For Snhg16 
lncRNA whose overexpression decreased calcium deposition in the cells (Fig. 4A), we also observed a slight 
increase of the calcium contents when it was depleted in the cells (Supplementary Figs 2 and 4a). However, the 
marker genes related to osteoblast differentiation did not change significantly after the overexpression of Snhg16 
(Supplementary Fig. 4b). Thus, this lncRNA might regulate the calcium content in the cells with a different mech-
anism of Lrrc75a-as1.
At this point, the working mechanism about how Lrrc75a-as1 regulated the calcium metabolism is unknown. 
To surmise a possible regulatory target of Lrrc75-as1, we analyzed the subcellular localization of this lncRNA. 
Our data of subcellular fractionation suggests that Lrrc75a-as1 mainly acts in the cytoplasm (Fig. 3B). Previous 
studies suggested that the lncRNAs in the cytoplasm mainly exert their function through suppressing miRNAs. 
Interestingly, many miRNAs were predicted to bind the Lrrc75a-as1 sequence. Among these, there were miR-
29a-3p and miR-24-3p miRNAs, which were reported to have important functions in the physiology of VSMCs 
B
A
Lrrc75a-as1
miR-24-3p
73-94bp
Lrrc75a-as1
miR-29a-3p
270-291bp
3’ AUUGGCUAAAGUCUACCACGAU 5’
   |::  || | |||||||||:|:
5’ UGGGGGACUGCAGAUGGUGUUG 3’
∆G = -17.53 Kcal/mol
∆G = -23.19 Kcal/mol
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
log2(fold change)
(Relative to untreated)
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
6d
3d
log2(fold change)
(Relative to untreated)
6d
3d
Human Chromosome 17 (hg19)
16,342,000
16,343,000
16,344,000
Transcription Factor ChIP-seq
H3K27Ac
EP300
E2F1
SREBP1
HDAC2
SRF
BCLAF1
CREB1
SP1
GATA3
CBX3
STAT3
LRRC75A-AS1
C
3’ GACAAGGACGACUUGACUCGGU 5’
     |   | ||   :|||||||
5’ GGGCCGCAGCCAUGCUGAGCCC 3’
TCF3
Figure 5.  Analysis of the regulatory network of Lrrc75a-as1. (A,B) Expression change of (A) miR-29a-3p and 
(B) miR-24-3p during vascular calcification, and their sequences predicted to bind to that of Lrrc75a-as1 are 
shown. The expression change of miRNAs between untreated and Pi-treated samples for three or six days was 
calculated. The binding position was predicted from miRNA_Targets server38. (C) Analysis of transcription 
factors in the promoter of human Lrrc75a-as1. The position of ChIP-seq signals for each transcription factor 
and H3K27Ac was obtained using the UCSC Genome Browser (http://genome.ucsc.edu)58. The histone marker 
H3K27Ac is usually associated with active enhancers59.
8
Scientific Reports |          (2019) 9:5848  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-42283-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
(Fig. 5). Further investigation about the target genes modulated by these miRNAs in VSMCs is required to iden-
tify the detailed working mechanism of Lrrc75a-as1 in vascular calcification.
The analysis of upstream signaling may give us a hint about the function of lncRNAs. Therefore, we ana-
lyzed the promoter region of Lrrc75a-as1 lncRNA. Because this lncRNA is evolutionarily conserved among 
rat, mouse, and human, we investigated the transcription factors reported to bind at the promoter region of 
human Lrrc75a-as1 (Fig. 5C). This analysis led us to identify the transcription factors such as SRF, CREB1, and 
STAT3 as possible factors which may regulate the transcription of Lrrc75a-as1. It was reported that many tar-
get genes of SRF were related to calcium homeostasis42. Moreover, the knockdown of CREB1 attenuated low 
potassium-induced VSMC calcification43. It was also shown that suppression of STAT3 inhibited accelerated cal-
cification by interleukin-644. Because of the strong association of these factors to calcification, experimental vali-
dation of its regulation on Lrrc75a-as1 will be an important subject to elucidate the regulatory network involving 
lncRNAs during vascular calcification.
We also examined the expression level of Trpv2, a neighboring gene of Lrrc75a-as1. The marginal increase 
of Trpv2 mRNA was observed after induction of vascular calcification as analyzed from our RNA-seq data 
(Supplementary Fig. 5). It is probable that small amounts of Lrrp75-as1 transcript in the nucleus might be 
involved in the regulation of Trpv2.
A previous study reported Bmp2, Msx2, and Runx2 as osteoblast-related factors in calcified vessels50. Bmp2 
is a crucial factor in bone formation and vascular calcification. Moreover, Bmp2 facilitates osteoblast differen-
tiation, bone mineralization, atherosclerosis, and vascular calcification. Bmp2 begins calcification signaling 
in VSMCs and subsequently conducts transactivation of Msx2 and Runx2 in VSMCs51. Msx2 plays an impor-
tant role in intramembranous bone formation, which is similar to the calcification of tunica media. Its role in 
vascular calcification has also been demonstrated52. Runx2 has been shown to regulate vascular calcification 
in VSMCs53. Therefore, we measured the expression level of these factors after manipulating the expression of 
Lrrc75a-as1. Interestingly, Runx2, Msx2, and Bmp2 expression levels were reduced in VSMCs after overexpres-
sion of Lrrc75a-as1, suggesting that Lrrc75a-as1 negatively modulates vascular calcification by decreasing the 
expression of osteoblast-related factors.
In summary, we showed that Lrrc75a-as1 functions as a negative regulator of vascular calcification, suppress-
ing calcium accumulation and decreasing the expression of osteoblast-related factors. These observations shed 
light on the possibility that lncRNAs may serve as useful therapeutic targets to suppress vascular calcification and 
provide insights into the mechanism underlying the role of lncRNAs in vascular calcification.
Methods
Cell culture. 
Primary culture of rat VSMCs was performed as described in our previous study21. The A10 
cell line derived from the aorta of embryonic rat was purchased from American Type Culture Collection (CRL-
1476)54 and cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine 
serum (WelGene). All cells were maintained at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2.
Induction of vascular calcification in vitro and measurement of calcium deposition. 
To induce 
calcification, the growth medium was replaced with calcification medium [2 mM Pi (pH 7.4) in DMEM medium], 
and rat VSMCs and A10 cells were maintained in this medium for up to 6 days. The calcification phenotypes 
including calcium deposition were confirmed in our previous study21. We replaced the medium every 2 days. The 
first day of culture in calcification medium was set as day 0 and calcium deposition was measured at day 3 and 
day 6.
To determine calcium deposition, the cells were rinsed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and fixed in 
0.6 N hydrogen chloride solution at 4 °C for 24 h. The amount of calcium in the supernatant was measured by col-
orimetric analysis using a Calcium Assay Kit (QuantiChrom™ Calcium Assay Kit, BioAssay Systems) according 
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 7 μL of sample was transferred into a 96-well plate. Working reagent 
(200 μL) was added to the samples. The absorbance was measured at 570 nm using the Epoch microplate spec-
trophotometer (BioTek Instruments). Following this, cells were solubilized in 0.1 N NaOH/0.1% sodium dodecyl 
sulfate to normalize the calcium level. Total cellular protein levels were measured by the Bradford protein assay 
and used for normalization. Finally, the normalized value of untreated sample was subtracted from that of inor-
ganic phosphate (Pi)-treated sample to calculate the change in calcium deposition.
Sample preparation for RNA sequencing library construction. 
Exponentially growing rat VSMCs 
were divided into four culture dishes containing normal or calcification medium. For the calcification samples, 
cells were grown in calcification media for 6 h, 3 days, or 6 days (Fig. 1A). At day 6, total RNA was isolated from 
the cells using TRIzol reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Residual DNA in the samples was removed using DNase 
I (Takara). For RNA sequencing library preparation, Ribo-Zero Gold rRNA Removal Kit (Illumina) was used, 
and TruSeq Stranded Total RNA Kit (Illumina) was used for library construction. The library was sequenced 
using the HiSeq 2500 system (Illumina) in the paired-end mode with 100 sequencing cycles. We performed RNA 
sequencing in duplicate for each sample.
Analysis of RNA sequencing data. 
The process to quantify lncRNA expression is shown in Fig. 1B. To 
build a reference annotation, we downloaded the annotation files from RefSeq and Ensembl databases24,25. These 
annotations were merged using the Cuffmerge algorithm to obtain the reference annotation for further analysis55.
After obtaining the reference annotation, we removed the entire or part of the sequence with low quality 
reads using Trimmomatic algorithm56. After the alignment of filtered reads into the rat genome (rn6) using 
STAR aligner57, the reads were assembled by Cufflinks using our reference annotation as the guide of assembly55. 
The annotations made from each sequencing data were assembled by Cuffmerge, and fragments per kilobase 
9
Scientific Reports |          (2019) 9:5848  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-42283-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
of transcript per million mapped reads (FPKM) was measured using Cuffnorm algorithm based on the newly 
assembled annotation55. We averaged the FPKM from duplicate samples. We only selected those lncRNAs with 
an average FPKM value greater than 10 and not 0 in any sample. In the criterion to choose candidate lncRNAs 
based on expression change, we first selected the lncRNAs whose expression was changed more than two fold in 
any Pi-treated sample compared to that in untreated samples. Among the selected lncRNAs, we only chose the 
lncRNAs whose expression changed in all three Pi-treated samples or either increased or decreased gradually 
over time.
Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). 
Complementary DNA 
(cDNA) was synthesized from total RNA using RevertAid Reverse Transcriptase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 
random hexamer primers (Thermo Fisher Scientific). qRT-PCR was conducted using Power SYBR Green PCR 
Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a Rotor-Gene Q (Qiagen). The primer sequences used for PCR are listed 
in Supplementary Table 3. Experiments were performed in triplicate. The expression level of each target transcript 
was normalized to that of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Gapdh).
Analysis of the transcript sequences and structures of lncRNAs. 
To obtain information about the 5′ 
and 3′ ends of lncRNAs, 5′ and 3′ rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) was carried out with the GeneRacer 
kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using total RNA isolated from rat VSMCs. The gene-specific primers used in this 
analysis are listed in Supplementary Table 4. The resultant cDNAs were sequenced, which provided information 
about the 5′ and 3′ ends of lncRNA transcripts. Using this information, we amplified full-length transcripts for 
each lncRNA, and obtained the exon-intron structures by sequencing the amplicon. The full-length sequences of 
lncRNAs are shown in Supplementary Table 2.
Subcellular fractionation. 
The cells in a culture dish were rinsed with ice-cold PBS, collected by a scrapper, 
and centrifuged at 6,000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C to remove the supernatant. The cell pellet was lysed with buffer A 
(10 mM HEPES, 10 mM KCl, 1 mM DTT, and 0.1 mM EDTA, pH 7.9) and incubated for 25 min on ice. The lysates 
were treated with 10% Nonidet P-40 and additionally incubated for 2 min on ice. The nuclei were pelleted by cen-
trifugation at 5,000 rpm for 3 min at 4 °C. The remaining supernatant was kept as the cytoplasmic fraction. The 
nuclear pellet was washed with buffer D (20 mM Tris, 100 mM KCl, and 0.2 mM EDTA, pH 8.0) and centrifuged 
at 10,000 rpm for 3 min at 4 °C to remove the supernatant. The pellet was lysed with TRIzol LS reagent (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific) for nuclear RNA extraction. The cytoplasmic fraction from the earlier step was centrifuged at 
13,200 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected and treated with TRIzol LS for cytoplasmic RNA 
extraction. Nuclear RNA was verified by the measurement of pre-mRNA form of Gapdh (pre-Gapdh), and cyto-
plasmic RNA was verified by the measurement of mature Gapdh and beta-actin (Actb).
Transfection of plasmid DNAs and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs). 
Full-length sequences of lncR-
NAs were obtained from the cDNA of rat VSMCs using Phusion DNA Polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) 
and primers (Supplementary Table 5). The PCR products were cloned into pcDNA3 vector and the sequences 
were confirmed by Sanger sequencing to produce lncRNA overexpression vectors. The plasmid constructs were 
transfected into A10 cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. For the RNA interference experiment, cells were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 with 30 nM 
siRNA (Bioneers) targeting Lrrc75a-as1 (Lrrc75a-as1 siRNA1, sense: 5′-ACG UUG ACA UCG UGG AAU UUU-
3′, antisense: 5′-UAU UCC ACG AUG UCA ACG UUU-3′; Lrrc75a-as1 siRNA2, sense: 5′-GGG AAG UUA GGG 
UGG AAG UUU-3′, antisense: 5′-UCU UCC ACC CUA ACU UCC CUU-3′).
Alizarin red S staining and quantification. 
For Alizarin red S staining, cells grown on 24-well plate 
were rinsed with PBS solution and fixed with 10% formalin for 30 min at room temperature. After three times of 
washing with distilled water, the cells were stained with 40 mM Alizarin red S solution (pH 4.2, Sigma-Aldrich) 
for overnight at room temperature, rinsed with PBS, and then photographed by microscopy (Carl Zeiss). To 
quantify Alizarin red S-stained mineralization, the stain was dissolved with 300 μL of 10% cetylpyridinium chlo-
ride (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at room temperature, and 200 μL of extracted solution was used to measure the 
absorbance at 562 nm using microplate spectrophotometer (BioTeK). The concentration of mineralization was 
calculated based on the standard graph depicted using the absorbance of standard samples.
Statistical analysis. 
If not mentioned otherwise, the statistical analyses were performed by a two-sided 
paired t-test.
References
	 1.	 Massy, Z. A. & Drüeke, T. B. Magnesium and outcomes in patients with chronic kidney disease: focus on vascular calcification, 
atherosclerosis and survival. Clinical Kidney Journal 5, i52–i61, https://doi.org/10.1093/ndtplus/sfr167 (2012).
	 2.	 Giachelli, C. M. Vascular calcification mechanisms. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology: JASN 15, 2959–2964, https://doi.
org/10.1097/01.Asn.0000145894.57533.C4 (2004).
	 3.	 Fuery, M. A., Liang, L., Kaplan, F. S. & Mohler, E. R. III. Vascular ossification: Pathology, mechanisms, and clinical implications. 
Bone 109, 28–34 (2018).
	 4.	 Wu, M., Rementer, C. & Giachelli, C. M. Vascular calcification: an update on mechanisms and challenges in treatment. Calcified 
tissue international 93, 365–373 (2013).
	 5.	 Shao, J.-S., Cai, J. & Towler, D. A. Molecular mechanisms of vascular calcification: lessons learned from the aorta. Arteriosclerosis, 
thrombosis, and vascular biology 26, 1423–1430 (2006).
	 6.	 Bardeesi, A. S. A. et al. A novel role of cellular interactions in vascular calcification. Journal of translational medicine 15, 95 (2017).
	 7.	 Spin, J. M., Maegdefessel, L. & Tsao, P. S. Vascular smooth muscle cell phenotypic plasticity: focus on chromatin remodelling. 
Cardiovascular research 95, 147–155 (2012).
10
Scientific Reports |          (2019) 9:5848  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-42283-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
	 8.	 Ecker, J. R. et al. Genomics: ENCODE explained. Nature 489, 52 (2012).
	 9.	 Gerstein, M. B. et al. Architecture of the human regulatory network derived from ENCODE data. Nature 489, 91 (2012).
	10.	 Esteller, M. Non-coding RNAs in human disease. Nature Reviews Genetics 12, 861, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg3074 (2011).
	11.	 Mercer, T. R., Dinger, M. E. & Mattick, J. S. Long non-coding RNAs: insights into functions. Nature Reviews Genetics 10, 155, https://
doi.org/10.1038/nrg2521 (2009).
	12.	 Goyal, N., Kesharwani, D. & Datta, M. Lnc-ing non-coding RNAs with metabolism and diabetes: roles of lncRNAs. Cell Mol Life Sci 
75, 1827–1837, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-018-2760-9 (2018).
	13.	 Guttman, M. et al. Chromatin signature reveals over a thousand highly conserved large non-coding RNAs in mammals. Nature 458, 
223, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07672 (2009).
	14.	 Mercer, T. R. & Mattick, J. S. Structure and function of long noncoding RNAs in epigenetic regulation. Nature structural & molecular 
biology 20, 300 (2013).
	15.	 Chujo, T., Yamazaki, T. & Hirose, T. Architectural RNAs (arcRNAs): A class of long noncoding RNAs that function as the scaffold of 
nuclear bodies. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Gene Regulatory Mechanisms 1859, 139–146 (2016).
	16.	 Andreou, I., Sun, X., Stone, P. H., Edelman, E. R. & Feinberg, M. W. miRNAs in atherosclerotic plaque initiation, progression, and 
rupture. Trends in Molecular Medicine 21, 307–318, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmed.2015.02.003 (2015).
	17.	 Li, H., Zhu, H. & Ge, J. Long noncoding RNA: recent updates in atherosclerosis. International journal of biological sciences 12, 898 
(2016).
	18.	 Bell, R. D. et al. Identification and initial functional characterization of a human vascular cell–enriched long noncoding RNA. 
Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular biology 34, 1249–1259 (2014).
	19.	 Zhao, J. et al. MYOSLID is a novel serum response factor–dependent long noncoding RNA that amplifies the vascular smooth 
muscle differentiation program. Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular biology 36, 2088–2099 (2016).
	20.	 Yu, C. et al. LncRNA TUG1 sponges miR-204-5p to promote osteoblast differentiation through upregulating Runx2 in aortic valve 
calcification. Cardiovascular Research 114, 168–179, https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/cvx180 (2018).
	21.	 Kwon, D.-H. et al. MDM2 E3 ligase-mediated ubiquitination and degradation of HDAC1 in vascular calcification. Nature 
Communications 7, 10492, https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10492 (2016).
	22.	 Liberzon, A. et al. Molecular signatures database (MSigDB) 3.0. Bioinformatics 27, 1739–1740, https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/btr260 (2011).
	23.	 Kanehisa, M., Sato, Y., Kawashima, M., Furumichi, M. & Tanabe, M. KEGG as a reference resource for gene and protein annotation. 
Nucleic Acids Res 44, D457–462, https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv1070 (2016).
	24.	 Kersey, P. J. et al. Ensembl Genomes 2018: an integrated omics infrastructure for non-vertebrate species. Nucleic Acids Res 46, 
D802–D808, https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx1011 (2018).
	25.	 Pruitt, K. D., Tatusova, T. & Maglott, D. R. NCBI reference sequences (RefSeq): a curated non-redundant sequence database of 
genomes, transcripts and proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 35, D61–65, https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkl842 (2007).
	26.	 Fogelstrand, P., Féral, C. C., Zargham, R. & Ginsberg, M. H. Dependence of proliferative vascular smooth muscle cells on CD98hc 
(4F2hc, SLC3A2). Journal of Experimental Medicine 206, 2397–2406 (2009).
	27.	 Reynolds, J. L. et al. Multifunctional roles for serum protein fetuin-a in inhibition of human vascular smooth muscle cell 
calcification. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology 16, 2920–2930 (2005).
	28.	 Samyn-Petit, B., Krzewinski-Recchi, M.-A., Steelant, W. F., Delannoy, P. & Harduin-Lepers, A. Molecular cloning and functional 
expression of human ST6GalNAc II. Molecular expression in various human cultured cells. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-
General Subjects 1474, 201–211 (2000).
	29.	 Bollée, G. et al. Nephronophthisis related to homozygous NPHP1 gene deletion as a cause of chronic renal failure in adults. 
Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation 21, 2660–2663 (2006).
	30.	 Neven, E. & D’haese, P. C. Vascular calcification in chronic renal failure: what have we learned from animal studies? Circulation 
research 108, 249–264 (2011).
	31.	 Muraki, K. et al. TRPV2 is a component of osmotically sensitive cation channels in murine aortic myocytes. Circulation research 93, 
829–838 (2003).
	32.	 Tang, R., Zhang, G., Wang, Y. C., Mei, X. & Chen, S. Y. The long non-coding RNA GAS5 regulates transforming growth factor beta 
(TGF-beta)-induced smooth muscle cell differentiation via RNA Smad-binding elements. J Biol Chem 292, 14270–14278, https://
doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M117.790030 (2017).
	33.	 Michalik, K. M. et al. Long noncoding RNA MALAT1 regulates endothelial cell function and vessel growth. Circ Res 114, 1389–1397, 
https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.303265 (2014).
	34.	 Quinn, J. J. & Chang, H. Y. Unique features of long non-coding RNA biogenesis and function. Nature Reviews Genetics 17, 47, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg.2015.10 (2015).
	35.	 Hutchinson, J. N. et al. A screen for nuclear transcripts identifies two linked noncoding RNAs associated with SC35 splicing 
domains. BMC Genomics 8, 39, https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2164-8-39 (2007).
	36.	 Kong, L. et al. CPC: assess the protein-coding potential of transcripts using sequence features and support vector machine. Nucleic 
acids research 35, W345–W349 (2007).
	37.	 Wang, L. et al. CPAT: Coding-Potential Assessment Tool using an alignment-free logistic regression model. Nucleic acids research 
41, e74–e74 (2013).
	38.	 Kumar, A., Wong, A. K., Tizard, M. L., Moore, R. J. & Lefevre, C. miRNA_Targets: a database for miRNA target predictions in coding 
and non-coding regions of mRNAs. Genomics 100, 352–356, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2012.08.006 (2012).
	39.	 Du, Y. et al. Upregulation of a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs-7 by miR-29 repression mediates 
vascular smooth muscle calcification. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 32, 2580–2588, https://doi.org/10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.300206 
(2012).
	40.	 Bang, C., Fiedler, J. & Thum, T. Cardiovascular importance of the microRNA-23/27/24 family. Microcirculation 19, 208–214, https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1549-8719.2011.00153.x (2012).
	41.	 Chan, M. C. et al. Molecular basis for antagonism between PDGF and the TGFbeta family of signalling pathways by control of miR-
24 expression. EMBO J 29, 559–573, https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2009.370 (2010).
	42.	 Miano, J. M., Long, X. & Fujiwara, K. Serum response factor: master regulator of the actin cytoskeleton and contractile apparatus. 
Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 292, C70–81, https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00386.2006 (2007).
	43.	 Sun, Y. et al. Dietary potassium regulates vascular calcification and arterial stiffness. JCI Insight 2, https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.
insight.94920 (2017).
	44.	 Fukuyo, S. et al. IL-6-accelerated calcification by induction of ROR2 in human adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells is 
STAT3 dependent. Rheumatology (Oxford) 53, 1282–1290, https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/ket496 (2014).
	45.	 Both, J., Wu, T., ten Asbroek, A. L., Baas, F. & Hulsebos, T. J. Oncogenic Properties of Candidate Oncogenes in Chromosome Region 
17p11. 2p12 in Human Osteosarcoma. Cytogenetic and genome research 150, 52–59 (2016).
	46.	 Cao, W.-J., Wu, H.-L., He, B.-S., Zhang, Y.-S. & Zhang, Z.-Y. Analysis of long non-coding RNA expression profiles in gastric cancer. 
World journal of gastroenterology: WJG 19, 3658 (2013).
	47.	 Leavey, K. et al. Gene markers of normal villous maturation and their expression in placentas with maturational pathology. Placenta 
58, 52–59 (2017).
11
Scientific Reports |          (2019) 9:5848  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-42283-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
	48.	 Lv, M. et al. LncRNAs as new biomarkers to differentiate triple negative breast cancer from non-triple negative breast cancer. 
Oncotarget 7, 13047 (2016).
	49.	 Wang, F. et al. A three–lncRNA signature for prognosis prediction of acute myeloid leukemia in patients. Molecular medicine reports 
18, 1473–1484 (2018).
	50.	 Hruska, K. A., Mathew, S. & Saab, G. Bone morphogenetic proteins in vascular calcification. Circulation research 97, 105–114 (2005).
	51.	 Li, X., Yang, H. Y. & Giachelli, C. M. BMP-2 promotes phosphate uptake, phenotypic modulation, and calcification of human 
vascular smooth muscle cells. Atherosclerosis 199, 271–277, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2007.11.031 (2008).
	52.	 Shao, J. S. et al. Msx2 promotes cardiovascular calcification by activating paracrine Wnt signals. J Clin Invest 115, 1210–1220, https://
doi.org/10.1172/JCI24140 (2005).
	53.	 Byon, C. H. et al. Oxidative stress induces vascular calcification through modulation of the osteogenic transcription factor Runx2 by 
AKT signaling. J Biol Chem 283, 15319–15327, https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M800021200 (2008).
	54.	 Rao, R. S., Miano, J. M., Olson, E. N. & Seidel, C. L. The A10 cell line: a model for neonatal, neointimal, or differentiated vascular 
smooth muscle cells? Cardiovascular research 36, 118–126 (1997).
	55.	 Trapnell, C. et al. Transcript assembly and quantification by RNA-Seq reveals unannotated transcripts and isoform switching during 
cell differentiation. Nat Biotechnol 28, 511–515, https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1621 (2010).
	56.	 Bolger, A. M., Lohse, M. & Usadel, B. Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence data. Bioinformatics 30, 2114–2120, 
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu170 (2014).
	57.	 Dobin, A. et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29, 15–21, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts635 
(2013).
	58.	 Kent, W. J. et al. The human genome browser at UCSC. Genome Res 12, 996–1006, https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.229102 (2002).
	59.	 Creyghton, M. P. et al. Histone H3K27ac separates active from poised enhancers and predicts developmental state. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA 107, 21931–21936, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1016071107 (2010).
Acknowledgements
We thank the members of the Department of Biochemistry and Department of Pharmacology, Chonnam 
National University Medical School, for their helpful discussions. This work was supported by the National 
Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (NRF-2018R1A2B6001104 
and NRF-2018R1A2B3001503).
Author Contributions
G.J., D.H.K., S.S., N.C., J.R. and Y.H.L. carried out biochemical experiments. G.J., D.H.K., J.K., W.J.P., H.K. and 
Y.K.K. analyzed the biochemical data. G.J. and Y.K.K. performed bioinformatics analyses. G.J., H.K. and Y.K.K. 
wrote the manuscript.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-42283-x.
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2019

===== Nakajima2014_NatGenet_OPLL+GWAS =====

1012 
VOLUME 46 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2014  Nature Genetics
Ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine 
(OPLL) is a common spinal disorder among the elderly that causes 
myelopathy and radiculopathy. To identify genetic factors for 
OPLL, we performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) 
in ~8,000 individuals followed by a replication study using an 
additional ~7,000 individuals. We identified six susceptibility 
loci for OPLL: 20p12.3 (rs2423294: P = 1.10 × 10−13), 
8q23.1 (rs374810: P = 1.88 × 10−13), 12p11.22 (rs1979679: 
P = 4.34 × 10−12), 12p12.2 (rs11045000: P = 2.95 × 10−11), 
8q23.3 (rs13279799: P = 1.28 × 10−10) and 6p21.1 (rs927485: 
P = 9.40 × 10−9). Analyses of gene expression in and around the 
loci suggested that several genes are involved in OPLL etiology 
through membranous and/or endochondral ossification processes. 
Our results bring new insight to the etiology of OPLL.
OPLL (MIM 602475) is a common disease caused by abnormal ossi­
fication of the posterior longitudinal ligament in the spinal canal, 
affecting 0.8–3.0% of Asians and 0.1–1.7% of European Caucasians1. 
The ossified ligament compresses the spinal cord and nerve root, 
causing serious neurological dysfunction2. Several lines of evidence 
suggest that genetic factors contribute to its etiology and patho­
genesis3–5; affected sibling-pair linkage studies and candidate gene 
association studies have identified a number of genes or loci that are 
linked to OPLL susceptibility6–8. However, replication studies have 
failed to verify these results, even in the same ancestry groups as the 
original studies9. A GWAS using high-density SNP data has not yet 
been reported for OPLL.
To identify OPLL susceptibility genes, we conducted a GWAS in a 
Japanese population consisting of 1,130 individuals with OPLL and 
7,135 controls (Online Methods). After quality control filtering of 
SNP genotyping data (Online Methods), 616,496 autosomal SNPs 
were examined for association with the Cochran-Armitage trend 
test. Analysis of population stratification with principal-component 
analysis (PCA) showed that all individuals in our study were Japanese 
A genome-wide association study identifies susceptibility 
loci for ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament 
of the spine
Masahiro Nakajima1,30, Atsushi Takahashi2,30, Takashi Tsuji3,29, Tatsuki Karasugi1,4, Hisatoshi Baba5, 
Kenzo Uchida5, Shigenori Kawabata6, Atsushi Okawa6, Shigeo Shindo7, Kazuhiro Takeuchi8, Yuki Taniguchi9, 
Shingo Maeda10, Masafumi Kashii11, Atsushi Seichi12, Hideaki Nakajima5, Yoshiharu Kawaguchi13, 
Shunsuke Fujibayashi14, Masahiko Takahata15, Toshihiro Tanaka16, Kei Watanabe17, Kazunobu Kida18, 
Tsukasa Kanchiku19, Zenya Ito20, Kanji Mori21, Takashi Kaito22, Sho Kobayashi23, Kei Yamada24, Masahito Takahashi25, 
Kazuhiro Chiba3,29, Morio Matsumoto3, Ken-Ichi Furukawa26, Michiaki Kubo27, Yoshiaki Toyama3, Genetic 
Study Group of Investigation Committee on Ossification of the Spinal Ligaments28 & Shiro Ikegawa1
1Laboratory for Bone and Joint Diseases, Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. 2Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, Center for Integrative 
Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan. 3Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan. 4Department of Orthopaedic 
and Neuro-Musculoskeletal Surgery, Faculty of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. 5Department of Orthopaedics and 
Rehabilitation Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui, Fukui, Japan. 6Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 
Tokyo, Japan. 7Department of Orthopedics, Kudanzaka Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. 8Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, National Okayama Medical Center, Okayama, 
Japan. 9Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. 10Department of Medical Joint Materials, Graduate School 
of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan. 11Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Osaka, Japan. 12Department of Orthopedics, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Japan. 13Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Toyama University, Toyama, Japan. 
14Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. 15Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Hokkaido University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. 16Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine, Hirosaki, Japan. 
17Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Niigata University Medical and Dental General Hospital, Niigata, Japan. 18Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kochi Medical 
School, Kochi, Japan. 19Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine, Ube, Japan. 20Department of Orthopedics, Nagoya 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. 21Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Japan. 22Department of 
Orthopaedic Surgery, National Hospital Organization Osaka Minami Medical Center, Osaka, Japan. 23Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Hamamatsu University 
School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan. 24Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan. 25Department of Orthopaedic 
Surgery, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. 26Department of Pharmacology, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine, Hirosaki, Japan. 
27Laboratory for Genotyping Development, Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan. 28A full list of members and affiliations appears in 
the Supplementary Note. 29Present address: Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kitasato University Kitasato Institute Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. 30These authors 
contributed equally to this work. Correspondence should be addressed to S.I. (sikegawa@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp).
Received 20 February; accepted 30 June; published online 27 July 2014; doi:10.1038/ng.3045
l e t t e r s
npg
© 2014 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
Nature Genetics  VOLUME 46 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2014	
1013
(Supplementary Fig. 1a); however, there was a small proportion of 
samples that were separated from the major Japanese (Hondo) cluster10 
when PCA was performed using only the genotype information for 
the cases and controls in the study (Supplementary Fig. 1b). We 
used samples from the major Japanese cluster consisting of 1,112 
cases and 6,810 controls (Supplementary Table 1) and generated a 
quantile-quantile plot (Supplementary Fig. 1c). We found that the 
genomic inflation factor (λGC) was 1.01, indicating that there was a 
low possibility of false positive associations resulting from popula­
tion stratification. Twenty-six SNPs within six chromosomal regions 
at 8p11.21, 8q23.1, 8q23.3, 12p12.2, 12p11.22 and 20p12.3 had 
associations that reached the genome-wide significance threshold 
of P < 5 × 10−8 (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Table 2). We further 
found an additional two loci (6p21.2 and 18q23) showing sugges­
tive association with OPLL (P < 5 × 10−7; Fig. 1 and Supplementary 
Table 2). To investigate additional susceptibility loci, we obtained 
whole-genome association results for imputed SNPs. We found that 
895 SNPs in the 8 identified loci were associated at P < 5 × 10−7, and 
no other associated loci were uncovered. We also examined 12,228 
SNPs on the X chromosome for association with OPLL and found no 
significant association.
To confirm the associations at the eight loci, we selected the eight 
SNPs that had the smallest P value at each locus for the replication 
study. We genotyped an independent set of 548 Japanese individuals 
with OPLL and 6,469 Japanese controls (Supplementary Table 1), 
finding significant associations for 5 of the 8 SNPs, even after 
Bonferroni correction with P < 6.25 × 10−3 (0.05/8) (Table 1 and 
Supplementary Table 2). Combining the results from the GWAS and 
replication study, six SNPs reached a genome-wide significance thresh­
old of P < 9.68 × 10−9 (0.05/5,163,786) (Table 1 and Supplementary 
Table 3). The Breslow-Day test for these six SNPs showed an absence 
of significant heterogeneity (P > 0.05) between studies. We carried 
out age- and sex-adjusted analyses using a logistic regression model 
and confirmed similar association after adjustment (Supplementary 
Table 4). We next conducted conditional analysis to adjust for the top 
SNPs at these six loci using the GWAS data. There were no independ­
ently associated signals in the six loci (Supplementary Fig. 2).
The most highly associated SNP in the meta-analysis, rs2423294 
(Pcombined = 1.10 × 10−13), was located in the 3′ flanking region of 
HAO1 at 20p12.3 (Fig. 2a). HAO1 is expressed primarily in the liver 
and pancreas and encodes hydroxyacid oxidase, which oxidizes 
2-hydroxyacid. We identified 80 imputed SNPs in this region 
that reached a genome-wide significance threshold for association 
(P < 5 × 10−8); 71 highly associated SNPs (P < 1 × 10−9) were located 
in the 3′ flanking region of HAO1 (Fig. 2a).
The associated region at 8q23.1 contained three genes—RSPO2, 
EIF3E and EMC2 (Fig. 2b). RSPO2 encodes a member of the 
R-spondin family of secreted proteins that are involved in β-catenin 
activation through canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling11, which 
is indispensable for osteoblastogenesis12. Reduced expression of 
R-spondin 2 has been reported in osteoarthritis-derived osteoblasts, 
and Wnt-dependent mineralization of osteoblasts is promoted by 
R-spondin 2 (ref. 13). EIF3E encodes a component of the eukaryotic 
translation initiation factor 3 (eIF-3) complex, which is required for 
several steps in the initiation of protein synthesis. The eIF-3 complex 
1
2
3
4
10
5
6
7
8
9
Chromosome
10 11 12 13 141516
17 18 19 20 21 22
8
6
−log10 (P value)
4
2
0
6p21.2
8p11.21
8q23.1
8q23.3
12p12.2
12p11.22
20p12.3
18q23
Figure 1  Manhattan plot showing the −log10 P value for each SNP in 
the GWAS. Values were plotted against their respective positions on 
the autosomal chromosomes. The red line represents the genome-wide 
significance threshold (P = 5 × 10−8). The blue line represents the 
threshold for the selection of SNPs for the replication study (P = 5 × 10−7).
Table 1  Association of the six genome-wide significant loci
Allele
(risk allele)
Chromosome
Genes in or near
associated regiona
Study
RAF
P valueb
OR (95% CI)c
Phetd
SNP ID
Case
Control
rs2423294
T/C (T)
20p12.3
HAO1
GWAS
0.207
0.155
4.90 × 10−10
1.43 (1.27–1.60)
Replication
0.203
0.155
4.00 × 10−5
1.38 (1.19–1.62)
Combinede
0.205
0.155
1.10 × 10−13
1.41 (1.29–1.55)
0.757
rs374810
A/G (G)
8q23.1
RSPO2, EIF3E,
GWAS
0.676
0.607
5.79 × 10−10
1.35 (1.23–1.49)
EMC2
Replication
0.675
0.615
8.88 × 10−5
1.30 (1.14–1.49)
Combinede
0.676
0.611
1.88 × 10−13
1.34 (1.24–1.44)
0.651
rs1979679
T/C (T)
12p11.22
CCDC91
GWAS
0.422
0.360
2.42 × 10−8
1.30 (1.18–1.42)
Replication
0.426
0.364
4.75 × 10−5
1.30 (1.14–1.47)
Combinede
0.423
0.362
4.34 × 10−12
1.30 (1.21–1.40)
0.994
rs11045000
A/G (A)
12p12.2
LOC100506393
GWAS
0.523
0.454
1.74 × 10−9
1.32 (1.20–1.44)
Replication
0.514
0.466
2.35 × 10−3
1.21 (1.07–1.37)
Combinede
0.520
0.460
2.95 × 10−11
1.28 (1.19–1.38)
0.281
rs13279799
A/G (G)
8q23.3
LINC00536, EIF3H
GWAS
0.378
0.317
8.96 × 10−9
1.31 (1.19–1.44)
Replication
0.368
0.322
1.80 × 10−3
1.23 (1.08–1.39)
Combinede
0.375
0.319
1.28 × 10−10
1.28 (1.19–1.38)
0.416
rs927485
T/C (C)
6p21.1
CDC5L, MIR4642,
GWAS
0.176
0.134
2.10 × 10−7
1.37 (1.22–1.55)
SUPT3H
Replication
0.169
0.140
8.19 × 10−3
1.25 (1.06–1.48)
Combinede
0.173
0.137
9.40 × 10−9
1.33 (1.21–1.46)
0.372
RAF, risk allele frequency; OR, odds ratio; CI, confidence interval.
aGenes in the LD block of the associated SNPs are shown in bold. bResults from the Cochran-Armitage trend test. cEstimated for the risk allele from a 2 × 2 allele frequency table. dResults from 
the Breslow-Day test. eCalculated by the Mantel-Haenszel method.
l e t t e r s
npg
© 2014 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
1014 
VOLUME 46 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2014  Nature Genetics
l e t t e r s
stimulates mRNA recruitment to the 43S preinitiation complex 
and scanning of the mRNA for recognition of the translation 
initiation codon14. EMC2 encodes a component of the endoplasmic 
reticulum membrane protein complex15; however, its cellular func­
tion is unclear.
The chromosome 12p11.22 region contained CCDC91 (Fig. 2c), 
which encodes a protein involved in the trans-Golgi network. Notably, 
the associated region was located adjacent to the PTHLH gene, which 
encodes a member of the parathyroid hormone (PTH) family. PTH, 
via its receptor PTH1R, regulates endochondral ossification, which is 
related to OPLL progression16. Associated SNPs at the 12p12.2 locus 
were in LOC100506393 (Fig. 2d), which is predicted to encode a large 
intergenic noncoding RNA (lincRNA). LOC100506393 consists of 
three exons and has no similarity to known orthologous transcripts. 
The associated region at 8q23.3 was located in a gene desert between 
LINC00536 and EIF3H (Fig. 2e). LINC00536 encodes a lincRNA of 
unknown function. EIF3H encodes a component of the eIF-3 com­
plex, as does EIF3E. The fact that two of the six loci for OPLL harbor 
genes encoding proteins in the eIF-3 complex suggests that aberra­
tions in this pathway might be key in OPLL pathogenesis.
The associated region at 6p21.1 was located in the gene desert 
between CDC5L, MIR4642 and SUPT3H (Fig. 2f). The cell division 
cycle 5–like protein encoded by the CDC5L gene is a positive regula­
tor of G2/M progression in the cell cycle17. CDC5L was also found 
to be a core component of a putative E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. 
This complex has been shown to have a role in pre-mRNA splic­
ing from yeast to humans18. MIR4642, located in intron 14 of the 
CDC5L gene, encodes a microRNA whose target genes and functions 
are unknown. SUPT3H encodes a human homolog of Spt3, which is 
a Saccharomyces cerevisiae transcription factor required for the tran­
scription of a number of RNA polymerase II–transcribed genes19. 
An association of bone mineral density in the lumbar spine with a 
SNP (rs11755164) 155 kb downstream of the SUPT3H gene has been 
reported20, but this SNP was not in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with 
rs927485 (D′ = 0.013, r2 = 0).
Fifteen genes or loci have previously been reported to be associ­
ated with OPLL. We investigated the GWAS data for these reported 
genes but found no significant association (Supplementary Table 5). 
A genome-wide linkage study reported five loci that showed suggestive 
linkage after stratification by OPLL severity, age at diagnosis and asso­
ciated diabetes mellitus21. One of the six SNPs that showed genome-
wide significant association with OPLL, rs2423294 (Pcombined = 1.10 × 
10−13), was located in the linkage region at 20p12.3 (Supplementary 
Fig. 3). We stratified the cases from our GWAS according to the pre­
vious linkage study21 and investigated the associations of the SNPs 
in the linkage regions. In all strata, the OR estimates for association 
increased after stratification (Supplementary Table 6). A stratum of 
subjects without diabetes mellitus showed genome-wide significant 
association at rs10486860 in the 7q22 linkage region (P = 4.31 × 10−8), 
suggesting that OPLL is genetically heterogeneous and that the locus 
is associated with a subtype of OPLL. Association of diabetes mellitus 
in individuals with OPLL and the contribution of abnormal insulin 
metabolism to OPLL have been reported22.
To understand the functional roles of the loci and genes associ­
ated with OPLL, we first examined expression of the candidate genes 
within the LD blocks for the associated SNPs (Fig. 2). We assessed 
the mRNA expression of these six genes in human bone cells and 
fibroblasts by RT-PCR. EIF3E, EMC2 and CCDC91 were abundantly 
expressed in both cells, whereas HAO1, RSPO2 and LOC100506393 
expression was absent in these cells (Supplementary Fig. 4). There 
was no difference in the expression of the genes in the two cell types. 
We then examined the expression of these genes in the ATDC5 cell 
line, a mouse model of endochondral ossification23. Expression of 
Hoa1, Rspo2 and Ccdc91 was lower during early stages of chondrogen­
esis, whereas expression of Sox9, the master gene for chondrogenesis, 
was higher; in later stages, the expression of cartilage matrix genes 
(Acan and Col2a1) was increased (Supplementary Fig. 5).
We next investigated the 63 genes within 1 Mb of the associated 
SNPs for differential expression in osteoblasts and fibroblasts. We 
examined the cell type–specific gene expression profile using the 
10
100
80
60
Recombination rate (cM/Mb)
40
20
0
rs2423294
a
r2
8
6
–log10 (P value)
4
7.6
7.8
HAO1
TMX4
PLCB1
Position on chr. 20 (Mb)
8.0
8.2
2
0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
10
100
80
60
Recombination rate (cM/Mb)
40
20
0
rs11045000
d
r2
8
6
–log10 (P value)
4
19.8
20.2
20.0
LOC100506393
PDE3A
Position on chr. 12 (Mb)
20.4
2
0
10
100
80
60
Recombination rate (cM/Mb)
40
20
0
rs374810
b
r2
8
6
–log10 (P value)
4
108.8
109.0
109.2
109.4
109.6
109.8
RSPO2
EIF3E
EMC2
Position on chr. 8 (Mb)
2
0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
10
100
80
60
Recombination rate (cM/Mb)
40
20
0
rs1979679
c
r2
8
6
–log10 (P value)
4
28.0
28.2
28.4
28.6
28.8
CCDC91
MANSC4
PTHLH
KLHDC5
Position on chr. 12 (Mb)
2
0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
10
100
80
60
Recombination 
rate (cM/Mb)
40
20
0
rs927485
f
r2
8
6
–log10 (P value)
4
44.2
44.6
44.4
SUPT3H
CDC5L
TCTE1
SPATS1
HSP90AB1
MIR4642
SLC35B2
MIR4647
NFKBIE
AARS2
TMEM151B
SLC29A1
CAPN11
Position on chr. 6 (Mb)
44.8
2
0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
10
100
80
60
Recombination rate (cM/Mb)
40
20
0
rs13279799
e
r2
8
6
–log10 (P value)
4
117.2
117.6
117.4
LINC00536
EIF3H
RAD21
MIR3610
UTP23
RAD21-AS
Position on chr. 8 (Mb)
117.8
2
0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Figure 2  Regional association plots at six susceptibility loci for OPLL. Each plot shows −log10 P values against the chromosomal positions of SNPs 
in the specific region. The genotyped SNP with the strongest association signal in each locus is represented as a purple diamond; the other SNPs are 
colored according to the extent of LD with this SNP. Estimated recombination rates from the hg19/1000 Genomes Project March 2012 East Asian 
reference are shown as light-blue lines. (a) 20p12.3. (b) 8q23.1. (c) 12p11.22. (d) 12p12.2. (e) 8q23.3. (f) 6p21.1.
npg
© 2014 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
Nature Genetics  VOLUME 46 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2014	
1015
l e t t e r s
FANTOM5 SSTAR database24. The expression of four genes was 
increased by >2-fold in osteoblasts, whereas the expression of six genes 
was increased by >2-fold in fibroblasts (Supplementary Table 7). 
We examined the ten genes that showed differential expression in 
quantitative PCR (qPCR) experiments and confirmed increased gene 
expression of RSPH9 and STK38L in osteoblasts (Supplementary 
Table 7), suggesting that these genes have a role in membranous 
ossification. The protein encoded by the RSPH9 gene is a com­
ponent of the radial spoke head in motile cilia and flagella25. The 
primary cilia machinery has a critical role in the Hedgehog signal­
ing pathway in skeletal development and has been implicated in a 
dozen disorders known as skeletal ciliopathies26. STK38L encodes 
a serine/threonine protein kinase that controls the protein stabil­
ity of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor protein p21 through 
direct phosphorylation and inhibits G1/S progression through the 
cell cycle27. We further investigated expression of the 63 genes in 
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) from the spinal ligament. We com­
pared gene expression between the MSCs obtained from subjects 
with and without OPLL28 using a cDNA microarray and confirmed 
differential expression by qPCR. There was no significant difference 
in the expression of the genes within 1 Mb of the associated SNPs 
(data not shown).
To gain additional information regarding the function of the 
SNPs, we examined all publically available expression quantitative 
trait locus (eQTL) data (Genevar) obtained from the analysis of a 
lymphoblastoid cell line29. There was no evidence of a significant 
association between genotype and gene expression (P > 0.05 after 
adjustment for multiple testing). We applied literature-based pathway 
analysis, using GRAIL30 to investigate the connections between genes 
in the OPLL-associated loci. We used 6 regions that had a significant 
genome-wide association as query regions, resulting in the analysis 
of 12 unique genes. We found a subset of two SNPs with a functional 
connection (GRAIL P < 0.05)—EIF3E (rs374810; P = 0.020) and 
EIF3H (rs13279799; P = 0.021)—with members of the translation 
initiation pathway.
In summary, through a GWAS and replication study in Japanese 
populations, we identified six new susceptibility loci for OPLL. One of 
these overlapped with a previously reported linkage region. Analyses 
of gene expression in and around the OPLL-associated loci suggested 
that RSPH9 and STK38L might be involved in OPLL etiology through 
the membranous ossification process and that HAO1, RSPO2 and 
CCDC91 might be involved through the endochondral ossification 
process. Additional genetic and functional studies for the loci and 
genes identified by our study should aid in clarification of the etiology 
and pathogenesis of OPLL.
URLs. 1000 Genomes Project, http://www.1000genomes.org/; 
Genevar, http://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/software/genevar/; 
GRAIL, http://www.broadinstitute.org/mpg/grail/; FANTOM5 
SSTAR, http://fantom.gsc.riken.jp/5/sstar/Main_Page; EIGENSTRAT, 
http://genetics.med.harvard.edu/reich/Reich_Lab/Software.html; 
Minimac, http://genome.sph.umich.edu/wiki/Minimac; LocusZoom, 
http://csg.sph.umich.edu/locuszoom/; PLINK, http://pngu.mgh.
harvard.edu/~purcell/plink/.
Methods
Methods and any associated references are available in the online 
version of the paper.
Note: Any Supplementary Information and Source Data files are available in the 
online version of the paper.
Acknowledgments
We thank the individuals with OPLL and their families who participated in this 
study and the Japan OPLL Network (Zen-Sekichu-Ren), including Ishikawa 
prefecture OPLL Tomo-no-kai. We also thank Y. Takahashi and T. Oguma for 
technical assistance. The work reported in this article was supported by grants 
from the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan: Committee for Study 
of Ossification of Spinal Ligament (H23-Nanchi-Ippan-032) and Committee for 
Research and Development of Therapies for Ossification of Posterior Longitudinal 
Ligament (H26-Itaku(Nan)-Ippan-053).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
S.I. designed the project and provided overall project management. M.N. and 
S.I. drafted the manuscript. M.N. and M. Kubo performed the genotyping for the 
GWAS. A.T. analyzed the GWAS data. T. Tsuji, T. Karasugi, H.B., K.U., S. Kawabata, 
A.O., S.S., K.T., Y. Taniguchi, S.M., M. Kashii, A.S., H.N., Y.K., S.F., M. Takahata, 
T. Tanaka, K.W., K.K., T. Kanchiku, Z.I., K.M., T. Kaito, S. Kobayashi, K.Y., 
M. Takahashi, K.C., M.M., K.-I.F. and Y. Toyama managed the DNA samples 
and clinical data. 
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://www.nature.com/
reprints/index.html.
1.	 Matsunaga, S. & Sakou, T. in OPLL: Ossification of the Posterior Longitudinal 
Ligament 2nd edn. (eds. Yonenobu, K., Nakamura, K. & Toyama, Y.) 11–17 
(Springer, Tokyo, 2006).
2.	 Matsunaga, S. et al. Pathogenesis of myelopathy in patients with ossification of the 
posterior longitudinal ligament. J. Neurosurg. 96, 168–172 (2002).
3.	 Sakou, T., Matsunaga, S. & Koga, H. Recent progress in the study of pathogenesis 
of ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament. J. Orthop. Sci. 5, 310–315 
(2000).
4.	 Taketomi, E., Sakou, T., Matsunaga, S. & Yamaguchi, M. Family study of a twin 
with ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament in the cervical spine. Spine 
17, S55–S56 (1992).
5.	 Okawa, A. et al. Mutation in Npps in a mouse model of ossification of the posterior 
longitudinal ligament of the spine. Nat. Genet. 19, 271–273 (1998).
6.	 Koga, H. et al. Restriction fragment length polymorphism of genes of the α2(XI) 
collagen, bone morphogenetic protein-2, alkaline phosphatase, and tumor necrosis 
factor-α among patients with ossification of posterior longitudinal ligament and 
controls from the Japanese population. Spine 21, 469–473 (1996).
7.	 Nakamura, I. et al. Association of the human NPPS gene with ossification of the 
posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine (OPLL). Hum. Genet. 104, 492–497 
(1999).
8.	 Tanaka, T. et al. Genomewide linkage and linkage disequilibrium analyses identify 
COL6A1, on chromosome 21, as the locus for ossification of the posterior longitudinal 
ligament of the spine. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73, 812–822 (2003).
9.	 Horikoshi, T. et al. A large-scale genetic association study of ossification of the 
posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. Hum. Genet. 119, 611–616 (2006).
10.	Yamaguchi-Kabata, Y. et al. Japanese population structure, based on SNP genotypes 
from 7003 individuals compared to other ethnic groups: effects on population-based 
association studies. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 83, 445–456 (2008).
11.	Kim, K.A. et al. R-spondin proteins: a novel link to β-catenin activation. Cell Cycle 
5, 23–26 (2006).
12.	Monroe, D.G., McGee-Lawrence, M.E., Oursler, M.J. & Westendorf, J.J. Update on 
Wnt signaling in bone cell biology and bone disease. Gene 492, 1–18 (2012).
13.	Abed, É. et al. R-spondins are newly recognized players in osteoarthritis that regulate 
Wnt signaling in osteoblasts. Arthritis Rheum. 63, 3865–3875 (2011).
14.	Chaudhuri, J., Chowdhury, D. & Maitra, U. Distinct functions of eukaryotic translation 
initiation factors eIF1A and eIF3 in the formation of the 40 S ribosomal preinitiation 
complex. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 17975–17980 (1999).
15.	Christianson, J.C. et al. Defining human ERAD networks through an integrative 
mapping strategy. Nat. Cell Biol. 14, 93–105 (2012).
16.	Sato, R. et al. Ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the cervical 
spine: histopathological findings around the calcification and ossification front. 
J. Neurosurg. Spine 7, 174–183 (2007).
17.	Zhang, N., Kaur, R., Akhter, S. & Legerski, R.J. Cdc5L interacts with ATR and is required 
for the S-phase cell-cycle checkpoint. EMBO Rep. 10, 1029–1035 (2009).
18.	Ajuh, P. et al. Functional analysis of the human CDC5L complex and identification 
of its components by mass spectrometry. EMBO J. 19, 6569–6581 (2000).
19.	Yu, J., Madison, J.M., Mundlos, S., Winston, F. & Olsen, B.R. Characterization of 
a human homologue of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae transcription factor Spt3 
(SUPT3H). Genomics 53, 90–96 (1998).
20.	Estrada, K. et al. Genome-wide meta-analysis identifies 56 bone mineral density 
loci and reveals 14 loci associated with risk of fracture. Nat. Genet. 44, 491–501 
(2012).
21.	Karasugi, T. et al. A genome-wide sib-pair linkage analysis of ossification of the 
posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. J. Bone Miner. Metab. 31, 136–143 
(2013).
npg
© 2014 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
1016 
VOLUME 46 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2014  Nature Genetics
22.	Kawaguchi, H. et al. in  OPLL: Ossification of the Posterior Longitudinal Ligament 2nd 
edn. (eds. Yonenobu, K., Nakamura, K. & Toyama, Y.) 71–75 (Springer, Tokyo, 2006).
23.	Shukunami, C. et al. Chondrogenic differentiation of clonal mouse embryonic cell 
line ATDC5 in vitro: differentiation-dependent gene expression of parathyroid 
hormone (PTH)/PTH-related peptide receptor. J. Cell Biol. 133, 457–468 (1996).
24.	FANTOM Consortium and RIKEN PMI and CLST (DGT). A promoter-level mammalian 
expression atlas. Nature 507, 462–470 (2014).
25.	Castleman, V.H. et al. Mutations in radial spoke head protein genes RSPH9 and 
RSPH4A 
cause 
primary 
ciliary 
dyskinesia 
with 
central-microtubular-pair 
abnormalities. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 84, 197–209 (2009).
26.	Huber, C. & Cormier-Daire, V. Ciliary disorder of the skeleton. Am. J. Med. Genet. 
C. Semin. Med. Genet. 160C, 165–174 (2012).
27.	Cornils, H., Kohler, R.S., Hergovich, A. & Hemmings, B.A. Human NDR kinases 
control G1/S cell cycle transition by directly regulating p21 stability. Mol. Cell. Biol. 
31, 1382–1395 (2011).
28.	Harada, Y. et al. Osteogenic lineage commitment of mesenchymal stem cells from 
patients with ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament. Biochem. Biophys. 
Res. Commun. 443, 1014–1020 (2014).
29.	Yang, T.P. et al. Genevar: a database and Java application for the analysis 
and visualization of SNP-gene associations in eQTL studies. Bioinformatics 26, 
2474–2476 (2010).
30.	Raychaudhuri, S. et al. Identifying relationships among genomic disease regions: 
predicting genes at pathogenic SNP associations and rare deletions. PLoS Genet. 
5, e1000534 (2009).
l e t t e r s
npg
© 2014 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
Nature Genetics
doi:10.1038/ng.3045
ONLINE METHODS
Subjects. The characteristics of each case-control group are shown in 
Supplementary Table 1. OPLL was diagnosed by experienced spinal surgeons 
from the participating hospitals on the basis of radiographic examination of 
the spine. Ectopic bone formation of the posterior longitudinal ligament in the 
cervical region of the spine was evaluated. A total of 1,660 Japanese individu­
als who had OPLL of more than two vertebra segments were included in this 
study. We used genome-wide screening data from subjects with 1 of 10 diseases 
(1,145 with cerebral aneurysm, 1,034 with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, 811 with endometrial cancer, 1,020 with esophageal cancer, 935 with 
glaucoma, 1,442 with atopic dermatitis, 1,667 with epilepsy, 1,732 with Graves’ 
disease, 612 with nephrotic syndrome and 1,016 with urolithiasis) unrelated 
to OPLL in the BioBank Japan Project31, 978 volunteers from the Osaka-
Midosuji Rotary Club in Japan and 887 healthy subjects from the PharmaSNP 
Consortium for the controls. All individuals gave written informed consent 
to participate in the study. This research project was approved by the ethical 
committees at the RIKEN Yokohama Institute.
Genotyping and quality control for GWAS. Genomic DNA was extracted 
from peripheral blood leukocytes using a standard method. For the GWAS, 
we genotyped case samples using the Illumina HumanOmniExpressExome 
BeadChip and control samples using the Illumina HumanOmniExpress 
BeadChip and the Illumina HumanExome BeadChip. After standard SNP 
quality control, which excluded SNPs with a call rate of <0.99, SNPs that devi­
ated from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (P < 1 × 10−6 in controls) and non-
polymorphic SNPs, a total of 616,496 autosomal SNPs were used for further 
analysis. For sample quality control, we evaluated cryptic relatedness for each 
sample with an identity-by-state method and removed samples that showed 
second-degrees relatedness or closer. To examine population stratification 
in this study, we performed PCA32 using four reference populations from 
HapMap data as the reference, including Europeans (CEU), Africans (YRI), 
Japanese (JPT) and Han Chinese (CHB), with smartpca32. We generated the 
scatterplot, using the top two associated principal components (eigenvectors) 
to identify outliers who did not belong to the JPT/CHB cluster. Subsequently, 
we performed PCA using only the genotype information from the case and 
control subjects without HapMap data to further evaluate population sub­
structure. After performing PCA, we selected 1,112 cases and 6,810 controls 
within the major Japanese (Hondo) cluster for subsequent analysis. We used 
the quantile-quantile plot of observed P values to evaluate the potential effect 
of population stratification.
In the replication study, we genotyped 548 individuals with OPLL using a 
multiplex PCR–based Invader assay (Third Wave Technologies). We recruited 
6,469 controls within the Hondo cluster registered in BioBank Japan with­
out OPLL for the replication study. The genotype concordance rate for 
the six SNPs in Table 1 between samples genotyped using the Illumina 
HumanOmniExpressExome BeadChip and the same samples genotyped with 
the multiplex PCR–based Invader assay was 0.9997.
Statistical analysis. In the GWAS and the replication study, we assessed the 
association of each SNP with the 1-degree-of-freedom Cochran-Armitage 
trend test. We calculated OR values and their CIs from a 2 × 2 allele fre­
quency table. We combined data from the GWAS and replication study using 
the Mantel-Haenszel method and examined heterogeneity between studies 
using the Breslow-Day test33. Regional association plots were generated using 
LocusZoom34. We carried out conditional logistic regression analysis with 
PLINK v1.07 (ref. 35), adjusting for the top SNPs for each locus to determine 
whether independently associated SNPs existed.
X-chromosome association study. We performed testing for association on 
the X chromosome for male and female genotypes separately. For male geno­
types, we used 758 cases and 3,988 controls. After quality control as described 
above, we applied the χ2 test to the 2 × 2 contingency table for 12,401 SNPs. 
For female genotypes, we used 354 cases and 2,822 controls and applied the 
1-degree-of-freedom Cochran-Armitage trend test for 12,908 SNPs. We com­
bined the male and female association test results for 12,229 SNPs using the 
inverse normal method36.
Imputation. We performed genotype imputation within the GWAS using 
Minimac37. We used individuals from the 1000 Genomes Project (phased JPT, 
CHB and Han Chinese South (CHS) data; March 2012) as reference popula­
tions38. Because imputation errors are more serious when allele frequencies 
are low, SNPs with minor allele frequencies of <1% were excluded. SNPs with 
a low quality of imputation (Minimac software quality score of R2 < 0.9) were 
also excluded. After quality control, 5,163,786 imputed SNPs were available for 
analysis. Association tests were performed for dosage with mach2dat39.
Pathway analysis. We investigated connections between genes in the OPLL-
associated loci with GRAIL30. We set the parameters as follows: genome assem­
bly, release 22/hg18; HapMap population, JPT + CHB; functional data source, 
PubMed text (August 2012); gene size correction, off; gene list, all human 
genes within the database. The rs numbers of the six SNPs listed in Table 1 
were used as a query.
Gene expression analysis. MSCs from the spinal ligaments of individuals 
with and without OPLL were obtained as previously described28. ATDC5 
cells (RIKEN Cell Bank) were cultured as previously described23. cDNA from 
MSCs, ATDC5 cells, dermal fibroblast and bone was synthesized for quantita­
tive RT-PCR using the Sensiscript RT kit (Qiagen). Quantitative RT-PCR was 
performed with a StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems) 
using the QuantiTect SYBR Green PCR kit (Qiagen).
Microarray analysis. We analyzed mRNA expression in MSCs from the spi­
nal ligaments of individuals with and without OPLL28 using the SurePrint 
G3 Human Gene Expression 8x60K array (Agilent Technologies). For the 
transcripts whose levels were changed by >2-fold and had a false discovery 
rate–corrected Welch’s t-test P value of <0.05, we verified the difference in 
expression by qPCR (n = 8 for individuals with and without OPLL).
31.	Nakamura, Y. The BioBank Japan Project. Clin. Adv. Hematol. Oncol. 5, 696–697 
(2007).
32.	Price, A.L. et al. Principal components analysis corrects for stratification in genome-
wide association studies. Nat. Genet. 38, 904–909 (2006).
33.	Breslow, N.E. & Day, N.E. Statistical methods in cancer research. Volume II—the 
design and analysis of cohort studies. IARC Sci. Publ. (82), 1–406 (1987).
34.	Pruim, R.J. et al. LocusZoom: regional visualization of genome-wide association 
scan results. Bioinformatics 26, 2336–2337 (2010).
35.	Purcell, S. et al. PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome association and population-
based linkage analyses. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81, 559–575 (2007).
36.	Tukiainen, T. et al. Chromosome X–wide association study identifies loci for fasting 
insulin and height and evidence for incomplete dosage compensation. PLoS Genet. 
10, e1004127 (2014).
37.	Howie, B., Fuchsberger, C., Stephens, M., Marchini, J. & Abecasis, G.R. Fast and 
accurate genotype imputation in genome-wide association studies through pre-
phasing. Nat. Genet. 44, 955–959 (2012).
38.	1000 Genomes Project Consortium. A map of human genome variation from 
population-scale sequencing. Nature 467, 1061–1073 (2010).
39.	Li, Y., Willer, C.J., Ding, J., Scheet, P. & Abecasis, G.R. MaCH: using sequence 
and genotype data to estimate haplotypes and unobserved genotypes. Genet. 
Epidemiol. 34, 816–834 (2010).
npg
© 2014 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.

===== Patel2019_ExpCellRes_Calcification+VSMC+Osteoblast =====

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Experimental Cell Research
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yexcr
Diﬀering calciﬁcation processes in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells
and osteoblasts
Jessal J. Patela,b,1, Lucie E. Bournea,1, Bethan K. Daviesa, Timothy R. Arnettc, Vicky E. MacRaed,
Caroline PD. Wheeler-Jonesa, Isabel R. Orrissa,∗
a Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, Royal Veterinary College, London, UK
b School of Life & Medical Sciences, University of Hertfordshire, Hatﬁeld, UK
c Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, London, UK
d The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Vascular calciﬁcation
Bone formation
Osteoblast
VSMC
Alkaline phosphatase
A B S T R A C T
Arterial medial calciﬁcation (AMC) is the deposition of calcium phosphate mineral, often as hydroxyapatite, in
the medial layer of the arteries. AMC shares some similarities to skeletal mineralisation and has been associated
with the transdiﬀerentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) towards an osteoblast-like phenotype. This
study used primary mouse VSMCs and calvarial osteoblasts to directly compare the established and widely used
in vitro models of AMC and bone formation. Signiﬁcant diﬀerences were identiﬁed between osteoblasts and
calcifying VSMCs. First, osteoblasts formed large mineralised bone nodules that were associated with widespread
deposition of an extracellular collagenous matrix. In contrast, VSMCs formed small discrete regions of calciﬁ-
cation that were not associated with collagen deposition and did not resemble bone. Second, calcifying VSMCs
displayed a progressive reduction in cell viability over time (≤7-fold), with a 50% increase in apoptosis,
whereas osteoblast and control VSMCs viability remained unchanged. Third, osteoblasts expressed high levels of
alkaline phosphatase (TNAP) activity and TNAP inhibition reduced bone formation by to 90%. TNAP activity in
calcifying VSMCs was ∼100-fold lower than that of bone-forming osteoblasts and cultures treated with β-gly-
cerophosphate, a TNAP substrate, did not calcify. Furthermore, TNAP inhibition had no eﬀect on VSMC calci-
ﬁcation. Although, VSMC calciﬁcation was associated with increased mRNA expression of osteoblast-related
genes (e.g. Runx2, osterix, osteocalcin, osteopontin), the relative expression of these genes was up to 40-fold
lower in calcifying VSMCs versus bone-forming osteoblasts. In summary, calcifying VSMCs in vitro display some
limited osteoblast-like characteristics but also diﬀer in several key respects: 1) their inability to form collagen-
containing bone; 2) their lack of reliance on TNAP to promote mineral deposition; and, 3) the deleterious eﬀect
of calciﬁcation on their viability.
1. Introduction
Vascular calciﬁcation is a common consequence of ageing, athero-
sclerosis, diabetes and chronic kidney disease. It is the pathological
deposition of calcium phosphate mineral, usually as hydroxyapatite, in
the medial and/or intimal layer of the arteries and heart valves. Arterial
medial calciﬁcation (AMC) refers to the calciﬁcation that occurs within
the tunica media of blood vessels and is characterised by increased
vessel stiﬀness and reduced blood ﬂow [1]. Traditionally, AMC was
thought to be a passive process caused by high serum levels of phos-
phate and calcium. However, it is now accepted that vascular calciﬁ-
cation is a complex cell-mediated process that is thought to share some
similarities with physiological bone formation [2]. Indeed, histological
analysis of calciﬁed arteries from patients with end stage renal disease
has shown the expression of several bone-associated proteins including
osteopontin (OPN), tissue non-speciﬁc alkaline phosphatase (TNAP)
and Runx2 [3,4].
The underlying factors which lead to the development of AMC are
multifaceted and not fully characterised. However, there has been sig-
niﬁcant advances in our understanding in recent years (see reviews
[5–8]). The structural protein which predominates in the medial layer
of blood vessels is elastin, and it is thought that these ﬁbres could act as
the nucleation site for calciﬁcation [9]. The predominant cell type
driving AMC is the vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) [10,11]. Under
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2019.04.020
Received 12 November 2018; Received in revised form 11 April 2019; Accepted 15 April 2019
∗Corresponding author. Department of Comparative Biomedical Science, Royal Veterinary College London, NW1 0TU, UK.
E-mail address: iorriss@rvc.ac.uk (I.R. Orriss).
1 These authors contributed equally to the work.
Experimental Cell Research 380 (2019) 100–113
Available online 18 April 2019
0014-4827/ Crown Copyright © 2019 Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).
T
normal conditions, calciﬁcation is prevented by the actions of locally
produced (e.g. pyrophosphate) and circulating (e.g. fetuin A) inhibitors
[2]. However, when extracellular phosphate levels increase, VSMCs can
undergo a phenotypic transdiﬀerentiation to take on characteristics
usually associated with bone-forming osteoblasts [8,10,12]. These al-
tered VSMCs have been reported to express TNAP and other bone-re-
lated but not bone-speciﬁc proteins (e.g. OPN, COL1α1), and release
mineralisation-competent matrix vesicles [10,13,14]. Coupled with a
reduction in calciﬁcation inhibitors and increased VSMC apoptosis,
these changes can lead to the development of AMC [2,15].
One of the fundamental regulators of mineralisation is the ratio of
pyrophosphate to phosphate within the local environment [16]. Pyr-
ophosphate, which was identiﬁed as a key endogenous inhibitor of
biomineralisation in the 1960s [17], prevents crystal growth and re-
tards the conversion of amorphous calcium phosphates to crystalline
apatites. Pyrophosphate can be generated from nucleotide tripho-
sphates (such as ATP or UTP) by the actions of ecto-nucleotide pyr-
ophosphatase/phosphodiesterases (NPPs). NPPs display widespread
tissue expression and NPP1 in particular plays an important role in
regulating bone and soft tissue calciﬁcation [18,19]. TNAP is the key
enzyme involved in pyrophosphate breakdown [20]. Previous work has
shown that the opposing actions of NPP1 and TNAP are critical in de-
termining the extracellular phosphate/pyrophosphate ratio and, thus,
the level of skeletal mineralisation [20,21]. Increased TNAP expression
and activity combined with a decrease in NPP1 expression and activity
also
play
a
role
in
the
development
of
vascular
calciﬁcation
[11,18,22–25].
Despite the reported similarities between AMC and bone formation
most in vitro studies only examine VSMCs in isolation using increased,
and often excessive, phosphate levels as the stimulus for calciﬁcation.
Furthermore, the classiﬁcation of a VSMC as an osteoblast-like cell is
often based upon the mRNA expression of osteogenic marker genes,
many of which are not unique to osteoblasts. This study used the well-
established primary mouse VSMC and osteoblast assays to directly
compare in vitro VSMC calciﬁcation and bone formation.
2. Methods
2.1. Reagents
All tissue culture reagents were purchased from Life Technologies
(Paisley, UK); unless mentioned, all chemicals were purchased from
Sigma Aldrich (Poole, UK). All primary antibodies were obtained from
Abcam UK (Cambridge, UK) and secondary antibodies from Jackson
Immuno Research Europe (Ely, UK).
2.2. Animals
Primary osteoblasts and VSMCs were isolated from C57BL/6J mice.
All procedures complied with the UK animals (Scientiﬁc Procedures)
Act 1986 and were reviewed and approved by the Royal Veterinary
College Research Ethics Committee.
2.3. Vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) calciﬁcation assay
Primary VSMCs were isolated from aortas of 6–8 week old mice.
After removal of the adventitia, the aorta was opened to expose the
endothelium under a dissection microscope. Tissues from 6 to 8 animals
were pooled and incubated with trypsin (0.25% w/v) for 10 min to
remove any remaining adventitia and endothelium. Tissues were in-
cubated overnight in alpha Minimum Essential Medium, supplemented
with 10% foetal calf serum (FCS), 100U/ml penicillin, 100μg/ml
streptomycin and 0.25μg/ml amphotericin (complete mixture abbre-
viated to αMEM) before being digested with 425U/ml collagenase type
II (Worthington Biomedical Corporation, Lakewood, USA) for 5 h.
Isolated VSMCs were expanded in T25 tissue culture ﬂasks in a
humidiﬁed atmosphere of 5% CO2-95% air at 37 °C until conﬂuent.
Following seeding into 24-well plates, VSMCs were cultured in either
control medium (αMEM) or calcifying medium (αMEM + 2 mM sodium
orthophosphate, 2–10 mM β-glycerophosphate or 1 mM β-glycer-
ophosphate/1 mM sodium diphosphate) for up to 14 days, with half
medium changes every 3 days. Medium pH was monitored throughout.
All experiments were performed on cells that were expanded and then
plated; cells were not passaged at any stage. Key, deﬁned time points
for calcifying VSMC cultures were: day 7 (onset of calciﬁcation), day 10
(sporadic calciﬁcation) and day 14 (widespread calciﬁcation).
2.4. Osteoblast bone formation assay
Osteoblasts were isolated from the calvariae of 3–5 day old mice by
trypsin/collagenase digestion as previously described [26–28]. Fol-
lowing isolation, cells were resuspended in αMEM and cultured for 2–4
days in a humidiﬁed atmosphere of 5% CO2-95% air at 37 °C in 75 cm2
ﬂasks until fully conﬂuent. Cells were sub-cultured into 6-well trays in
αMEM supplemented with 50 μg/ml ascorbic acid and 2 mM β-glycer-
ophosphate or 1 mM β-glycerophosphate/1 mM sodium diphosphate
and, with half medium changes every 3 days. Medium pH was mon-
itored throughout. All experiments were performed on cells that were
expanded and then plated; cells were not passaged at any stage. Deﬁned
time points for osteoblast cultures were day 4 (proliferating cells), day 7
(early osteoblasts), day 10 (mature osteoblasts) and day 14 (mature,
bone-forming osteoblasts).
2.5. Determination of VSMC calciﬁcation and bone formation
Calcifying VSMCs or bone-forming osteoblasts were washed twice
with phosphate buﬀered saline (PBS) and incubated with 0.6 M HCl at
room temperature for 24 h. Calcium content was measured color-
imetrically by stable interaction with o-cresolphthalein using a com-
mercially available kit (Sigma-Adrich, Poole, UK) and corrected for
total protein concentration using the Bradford assay (Sigma-Aldrich,
Poole, UK). Bone formation in osteoblast cultures was also determined
using image analysis, as described previously [26,28]. Calcium de-
position was visualised by alizarin red staining of osteoblast/VSMC cell
layers, as previously described [28].
2.6. Staining for collagen and elastin deposition
Deposited collagen and elastin were visualised in osteoblasts and
control/calcifying VSMCs cultured for 7 and 14 days. Cells were ﬁxed
for 24 h in Bouin's solution before being stained using an Elastic Stain
kit (Sigma Aldrich, Poole, UK) as per manufacturer's instructions. The
presence of deposited elastic ﬁbres (black) and/or collagen ﬁbres (red)
was visualised by transmitted light microscopy.
2.7. Immunoﬂuorescence
Osteoblasts and VSMCs were seeded onto sterile 1 cm diameter
discs, cut from Melinex (Dupont Teijin Films, UK) clear polyester ﬁlm,
and cultured for up to 14 days. Upon termination, discs were ﬁxed with
4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buﬀer for 20 min at room
temperature, washed 3 × 5 min with PBS and stored at 4 °C in PBS until
staining. Each disc was incubated with a blocking solution consisting of
2% BSA in PBS, for 1 h. Rabbit primary antibodies were diluted in
blocking solution at 1:500 (Col1α1) or 1:200 (SM22α). Discs were in-
cubated overnight in the primary antibody solution at 4 °C. Cells were
subjected to three 5 min washes with PBS before incubation for 1 h with
the donkey anti-rabbit Cy3-labelled secondary antibody solution
(1:400), diluted in PBS with 1% BSA. After three further 5 min PBS
washes, discs were mounted on to microscope slides using Prolong™
Diamond Antifade Mountant with DAPI (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc, UK)
and viewed by ﬂuorescence microscopy (Cy3 absorbance and emission
J.J. Patel, et al.
Experimental Cell Research 380 (2019) 100–113
101
at 550 nm and 570 nm, respectively).
2.8. Elastin and collagen assays
Elastin and soluble collagen levels were investigated in control
VSMCs, calcifying VSMCs and osteoblasts after 7 and 14 days of culture.
To measure elastin, cell layers were treated with 0.25% trypsin for
10 min to detach the cells. The resulting suspension was spun at
2,500 rpm for 5 min to pellet the cells and associated proteins. Cell-
associated elastin was converted to water soluble α-elastin using 0.25 M
oxalic acid and heating for 1 h at 100 °C. Elastin levels were measured
using the Fastin™elastin assay (Biocolor Ltd, County Antrim, UK) ac-
cording to the manufacturer's instructions.
To measure soluble collagen, cells were transferred to αMEM con-
taining 5% FCS and the lysyl oxidase inhibitor β-aminoproponitrile
(50 μg/ml) for the ﬁnal 24 h of culture. The concentration of collagen
accumulated in the tissue culture medium was assayed using a Sirius
red dye-based kit (Sircol soluble collagen assay, Biocolor Ltd) according
to the manufacturer's instructions. For both assays, samples were nor-
malised to total cell protein using the Bradford assay (Sigma-Aldrich,
Poole, UK).
2.9. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
VSMCs and osteoblasts were seeded onto sterile 1 cm diameter discs,
cut from melinex clear polyester ﬁlm (Dupont Teijin Films, UK), and
cultured for 14 days in calcifying or non-calcifying conditions. Cells
were ﬁxed with fresh 2% glutaraldehyde/0.1 M sodium cacodylate for
48 h. Discs were rinsed with 0.1 M phosphate buﬀer and post-ﬁxed in
1% osmium tetroxide/1.5% potassium ferrocyanine in 0.1 M sodium
cacodylate buﬀer. Specimens were dehydrated in a graded-ethanol
water series and inﬁltrated with Agar 100 resin. Ultra-thin sections
were cut at 70–80 nm using a diamond knife on a Reichert Ultracut E
microtome. Sections were collected on 300 mesh grids, counterstained
with lead citrate and viewed using a Joel 1010 transition electron mi-
croscope; images were recorded using a Gatan Orius CCD camera.
2.10. Determination of total TNAP and NPP activity
Enzyme activity was assessed in osteoblasts and VSMCs cultured for
14 days. TNAP activity was measured in cell lysates using a colorimetric
assay (Anaspec, CA, USA), as previously described [29]. TNAP activity
was normalised to cell protein using the Bradford assay (Sigma-Aldrich,
Poole, UK).
The assay to measure total cellular NPP activity was based on the
method originally described by Razzell and Khorana [30]. Brieﬂy, cells
were lysed in a buﬀer containing 1% Triton x 100 in 0.2 M Tris base
with 1.6 mM MgCl2, pH 8.1. Following centrifugation at 500×g, the
NPP activity of collected supernatants was measured using 5 mM p-
nitrophenyl-thymidine 5′-monophosphate as a substrate. Total protein
in cell lysates was determined using the Bradford assay (Sigma-Aldrich,
Poole, UK).
2.11. TNAP staining and inhibition
VSMCs (control and calcifying) and osteoblasts were cultured for 14
days before ﬁxation with 2.5% glutaraldehyde. Cell layers were ﬁxed to
demonstrate TNAP expression using a commercially available kit
(Sigma-Aldrich, Poole, UK). To determine the eﬀect of TNAP inhibition
on calciﬁcation and bone formation, calcifying VSMCs and osteoblasts
were
cultured
for
14
days
with
a
0.1–10 μM
TNAP
inhibitor
(CAS496014-13-2, Merck-Millipore, Watford, UK).
2.12. Cell number and viability assay
Cell number and viability were determined at regular intervals
during the culture period using the CytoTox 96® colorimetric cyto-
toxicity assay (Promega UK, Southampton UK), as described previously
[29]. Cell supernatants were collected to determine medium lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) levels (cell viability). To establish total cellular
LDH levels, cells were lysed with 1% Triton X-100 in water for 1 h. The
LDH content of the supernatants and cell lysates were measured col-
orimetrically (490 nm) according to the manufacturer's instructions. A
standard curve for determination of cell numbers was constructed using
cells seeded at 102 to 106/well. Cell viability was calculated by ex-
pressing medium LDH as a percentage of the total cellular LDH/cell.
2.13. Quantiﬁcation of apoptosis by ﬂow cytometry
VSMCs plated in 24-well trays were cultured in control or calciﬁ-
cation medium for 7 days. Apoptosis was assessed via ﬂow cytometry
using
an
annexin
V
antibody
conjugated
to
ﬂuorescein
(Life
Technologies, Paisley, UK), as per manufacturer's instructions. Brieﬂy,
cells were detached using trypsin (0.25%) and the resultant pellet wa-
shed in ice cold PBS. This suspension was centrifuged and resuspended
in 1× annexin-binding buﬀer (Life Technologies, Paisley, UK). A
sample of this suspension was incubated with the annexin V antibody
for 15 min and then analysed using a BD FACSCanto II Flow Cytometer
(Becton, Dickinson and Company, Oxford, UK). Data were processed to
calculate percentage apoptosis using Flowing Software (version 2.5.1)
(Turku University, Finland).
2.14. Total RNA extraction and DNase treatment
VSMCs (control and calcifying) and osteoblasts were cultured for 14
days before total RNA was extracted using TRIZOL® reagent (Invitrogen,
Paisley, UK) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Extracted
RNA was treated with RNase-free DNase I (35U/ml) for 30 min at 37 °C.
The reaction was terminated by heat inactivation at 65 °C for 10 min.
Total RNA was quantiﬁed spectrophotometrically by measuring ab-
sorbance at 260 nM. RNA was stored at −80 °C until ampliﬁcation by
qRT-PCR.
2.15. Quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
VSMC and osteoblast RNA (50 ng) was transcribed and ampliﬁed
using the qPCRBIO SyGreen one-step qRT-PCR kit (PCR Biosystems,
London, UK), which allows cDNA synthesis and PCR ampliﬁcation to be
carried out sequentially. qRT-PCR was performed according to manu-
facturer's instructions with initial cDNA synthesis (45 °C for 10 min) and
reverse transcriptase inactivation (95 °C for 2 min) followed by 40 cy-
cles of denaturation (95 °C for 5 s) and detection (60 °C for 30 s). All
reactions were carried out in triplicate using RNAs derived from 4
diﬀerent cultures. Primers sequences (forward/reverse): β-actin, S: gcc
ttc ctt cct ggg tat gg/AS: tcc gat tca act cat act gc; Collagen type 1 alpha
chain 1 (Col1α1): S: ggg aca cag agg ttt cag tgg/AS: agc tcc att ttc acc agg
act g; TNAP (Alpl), S: aaa cct aga cac aag cac tc/AS: tcc gat tca act cat act
gc; Osteocalcin (Bglap2), S: gca gac acc atg agg acc ct/AS: gca gct tgt gcc
gtc cat ac; Osterix(Sp7), S: aga gat ctg agc tgg gta gag g/AS: aag aga gcc tgg
caa gag g; OPN (Spp1), S: gag agc cag gag agt gcc ga/AS: gct ttg gaa ctt gct
tga cta tcg; Runx2, S: acc ata aca gtc ttc aca aat cct/AS: cag gcg atc aga gaa
caa act a; Sm22α, S: tcc agt cca caa acg acc aag c/AS: gaa ttg agc cac ctg ttc
cat ctg; Myosin heavy chain (Myh10), S: atc aag cag ctt cgc aaa c/AS: tcg
agc ctc ttc tag ttc acg; Caldesmon 1 (Cald1), S: cag ctg cgg aca tgc tta g/
AS: cgt cat cat cat ttc tct gat agg; Smoothelin (Smtn), S: ccg acc aaa cta aca
cga aac/AS: act cag aat tcc tga cat gtg g; α-Smooth muscle actin (Acta2),
S: ctc tct tcc agc cat ctt tca t/AS: tat agg tgg ttt cgt gga tgc; Elastin, S: tgg agc
agg act tgg agg t/AS: cct cca gca cca tac tta gca.
2.16. Western blot
Protein was extracted from VSMCs (in control and calciﬁcation
J.J. Patel, et al.
Experimental Cell Research 380 (2019) 100–113
102
medium) and osteoblasts at 4, 7 and 14 days. Cell layers were lysed in
ice-cold radio immunoprecipitation (RIPA) lysis buﬀer (50 mM Tris HCl
pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS 1 mM phenyl methyl
sulfonyl ﬂuoride (PMSF), 1 mg/ml aprotinin, 1 mM Na3VO4 and
2.5 mg/ml deoxicolic acid). Cell homogenates were sonicated for 5 min
and stored at −80 °C for at least half an hour before use. Protein
concentrations from lysates were determined using the Bradford assay
(Sigma-Aldrich, Poole, UK). Prior to loading total protein samples were
denatured by incubating at 95 °C for 5 min in the presence of 5× re-
ducing sample buﬀer (60 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 25% glycerol, 2% SDS,
10% β-mercaptoethanol and 0.1% bromophenol blue). Protein samples
(20μg/lane) were loaded into SDS-PAGE (10%) gels and transferred
onto
a
polyvinylideniﬂuoride
(PVDF)
membrane
(Amersham,
Buckinghamshire, UK) by the use of a wet tank blotter (Bio-Rad,
Watford, UK) at 150 V for 1 h. Membranes were then blocked with 5%
non-fat milk and incubated with β-actin (1:1000), Runx2 (1:500), OPN
(1:200), SM22α (1:200) or Acta2 (1:500) antibodies overnight at 4 °C.
After washing, blots were incubated in horseradish peroxidase-con-
jugated secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. A peroxidase
detection system (Immobilon™Western, Merck-Millipore, Watford UK)
and ChemiDoc™XRS + system (Bio-Rad, Watford, UK) was used for the
visualisation of immunoreactivity.
2.17. Measurement of ATP release
Basal ATP release from VSMCs was measured at 4, 7, 10 and 14 days
of culture and from osteoblasts at day 14 of culture. Prior to mea-
surement of ATP release, culture medium was removed, cell layers
washed and cells incubated with serum-free DMEM. To measure basal
ATP release, samples were collected after 1 h and immediately mea-
sured using the luciferin-luciferase assay as described previously [31].
2.18. Statistical analysis
Data were analysed using GraphPad Prism 7 software (San Diego,
CA). Statistical comparisons were made using a T-test or a one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a post-hoc Bonferroni correction for
multiple comparisons. Results are expressed as means ± SEM for 6–12
replicates. Results are representative of experiments performed at least
three times using cells obtained from diﬀerent animal isolations.
3. Results
3.1. The morphology of in vitro VSMC calciﬁcation diﬀers from that of bone
formation by osteoblasts
Examination of cultures by light microscopy demonstrated that os-
teoblasts reproducibly formed abundant, large mineralised bone no-
dules when cultured with 2 mM β-glycerophosphate. These bone
structures stain strongly with alizarin red and are often associated with
regions of unmineralised collagenous matrix (Fig. 1A). However, ex-
cessive levels of β-glycerophosphate (10 mM) resulted in non-speciﬁc
mineral deposition that is not true bone formation (Fig. 1B). Control
VSMCs were densely packed but displayed no signs of calciﬁcation
(Fig. 1C). VSMCs treated with 2 mM or 10 mM β-glycerophosphate for
14 days did not calcify (Fig. 1D and E). VSMCs cultured with 2 mM
sodium orthophosphate formed discrete regions of calciﬁcation that
were much smaller than osteoblast bone nodules and did not appear to
be associated with collagenous matrix (Fig. 1F). In osteoblasts, sodium
orthophosphate also resulted in some non-speciﬁc mineral deposition
(Fig. 1G). Assessment of culture medium pH revealed no signiﬁcant
diﬀerences between the diﬀerent conditions: 2 mM β-glycerophosphate
(osteoblasts = pH 7.48 ± 0.01, VSMCs = pH 7.49 ± 0.01), 10 mM β-
glycerophosphate
(osteoblasts = pH
7.47 ± 0.02,
VSMCs = pH
7.46 ± 0.01), sodium orthophosphate (osteoblasts = pH 7.48 ± 0.03,
VSMCs = pH 7.48 ± 0.03) and control VSMCs (pH 7.49 ± 0.01).
To ensure that results were not confounded by non-cell mediated
calciﬁcation processes, unless stated, for all subsequent experiments
osteoblasts were cultured in 2 mM β-glycerophosphate and calcifying
VSMCs refers to cells cultured with 2 mM sodium orthophosphate. The
overall quantity of deposited calcium, as assessed by colorimetric assay,
was
similar
in
bone-forming
osteoblasts
and
calcifying
VSMCs
(Fig. 1H).
3.2. Collagen production by osteoblasts and VSMCs
Deposition of collagen ﬁbres (red) was visible in both early osteo-
blast (day 7) and mature, bone-forming osteoblast (day 14) cultures. By
day 14, extensive mineralisation of the organic matrix had occurred;
collagen ﬁbres showed as regions of red staining underneath the de-
posited bone mineral (dark brown/black) (Fig. 2A). There was no ob-
vious deposition of collagen ﬁbres in control or calcifying VSMCs at any
stage via light microscopy (Fig. 2A). Immunoﬂuoresecent staining for
Col1α1 showed extensive protein expression in and around osteoblasts
(Fig. 2A). Control and calcifying VSMCs also displayed Col1α1 ex-
pression; however, immunostaining was usually cell associated and
much less widespread than in osteoblasts (Fig. 2A). Control staining for
SM22α showed uniform expression across the cell layers in both VSMC
and osteoblast cultures (Fig. 2A).
Analysis of Col1α1 mRNA levels (day 14 of culture) showed that
gene expression was up to 11-fold lower in control and calcifying
VSMCs, relative to bone forming osteoblasts (Fig. 2B). Osteoblast dif-
ferentiation and bone formation were associated with increased levels
of soluble collagen. In contrast, no soluble collagen was detected in
cultures of control or calcifying VSMCs (Fig. 2C).
3.3. Production of elastin by cultured VSMCs and osteoblasts
There was no obvious discrete staining of elastin ﬁbres (black)
evident in osteoblast, control or calcifying VSMCs at any stage
(Fig. 2A). However, large regions of dark brown/black staining, which
corresponded to the areas of calciﬁcation, were observed in osteoblasts
and calcifying VSMCs. Analysis of elastin mRNA levels (day 14 of cul-
ture) showed that gene expression was ∼2-fold higher in control
VSMCs, relative to bone-forming osteoblasts and calcifying VSMCs
(Fig. 2D). Cell-associated elastin was detected in control VSMCs, cal-
cifying VSMCs and osteoblasts at all stages (Fig. 2E). Consistent with
the mRNA expression, control VSMCs displayed higher elastin levels
(≤50%) than osteoblasts and calcifying VSMCs at day 14; no diﬀer-
ences were observed at day 7 (Fig. 2E).
3.4. Marked diﬀerences in the ultrastructure of VSMC calciﬁcation and the
mineralised bone nodules formed by osteoblasts
TEM imaging of early osteoblasts showed no evidence of bone for-
mation (Fig. 3A). Clear extracellular deposition of collagen ﬁbres and
widespread mineralised matrix (Fig. 3C and E) were evident in mature,
bone-forming osteoblasts. The banding pattern typically associated
with collagen ﬁbres was clearly visible within the mineralised bone
nodule (Fig. 3E). No calciﬁcation was observed in VSMCs grown under
basal conditions (Fig. 3B). In cultures of calcifying VSMCs, there were
no collagen ﬁbres, however, deposits of ﬁlamentous cellular debris
were observed (Fig. 3D and F). VSMC calciﬁcation typically occurred as
small discrete regions sometimes associated with cellular debris
(Fig. 3F). Comparatively, osteoblast-mediated bone mineralisation was
denser, larger and more widespread than the calciﬁcation in VSMC
cultures (Fig. 3E and F). In bone-forming osteoblasts, matrix vesicles
were observed in association with deposited collagen ﬁbres, whilst
cultures of calcifying VSMCs contained smaller extracellular vesicles
that were often associated with the ﬁlamentous cellular debris (Fig. 3G
and H).
J.J. Patel, et al.
Experimental Cell Research 380 (2019) 100–113
103
3.5. TNAP activity is 100-fold higher in bone-forming osteoblasts than
calcifying VSMCs
Bone-forming osteoblasts showed strong expression of TNAP, par-
ticularly in the cells surrounding the bone nodules (Fig. 4A). In con-
trast, calcifying VSMCs displayed limited, diﬀuse staining for TNAP
(Fig. 4A). No obvious TNAP staining was evident in cultures of control
VSMCs (Fig. 4A). The rank order for TNAP activity was bone-forming
osteoblasts > > > calcifying
VSMCs > control
VSMCs
(Fig.
4B);
VSMCs displayed a very low level of enzyme activity relative to os-
teoblasts (at least 100-fold lower). Basal TNAP activity was 50% higher
in calcifying VSMCs (2.85 ± 0.1 units/min/μg) compared to control
VSMCs (≤1.84 ± 0.1 units/min/μg) (Fig. 4B).
The TNAP inhibitor (CAS496014-13-2) concentration-dependently
(≥0.1 μM) reduced bone formation by up to 90% (Fig. 4D). In contrast,
culture of VSMCs with the same TNAP inhibitor had no eﬀect on the
level of calciﬁcation (Fig. 4E).
3.6. VSMCs display higher total NPP activity than osteoblasts
Rank order of total NPP activity was control VSMCs > calcifying
VSMCs > bone-forming osteoblasts (Fig. 4C). NPP activity in calci-
fying VSMCs was 3-fold lower than control VSMCs. Osteoblast total NPP
activity was 3.4-fold and 11-fold lower than calcifying and control
VSMCs, respectively (Fig. 4C).
3.7. Cell number and viability are reduced in calcifying VSMCs but not in
bone-forming osteoblasts
Both cell types progressively increased in number as the culture
progressed; osteoblasts showed the largest increase in cell number over
time (Fig. 5A). At day 4, 7 and 10 there were no diﬀerences in control
Fig. 1. Comparison of in vitro bone formation and VSMC calciﬁcation. Representative phase contrast microscopy images (alizarin red stained) and whole well scans
(unstained) of osteoblast and VSMCs after 14 days in culture. (A) Abundant formation of mineralised bone nodules by primary osteoblasts cultured with 2 mM β-
glycerophosphate; unmineralised deposited collagen is highlighted by the arrow. (B) Widespread, non-speciﬁc mineral deposition was observed in osteoblasts
cultured with 10 mM β-glycerophosphate (highlighted by the arrow). (C) No calciﬁcation in control VSMC cultures. VSMCs cultured with (D) 2 mM and (E) 10 mM β-
glycerophosphate for 14 days do not calcify. (F) VSMCs grown in 2 mM sodium orthophosphate form small, discrete regions of calciﬁcation. These structures are
signiﬁcantly smaller than osteoblast bone nodules and are less visible in the whole well scans. (G) Osteoblasts cultured with sodium orthophosphate also display non-
speciﬁc mineral deposition (white arrow). Scale bars: phase contrast microscopy images = 250 μm, tissue culture wells = 0.5 cm. (H) The overall level of deposited
calcium was similar in cultures of bone-forming osteoblasts and calcifying VSMCs (2 mM phosphate) but ∼90% lower in control VSMCs. Values are mean ± SEM
(n = 6 replicate wells), *** = p < 0.001.
J.J. Patel, et al.
Experimental Cell Research 380 (2019) 100–113
104
Fig. 2. Collagen and elastin production by osteoblasts and VSMCs. (A) Osteoblasts and VSMCs were cultured for 7 or 14 days and then stained to visualise collagen (red)
and elastin (black) ﬁbres. Representative light microscopy images showing widespread deposition of collagen (highlighted by the arrows) in early and mature, bone-
forming osteoblasts. Mineralised matrix in bone-forming cultures stained dark brown/black and was associated with collagen staining. No obvious collagen or elastin
staining in control VSMCs or calcifying VSMCs via light microscopy. Regions of calciﬁcation in VSMC cultures also stained dark brown/black (highlighted by the
arrows). Immunoﬂuorescent staining for Col1α1 showed extensive collagen expression and deposition in osteoblast cultures. Control and calcifying VSMCs also
expressed Col1α1 protein but immunostaining was primarily cell associated rather than extracellular. Staining for SM22α showed uniform expression across os-
teoblast and VSMC cell layers. Scale bars, light microscopy = 50 μm, immunoﬂuorescence = 50 μm. (B) Col1α1 mRNA expression was up to 11-fold lower in control
and calcifying VSMCs, relative to bone-forming osteoblasts. (C) Soluble collagen levels increased with osteoblast diﬀerentiation and bone formation (black bar). No
soluble collagen was detected in control and calcifying VSMC cultures [ND = not detected]. (D) Elastin mRNA expression was ∼2-fold higher in control VSMCs than
bone-forming osteoblasts; calcifying VSMCs and osteoblasts displayed similar levels of elastin expression. (E) Cell-associated elastin was up to 50% higher in control
VSMCs compare to calcifying VSMCs and osteoblasts. Values are mean ± SEM (n = 6 replicate wells, n = 4 RNA sets), * = p < 0.05, *** = p < 0.001.
J.J. Patel, et al.
Experimental Cell Research 380 (2019) 100–113
105
and calcifying VSMC number; at day 14, cell number was 12% lower in
calcifying VSMCs (Fig. 5A). Increasing culture time was also associated
with a progressive reduction in viability (shown as percentage of dead
cells) of calcifying VSMCs; osteoblast and control VSMC viability was
unchanged (Fig. 5B). The percentage of dead cells was up to 7-fold
higher in calcifying VSMCs than bone-forming osteoblasts and control
VSMCs (Fig. 5B). The level of apoptosis was nearly doubled in calci-
fying VSMCs compared to control cells after 7 days in culture (Fig. 5C).
For comparison, osteoblasts were also cultured in conditions associated
with dystrophic mineral deposition (10 mM β-glycerophosphate or
2 mM sodium orthophosphate); these cells displayed reduced viability
compared to osteoblasts grown in optimal conditions for regulated bone
formation (+2 mM β-glycerophosphate) (Fig. 5D).
3.8. Comparison of marker gene expression between VSMCs and bone-
forming osteoblasts
mRNA expression of typical osteoblast (Runx2, Sp7, Alpl, Spp1,
Bglap2) and VSMC (Sm22α, Myh10, Acta2, Cald1, Smtn) markers was
investigated in control VSMCs, calcifying VSMCs and bone-forming
osteoblasts after 14 days of culture. Data are presented as the fold
change in mRNA expression relative to that seen in bone-forming os-
teoblasts (Fig. 6A and B).
Previous work has shown that VSMC calciﬁcation is associated with
an increase in expression of osteoblast markers [10,13]. Consistent with
this, we found that expression of Runx2, Sp7, Alpl, Bglap2 and Spp1 was
increased up to 6-fold in calcifying VSMCs compared to control VSMCs
(Fig. 6A). However, in all cases mRNA levels were signiﬁcantly lower in
VSMCs than in mature, bone-forming osteoblasts. Expression of Runx2
Fig. 3. Diﬀerences in the ultrastructure of
VSMC calciﬁcation and the mineralised bone
nodules formed by osteoblasts. Cultures of (A)
early osteoblasts and (B) non-calcifying
VSMCs showed no evidence of any extra-
cellular mineralisation. (C) In bone-forming
osteoblasts there was widespread collagen
[COL]
deposition
and
clear
mineralised
matrix which formed part of a bone nodule
[BN]. (D) Cultures of calcifying VSMCs
contained amorphous regions of calciﬁca-
tion [Cal] and extracellular ﬁbril-like struc-
tures that appeared to be cellular debris
[CD] but no deposited collagen ﬁbres. (E)
Higher power images showed that miner-
alised matrix [MM] was formed in and
around the collagen ﬁbres [COL] in bone-
forming osteoblasts. (F) The extracellular
calciﬁcation [Cal] present in VSMCs was less
widespread, morphologically distinct from
the osteoblast bone nodules and was some-
times associated with ﬁlamentous cellular
debris [CD]. (G) In osteoblasts, matrix ve-
sicles [MV] were seen associated with col-
lagen ﬁbres [COL]. (H) In calcifying VSMCs,
extracellular vesicles [EV] were observed
associated with ﬁlamentous cellular debris
[CD]. Images shown are representative of
the calciﬁcation and matrix deposition ob-
served in three diﬀerent cell preparations.
Scale bars: A-B = 5 μm, C-D = 2 μm, E-
F = 1 μm, G-H = 200 nm.
J.J. Patel, et al.
Experimental Cell Research 380 (2019) 100–113
106
and Sp7 (early osteoblast markers) was up to 12-fold lower in control
VSMCs and 3-fold lower in calcifying VSMCs compared to osteoblasts.
Control VSMCs showed very limited expression of mature osteoblast
marker genes (Alpl, Bglap2, Spp1) with mRNA levels up to 120-fold
lower than that seen in bone-forming osteoblasts. Expression levels of
these genes increased when VSMCs began to calcify but remained up to
40-fold lower than in osteoblasts (Fig. 6A).
Bone-forming osteoblasts were found to express mRNA for all the
VSMC marker genes studied (Fig. 6B). Of these, only Cald1, Myh10 and
Smtn were expressed at a higher level in VSMCs than osteoblasts. Ex-
pression of Sm22α and Acta2 was at a similar level in control VSMCs but
up to 4-fold lower in calcifying VSMCs (compared to osteoblasts)
(Fig. 6B).
3.9. Comparison of protein expression in osteoblasts and VSMCs
Changes in the protein expression of osteoblast (Runx2, OPN) and
VSMC genes (Sm22α, Acta2) were investigated in osteoblasts and
VSMCs. After 7 and 14 days of culture, levels of Sm22α were lower in
calcifying VSMCs compared to control VSMCs (Fig. 6C). Calciﬁcation
had less of an eﬀect on Acta2 protein expression with only a small
decrease at day 14. Osteoblasts also displayed strong expression of
these proteins with Sm22α levels, in particular, being higher in osteo-
blasts than VSMCs. Furthermore, cellular diﬀerentiation appeared to
inﬂuence osteoblast Sm22α expression since the highest levels were
seen in proliferating cells (day 4) (Fig. 6C).
The transcription factor, Runx2, is considered an early osteoblast
marker whilst OPN is a marker of more mature, bone-forming cells.
Runx2 protein expression was detected in osteoblasts, control and cal-
cifying VSMCS but, in keeping with the mRNA data, the levels were
higher in osteoblasts (at all stages of diﬀerentiation). Interestingly,
Runx2 expression was fairly similar in calcifying and control cells
(Fig. 6C). OPN expression increased with osteoblast diﬀerentiation with
the highest levels in mature, bone-forming cells. At day 7, control and
calcifying VSMCs showed no OPN protein expression; however, low
OPN expression was evident in calcifying VSMCs at day 14 (Fig. 6C).
3.10. Release of the mineralisation inhibitor, ATP, by osteoblasts and
VSMCs
ATP is an extracellular signalling molecule and a substrate for a
range of ecto-nucleotidases including NPP1. Side-by-side comparison
after 14 days in culture showed that rank order of ATP release per cell
was bone-forming osteoblast > calcifying VSMCs > control VSMCs;
osteoblasts released 2.4-fold and 4.3-fold more ATP than calcifying and
control VSMCs, respectively (Fig. 7A). Throughout the culture period,
the extracellular ATP levels were up to 85% higher in calcifying VSMCs
compared to control VSMCs (Fig. 7B).
Fig. 4. TNAP activity is 100-fold higher in bone forming osteoblasts than calcifying VSMCs. (A) Representative whole well scans and phase contrast microscopy images of
osteoblasts and VSMCs stained to visualise TNAP expression. Bone-forming osteoblasts displayed the highest level of TNAP expression with only limited staining in
calcifying VSMCs (highlighted by the arrow). No obvious TNAP staining was observed in control VSMCs. Scale bars: phase contrast microscopy images = 250 μm,
tissue culture wells = 0.5 cm. (B) Rank order of TNAP activity was bone-forming osteoblasts > > > calcifying VSMCs > control VSMCs. TNAP activity was 50%
higher in calcifying VSMCs compared to control VSMCs. (C) Rank order of total NPP activity was control VSMCs > calcifying VSMCs > bone-forming osteoblasts.
(D) Culture with a TNAP inhibitor (≥0.1 μM) reduced bone formation by up to 90%. (E) Inhibition of TNAP had no eﬀect on VSMC calciﬁcation. Values are
mean ± SEM (n = 6 replicate wells), *** = p < 0.001.
J.J. Patel, et al.
Experimental Cell Research 380 (2019) 100–113
107
3.11. Identiﬁcation of a ‘universal’ mineralisation medium for osteoblastic
bone formation and VSMC calciﬁcation
One potential limitation of the results described above is that they
use slightly diﬀerent tissue culture conditions to induce bone miner-
alisation/VSMC calciﬁcation (i.e. the form of phosphate used). To verify
that the eﬀects observed here were due to fundamental diﬀerences in
the cells rather than the form of phosphate added, we identiﬁed con-
ditions that could induce regulated bone formation and VSMC calciﬁ-
cation. Culture of cells in medium supplemented with 1 mM β-glycer-
ophosphate and 1 mM sodium diphosphate (1 + 1 conditions) resulted
in selective mineralisation of the collagenous matrix in osteoblasts and
the formation of small regions of calciﬁcation in VSMCs (Fig. 8A). For
both cell types, the calciﬁcation formed displayed a similar morphology
to that seen in osteoblasts and VSMCs cultured in the original condi-
tions (Fig. 1A and F). The level of TNAP and Col1α1 staining and the
appearance of the calciﬁcation under TEM also strongly resembled that
observed with the original conditions (Fig. 8A).
The diﬀerent cell culture conditions had no eﬀect on the overall
level of mineralised bone nodule formation (Fig. 8B), whilst the level of
VSMC calciﬁcation was increased by 40% in the 1 + 1 conditions
(Fig. 8C). Key parameters such as cell number (Fig. 8D), cell viability
(Fig. 8E), ATP release (Fig. 8F) and TNAP activity (Fig. 8G) were un-
changed. Furthermore, in all cases the diﬀerences between mineralising
osteoblasts and calcifying VSMC were still observed.
4. Discussion
The development of AMC is widely accepted to be associated with a
phenotypic transdiﬀerentiation of VSMCs which results in them taking
on characteristics usually associated with bone-forming osteoblasts
[2,8,10,12]. The culture of VSMCs in a calcifying (high phosphate)
environment is widely used to study the pathogenesis of AMC in vitro.
This investigation directly compared this model of AMC with the es-
tablished
and extensively
used osteoblast
bone formation
assay
[26–28]. It also sought to develop a ‘universal’ calciﬁcation medium
which allowed the direct comparison of both processes. We found that,
compared to control VSMCs, calcifying VSMCs exhibit some limited
osteoblast-like characteristics. However, they diﬀer to mature osteo-
blasts in a number of key ways including: 1) their failure to form
Fig. 5. Reduced cell viability and number in calcifying
VSMCs. (A) All cells showed an increase in number
with increasing time in culture. Cell number was
unchanged at day 4, 7 and 10 but was decreased 12%
at day 14 in calcifying VSMCs compared to control
VSMCs. (B) Increasing culture time was associated
with a progressive reduction in calcifying VSMC cell
viability; the percentage of dead cells was up to 7-
fold higher in calcifying VSMCs compared to bone-
forming osteoblasts and control VSMCs. (C) At day 7,
the level of apoptosis was almost doubled in calci-
fying VSMCs compared to control cells. (D) Reduced
viability in osteoblasts grown in medium associated
with
dystrophic
mineral
deposition.
Values
are
mean ± SEM
(n
=
6
replicate
wells),
*** = p < 0.001, * = p < 0.05.
J.J. Patel, et al.
Experimental Cell Research 380 (2019) 100–113
108
collagen-containing bone; 2) their lack of reliance on TNAP to promote
mineral deposition; and, 3) the negative eﬀect of calciﬁcation on their
survival. Our study shows that development of VSMC calciﬁcation in
vitro is a process distinct from the bone nodule formation performed by
cultured osteoblasts. Furthermore, calcifying VSMCs appear to have a
transitional phenotype that lies somewhere between that of a normal
VSMC and a mature, bone-forming osteoblast.
VSMC calciﬁcation and mineralised bone nodule formation are the
commonly used experimental end points for studying AMC and osteo-
genesis, respectively, in vitro. This investigation clearly shows that,
when cultured with physiologically relevant levels of phosphate (i.e.
≤3 mM), these processes diﬀer signiﬁcantly. The data presented in
Figs. 1–3, and also in many other studies [26,28,32], show that osteo-
blasts secrete and deposit signiﬁcant amounts of collagenous matrix
which is then mineralised to form large “trabecular-shaped” bone no-
dules in vitro. In contrast, culture of VSMCs in phosphate-containing
medium led to the formation of numerous small regions of calciﬁcation
that were not obviously associated with extracellular matrix. High
power imaging using TEM revealed that this calciﬁcation was fre-
quently located on and around ﬁlamentous cellular debris rather than
collagen ﬁbres. Further analysis of collagen production showed that
both cell types expressed Col1α1 mRNA and protein. In the case of
VSMCs, and consistent with earlier work [33], Col1α1 expression was
primarily localised in or on the surface of cells. Whilst clearly expressed
by VSMCs, no soluble collagen was detected in the culture medium and
no deposited collagen ﬁbres were evident in the TEM images. This in-
dicates that VSMCs are not exporting and depositing collagen into the
extracellular environment in the same manner as osteoblasts. However,
this lack of reliance on collagen for in vitro VSMC calciﬁcation is in
contrast to a recent study which implicated the collagen cross-linking
factors, LOX and PLOD, in the development of AMC [34]. Cell asso-
ciated elastin was detected in both VSMCs and osteoblasts with the
highest level seen in control, non-calcifying VSMCs. The observed de-
crease in elastin production in calcifying VSMCs compared to control
cells is consistent with earlier studies which have associated AMC with
a loss of elastin [35,36]. Taken together, these data show that the ex-
tracellular matrix produced by cultured VSMCs in vitro diﬀers con-
siderably in composition, abundance and structure to that which is
secreted by bone-forming osteoblasts.
Earlier work has linked the initiation of AMC with increased VSMC
apoptosis [15,37,38]. Although mechanistically not fully deﬁned, it is
thought that a calcifying environment can induce apoptosis and the
Fig. 6. Comparison of marker gene expres-
sion
in
osteoblasts
and
VSMCs.
(A)
Expression of Runx2, Sp7, Alpl, Bglap2 and
Spp1 was increased in calcifying VSMCs
compared to control VSMCs but, in all cases,
mRNA expression levels were lower in
VSMCs than osteoblasts. (B) Osteoblasts
express mRNA for all the VSMC marker
genes studied. Only Cald1, Myh10 and Smtn
were expressed at a higher level in VSMCs
than osteoblasts. mRNA expression is pre-
sented as the fold change in VSMC expres-
sion relative to bone-forming osteoblasts.
Values are mean ± SEM (n = 4 RNA sets),
*** = p
<
0.001, ** = p
<
0.01
* = p < 0.05. (C) Protein expression of
Sm22α was lower in calcifying VSMCs
compared to control VSMCs at both day 7
and 14; calciﬁcation had a limited eﬀect on
Acta2 levels. Osteoblasts also displayed
strong expression of these proteins with
Sm22α expression being higher in osteo-
blasts than VSMCs. Runx2 was detected in
osteoblasts, control and calcifying VSMCs
with the highest levels being seen in osteo-
blasts. OPN protein was expressed at all
stages of osteoblast diﬀerentiation but pro-
tein levels were highest in mature, miner-
alising osteoblasts. OPN protein was only
evident in calcifying VSMCs at day 14. Blots
shown are representative of experiments
performed 3 times with diﬀerent protein
sets.
J.J. Patel, et al.
Experimental Cell Research 380 (2019) 100–113
109
VSMC-derived apoptotic bodies can then act as nucleation sites for
hydroxyapatite crystal formation [15]. Consistent with these observa-
tions, we found that VSMC calciﬁcation was associated with higher
levels of cell death and apoptosis compared to control VSMCs. The in-
crease in calcifying VSMC apoptosis was measured after 7 days in
culture, at this point the level of calciﬁcation is still fairly low and any
changes in gene expression are less pronounced. This further supports
the notion that increased apoptosis is one of the early events in the
development of AMC. Earlier studies have also shown that inhibiting
apoptosis can lead to a reduction in AMC [38,39]. In agreement, we
have previously demonstrated that extracellular ATP and UTP can in-
hibit VSMC calciﬁcation by up to 80%, a protective eﬀect that is
mediated via the prevention of calciﬁcation-induced apoptosis [40].
However, since extracellular nucleotides do not fully block calciﬁca-
tion, these ﬁndings also suggest that increased apoptosis is not the only
factor driving the development of VSMC calciﬁcation in this experi-
mental model.
In contrast, physiological bone formation is not associated with
signiﬁcant osteoblast cell death. Consistent with this, the viability of
actively mineralising osteoblasts remained unchanged when cells were
grown in optimal conditions for bone formation. Bone mineralisation is
instead initiated within matrix vesicles where the coordinated actions
of enzymes and proteins allow regulated hydroxyapatite formation
without cell death [41,42]. Matrix vesicles associated with collagen
ﬁbres were evident in our bone-forming osteoblast cultures. AMC has
also been linked with the release of mineralisation-competent extra-
cellular vesicles [14]. Consistent with these ﬁndings, we observed ex-
tracellular vesicles associated with ﬁlamentous cellular debris. To-
gether, these data suggest that the processes which drive the initiation
of calciﬁcation in AMC are much more heterogeneous than those in
bone mineralisation. Thus, the dissimilar appearance of VSMC calciﬁ-
cation and mineralised bone nodules in vitro could reﬂect diﬀerences in
both the extracellular matrix and the events which initiate calciﬁcation.
Bone mineralisation is a tightly regulated process that involves the
coordinated activity of TNAP and NPP1 to control the phosphate/pyr-
ophosphate ratio [20,21]. AMC has been associated with an increase in
VSMC TNAP expression and activity [11,23,43]. Our data show that a
high phosphate environment increases VSMC TNAP expression and
activity to some extent. However, calcifying VSMCs still displayed le-
vels of TNAP activity that were up to 100-fold lower than those ob-
served in bone-forming osteoblasts. Furthermore, β-glycerophosphate
(2–10 mM), which is hydrolysed by TNAP to produce phosphate, did
not induce VSMC calciﬁcation within 14 days (unlike phosphate).
Culture with a TNAP inhibitor also had no eﬀect on the level of calci-
ﬁcation. This observation is in agreement with earlier studies which
showed no eﬀect of TNAP inhibition on calciﬁcation [44,45] but is in
contrast to other investigations which reported that blocking TNAP
activity can reduce calciﬁcation [46,47]. The reasons for this dis-
crepancy between investigations is unclear but may be related to the
experimental approaches used. In particular, many studies use the non-
selective compound Levamisole to reduce TNAP activity, here we used
the more potent and selective TNAP inhibitor (CAS496014-13-2) [48].
The eﬀectiveness of this compound is highlighted by the clear, dose-
dependent inhibition of mineralised bone nodule formation in osteo-
blast cultures (Fig. 4E). Taken together our ﬁndings suggest that, unlike
in osteoblasts, TNAP does not play a signiﬁcant role in mediating VSMC
calciﬁcation in vitro. Interestingly, we have also shown that extra-
cellular ATP, at a concentration that inhibits VSMC calciﬁcation by up
to 90%, actually causes a counter-intuitive increase in TNAP activity
[40]. Therefore it is clear, that the exact role of TNAP in driving the
development of VSMC calciﬁcation in vitro requires further clariﬁca-
tion.
Under normal physiological conditions, VSMCs can prevent tissue
calciﬁcation by producing local inhibitors such as pyrophosphate [2].
Previous studies have shown that development of AMC is associated
with a decrease in NPP1 activity [18,24,25]. Consistent with this, we
found that control VSMCs displayed the highest level of total NPP ac-
tivity and calciﬁcation was associated with a loss of enzyme activity.
It has been reported that calcifying VSMCs undergo a phenotypic
transdiﬀerentiation to become more osteoblast-like [10,12]. These
changes have been associated with increased expression of typical os-
teoblast genes (e.g. Runx2, Alpl (TNAP), Bgalp2 (OCN), Spp1 (OPN)) and
decreased expression of VSMC genes (e.g. Sm22α, Acta2) [10,12]. This
study directly compared the relative levels of gene expression between
mature, bone-forming osteoblasts, control VSMCs and calcifying VSMCs
for the ﬁrst time. An increase in osteogenic gene expression in calci-
fying VSMCs was observed in this study; however, the relative levels of
mRNA expression remained signiﬁcantly lower in calcifying VSMCs
than osteoblasts. Markers of the mature osteoblast phenotype such as
Alpl, Bgalp2 and Spp1 showed particularly limited expression. The low
mRNA levels of these genes suggests that, even when there is wide-
spread calciﬁcation, calcifying VSMCs are only at the early stages of
Fig. 7. Release of the mineralisation inhibitor, ATP, by osteo-
blasts and VSMCs. (A) Rank order of ATP release per cell was
bone-forming
osteoblasts > calcifying
VSMCs > control
VSMCs. Osteoblasts released 2.4-fold and 4.3-fold more ATP
than calcifying and control VSMCs, respectively. (B) Basal
ATP release was up to 85% higher in calcifying VSMCs
compared to control VSMCs. Values are mean ± SEM
(n = 12 replicate wells), *** = p < 0.001, * = p < 0.05.
J.J. Patel, et al.
Experimental Cell Research 380 (2019) 100–113
110
diﬀerentiating towards an osteoblast-like lineage.
VSMCs show a high degree of plasticity and therefore many genes
are used as markers of the cell phenotype including Sm22α, Acta2,
Cald1, Myh10 and Smtn [49,50]. In broad agreement to earlier work, we
observed decreased levels of Sm22α, Acta2 and Cald1 mRNA in calci-
fying VSMCs. Somewhat surprisingly, we found that bone-forming
osteoblasts also expressed mRNA for all of the VSMC genes studied. In
general, the relative level of mRNA expression was higher in VSMCs
than osteoblasts; however, in the case of Sm22α and Acta2, bone-
forming osteoblasts expressed more mRNA than calcifying VSMCs.
Additionally, strong Sm22α and Acta2 protein expression was observed
in osteoblasts at all stages of diﬀerentiation, and in the case of Sm22α
Fig. 8. The same functional diﬀerences in bone formation and VSMC calciﬁcation are observed when cells are grown in identical tissue culture conditions. (A) Osteoblasts
cultured in 1 mM β-glycerophosphate + 1 mM sodium phosphate form large mineralised bone nodules and display widespread collagen deposition and TNAP
staining. VSMCs grown in the same conditions form small discrete regions of calciﬁcation that are not associated with TNAP staining. Col1α1 immunostaining in
VSMCs is cell associated (Scale bars: phase contrast = 250 μm, immunoﬂuorescence = 50 μm, TEM = 1 μm). The level of (B) bone formation is similar in cells
cultured under the original versus new conditions. (C) The level of VSMC calciﬁcation was increased by 40% in the new conditions. Comparison of (D) cell number,
(E) cell viability, (F) ATP release and (G) TNAP activity shows that the functional diﬀerences between osteoblasts and VSMCs are the same in cells cultured in the
original and new conditions. Original conditions: 2 mM β-glycerophosphate (osteoblasts) or 2 mM sodium orthophosphate (VSMCs). New conditions: 1 mM β-
glycerophosphate + 1 mM sodium phosphate. Values are mean ± SEM (n = 6–12 replicate wells), *** = p < 0.001, ** = p < 0.01.
J.J. Patel, et al.
Experimental Cell Research 380 (2019) 100–113
111
levels were higher in osteoblasts than VSMCs. These ﬁndings are con-
sistent with previous studies which reported expression of VSMC mar-
kers (e.g. Acta2, calponin, Myh10) by osteoblasts and mesenchymal
stem cells [51–56]. Thus, despite being widely used in publications,
these proteins may not represent the most appropriate markers for
studying the loss of/change in VSMC phenotype in a calcifying en-
vironment.
Controlled ATP release has been demonstrated from many cell types
including VSMCs and osteoblasts [31,57]. This study found that ex-
tracellular ATP levels were higher in cultures of calcifying VSMCs than
control VSMCs. ATP can act via P2 receptors to inhibit bone miner-
alisation [29,58] and AMC [40,59]. Furthermore, ATP can also be
broken down by NPPs to produce pyrophosphate. Thus, the increase in
ATP release from calcifying VSMCs could reﬂect a mechanism by which
the cells are attempting to prevent further calciﬁcation by releasing
local inhibitors. However, since calcifying VSMCs also display reduced
cell viability the higher extracellular ATP levels could also reﬂect the
release of intracellular ATP from dying cells.
Many of the experimental protocols employed to model AMC in vitro
do so by increasing the extracellular phosphate levels in the culture
medium. The additional phosphate added varies from 2mM to 10mM
and is usually in the form of sodium phosphate [40,60,61] or, occa-
sionally,
β-glycerophosphate
[10,39].
Even
in
severe
hyperpho-
sphatemia, serum phosphate levels of over 3 mM are rare in vivo; thus,
the experimental study of higher phosphate concentrations may have
little pathophysiological relevance. Furthermore, a recent investigation
by Hortells et al. [62] reported that higher concentrations of phosphate
(≥3 mM) will saturate the tissue culture medium leading to non-spe-
ciﬁc, non-cell mediated calcium phosphate precipitation. The same also
applies to osteoblasts since culture with ≥5 mM β-glycerophosphate
leads to reduced cell viability and widespread non-speciﬁc mineralisa-
tion that is not true bone formation (Figs. 1 and 5) [26,28]. Thus, to
avoid confounding results caused by dystrophic mineral deposition, this
study used low, physiologically relevant phosphate concentrations
(2 mM) to compare AMC and bone formation. Since β-glycerophosphate
failed to induce VSMC calciﬁcation within 14 days, sodium orthopho-
sphate was used in the VSMC experiments. Sodium orthophosphate was
not suitable for osteoblast cultures because, even at 2 mM, it resulted in
non-speciﬁc mineral deposition and increased cell death. Both of these
events are not representative of the in vivo physiological situation and
therefore not appropriate to use. The comparison of cells grown in
diﬀerent conditions represents a potential limitation of the ﬁndings
presented as it is possible that the diﬀering forms of phosphate con-
tributed to some of the functional diﬀerences observed. Therefore, we
also sought to identify culture conditions which allow both regulated
bone formation and VSMC calciﬁcation. A combination approach of
1 mM β-glycerophosphate + 1 mM sodium phosphate proved to be the
most eﬀective approach. Osteoblasts and VSMCs cultured using this
medium supplementation behaved in the same way as cells grown in
the original culture conditions. Taken together, this suggests that the
functional diﬀerences observed between in vitro bone formation and
VSMC calciﬁcation are most likely cell-mediated rather than due to the
culture conditions.
In summary, this study showed that VSMCs cultured in a high
phosphate environment undergo phenotypic changes to develop some
limited osteoblast-like properties. However, calcifying mouse VSMCs
diﬀer signiﬁcantly from mature, bone-forming mouse osteoblasts and
instead appear to display a phenotype that is in between that of a
normal cultured VSMC and a mature osteoblast. It should be empha-
sised that this comparison is for in vitro studies where calciﬁcation has
been induced solely by increasing extracellular phosphate levels.
However, given the widespread use of in vitro models in vascular cal-
ciﬁcation research it is important that the diﬀerences between osteo-
blasts and calcifying VSMCs are acknowledged in order to prevent in-
accurate or over interpretation of research ﬁndings. Ultimately,
understanding the diﬀerences between VSMCs and osteoblasts may
help develop therapeutic strategies which prevent pathological AMC
without impacting physiological skeletal mineralisation.
Conﬂicts of interest
The authors have no conﬂict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for the support of the British Heart
Foundation (grant number PG/15/13/31296), Arthritis Research UK
(grant number: 19205) and the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council (BBSRC, grant number: BB/M009513/1)). We thank
Mark Turmaine (Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, UCL)
for his assistance in preparing the samples and performing the TEM.
References
[1] M.J. Young, J.E. Adams, G.F. Anderson, A.J. Boulton, P.R. Cavanagh, Medial ar-
terial calciﬁcation in the feet of diabetic patients and matched non-diabetic control
subjects, Diabetologia 36 (1993) 615–621.
[2] D. Zhu, N.C. Mackenzie, C. Farquharson, V.E. Macrae, Mechanisms and clinical
consequences of vascular calciﬁcation, Front. Endocrinol. 3 (2012) 95.
[3] S.M. Moe, D. Duan, B.P. Doehle, K.D. O'Neill, N.X. Chen, Uremia induces the os-
teoblast diﬀerentiation factor Cbfa1 in human blood vessels, Kidney Int. 63 (2003)
1003–1011.
[4] S.M. Moe, K.D. O'Neill, D. Duan, S. Ahmed, N.X. Chen, S.B. Leapman, N. Fineberg,
K. Kopecky, Medial artery calciﬁcation in ESRD patients is associated with de-
position of bone matrix proteins, Kidney Int. 61 (2002) 638–647.
[5] S. Yamada, C.M. Giachelli, Vascular calciﬁcation in CKD-MBD: roles for phosphate,
FGF23, and klotho, Bone 100 (2017) 87–93.
[6] C.Y. Ho, C.M. Shanahan, Medial arterial calciﬁcation: an overlooked player in
peripheral arterial disease, Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 36 (2016) 1475–1482.
[7] J.D. Hutcheson, M.C. Blaser, E. Aikawa, Giving calciﬁcation its due: recognition of a
diverse disease: a ﬁrst attempt to standardize the ﬁeld, Circ. Res. 120 (2017)
270–273.
[8] C.M. Shanahan, M.H. Crouthamel, A. Kapustin, C.M. Giachelli, Arterial calciﬁcation
in chronic kidney disease: key roles for calcium and phosphate, Circ. Res. 109
(2011) 697–711.
[9] N. Niederhoﬀer, I. Lartaud-Idjouadiene, P. Giummelly, C. Duvivier, R. Peslin,
J. Atkinson, Calciﬁcation of medial elastic ﬁbers and aortic elasticity, Hypertension
29 (1997) 999–1006.
[10] D. Zhu, N.C. Mackenzie, J.L. Millan, C. Farquharson, V.E. Macrae, The appearance
and modulation of osteocyte marker expression during calciﬁcation of vascular
smooth muscle cells, PLoS One 6 (2011) e19595.
[11] S. Narisawa, D. Harmey, M.C. Yadav, W.C. O'Neill, M.F. Hoylaerts, J.L. Millan,
Novel inhibitors of alkaline phosphatase suppress vascular smooth muscle cell
calciﬁcation, J. Bone Miner. Res. 22 (2007) 1700–1710.
[12] S. Jono, M.D. McKee, C.E. Murry, A. Shioi, Y. Nishizawa, K. Mori, H. Morii,
C.M. Giachelli, Phosphate regulation of vascular smooth muscle cell calciﬁcation,
Circ. Res. 87 (2000) E10–E17.
[13] S.A. Steitz, M.Y. Speer, G. Curinga, H.Y. Yang, P. Haynes, R. Aebersold, T. Schinke,
Gm Karsenty, C.M. Giachelli, Smooth muscle cell phenotypic transition associated
with calciﬁcation: upregulation of Cbfa1 and downregulation of smooth muscle
lineage markers, Circ. Res. 89 (2001) 1147–1154.
[14] A.N. Kapustin, C.M. Shanahan, Calcium regulation of vascular smooth muscle cell-
derived matrix vesicles, Trends Cardiovasc. Med. 22 (2012) 133–137.
[15] D. Proudfoot, J.N. Skepper, L. Hegyi, M.R. Bennett, C.M. Shanahan, P.L. Weissberg,
Apoptosis regulates human vascular calciﬁcation in vitro: evidence for initiation of
vascular calciﬁcation by apoptotic bodies, Circ. Res. 87 (2000) 1055–1062.
[16] I.R. Orriss, T.R. Arnett, R.G. Russell, Pyrophosphate: a key inhibitor of miner-
alisation, Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 28 (2016) 57–68.
[17] H. Fleisch, S. Bisaz, Mechanism of calciﬁcation: inhibitory role of pyrophosphate,
Nature 195 (1962) 911.
[18] N.C. Mackenzie, D. Zhu, E.M. Milne, H.R. van 't, A. Martin, Q.L. Darryl, J.L. Millan,
C. Farquharson, V.E. Macrae, Altered bone development and an increase in FGF-23
expression in Enpp1(-/-) mice, PLoS One 7 (2012) e32177.
[19] M.O. Hajjawi, V.E. MacRae, C. Huesa, A. Boyde, J.L. Millan, T.R. Arnett, I.R. Orriss,
Mineralisation of collagen rich soft tissues and osteocyte lacunae in Enpp1-/- mice,
Bone 69C (2014) 139–147.
[20] L. Hessle, K.A. Johnson, H.C. Anderson, S. Narisawa, A. Sali, J.W. Goding,
R. Terkeltaub, J.L. Millan, Tissue-non speciﬁc alkaline phosphatase and plasma cell
membrane glycoprotein-1 are central antagonistic regulators of bone mineraliza-
tion, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99 (2002) 9445–9449.
[21] K.A. Johnson, L. Hessle, S. Vaingankar, C. Wennberg, S. Mauro, S. Narisawa,
J.W. Goding, K. Sano, J.L. Millan, R. Terkeltaub, Osteoblast tissue-nonspeciﬁc al-
kaline phosphatase antagonizes and regulates PC-1, Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr.
Comp. Physiol. 279 (2000) R1365–R1377.
[22] N.C. Mackenzie, C. Huesa, F. Rutsch, V.E. Macrae, New insights into NPP1 function:
lessons from clinical and animal studies, Bone 51 (2012) 961–968.
J.J. Patel, et al.
Experimental Cell Research 380 (2019) 100–113
112
[23] C.R. Sheen, P. Kuss, S. Narisawa, M.C. Yadav, J. Nigro, W. Wang, T.N. Chhea,
E.A. Sergienko, K. Kapoor, M.R. Kackson, M.F. Hoylaerts, A.B. Pinkerton,
W.C. O'Neill, J.L. Millan, Pathophysiological role of vascular smooth muscle alka-
line phosphatase in medial artery calciﬁcation, J. Bone Miner. Res. 30 (2015)
824–836.
[24] F. Rutsch, S. Vaingankar, K. Johnson, I. Goldﬁne, B. Maddux, P. Schauerte,
H. Kalhoﬀ, K. Sano, W.A. Boisvert, A. Superti-Furga, R. Terkeltaub, PC-1 nucleoside
triphosphate pyrophosphohydrolase deﬁciency in idiopathic infantile arterial cal-
ciﬁcation, Am. J. Pathol. 158 (2001) 543–554.
[25] R. Villa-Bellosta, X. Wang, J.L. Millan, G.R. Dubyak, W.C. O'Neill, Extracellular
pyrophosphate metabolism and calciﬁcation in vascular smooth muscle, Am. J.
Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 301 (2011) H61–H68.
[26] I.R. Orriss, S.E. Taylor, T.R. Arnett, Rat osteoblast cultures, Methods Mol. Biol. 816
(2012) 31–41.
[27] I.R. Orriss, M.O. Hajjawi, C. Huesa, V.E. MacRae, T.R. Arnett, Optimisation of the
diﬀering conditions required for bone formation in vitro by primary osteoblasts
from mice and rats, I, Int. J. Mol. Med. 34 (2014) 1201–1208.
[28] S.E. Taylor, M. Shah, I.R. Orriss, Generation of rodent and human osteoblasts,
BoneKEy Rep., BoneKEy Rep. 3 (2014) 585.
[29] I.R. Orriss, M.L. Key, A. Brandao-Burch, J.J. Patel, G. Burnstock, T.R. Arnett, The
regulation of osteoblast function and bone mineralisation by extracellular nucleo-
tides: the role of P2X receptors, Bone 51 (2012) 389–400.
[30] W.E. Razzell, H.G. Khorana, Studies on polynucleotides. IV. Enzymic degradation;
the stepwise action of venom phosphodiesterase on deoxyribo-oligonucleotides, J.
Biol. Chem. 234 (1959) 2114–2117.
[31] I.R. Orriss, G.E. Knight, J.C. Utting, S.E. Taylor, G. Burnstock, T.R. Arnett, Hypoxia
stimulates vesicular ATP release from rat osteoblasts, J. Cell. Physiol. 220 (2009)
155–162.
[32] H.A. Declercq, R.M. Verbeeck, L.I. De Ridder, E.H. Schacht, M.J. Cornelissen,
Calciﬁcation as an indicator of osteoinductive capacity of biomaterials in osteo-
blastic cell cultures, Biomaterials 26 (2005) 4964–4974.
[33] P. Nahar-Gohad, N. Gohad, C.C. Tsai, R. Bordia, N. Vyavahare, Rat aortic smooth
muscle cells cultured on hydroxyapatite diﬀerentiate into osteoblast-like cells via
BMP-2-SMAD-5 pathway, Calcif. Tissue Int. 96 (2015) 359–369.
[34] E. Jover, A. Silvente, F. Marin, J. Martinez-Gonzalez, M. Orriols, C.M. Martinez,
C.M. Puche, M. Valdes, C. Rodreiguez, D. Hernandez-Romero, Inhibition of enzymes
involved in collagen cross-linking reduces vascular smooth muscle cell calciﬁcation,
FASEB J. 32 (2018) 4459–4469.
[35] R. Sudo, F. Sato, T. Azechi, H. Wachi, MiR-29-mediated elastin down-regulation
contributes to inorganic phosphorus-induced osteoblastic diﬀerentiation in vascular
smooth muscle cells, Genes Cells 20 (2015) 1077–1087.
[36] H. Sugitani, H. Wachi, H. Murata, F. Sato, R.P. Mecham, Y. Seyama,
Characterization of an in vitro model of calciﬁcation in retinal pigmented epithelial
cells, J. Arteroscler Thromb. 10 (2003) 48–56.
[37] M.C. Clarke, T.D. Littlewood, N. Figg, J.J. Maguire, A.P. Davenport, M. Goddard,
M.R. Bennet, Chronic apoptosis of vascular smooth muscle cells accelerates ather-
osclerosis and promotes calciﬁcation and medial degeneration, Circ. Res. 102
(2008) 1529–1538.
[38] P. Ciceri, F. Elli, P. Braidotti, M. Falleni, D. Tosi, G. Bulfamante, G.A. Block,
M. Cozzolino, Iron citrate reduces high phosphate-induced vascular calciﬁcation by
inhibiting apoptosis, Atherosclerosis 254 (2016) 93–101.
[39] A. Ponnusamy, S. Sinha, G.D. Hyde, S.J. Borland, R.F. Taylor, E. Pond, H.J. Eyre,
C.A. Inkson, A. Gilmore, N. Ashton, P.A. Kalra, A.E. Canﬁeld, FTI-277 inhibits
smooth muscle cell calciﬁcation by up-regulating PI3K/Akt signaling and inhibiting
apoptosis, PLoS One 13 (2018) e0196232.
[40] J.J. Patel, D. Zhu, B. Opdebeeck, P. D'Haese, J.L. Millan, L.E. Bourne,
C.P.D. Wheeler-Jones, T.R. Arnett, V.E. Macrae, I.R. Orriss, Inhibition of arterial
medial calciﬁcation and bone mineralization by extracellular nucleotides: the same
functional eﬀect mediated by diﬀerent cellular mechanisms, J. Cell. Physiol. 233
(2018) 3230–3243.
[41] H.C. Anderson, R. Cecil, S.W. Sajdera, Calciﬁcation of rachitic rat cartilage in vitro
by extracellular matrix vesicles, Am. J. Pathol. 79 (1975) 237–254.
[42] H.C. Anderson, Matrix vesicles and calciﬁcation, Curr. Rheumatol. Rep. 5 (2003)
222–226.
[43] L. Panh, J.B. Ruidavets, H. Rousseau, A. Petermann, V. Bongard, E. Berard,
D. Taraskiewicz, O. Lairez, M. Galinier, D. Carrie, J. Ferrieres, Association between
serum alkaline phosphatase and coronary artery calciﬁcation in a sample of primary
cardiovascular prevention patients, Atherosclerosis 260 (2017) 81–86.
[44] R.C. Shroﬀ, R. McNair, J.N. Skepper, N. Figg, L.J. Schurgers, J. Deanﬁeld, L. Rees,
C.M. Shanahan, Chronic mineral dysregulation promotes vascular smooth muscle
cell adaptation and extracellular matrix calciﬁcation, J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 21
(2010) 102–112.
[45] S. Morony, A.P. Sage, T. Corbin, J. Lu, Y. Tintut, L.L. Demer, Enhanced miner-
alization potential of vascular cells from SM22alpha-Rankl (tg) mice, Calcif. Tissue
Int. 91 (2012) 379–386.
[46] L. Bessueille, M. Fakhry, E. Hamade, B. Badran, D. Magne, Glucose stimulates
chondrocyte diﬀerentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells and calciﬁcation: a
possible role for IL-1 beta, FEBS Lett. 589 (2015) 2797–2804.
[47] A. Shioi, Y. Nishizawa, S. Jono, H. Koyama, M. Hosoi, H. Morii, Beta-glyceropho-
sphate accelerates calciﬁcation in cultured bovine vascular smooth muscle cells,
Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 15 (1995) 2003–2009.
[48] R. Dahl, E.A. Sergienko, Y. Su, Y.S. Mostoﬁ, L. Yang, A.M. Simao, S. Narisawa,
B. Brown, A. Mangravita-Novo, M. Vicchiarelli, L.H. Smith, W.C. O'Neil, J.L. Millan,
N.D. Cosford, Discovery and validation of a series of aryl sulfonamides as selective
inhibitors of tissue-nonspeciﬁc alkaline phosphatase (TNAP), J. Med. Chem. 52
(2009) 6919–6925.
[49] S.S. Rensen, P.A. Doevendans, G.J. van Eys, Regulation and characteristics of vas-
cular smooth muscle cell phenotypic diversity, Neth. Heart J. 15 (2007) 100–108.
[50] J.J. Patel, S. Srivastava, R.C. Siow, Isolation, culture, and characterization of vas-
cular smooth muscle cells, Methods Mol. Biol. 1430 (2016) 91–105.
[51] B. Kinner, M. Spector, Expression of smooth muscle actin in osteoblasts in human
bone, J. Orthop. Res. 20 (2002) 622–632.
[52] B. Kinner, J.M. Zaleskas, M. Spector, Regulation of smooth muscle actin expression
and contraction in adult human mesenchymal stem cells, Exp. Cell Res. 278 (2002)
72–83.
[53] N. Su, M. Chen, S. Chen, C. Li, Y. Xie, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhang, L. Zhao, Q. He, X. Du,
D. Chen, L. Chen, Overexpression of H1 calponin in osteoblast lineage cells leads to
a decrease in bone mass by disrupting osteoblast function and promoting osteoclast
formation, J. Bone Miner. Res. 28 (2013) 660–671.
[54] Y. Liu, B. Deng, Y. Zhao, S. Xie, R. Nie, Diﬀerentiated markers in undiﬀerentiated
cells: expression of smooth muscle contractile proteins in multipotent bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells, Dev. Growth Diﬀer. 55 (2013) 591–605.
[55] B.G. Matthews, E. Torreggiani, E. Roeder, I. Matic, D. Grcevic, I. Kalajzic,
Osteogenic potential of alpha smooth muscle actin expressing muscle resident
progenitor cells, Bone 84 (2016) 69–77.
[56] H. Yoshikawa, S.I. Taniguchi, H. Yamamura, S. Mori, M. Sugimoto, K. Miyado,
K. Nakamura, K. Nakao, M. Katsuki, N. Shibata, K. Takahashi, Mice lacking smooth
muscle calponin display increased bone formation that is associated with en-
hancement of bone morphogenetic protein responses, Genes Cells 3 (1998)
685–695.
[57] D.A. Prosdocimo, D.C. Douglas, A.M. Romani, W.C. O'Neill, G.R. Dubyak, Autocrine
ATP release coupled to extracellular pyrophosphate accumulation in vascular
smooth muscle cells, Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 296 (2009) C828–C839.
[58] I.R. Orriss, J.C. Utting, A. Brandao-Burch, K. Colston, B.R. Grubb, G. Burnstock,
T.R. Arnett, Extracellular nucleotides block bone mineralization in vitro: evidence
for dual inhibitory mechanisms involving both P2Y2 receptors and pyrophosphate,
Endocrinology 148 (2007) 4208–4216.
[59] R. Villa-Bellosta, V. Sorribas, Prevention of vascular calciﬁcation by polyphosphates
and nucleotides- role of ATP, Circ. J. 77 (2013) 2145–2151.
[60] B.A. Willems, M. Furmanik, M.M.J. Caron, M.L.L. Chatrou, D.H.M. Kusters,
T.J.M. Welting, M. Stock, M.S. Rafael, C.S.B. Viegas, D.C. Simes, C. Vermeer,
C.P.M. Reutelingsperger, L.J. Schurgers, Ucma/GRP inhibits phosphate-induced
vascular smooth muscle cell calciﬁcation via SMAD-dependent BMP signalling, Sci.
Rep. 8 (2018) 4961.
[61] D. Zhu, N.A. Rashdan, K.E. Chapman, P.W. Hadoke, V.E. MacRae, A novel role for
the mineralocorticoid receptor in glucocorticoid driven vascular calciﬁcation, Vasc.
Pharmacol. 86 (2016) 87–93.
[62] L. Hortells, C. Sosa, A. Millan, V. Sorribas, Critical parameters of the in vitro method
of vascular smooth muscle cell calciﬁcation, PLoS One 10 (2015) e0141751.
J.J. Patel, et al.
Experimental Cell Research 380 (2019) 100–113
113

===== Tachibana2022_SciAdv_RSPO2+Tendon+EctopicOssification =====

Tachibana et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn2138 (2022)     19 August 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
1 of 15
D I SE ASES AND DIS ORDE RS
RSPO2 defines a distinct undifferentiated  
progenitor in the tendon/ligament and suppresses 
ectopic ossification
Naohiro Tachibana1, Ryota Chijimatsu2, Hiroyuki Okada3, Takeshi Oichi1, Yuki Taniguchi1, 
Yuji Maenohara1, Junya Miyahara1, Hisatoshi Ishikura1, Yasuhide Iwanaga1,4, Yusuke Arino1, 
Kosei Nagata1, Hideki Nakamoto1, So Kato1, Toru Doi1, Yoshitaka Matsubayashi1, 
Yasushi Oshima1, Asuka Terashima2, Yasunori Omata2, Fumiko Yano2, Shingo Maeda5, 
Shiro Ikegawa6, Masahide Seki7, Yutaka Suzuki7, Sakae Tanaka1, Taku Saito1*
Ectopic endochondral ossification in the tendon/ligament is caused by repetitive mechanical overload or inflam-
mation. Tendon stem/progenitor cells (TSPCs) contribute to tissue repair, and some express lubricin [proteoglycan 4 
(PRG4)]. However, the mechanisms of ectopic ossification and association of TSPCs are not yet known. Here, we 
investigated the characteristics of Prg4-positive (+) cells and identified that R-spondin 2 (RSPO2), a WNT activator, 
is specifically expressed in a distinct Prg4+ TSPC cluster. The Rspo2+ cluster was characterized as mostly undiffer-
entiated, and RSPO2 overexpression suppressed ectopic ossification in a mouse Achilles tendon puncture model 
via chondrogenic differentiation suppression. RSPO2 expression levels in patients with ossification of the posterior 
longitudinal ligament were lower than those in spondylosis patients, and RSPO2 protein suppressed chondrogenic 
differentiation of human ligament cells. RSPO2 was induced by inflammatory stimulation and mechanical loading 
via nuclear factor B. Rspo2+ cells may contribute to tendon/ligament homeostasis under pathogenic conditions.
INTRODUCTION
Tendons and ligaments are connective tissues that are essential for 
joint stability and motion. They are characterized as dense fibers 
that consist of collagen fibrils (1). Tendons and ligaments connect 
muscle to bone and bone to bone, respectively. Ectopic ossification 
of the tendon is common in populations with high risk of tendon 
injury such as athletes and workers with repetitive tendon overuse 
(2). Although the underlying mechanisms have not been fully eluci-
dated, it is thought that a failed injury repair process that begins with 
inflammation is involved in ectopic ossification of the tendon (2). 
Histologically, the process is usually followed by endochondral 
ossification, which begins with chondrocyte differentiation, hyper-
trophy, and replacement by osteoblasts (2). Similar pathological 
conditions occur in the ligaments. Ectopic ossification is often ob-
served in the ligaments, e.g., ossification of the posterior longitudinal 
ligament (OPLL) of the spine and ossification of the yellow ligament 
(2, 3). A previous genome-wide association study (GWAS) identi-
fied several susceptibility loci that are located near the HAO1, RSPO2, 
EIF3E, EMC2, and CCDC91 genes (4). Among them, R-spondin 2 
(RSPO2) is associated with the regulation of endochondral ossifi-
cation (5).
Because there is no effective therapy for the abovementioned 
diseases, several studies have aimed to determine the mechanisms 
of tendon/ligament homeostasis, degeneration, and ossification. 
Recently, several markers for tenocytes and tendon stem/progenitor 
cells (TSPCs) have been reported. Regarding differentiated tendon 
cells, transcription factors including scleraxis (SCX), mohawk (MKX), 
and glycoprotein tenomodulin (TNMD) are well-established markers 
(6). Regarding TSPCs, a recent study using single-cell transcriptomics 
identified the tubulin polymerization-promoting protein family 
member 3 (TPPP3) as a novel marker for TSPC (7). The cell popu-
lation that expresses both Tppp3 and platelet-derived growth factor 
receptor-alpha (Pdgfra), a representative marker for mesenchymal 
stem cells (MSCs), is defined as TSPC (7). Tppp3/Pdgfra-positive (+) 
cells can generate new tenocytes and undergo self-renew upon inju-
ry (7); however, the role of these cells in tendon/ligament homeostasis 
and their association with pathological conditions, such as enthe-
sopathy and ligament ossification, remain unknown.
Proteoglycan 4 (PRG4), also known as lubricin, is an extracellular 
matrix protein that is expressed in superficial cells of the articular 
cartilage and synovium, ligaments, and tendons (8, 9). It plays es-
sential roles in the boundary lubrication of synovial joints and 
tendons (8). In humans, loss-of-function mutations in PRG4 leads 
to camptodactyly-arthropathy-coxa vara-pericarditis syndrome (10). 
Cell tracking analyses using Prg4-CreERT2 mice demonstrated that 
Prg4+ cells in the superficial layer of articular cartilage serve as a 
progenitor population for chondrocytes in deeper layers (11). We 
recently reported another role of lubricin, in which it contributes to 
joint homeostasis by suppressing differentiation of the superficial 
cells and the ectopic chondrogenic differentiation of synovial cells 
(12). Prg4 is expressed in tendons and ligaments and has been 
reported to be expressed in Tppp3+/Pdgfra+ cells (7); however, 
Prg4-expressing cells in these tissues have not yet been characterized. 
Considering the progenitor properties of Prg4+ cells and the inhibi-
tory effects of PRG4 against cell differentiation in the cartilage and 
synovium, we hypothesized that PRG4 is also associated with the 
1Sensory and Motor System Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. 2Bone and Cartilage Regenerative Medicine, Graduate 
School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. 3Center for Disease Biology 
and Integrative Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo, Japan. 4Department of Bioengineering, Graduate School of Engineering, 
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. 5Department of Bone and Joint Medicine, 
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, 
Japan. 6Laboratory for Bone and Joint Diseases, Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, 
RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. 7Laboratory of Systems Genomics, Department of Computa-
tional Biology and Medical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Japan.
*Corresponding author. Email: tasaitoutky@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Copyright © 2022 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim to 
original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed 
under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 25, 2022
Tachibana et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn2138 (2022)     19 August 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
2 of 15
differentiation of progenitors in connective tissues such as tendons 
and ligaments and that Prg4+ cells in those locations have distinct 
features.
Here, we describe the identification and characterization of an 
Rspo2+ cluster within the Prg4+ cell cluster of a mouse model of ten-
don ectopic ossification. We examined cell populations during ec-
topic ossification of a mouse tendon model by single-cell RNA 
sequencing (scRNA-seq) using Prg4-CreERT2 and R26-tdTomato mice. 
We characterized the Rspo2+ cluster and analyzed interactions be-
tween the identified clusters. We compared our findings with de-
posited data from another mouse heterotopic tendon ossification 
model and further examined the role of the RSPO2 protein in the 
Prg4+ clusters in tendon homeostasis using tissue-specific transgenic 
mice. We then investigated the expression and role of RSPO2 in human 
ligament cells and surgical specimens by RNA-seq and immuno­
staining. Last, we show that RSPO2 is induced by mechanical load-
ing and nuclear factor B (NF-B).
RESULTS
Ectopic endochondral ossification occurs in a mouse Achilles 
tendon puncture model
To examine cell populations during ectopic endochondral ossifica-
tion in vivo, we used a mouse Achilles tendon puncture (ATP) model, 
in which ectopic endochondral ossification in the tendon was produced 
by minimal invasion (13). As previously described, mouse Achilles 
tendons were punctured with a 27-gauge needle at five different sites. 
Micro–computed tomography (CT) detected ossification between 
8 and 12 weeks after ATP induction (Fig. 1A). Before the ossification, 
expression of sex-determining region Y-box transcription factor 9 
(SOX9) and collagen type 2 (COL2) began to increase at 1 week, and 
COL2-positive cell rates remained higher than those in the sham group 
throughout (Fig. 1B). COL2 was detected around cuboid- or spherical-­
shaped cells (Fig. 1B). PRG4-positive cells tended to increase at 1 week, 
but this was not significant compared with the sham group (Fig. 1B). 
We also confirmed no obvious changes in the sham tendons during the 
experimental period (fig. S1, A and B). These data indicate that ectopic 
chondrogenic differentiation begins within 1 week after the ATP.
Characteristics of the TSPC population change after invasion
To optimize the protocol for scRNA-seq, we confirmed the profile 
of Prg4-expressing cells using deposited scRNA-seq data of a hetero-
topic ossification model of the mouse Achilles tendon, which was 
induced by burn and tenotomy (GSE126060) (14). The uniform mani-
fold approximation and projection (UMAP) plotting of the scRNA-
seq data at days 0 and 7 identified nine distinct cell clusters (fig. S2A). 
On the basis of the expression distribution of genes related to each 
differentiation pathway, two clusters, 1 and 2, were characterized as 
mesenchymal cells (fig. S2, A to C). In the secondary analyses of the 
mesenchymal cell clusters, seven clusters were identified (fig. S3A). 
In the normal mouse Achilles tendon at day 0, most cells were 
divided into cluster 2 or 6. Cluster 2, which highly expresses Tppp3 
and Pdgfa, was characterized as TSPCs (fig. S3, B and C). Cluster 6 
expressed Prg4 and Tnmd, markers of tenocytes (fig. S3C). Notably, 
at day 7, the number of cluster 2 cells was markedly decreased and 
several Pdgfra+ clusters emerged (fig. S3B). In addition to cluster 6, 
Prg4+ cells were detected in cluster 7 at day 7 (fig. S3, B and C). 
Cluster 7 expressed some progenitor markers including Pdgfra, 
Cd151, and Bglap, instead of tenogenic or tenocyte markers (fig. 
S3C). Together, in addition to the Prg4 expression level, the charac-
teristics of Prg4+ cells were altered in response to invasion.
Rspo2 is specifically expressed in a subpopulation 
of the Prg4+ progenitor cluster
Next, we prepared Prg4-CreERT2;R26-tdTomato mice to analyze the 
Prg4+ cell population by scRNA-seq. To examine the postinvasive 
changes of Prg4 expression and Prg4+ cells, we injected tamoxifen 
twice into Prg4-CreERT2;R26-tdTomato mice 3 and 4 days after ATP 
induction and performed scRNA-seq using cells obtained from the 
Achilles tendons 1 week after the ATP induction. Histological anal-
ysis was used to confirm that tdTomato expression was not present 
in the tendon without tamoxifen injection (fig. S4A) and that Prg4 
and tdTomato were coexpressed after tamoxifen injection (fig. S4B). 
The UMAP using the Seurat package (15) showed 10 distinct clus-
ters (Fig. 2A and fig. S5). Clusters 0, 2, and 5 were estimated as un-
differentiated by CytoTRACE (16) (Fig. 2B) and highly expressed 
undifferentiated mesenchymal cell markers (fig. S5). We then per-
formed secondary analyses of the mesenchymal cell clusters and 
identified seven different cell clusters (Fig. 2C). Prg4 was highly ex-
pressed in clusters 6 and 7, and tdTomato was only detected in these 
two clusters (Fig. 2D). Notably, Rspo2 was specifically expressed in 
cluster 6 (Fig. 2D). RSPO family members are secreted proteins that 
can activate canonical WNT signaling (17). The WNT pathways play 
essential roles in mesenchymal cells during skeletal development 
(18). RSPO2 has been identified as an OPLL susceptible gene (4), 
and it suppresses the early stage of the endochondral ossification 
process (19). In contrast to cluster 6, another Prg4+ cluster, cluster 
7, did not express Rspo2 (Fig. 2D). Cluster 7 expressed marker genes 
for chondrogenic and endochondral ossification, such as Col2a1, 
Acan, and Sox9, indicating that the Rspo2−Prg4+ cluster can be char-
acterized as a chondrogenic progenitor population (Fig. 2D). In the 
deposited scRNA-seq data of GSE126060, Rspo2 was specifically 
expressed in one of the Prg4+ clusters (cluster7; fig. S3C). Notably, 
the Rspo2+ cluster was rarely detected at day 0 (fig. S3, B and C).
To confirm Rspo2 expression in Prg4+ cells, we collected tdTomato+ 
cells from the Achilles tendons of Prg4-CreERT2;R26-tdTomato mice 
by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). We used cells derived 
from the Achilles tendons of CAG-Cre;R26-tdTomato and wild-type 
(WT) mice as FACS-positive and FACS-negative controls, respec-
tively. We collected tdTomato+ and tdTomato− cells from the Achilles 
tendons of Prg4-CreERT2;R26-tdTomato mice 1 week after ATP in-
duction followed by subsequent tamoxifen administration, accord-
ing to the threshold values using positive and negative controls (fig. 
S6A). Prg4 and Rspo2 were clearly and specifically expressed in the 
tdTomato+ cells (fig. S6B). We then compared tdTomato+ cells from 
the Achilles tendons of Prg4-CreERT2;R26-tdTomato mice 1 week af-
ter ATP or sham surgery. Notably, tdTomato+ cells from sham mice 
expressed Tppp3, but mRNA levels of Rspo2, Pdgfra, and Procr were 
much lower (fig. S6C). In contrast, tdTomato+ cells from ATP mice 
highly expressed Rspo2, as well as Pdgfra, Tppp3, and Procr (fig. 
S6C). These data were consistent with the deposited scRNA-seq data 
of GSE126060 at days 0 and 7 (fig. S3, B and C).
We performed immunofluorescence to examine RSPO2 expres-
sion in the Achilles tendons of Prg4-CreERT2;R26-tdTomato mice, 
which received tamoxifen administration after ATP induction. 
tdTomato+ cells, but not RSPO2+ or COL2+ cells, were present in 
sham tendons (Fig. 3 and fig. S7). RSPO2+tdTomato+ and COL2+ 
tdTomato+ cells were observed in the center of tendons at 1 and 2 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 25, 2022
Tachibana et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn2138 (2022)     19 August 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
3 of 15
weeks after ATP (Fig. 3 and fig. S7). RSPO2+tdTomato+ cells, but 
not COL2+ cells, were present in the tendon sheath (Fig. 3). In addi-
tion, we injected tamoxifen into Prg4-CreERT2;R26-tdTomato mice 
1 week before ATP induction. Unlike the expansion of tdTomato+ 
cells in the postinjury tamoxifen-injected mice (Fig. 3), few tdTomato+ 
cells were present, and RSPO2+tdTomato+ cells were not observed 
in the preinjury tamoxifen-injected mice (fig. S8).
The Rspo2+ cluster is characterized as a cluster 
of undifferentiated progenitors
In addition to Rspo2 and Prg4, cluster 6 cells expressed stem cell 
markers such as Pdgfra, Tppp3, Itga6, Tspan15, and Procr (Fig. 2D) 
(7, 20–24). In addition, Bglap-positive cells have been reported to be 
involved in tendon repair (25). Tppp3+Pdgfra+ cells, characterized 
as TSPCs, were detected in clusters 1, 3, and 6 (Fig. 2D). Compared 
with cluster 6, clusters 1 and 3 predominantly expressed Col15a1, 
Fst, and Runx2 (Fig. 2D). Col15a1 is an indicator for the differenti-
ation of MSCs toward osteogenic differentiation (26). Follistatin, coded 
by Fst, is involved in osteogenesis (27). Runx2 is a master transcrip-
tion factor for osteoblast differentiation (28–30). Scx, a master tran-
scription factor for tenogenesis, was highly expressed in clusters 0, 
2, 4, and 5 (Fig. 2D). Of these, cluster 5 abundantly expressed Mkx 
and Tnmd, indicating that the Scx+Mkx+Tnmd+ cluster can be char-
acterized as a tenogenic progenitor population (Fig. 2D).
The Gene Ontology (GO) pathways enriched in the seven clus-
ters were analyzed by clusterProfiler (31) and are shown in Fig. 4A. 
“Extracellular structure organization,” “extracellular matrix organi-
zation,” “external encapsulating structure organization,” and 
“collagen-containing extracellular matrix” were up-regulated terms 
in clusters 0, 1, 2, 5, and 7 (Fig. 4A). Conversely, “ossification” was 
detected only in cluster 7 (Fig. 4A). GO pathways related to cell cy-
cle regulation and proliferation were detected in cluster 4 (Fig. 4A). 
The GO pathways related with specific differentiation tendencies 
were not up-regulated in cluster 6 (Fig. 4A).
Next, we performed pseudotime analysis. In diffusion map pseudo-
time (32), cluster 6 was clearly located in the most undifferentiated 
position (Fig. 4B). Rspo2 and other stem cell markers were highly 
expressed in the undifferentiated state during the pseudotime course 
estimated by Monocle2 (33) (Fig. 4C). On the basis of gene expres-
sion distribution patterns, a trajectory starting from the Rspo2+ cluster 
(cluster 6) was created (Fig. 4D). In the trajectory, the Tppp3+Pdgfra+ 
Rspo2− clusters (clusters 1 and 3) were downstream of the Rspo2+ 
cluster, and the tenogenic and chondro/osteogenic clusters were 
located in a different downstream trajectory (Fig. 4D). These data 
indicate that Rspo2+ cells are undifferentiated progenitors.
RSPO2 inhibits ectopic endochondral ossification in tendons
To estimate the role of the Rspo2+ cluster and the RSPO2 protein in 
tendons, we evaluated cell-cell interrelationships between the Rspo2+ 
cluster and the chondrogenic, tenogenic, Tppp3+Pdgfra+Rspo2−, and 
Rspo2+ clusters using scTensor (tables S1 to S4) (34). Leucine-rich 
repeat containing G protein–coupled receptors 4 to 6 (LGR4 to LGR6) 
1
2
4
8
Sham
µCT
SOX9
COL2
12 w
A
PRG4
50 µm
RSPO2
12 w
Sham 1
2
4
8
0
4
8
×107
Bone volume (µm3)
C
12 w
Sham
1
2
4
8
Sox9
0
10
15
5
Relative mRNA level
Col2a1
4000
8000
Prg4
0
2
4
Rspo2
0
4
8
*
*
3 d
*
SOX9
COL2
PRG4
RSPO2
0
80
40
Positive cell rates
(%)
****
12 w
Sham 1
2
4
8
0
5
10
0
5
10
0
80
40
* **
****
*
B
Fig. 1. Ectopic endochondral ossification in a mouse ATP model. (A) CT images of the tendons in a time-course analysis after ATP. The right panel indicates the bone 
volume of the tendons. Sham mice received only skin puncture and were analyzed 12 weeks after surgery. (B) Immunohistochemistry of SOX9, COL2, PRG4, and RSPO2 in 
a time-course analysis after ATP. Right panels indicate positive cell rates. All data are expressed as dot plots and means ± SD (n = 8 mice per group). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, 
and ****P < 0.0001 versus sham, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey’s multiple comparisons test.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 25, 2022
Tachibana et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn2138 (2022)     19 August 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
4 of 15
are known as receptors for Rspo2 (35). Notably, Rspo2-Lgr6 was 
ranked fourth in the ligand-receptor pairs from the Rspo2+ cluster to 
the chondrogenic progenitor (table S1 and fig. S9). Considering pre-
vious findings that showed that RSPO2 suppresses the early stage of 
chondrogenic differentiation (19), it was hypothesized that the Rspo2+ 
cluster suppresses differentiation of the chondrogenic cluster via 
RSPO2 and other secreted factors.
To examine roles of RSPO2 in tendons in vivo, we generated 
Cre-dependent transgenic mice (CAG-EGFP-Rspo2; Fig. 5A). We 
confirmed the transgenic expression of Rspo2 in the Achilles tendon 
of Prg4-CreERT2;CAG-EGFP-Rspo2 mice by measuring the RSPO2 
protein levels (Fig. 5B). Bone mass of ectopic ossification areas was 
significantly decreased in Prg4-CreERT2;CAG-EGFP-Rspo2 mice com-
pared with Prg4-CreERT2 mice (Fig. 5C). mRNA levels of Sox9 and 
Col2a1 were significantly reduced in Prg4-CreERT2;CAG-EGFP-Rspo2 
tendons (Fig. 5D). Immunofluorescent analysis of Prg4-CreERT2; 
R26-tdTomato;CAG-EGFP-Rspo2 tendons demonstrated the efficient 
expression of RSPO2 protein in the tdTomato+ cells and the sup-
pression of COL2 expression (Fig. 5E).
We examined the effects of an antibody against RSPO2 injected 
intraperitoneally into WT mice 3 days after ATP induction. Bone 
mass was significantly decreased in RSPO2 antibody–injected mice 
compared with vehicle-injected mice (fig. S10A). mRNA levels of 
Sox9 and Col2a1 were significantly increased in the tendons of RSPO2 
antibody–injected mice (fig. S10B). All these data indicate that RSPO2 
protein inhibits ectopic endochondral ossification via suppression 
of chondrogenic differentiation.
RSPO2 suppresses chondrogenic differentiation of  
human ligament cells
We next investigated the expression and role of RSPO2 in ligament 
cells. We performed RNA-seq of human primary ligament cells that 
had undergone chondrogenic differentiation (fig. S11, A to C). The 
heatmap shows the increase of many chondrogenic transcription 
Fig. 2. scRNA-seq of Achilles tendons from Prg4-CreERT2;R26-tdTomato ATP mice. (A) Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) of 10 clusters from the 
Achilles tendon. Overall, 7157 cells were analyzed from five mice. Clusters 0, 2, and 5, enclosed in a dotted line, are characterized as mesenchymal cells. (B) Predicted 
differentiation stages for each cluster using CytoTRACE. (C) UMAP from the mesenchymal cell clusters [clusters 0, 2, and 5 in (A)]. (D) Violin plots of marker genes for vari-
ous cell types in mesenchymal cell clusters.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 25, 2022
Tachibana et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn2138 (2022)     19 August 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
5 of 15
factors and cartilage matrix genes, such as SOX9, SOX6, SOX5, 
RUNX3, COL2A1, COL11A1, COL11A2, and ACAN (Fig. 6A). GO 
analysis indicated an up-regulation of processes such as “skeletal 
system development,” “ossification,” “extracellular matrix organi-
zation,” “extracellular structure organization,” and “tissue develop-
ment” (Fig. 6B). Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain 
reaction (qRT-PCR) confirmed the down-regulation of RSPO2, 
accompanied by a decrease of AXIN2, a representative downstream 
molecule of canonical WNT pathway, and the MSC markers, ENG 
(CD105) and NT5E (CD73; Fig. 6C).
To compare these gene expression changes with those in standard 
chondrogenic differentiation, we reanalyzed deposited RNA-seq data 
of human MSCs that had undergone chondrogenic differentiation 
(36). Similar to the differentiation of human ligament cells, the heat-
map showed the increase of many chondrogenic transcription fac-
tors and cartilage matrix genes during human MSC differentiation 
(fig. S12). RSPO2 increased at day 1 and decreased thereafter (fig. 
S12). In the comparison of data from days 0 and 7, GO processes, 
such as “skeletal system development,” “ossification,” “extracellular 
matrix organization,” “extracellular structure organization,” and 
“tissue development,” were also up-regulated (fig. S13, A and B).
To examine the role of RSPO2 protein in the differentiation of 
ligament cells, we next performed in vitro experiments using human 
primary ligament cells. We induced chondrogenic differentiation of 
human ligament cells in the presence of recombinant human (rh) 
RSPO2 and LiCl, an activator of canonical WNT signaling, or a vehicle. 
Both rhRSPO2 and LiCl treatments reduced Alcian blue staining 
(fig. S14A) and the expression of COL2A1 and ACAN (fig. S14B), 
whereas AXIN2 was increased (fig. S14B). PRG4 expression was mildly 
decreased by rhRSPO2 and LiCl treatments (fig. S14B). Luciferase 
activity of TOPflash, a reporter of the canonical WNT pathway, was 
clearly up-regulated by both rhRSPO2 and LiCl (fig. S14C).
RSPO2 expression is down-regulated in patients with OPLL
Because RSPO2 is a known OPLL susceptibility gene, we next examined 
its expression in the spine. In a WT mouse model, RSPO2 protein 
was detected in the posterior longitudinal ligament and posterior 
anulus fibrosus (Fig. 7A). These areas were stained with X-gal in a 
Fig. 3. Immunofluorescence of tdTomato+ cells in the tendons of the Prg4-CreERT2;R26-tdTomato ATP model. Immunofluorescence of RSPO2, tdTomato, and 
COL2 in the center or sheath of Prg4-CreERT2;R26-tdTomato Achilles tendons 1 and 2 weeks after ATP induction. Tamoxifen was injected twice, 3 and 4 days after ATP in-
duction. Eight mice were analyzed, and representative images are shown. Positive cell rates are shown in fig. S7.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 25, 2022
Tachibana et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn2138 (2022)     19 August 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
6 of 15
TOPGAL reporter mouse to investigate canonical WNT signaling 
(Fig. 7B). We next examined the expression level of RSPO2 in human 
paraspinal ligaments. Because it was difficult to obtain posterior 
longitudinal ligaments from non-OPLL patients, we compared yellow 
ligaments from patients with cervical OPLL and cervical spondylotic 
myelopathy (CSM). Both the mRNA level of RSPO2 and the RSPO2+ 
cell rate were significantly lower in the OPLL ligaments than those 
in CSM ligaments (Fig. 7, C and D). RNA-seq of OPLL and CSM 
samples showed a decrease in RSPO2 expression, and ingenuity path-
way analysis indicated a down-regulation of the canonical WNT 
pathway in the OPLL samples in comparison to CSM samples, al-
though the Z score (−1.291) is less than the significance threshold 
(Fig. 7, E and F, and fig. S15, A to C). These findings are consistent 
with previous studies (4, 19) and the inhibitory effect of RSPO2 on 
endochondral ossification.
We examined the location of RSPO2 in the posterior longitudinal 
ligaments resected from patients with OPLL and found a representative 
ligament tissue in which endochondral ossification was progressing 
(e.g., containing regenerated ligament, cartilage, and bone; fig. S16). 
RSPO2+ cells were detected in the boundary region between COL2+ 
and degenerated ligament areas but were not detected in the ossifi-
cation lesions (fig. S16).
RSPO2 is induced by NF-B signaling
Last, we analyzed the upstream pathway of RSPO2. We analyzed the 
levels of transcription factors that played regulatory roles in each of 
the identified mesenchymal cell clusters from Fig. 2C, using SCENIC 
(37) (fig. S17), and extracted those in the Rspo2+ undifferentiated 
progenitor (cluster 6; Fig. 8A). FOXO1 (forkhead box O1) and CREB5 
(cAMP responsive element binding protein 5) were reported to regu-
late PRG4 expression in articular cartilage (38, 39). Among the 14 tran-
scription factors estimated to be involved in regulation of cluster 6, 
we focused on Rela, a representative transcription factor of NF-B, 
because NF-B is widely associated with various biological phenomena 
including responses to injury, tissue repair, and inflammation. Al-
though the mRNA level of Rela does not correlate with NF-B activity, 
Fig. 4. GO and pseudotime analyses of the scRNA-seq data of the tendons from Prg4-CreERT2;R26-tdTomato ATP mice. (A) Representative GO pathway enrichment 
of the 11 clusters in Fig. 2C using clusterProfiler. (B) Diffusion map pseudotime analysis of the mesenchymal cell clusters in Fig. 2C. dpt, diffusion pseudotime. (C) Marker 
gene plotting in pseudotime by Monocle2. (D) Trajectory analysis of the mesenchymal cell clusters by Monocle2. Characterization of each cluster is as follows: 0, 2, and 4, 
tenogenic; 1, 3, and 6, undifferentiated progenitor; 5, tenocyte; 7, chondrogenic, as shown in Fig. 2C.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 25, 2022
Tachibana et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn2138 (2022)     19 August 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
7 of 15
the Rela expression level was relatively higher in the Rspo2+ cluster 
compared with other clusters (Fig. 8, B and C). Human ligament 
cells cultured with interleukin-1 (IL-1) showed a marked induc-
tion of RSPO2 (Fig. 8D); this induction was significantly reduced by 
Bay11-7085, an IB kinase (IKK) inhibitor (Fig. 8E).
In addition to inflammatory stimulation, we previously reported 
that NF-B also has essential roles in mechanical overloading-­induced 
cartilage degeneration; mechanical stress induces gremlin-1 via the 
Rac1–NF-B pathway in chondrocytes, and induced gremlin-1 in-
duces the excessive activation of the NF-B pathway (40). Because 
mechanical stress is associated with ectopic ossification of the tendon 
and ligament, we examined whether mechanical loading induced 
RSPO2 expression. Notably, RSPO2 was significantly induced by 
cyclic tensile stress loading (Fig. 8F), and this induction was also 
abolished by Bay11-7085 (Fig. 8G). RSPO2 was increased by cyclic 
tensile stress loading at the protein level, which was accompanied by 
increased inhibitor of nuclear factor B (IB) phosphorylation 
(Fig. 8H). The induction of RSPO2 by cyclic tensile stress loading 
was also diminished by two different Rac1 inhibitors, EHT1864 and 
NSC23766 (Fig. 8I). These data suggest that inflammation or me-
chanical loading on the tendon/ligament induces RSPO2 expression 
via the Rac1–NF-B pathway, similarly to gremlin-1 induction in 
chondrocytes (40).
DISCUSSION
The present study demonstrated that Rspo2 is coexpressed with Prg4 
in a subset of Tppp3+Pdgfra+ progenitors in the mouse Achilles tendon. 
This population is characterized by undifferentiated progenitors rather 
than Tppp3+Pdgfra+Rspo2− progenitors. Rspo2 overexpression in Prg4+ 
cells suppressed ectopic endochondral ossification of the mouse Achilles 
tendon. Similarly, RSPO2 inhibited chondrogenic differentiation of 
Fig. 5. Rspo2 overexpression suppresses ectopic ossification in a mouse ATP model. (A) Schematic of a transgene for Cre-dependent Rspo2 overexpression 
(CAG-EGFP-­Rspo2 mouse). (B) Protein levels of RSPO2 in the Achilles tendon of 9-week-old Prg4-CreERT2 and Prg4-CreERT2;CAG-EGFP-Rspo2 mice that received tamoxifen 
injection at 8 weeks of age. n = 3 mice per group. (C) Ectopic ossification in the Achilles tendon of 20-week-old Prg4-CreERT2 and Prg4-CreERT2;CAG-EGFP-Rspo2 mice, which 
received tamoxifen injection and ATP at 8 weeks of age. Left panels are representative images of CT, and right panels show quantified bone volume in the Achilles ten-
dons. n = 14 mice per group. (D) mRNA levels of Col2a1, Sox9, Prg4, and Rspo2 in the Achilles tendons of Prg4-CreERT2 and Prg4-CreERT2;CAG-EGFP-Rspo2 mice 1 week after 
ATP induction. n = 6 mice per group. (E) Immunofluorescence of RSPO2, tdTomato, and COL2 in the Achilles tendons of Prg4-CreERT2;R26-tdTomato and Prg4-CreERT2;R26-­
tdTomato;CAG-EGFP-Rspo2 mice 1 week after ATP induction. All data are expressed as dot plots and means ± SD. *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001, unpaired t test.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 25, 2022
Tachibana et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn2138 (2022)     19 August 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
8 of 15
Fig. 6. RSPO2 expression decreases during the chondrogenic differentiation of human ligament cells. RNA-seq of human ligament cells following chondrogenic 
differentiation. Control (Cntl) and differentiation (Diff) groups (n = 3 each) were analyzed. (A) Heatmap of differentially expressed genes extracted by the terms “chondrocyte,” 
“development,” and “differentiation” in the GO biological process. The blue arrow indicates RSPO2. (B) GO biological processes altered by chondrogenic differentiation. 
(C) Validation of mRNA levels of RSPO2 and marker genes by qRT-PCR. Data are expressed as dot plots and means ± SD (n = 9 per group, three independent experiments 
using cells from three different donors). ***P < 0.001 and ****P < 0.0001, unpaired t test.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 25, 2022
Tachibana et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn2138 (2022)     19 August 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
9 of 15
Fig. 7. RSPO2 expression is down-regulated in patients with OPLL. (A) Immunohistochemistry of Rspo2 in the cervical vertebrae of C57BL/6J mice. The inset box in the 
left panel indicates the location of the enlarged image shown in the right panel. (B) X-gal staining in the cervical vertebrae of TOPGAL mice. The inset box in the left panel 
indicates the location of the enlarged image shown in the right panel. (C) mRNA levels of RSPO2 in spinal ligaments from patients with OPLL (n = 21) and CSM (n = 17). 
(D) Immunohistochemistry of RSPO2 in spinal ligaments from patients with OPLL (n = 14) and CSM (n = 12). The two left panels show representative images; the right 
panel indicates the positive cell rates. (E) Heatmap of differentially expressed genes (false discovery rate < 0.1, |logFC| > 4) ordered by gene expression level from RNA-seq 
analysis of human spinal ligaments obtained from patients with OPLL and CSM (n = 2 per group). The blue arrow indicates RSPO2. (F) Ingenuity pathway analysis of the 
RNA-seq data. |Z score| > 2 was the significance threshold. All data are expressed as dot plots and means ± SD. **P < 0.01, unpaired t test.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 25, 2022
Tachibana et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn2138 (2022)     19 August 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
10 of 15
human ligament cells, and its expression is decreased in patients with 
OPLL. Last, we identified NF-B as an upstream regulator of RSPO2 
and displayed that inflammation or mechanical loading induced 
RSPO2 via the Rac1–NF-B pathway.
Nakajima et al. (4) performed a GWAS of OPLL in ~8000 indi-
viduals followed by a replication study using an additional ~7000 
individuals. The GWAS revealed six susceptibility loci for OPLL 
(4). The rs374810 locus, one of the most significant loci, is located 
121 bp upstream of the transcription start site of the RSPO2 gene 
(4). RSPO2 is a potent activator of canonical WNT signaling (17). 
The activation of the canonical WNT pathway in immature chondro-
cytes suppresses maturation (18, 41). Nakajima et al. (19) also reported 
roles of RSPO2 protein in chondrocyte differentiation. In the chon-
drogenic cell line, ATDC5, overexpression of RSPO2 inhibited chon-
drocyte differentiation, while RSPO2-neutralizing antibody stimulated 
it (19). In the present study, the Rspo2-Lgr6 pair was highly estimated 
Fig. 8. The NF-B pathway induces RSPO2. (A) Heatmap of upstream transcription factors that regulate the Rspo2+ cluster in Fig. 2C, extracted by SCENIC. Heatmap for 
all clusters is shown in fig. S17. Feature plot (B) and violin plot (C) showing Rela expression in the cluster depicted in Fig. 2C. (D) mRNA levels of RSPO2 in human ligament 
cells cultured in the presence of vehicle and various amounts of IL-1. (E) mRNA levels of RSPO2 in human ligament cells cultured in the presence of vehicle and IL-1 
(1 ng/ml), with or without IKK inhibitor, Bay11-7085 (Bay). (F) mRNA level of RSPO2 in human ligament cells before (BL) and after tensile stress loading (+) or without 
loading (−). (G) mRNA level of RSPO2 in human ligament cells after tensile stress loading with or without Bay. (H) Protein level of inhibitor of nuclear factor B (IB), 
phosphorylated IB (p-IB), RSPO2, and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) in human ligament cells after tensile stress loading with or without Bay. 
(I) mRNA levels of RSPO2 in human ligament cells after tensile stress loading with or without Rac1 inhibitor, EHT1864 (EHT; left) or NSC23766 (NSC; right). All data are ex-
pressed as dot plots and means ± SD. n = 9 per group, three independent experiments using cells from three different donors (D to G and I); n = 3 per group, using cells 
from three different donors (H). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ****P < 0.0001, one-way ANOVA and Tukey’s multiple comparisons test.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 25, 2022
Tachibana et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn2138 (2022)     19 August 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
11 of 15
to function between the Rspo2+ undifferentiated progenitor and 
Rspo2−Prg4+ chondrogenic progenitor by the CCI (cell-cell interac-
tion) analysis (table S1 and fig. S9). RSPO2 overexpression reduced 
ectopic ossification in the mouse Achilles tendon (Fig. 5), and 
rhRSPO2 treatment suppressed chondrogenic differentiation of 
human ligament cells (fig. S14). The anti-chondrogenic differentia-
tion effects of RSPO2 protein can be explained by the activation of 
the canonical WNT signaling pathway. We did not perform scRNA-
seq using human ligament cells in the current study. Further com-
prehensive studies will be necessary to determine the roles of the 
RSPO2+ subset in human ligaments and the pathophysiology of 
ligament ossification.
Staverosky et al. (42) first reported that Tppp3 is expressed in 
cells at the circumference of the developing tendon, where there are 
abundant progenitors. Recently, Harvey et al. (7) reported that the 
Tppp3+Pdgfra+ cell population can generate new tenocytes and can 
undergo self-renewal upon injury, indicating that expression of Tppp3 
and Pdgfra defines TSPCs. In our analysis, the Tppp3+Pdgfra+ popu-
lation consisted of heterogeneous cells, as shown by previous and 
present scRNA-seq data (Fig. 2D and fig. S3C). We found that Rspo2 
is specifically expressed in a distinct cluster of Tppp3+Pdgfra+ cells. 
RSPO2 and LGRs are involved in the maintenance of stemness and 
self-renewal (35, 43). In addition to Rspo2, Tppp3, and Pdgfra, the 
Rspo2+ cluster expresses Itga6, Tspan15, and Procr (Fig. 2D), which 
are known stem cell and progenitor markers (20–24). The pseudo-
time analyses also support the undifferentiated status of the Rspo2+-
cluster (Fig. 4, B to D). All these data consistently indicate that Rspo2 
is expressed in a distinct undifferentiated progenitor cluster. How-
ever, the RSPO2+ cluster is rarely detected in normal tendons and 
emerges after invasion (Fig. 3 and fig. S3B). Because RSPO2 expres-
sion is increased by inflammation or mechanical loading through 
NF-B, these stimulations may be involved in the induction of the 
RSPO2+ cluster. Considering that RSPO2 suppresses ectopic endo-
chondral ossification after tendon injury, one of the major roles of 
the RSPO2+ cluster might be to support the appropriate regenera-
tion of tendons. Although we did not determine the origin of the 
RSPO2+ population in this study, we showed that it does not derive 
from PRG4+ lineage cells (fig. S8). Some TSPCs in normal tendons 
may acquire the de novo expression of RSPO2 and PRG4 by inva-
sion. In addition, we did not determine the fate of the RSPO2+ cluster. 
Although pseudotime analyses indicated the undifferentiated state 
of the Rspo2+ cluster, we did not obtain data to demonstrate its sub-
sequent differentiation.
In the articular cartilage, PRG4 is expressed in the superficial 
zone (8). Kozhemyakina et al. (11) reported that Prg4+ cells serve as 
a progenitor population for mature chondrocytes in deeper layers. 
They showed that Prg4+ cells in the superficial zone expand into 
deeper regions in a time-course analysis with cell tracking using 
Prg4-CreERT2;R26-LacZ mice (11). In addition, the PRG4 protein itself 
suppresses chondrocyte differentiation of superficial immature cells 
and synovial cells (12). However, Prg4+ cells in the articular cartilage 
have not been characterized by scRNA-seq, and their heterogeneity 
has not yet been revealed. The present study indicated the presence 
of two populations of Prg4+ cells in the tendon/ligament: Rspo2+ 
undifferentiated progenitors and Rspo2− chondrogenic progenitors. 
Although RSPO2 in the growth plate chondrocytes is involved in 
endochondral ossification during skeletal development (5) and RSPO2 
derived from the synovium is involved in osteoarthritis development 
(44, 45), the expression and role of RSPO2 in the articular cartilage 
are unknown. We previously reported that the canonical WNT 
pathway is activated by mechanical loading in the superficial zone 
of articular cartilage and contributes to the transcriptional induc-
tion of Prg4 (46). However, Prg4 was not induced by RSPO2 over-
expression in the mouse Achilles tendon (Fig. 5D). Characteristics 
of Prg4+ or Rspo2+ cells and the role of RSPO2 may be quite differ-
ent between the articular cartilage and the tendon/ligament.
Recently, we reported that mechanical overload induced gremlin-1 
via the Rac1–NF-B pathway in chondrocytes (40). Consistently, we 
found that Rspo2 is induced by the same pathway, which was deter-
mined by estimation of the transcription factors associated with the 
Rspo2+cluster using SCENIC (Fig. 8A). In addition to gremlin-1, Rspo2 
is induced by IL-1 and mechanical loading, and its induction is dis-
rupted by NF-B inhibitors (Fig. 8). Because NF-B is widely involved 
in inflammatory responses, Rspo2 may be induced by proinflam-
matory cytokines other than IL-1 during tissue injury and repair 
processes. Repetition of inflammation or mechanical overloading 
can cause micro-injury, degeneration, and consequently ectopic os-
sification of the tendon/ligament (47). Together, the Rspo2+ cluster 
likely contributes to appropriate maintenance or repair of the tendon/
ligament under such pathological conditions by suppression of chon-
drogenic differentiation in progenitor cells. We did not show the 
biological significance of mechanical loading and NF-B in the reg-
ulation of RSPO2 expression in this study. Furthermore, we did not 
examine other upstream pathways that might induce RSPO2. In 
addition to inflammation and mechanical loading, aging is another 
factor associated with this pathophysiology (2). In the present study, 
we did not examine alterations in Rspo2 expression levels or in 
Rspo2+ cells with aging. These issues should be investigated to fully 
determine how RSPO2 and Rspo2+ cells are regulated against vari-
ous conditions such as inflammation, overuse, and aging.
We identified an Rspo2+ undifferentiated cluster in our scRNA-
seq data from a mouse ATP model and confirmed this cluster using 
deposited scRNA-seq data of a different mouse Achilles tendon model. 
However, we could not perform scRNA-seq of ligaments of human 
samples because resection surgery of ossified tendons/ligaments is rarely 
performed, and therefore, appropriate human surgical specimens were 
not available. Moreover, we could not obtain a sufficient number of cells 
for scRNA-seq analysis of mouse ligaments. Considering that tendons 
and ligaments are not identical, the presence and role of Rspo2+ cells 
in ligaments and in human samples should be examined in the future.
In conclusion, we found that Rspo2 is specifically expressed in 
one of two Prg4+ clusters in the tendon/ligament. Rspo2 expression 
defines a distinct undifferentiated progenitor subpopulation of 
Tppp3+Pdgfra+ cells. RSPO2 protein suppresses ectopic endochondral 
ossification in the tendon/ligament. Moreover, Rspo2 is induced by 
inflammatory stimulation and mechanical loading via the NF-B 
pathway. The present findings contribute to our understanding of 
tendon/ligament homeostasis and of the mechanisms underlying 
ectopic ossification that is observed in diseases, such as OPLL.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
All animal experiments were conducted in accordance with the 
guidelines described in the Guide for the Use and Care of Laboratory 
Animals of the Institute for Laboratory Animal Research (ILAR, 2011). 
Furthermore, animal experiments were approved by the Institu-
tional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of The University 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 25, 2022
Tachibana et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn2138 (2022)     19 August 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
12 of 15
of Tokyo (M-P17-091). All animals were housed in a facility under 
the supervision of the IACUC at 18° to 22°C with a 12-hour light/
dark cycle and were allowed free access to food and water. Genotypes 
were analyzed in each experiment. For all in vitro and in vivo studies 
requiring WT mice, adult male (8 weeks old) C57BL/6J mice were 
purchased from Sankyo Lab Services (Tokyo, Japan). The compara-
tive groups were maintained on a C57BL/6J background. TOPGAL 
mice, Prg4-CreERT2, and Rosa26-tdTomato mice were obtained from 
the Jackson Laboratory (Sacramento, CA). We generated Prg4-CreERT2; 
R26-tdTomato mice by mating Prg4-CreERT2 male mice with R26-­
tdTomato female mice. The primer sequences used for genotyping are 
shown in table S5. For the generation of CAG-EGFP-Rspo2 mice, the 
transgene shown in Fig. 5A was constructed. DNA purification and 
microinjection were performed in accordance with standard protocols.
Mouse ATP model
All surgeries were performed on 8-week-old male mice under general 
anesthesia with the aid of an operating microscope. The mice were 
anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection with a mixture of medeto-
midine (0.3 mg/kg; #0002949, Nippon Zenyaku Kogyo, Koriyama, 
Japan), midazolam (4.0 mg/kg; #169738, Astellas, Tokyo, Japan), and 
butorphanol (5.0 mg/kg; #016440, Meiji Seika Pharma, Tokyo, Japan). 
A 27-gauge needle was used for the puncture, which was performed 
percutaneously from the outside of the Achilles tendon body, and 
this process was repeated five times at different sites on the Achilles 
tendon body of each mouse, as previously described (13). In the sham 
operation, the needle was inserted through the skin without touching 
the Achilles tendon (13). For tamoxifen induction, mice were in-
jected intraperitoneally with tamoxifen (10 mg/ml; #T006000, 
Toronto Research Chemicals, Toronto, Canada) in corn oil at a dose 
of 50 g/g body weight. The injection was performed twice over 
consecutive days before or after ATP induction. For the administra-
tion of an antibody against RSPO2, ATP was induced in 8-week-old 
WT mice, which then received 10 l of RSPO2 antibody solution or 
vehicle (10 g/ml) [phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)] injected into 
the Achilles tendon every day for 20 days starting from the day after 
ATP induction.
Micro–computed tomography
CT images were acquired using an inspeXio SMX-100CT (Shimadzu 
Corporation, Kyoto, Japan). We defined a 2 mm by 2 mm by 4 mm 
measurement space 0.1 mm proximal to the Achilles tendon attach-
ment site and validated the volume of ossification within the mea-
surement space. The imaging conditions were as follows: voltage, 
75 kV; current, 120 A; voxel size, 0.006 mm per voxel; image size, 
1024 by 1024 pixels; and slice thickness, 0.04 mm. TRI/3D-BON-FCS64 
(RATOC System Engineering, Tokyo, Japan) was used for analysis.
Histological analyses and immunohistochemistry
Mice were euthanized by carbon dioxide (CO2) inhalation and 
perfusion-fixed in 10% buffered formalin from the left ventricle for 
5 min. The ankles and Achilles tendons were then dissected, fixed in 
10% buffered formalin for 24 hours, demineralized in 10% EDTA 
(pH 7.4) for 14 days, and paraffin-embedded, and then sagittal 
sections of 4-m thickness were cut out. The specimens were used 
for hematoxylin and eosin staining, nuclear fast red staining, X-gal 
staining, and immunohistochemistry. Information on antibodies is 
provided in table S6. After reacting with horseradish peroxidase–
conjugated antibodies, positive signal colors were generated using 
Histofine Simple stain DAB (3,3’-diaminobenzine) (#415172, Nichirei 
Biosciences, Tokyo, Japan). The positively stained areas were mea-
sured using ImageScope (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). 
Fluorescence staining was evaluated by confocal microscopy (LSM880, 
Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) using Alexa Fluor (#A32731, #A32728, 
and #A11058, Invitrogen, Waltham, CA) as a secondary antibody 
followed by a 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole–containing inclusion 
agent (#12745-74, Nacalai Tesque Inc., Kyoto, Japan).
Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase 
chain reaction
Total RNA was extracted using the Direct-zol RNA Kit (#R2062, 
Zymo Research, Irvine, CA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
protocol. We confirmed that A260/A280 = 1.8 to 2.0 in all RNA sam-
ples. Total RNA was reverse-transcribed into cDNA using Rever Tra 
Ace qPCR RT Master Mix (#FSQ-201, TOYOBO, Osaka, Japan). 
Then, the qRT-PCR was performed using THUNDERBIRD SYBR 
qPCR Mix (#FSQ-201, TOYOBO) and Thermal Cycler Dice Real-­
Time System III (Takara Bio, Kusatsu, Japan). Information on 
primers is given in table S7. The absolute standard curve method 
was used to measure the expression level, which was normalized to 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase expression.
scRNA-seq using 10x genomics
ATP was induced in five Prg4-CreERT2;R26-tdTomato mice at 8 weeks 
of age, followed by tamoxifen injection 3 and 4 days after ATP, and 
were then euthanized 1 week after the ATP. The Achilles tendons were 
harvested and minced in ice-cold PBS. The harvested tissues were 
digested in RPMI 1640 medium (#30264-85, Nacalai Tesque Inc.) con-
taining 0.3% type 1 collagenase (#CLS1, Worthington, Columbus, 
OH) and 0.4% dispase II (#04942078001, Roche, Basel, Switzerland) 
at 37°C for 45 min with constant agitation. Cells were filtered through 
100-, 70-, and 40-m strainers, centrifuged, counted, and resus-
pended at a concentration of 1000 cells/l. Cell viability was assessed 
using the trypan blue exclusion method with a LUNA-FL (Logos 
Biosystems, Anyang, South Korea) automated counter, and samples 
with viability greater than 80% were processed for further sequenc-
ing. Single-cell libraries were prepared using the Chromium Con-
troller (10x Genomics, Pleasanton, CA) according to the protocol 
of Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3′ Reagent Kits (v3.1 10x Ge-
nomics). Libraries were prepared using Chromium Controller 
(10x Genomics). Alignment, quantification, and aggregation of sam-
ple count matrices were performed using the 10x Genomics Cell 
Ranger pipeline (v.5.0.0), retaining an average of 61,308 reads per 
cell mapped read depth normalization.
Bioinformatics analysis of single-cell sequencing data
The Cell Ranger summary showed a cell count of 7157, with a me-
dian of 3242 genes per cell. We performed the downstream analysis 
steps using the Seurat R package (15). Cells with less than 1000 genes 
per cell and a mitochondrial read content greater than 5% were filtered 
out. Downstream analysis steps for each sample type included normal-
ization, identification of genes with high variability among single cells, 
scaling based on UMI (unique molecular identifier) count and batch 
effects, dimensionality reduction (UMAP), unsupervised clustering, and 
discovery of cell type–specific markers with different expression levels. 
The clustering data were further subclustered using CytoTRACE 
(16). The subcluster data were subjected to trajectory analysis using 
diffusion map pseudotime (32) and Monocle2 (33), and cell-cell 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 25, 2022
Tachibana et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn2138 (2022)     19 August 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
13 of 15
interactions were analyzed using scTensor (34). SCENIC (37) was used 
to estimate upstream transcription factors.
Flow cytometry
Cells were obtained from the Achilles tendons of Prg4-CreERT2;R26-­
tdTomato mice, as described above. The cells were filtered through 
100-, 70-, and 40-m strainers; centrifuged; and suspended in PBS 
with 0.1% bovine serum albumin for analysis. tdTomato+ cells were 
sorted using Cell Sorter SH800 (Sony, Tokyo, Japan).
Human samples
For human samples, written informed consent was obtained from 
all individuals, and approval was obtained from The University of 
Tokyo Ethics Committee (Institutional Review Board 0622-12). All 
relevant codes of ethics were complied with. Samples were collected 
from patients who underwent cervical spine surgery for OPLL or CSM.
Primary culture of human ligament cells
The harvested human paraspinal ligament tissues were digested in 
RPMI 1640 medium (#30264-85, Nacalai Tesque Inc.) containing 
0.3% type 1 collagenase (#CLS1, Worthington) and 0.4% dispase II 
(#04942078001, Roche) at 37°C for 45 min with constant agitation. 
Primary cells were then seeded into 24-well collagen-coated micro-
plates (#4820-010, AGC Techno Glass, Haibara-gun, Japan) at a density 
of 1 × 105 cells per well. For chondrogenic differentiation, the cells 
were cultured with chondrogenic medium (Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s 
medium and 1% ITS (Insulin-Transferrin-Selenium) + Premix; #354352, 
Corning, New York City, NY), l-ascorbic acid diphosphate (50 g/ml; 
#49752, Sigma-Aldrich), and l-proline (40 g/ml; #P0380, Sigma-­
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) supplemented with bone morphogenetic 
protein-2 (100 ng/ml; #100-21, PeproTech) and transforming growth 
factor–1 (10 ng/ml; #100-21, PeproTech) at 37°C in a humidified atmo-
sphere containing 5% CO2. The medium was changed twice a week.
RNA sequencing
Total RNA was extracted from human cells. We confirmed that 
A260/A280 = 1.8 to 2.0, and the RNA integrity number was >7 in all 
RNA samples. In accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol, the 
sequence libraries for expression analysis of human surgical samples 
were prepared using the NEBNext Ultra II RNA Library Prep Kit for 
Illumina (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA). Sequencing was per-
formed on an Illumina HiSeq 4000 System with two 150-bp paired-
end reads (Veritas Genetics, Danvers, MA). The raw sequence data 
were filtered using Trimmomatic (version 0.39) to remove adapter 
sequences, low-quality reads, N-rich sequences, and reads less than 
50 bp in length. The filtered data were aligned against the human 
reference genome (GRCh38.p13) using STAR (version 2.7.3a). In 
addition, gene expression counts and transcripts per million value 
were calculated using RSEM (version 1.3.3). The data for RNA-seq 
of the chondrogenic differentiation samples were analyzed using 
DNBseq (BGI, Shenzhen, China) with 50-bp single-end or 100-bp 
paired-end reads. The filtered data were aligned against the human 
reference genome (GRCh38.p12). Data analysis was performed by 
iDEP.91 (http://bioinformatics.sdstate.edu/idep/) and ingenuity 
pathway analysis (QIAGEN, Düsseldorf, Germany).
Cyclic tensile strain loading
Human ligament cells were seeded into silicon stretch chambers 
coated with fibronectin (#356008, Corning) at a density of 1 × 105 cells 
per chamber; each chamber had a culture surface of 2 cm by 2 cm. 
After 48 hours, cyclic tensile strain (0.5 Hz, 10% elongation) was applied 
for 24 hours using the STB-140 mechanical stretch system (Strex, Osaka, 
Japan) in a CO2 incubator. Control cells were seeded into the same 
chambers and cultured without cyclic tensile strain. Cells were treated 
with 50 nM BAY11-7085 (#S7352, Selleck Chemicals, Houston, TX), 
10 M EHT1864 (#S7482, Selleck), and NSC23766 (#SML0952, 
Merck, Darmstadt, Germany).
Western blotting
Cells were lysed with T-PER (Tissue Protein Extraction Reagent) 
(#78510, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) supplemented 
with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (#25955-24 and #07575-51, 
Nacalai Tesque Inc.). After mixing the samples with 4× LDS (lithium 
dodecyl sulfate) sample buffer (#2178723, Thermo Fisher Scientific) 
and dithiothreitol (#14128-91, Nacalai Tesque Inc.), the samples 
were boiled at 70°C for 10 min. Next, 10 g of protein was applied 
to each lane of a 4 to 12% Bolt Bis-Tris Plus precast polyacrylamide 
gel (#NW04122BOX, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated by 
electrophoresis. After blocking with Blocking One (#03953-95, 
Nacalai Tesque Inc.) for 30 min, the polyvinylidene difluoride 
membranes (#033-22453, Wako, Osaka, Japan) were probed with 
the corresponding antibodies overnight at 4°C or for 1 hour at 
room temperature. The immunoreactions were visualized using 
ChemiLumi One Super (#02230-30, Nacalai Tesque Inc.) and iBright 
1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Band signals were measured using 
iBright Analysis Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Information 
on antibodies is given in table S8.
Luciferase assay
The human chondrosarcoma cell line SW1353 and human embryonic 
kidney cells 293 were seeded in 24-well plates. Lipofectamine 3000 
(#L3000015, Invitrogen) was used to cotransfect the pGL4.49 (luc2P/
TCF-LEF-RE/Hygro) reporter vector (Promega, Madison, WI) and 
pRL-TK (Promega). After 48 hours, cells were treated with rhRSPO2 
(#120-43, PeproTech, NJ, USA) or lithium chloride (#123-01162, Wako) 
for another 24 hours. Luciferase assays were performed using a 
PicaGene Dual SeaPansy Luminescence Kit (#PGD-S, Toyo Bnet, 
Tokyo, Japan) and a GloMax 96 Microplate Luminometer (Promega). 
Data were presented as the ratio of Fleffi activity to Renilla activity.
Statistical analyses
GraphPad Prism version 8.4.3 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA) 
was used for statistical analysis. Values are expressed as means ± 
SD. The Student’s unpaired two-tailed t test was applied to compare 
two groups. For multiple comparisons, statistical analysis was per-
formed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey’s 
multiple comparisons test. The sample size was chosen on the basis 
of the fact that previous literature using similar methods had reported 
moderate effect sizes. P < 0.05 was considered significant.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at https://science.org/doi/10.1126/
sciadv.abn2138
View/request a protocol for this paper from Bio-protocol.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
	 1.	 L. Bobzin, R. R. Roberts, H. J. Chen, J. G. Crump, A. E. Merrill, Development 
and maintenance of tendons and ligaments. Development 148, dev186916 (2021).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 25, 2022
Tachibana et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn2138 (2022)     19 August 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
14 of 15
	 2.	 Q. Zhang, D. Zhou, H. Wang, J. Tan, Heterotopic ossification of tendon and ligament. 
J. Cell. Mol. Med. 24, 5428–5437 (2020).
	 3.	 S. Ehara, T. Simamura, R. Nakamura, K. Yamazaki, Paravertebral ligamentous ossification: 
DISH, OPLL and OLF. Eur. J. Radiol. 27, 196–205 (1998).
	 4.	 M. Nakajima, A. Takahashi, T. Tsuji, T. Karasugi, H. Baba, K. Uchida, S. Kawabata, A. Okawa, 
S. Shindo, K. Takeuchi, Y. Taniguchi, S. Maeda, M. Kashii, A. Seichi, H. Nakajima, 
Y. Kawaguchi, S. Fujibayashi, M. Takahata, T. Tanaka, K. Watanabe, K. Kida, T. Kanchiku, 
Z. Ito, K. Mori, T. Kaito, S. Kobayashi, K. Yamada, M. Takahashi, K. Chiba, M. Matsumoto, 
K.-I. Furukawa, M. Kubo, Y. Toyama; Genetic Study Group of Investigation Committee on 
Ossification of the Spinal Ligaments, S. Ikegawa, A genome-wide association study 
identifies susceptibility loci for ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament 
of the spine. Nat. Genet. 46, 1012–1016 (2014).
	 5.	 Y. Takegami, B. Ohkawara, M. Ito, A. Masuda, H. Nakashima, N. Ishiguro, K. Ohno, 
R-spondin 2 facilitates differentiation of proliferating chondrocytes into hypertrophic 
chondrocytes by enhancing Wnt/-catenin signaling in endochondral ossification. 
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 473, 255–264 (2016).
	 6.	 B. Walia, A. H. Huang, Tendon stem progenitor cells: Understanding the biology to inform 
therapeutic strategies for tendon repair. J. Orthop. Res. 37, 1270–1280 (2019).
	 7.	 T. Harvey, S. Flamenco, C. M. Fan, A Tppp3+Pdgfra+ tendon stem cell population 
contributes to regeneration and reveals a shared role for PDGF signalling in regeneration 
and fibrosis. Nat. Cell Biol. 21, 1490–1503 (2019).
	 8.	 D. K. Rhee, J. Marcelino, M. A. Baker, Y. Gong, P. Smits, V. Lefebvre, G. D. Jay, M. Stewart, 
H. Wang, M. L. Warman, J. D. Carpten, The secreted glycoprotein lubricin protects 
cartilage surfaces and inhibits synovial cell overgrowth. J. Clin. Invest. 115, 622–631 
(2005).
	 9.	 R. T. Kohrs, C. Zhao, Y. L. Sun, G. D. Jay, L. Zhang, M. L. Warman, K. N. An, P. C. Amadio, 
Tendon fascicle gliding in wild type, heterozygous, and lubricin knockout mice. J. Orthop. 
Res. 29, 384–389 (2011).
	10.	 J. Marcelino, J. D. Carpten, W. M. Suwairi, O. M. Gutierrez, S. Schwartz, C. Robbins, R. Sood, 
I. Makalowska, A. Baxevanis, B. Johnstone, R. M. Laxer, L. Zemel, C. A. Kim, J. K. Herd, 
J. Ihle, C. Williams, M. Johnson, V. Raman, L. G. Alonso, D. Brunoni, A. Gerstein, 
N. Papadopoulos, S. A. Bahabri, J. M. Trent, M. L. Warman, CACP, encoding a secreted 
proteoglycan, is mutated in camptodactyly-arthropathy-coxa vara-pericarditis syndrome. 
Nat. Genet. 23, 319–322 (1999).
	11.	 E. Kozhemyakina, M. Zhang, A. Ionescu, U. M. Ayturk, N. Ono, A. Kobayashi, 
H. Kronenberg, M. L. Warman, A. B. Lassar, Identification of a Prg4-expressing articular 
cartilage progenitor cell population in mice. Arthritis Rheumatol. 67, 1261–1273 (2015).
	12.	 Y. Maenohara, R. Chijimatsu, N. Tachibana, K. Uehara, F. Xuan, D. Mori, Y. Murahashi, 
H. Nakamoto, T. Oichi, S. H. Chang, T. Matsumoto, Y. Omata, F. Yano, S. Tanaka, T. Saito, 
Lubricin contributes to homeostasis of articular cartilage by modulating differentiation 
of superficial zone cells. J. Bone Miner. Res. 36, 792–802 (2020).
	13.	 X. Wang, F. Li, L. Xie, J. Crane, G. Zhen, Y. Mishina, R. Deng, B. Gao, H. Chen, S. Liu, P. Yang, 
M. Gao, M. Tu, Y. Wang, M. Wan, C. Fan, X. Cao, Inhibition of overactive TGF- attenuates 
progression of heterotopic ossification in mice. Nat. Commun. 9, 551 (2018).
	14.	 M. Sorkin, A. K. Huber, C. Hwang, W. F. Carson IV, R. Menon, J. Li, K. Vasquez, C. Pagani, 
N. Patel, S. Li, N. D. Visser, Y. Niknafs, S. Loder, M. Scola, D. Nycz, K. Gallagher, 
L. K. McCauley, J. Xu, A. W. James, S. Agarwal, S. Kunkel, Y. Mishina, B. Levi, Regulation 
of heterotopic ossification by monocytes in a mouse model of aberrant wound healing. 
Nat. Commun. 11, 722 (2020).
	15.	 Y. Hao, S. Hao, E. Andersen-Nissen, W. M. Mauck III, S. Zheng, A. Butler, M. J. Lee, A. J. Wilk, 
C. Darby, M. Zager, P. Hoffman, M. Stoeckius, E. Papalexi, E. P. Mimitou, J. Jain, 
A. Srivastava, T. Stuart, L. M. Fleming, B. Yeung, A. J. Rogers, J. M. McElrath, C. A. Blish, 
R. Gottardo, P. Smibert, R. Satija, Integrated analysis of multimodal single-cell data. Cell 
184, 3573–3587.e29 (2021).
	16.	 G. S. Gulati, S. S. Sikandar, D. J. Wesche, A. Manjunath, A. Bharadwaj, M. J. Berger, F. Ilagan, 
A. H. Kuo, R. W. Hsieh, S. Cai, M. Zabala, F. A. Scheeren, N. A. Lobo, D. Qian, F. B. Yu, 
F. M. Dirbas, M. F. Clarke, A. M. Newman, Single-cell transcriptional diversity is a hallmark 
of developmental potential. Science 367, 405–411 (2020).
	17.	 K. A. Kim, M. Wagle, K. Tran, X. Zhan, M. A. Dixon, S. Liu, D. Gros, W. Korver, S. Yonkovich, 
N. Tomasevic, M. Binnerts, A. Abo, R-Spondin family members regulate the Wnt pathway 
by a common mechanism. Mol. Biol. Cell 19, 2588–2596 (2008).
	 18.	 Y. Usami, A. T. Gunawardena, M. Iwamoto, M. Enomoto-Iwamoto, Wnt signaling 
in cartilage development and diseases: Lessons from animal studies. Lab. Invest. 96, 
186–196 (2016).
	19.	 M. Nakajima, I. Kou, H. Ohashi, S. Ikegawa; Genetic Study Group of the Investigation 
Committee on the Ossification of Spinal Ligaments, Identification and functional 
characterization of RSPO2 as a susceptibility gene for ossification of the posterior 
longitudinal ligament of the spine. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 99, 202–207 (2016).
	20.	 N. Sidahmed-Adrar, J.-F. Ottavi, N. Benzoubir, T. A. Saadi, M. B. Saleh, P. Mauduit, 
C. Guettier, C. Desterke, F. L. Naour, Tspan15 is a new stemness-related marker 
in hepatocellular carcinoma. Proteomics 19, e1900025 (2019).
	21.	 P. H. Krebsbach, L. G. Villa-Diaz, The role of integrin 6 (CD49f) in stem cells: More than 
a conserved biomarker. Stem Cells Dev. 26, 1090–1099 (2017).
	22.	 D. Wang, J. Wang, L. Bai, H. Pan, H. Feng, H. Clevers, Y. A. Zeng, Long-term expansion 
of pancreatic islet organoids from resident Procr+ progenitors. Cell 180, 1198–1211.e19 
(2020).
	23.	 F. Zhou, X. Li, W. Wang, P. Zhu, J. Zhou, W. He, M. Ding, F. Xiong, X. Zheng, Z. Li, Y. Ni, 
X. Mu, L. Wen, T. Cheng, Y. Lan, W. Yuan, F. Tang, B. Liu, Tracing haematopoietic stem cell 
formation at single-cell resolution. Nature 533, 487–492 (2016).
	24.	 Y. Gan, J. He, J. Zhu, Z. Xu, Z. Wang, J. Yan, O. Hu, Z. Bai, L. Chen, Y. Xie, M. Jin, S. Huang, 
B. Liu, P. Liu, Spatially defined single-cell transcriptional profiling characterizes diverse 
chondrocyte subtypes and nucleus pulposus progenitors in human intervertebral discs. 
Bone Res. 9, 37 (2021).
	 25.	 Y. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Xia, Y. F. Yao, A. F. T. Mak, P. S. H. Yung, K. M. Chan, L. Wang, 
C. Zhang, Y. Huang, K. K. L. Mak, Osteocalcin expressing cells from tendon sheaths in mice 
contribute to tendon repair by activating Hedgehog signaling. eLife 6, e30474 (2017).
	26.	 G. Lisignoli, E. Lambertini, C. Manferdini, E. Gabusi, L. Penolazzi, F. Paolella, M. Angelozzi, 
V. Casagranda, R. Piva, Collagen type XV and the 'osteogenic status'. J. Cell. Mol. Med. 21, 
2236–2244 (2017).
	27.	 S. Fahmy-Garcia, E. Farrell, J. Witte-Bouma, I. R.-v. den Berge, M. Suarez, D. Mumcuoglu, 
H. Walles, S. G. J. M. Kluijtmans, B. C. J. van der Eerden, G. J. V. M. van Osch, 
J. P. T. M. van Leeuwen, M. van Driel, Follistatin effects in migration, vascularization, 
and osteogenesis in vitro and bone repair in vivo. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 7, 38 (2019).
	28.	 P. Ducy, R. Zhang, V. Geoffroy, A. L. Ridall, G. Karsenty, Osf2/Cbfa1: A transcriptional 
activator of osteoblast differentiation. Cell 89, 747–754 (1997).
	29.	 T. Komori, H. Yagi, S. Nomura, A. Yamaguchi, K. Sasaki, K. Deguchi, Y. Shimizu, 
R. T. Bronson, Y. H. Gao, M. Inada, M. Sato, R. Okamoto, Y. Kitamura, S. Yoshiki, 
T. Kishimoto, Targeted disruption of Cbfa1 results in a complete lack of bone formation 
owing to maturational arrest of osteoblasts. Cell 89, 755–764 (1997).
	30.	 F. Otto, A. P. Thornell, T. Crompton, A. Denzel, K. C. Gilmour, I. R. Rosewell, G. W. Stamp, 
R. S. Beddington, S. Mundlos, B. R. Olsen, P. B. Selby, M. J. Owen, Cbfa1, a candidate gene 
for cleidocranial dysplasia syndrome, is essential for osteoblast differentiation and bone 
development. Cell 89, 765–771 (1997).
	31.	 T. Wu, E. Hu, S. Xu, M. Chen, P. Guo, Z. Dai, T. Feng, L. Zhou, W. Tang, L. Zhan, X. Fu, S. Liu, 
X. Bo, G. Yu, clusterProfiler 4.0: A universal enrichment tool for interpreting omics data. 
Innovation 2, 100141 (2021).
	32.	 P. Angerer, L. Haghverdi, M. Büttner, F. J. Theis, C. Marr, F. Buettner, Destiny: Diffusion 
maps for large-scale single-cell data in R. Bioinformatics 32, 1241–1243 (2016).
	33.	 X. Qiu, Q. Mao, Y. Tang, L. Wang, R. Chawla, H. A. Pliner, C. Trapnell, Reversed graph 
embedding resolves complex single-cell trajectories. Nat. Methods 14, 979–982 (2017).
	34.	 K. Tsuyuzaki, M. Ishii, I. Nikaido, Uncovering hypergraphs of cell-cell interaction from 
single cell RNA-sequencing data. bioRxiv 566182 (2019).
	35.	 A. A. Raslan, J. K. Yoon, R-spondins: Multi-mode WNT signaling regulators in adult stem 
cells. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 106, 26–34 (2019).
	36.	 K. Futrega, P. G. Robey, T. J. Klein, R. W. Crawford, M. R. Doran, A single day of TGF-1 
exposure activates chondrogenic and hypertrophic differentiation pathways in bone 
marrow-derived stromal cells. Commun. Biol. 4, 29 (2021).
	37.	 S. Aibar, C. B. González-Blas, T. Moerman, V. A. Huynh-Thu, H. Imrichova, G. Hulselmans, 
F. Rambow, J. C. Marine, P. Geurts, J. Aerts, J. van den Oord, Z. K. Atak, J. Wouters, S. Aerts, 
SCENIC: Single-cell regulatory network inference and clustering. Nat. Methods 14, 
1083–1086 (2017).
	38.	 T. Matsuzaki, O. Alvarez-Garcia, S. Mokuda, K. Nagira, M. Olmer, R. Gamini, K. Miyata, 
Y. Akasaki, A. I. Su, H. Asahara, M. K. Lotz, FoxO transcription factors modulate autophagy 
and proteoglycan 4 in cartilage homeostasis and osteoarthritis. Sci. Transl. Med. 10, 
eaan0746 (2018).
	39.	 C. H. Zhang, Y. Gao, U. Jadhav, H. H. Hung, K. M. Holton, A. J. Grodzinsky, R. A. Shivdasani, 
A. B. Lassar, Creb5 establishes the competence for Prg4 expression in articular cartilage. 
Commun. Biol. 4, 332 (2021).
	40.	 S. H. Chang, D. Mori, H. Kobayashi, Y. Mori, H. Nakamoto, K. Okada, Y. Taniguchi, S. Sugita, 
F. Yano, U. I. Chung, J. R. Kim-Kaneyama, M. Yanagita, A. Economides, E. Canalis, D. Chen, 
S. Tanaka, T. Saito, Excessive mechanical loading promotes osteoarthritis through 
the gremlin-1–NF-B pathway. Nat. Commun. 10, 1442 (2019).
	41.	 Y. Tamamura, T. Otani, N. Kanatani, E. Koyama, J. Kitagaki, T. Komori, Y. Yamada, 
F. Costantini, S. Wakisaka, M. Pacifici, M. Iwamoto, M. Enomoto-Iwamoto, Developmental 
regulation of Wnt/beta-catenin signals is required for growth plate assembly, cartilage 
integrity, and endochondral ossification. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 19185–19195 (2005).
	42.	 J. A. Staverosky, B. A. Pryce, S. S. Watson, R. Schweitzer, Tubulin polymerization-
promoting protein family member 3, Tppp3, is a specific marker of the differentiating 
tendon sheath and synovial joints. Dev. Dyn. 238, 685–692 (2009).
	43.	 K. S. Yan, C. Y. Janda, J. Chang, G. X. Y. Zheng, K. A. Larkin, V. C. Luca, L. A. Chia, A. T. Mah, 
A. Han, J. M. Terry, A. Ootani, K. Roelf, M. Lee, J. Yuan, X. Li, C. R. Bolen, J. Wilhelmy, 
P. S. Davies, H. Ueno, R. J. von Furstenberg, P. Belgrader, S. B. Ziraldo, H. Ordonez, 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 25, 2022
Tachibana et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabn2138 (2022)     19 August 2022
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
15 of 15
S. J. Henning, M. H. Wong, M. P. Snyder, I. L. Weissman, A. J. Hsueh, T. S. Mikkelsen, 
K. C. Garcia, C. J. Kuo, Non-equivalence of Wnt and R-spondin ligands during Lgr5+ 
intestinal stem-cell self-renewal. Nature 545, 238–242 (2017).
	44.	 T. Okura, B. Ohkawara, Y. Takegami, M. Ito, A. Masuda, T. Seki, N. Ishiguro, K. Ohno, 
Mianserin suppresses R-spondin 2-induced activation of Wnt/-catenin signaling 
in chondrocytes and prevents cartilage degradation in a rat model of osteoarthritis. 
Sci. Rep. 9, 2808 (2019).
	45.	 H. Zhang, C. Lin, C. Zeng, Z. Wang, H. Wang, J. Lu, X. Liu, Y. Shao, C. Zhao, J. Pan, S. Xu, 
Y. Zhang, D. Xie, D. Cai, X. Bai, Synovial macrophage M1 polarisation exacerbates 
experimental osteoarthritis partially through R-spondin-2. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 77, 
1524–1534 (2018).
	46.	 F. Xuan, F. Yano, D. Mori, R. Chijimatsu, Y. Maenohara, H. Nakamoto, Y. Mori, Y. Makii, 
T. Oichi, M. M. Taketo, H. Hojo, S. Ohba, U. I. Chung, S. Tanaka, T. Saito, Wnt/-catenin 
signaling contributes to articular cartilage homeostasis through lubricin induction 
in the superficial zone. Arthritis Res. Ther. 21, 247 (2019).
	47.	 R. Nakamichi, H. Asahara, Regulation of tendon and ligament differentiation. Bone 143, 
115609 (2021).
Acknowledgments: We thank J. Sugita, K. Kaneko, R. Honma, and K. Abe for technical 
assistance. We thank G. Lenihan-Geels and J. L. Croxford from Edanz (https://jp.edanz.com/ac) 
for editing a draft of this manuscript. Funding: This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI 
(19H05654 to S.T. and T.S.), JSPS KAKENHI (19H05565 to S.T., T.S., and Y.Om.), JSPS KAKENHI 
(21K19552 to T.S.), JSPS KAKENHI (20H03799 to T.S.), JSPS KAKENHI (18KK0254 to T.S. and F.Y.), 
JSPS KAKENHI (20K09495 to Y.Os. and T.S.), JSPS KAKENHI (19K09641 to F.Y.), JSPS KAKENHI 
(21KK0155 to F.Y.), The Nakatomi Foundation (to N.T.), and Japan Agency for Medical Research 
and Development (16ek0109042h0003 to T.S.). Author contributions: Conceptualization: 
N.T., H.O., and T.S. Methodology: N.T., H.O., and T.S. Investigation: N.T., Y.T., J.M., H.I., Y.I., Y.A., 
K.N., H.N., S.K., T.D., Y.Mat., Y.Os., S.M., and M.S. Visualization: N.T., R.C., H.O., and Y.Mae. 
Supervision: R.C., H.O., T.O., A.T., Y.Om., F.Y., S.I., Y.S., S.T., and T.S. Writing—original draft: N.T. 
and T.S. Writing—review and editing: N.T., S.I., and T.S. Competing interests: The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: All data 
needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper, the Supplementary 
Materials, and/or the deposited data. The scRNA-seq data of the mouse ATP model, RNA-seq 
data of patients with OPLL and CSM, and RNA-seq data of chondrogenic differentiation of 
human ligament cells were deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/geo/) under accession numbers GSE188758, GSE188760, and GSE188759, respectively. 
CAG-EGFP-Rspo2 mice were deposited in the RIKEN BioResource Research Center (https://web.
brc.riken.jp/en/). Other noncommercially available materials described in this study may be 
obtained with pending scientific review and a completed material transfer agreement. 
Requests should be submitted to T.S. (tasaitoutky@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp).
Submitted 15 November 2021
Accepted 8 July 2022
Published 19 August 2022
10.1126/sciadv.abn2138
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 25, 2022
Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science Advances (ISSN ) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue NW,
Washington, DC 20005. The title Science Advances is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Copyright © 2022 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim
to original U.S. Government Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
RSPO2 defines a distinct undifferentiated progenitor in the tendon/ligament and
suppresses ectopic ossification
Naohiro TachibanaRyota ChijimatsuHiroyuki OkadaTakeshi OichiYuki TaniguchiYuji MaenoharaJunya MiyaharaHisatoshi
IshikuraYasuhide IwanagaYusuke ArinoKosei NagataHideki NakamotoSo KatoToru DoiYoshitaka MatsubayashiYasushi
OshimaAsuka TerashimaYasunori OmataFumiko YanoShingo MaedaShiro IkegawaMasahide SekiYutaka SuzukiSakae
TanakaTaku Saito
Sci. Adv., 8 (33), eabn2138. • DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.abn2138
View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.abn2138
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 25, 2022

===== Liu2021_FrontCellDevBiol_Scleraxis+TendonDifferentiation =====

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 03 June 2021
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.654397
Edited by:
Hongwei Ouyang,
Zhejiang University, China
Reviewed by:
Lin Junxin,
Zhejiang University, China
Alice Huang,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, United States
*Correspondence:
Rulang Jiang
Rulang.Jiang@cchmc.org
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Stem Cell Research,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental
Biology
Received: 16 January 2021
Accepted: 05 May 2021
Published: 03 June 2021
Citation:
Liu H, Xu J, Lan Y, Lim H-W and
Jiang R (2021) The Scleraxis
Transcription Factor Directly
Regulates Multiple Distinct Molecular
and Cellular Processes During Early
Tendon Cell Differentiation.
Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 9:654397.
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.654397
The Scleraxis Transcription Factor
Directly Regulates Multiple Distinct
Molecular and Cellular Processes
During Early Tendon Cell
Differentiation
Han Liu1, Jingyue Xu1, Yu Lan1,2,3,4, Hee-Woong Lim4,5 and Rulang Jiang1,2,4*
1 Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 2 Division
of Plastic Surgery, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 3 Department of Surgery,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 4 Department of Pediatrics, University
of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 5 Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children’s
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States
Proper development of tendons is crucial for the integration and function of the
musculoskeletal system. Currently little is known about the molecular mechanisms
controlling tendon development and tendon cell differentiation. The transcription factor
Scleraxis (Scx) is expressed throughout tendon development and plays essential roles
in both embryonic tendon development and adult tendon healing, but few direct
target genes of Scx in tendon development have been reported and genome-wide
identiﬁcation of Scx direct target genes in vivo has been lacking. In this study, we have
generated a ScxFlag knockin mouse strain, which produces fully functional endogenous
Scx proteins containing a 2xFLAG epitope tag at the carboxy terminus. We mapped the
genome-wide Scx binding sites in the developing limb tendon tissues, identifying 12,097
high quality Scx regulatory cis-elements in-around 7,520 genes. Comparative analysis
with previously reported embryonic tendon cell RNA-seq data identiﬁed 490 candidate
Scx direct target genes in early tendon development. Furthermore, we characterized
a new Scx gene-knockout mouse line and performed whole transcriptome RNA
sequencing analysis of E15.5 forelimb tendon cells from Scx−/−embryos and control
littermates, identifying 68 genes whose expression in the developing tendon tissues
signiﬁcantly depended on Scx function. Combined analysis of the ChIP-seq and RNA-
seq data yielded 32 direct target genes that required Scx for activation and an
additional 17 target genes whose expression was suppressed by Scx during early
tendon development. We further analyzed and validated Scx-dependent tendon-speciﬁc
expression patterns of a subset of the target genes, including Fmod, Kera, Htra3, Ssc5d,
Tnmd, and Zfp185, by in situ hybridization and real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction assays. These results provide novel insights into the molecular mechanisms
mediating Scx function in tendon development and homeostasis. The ChIP-seq and
RNA-seq data provide a rich resource for aiding design of further studies of the
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
1
June 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 654397
Liu et al.
Scx Target Genes in Tendon Development
mechanisms regulating tendon cell differentiation and tendon tissue regeneration. The
ScxFlag mice provide a valuable new tool for unraveling the molecular mechanisms
involving Scx in the protein interaction and gene-regulatory networks underlying many
developmental and disease processes.
Keywords: bHLH, cell differentiation, ChIP-seq, CRISPR, RNA-seq, Scx, tendon development
INTRODUCTION
Tendons and ligaments are specialized connective tissues
densely packed with collagen ﬁbers, composed primarily of
type I collagen fascicles with several other collagens, elastin,
and various proteoglycans making up the remainder of the
extracellular matrix (ECM) surrounding the resident tenocytes
(Birch et al., 2013; Davis et al., 2013). Tendons connect skeletal
muscles to bones and transmit mechanical forces generated
from muscle contraction whereas the ligaments align bones
within joints and reinforce their stability and ﬂexibility. Many
musculoskeletal diseases involve injuries and tissue degeneration
in tendons and ligaments (Yang et al., 2013; Nourissat et al.,
2015). Although it is expected that many genes and molecular
pathways are shared during the processes of tendon development
and tendon healing/regeneration, the molecular mechanisms
controlling tendon development, including speciﬁcation of
tendon progenitor cells from mesenchymal stem cells, migration
to local domains and diﬀerentiation into mature tenocytes,
secretion of ECM molecules and organization of ﬁbrils and
ﬁbers into tendon bundles, are not well understood. With
the development and wide application of gene knockout
technologies, thousands of mutant mouse lines carrying loss-
of-function mutations in individual genes have been generated
and analyzed in the last 30 years. However, only loss of
function of the Scleraxis (Scx) transcription factor and TGFβ
signaling led to severe disruption of tendon development
whereas mice deﬁcient in several other genes individually
or in combination, including genes encoding the Mohawk
(Mkx) transcription factor, the early growth response (EGR)
1 and 2 transcription factors, various proteoglycans, and
tenomodulin, exhibited mild postnatal tendon defects (Docheva
et al., 2005; Murchison et al., 2007; Kilts et al., 2009; Pryce
et al., 2009; Ito et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2010; Lejard et al.,
2011; Dourte et al., 2013; Guerquin et al., 2013; Dunkman
et al., 2014; Delgado Caceres et al., 2018; Shukunami et al.,
2018). While these data suggest that the tendon developmental
processes are well orchestrated with built-in compensatory
regulatory mechanisms (Delgado Caceres et al., 2018), better
understanding of the molecular mechanisms controlling tendon
development and tendon cell diﬀerentiation will be instrumental
for the development of eﬀective methods for tendon repair
and regeneration.
Scleraxis is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factor that is expressed in early embryonic tendon progenitor
cells and stays strongly expressed throughout tendon cell
diﬀerentiation into mature tenocytes (Cserjesi et al., 1995;
Schweitzer et al., 2001). Mice homozygous for Scx null
mutation exhibit severe hypoplasia or complete absence of force
transmitting tendons, while the muscle anchoring tendons and
ligaments are less aﬀected (Murchison et al., 2007; Shukunami
et al., 2018). Further studies showed that Scx function is not
required for tendon progenitor cell initiation but is crucial for
tendon cell diﬀerentiation (Murchison et al., 2007). Studies in
mouse and chick embryos showed that TGFβ and FGF signaling
pathways are essential for induction of tendon progenitor cells
by activating expression of Scx and other tendon genes (Kuo
et al., 2008; Pryce et al., 2009; Hasson, 2011; Havis et al.,
2016). Moreover, a recent study demonstrated that Scx function
is also required for adult tendons in response to mechanical
loading (Gumucio et al., 2020). How Scx regulates tendon cell
diﬀerentiation is still unclear. Currently very few genes, including
Col1a1 and Tnmd, have been identiﬁed as potential direct target
genes of Scx in tenocytes primarily through in vitro functional
analysis of putative Scx-binding promoter elements (Shukunami
et al., 2006, 2018; Lejard et al., 2007), whereas large scale
identiﬁcation of Scx direct transcriptional target genes during
tendon cell diﬀerentiation in vivo is still lacking.
In this study, we ﬁrst generated a novel ScxFlag knockin
mouse line, which expresses the endogenous Scx protein with
a 2xFLAG epitope tag at the carboxy terminus, through
CRISPR/cas9-mediated genome editing. Using the ScxFlag mice,
we mapped the genome-wide Scx binding sites in embryonic
tendon progenitors and diﬀerentiating tendon cells using
chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high throughput
DNA sequencing, which mapped high quality Scx-binding
sites in the promoter and/or enhancer regions in 7,520
genes. Furthermore, we characterized a new Scx gene-knockout
mouse resource that is accessible to the wide biomedical
research community and performed whole transcriptome RNA
sequencing analysis of early diﬀerentiating limb tendons in
Scx−/−and wildtype littermates. These ChIP-seq and RNA-
seq datasets provide a rich resource for further studies
of the molecular mechanisms regulating tendon formation
and tendon cell diﬀerentiation. Combined analyses of the
ChIP-seq and RNA-seq data provide novel insights into the
molecular mechanisms mediating Scx regulation of tendon
cell diﬀerentiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Mice
Scx-GFP transgenic mice (Pryce et al., 2007) were generously
provided by Dr. Ronen Schweitzer (Shriners Hospitals for
Children, Portland, Oregon). To generate ScxFlag knock-in
mice, pretested guide RNAs targeting the genomic sequence
containing the endogenous Scx translational STOP codon
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
2
June 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 654397
Liu et al.
Scx Target Genes in Tendon Development
were co-injected with a single-stranded oligonucleotide donor
template (Figure 1A) and humanized Cas9 mRNAs into zygotes
of B6D2F1 (C57BL/6 X DBA2) mice. Genome-modiﬁed founder
mice were identiﬁed by using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
assay and crossed to CD-1 mice to generate ScxFlag/+ hemizygous
mice. Genotypically veriﬁed G1 ScxFlag/+ hemizygous mice were
intercrossed to generate ScxFlag/Flag homozygous mice. Scx+/−
mutant mice were purchased from the Mutant Mouse Research
and Resource Center at the University of California Davis
(KOMP catalog#13478). All mouse strains were maintained by
crossing to CD-1 wildtype mice (Charles River, Stock# 022), or
by intercrossing between siblings. All animal procedures were
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
(IACUC) at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center
(CCHMC). The mice were housed in AAALAC accredited barrier
housing conditions at CCHMC.
Histology, in situ Hybridization, and
Immunoﬂuorescent Staining
Mice were euthanized at predetermined stage and embryos
were collected in cold PBS, ﬁxed in 4% PFA overnight, washed
in PBS for 3 times and processed to 100% methanol (for
whole mount in situ hybridization), or paraﬃn for section (for
histology staining and section in situ hybridization). Histology
staining and in situ hybridization procedures were performed
as previously described (Liu et al., 2013, 2015). In situ probe
templates were ampliﬁed by PCR from total cDNA sample
of E13.5 wildtype forelimbs. Antisense RNA probes were
synthesized from templates using T7 RNA polymerase (Promega
catalog# P2075). Immunoﬂuorescent staining was performed as
previously described (Xu et al., 2014). The primary antibodies
used include anti-Sox9 (Santa Cruz, catalog# sc-20095, 1:25
dilution) and anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma, catalog# F1804, 1:50
dilution). The secondary antibodies were Alexa Fluor 568-
conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (H + L) and Alexa Fluor
488-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (H + L) [(Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, United States), catalog# A11004 and
A27034, 1:500 dilution].
Skeletal Preparations
Mice were euthanized at postnatal day 0, heated at 65◦C in
distilled water for 3 min, and de-skinned manually. Whole de-
skinned embryos were stained in Alcian Blue solution (15 mg
Alcian Blue dissolved in 20 ml glacial acetic acid plus 80 ml 95%
FIGURE 1 | Generation of ScxFlag mice. (A) Schematics of the strategy for generating ScxFlag mice using the CRISPR/CAS9 approach. The top row shows the
genomic organization of the mouse Scx locus. The two exons are boxed with coding regions ﬁlled in black and untranslated regions in white. The second row shows
the sequence around the translation STOP codon (TAG, labeled in red font). The third row shows the selected guide RNA target site sequence. The fourth row
shows part of the correctly edited ScxFlag allele sequence containing the insertion of the 2xFLAG coding sequence (in green font) immediately 5′ to the STOP codon.
The ﬁfth row shows the amino acid sequence of the 2xFLAG tag. (B) PCR genotyping result from a litter of ScxFlag/+ mouse intercross. (C–F) Images of HE and
alcian blue-stained longitudinal sections through the middle of the knee (C,D) and ankle (E,F) of E18.5 wildtype (C,E) and ScxFlag/Flag (D,F) embryos. Arrow in
panels (C,D) point to patellar tendon. Arrowheads in panels (E,F) point to Achilles tendon. ca, calcaneus; fe, femur; ti, tibia. (G–J) immunoﬂuorescent staining of
sections through the knee (G), ankle (H), forelimb autopod (I), and forelimb zeugopod (J) regions of E16.5 ScxFlag/+ embryos. Immunoﬂuorescence of Sox9 is
shown in green color, Immunoﬂuorescence of the FLAG epitope is shown in red color, and DAPI counterstaining of cellular nuclei is shown in blue color. Arrow in
panels G,H points to patellar and Achilles tendons, respectively. Arrowhead in panel (G) point to the cruciate ligaments, whereas arrowhead in panel (H) point to a
smaller tendon next to the Achilles. The numbers in panels (I,J) mark distinct forelimb tendons as: 1 - Collateral Ligament Metacarpophalangeal joint; 2 - Flexor
Digitorium Profundus; 3 - Extensor Pollicis; 4 - Extensor Carpi Radialis Longus; 5 - Extensor Digitorium Communis; 6 - Extensor Digiti Quarti; 7 - Extensor Digiti
Quinti; 8 - Extensor Carpi Ulnaris; 9 - Flexor Digitorium Sublimis; 10 - Flexor Carpi Radialis; 11 - Palmaris Longus.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
3
June 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 654397
Liu et al.
Scx Target Genes in Tendon Development
ethanol) for 48–72 h, re-ﬁxed in 100% ethanol for 24 h, and
stained in Alizarin Red solution (50 mg Alizarin Red dissolved
in 2% KOH) for 24 h. The samples were transferred into 50%
glycerol solution for imaging and long term storage.
Body Weight Measurement and
Statistical Analysis
Mice were weighed at post-natal day 21. Body weights of 10
Scx+/+, 19 Scx+/−, and 12 Scx−/−mice were collected and
processed for statistical analysis. To compare the body weight
diﬀerences among the three genotypes, we used one-way ANOVA
followed by Turkey’s multiple comparison posttest. P value less
than 0.05 was considered statistically signiﬁcant and marked as ∗.
P value less than 0.01 was marked as ∗∗, whereas P value less than
0.001 was marked as ∗∗∗when applicable.
ChIP-seq and Data Analysis
Three biological repeats, each containing 10 pairs of forelimbs
from E13.5 ScxFlag/Flag embryos, were collected for chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis as previously described
(Xu et al., 2020). Brieﬂy, DNA/protein complexes were extracted
and incubated with the anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma, catalog#
F1804). Sequencing libraries were generated using the ThruPLEX
DNA sequencing kit (Rubicon Genomics). Sequencing was
performed on Illumina NextSeq500. ChIP-seq reads were aligned
to UCSC mouse genome 10 mm using STAR aligner (ver.
2.7.4) (Dobin et al., 2013). To match the sequencing depth
across samples, aligned reads were down-sampled to 30 million.
After deduplication, peaks were called for each Scx ChIP-seq
dataset using HOMER (Hypergeometric Optimization of Motif
EnRichment) (v4.11) (Heinz et al., 2010) against a matching
input sample. To identify reproducible and uniﬁed Scx peaks,
we performed second round diﬀerential analysis comparing Scx
samples versus input samples anchoring on all the detected
Scx peaks. First, Scx peaks from the three biological replicates
were pooled and merged into a preliminary peak set. Second,
read counts were measured in all the Scx ChIP samples and
input samples within the peak set. Finally, exact test was
performed using EdgeR (Robinson et al., 2010) comparing Scx
ChIP and input samples. Final Scx peaks were deﬁned by log2
fold-change (log2FC) over input > 2 and FDR < 0.01. De
novo motif analysis of the Scx peaks was performed within a
200 bp window using Homer (v4.11) (Heinz et al., 2010) with
default options. Peak-gene association analysis was performed
utilizing the online GREAT (Genomic Regions Enrichment of
Annotations Tool) program (version 4.0) (McLean et al., 2010).
Gene regulatory domains utilized for region annotation were
deﬁned as minimum 5 kb upstream and 1 kb downstream of
the gene transcription start site (TSS), and extended in both
directions to the nearest gene’s basal domain but no more
than the maximum extension of 1000 kb in one direction
(“Basal plus extension” option)1. The ChIP-seq raw data have
been deposited into the National Center for Biotechnology
Information Gene Expression Omnibus database (NCBI GEO
Accession Number GSE173428).
1http://great.stanford.edu
Fluorescence-Activating Cell Sorting
(FACS)
E15.5 embryonic forelimbs were dissected from embryos of
Scx+/−; Scx-GFP female crossed with Scx+/−; Scx-GFP male
mice. The freshly dissected embryonic forelimbs were digested
with the trypsin−EDTA solution (Invitrogen) at 37◦C for
4 min. After inactivation of trypsin with DMEM containing
10% FBS, cells were dissociated by pipetting. The dissociated
limb cells were suspended in PBS with 2% FBS and 10 mM
EDTA, and ﬁltered through a 40 µm nylon cell strainer (BD
Falcon, 352340). GFP+
cells from each sample were isolated
using BD FACSAria II.
RNA−Seq and Data Analysis
RNA-seq were carried out using FACS isolated GFP+
cells
from the forelimb tissues of three Scx−/−embryos and three
littermate controls at E15.5. Total RNAs were extracted from
FACS isolated E15.5 forelimb GFP+
cells using the Qiagen
RNeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen catalog# 74004). cDNA ampliﬁcation
was carried out using the Ovation RNA-Seq System V2 kit
(Tecan Genomics Inc.). The sequencing libraries were made
using the Nextera XT DNA Library Prep kit (Illumina), and
sequenced using Illumina NovaSeq 6000 for 75 bp paired-end
reads. RNA-seq reads were aligned to UCSC mouse genome
10 mm using STAR aligner (v2.7.4) (Dobin et al., 2013). Read
counts for each gene were measured using FeatureCounts in
the subread package (v1.6.2) (Liao et al., 2014). To avoid sex-
speciﬁc bias in the analysis, genes in chromosome Y were
discarded. In addition, RUVseq (RUVs, k = 1) (Risso et al.,
2014) was applied to account for sex-speciﬁc contribution to
the gene expression proﬁles and to identify sex-independent
gene expression changes upon Scx deletion. Principal component
analysis was applied to normalized FPKM (fragment per kilobase
of transcript per million mapped reads) and log-transformed
count data. Diﬀerential gene expression analysis was performed
using DESeq2 (Love et al., 2014). Diﬀerentially expressed genes
were identiﬁed by FDR < 0.05. Gene ontology (GO) analysis was
performed using the online ToppGene tools2 (Chen et al., 2009).
Hierarchical clustering of the diﬀerential gene expression proﬁles
was performed using Pearson correlation coeﬃcient of log-
transformed gene expression level (FPKM) as similarity measure
under Ward’s criterion. Clustering heatmap was visualized
in z-score. The RNA-seq data have been deposited into the
National Center for Biotechnology Information Gene Expression
Omnibus database (NCBI GEO Accession Number GSE173428).
Quantitative RT-PCR
E13.5 and E15.5 Scx−/−mutant and wildtype control forelimb
samples were collected. Total RNAs were extracted using the
Qiagen RNeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen catalog# 74004), and reverse
transcribed using SuperScriptTM III First-Strand Synthesis
System (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, United States
catalog# 18080051). At each stage, at least 5 samples per genotype
were used for quantitative RT-PCR. Relative mRNA levels were
2https://toppgene.cchmc.org
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
4
June 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 654397
Liu et al.
Scx Target Genes in Tendon Development
normalized to that of Hprt mRNAs. Student’s t test was used
for pairwise comparison. P < 0.05 was considered signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent. P value less than 0.05 was considered statistically
signiﬁcant and marked as ∗. P value less than 0.01 was marked
as ∗∗, whereas P value less than 0.001 was marked as ∗∗∗
when applicable.
RESULTS
Generation of a Novel ScxFlag Mouse
Line and Genome-Wide Mapping of
Endogenous Scx Binding Sites in the
Tendon Progenitor Cells in vivo
No speciﬁc antibody for the Scx protein that allows direct analysis
of endogenous Scx-binding at target genes has been reported.
To facilitate direct and speciﬁc analysis of endogenous Scx
protein activity, we used the CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome
editing strategy (Cong et al., 2013; Scott and Hu, 2019) to
insert a well-characterized 2xFLAG epitope tag at the carboxy
terminus of the endogenous Scx protein in mice (Figure 1A).
Detailed description of the procedures for generating the ScxFlag
founder mice is provided in the Materials and Methods section.
The ScxFlag/+ founder mice were crossed to wildtype CD1
mice and the G1 ScxFlag/+ hemizygous progenies (Figure 1B)
were sequence-veriﬁed for correct integration and germ-line
transmission of the ScxFlag allele as designed. The ScxFlag/+ mice
were then intercrossed to generate ScxFlag/Flag homozygous mice,
which were born at expected Mendelian ratio and did not display
any phenotypic diﬀerence from their hemizygous or wildtype
littermates (Figures 1C–F). Immunoﬂuorescent staining of
sections of mouse embryos using an anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma,
catalog# F1804) showed that the Scx-FLAG fusion protein was
strongly and speciﬁcally expressed in both tendons and ligaments
(Figures 1G–J), consistent with previously reported patterns of
expression of endogenous Scx mRNAs and of the transgenic Scx-
GFP reporter activity (Murchison et al., 2007; Pryce et al., 2007;
Watson et al., 2009). Since the ScxFlag/Flag homozygous mice
do not have any phenotypic abnormality, the insertion of the
FLAG epitope tag at the carboxy-terminus of the endogenous
Scx protein did not aﬀect Scx function, providing a valuable
new tool for direct analysis of endogenous Scx function during
development, tissue homeostasis, and injury repair.
To investigate Scx-mediated transcriptional regulation during
early tendon development, we dissected forelimbs from E13.5
ScxFlag/Flag embryos and performed ChIP-seq experiments in
triplicates using the anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma, catalog#
F1804). Analysis of the ChIP-seq data identiﬁed 12,097 highly
enriched Scx-associated chromatin regions (ChIP-seq peaks)
(Figures 2A,B). About 77% (9,272 of 12,097) of the Scx ChIP-seq
peaks were located in intronic or intergenic regions associated
with one or two genes in the immediate vicinity within 500 kb
from the gene’s transcription start site (TSS), whereas only
about 14% (1,670 of 12,097) of the Scx-binding sites were
located within gene promoter regions (Figures 2A–C). De novo
motif analysis revealed that the most enriched endogenous
Scx-binding domain contains a core sequence C-A-G/T-A/C-
T-G (Figure 2D), which was present in >45% of the ChIP-
seq peak regions and matches the Scx-binding core sequence
previously determined by electrophoresis mobility shift assays
(Shukunami et al., 2018). The second most enriched motif, which
is present in 15.8% of the ChIP-seq peaks, contains a core
sequence that matches the consensus binding motif of the Nfat
family transcription factors, TGGAAA (Yu et al., 2015; Klein-
Hessling et al., 2017; Figure 2D). It has been reported that Scx and
Nfatc4, a member of the Nfat family, act cooperatively to regulate
the transcription of Col1a1 in tendon ﬁbroblast cells (Lejard
et al., 2007). The signiﬁcant enrichment of the Nfat binding motif
in the Scx ChIP-seq peaks indicate that Scx and Nfat family
proteins act together to regulate expression of many genes during
tendon development.
Genomic Regions Enrichment of Annotations Tool analysis
of the ChIP-seq data recovered 7,520 genes associated with the
Scx-binding genomic regions. To gain insight into Scx-mediated
transcriptional regulation during early tendon development,
we compared the ChIP-seq data with the previously reported
RNA-seq data analyzing transcriptome proﬁles of developing
mouse hindlimb tendons (Liu et al., 2015). We found that
high quality Scx ChIP-seq peaks were detected in 490 of
the 970 genes whose expression was upregulated by more
than 1.5-fold in Scx-GFP+
cells during early tendon cell
diﬀerentiation in the mouse hindlimb from E13.5 to E15.5
(Figure 2E). GO analysis showed that this group is highly
enriched with genes playing roles in “extracellular matrix
organization,” “collagen ﬁbril organization,” and “connective
tissue development” (Figure 2F), consistent with a major role of
Scx in regulating tendon formation.
Characterization of a New Scx Mutant
Mouse Resource
Whereas several distinct Scx mutant mouse lines have been
reported (Murchison et al., 2007; Yoshimoto et al., 2017;
Shukunami et al., 2018), none of these are available to the
wide biomedical research community through the Mutant
Mouse Resource Centers. On the other hand, the United States
National
Institutes
of
Health-funded
Knock-out
Mouse
Project (KOMP) Consortium has generated a Scx-knockout
mouse
line
[C57BL/6N-Scxtm1.1(KOMP)Vlcg/MbpMmucd]
and
made available through the Mouse Biology Program at the
University of California Davis, but the tendon developmental
defects in mice homozygous for this particular Scx knockout
allele has not been described. We obtained the C57BL/6N-
Scxtm1.1(KOMP)Vlcg/MbpMmucd
mouse
line
and
established
a breeding colony. The Scxtm1.1(KOMP) allele (abbreviated as
Scx−in the rest of the report) contains an insertion of the
VelociGene ZEN-Ub1 LacZ reporter cassette replacing the
entire protein-coding sequences from the translation start
site in Exon-1 to 56 bp 3′ to the translation STOP codon
in Exon-2 of the Scx gene (Figure 3A). We conﬁrmed the
structure and correct integration of the lacZ reporter cassette
at the Scx locus through Sanger sequencing of genomic PCR
products. However, no speciﬁc beta-galactosidase reporter
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
5
June 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 654397
Liu et al.
Scx Target Genes in Tendon Development
FIGURE 2 | ChIP-seq analysis of E13.5 ScxFlag/Flag forelimbs. (A) Peak-gene association analysis with the GREAT online tool (http://great.stanford.edu). The “basal
plus extension” parameter was used to associate the ChIP-seq peaks to genes within 1,000 kb. The majority of peaks were associated with 1 or 2 genes.
(B) Distribution of peak-gene associations by their distances to the transcription start site (TSS). (C) Distribution of ChIP-seq peaks by their locations. The majority of
peaks are located in intronic (4428) or intergenic (4844) regions, while 1670 peaks were located in promoter regions. (D) The two most enriched Scx binding motifs
from ChIP-seq peaks. (E) Comparison of 7520 genes with associated ChIP-seq peaks, with 970 genes that were up-regulated in GFP+ hindlimb cells from E13.5 to
E15.5 by at least 1.5-fold. (F) Gene ontology analysis of the 490 differentially expressed genes with associated peaks from panel (E). Representative GO terms are
listed in the order of their p-values, with the most enriched GO term on top.
activity was detected in developing tendon tissues in the
heterozygous
and
homozygous
mutant
mouse
embryos,
likely due to reporter gene silencing described previously
in multiple other KOMP mouse lines (Kirov et al., 2015).
To conﬁrm that Scx function is lost in the Scx−/−embryos,
we carried out in situ hybridization assay using a probe
speciﬁc for the Scx coding sequence and found that Scx
mRNA expression was completely absent in the Scx−/−
embryos (Figures 3B,C).
We further characterized the phenotypes of the Scx−/−
mutant mice. Scx−/−mice were born at Mendelian ratio, but
with reduced body size and severely impaired limbs, with the
autopod of both fore- and hind-limbs locked in a dorsal ﬂexure
(Supplementary Figure 1). All neonatal Scx−/−mutant mice
exhibited severe hypoplasia of major limb and tail tendons
(Figures 3D–I). Analysis of skeletal preparations showed that
Scx−/−mutants lacked the deltoid tuberosity of the humerus
in the forelimb and exhibited reduced size of the patella
and the entheseal cartilage of the calcaneus in the hindlimb
(Supplementary Figures 2A–D). In addition, the transverse
processes of the lumbar vertebrae were reduced in the Scx−/−
mutants (Supplementary Figures 2E, F). Using a previously
reported Scx-GFP transgenic reporter (Pryce et al., 2007), we
found that tendon diﬀerentiation and condensation in the
developing limbs were disrupted by E15.5 in the homozygous
mutant embryos (Supplementary Figure 3). The tendon and
skeletal defects in these Scx−/−mice are similar to those reported
previously in two other independent Scx mutant mouse lines
(Murchison et al., 2007; Shukunami et al., 2018). Thus, this
KOMP-generated Scx knockout mouse line is a valuable resource
for the biomedical research community for further studies of Scx
function in vivo.
Analysis of Scx-Dependent
Transcriptome Expression Proﬁles
During Early Tendon Cell Differentiation
in vivo
We crossed the Scx-GFP transgenic reporter (Pryce et al., 2007)
into the new Scx+/−mouse line and then intercrossed Scx+/−;
Scx-GFP mice for analysis of transcriptomic eﬀects of Scx during
early tendon cell diﬀerentiation. Scx-GFP+ cells were isolated
by FACS from freshly dissected forelimb tissues from E15.5
wildtype, Scx+/−, and Scx−/−mutant embryos for RNA-seq
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
6
June 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 654397
Liu et al.
Scx Target Genes in Tendon Development
FIGURE 3 | Characterization of a Scx null mutant mouse strain. (A) Schematic diagram and strategy of generating Scx null mutant allele. A VelociGene ZEN-Ub1
LacZ reporter cassette was inserted after the endogenous Scx ATG codon, by homologous recombination, and replaced the entire Scx coding sequence plus a
56 bp 3′ UTR sequence. (B,C) In situ hybridization on E13.5 Scx−/−mutant and control forelimbs, with an anti-sense RNA probe against the protein coding region
of the Scx mRNAs. (D–I) Whole mount view of tendons in forelimb (D,E), hindlimb (F,G), and tail (H,I) from Scx−/−mutant (E,G,I) and control littermates (D,F,H) at
P21. White arrowheads point to extensor digitorium communis in panels (D,E), Achilles tendons in panels (F,G), and tail tendons in panels (H,I). Scale bar is 500 µm
in panel (B) and 1000 µm in panel (D).
analysis. Analysis of the RNA-seq results from three Scx−/−
embryos and three control littermates identiﬁed 68 genes that
exhibited signiﬁcant changes in expression levels (FDR < 0.05) in
the forelimb Scx-GFP+ cells in E15.5 Scx−/−embryos compared
with their control littermates (Figures 4A–D). Comparison
of the Scx-dependent diﬀerentially expressed genes with the
Scx ChIP-seq data revealed that 32 of the signiﬁcantly down-
regulated genes were associated with Scx occupancy in the tendon
progenitor cells (Figure 4E and Table 1). These genes are likely
critical direct target genes mediating Scx function in tendon
formation and early tendon cell diﬀerentiation. Indeed, GO
analysis of this gene group showed that “tendon development,”
“tendon cell diﬀerentiation,” “keratan sulfate biosynthesis,” and
“ECM organization” are among the most signiﬁcantly enriched
biological processes (Figure 4F). The most signiﬁcantly down-
regulated Scx target genes in the E15.5 Scx−/−forelimb tendon
cells include Fmod, Tnmd, Kera, and Col11a1 (Figure 4C and
Table 1), of which each plays important roles in tendon cell
diﬀerentiation and/or collagen ﬁbrillogenesis (Svensson et al.,
1999; Pellegata et al., 2000; Docheva et al., 2005; Kilts et al.,
2009; Wenstrup et al., 2011; Sun et al., 2020) but only Tnmd
has previously been identiﬁed as a Scx transcriptional target gene
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
7
June 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 654397
Liu et al.
Scx Target Genes in Tendon Development
FIGURE 4 | RNA-seq data analysis and identiﬁcation of candidate Scx direct target genes. (A) Principal component plot displaying the three Scx−/−and three
control samples along PC1 and PC2, which account for 54 and 22%, respectively, of the variability within the RNA-seq dataset. (B) MA plot displaying differential
expression proﬁles of the Scx−/−and control samples. Up-regulated genes are marked in red whereas down-regulated genes are marked in blue. (C) Volcano plot
displaying the log2 fold change against the log10 value of the FDR adjusted P value. Up-regulated genes are shown in red while down-regulated genes shown in
blue. Top 10 down-regulated and top 10 upregulated genes are marked by with symbol. (D) Heatmap showing hierarchical clustering on the 68 differentially
expressed genes. The z-score scale bar represents relative expression+/- 2SD from the mean. (E) Comparisons of 7520 genes with associated Scx binding peaks
with 37 down-regulated genes in Scx−/−samples at E15.5 and 31 up-regulated genes in Scx−/−samples at E15.5 (B). (F,G) Gene ontology analyses of 32
down-regulated genes associated with Scx-binding peaks and 17 up-regulated genes associated with Scx-binding peaks, respectively. Representative GO terms
are listed in the order of their P values, with the most enriched GO term on top.
(Li et al., 2015; Shukunami et al., 2018). The Scx-dependent target
genes also include three genes encoding transcription factors,
Mkx, Six2, and Eya1 (Table 1). Mkx function is required for
tendon ﬁbril growth and tendon homeostasis (Ito et al., 2010; Liu
et al., 2010, 2019; Suzuki et al., 2016).
Analysis of RNA-seq data also revealed 31 genes that were
signiﬁcantly up-regulated in the Scx-GFP+ forelimb cells of E15.5
Scx−/−embryos compared with control littermates (Figures 4B–
D). Among these, 17 genes were associated with Scx ChIP-seq
peaks in the tendon progenitor cells (Figure 4E and Table 2).
GO analysis of this group of genes showed that many of
these, including Ccbe1, Cxcl12, Epha3, Fgf10, Igf1, Ldb2, Postn,
Smoc2, and Surf1, are involved in “regulation of cell migration”
(Figure 4G). In addition, Surf1, Postn, Smoc2, Eln, and Nid2
are involved in regulation of “extracellular matrix organization,”
whereas Cxcl12 and Fgf10 have been implicated in “induction
of chemotaxis” (Figure 4G and Table 2). Taken together, Scx
regulates early tendon cell diﬀerentiation by controlling the
expression of multiple ECM components as well as signaling
pathways controlling cell behavior.
Multiple Scx Target Genes Exhibited
Speciﬁc Scx-Dependent Expression
During Tendon Differentiation
We further analyzed the patterns of expression of the top 10
down-regulated genes in the E15.5 Scx−/−embryos from the
RNA-seq data. Whole mount in situ hybridization analyses
showed that the Fmod, Htra3, Kera, Ssc5d, Tnmd, and Zfp185
genes each exhibited highly speciﬁc patterns of expression in
the developing tendon tissues in E14.5 wildtype embryos and
their expression in the developing limb tendons was dramatically
reduced in the Scx−/−littermates (Figures 5A–L). Furthermore,
quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis revealed that expression
of each of these genes was already signiﬁcantly reduced in the Scx-
GFP+ forelimb mesenchyme cells in Scx−/−embryos by E13.5,
in comparison with their control littermates (Figure 5M). Among
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
8
June 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 654397
Liu et al.
Scx Target Genes in Tendon Development
TABLE 1 | Genes with associated Scx-binding peaks and down-regulated in Scx−/−tendon cells at E15.
Gene symbol
Scx-binding peaks (numbers indicate distance to TSS, in bp)
Adgrg2
−184004
Aqp1
−90524*
−41742
−3597
−3169
+2103
C1qtnf3
−229323*
−79453
−75909
−23517
−11848
−3835*
−623*
Ccdc85a
+114267
+118157
Ccdc88a
−13517
−2700
−1
Chst5
+5231
+5847
Cilp2
+9479
Col11a1
−170353
−98636
+34903
+35353
Col22a1
+106886
Cyr61
+931
Dock4
+210357
+248137
+250413
+256430
+256533
+295104
+342939
+343124
Enpp2
+114774
Eya1
−375541
−112658
−47591
+52976
+165834
+173401
+378637
+382083
Fat3
−425380
−329482
−140752
−895
+33046
+230423
+246601
+348404*
Fmod
−95614
−58501
−23204
−26
Htra3
+57656
+70290*
Kera
+5138
+12293
+17683
+19969
Mkx
−231675*
−227917*
−83259
−33399
Mtcl1
+20857
+32469
+84844
+214107
Naalad2
+4887
Olfml2b
−38976
−5227
+7772
+11134
+57278
+74224
Plch1
+27008
+268469
+357217
Rﬂnb
−132608*
−97812*
−71599
−15311
−14423
−14271
−55
Scube2
+14689
+30597
Six2
−247206
−242150
−218515
−205193
−193527
−173342
−164957
−135585
Ssc5d
−776
St8sia1
+18010
+26582
+26704
+149719*
Syt7
−69362
−7436
+14213
+39584*
Thbs4
−37977
−33745
+62949
+155236*
Tmem44
+14520
+71219
Tnmd
−90582
−20742
Zfp185
−423
*Peak located in neighboring gene.
those, Fmod and Tnmd have been reported to play important
roles in tendon development whereas Kera plays crucial roles in
other connective tissues including the cornea (Svensson et al.,
1999; Pellegata et al., 2000; Docheva et al., 2005; Kilts et al.,
2009). Htra3 and Zfp185 exhibited speciﬁc expression in the
developing tendons, similar to Tnmd, whereas Ssc5d exhibited a
similar pattern of expression as Fmod in both tendon cells and
in joint cells (Figure 5). Further in situ hybridization analysis
of serial transverse sections through the digit, metacarpal, and
zeugopod regions of the E15.5 forelimb samples conﬁrmed
the speciﬁcity of expression of Htra3, Zfp185, and Tnmd
throughout the diﬀerentiating tendon cells (Supplementary
Figure 4). Examination of the Scx ChIP-seq proﬁles associated
with these genes showed high quality enrichment of Scx binding
at the basal promoter regions of Fmod, Ssc5d, and Zfp185
whereas Scx binding was also speciﬁcally enriched at distal
regulatory elements associated with Fmod, Kera, Htra3, and
Tnmd (Figure 6). Whereas the roles of Htra3, Ssc5d, and Zfp185
in tendon development remain unknown, our ﬁnding that they
are direct Scx targets that exhibit Scx-dependent activation
during early tendon diﬀerentiation suggests that they play crucial
roles downstream of Scx in tendon development.
DISCUSSION
Previous genetic studies have identiﬁed Scx as the most
crucial transcriptional regulator of tendon development as well
as tendon homeostasis and repair (Murchison et al., 2007;
Yoshimoto et al., 2017; Shukunami et al., 2018; Gumucio et al.,
2020). Mice lacking Scx exhibited loss or severe disruption
of force-transmitting tendons throughout the body as well as
defects in entheseal development (Murchison et al., 2007; Killian
and Thomopoulos, 2016; Yoshimoto et al., 2017). However,
the molecular mechanisms mediating Scx function in tendon
development is not well understood and very few Scx target
genes in tendon cells have been identiﬁed. The lack of large scale
identiﬁcation of direct target genes of Scx in tendon development
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
9
June 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 654397
Liu et al.
Scx Target Genes in Tendon Development
TABLE 2 | Genes with associated Scx-binding peaks and upregulated in Scx−/−tendon cells at E15.5.
Gene symbol
Scx-binding peaks (numbers indicate distance to TSS, in bp)
Adgrb3
−746
+600918*
Aspn
−37162*
+1353
+3527
Ccbe1
−112895
+57507*
+192663*
+210538*
Cxcl12
−311414
−222186
−200466
−83159
−63138
+18174
+139363
+248065
Dio2
+329510
Eln
−153983*
−148138
−70385
Epha3
+7097
+244725
+250929
+307693
+576357
+747465
+779839
+779948
Fgf10
−237483
+195887
Fibin
−50132
−50030
−48436
−29864
+124
+267
+9459
+13190
Igf1
−206628
−183042
−182419
−148
+1161
+187057
+188639
Ldb2
−322438*
−123018
−15277
+214796
Lingo2
−801973*
−15799
+145957
Nid2
+66867*
Postn
−10601
+127772
+129401
+226369
+297040
+304008
Prg4
−339455*
−294031*
−251594
−149528
−106405
−23787
Smoc2
−48448
+34969
+91272*
+217732
+231118
+327987
+385193*
Sulf1
−513097
−254232
−111144
+194
*Peak located in neighboring gene.
FIGURE 5 | Characterization of candidate genes from ChIP-seq and RNA-seq. (A–L) Whole mount in situ hybridization of six candidate genes in E14.5 Scx−/−
mutant (B,D,F,H,J,L) and control (A,C,E,G,I,K) forelimbs. Expression of Fmod, Kera, Ssc5d, and Zfp185 was dramatically reduced in Scx−/−mutant limbs
(B,F,H,L), while expression of Htra3 and Tnmd were nearly completely absent in Scx−/−mutant (D,J). Expression of Fmod and Ssc5d persisted in digit ligaments in
the mutant limbs (B,H). (M) Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of expression of the six candidate genes in Scx−/−mutant and control forelimb samples at E13.5 and
E15.5. All genes were signiﬁcantly reduced in Scx−/−mutants at both stages, compared with control littermates. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
is largely due to the lack of a reliable speciﬁc antibody for
mapping genome-wide Scx binding in tendon cells in vivo. Scx
belongs to the class II bHLH family of transcription factors, of
which many have been shown to bind to an E-box (CANNTG)
motif (Cserjesi et al., 1995; Massari and Murre, 2000). However,
this short redundant sequence can be found throughout the
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
10
June 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 654397
Liu et al.
Scx Target Genes in Tendon Development
FIGURE 6 | Visualization of the Scx-binding peaks associated with the candidate Scx direct target genes. (A–F) genome browser views of genomic regions
containing, Fmod (A), Htra3 (B), Kera (C), Ssc5d (D), Tnmd (E), and Zfp185 (F) genes. Numbers under each peak indicate the distance to the transcription start site
(TSS) the marked gene. The red arrow in panel (E) point to a Scx-binding peak at the Tnmd gene promoter region that is recognizable upon careful examination but
was below the FDR < 0.01 threshold for identifying genome-wide Scx binding sites in our ChIP-seq data analysis.
genome. Thus, previous studies of Scx-mediated transcriptional
regulation of putative target genes primarily relied on in vitro
biochemical assays including electrophoresis mobility shift assay
of recombinant Scx protein binding to E-box containing
promoter sequences and promoter reporter assays in cell
transfection studies (Lejard et al., 2007; Shukunami et al., 2018;
Paterson et al., 2020), and more recently ChIP-qPCR assays of
candidate promoter regions (Paterson et al., 2020). In this study,
we have generated ScxFlag mice and demonstrate that this new
mouse line enables direct analysis of endogenous Scx protein
function in the normal developmental and physiological context.
Whereas we have used this mouse line for genome-wide mapping
of Scx binding sites in early developing limb tendon tissues, this
mouse line will provide a valuable tool for direct analysis of Scx
function in many developmental and disease processes where
Scx plays a role.
Our ChIP-seq analysis identiﬁed 12,097 high quality Scx
binding sites in the E13.5 mouse forelimb, with the most highly
enriched de novo motif identiﬁed as 5′ CAG/TA/CTG 3′. Whereas
previous in vitro studies have shown Scx binding to various
E-boxes including CACGTG in the Col1a1 promoter (Lejard
et al., 2007), CAGGTG in the Col2a1 promoter (Furumatsu et al.,
2010), and CAAATG and CAGATG in the Tnmd promoter (Li
et al., 2015), direct comparative EMSA analysis of Scx binding
to ﬁve distinct E-box containing elements from the mouse
Tnmd promoter region showed that Scx preferentially bound to
CAGATG and CATCTG, but not the others (Shukunami et al.,
2018). Thus, the consensus Scx binding motif from our ChIP-seq
data matches perfectly with the EMSA-determined preferential
Scx binding motif, which aﬃrms our genome-wide mapped Scx-
binding sites. Whereas several in vitro studies have repeatedly
demonstrated Scx binding to the Tnmd promoter regions and
Scx activated expression of Tnmd promoter-reporter constructs
in co-transfected cells (Li et al., 2015; Shukunami et al., 2018),
our ChIP-seq results showed that endogenous Scx binding was
primarily enriched at two upstream locations at about 20 and
90 kb, respectively, from the Tnmd TSS (Figure 6E). A minor Scx
binding peak was detected at the Tnmd basal promoter region
(Figure 6E), which is enriched over 4-fold over the input but the
FDR value, at 0.025, was below the stringent threshold (4-fold
enrichment over input and FDR < 0.01) used for identifying the
genome-wide Scx binding peaks in our analysis. It is possible that
Scx binding to both the distal enhancers and the promoter region
to synergistically activate Tnmd gene expression in tenocytes.
Whereas previous studies have shown that activation of Tnmd
expression during tendon development depends on Scx function
and that Tnmd plays crucial roles in tenocyte proliferation
and maturation, Tnmd null mice exhibited a much milder
tendon phenotype than Scx−/−mice (Docheva et al., 2005;
Murchison et al., 2007; Yoshimoto et al., 2017; Shukunami et al.,
2018). Our ChIP-seq and RNA-seq results demonstrate that Scx
directly regulates expression of a large number of genes during
early tendon development, including activation of expression
of many tendon cell-speciﬁc genes. In particular, we validated
Fmod, Htra3, Ssc5d, and Zfp185 as new direct target genes that
dependent on Scx for their expression in the diﬀerentiating
tendon cells. Fmod-deﬁcient mice exhibited defects in tendon
collagen ﬁbrillogenesis (Chakravarti, 2002), but the roles of
Htra3, Ssc5d, and Zfp185 in tendon development are unknown.
Htra3 encodes a serine peptidase that cleaves proteoglycans,
thus may function in ECM remodeling (Nie et al., 2003; Glaza
et al., 2015). Ssc5d (scavenger receptor cysteine rich family member
with 5 domains) has been implicated in playing a role at the
interface between adaptive and innate immunity and in placental
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
11
June 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 654397
Liu et al.
Scx Target Genes in Tendon Development
function (Goncalves et al., 2009). Zfp185 encodes LIM domain
type zinc ﬁnger protein (Heiss et al., 1997; Zhang et al., 2016).
Whereas the Zfp185 protein was originally hypothesized to reside
in the cell nucleus, subsequent in vitro cell biological studies
suggested that Zfp185 binds to F-actin and may be involved in
modulating dynamics of actin ﬁlaments (Wang et al., 2008; Zhang
et al., 2016). Thus, these gene products have diverse cellular
functions and loss of their expression during early tendon cell
diﬀerentiation in the Scx−/−embryos likely contributed to the
severe disruption of tendon condensation phenotype.
Whereas our ChIP-seq analysis identiﬁed more than 12,000
high quality Scx-binding regions associated with over 7,500
genes in the embryonic forelimb tissues, our RNA-seq analysis
uncovered a relatively small number of genes that exhibited
signiﬁcant diﬀerential expression in the Scx-GFP+
forelimb
tendon cells between E15.5 Scx−/−and control littermates. These
results suggest that Scx participates in the regulation of a large
number of genes during early tendon development, but other
factors likely partly compensate for Scx function in the Scx−/−
mice. Nevertheless, the diﬀerential gene expression proﬁles
uncovered by our RNA-seq data provide new insights into
the molecular mechanisms underlying Scx-mediated regulation
of tendon formation. It has been shown that the tendon
microﬁbrils are highly disorganized in the Scx−/−mouse
embryos (Murchison et al., 2007). We found that expression of
Col11a1 was among the most down-regulated genes in the E15.5
Scx−/−forelimb tendon cells. Recent studies have shown that
ColXI, the gene product of Col11a1, plays an essential role in
tendon ﬁbril assembly and organization (Wenstrup et al., 2011;
Sun et al., 2020). Mice with tendon-speciﬁc disruption of Col11a1
in the Scx-expressing lineages exhibited abnormal tendon ﬁbril
structure, smaller ﬁbril diameter and disrupted ﬁbril alignment
(Sun et al., 2020). Thus, activation of Col11a1 expression in
the diﬀerentiating tenocytes is likely an important part of Scx
function in tendon formation. In addition to regulating tendon
ECM organization and ﬁbrillogenesis, Scx plays a crucial role in
regulating tendon cell morphology and organization (Murchison
et al., 2007). Whereas wildtype tenocytes develop a complex
network of cytoplasmic extensions that engulf the collagen ﬁbril
bundles during tendon ﬁbrillogenesis, the tenocytes in Scx−/−
mouse embryos exhibited much reduced and less complex
cytoplasmic extensions (Murchison et al., 2007). We found that
Dock4, encoding a key regulator of ﬁlapodia and lamellipodia
protrusions (Hiramoto et al., 2006; Abraham et al., 2015), was
among the top downregulated genes in the E15.5 tendon cells.
As tenocyte cytoplasmic extensions likely also involve spatially
regulated changes of the actin cytoskeleton, our ﬁnding of
signiﬁcant down-regulation of Zfp185, Ccdc85a and Ccdc88a,
which all encode actin binding proteins, in the tendon cells in
E15.5 Scx−/−embryos suggests that Scx regulates expression of
multiple cytoplasmic proteins to control tenocyte morphology
and organization. Moreover, to maintain the stretched tenocyte
morphology with a complex network of cytoplasmic extensions
during tendon growth and elongation likely requires cell
membrane repair mechanisms to maintain plasma membrane
integrity. In Scx−/−mice tendon rudiments were detected in
the embryonic tail but tail tendon was completely absent in
2-week-old mutant mice due to increased apoptosis (Murchison
et al., 2007). Among the most signiﬁcantly downregulated
genes in the Scx−/−tendon cells in our RNA-seq data is Syt7
(Figure 4C), which encodes a transmembrane protein with a
crucial role in maintenance of plasma membrane integrity and
repair via regulating lysosomal exocytosis (Chakrabarti et al.,
2003). Further studies will be needed to investigate whether Syt7
plays an important role in Scx-mediated tenocyte diﬀerentiation
and maintenance. Furthermore, it has been shown that Scx
function is required for proper organization of tendon sheath
such as the endotenon and that Epha4-expressing endotenon cells
were detected intermixed with tenocytes in the limb tendons in
Scx−/−embryos (Murchison et al., 2007). Our RNA-seq data
showed that expression of Epha3 was signiﬁcantly increased in
the limb tendon cell in E15.5 Scx−/−embryos. It is possible
that the increased Epha3 expression in the tenocytes resulted in
disruption of the Eph-Efn signaling involved in regulation of
tendon sheath formation.
Whereas Scx is expressed in all tendon progenitor cells
and throughout of tendon development (Schweitzer et al.,
2001; Brent et al., 2003), only a subset of tendon tissues
were signiﬁcantly disrupted in Scx−/−mice (Murchison et al.,
2007). Huang et al. (2019) demonstrated that Scx function is
required for recruitment of mesenchymal progenitor cells into
the initially formed tendon rudiments during the growth and
elongation of the limbs and tail (Huang et al., 2019). Remarkably,
lineage-speciﬁc genetic analysis and cell transplantation assays
demonstrated that Scx function is exclusively required in
the recruited mesenchymal cells, but not in the recruiting
tendon, for the recruitment and integration of the mesenchymal
progenitor cells during tendon elongation (Huang et al.,
2019). The molecular mechanism acting downstream of Scx
in mediating the tendon cell recruitment and elongation is
currently unknown. Although our RNA-seq data show signiﬁcant
changes in expression of several signaling molecules involved
in regulation of cell migration and/or chemotaxis in the
Scx−/−Scx-GFP+
forelimb cells, it is not clear whether
and how some of these molecules may mediate Scx function
in tendon cell recruitment. Further analysis of the detailed
spatiotemporal patterns of expression of these genes during
tendon elongation and/or single-cell transcriptomic proﬁling
combined with lineage-speciﬁc functional studies will help
resolve the underlying molecular mechanism.
In a recent report, Gumucio et al. (2020) performed RNA-seq
analysis to identify genes and signaling pathways that respond
diﬀerently to mechanical overloads in the plantaris tendons in
adult mice due to conditional inactivation of Scx (Gumucio
et al., 2020). We compared our RNA-seq results from embryonic
tendon cells with their RNA-seq results from the adult tenocytes
and found that there were a number of overlapping genes
in both the down-regulated and up-regulated groups of Scx-
dependent diﬀerentially expressed genes. In particular, the Fmod,
Kera, Ssc5d, Tnmd, and Zfp185 genes were signiﬁcantly down-
regulated in the adult Scx-deﬁcient mutant tendon tissues. These
genes likely play important roles in tendon cell diﬀerentiation
at both embryonic and adult stages. Thus, further elucidation of
the molecular mechanisms of tendon development will facilitate
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
12
June 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 654397
Liu et al.
Scx Target Genes in Tendon Development
investigation of adult tendon cell behaviors during injuries
and regeneration and contribute ultimately to improvement in
strategies for tendon therapies. In this regard, our ChIP-seq and
RNA-seq datasets provide a rich resource for aiding the design of
new studies of the molecular and cellular mechanisms of tendon
development and repair.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
ChIP-seq and RNA-seq data was deposited in the NCBI GEO
database under the accession number(s) GSE173428.
ETHICS STATEMENT
The animal study was reviewed and approved by Cincinnati
Children’s Research Foundation Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee (IACUC).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
HL, YL, and RJ conceptualized and designed the research. HWL
helped revise the research design and data analysis during the
manuscript revision. HL and JX performed the research. HL,
JX, YL, HWL, and RJ analyzed the data and critically revised
the manuscript. HL and RJ wrote the manuscript. All authors
approved the ﬁnal manuscript and agreed to be accountable for
all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the
accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately
investigated and resolved.
FUNDING
This
research
was
supported
by
Cincinnati
Children’s
Hospital
Medical
Center
institutional
funds
to
RJ
and
Cincinnati Children’s Research Foundation Trustee Award
to HWL.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The
Scxtm1.1(KOMP)Vlcg/+
mouse
strain
used
for
this
research project was created from ES cell clone 14378A-H1,
generated by Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., and made
into live mice by the KOMP Repository (www.KOMP.org)
and the Mouse Biology Program (www.mousebiology.org)
at the University of California Davis. We thank Ronen
Schweitzer
at
Shriners
Hospitals
for
Children
(Portland,
Oregon) for providing the Scx-GFP transgenic mouse strain.
We thank the Transgenic Animal and Genome Editing
Core
facility
at
Cincinnati
Children’s
Hospital
Medical
Center for assistance with the generation of the ScxFlag
mouse strain.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcell.2021.
654397/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Abraham, S., Scarcia, M., Bagshaw, R. D., McMahon, K., Grant, G., Harvey, T.,
et al. (2015). A Rac/Cdc42 exchange factor complex promotes formation of
lateral ﬁlopodia and blood vessel lumen morphogenesis. Nat. Commun. 6:7286.
doi: 10.1038/ncomms8286
Birch, H. L., Thorpe, C. T., and Rumian, A. P. (2013). Specialisation of extracellular
matrix for function in tendons and ligaments. Muscles Ligaments Tendons J. 3,
12–22. doi: 10.11138/mltj/2013.3.1.012
Brent, A. E., Schweitzer, R., and Tabin, C. J. (2003). A somitic compartment of
tendon progenitors. Cell 113, 235–248.
Chakrabarti, S., Kobayashi, K. S., Flavell, R. A., Marks, C. B., Miyake, K., Liston,
D. R., et al. (2003). Impaired membrane resealing and autoimmune myositis in
synaptotagmin VII-deﬁcient mice. J. Cell Biol. 162, 543–549. doi: 10.1083/jcb.
200305131
Chakravarti, S. (2002). Functions of lumican and ﬁbromodulin: lessons from
knockout mice. Glycoconj J. 19, 287–293. doi: 10.1023/A:1025348417078
Chen, J., Bardes, E. E., Aronow, B. J., and Jegga, A. G. (2009). ToppGene Suite for
gene list enrichment analysis and candidate gene prioritization. Nucleic Acids
Res. 37, 305–311. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp427
Cong, L., Ran, F. A., Cox, D., Lin, S., Barretto, R., Habib, N., et al. (2013). Multiplex
genome engineering using CRISPR/Cas systems. Science 339, 819–823. doi:
10.1126/science.1231143
Cserjesi, P., Brown, D., Ligon, K. L., Lyons, G. E., Copeland, N. G., Gilbert, D. J.,
et al. (1995). Scleraxis: a basic helix-loop-helix protein that preﬁgures skeletal
formation during mouse embryogenesis. Development 121, 1099–1110.
Davis, M. E., Gumucio, J. P., Sugg, K. B., Bedi, A., and Mendias, C. L. (2013).
MMP inhibition as a potential method to augment the healing of skeletal
muscle and tendon extracellular matrix. J. Appl. Physiol. 115, 884–891. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00137.2013
Delgado Caceres, M., Pfeifer, C. G., and Docheva, D. (2018). Understanding
tendons: lessons from transgenic mouse models. Stem Cells Dev. 27, 1161–1174.
doi: 10.1089/scd.2018.0121
Dobin, A., Davis, C. A., Schlesinger, F., Drenkow, J., Zaleski, C., Jha, S., et al.
(2013). STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29, 15–21.
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts635
Docheva, D., Hunziker, E. B., Fassler, R., and Brandau, O. (2005). Tenomodulin is
necessary for tenocyte proliferation and tendon maturation. Mol. Cell. Biol. 25,
699–705. doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.2.699-705.2005
Dourte, L. M., Pathmanathan, L., Mienaltowski, M. J., Jawad, A. F., Birk, D. E., and
Soslowsky, L. J. (2013). Mechanical, compositional, and structural properties of
the mouse patellar tendon with changes in biglycan gene expression. J. Orthop.
Res. 31, 1430–1437. doi: 10.1002/jor.22372
Dunkman, A. A., Buckley, M. R., Mienaltowski, M. J., Adams, S. M., Thomas, S. J.,
Kumar, A., et al. (2014). The injury response of aged tendons in the absence of
biglycan and decorin. Matrix Biol. 35, 232–238. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2013.10.
008
Furumatsu, T., Shukunami, C., Amemiya-Kudo, M., Shimano, H., and Ozaki,
T. (2010). Scleraxis and E47 cooperatively regulate the Sox9-dependent
transcription. Int. J. Biochem. Cell. Biol. 42, 148–156. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2009.
10.003
Glaza, P., Osipiuk, J., Wenta, T., Zurawa-Janicka, D., Jarzab, M., Lesner, A., et al.
(2015). Structural and functional analysis of human HtrA3 protease and its
subdomains. PLoS One 10:e0131142. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131142
Goncalves, C. M., Castro, M. A., Henriques, T., Oliveira, M. I., Pinheiro, H. C.,
Oliveira, C., et al. (2009). Molecular cloning and analysis of SSc5D, a new
member of the scavenger receptor cysteine-rich superfamily. Mol. Immunol. 46,
2585–2596. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.05.006
Guerquin, M. J., Charvet, B., Nourissat, G., Havis, E., Ronsin, O., Bonnin, M. A.,
et al. (2013). Transcription factor EGR1 directs tendon diﬀerentiation and
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
13
June 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 654397
Liu et al.
Scx Target Genes in Tendon Development
promotes tendon repair. J. Clin. Invest. 123, 3564–3576. doi: 10.1172/JCI6
7521
Gumucio, J. P., Schonk, M. M., Kharaz, Y. A., Comerford, E., and Mendias,
C. L. (2020). Scleraxis is required for the growth of adult tendons in response
to mechanical loading. JCI Insight 5:e138295. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.13
8295
Hasson, P. (2011). "Soft" tissue patterning: muscles and tendons of the limb take
their form. Dev. Dyn. 240, 1100–1107. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22608
Havis, E., Bonnin, M. A., Esteves de Lima, J., Charvet, B., Milet, C., and
Duprez, D. (2016). TGFbeta and FGF promote tendon progenitor fate and act
downstream of muscle contraction to regulate tendon diﬀerentiation during
chick limb development. Development 143, 3839–3851. doi: 10.1242/dev.13
6242
Heinz, S., Benner, C., Spann, N., Bertolino, E., Lin, Y. C., Laslo, P., et al. (2010).
Simple combinations of lineage-determining transcription factors prime cis-
regulatory elements required for macrophage and B cell identities. Mol. Cell.
38, 576–589. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.05.004
Heiss, N. S., Gloeckner, G., Bachner, D., Kioschis, P., Klauck, S. M., Hinzmann,
B., et al. (1997). Genomic structure of a novel LIM domain gene (ZNF185) in
Xq28 and comparisons with the orthologous murine transcript. Genomics 43,
329–338. doi: 10.1006/geno.1997.4810
Hiramoto, K., Negishi, M., and Katoh, H. (2006). Dock4 is regulated by RhoG
and promotes Rac-dependent cell migration. Exp. Cell Res. 312, 4205–4216.
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2006.09.006
Huang, A. H., Watson, S. S., Wang, L., Baker, B. M., Akiyama, H., Brigande, J. V.,
et al. (2019). Requirement for scleraxis in the recruitment of mesenchymal
progenitors during embryonic tendon elongation. Development 146:dev182782.
doi: 10.1242/dev.182782
Ito, Y., Toriuchi, N., Yoshitaka, T., Ueno-Kudoh, H., Sato, T., Yokoyama, S.,
et al. (2010). The Mohawk homeobox gene is a critical regulator of tendon
diﬀerentiation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 107, 10538–10542. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
1000525107
Killian, M. L., and Thomopoulos, S. (2016). Scleraxis is required for the
development of a functional tendon enthesis. FASEB J. 30, 301–311. doi: 10.
1096/fj.14-258236
Kilts, T., Ameye, L., Syed-Picard, F., Ono, M., Berendsen, A. D., Oldberg, A.,
et al. (2009). Potential roles for the small leucine-rich proteoglycans biglycan
and ﬁbromodulin in ectopic ossiﬁcation of tendon induced by exercise and
in modulating rotarod performance. Scand J. Med. Sci. Sports 19, 536–546.
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0838.2009.00909.x
Kirov, J. V., Adkisson, M., Nava, A. J., Cipollone, A., Willis, B., Engelhard, E. K.,
et al. (2015). Reporter gene silencing in targeted mouse mutants is associated
with promoter CpG Island Methylation. PLoS One 10:e0134155. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0134155
Klein-Hessling, S., Muhammad, K., Klein, M., Pusch, T., Rudolf, R., Floter, J., et al.
(2017). NFATc1 controls the cytotoxicity of CD8(+) T cells. Nat. Commun.
8:511. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-00612-6
Kuo, C. K., Petersen, B. C., and Tuan, R. S. (2008). Spatiotemporal protein
distribution of TGF-betas, their receptors, and extracellular matrix molecules
during embryonic tendon development. Dev. Dyn. 237, 1477–1489. doi: 10.
1002/dvdy.21547
Lejard, V., Blais, F., Guerquin, M. J., Bonnet, A., Bonnin, M. A., Havis, E., et al.
(2011). EGR1 and EGR2 involvement in vertebrate tendon diﬀerentiation.
J. Biol. Chem. 286, 5855–5867. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.153106
Lejard, V., Brideau, G., Blais, F., Salingcarnboriboon, R., Wagner, G., Roehrl,
M. H., et al. (2007). Scleraxis and NFATc regulate the expression of the pro-
alpha1(I) collagen gene in tendon ﬁbroblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 17665–17675.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M610113200
Li, Y., Ramcharan, M., Zhou, Z., Leong, D. J., Akinbiyi, T., Majeska, R. J., et al.
(2015). The role of scleraxis in fate determination of mesenchymal stem cells
for tenocyte diﬀerentiation. Sci. Rep. 5:13149. doi: 10.1038/srep13149
Liao, Y., Smyth, G. K., and Shi, W. (2014). featureCounts: an eﬃcient
general purpose program for assigning sequence reads to genomic features.
Bioinformatics 30, 923–930. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt656
Liu, H., Lan, Y., Xu, J., Chang, C. F., Brugmann, S. A., and Jiang, R. (2013).
Odd-skipped related-1 controls neural crest chondrogenesis during tongue
development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 110, 18555–18560. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
1306495110
Liu, H., Xu, J., and Jiang, R. (2019). Mkx-Deﬁcient mice exhibit hedgehog
signaling-dependent ectopic ossiﬁcation in the achilles tendons. J. Bone Miner
Res. 34, 557–569. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.3630
Liu, H., Xu, J., Liu, C. F., Lan, Y., Wylie, C., and Jiang, R. (2015). Whole
transcriptome expression proﬁling of mouse limb tendon development by using
RNA-seq. J. Orthop. Res. 33, 840–848. doi: 10.1002/jor.22886
Liu, W., Watson, S. S., Lan, Y., Keene, D. R., Ovitt, C. E., Liu, H., et al. (2010).
The atypical homeodomain transcription factor Mohawk controls tendon
morphogenesis. Mol. Cell. Biol. 30, 4797–4807. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00207-10
Love, M. I., Huber, W., and Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold
change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15:550.
doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8
Massari, M. E., and Murre, C. (2000). Helix-loop-helix proteins: regulators of
transcription in eucaryotic organisms. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20, 429–440. doi: 10.1128/
mcb.20.2.429-440.2000
McLean, C. Y., Bristor, D., Hiller, M., Clarke, S. L., Schaar, B. T., Lowe, C. B., et al.
(2010). GREAT improves functional interpretation of cis-regulatory regions.
Nat. Biotechnol. 28, 495–501. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1630
Murchison, N. D., Price, B. A., Conner, D. A., Keene, D. R., Olson, E. N., Tabin,
C. J., et al. (2007). Regulation of tendon diﬀerentiation by scleraxis distinguishes
force-transmitting tendons from muscle-anchoring tendons. Development 134,
2697–2708. doi: 10.1242/dev.001933
Nie, G. Y., Hampton, A., Li, Y., Findlay, J. K., and Salamonsen, L. A. (2003).
Identiﬁcation and cloning of two isoforms of human high-temperature
requirement factor A3 (HtrA3), characterization of its genomic structure and
comparison of its tissue distribution with HtrA1 and HtrA2. Biochem. J. 371,
39–48. doi: 10.1042/BJ20021569
Nourissat, G., Berenbaum, F., and Duprez, D. (2015). Tendon injury: from biology
to tendon repair. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 11, 223–233. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.
2015.26
Paterson, Y. Z., Evans, N., Kan, S., Cribbs, A., Henson, F. M. D., and Guest, D. J.
(2020). The transcription factor scleraxis diﬀerentially regulates gene expression
in tenocytes isolated at diﬀerent developmental stages. Mech. Dev. 163:103635.
doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2020.103635
Pellegata, N. S., Dieguez-Lucena, J. L., Joensuu, T., Lau, S., Montgomery, K. T.,
Krahe, R., et al. (2000). Mutations in KERA, encoding keratocan, cause cornea
plana. Nat. Genet. 25, 91–95. doi: 10.1038/75664
Pryce, B. A., Brent, A. E., Murchison, N. D., Tabin, C. J., and Schweitzer, R. (2007).
Generation of transgenic tendon reporters, ScxGFP and ScxAP, using regulatory
elements of the scleraxis gene. Dev. Dyn. 236, 1677–1682. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.
21179
Pryce, B. A., Watson, S. S., Murchison, N. D., Staverosky, J. A., Dunker, N., and
Schweitzer, R. (2009). Recruitment and maintenance of tendon progenitors
by TGFbeta signaling are essential for tendon formation. Development 136,
1351–1361. doi: 10.1242/dev.027342
Risso, D., Ngai, J., Speed, T. P., and Dudoit, S. (2014). Normalization of RNA-
seq data using factor analysis of control genes or samples. Nat. Biotechnol. 32,
896–902. doi: 10.1038/nbt.2931
Robinson, M. D., McCarthy, D. J., and Smyth, G. K. (2010). edgeR: a Bioconductor
package for diﬀerential expression analysis of digital gene expression data.
Bioinformatics 26, 139–140. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp616
Schweitzer, R., Chyung, J. H., Murtaugh, L. C., Brent, A. E., Rosen, V., Olson, E. N.,
et al. (2001). Analysis of the tendon cell fate using Scleraxis, a speciﬁc marker
for tendons and ligaments. Development 128, 3855–3866.
Scott, M. A., and Hu, Y. C. (2019). Generation of CRISPR-edited rodents using
a Piezo-Driven Zygote injection technique. Methods Mol. Biol. 1874, 169–178.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-8831-0_9
Shukunami, C., Takimoto, A., Nishizaki, Y., Yoshimoto, Y., Tanaka, S., Miura, S.,
et al. (2018). Scleraxis is a transcriptional activator that regulates the expression
of Tenomodulin, a marker of mature tenocytes and ligamentocytes. Sci. Rep.
8:3155. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-21194-3
Shukunami, C., Takimoto, A., Oro, M., and Hiraki, Y. (2006). Scleraxis positively
regulates the expression of tenomodulin, a diﬀerentiation marker of tenocytes.
Dev. Biol. 298, 234–247. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.06.036
Sun, M., Luo, E. Y., Adams, S. M., Adams, T., Ye, Y., Shetye, S. S., et al. (2020).
Collagen XI regulates the acquisition of collagen ﬁbril structure, organization
and functional properties in tendon. Matrix Biol. 94, 77–94. doi: 10.1016/j.
matbio.2020.09.001
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
14
June 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 654397
Liu et al.
Scx Target Genes in Tendon Development
Suzuki, H., Ito, Y., Shinohara, M., Yamashita, S., Ichinose, S., Kishida, A.,
et al. (2016). Gene targeting of the transcription factor Mohawk in rats
causes heterotopic ossiﬁcation of Achilles tendon via failed tenogenesis.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 113, 7840–7845. doi: 10.1073/pnas.152205
4113
Svensson, L., Aszodi, A., Reinholt, F. P., Fassler, R., Heinegard, D., and Oldberg,
A. (1999). Fibromodulin-null mice have abnormal collagen ﬁbrils, tissue
organization, and altered lumican deposition in tendon. J. Biol. Chem. 274,
9636–9647. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.14.9636
Wang, N., Zheng, Q., Zhang, J. S., and Zhao, Y. (2008). Molecular cloning and
characterization of a novel mouse actin-binding protein Zfp185. J. Mol. Histol.
39, 295–302. doi: 10.1007/s10735-008-9165-2
Watson, S. S., Riordan, T. J., Pryce, B. A., and Schweitzer, R. (2009). Tendons and
muscles of the mouse forelimb during embryonic development. Dev. Dyn. 238,
693–700. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21866
Wenstrup, R. J., Smith, S. M., Florer, J. B., Zhang, G., Beason, D. P., Seegmiller, R. E.,
et al. (2011). Regulation of collagen ﬁbril nucleation and initial ﬁbril assembly
involves coordinate interactions with collagens V and XI in developing tendon.
J. Biol. Chem. 286, 20455–20465. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.223693
Xu, J., Liu, H., Lan, Y., Park, J. S., and Jiang, R. (2020). Genome-wide identiﬁcation
of Foxf2 target genes in palate development. J. Dent. Res. 99, 463–471. doi:
10.1177/0022034520904018
Xu, J., Liu, H., Park, J. S., Lan, Y., and Jiang, R. (2014). Osr1 acts downstream of and
interacts synergistically with Six2 to maintain nephron progenitor cells during
kidney organogenesis. Development 141, 1442–1452. doi: 10.1242/dev.10
3283
Yang, G., Rothrauﬀ, B. B., and Tuan, R. S. (2013). Tendon and ligament
regeneration and repair: clinical relevance and developmental paradigm. Birth
Defects Res. C Embryo Today 99, 203–222. doi: 10.1002/bdrc.21041
Yoshimoto, Y., Takimoto, A., Watanabe, H., Hiraki, Y., Kondoh, G., and
Shukunami, C. (2017). Scleraxis is required for maturation of tissue domains
for proper integration of the musculoskeletal system. Sci. Rep. 7:45010. doi:
10.1038/srep45010
Yu, H. B., Yurieva, M., Balachander, A., Foo, I., Leong, X., Zelante, T., et al.
(2015). NFATc2 mediates epigenetic modiﬁcation of dendritic cell cytokine and
chemokine responses to dectin-1 stimulation. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, 836–847.
doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1369
Zhang, Y., Lan, H., Shao, Q., Wang, R., Chen, H., Tang, H., et al. (2016). An
A20/AN1-type zinc ﬁnger protein modulates gibberellins and abscisic acid
contents and increases sensitivity to abiotic stress in rice (Oryza sativa). J. Exp.
Bot. 67, 315–326. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erv464
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Liu, Xu, Lan, Lim and Jiang. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No
use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
15
June 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 654397

===== Zou2025_NatRevRheumatol_Fibroblast+InflammatoryDisease =====

Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
336
nature reviews rheumatology
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41584-025-01259-0
 Check for updates
Fibroblasts in immune responses, 
inflammatory diseases and 
therapeutic implications
Angela E. Zou 
  1,3, Suppawat Kongthong1,3, Alisa A. Mueller 
  1,2,4 & Michael B. Brenner 
  1,4 
Abstract
Once regarded as passive bystander cells of the tissue stroma, fibroblasts 
have emerged as active orchestrators of tissue homeostasis and 
disease. From regulating immunity and controlling tissue remodelling 
to governing cell growth and differentiation, fibroblasts assume 
myriad roles in guiding normal tissue development, maintenance 
and repair. By comparison, in chronic inflammatory diseases such as 
rheumatoid arthritis, fibroblasts recruit and sustain inflammatory 
leukocytes, become dominant producers of pro-inflammatory factors 
and catalyse tissue destruction. In other disease contexts, fibroblasts 
promote fibrosis and impair host control of cancer. Single-cell studies 
have uncovered striking transcriptional and functional heterogeneity 
exhibited by fibroblasts in both normal tissues and diseased tissues. 
In particular, advances in the understanding of fibroblast pathology in 
rheumatoid arthritis have shed light on pathogenic fibroblast states 
in other chronic diseases. The differentiation and activation of these 
fibroblast states is driven by diverse physical and chemical cues within 
the tissue microenvironment and by cell-intrinsic signalling and 
epigenetic mechanisms. These insights into fibroblast behaviour and 
regulation have illuminated therapeutic opportunities for the targeted 
deletion or modulation of pathogenic fibroblasts across many diseases.
Sections
Introduction
The roles of fibroblasts in 
health and inflammatory 
disease
Fibroblast populations in 
rheumatoid arthritis and other 
chronic inflammatory diseases
Mechanisms driving  
fibroblast heterogeneity  
and pathogenicity
Fibroblasts as therapeutic 
targets
Conclusions
1Division of Rheumatology, Inflammation and Immunity, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 2Present address: Division of Immunology and Rheumatology, 
Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA and Palo Alto Veterans Affairs 
Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA, USA. 3These authors contributed equally: Angela E. Zou, Suppawat Kongthong. 
4These authors jointly supervised this work: Alisa A. Mueller and Michael B. Brenner. 
 e-mail: mbrenner@ 
bwh.harvard.edu
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
337
Review article
and by other cell types16–18, which adds to the challenge of devising safe, 
efficacious fibroblast-directed therapies.
In this Review, we describe the normal and pathogenic roles of 
fibroblasts, focusing on RA as a disease in which fibroblasts have been 
studied in detail and extending our discussion to other inflammatory 
diseases. RA is a chronic autoimmune disease marked by inflammation 
of the joint synovium, bone and cartilage destruction and progressive 
disability19,20 (Box 1). DMARDs, including biologics such as TNF inhibi-
tors, have transformed RA treatment; however, these therapies show 
limited efficacy. 50–60% of patients with RA on first-line DMARDs 
fail to meet treatment targets (≥70% reduction in disease activity, 
also referred to as ACR70, after 6 months of treatment)20. Moreover, 
among individuals who respond inadequately to any given DMARD, 
only 10–15% respond to a subsequent line of therapy, and 15–25% of 
all patients remain refractory to any therapeutic20,21. Strikingly, in the 
synovial tissue of treatment-refractory patients with RA, fibroblasts are 
the most highly enriched cell population12,13. Although healthy syno-
vial fibroblasts structurally define the normal synovium and provide 
stability and lubrication to the joint22,23, during RA these fibroblasts 
expand dramatically and acquire both pathogenic pro-inflammatory 
behaviours and tissue-invasive behaviours that enable them to drive 
chronic synovial inflammation and bone and cartilage destruction19. 
No RA therapies specifically target these pathogenic fibroblasts.
Here, we provide an overview of fibroblast biology that illustrates 
how homeostatic fibroblast functions are subverted during inflam-
matory diseases, fibrosis and cancer. We synthesize insights from 
single-cell studies to describe synovial fibroblast populations and cell 
states in RA. We describe how fibroblasts in RA compare with fibroblast 
states in other inflammatory contexts and examine the key mechanisms 
that drive fibroblast differentiation, activation and pathogenic behav-
iour. Finally, we discuss how these insights pave the way for therapeutic 
targeting of fibroblasts in RA and other diseases.
The roles of fibroblasts in health  
and inflammatory disease
In this section, we describe the prominent roles that fibroblasts assume 
in controlling immune responses, remodelling tissues, organizing 
niches within tissues and regulating their own proliferation and dif-
ferentiation. We discuss how these functions are dysregulated in 
pathogenic fibroblasts that drive RA and other chronic inflammatory 
diseases, fibrosis and cancer.
Fibroblast-mediated immune regulation
To mount an effective immune response, antigens and immune cells 
must converge in specialized compartments within the lymph node, 
spleen and other secondary lymphoid tissues. Lymphoid tissue fibro-
blasts are frontline orchestrators of the complex cellular processes 
required for adaptive immunity. Understanding the roles that these 
fibroblasts assume in organizing lymphoid structures and regulating 
immune cells will provide insights into how pathogenic fibroblasts 
promote autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. Numerous lymphoid 
tissue fibroblast subpopulations, known as fibroblastic reticular cells 
(FRCs), have now been identified. Each FRC subpopulation is defined 
by its distinct location, marker expression and immunological func-
tion, as reviewed elsewhere24–28; here, we highlight a few prominent 
examples in the lymph node (Fig. 1a).
During embryonic development, FRC precursors regulate the for-
mation and organization of the lymph node, a process highly depend-
ent on lymphotoxin signalling27,28. As afferent lymph enters the mature 
Key points
	
• Fibroblasts assume multifaceted roles in regulating immunity, 
guiding tissue architecture and remodelling and defining the 
functional organization of tissues.
	
• During disease, fibroblasts can acquire inflammatory, fibrogenic, 
tissue degradative or hyperplastic phenotypes that promote pathology 
and predominate in treatment resistance.
	
• Although long implicated in fibrotic disease, fibroblasts have 
emerged as important drivers and regulators of chronic inflammatory 
and malignant diseases.
	
• Single-cell profiling of diseased tissues has uncovered 
transcriptionally and functionally distinct fibroblast subpopulations, 
some of which are tissue specific or disease specific and others 
of which are shared across multiple tissues and diseases.
	
• Morphogen gradients, synergistic and autocrine cytokine signalling, 
adhesion molecules, mechanotransducers and epigenetic regulators 
are some of the key factors that promote the differentiation and 
activation of pathogenic fibroblast states.
	
• Insights into fibroblast pathogenicity are spurring the development 
of therapeutics to deplete, deactivate, neutralize or reprogram 
fibroblasts in fibrosis, cancer and chronic inflammatory diseases.
Introduction
Historically, fibroblasts were viewed as homogeneous, spindle- 
shaped cells that provided structural support to tissues1; however, 
the diverse phenotypes and functions of fibroblasts in both health 
and disease are becoming increasingly apparent. Although fibro-
blasts mostly originate from mesenchymal progenitors and typically 
express collagen, vimentin and platelet-derived growth factor recep-
tor α (PDGFRα)2–4, these markers are not expressed by all fibroblasts, 
nor do they fully distinguish fibroblasts from other cell types, such as 
epithelial, endothelial or haematopoietic cells4–7. Moreover, single-cell 
studies have revealed remarkable fibroblast heterogeneity across tis-
sues, biological processes and disease states. Even within a single tissue, 
fibroblasts exhibit a range of fibroblast subsets and lineages, and they 
can readily change states in response to local cues.
During homeostasis, fibroblasts regulate immune responses, 
remodel tissues, define cellular niches within tissues and undergo con-
trolled proliferation and differentiation. However, when dysregulated, 
fibroblasts can perpetuate tissue inflammation and damage to drive 
chronic inflammatory and fibrotic diseases and support cancer growth, 
metastasis and immune evasion. Critically, current molecular and 
immunological therapies fail to effectively target disease-associated 
fibroblasts. Pathogenic fibroblasts have now been linked to treatment 
resistance and poor prognosis across a range of diseases, including 
solid tumours, organ fibrosis, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA)8–13. Thus, there is a major need to develop 
fibroblast-targeting therapeutic strategies. Although molecules such 
as fibroblast activation protein-α (FAPα) and cadherin-11 (CDH11) have 
been proposed as targetable markers of pathogenic fibroblasts14,15, 
these molecules are also expressed at low levels during homeostasis 
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
338
Review article
lymph node, it encounters a reticular meshwork formed by specialized 
FRCs known as marginal reticular cells, which capture and transport 
soluble antigens from the lymph to the B cell follicles29,30. Meanwhile, 
through chemokine secretion, other FRC subsets organize the traf-
ficking, recruitment, compartmentalization and survival of diverse 
leukocyte populations throughout the lymph node. FRCs within the 
B cell follicles, termed follicular dendritic cells (FDCs), produce CXCL13 
to attract CXCR5-expressing B cells and support their survival and 
proliferation within follicles through secretion of BAFF and CXCL12 
(refs. 18,31). FDCs also capture soluble antigens that are delivered to 
the follicle by marginal reticular cells, present them to B cells using Fc 
receptors (such as CD32), and form and maintain germinal centres to 
help to generate affinity-matured plasma cells and memory B cells32,33. 
FRCs in the T cell zone, termed T cell zone reticular cells (TRCs), recruit 
CCR7-expressing naive T cells through the production of CCL19 and 
CCL21 and promote their survival by secreting IL-7 (refs. 18,34). TRCs 
also facilitate interactions between T cells and dendritic cells (DCs), 
expressing molecules such as podoplanin (PDPN) that enhance the 
motility and trafficking of DCs to the T cell zone via activation of C-type 
lectin receptor 2 (ref. 35).
In addition to activating immune responses, FRCs can suppress and 
resolve immune responses. For instance, TRCs can present self-antigens 
via MHC class II molecules to CD4+ T cells to promote tolerance18,36–39. 
TRCs also produce immunosuppressive molecules, such as nitric oxide, 
that limit T cell expansion and priming by DCs once a pathogen or insult 
has been contained40,41. Thus, in health, FRCs successfully balance 
both the initiation and the resolution of adaptive immune responses.
Although not as comprehensively studied, under homeostatic 
conditions, fibroblasts in barrier tissues such as the gut and lung also 
exhibit antigen presentation and immunoregulatory properties that 
promote tolerance42,43. Notably, fibroblasts in the healthy synovial 
lining express the complement pathway inhibitor CD55 (also known 
as decay-accelerating factor22), which suggests a role in maintaining 
immunological quiescence in the synovium.
By contrast, during autoimmune diseases such as RA, systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE) and IBD, FRCs in the lymphoid tissues contribute 
to the breakdown of tolerance and generation of autoreactive T cell and 
B cell responses44–46. Lymph nodes from patients with autoimmunity are 
frequently enlarged, with prominent FDC-driven follicular hyperplasia 
and autoantibody production in activated germinal centres47–50. Addi-
tionally, fibroblasts in diseased peripheral tissues also become patho-
logically activated, adopting inflammatory, FRC-like states in response 
to stimuli such as TNF, IL-17, IL-1β, interferons and oncostatin M51–53. These 
inflammatory fibroblasts upregulate FAPα and produce substantial quan-
tities of cytokines and chemokines, notably IL-6, IL-33, CXCL8, CXCL12, 
CCL19 and CCL21, to recruit an array of both innate and adaptive leuko-
cytes to the site of inflammation13,52–55 (Fig. 1a). Inflammatory fibroblasts 
also promote leukocyte activation and persistence within affected tis-
sues and can even organize leukocytes into tertiary lymphoid structures 
(TLSs) that heavily resemble lymph nodes in structure and function. 
Additionally, compared with their homeostatic counterparts, inflam-
matory fibroblasts can exhibit substantially elevated expression of MHC 
class II molecules, which suggests an increased ability to present antigens 
to lymphocytes56,57. However, unlike FRCs, which initiate acute, inherently 
self-limited immune responses, fibroblasts in inflammatory diseases 
can engage in autocrine signalling through pro-inflammatory cytokine 
pathways51,58 to drive a chronic inflammatory state marked by sustained 
leukocyte recruitment and activation. In tumours, similar populations of 
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) have also been observed. Among 
the identified CAF states, inflammatory CAFs influence immune cell 
trafficking and organization in tumours in ways analogous to lymph 
node FRCs59. Meanwhile, antigen-presenting CAFs, which express MHC 
Box 1 | The synovium in health and rheumatoid arthritis
 
The synovium is a soft connective tissue that lines the inner surface of 
joints, acting as a physical and chemical barrier that protects the joint 
from mechanical and biological stressors22,23,162. Resident fibroblasts 
organize the synovium into a lining and sublining layer. The lining, 
which is located at the synovial surface, consists of a compact layer 
of lining fibroblasts and macrophages (which is 1–2 cells thick)22. 
Lining fibroblasts secrete hyaluronan and lubricin, which are key 
components of the synovial joint fluid that lubricates and minimizes 
friction along the joint space22,162. By contrast, the sublining is sparsely 
populated by fibroblasts, macrophages, adipocytes, T cells and 
B cells, which are loosely embedded within the tissue extracellular 
matrix22,23,162,248.
In rheumatoid arthritis (RA), the synovium transforms into a  
highly inflamed and destructive tissue. The synovial lining expands 
to >10 cells in thickness and forms an invasive pannus that drives 
cartilage and bone destruction22,162. The sublining becomes even 
more hyperplastic and neovascularized than the lining and is 
characterized by a substantial infiltration of activated leukocytes, 
including monocytes, dendritic cells, T cells and B cells, which 
can organize into lymphoid aggregates and tertiary lymphoid 
structures22,249.
RA synovitis arises from a complex interplay between genetic 
predisposition and environmental factors. Variants in the HLA-DR gene 
locus, along with exposures such as smoking and specific infections, 
are strongly linked to increased RA risk19,250. These factors are posited 
to predispose individuals to the development of autoreactive immune 
responses, particularly against post-translationally modified proteins 
such as citrullinated proteins19. Anti-citrullinated protein antibodies 
and pro-inflammatory cytokines are detectable prior to arthritis onset 
in a majority of patients with RA19,251.
Subsequently, a ‘second hit’ that triggers symptomatic 
inflammation specifically within the joint synovium seems to be 
required19,252. In response to local pro-inflammatory stimuli, activated 
synovial fibroblasts and macrophages secrete a range of cytokines 
and chemokines to promote the influx of pathogenic leukocytes22,249. 
Synovia-infiltrating T cell populations are essential to disease 
progression, including CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, which recognize 
citrullinated proteins253,254, peripheral CD4+ helper T cells that 
facilitate local B cell proliferation and differentiation255 and granzyme 
K-expressing CD8+ T cells that activate the complement cascade256. 
Meanwhile, oligoclonally expanded B cells drive continued epitope 
spreading over the disease course257. Beyond these characteristic 
features, synovial architecture, cellular composition and 
transcriptomic profiles can vary substantially in patients with RA13,105, 
suggesting that distinct routes of disease pathogenesis, progression 
and therapeutic intervention must be considered for each patient.
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
339
Review article
class II molecules, can either stimulate or inhibit antitumour immune 
responses depending on the tumour or tissue of origin60–62.
Fibroblast-mediated tissue remodelling
Fibroblasts synthesize a wide array of extracellular matrix (ECM) mol-
ecules, including collagens, proteoglycans, laminins, glycoproteins and 
elastins, which provide structural scaffolding to tissues63. They actively 
modify ECM structure and composition through regulated production of 
lysyl oxidases, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a disintegrin and met-
alloproteinases (ADAMs) and MMP inhibitors that enable ECM crosslink-
ing, glycosylation and proteolysis63,64. Fibroblasts also express a variety 
of integrins, cadherins, mechanoreceptors and cytoskeletal molecules, 
which enables them to sense mechanical cues from the ECM and neigh-
bouring cells and also directly exert contractile force on the ECM65–67. 
Collectively, this balance of matrix sensing, synthesis and pruning by 
fibroblasts enables them to construct compositionally distinct ECM 
environments that are uniquely tuned to support specific ­anatomical, 
functional and biomechanical requirements across tissues (Fig. 1b).
In the synovium, production of lubricin (proteoglycan 4) and 
hyaluronan by fibroblasts is integral to proper joint movement and 
lubrication68. In the lymph nodes, FRC remodelling activities are 
similarly indispensable for constructing the conduits that transport 
immune cells and antigens and also serve as cellular scaffolding for 
leukocytes to migrate and interact18,69. Additionally, FRCs form adjacent 
connections with neighbouring FRCs through CDH11 and synthesize 
a combination of collagen type I and collagen type XIV, which enable 
mechanical regulation of channel diameter and tensile strength within 
the lymph node18. Importantly, during infection, FRCs promote relaxa-
tion and expansion of the lymph node architecture to support the 
ingress and clonal expansion of immune cells35,70.
During tissue injury, fibroblasts mechanically sense local disrup-
tion to the ECM and become activated by cytokines (such as TGF-β and 
IL-11), leading to their differentiation into myofibroblasts, which are 
key mediators of tissue repair67,71. Myofibroblasts are marked by high 
expression of contractile proteins, including α-smooth muscle actin, 
and also deposit considerable quantities of ECM, which enables them 
to restore mechanical strength to the tissue71. Although myofibro-
blasts are transient in the context of acute injury and repair, activated 
myofibroblasts can persist during chronic injury and inflammation, 
producing excessive and disorganized ECM that disrupts normal tissue 
architecture and function and drives scarring and fibrosis72,73 (Fig. 1b). 
The heart, lung, liver, colon and skin are common sites of fibrosis 
following chronic inflammation or injury73. Additionally, in cancers, 
a myofibroblast-like CAF population emerges in response to TGF-β 
activation and can suppress antitumour immunity by impeding the 
infiltration of immune cells into the tumour parenchyma9,59.
By contrast, in RA and other inflammatory diseases, fibroblasts can 
acquire adverse ECM degradative properties (Fig. 1b). After stimula-
tion by pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF and IL-1β, synovial 
fibroblasts in RA produce excessive levels of MMPs and ADAMs and 
upregulate CDH11, which enables them to degrade the surrounding 
ECM and directly invade and destroy articular cartilage and bone15,19,74. 
Additionally, RA synovial fibroblasts highly express receptor activator 
of nuclear factor-κB ligand (RANKL), which activates nearby osteoclasts 
that resorb calcium and erode bone19,75.
Fibroblast-mediated organization of tissue niches
Beyond producing ECM molecules, fibroblasts are also highly spe-
cialized in their ability to secrete molecules such as growth factors, 
cytokines and morphogens. As these factors are produced, their dis-
tribution and bioactivity are further modified by the ECM. This enables 
fibroblasts to signal to neighbouring cells in varied and elaborate ways 
and form unique niches that support key cell types and tissue functions 
(Fig. 2a). For instance, through spatially restricted secretion of CXCL12, 
CXCL13, CCL19 and CCL21, FRCs establish distinct B cell follicles and 
T cell zones in the lymph node18,31,34. In the gut, fibroblasts help to define 
the key Wnt and BMP signalling gradients that guide epithelial renewal 
and differentiation along the intestinal crypt to the villus76–78. At the 
crypt base, PDGFRAlow fibroblasts support the proliferation of nearby 
intestinal stem cells through secretion of canonical Wnt ligands, activa-
tors of Wnt signalling and inhibitors of BMP signalling, whereas at the 
villus, PDGFRAhigh fibroblasts support intestinal epithelial cell differen-
tiation through the production of BMP ligands and non-canonical Wnt 
ligands. In the skin, dermal fibroblasts that signal through the Hedge-
hog pathway secrete the TGF-β ligand SCUBE3 to activate hair follicles 
from resting to growth states79. Finally, in the synovium, fibroblasts 
expressing Notch receptors (such as NOTCH3) engage with neighbour-
ing endothelial cells that express Notch ligands to establish perivascular 
niches that regulate local fibroblast differentiation80.
Fibroblasts form specialized niches not only within a specific tis-
sue but also across different anatomical regions. On the basis of their 
site of origin, dermal and synovial fibroblasts express distinct home-
obox (HOX) transcription factors that direct site-specific cell differen-
tiation and confer positional identity to the skin and joints81,82. Notably, 
HOXA13 is specifically expressed by fibroblasts in distal regions, such 
as the digits, and can induce the expression of Wnt ligands and other 
morphogens that are critical for the activation and maintenance of 
distal limb development and patterning81,83.
In tissues that are targeted by inflammatory and autoimmune 
diseases, such as the synovium in RA and the salivary glands in Sjögren 
syndrome, aberrantly activated inflammatory PDPN+FAPα+ fibroblasts 
establish lymphoid aggregates and TLSs84–86 (Fig. 2a). Much akin to 
the developing lymph node, TLSs are formed through lymphotoxin 
signalling by the local fibroblasts, as well as IL-13 and IL-22 derived 
from both stromal and immune cells86. TLSs resemble the lymph node 
in both structure and organization, with distinct T cell and B cell com-
partments, germinal centres and FDCs that promote the localized 
activation and persistence of autoreactive lymphocytes87,88. Meanwhile, 
through disordered production of ECM molecules and remodelling 
enzymes, pathogenic tissue remodelling fibroblasts can instigate the 
formation of an invasive pannus that degrades surrounding tissues, 
as is observed in RA19,89, or drive the formation of fibroblastic foci 
and fibrotic zones as seen in fibrotic diseases90. Similarly, in cancer, 
inflammatory CAFs organize tumour-associated TLSs91,92, whereas 
myofibroblast-like CAFs often perpetuate an immune cell-excluded 
tumour microenvironment (referred to as a ‘immune desert’), which 
leads to the suppression of antitumour immune responses8,9,59.
Regulation of fibroblast growth and differentiation
Fibroblast self-renewal, differentiation and proliferation are tightly con-
trolled to preserve homeostatic tissue structure and function (Fig. 2b). 
Although FRCs rapidly proliferate at the onset of an immune response 
to facilitate lymph node expansion, they also readily contract in number 
as immune cells egress and the immune response resolves35,93. Similarly, 
the initial stages of tissue injury trigger fibroblast proliferation and 
conversion into myofibroblasts, but once tissue ECM and structural 
integrity are restored, myofibroblasts wane in number and can dedif-
ferentiate into quiescent fibroblasts and adipocytes94–96. In healthy 
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
340
Review article
Adaptive immunity 
Lymph node fibroblastic reticular cells
B cell follicle
T cell zone
Homeostasis
Inflammatory fibroblasts
Balanced ECM remodelling
Synthesize, modify and
prune the ECM
TRC
IL-7
CCL19
CCL21
T cell
DC
Nitric
oxide
Chronic tissue inflamation 
Excessive ECM deposition
Aﬀected end-organs
(such as the gut and joint)
Recruit and retain
B cells
Present antigen to
B cells
Recruit and activate
autoreactive B cells
and T cells
Restrain T cells and
promote the resolution
of immune responses
B cell
CXCL13
BAFF
FcR
Plasma cell
BCR
Support germinal centres
and the production of
high-aﬀinity antibodies
Recruit T cells and DCs
and support T cell–DC
interactions
Pro-inflammatory mediators
(Interferons, TNF, IL-1β, IL-17 and LPS)
Autocrine loops
(LIF–LIFR)
Inflammatory
fibroblast
Monocytes
CCL19
CCL20
CCL21
BAFF
CXCL12
CXCL13
CCL2
CXCL8
IL-6 
Neutrophils
Recruit inflammatory
leukocytes
Crosslinks
Homeostatic
fibroblast
MMPs
ADAMs
MMPs
ADAMs
Cleaved ECM
TNF and IL-1β
RANKL
Integrins
Hyaluronan
Collagen
Proteoglycan
TGF-β
IL-11
Disorganized
ECM
Fibrosis
Excessive ECM destruction
Invasion
Osteoclast
a  
Present autoantigen to
T cells
FDC
Autoreactive
T cell
Autoreactive B cell
Peptide–MHC class Il
TCR
b  
Myofibroblast
Invasive fibroblast
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
341
Review article
Fig. 1 | Fibroblasts regulate immunity and tissue remodelling. a, Left: 
orchestration of adaptive immunity by lymph node fibroblastic reticular cells.  
In the B cell follicle, follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) recruit B cells and support their 
activation, retention and maturation. In the T cell zone, T cell zone reticular cells 
(TRCs) enable T cell and dendritic cell (DC) recruitment and subsequent T cell–
DC interactions. In addition, TRCs can suppress activated T cells at the conclusion 
of an immune response. Right: aberrant inflammatory signalling and leukocyte 
recruitment by peripheral tissue fibroblasts during chronic inflammation. 
Pathogenically activated fibroblasts are sustained by paracrine and autocrine 
pro-inflammatory stimuli, and these cells secrete an array of chemokines and 
cytokines to recruit, activate and retain inflammatory leukocytes in the diseased 
tissue. b, Left: coordinated extracellular matrix (ECM) production, modification 
and degradation by homeostatic fibroblasts (blue) to generate and maintain 
normal tissue structure and architecture. Right: fibroblasts can promote 
dysregulated ECM remodelling during disease. In tissue fibrosis, myofibroblasts 
(yellow) produce excessive ECM that is disorganized. In rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA), invasive fibroblasts (purple) cause ECM destruction and tissue degradation. 
ADAMs, a disintegrin and metalloproteinases; BCR, B cell receptor; LIF, leukaemia 
inhibitory factor; LIFR, LIF receptor; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; MMPs, matrix 
metalloproteinases; RANKL, receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand.
synovium, lining and sparse sublining fibroblasts exist in tight equi-
librium with other stromal and immune populations to maintain joint 
mechanics and immune homeostasis22,97; however, during chronic 
inflammatory diseases, pathogenic fibroblasts expand and persist, 
with emergence and enrichment of inflammatory subpopulations 
(Fig. 2b). For example, RA is marked by prominent hyperplasia of 
the synovial lining fibroblast layer, which expands from 1–2 cells to 
>10 cells in thickness, with sublining fibroblasts undergoing even 
greater expansion53,98. Fibrosis is characterized by the persistence of 
myofibroblasts (Fig. 2b), whereas fibrogenic or desmoplastic processes 
in tumours are driven by myofibroblast-like CAFs59,73.
Collectively, through these prominent roles in immune regula-
tion, tissue remodelling, niche formation, and growth and differen-
tiation, fibroblasts have emerged as key contributors to both tissue 
homeostasis and disease.
Fibroblast populations in rheumatoid arthritis  
and other chronic inflammatory diseases
Synovial fibroblasts have historically been classified according to 
anatomical location in the lining or sublining22,97. Single-cell studies 
have greatly refined understanding of synovial fibroblast diversity and 
function. Here, we describe how sublining and lining fibroblasts differ 
not only anatomically but also transcriptionally and functionally. We 
discuss new layers of heterogeneity in the sublining fibroblast compart-
ment and highlight studies that link synovial fibroblast populations 
to treatment-refractory RA. Finally, we describe parallels between RA 
synovial fibroblasts and pathogenic fibroblast states in other chronic 
inflammatory diseases.
Healthy and disease-associated synovial fibroblast subsets
Initial single-cell studies of synovial fibroblasts identified subpopula-
tions that were pre-sorted by the surface expression of selected pro-
tein markers. In a study of human RA, synovial fibroblasts were sorted 
on the basis of THY1, PDPN, CDH11 and CD34 expression98. Sublining 
fibroblasts, which were defined as THY1+PDPN+CDH11+CD34−, were 
the main fibroblast population expanded in RA compared with osteo-
arthritis (OA)98. In transcriptomic and in vitro studies, this population 
exhibited enhanced cytokine secretion, proliferation and invasiveness, 
which suggests an active role in driving disease98. By contrast, THY1− 
fibroblasts, which represent lining fibroblasts, were expanded more 
in OA than in RA98.
In a mouse experimental arthritis model, two fibroblast subsets 
defined by their expression of FAPα and THY1 were examined for their 
respective contributions to arthritis pathology99. FAPα+THY1+ cells 
were mostly sublining fibroblasts and FAPα+THY1− cells were mostly 
lining fibroblasts. Adoptive transfer of sublining fibroblasts worsened 
the inflammatory severity of arthritis by increasing joint swelling and 
leukocyte infiltration, whereas adoptive transfer of lining fibroblasts 
promoted enhanced degradative disease by driving cartilage and bone 
joint damage99. These findings suggest that rather than simultaneously 
mediating both synovial inflammation and joint degradation, at least 
in mice, the lining and sublining fibroblasts predominantly assume 
distinct pathogenic roles.
Through large-scale single-cell studies of synovial biopsies from 
patients with RA and OA, consortium efforts from the Accelerat-
ing Medicines Partnership RA and SLE Network have substantially 
advanced the identification and functional annotation of synovial 
fibroblast subpopulations13,53,100 (Fig. 3). An initial study of 1,844 sorted 
synovial fibroblasts identified a CD55+ THY1− lining fibroblast cluster, 
as well as three clusters of THY1+ sublining fibroblasts that express 
HLA-DRA, CD34 and DKK3, respectively53. HLA-DRAhi sublining fibro-
blasts represent the main highly inflammatory, expanded fibroblast 
population in RA53. These fibroblasts account for nearly all of the 
IL-6 produced by fibroblasts in active RA, are dominant producers 
of CXCL12 and other chemokines and express high levels of CD74 
(also known as the invariant chain), which functions as a chaperone for 
MHC class II molecules53.
A second study by the AMP RA and SLE Network, which analysed 
79,555 stromal cells from RA and OA synovial tissue, revealed additional 
synovial fibroblast heterogeneity by identifying two lining and seven 
sublining synovial fibroblast populations13. Notably, two sublining 
fibroblast populations, including the aforementioned HLA-DRAhiCD74hi 
inflammatory cluster and a distinct CXCL12+SFRP1+ inflammatory 
cluster, are characterized by high IL-6 and CXCL12 production13. Mean-
while, the lining fibroblasts are enriched for matrix-degradative MMPs 
including MMP1 and MMP3 (ref. 13). These studies collectively suggest 
that inflammatory sublining fibroblasts dominate in RA and implicate 
lining fibroblasts in driving tissue destruction.
Insights have also been made into the functional roles of other 
sublining fibroblast populations and their relevance to RA pathogen-
esis. A CD34+ sublining fibroblast subset, identified in both of the AMP 
RA and SLE Network studies13,53, is expanded in RA and expresses high 
levels of PI16 and DPP4 (ref. 13). These markers define a population of 
fibroblasts found to be universally present across tissues101. Through 
lineage tracing studies in mice, these ‘universal’ fibroblasts have been 
proposed to function as a progenitor cell population101. Thus, CD34+ 
synovial fibroblasts might serve as progenitors to other fibroblast 
subsets in the synovium.
The AMP RA and SLE Network studies also identified NOTCH3+ 
perivascular and sublining fibroblast populations13. Organoid 
co-cultures revealed that the differentiation of these NOTCH3+ fibro-
blasts was driven by endothelial cell-derived Notch ligands80. Impor-
tantly, genetic deletion or pharmacological blockade of NOTCH3 
reduced inflammatory disease in a mouse model of inflammatory 
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
342
Review article
Quiescent fibroblast
Myofibroblast dediﬀerentiation
Wound healing
Resolving immune response
Lymph node fibroblast contraction
Abnormal self-regulation
Dense FRC
network
Homeostatic
FRC network
RA
Fibroblast hyperplasia
Fibrosis
Myofibroblast persistence
Lining fibroblasts
RA synovium (hyperplastic)
Healthy synovium
BMP
(villus)
Wnt
(crypt)
Intestinal
stem cell
Wnt+ fibroblast
Homeostatic self-regulation
Hair follicle stem cell niche
Intestinal villus–crypt axis
Lymph node T cell and B cell zones
Homeostatic niche organization
Myofibroblast
Epidermis
Dermis
BMP+
fibroblast
DC
T cell
T cell
zone
B cell
follicle
TRC
B cell
FDC
Enterocyte
Dermal
fibroblast
↑
HFSC
Hedgehog
signalling
SCUBE3
Myofibroblast
Fibrotic zone
Lymphoid aggregates
Pannus tissue
Disordered ECM
Sublining fibroblasts
Synovial
membrane
a
b
Autoreactive
B cell
Osteoclast
Inflammatory
fibroblast
Autoreactive
T cell
Invasive
fibroblast
Dysregulated niche organization
Myofibroblast
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
343
Review article
Fig. 2 | Fibroblasts organize tissue niches and undergo regulated 
proliferation. a, Left: fibroblasts organize cellular niches to ensure proper 
tissue form and function. Dermal fibroblasts regulate hair follicle stem cell 
(HFSC) activation (top). Intestinal fibroblasts at the crypt base and villus 
secrete a gradient of Wnt and BMP molecules to support intestinal stem-cell 
differentiation (bottom left). Lymph node fibroblastic reticular cells (FRCs) 
demarcate distinct T cell and B cell zones that guide the compartmentalized 
activation of B cell- and T cell-driven immune responses (bottom right). Right: 
pathogenic fibroblasts create dysfunctional cellular niches that promote 
disease. Persistently activated cardiac myofibroblasts create fibrotic tissue that 
disrupts myocardial function (top). In rheumatoid arthritis (RA), inflammatory 
fibroblasts organize lymphoid aggregates and tertiary lymphoid structures, 
sustaining autoreactive lymphocyte activity in the synovium (middle), whereas 
invasive fibroblasts organize pannus tissues that directly invade and destroy 
surrounding cartilage and bone (bottom). b, Left: fibroblasts undergo regulated 
proliferation and activation to support tissue homeostasis. Following an immune 
response, FRCs decrease in number to restore the lymph node to its homeostatic 
state (top). Myofibroblasts reduce in number and dedifferentiate to support the 
conclusion of successful wound healing (bottom). Right: pathogenic fibroblasts 
exhibit dysregulated proliferation and differentiation in disease; for example, 
synovial fibroblasts in RA become hyperplastic (top) and myofibroblasts persist 
and accumulate in fibrosis (bottom). BMP, bone morphogenetic protein; ECM, 
extracellular matrix; FDC, follicular dendritic cell; SCUBE3, signal peptide-CUB-
EGF domain-containing protein 3; TRC, T cell zone reticular cell.
arthritis80. These studies highlight the importance of Notch signalling 
in determining fibroblast state and the potential relevance of targeting 
Notch signalling in RA.
The Wnt pathway has also been implicated in synovial fibroblast 
heterogeneity and pathology. In the AMP RA and SLE Network studies, 
two synovial fibroblast clusters derived from the sublining and inter-
mediate lining–sublining regions were distinguished by the expres-
sion of the Wnt signalling regulators DKK3 and RSPO3, respectively13. 
Dkk3+Thy1+Lrrc15+ fibroblasts are highly expanded in a mouse model 
of inflammatory arthritis and exhibit transcriptional signatures associ-
ated with inflammation and ECM remodelling102. Another study ana-
lysing human RA synovial tissue (available as a preprint at the time of 
this writing) revealed that the vast majority of Wnt receptors, ligands 
and regulators are expressed specifically in synovial fibroblasts com-
pared with other cell types in the synovium, with DKK3 and RSPO3 defin-
ing a broad transcriptional gradient that extends across many synovial 
fibroblast populations103. These findings implicate synovial fibroblasts 
as the predominant cell population that engages in Wnt signalling 
during RA and suggest that Wnt activation drives a prominent axis 
of fibroblast heterogeneity. Strikingly, in mouse models of arthritis, 
injection of Wnt ligands worsened arthritis whereas pharmacological 
Wnt inhibition ameliorated arthritis103, consistent with prior studies in 
which genetic deletion of Wnt5a in mice blunted arthritis severity104. 
Collectively, these studies demonstrate that Notch and Wnt signal-
ling promote fibroblast differentiation and inflammatory activation, 
respectively, in inflammatory arthritis.
In RA, the proportions and types of fibroblasts vary across distinct 
synovial inflammatory phenotypes and correlate with response to 
therapy. Notably, RA synovia that exhibit a pauci-immune or fibroid 
pathotype, which is marked by histological enrichment of fibro-
blasts, are linked to higher rates of non-response to TNF inhibitors105. 
Furthermore, in a clinical trial (R4RA) comparing B cell depletion 
therapy (via rituximab) versus IL-6 receptor blockade therapy (via toci-
lizumab) in TNF inhibitor-refractory RA, bulk transcriptomic analyses 
revealed a predominance of fibroblast-derived genes in the synovial 
tissues of patients who failed to respond to all agents12. Deconvolu-
tion studies suggested a specific enrichment of DKK3+ fibroblasts in 
non-responders12. Meanwhile, work by the AMP RA and SLE Network 
has stratified RA synovial tissues into cell-type abundance phenotypes 
(CTAPs), each defined by the most abundant cell types or combina-
tions of cell types enriched in synovial tissue13. For example, synovia 
enriched in fibroblasts, particularly lining fibroblasts and CD34+ sublin-
ing fibroblasts, are termed CTAP-F, whereas synovia enriched in T cells 
and B cells are designated CTAP-TB. The authors also applied CTAP 
designations to patient samples from the R4RA trial, and consistent 
with prior findings, synovial tissues from individuals refractory to 
anti-TNF therapy, rituximab and tocilizumab were significantly asso-
ciated with CTAP-F, further linking synovial fibroblast enrichment to 
treatment resistance13.
Not only do fibroblast subsets drive RA pathogenesis but they 
might also facilitate resolution of inflammation and disease remission 
(Fig. 3). In healthy human synovium, synovial fibroblasts, specifically, 
APOD+ and PLIN2+ populations, exhibit enhanced lipid metabolism and 
cortisol signalling signatures that diminish during disease106. Inhibi-
tion of cortisol signalling in mice through fibroblast-specific dele-
tion of Nr3c1 (which encodes the glucocorticoid receptor) worsened 
inflammatory arthritis106. In both humans and mice, CD200+DKK3+ 
fibroblasts seem to be enriched during the resolving phase of arthritis, 
as well as after TNF inhibitor or IL-17 inhibitor treatment107. Expres-
sion of CD200 by these synovial fibroblasts might promote the activi-
ties of pro-resolving type 2 innate lymphoid cells, thereby fostering 
­inflammatory resolution107.
Fibroblast states shared across tissues and diseases
Cross-tissue and cross-disease fibroblast atlases in both humans and 
mice have generated further insights into fibroblast populations that 
are shared across multiple tissues and diseases. A study of fibroblast 
populations across four distinct diseases (RA, ulcerative colitis, Sjögren 
syndrome and interstitial lung disease) identified five fibroblast popu-
lations shared across tissues, with two specific populations shared 
across inflammatory states108. The first shared population associated 
with inflammation, CCL19+CXCL10+ fibroblasts, most resembles the 
HLA-DRAhi sublining fibroblasts described in RA. These cells directly 
interact with leukocytes through cytokine and chemokine signal-
ling, antigen presentation and localization in leukocyte-rich cellu-
lar niches. The second shared inflammation-associated population, 
SPARC+COL3A1+ fibroblasts, most resembles the THYhiNOTCH3+ sub-
lining fibroblast population identified in RA. These fibroblasts have a 
perivascular location, engage in crosstalk with endothelial cells and 
signal through Notch, Wnt, BMP and other developmental morphogens. 
Another cross-tissue analysis that focused on steady-state tissues in 
the mice identified two universal fibroblast populations, including 
the aforementioned Pi16+ population, which adopts a progenitor-like 
phenotype, and a Col15+ population, which secretes basement mem-
brane proteins101. Extension of these analyses to human tissues revealed 
a universal human fibroblast population enriched for genes that define 
the murine Pi16+ and Col15+ populations, suggesting cross-species 
similarities101. The discovery of these shared populations indicates 
that there could be common programs of fibroblast differentiation 
and pathogenic inflammatory activation across diseases.
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
344
Review article
Healthy
Lipid and cortisol-associated fibroblasts
PLIN2
T cells
B cells
Lining
Dendritic
cells
Neutrophils
APOD
Universal fibroblasts
Inflammatory fibroblasts
Vascular-interacting fibroblasts
Remodelling fibroblasts
RA
Adipocytes
Blood vessels
Homeostatic lining
fibroblast
Lining
macrophages
Fibroblast with signature 
for insulin signalling, lipid 
transport and oxidative 
stress protection
Fibroblast with lipid 
metabolism signature
Fibroblast present across 
tissues; possible progenitor
CD34, DPP4 and PI16
NOTCH3
MHC–II, IL–6, CXCL8, CXCL12, 
and other chemokines
RSPO3
CXCL10 and CCL19
Leukocyte-interacting fibroblast 
present across diseases
SPARC and COL3A1
Sublining fibroblast associated
with fibrogenesis
POSTN and COL3A1
Sublining fibroblast linked to
matrix remodelling and
inflammatory resolution
CD200 and DKK3
MMPs, ADAMs, RANKL
Tissue invasive, degradative 
lining fibroblast
Sublining
Lining
Sublining
Vascular-interacting fibroblast 
present across diseases
Perivascular sublining fibroblast
Sublining
monocytes and 
macrophages
Inflammatory
sublining
fibroblasts
Fig. 3 | Fibroblast populations in rheumatoid arthritis and chronic 
inflammatory disease. In the healthy synovium (left), fibroblasts and synovial 
tissue-resident macrophages form a thin lining layer that produces hyaluronan 
and lubricin. In the sublining, scant fibroblasts produce extracellular matrix 
(ECM) and intermix with vascular structures and adipocytes. During RA (right), 
both lining and sublining fibroblasts become hyperplastic and adopt pathogenic 
activation states. Lining fibroblasts acquire tissue destructive and invasive 
abilities, whereas in the sublining, there is an emergence of inflammatory 
fibroblasts, ECM remodelling fibroblasts and an expansion of vascular-
interacting fibroblasts. Inflammatory fibroblasts and vascular-interacting 
fibroblasts promote immune-cell infiltration into the synovium and can organize 
lymphoid aggregates and tertiary lymphoid structures. ECM remodelling 
fibroblasts are associated with both resolution of inflammation and synovial 
tissue fibrogenesis. ADAMs, a disintegrin and metalloproteinases; MMPs, matrix 
metalloproteinases; RANKL, receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand.
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
345
Review article
Mechanisms driving fibroblast heterogeneity  
and pathogenicity
In this section, we review mechanisms that promote fibroblast dif-
ferentiation and pathogenicity. We discuss how the microanatomical 
zonation of fibroblasts regulates their differentiation, and how their 
subsequent activation and effector function can be dynamically shaped 
by exogenous stimuli and imprinted epigenetically.
Zonated differentiation of fibroblasts
The markedly distinct phenotypes of synovial lining and sublining fibro-
blasts suggests that their differentiation and function are regulated by 
their spatial zonation or positioning within the synovium. Indeed, in 
the sublining, fibroblast differentiation is directed by endothelial cells, 
which establish a positional gradient of Notch signalling in fibroblasts 
that extends outwards from perivascular zones80 (Fig. 4a). Transcrip-
tional analyses suggest that this Notch- and morphogen-driven 
fibroblast-endothelial crosstalk is conserved across other tissues 
and diseases and involves SPARC+COL3A1+ fibroblasts108. Meanwhile, 
a study of healthy human synovium found that the homeostatic syno-
vial fibroblast state is maintained by cortisol derived from adipocytes 
immediately underlying the synovial sublining layer, a phenotype that 
is lost during inflammatory arthritis106. Collectively, the findings from 
these studies suggest that fibroblasts activated by Notch and other sig-
nalling pathways might form transcriptional gradients that correspond 
a  Zonated diﬀerentiation
d  Mechanotransduction
e  Epigenetic regulation
NOTCH–directed synovial
sublining fibroblast identity
Lining
Low NOTCH signalling
Sublining (perivascular)
High NOTCH signalling
Endothelium
b  Cytokine signalling and amplification loops
c  Invasive program activation
Endothelial cell 
(NOTCH ligands)
Sublining perivascular 
fibroblast (NOTCH3+)
NOTCH3
DLL4
LIF and IL–6
Primary pro-inflammatory stimuli
(TNF, interferons, IL–17 and IL–1β)
1.
IL–6R and LIFR (gp130)
Secondary autocrine amplification
loops (IL-6–IL-6R and LIF–LIFR)
2.
↑Motility and invasion
↑Motility and invasion
↑Inflammation
Stiﬀ matrix
Soft matrix
Homeostasis:
Normal cytokine, chemokine
and MMP gene accessibility
RA
Increased cytokine, chemokine
and MMP gene accessibility
↑ Gene expression
YAP/TAZ
ETS1
RANKL
Adjacent fibroblast
TNF, IL-1β and PDGFβ
CDH11
Macrophage
HBEGF
EGFR
Fig. 4 | Mechanisms driving fibroblast heterogeneity and pathogenicity.  
a, Morphogens establish signalling gradients that are instrumental in regulating 
fibroblast positional identity; for example, the sublining synovial fibroblast 
state is driven by Notch signalling via interactions with neighbouring endothelial 
cells. b, Establishment of a chronic inflammatory fibroblast state occurs via 
a two-step process: primary pro-inflammatory stimuli activate the synovial 
fibroblast to produce IL-6 and LIF, which then signal in an autocrine fashion 
through IL-6R and LIFR to sustain and amplify the initial fibroblast inflammatory 
response. c, Synovial fibroblast-mediated tissue invasion and joint destruction 
can be activated through soluble stimuli, including macrophage-derived HBEGF, 
signalling through mesenchymal cadherins, including cadherin-11 (CDH11), 
and transcriptional programs, including ETS1-driven activation of RANKL. 
d, Through mechanosensing of local tissue microenvironments, fibroblasts 
respond dynamically to substrate stiffness by modulating inflammatory 
and invasive behaviours. e, In rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and other chronic 
inflammatory diseases, fibroblasts acquire epigenetic changes, including DNA 
hypomethylation and activating histone marks that increase the accessibility of 
pro-inflammatory and invasive gene loci. RANKL, receptor activator of nuclear 
factor-κB ligand; LIF, leukaemia inhibitory factor; LIFR, LIF receptor; HBEGF, 
heparin binding EGF-like growth factor; PDGFβ, platelet-derived growth factor β.
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
346
Review article
to differential degrees of pathway activation, rather than discrete 
clusters or cell subsets. These gradients might correlate with the ana-
tomical locations of fibroblasts within the tissue and their proximity 
to cues derived from neighbouring cell types. Similarly, it is tempting 
to speculate that in the lining, interactions between fibroblasts and 
nearby tissue-resident macrophages, along with their regulation by 
factors within synovial fluid, could be essential in driving the lining 
fibroblast phenotype.
Spatial transcriptomics technologies that enable transcriptome- 
level quantification of gene expression in intact tissues now have the 
potential to unlock major insights into fibroblast zonation, differentia-
tion and specialization109. Initial spatial transcriptomics-based studies 
of tissues such as kidney110,111, lung112,113 and gut114,115 have identified 
new cellular populations, niches and cell–cell interactions that are 
pivotal not only in tissue development and homeostasis but also in 
disease pathogenesis and progression. Similarly, spatial transcrip-
tomics studies of the RA synovium (some of which are available as 
preprints at the time of this writing116–118) have begun to expand under-
standing of the cellular composition and spatial features of TLSs and 
perivascular niches116–121. Notably, sublining immune-interacting ITGA5+ 
fibroblasts and perivascular COMPhi fibroblasts are proposed to drive 
local hubs of TGF-β signalling in the synovium that might be impli-
cated in treatment-refractory disease118,121. Large-scale studies that 
are now underway, including efforts by the AMP Autoimmune and 
Immune-Mediated Disease Network, will provide additional insight 
into fibroblast heterogeneity and pathology in the full spatial context 
of the synovial tissue microenvironment.
Pathogenic signalling and amplification pathways  
in fibroblasts
Fibroblasts sense and respond to a range of cues, including cytokines, 
Toll-like receptor agonists, growth and differentiation factors, cell–cell 
contact and mechanical forces. In RA, synovial fibroblasts are acti-
vated by cytokines that include TNF, IL-17, interferons and IL-1β51,54 
(Fig. 4b). Notably, IFN-γ from infiltrating T cells and NK cells promotes 
the upregulation of MHC class II molecules and chemokines, which are 
highly expressed by the inflammatory HLA-DRAhi fibroblast popula-
tion that is expanded in the synovium in RA120,122. By comparison, TNF 
and IL-1β from T cells and myeloid cells can potently induce IL-6 and 
CXCL8 in inflammatory fibroblasts51,120. Fibroblasts also become highly 
activated after stimulation by endogenous Toll-like receptor ligands, 
such as heat shock proteins, fibrinogen and fibronectin extra domain A, 
which are enriched in inflamed tissues123–125. Finally, beyond classical 
pro-inflammatory stimuli, a study (available as a preprint at the time 
of this writing) reported the surprising role of Wnt proteins in driving 
pro-inflammatory cytokine and chemokine production by synovial 
fibroblasts103, suggesting that molecules such as morphogens and 
growth factors might have additional functions in driving ­inflammatory 
fibroblast pathology.
In inflamed tissues, fibroblasts often encounter multiple stimula-
tory factors in combination, which together amplify the inflammatory 
response. Notably, IL-17 coupled with TNF or IL-1β stimulation syner-
gistically enhances the production of IL-6 and other pro-inflammatory 
factors by fibroblasts126,127. In synovial fibroblasts, inflammatory 
gene induction by TNF and IL-17 co-stimulation is mediated by the 
transcriptional regulators cut-like homeobox 1 and IκBζ128. IL-17 also 
enhances the mRNA stability of pro-inflammatory cytokines and 
chemokines129. Similarly, in IBD, oncostatin M signals in concert with 
TNF and other cytokines to enhance, either additively or synergistically, 
the production of IL-6, CCL2, CXCL9 and other pro-inflammatory 
­factors by fibroblasts52.
The type of pathogenic fibroblast response depends on the nature 
of the cytokine stimulation. In particular, differences in the stimuli that 
promote inflammatory versus invasive fibroblast behaviours have 
emerged. For example, whereas IFN-γ, TNF and IL-1β have been exten-
sively implicated in the inflammatory activation of fibroblasts, only 
TNF and IL-1β upregulate the production of MMPs and other ECM deg-
radative factors that specifically mediate fibroblast invasiveness130,131. 
By comparison, TGF-β and IL-11 exert primarily fibrogenic effects on 
fibroblasts72,132. In addition to cytokines, growth factors such as PDGFs 
and epidermal growth factors (EGFs) can promote fibroblast migration 
and invasion. Notably, in the RA synovium, macrophages that secrete 
heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor activate EGF receptor signal-
ling in synovial fibroblasts, which enhances the invasiveness of these 
fibroblasts but only minimally alters their inflammatory behaviour133. 
Differences in the transcriptional regulation of inflammatory versus 
invasive gene programs could also be important; notably, the transcrip-
tion factor ETS1 promotes synovial fibroblast-mediated invasiveness 
and RANKL production but not chronic inflammation134 (Fig. 4c).
Following primary activation, fibroblasts can initiate second-
ary autocrine cytokine signalling loops that powerfully sustain and 
augment the initial stimulus (Fig. 4b). An autocrine amplification 
loop mediated by leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and its receptor 
(LIFR) promotes the prolonged upregulation of IL-6, CXCL8, IL-11 
and other pro-inflammatory factors in fibroblasts. After primary 
stimulation, fibroblasts readily produce LIF, which in turn activates 
LIFR-expressing fibroblasts and engages STAT4 signalling to consider-
ably amplify pro-inflammatory cytokine and chemokine transcription 
in fibroblasts51. The gp130 subunit for the LIF receptor is also the key 
signalling transducer for other IL-6 family receptors, including IL-6 and 
IL-11, both of which can signal in an autocrine fashion in activated fibro-
blasts as well. Notably, a positive feedback loop of IL-6–IL-6R signalling 
in fibroblasts contributes to arthritis and experimental autoimmune 
encephalitis in mice58. Meanwhile, autocrine LIF–LIFR and IL-11–IL-11RA 
signalling in TGFβ-stimulated fibroblasts sustains fibrogenic protein 
synthesis and promotes myofibroblast differentiation in cardiac and 
pulmonary fibrosis models132,135.
Activated pathogenic fibroblasts also exhibit altered expres-
sion of non-coding RNAs such as microRNAs. These small RNA 
molecules further modify gene regulation in cells by catalysing the 
post-transcriptional silencing and degradation of target mRNAs136. 
Several microRNAs in synovial fibroblasts are directly induced by 
TNF or IL-1β137–140 and can target matrix-degrading MMP genes138,140 
or factors such as TRAF6 and A20 (encoded by TNFAIP3), which regu-
late cytokine signalling pathways137,141. The wide range of microRNAs 
that are dysregulated in fibroblasts in RA and other inflammatory, 
fibrotic and malignant diseases has been reviewed comprehensively 
elsewhere142–145; however, the precise roles of many of these microRNAs 
in fibroblast pathology and disease pathogenesis remain unclear.
Beyond chemical cues, a range of physical cues from cell-surface 
receptors, the ECM and mechanotransducers combine to shape 
the activation and effector responses of fibroblasts (as reviewed in 
depth elsewhere67,146,147). Notably, although mesenchymal cadher-
ins are conventionally thought to control cell adhesion and tissue 
morphogenesis and structure, studies have shown that they also 
regulate the pathogenic inflammatory and tissue remodelling behav-
iours of fibroblasts (Fig. 4c). CDH11 has been identified as a particu-
larly important mediator of homotypic fibroblast-to-fibroblast 
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
347
Review article
adhesion65; CDH11-deficient fibroblasts failed to organize a lining 
layer, indicating a key role for CDH11 in synovial morphogenesis dur-
ing development148. Additionally, CDH11 is highly upregulated on RA 
synovial fibroblasts by pro-inflammatory stimuli, such as TNF, and pro-
motes both their invasiveness15,148 and their production of IL-6 and other 
pro-inflammatory cytokines149,150. In mouse models of inflammatory 
arthritis, synovial inflammation and cartilage damage were reduced in 
Cdh11-deficient mice or mice treated with an anti-CDH11 antibody148. 
Beyond regulating synovial fibroblast inflammation and invasion, 
CDH11 has also been implicated in skin, pulmonary and cardiac fibrosis; 
critically, CDH11 deficiency or blockade abolishes fibrosis151–153.
The migratory and joint degradative behaviours of synovial fibro-
blasts are also potentiated by cell-surface receptor-type protein tyros-
ine phosphatase α (RPTPα), which activates focal adhesion kinase 
(FAK) and Src kinase signalling and in turn promotes cell motility and 
invasion154,155. In addition, fibroblasts continually respond to physical 
stiffness and mechanical cues within local tissue environments through 
mechanosensing via the Hippo pathway and its transcriptional effec-
tors, YAP and TAZ (Fig. 4d). The motility and invasiveness of fibro-
blasts are generally enhanced on soft substrates compared with stiff 
substrates156,157, whereas inflammatory and fibrogenic behaviours are 
increased on stiff substrates158,159. In a mouse model of inflammatory 
arthritis, synovial fibroblasts exposed to repeated mechanical loading 
expressed augmented levels of CXCL1 and CCL2 and promoted exacer-
bated disease160. These findings directly implicate mechanostimulation 
as a cause of inflammatory fibroblast activation.
Epigenetic regulation of pathogenic fibroblasts
Although fibroblast identity and function are heavily shaped by the 
local microenvironment, key aspects of their inflammatory and invasive 
behaviour persist both in ex vivo culture and in implantation and adop-
tive transfer experiments99,161–163. Moreover, mouse studies suggest that 
synovial fibroblasts can migrate from the inflamed synovium to spread 
disease to uninvolved joints164, and in human studies, pre-inflammatory 
mesenchymal cells have been observed in the peripheral blood of 
patients with RA directly preceding disease flares165. These observa-
tions imply that beyond exogenous stimuli, cell-intrinsic mechanisms, 
such as epigenetic dysregulation, also contribute prominently to the 
development and maintenance of pathogenic fibroblast behaviours. 
Indeed, in RA synovial fibroblasts, a number of genes involved in inflam-
matory, invasive and differentiation pathways have now been found 
to be epigenetically altered (Fig. 4e). Targeted DNA methylation stud-
ies of synovial fibroblasts from individuals with RA compared with 
those from patients with OA identified hypomethylated loci in multi-
ple cytokine signalling genes, including IL6, CXCL12, STAT3, IL6R and 
CD74 (refs. 166–169). Meanwhile, IL6, CXCL8 and several MMP genes 
also have altered histone modification profiles in RA-derived versus 
OA-derived synovial fibroblasts, including increased levels of activating 
histone marks (such as histone H3 trimethylation at lysine 4 and histone 
H3 acetylation at lysine 27) and decreased levels of repressive marks 
(such as histone H3 trimethylation at lysine 27)170–172. Collectively, these 
epigenetic changes have been proposed to confer an ‘inflammatory 
memory’ to RA synovial fibroblasts, priming them to exhibit amplified 
or prolonged expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines 
and ECM remodelling factors after activation171,173.
Chronic or repeated exposure to pro-inflammatory stimuli seems 
to be an important factor that promotes fibroblast priming173,174. 
Specifically, the complement component C3, which is upregulated 
in inflammatory fibroblasts, was shown to prime mouse synovial 
fibroblasts by increasing the chromatin accessibility of IL-6 and other 
pro-inflammatory cytokines and by polarizing fibroblasts to a more 
glycolytic and mTOR-activated metabolic state174. The ability of fibro-
blasts to undergo epigenetic and metabolic priming by cell-intrinsic 
factors such as C3 could be a key mechanism that explains why RA 
frequently recurs at the same joints.
Advances in single-cell profiling have begun to facilitate a deeper 
understanding of how specific fibroblast states in RA are epigenetically 
regulated. Paired assessment of single-cell chromatin accessibility 
(ATAC sequencing) and transcriptomic profiles (RNA sequencing) of 
the RA synovium has highlighted distinct chromatin states between 
resting and activated fibroblast populations and also revealed the 
presence of three chromatin ‘superstates’ that encompass multiple 
fine-grained synovial fibroblast transcriptional states120,175. Notably, 
inflammatory HLA-DRAhiCD74hi and CXCL12+SFRP1+ sublining fibro-
blast populations identified by the AMP RA and SLE Network seem to 
share a common CXCL12+HLA-DRAhi chromatin superstate marked by 
enhanced accessibility of CD74, HLA-DR, IL-6 and CXCL12 gene loci175. 
In addition, beyond characterizing epigenetic regulation of known 
disease-related genes, the advent of multi-omic approaches that inte-
grate genome-wide DNA methylation, chromatin accessibility and 
histone modification studies in RA synovial fibroblasts has identified 
entirely new genes as regulators of fibroblast pathology, including 
HIP1, which drives fibroblast invasiveness176.
Many of these described epigenetic changes arise in early RA, 
potentially even prior to clinically detectable disease177,178. Moreover, 
these changes also differ by joint location82,179,180; for example, hip- 
and knee-derived synovial fibroblasts exhibit differential chromatin 
accessibility at IL6, and JAK and STAT genes that results in differential 
transcription of these factors and distinct sensitivity to Janus kinase 
(JAK) inhibitors179,180. Similar to dermal fibroblasts, which maintain 
highly anatomically compartmentalized HOX gene programs, synovial 
fibroblasts also exhibit joint-specific epigenetic regulation and expres-
sion of HOX genes that have been proposed to shape their functional 
development and pathogenic behaviours82,179.
Fibroblasts as therapeutic targets
Historically, therapeutic targeting of pathogenic fibroblasts in fibro-
sis, cancer and inflammatory diseases has been hindered by a lack of 
drug targets that are both effective and safe. However, major insights 
into fibroblast heterogeneity and pathogenicity have expanded the 
repertoire of potential targets that are selectively expressed in patho-
genic fibroblasts and reduced or absent in homeostatic fibroblasts. 
Furthermore, new therapeutic modalities such as chimeric antigen 
receptor T cells (CAR T cells) and T cell engagers (TCEs) could serve as 
innovative approaches to targeting pathogenic fibroblasts and modu-
lating their biology. Here, we summarize the therapeutic landscape for 
targeting pathogenic fibroblasts, highlighting past clinical failures and 
successes and ongoing challenges in the development and translation 
of effective and safe therapies.
Depletion of pathogenic fibroblasts
Given the multifaceted roles of fibroblasts in disease, selective deple-
tion of pathogenic fibroblasts or specific pathogenic fibroblast states is 
an attractive treatment strategy. Targeted cell depletion is traditionally 
achieved with monoclonal antibodies via antibody-dependent cellular 
cytotoxicity; however, immunoconjugates, which are monoclonal anti-
bodies combined with drug payloads, such as cytotoxic compounds, 
small molecules or radioisotopes, have shown enhanced efficacy across 
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
348
Review article
multiple cancers and autoimmune diseases181. Moreover, emerging 
modalities, such as CAR T cells and TCEs, can directly leverage T cell 
cytotoxicity for a deeper, more durable depletion of target patho-
genic cells182–184 (Fig. 5a). However, despite these therapeutic advances 
and an increased understanding of fibroblast biology, there are still 
no approved depletion strategies that specifically target fibroblasts. 
Selecting target molecules that are specific to pathogenic fibroblasts 
is critical to the success of fibroblast-depleting therapies.
FAPα, a type-II transmembrane protease, has been an appealing 
target owing to its low expression in healthy fibroblasts and broad 
upregulation by fibroblasts in conditions such as cancer, inflammatory 
diseases and fibrosis14,185,186. Initially developed to deplete CAFs in solid 
tumours, these FAPα-targeting strategies include unconjugated mono-
clonal antibodies, immunoconjugates, CAR T cells, vaccination and 
FAPα inhibitor–drug conjugates. Phase I–II clinical trials that assessed 
an anti-FAPα monoclonal antibody in cancer did not show efficacy, 
possibly owing to failure of the unconjugated monoclonal antibody to 
sufficiently induce cell death in CAFs187; however, newer approaches, 
such as CAR T cells, TCEs, vaccination and FAPI–drug conjugates, have 
demonstrated favourable results in cancer models and are now being 
explored in clinical trials (NCT04939610 and NCT01722149)186,188–195. On 
the basis of these promising findings, FAPα-based fibroblast depletion 
strategies are now being extended to disease indications beyond cancer. 
Notably, CAR T cells against FAPα could effectively treat cardiac fibrosis 
without clinical toxicity in mouse models196,197. Meanwhile, an anti-FAPα 
monoclonal antibody conjugated to IRDye-700DX, a photosensitizer 
that causes cell death after exposure to near-infrared light, reduced 
disease severity in a mouse model of arthritis198. As inflammatory 
fibroblasts, particularly subsets supporting TLS formation, express 
high levels of FAPα13,86, targeting FAPα could represent an especially 
promising fibroblast depletion strategy to treat RA, Sjögren syndrome 
and other inflammatory conditions that are characterized by lymphoid 
aggregation and TLS persistence in target tissues. However, despite 
promising efficacy and tolerability, caution is warranted as FAPα is also 
expressed by healthy bone marrow stromal cells and other cell types, 
and systemic depletion of FAPα-expressing cells can cause cachexia and 
anaemia16,17. Additionally, as FAPα expression varies between patients, 
FAPα-targeting approaches might not be equally effective in all patients. 
Using molecular imaging techniques, such as FAPI tracers combined 
with PET imaging (known as FAPI PET), could help to identify specific 
patients with high fibroblast FAPα expression who would be more likely 
to benefit therapeutically from FAPα-based depletion199.
In addition to FAPα, other potential cell-surface targets expressed 
by fibroblasts include THY1, PDPN, PDGFRA and CDH11 (refs. 4,18,65). 
Notably, CDH11 is highly upregulated by fibroblasts during inflam-
matory and fibrotic states, rendering it a promising target for direct 
depletion15,148,149,151–153,200; however, as CDH11 is also expressed by homeo-
static lymph node FRCs18, CDH11-based depletion strategies could also 
have undesirable adverse effects. Beyond thoughtful target selec-
tion and testing, the use of appropriate drug modalities that offer an 
acceptable risk–benefit ratio for patients is crucial (as reviewed exten-
sively elsewhere201–203). For instance, although CAR T cell therapies can 
eliminate target cells more effectively than unconjugated monoclonal 
antibodies, they carry risks such as cytokine release syndrome and 
neurotoxicity201–204. In addition, prior to CAR T cell infusion, lymphode-
pletion must be performed. This process can affect fertility, posing a 
Blocking
amplification
loops
d  
Eﬀector molecule
neutralization
e  
a  Direct depletion
FAP
IL–6
IL–6
IL–6
Anti-IL–6
antibody
Anti-IL-6R
antibody
IL–6R
IL–6R
T cell
LIF
LIFR
LIF
LIFR
Shifting
pathological state
c  
Diseased epigenetic
and metabolic state 
Normalized epigenetic 
and metabolic state 
Inhibiting
diﬀerentiation
b  
NOTCH3
DLL4
NOTCH3
DLL4
Anti-NOTCH3
antibody
Antibody and
antibody–drug
conjugates
FAP
inhibitor
NK cell
TCE
CD3
T cell
CAR
Cell death
Endothelial cells
Anti-LIFR antibody
(
(
(
(
IL–6
IL–6
Fig. 5 | Fibroblast-targeting therapeutic strategies. a, Selective depletion of 
pathogenic fibroblast subsets via targeting of cell-surface activation markers 
such as fibroblast activation protein α (FAPα), either through antibody-
mediated or through T cell-mediated depletion strategies. b, Targeting key 
pathways that drive fibroblast differentiation; for example, blocking NOTCH3 
signalling to prevent the differentiation of inflammatory sublining fibroblasts 
during rheumatoid arthritis. c, Targeting the epigenetic or metabolic state 
of pathogenically activated fibroblasts. d, Blocking autocrine signalling 
pathways that amplify pathological fibroblast activation; for example, targeting 
autocrine LIF–LIFR signalling in fibroblasts, which augments and sustains their 
inflammatory responses. e, Targeting the activity of fibroblast-secreted factors, 
such as IL-6, to prevent fibroblast-mediated recruitment and activation of 
pathogenic leukocytes. CAR, chimeric antigen receptor; LIF, leukaemia inhibitory 
factor; LIFR, LIF receptor; NK, natural killer; TCE, T cell engager.
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
349
Review article
tolerable risk for some patients with cancer but perhaps less acceptable 
for patients with autoimmunity, the majority of whom are women of 
childbearing age. To mitigate CAR T cell toxicities, preclinical stud-
ies have explored the use of transient CAR T cell therapeutic strate-
gies, such as delivering lipid nanoparticles containing CAR constructs 
to T cells in vivo to transiently induce CAR expression and activity 
in T cells197,205,206. This approach not only bypasses the need for CAR 
T cell generation ex vivo but also reduces toxicity risks associated with 
long-term CAR T cell persistence in patients. As an alternative to CAR 
T cells, TCEs offer a promising, safer alternative with efficient depletion 
efficacy203,207–209. Additionally, natural killer (NK) cell-based therapies, 
such as CAR–NK cells or NK cell engagers, have emerged as potential 
alternatives to CAR T cells, as they are associated with a lower risk of 
cytokine release syndrome but still exhibit potent cytotoxicity210.
Targeting the differentiation of pathogenic fibroblasts
As previously discussed, beyond transcriptomic insights into 
disease-associated fibroblasts, single-cell studies have also revealed 
pathways that potentiate the differentiation of fibroblasts into patho-
genic subsets. Blocking pathogenic fibroblast differentiation thus rep-
resents another promising therapeutic strategy (Fig. 5b); for example, 
in mice, pharmacological inhibition of Notch signalling in fibroblasts 
with an anti-NOTCH3 monoclonal antibody ameliorated inflamma-
tory fibroblast activation and arthritis severity80. As this perivascular 
fibroblast population (which expresses SPARC and COL3A1) is shared 
across multiple inflammatory diseases, targeting Notch signalling 
might be therapeutically beneficial beyond RA108. In fibrosis and can-
cer, several pathways, notably, TGF-β–SMAD signalling, can promote 
the differentiation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts, as reviewed in 
detail elsewhere8,9,211–213. Blocking factors that promote myofibroblast 
differentiation might be a potential therapeutic strategy for these 
diseases; however, myofibroblast differentiation is biologically com-
plex and mediated by multiple overlapping and redundant signalling 
mechanisms72,73,211. The successful therapeutic translation of preclinical 
fibrosis studies to patients has thus far been limited. Deeper analyses of 
omics-scale datasets could reveal more novel, promising therapeutic 
targets that can overcome these challenges.
Targeting pathogenic fibroblast state
Modulation of the dysregulated epigenetic and metabolic states of 
pathogenic fibroblasts has emerged as another potential therapeutic 
strategy (Fig. 5c). Targeting epigenetic regulators, such as the bromo-
domain histone-reading proteins, with I-BET151 suppresses the produc-
tion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and MMPs by synovial fibroblasts 
in vitro214. Meanwhile, targeting DNA methylation curtails fibroblast 
invasiveness215. These strategies could extend to myofibroblasts and 
CAFs, as epigenetic dysregulation is also observed in these cells216–218. 
The metabolic regulation of fibroblasts is also altered in disease, pre-
sumably owing to the energetic and biosynthetic demands of sustained 
activation and the changes in nutrient and oxygen content in diseased 
tissues219–225. For example, in RA, fibroblasts depend on glycolysis, via 
glucose transporter 1 and hexokinase 2, and glutaminolysis, via glu-
taminase 1, and inhibiting these pathways can ameliorate arthritis in 
mouse models226–230. Additionally, targeting upstream pathways such 
as C3 signalling that potentiate both metabolic and epigenetic changes 
in synovial fibroblasts could be therapeutically beneficial174. Like 
inflammatory fibroblasts in RA, CAFs and myofibroblasts also exhibit 
increased glycolysis, and inhibition of glycolysis has shown therapeutic 
potential in mouse tumour and fibrosis models231–234. Unlike the prior 
approaches discussed, metabolic inhibition strategies can target shared 
pathways, such as increased glycolytic dependence, which are found 
in both pathogenic fibroblasts and immune cells; hence, this strategy 
could simultaneously dampen multiple disease-driving cell types. Tools 
such as Compass (which uses transcriptomic data to infer the metabolic 
states of cells) can deconvolute single-cell datasets to further identify 
and characterize shared pathogenic metabolic features235.
Disruption of mediators that sustain fibroblast pathogenicity
A variety of external stimuli, including TNF, IFN-γ, IL-1β, IL-11 and 
TGF-β, can activate fibroblasts to drive inflammatory, degradative 
or fibrotic programs. Some current therapies work in part by block-
ing fibroblast activation, such as cytokine inhibitors (including TNF 
and IL-6 inhibitors) and signal transduction inhibitors (such as JAK 
inhibitors)236,237. However, as fibroblasts are highly responsive to many 
external cytokines, blocking any single activator will probably have 
only a partial effect. Mounting evidence shows that cytokine signalling 
induces autocrine amplification loops in fibroblasts, which heighten 
their pathogenic behaviours in autoimmune diseases, cancer and 
fibrosis. Targeting these autocrine amplification loops has the advan-
tage of blocking fibroblast activation in response to multiple external 
activators (Fig. 5d). Notably, blocking the autonomous LIF–LIFR loop 
curtails fibroblast activation downstream of both inflammatory and 
Glossary
Antibody-dependent cellular 
cytotoxicity
An immune response whereby 
antibodies tag a target cell, allowing 
immune cells, such as natural killer cells, 
to bind via their Fc receptors and release 
toxins to destroy the target cells.
Chimeric antigen receptor 
T cells
(CAR T cells). Genetically engineered 
T cells that are designed to recognize 
unique surface targets on diseased cells, 
which enables precise identification and 
elimination of target cells.
Cytokine release syndrome
A systemic inflammatory response 
caused by excessive cytokine release, 
which can be an adverse effect of CAR 
T cell therapy.
FAPα inhibitor–drug 
conjugates
(FAPI–drug conjugates). Small 
molecules or small peptides with an 
affinity for fibroblast activation protein α 
that are conjugated with drug payloads 
or with imaging agents such as 
radioisotopes.
Lymphodepletion
A chemotherapy or radiation-based 
regimen that reduces the number  
of circulating lymphocytes 
prior to CAR T cell and other 
adoptive cell therapies to improve 
the survival and persistence of the 
infused cells.
T cell engagers
(TCEs). Therapeutic molecules that 
simultaneously bind T cells via CD3 
and target cells to more readily 
induce T cell-mediated cytotoxicity, 
using formats that range from small 
bispecific proteins (such as BiTEs)  
to larger immunoglobulin-like 
constructs.
Tolerance
A safeguarding property that prevents 
the immune system from mounting 
responses to self-derived antigens, 
which is achieved through mechanisms 
that inactivate or eliminate autoreactive 
T cells and B cells.
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
350
Review article
fibrogenic signals51,135. CDH11 engagement also amplifies fibroblast 
responses to inflammatory signals, and its blockade markedly reduces 
inflammatory, invasive and fibrotic fibroblast behaviour in in vitro 
co-culture and organoid models15,148,149,151–153,200. In a phase II clinical trial, 
however, a CDH11-blocking monoclonal antibody failed to show efficacy 
in patients with RA that was refractory to anti-TNF therapy238. Alternative 
CDH11-targeting therapeutic modalities or targeting of CDH11 in fibro-
sis could still be effective. Additionally, findings suggest that the Wnt 
pathway represents another promising therapeutic target for blocking 
fibroblast-driven synovial inflammation in RA103. Overall, the preclinical 
data suggest that targeting autocrine or paracrine amplifier loops down-
stream of multiple primary activators of fibroblasts could effectively 
inhibit pathogenic fibroblast effector functions without cell depletion. 
Further identification of factors that promote these ­amplification loops 
could be achieved using omics studies and analyses.
Neutralization of pathogenic fibroblast-derived  
effector molecules
The secretome of pathogenic fibroblasts includes mediators of tissue 
inflammation and ECM remodelling, such as cytokines, chemokines and 
MMPs. Targeting these soluble factors or their downstream pathways 
could have therapeutic potential (Fig. 5e). Indeed, inhibition of IL-6 
signalling has revolutionized the treatment of multiple inflammatory 
diseases, including RA. Conceptually, this neutralization approach is 
straightforward, but the biology of these mediators is complex and 
highly tissue dependent or context dependent. For example, certain 
IL-6 family members (such as IL-6 and IL-11) are known to function via 
both cis and trans signalling pathways, each of which has a distinct role 
in maintaining homeostasis or perpetuating disease239. Non-selective 
blockade of both pathways could fail to achieve the desired therapeu-
tic effect or could lead to adverse effects, such as the development of 
intestinal perforations with IL-6 inhibition in Crohn’s disease240–243. 
These biological complexities are further demonstrated by the multiple 
failures to translate chemokine inhibition from animal studies into the 
clinic for inflammatory diseases, presumably owing to the functional 
redundancies between these chemokines244–247. Nevertheless, inhibi-
tion of the CXCL12–CXCR4 axis was efficacious in clinical cancer trials, 
highlighting an important, non-redundant role for fibroblast-derived 
CXCL12 in driving disease progression247. A more thorough understand-
ing of these biological complexities is needed to identify both safe and 
therapeutically efficacious molecular targets.
Challenges and considerations
For any fibroblast-directed therapeutic approach, the major challenge 
will be to selectively deplete or modulate pathogenic fibroblasts but 
spare healthy fibroblasts. Moreover, it will be important to pinpoint 
the specific patients and disease contexts in which targeting fibro-
blasts provides the greatest therapeutic benefit. One approach would 
be to trial these therapies in patients with early-stage or established 
inflammatory disease, either alone or in combination with other 
therapies11–13. Alternatively, given the mounting evidence that fibro-
blasts predominate in treatment-refractory inflammatory diseases, 
fibroblast-targeting therapies could be particularly useful in patients 
who respond inadequately to standard leukocyte-targeting and 
immunosuppressive therapies.
Conclusions
Molecular and single-cell characterization of fibroblasts in diseased 
tissues has provided major insights into their heterogeneity and 
pathogenicity. Ongoing advances in single-cell technologies prom-
ise to yield an ever more refined view of pathogenic fibroblast states 
and cell–cell interactions. These data are shedding light on the mecha-
nisms by which pathogenic fibroblasts arise through differentiation 
cues, aberrant signalling pathways and altered transcriptional and 
epigenetic regulation. Moreover, studies across multiple tissues and 
diseases have demonstrated that key pathogenic fibroblast subsets are 
shared, suggesting that approaches to depleting or modulating these 
fibroblast states could be beneficial across a range of disease indications.
Building on these findings, therapeutics that specifically target 
fibroblast deletion, activation or pathogenic behaviour show prom-
ise but are still in their nascency. Insights into pathogenic fibroblast 
activation and state have expanded the repertoire of potential thera-
peutic targets. Similarly, the development of innovative therapeutic 
modalities has greatly enhanced the efficiency and potency of fibro-
blast targeting. With these perspectives in mind, the field is primed, 
and emerging clinical trials across inflammatory, fibrotic and malignant 
diseases could be poised to reveal the next generation of effective, 
safe and durable fibroblast-targeting therapeutics.
Published online: 14 May 2025
References
1.	
Virchow, R. Die Cellularpathologie in ihrer Begründung auf physiologische und 
pathologische Gewebelehre: Pionierarbeit der Zellpathologie und Gewebelehre im 19. 
Jahrhundert. (Good Press, 1858).
2.	
Dulbecco, R., Allen, R., Okada, S. & Bowman, M. Functional changes of intermediate 
filaments in fibroblastic cells revealed by a monoclonal antibody. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 80, 1915–1918 (1983).
3.	
Chang, H. Y. et al. Diversity, topographic differentiation, and positional memory in human 
fibroblasts. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 12877–12882 (2002).
4.	
Muhl, L. et al. Single-cell analysis uncovers fibroblast heterogeneity and criteria for 
fibroblast and mural cell identification and discrimination. Nat. Commun. 11, 3953 
(2020).
5.	
Mor-Vaknin, N., Punturieri, A., Sitwala, K. & Markovitz, D. M. Vimentin is secreted by 
activated macrophages. Nat. Cell Biol. 5, 59–63 (2003).
6.	
Li, R. et al. Pdgfra marks a cellular lineage with distinct contributions to myofibroblasts  
in lung maturation and injury response. eLife 7, e36865 (2018).
7.	
Chandrakanthan, V. et al. Mesoderm-derived PDGFRA+ cells regulate the emergence  
of hematopoietic stem cells in the dorsal aorta. Nat. Cell Biol. 24, 1211–1225 (2022).
8.	
Mariathasan, S. et al. TGFβ attenuates tumour response to PD-L1 blockade by 
contributing to exclusion of T cells. Nature 554, 544–548 (2018).
9.	
Krishnamurty, A. T. et al. LRRC15+ myofibroblasts dictate the stromal setpoint to suppress 
tumour immunity. Nature 611, 148 (2022).
10.	
Fan, D., Takawale, A., Lee, J. & Kassiri, Z. Cardiac fibroblasts, fibrosis and extracellular 
matrix remodeling in heart disease. Fibrogenesis Tissue Repair 5, 15 (2012).
11.	
Friedrich, M. et al. IL-1-driven stromal-neutrophil interactions define a subset of patients 
with inflammatory bowel disease that does not respond to therapies. Nat. Med. 27, 
1970–1981 (2021).
12.	
Rivellese, F. et al. Rituximab versus tocilizumab in rheumatoid arthritis: synovial 
biopsy-based biomarker analysis of the phase 4 R4RA randomized trial. Nat. Med. 28, 
1256–1268 (2022).
13.	
Zhang, F. et al. Deconstruction of rheumatoid arthritis synovium defines inflammatory 
subtypes. Nature 623, 616–624 (2023).
14.	
Kelly, T., Huang, Y., Simms, A. E. & Mazur, A. Fibroblast activation protein-ɑ: a key 
modulator of the microenvironment in multiple pathologies. Int. Rev. Cell Mol. Biol. 297, 
83–116 (2012).
15.	
Kiener, H. P. et al. Cadherin-11 promotes invasive behavior of fibroblast-like synoviocytes. 
Arthritis Rheum. 60, 1305–1310 (2009).
16.	
Roberts, E. W. et al. Depletion of stromal cells expressing fibroblast activation protein-α 
from skeletal muscle and bone marrow results in cachexia and anemia. J. Exp. Med. 210, 
1137–1151 (2013).
17.	
Tran, E. et al. Immune targeting of fibroblast activation protein triggers recognition of 
multipotent bone marrow stromal cells and cachexia. J. Exp. Med. 210, 1125–1135 (2013).
18.	
Malhotra, D. et al. Transcriptional profiling of stroma from inflamed and resting lymph 
nodes defines immunological hallmarks. Nat. Immunol. 13, 499–510 (2012).
19.	
Gravallese, E. M. & Firestein, G. S. Rheumatoid arthritis — common origins, divergent 
mechanisms. N. Engl. J. Med. 388, 529–542 (2023).
20.	 Aletaha, D. & Smolen, J. S. Diagnosis and management of rheumatoid arthritis: a review. 
JAMA 320, 1360–1372 (2018).
21.	
Smolen, J. S. & Aletaha, D. Rheumatoid arthritis therapy reappraisal: strategies, 
opportunities and challenges. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 11, 276–289 (2015).
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
351
Review article
22.	 Smith, M. D. The normal synovium. Open Rheumatol. J. 5, 100–106 (2011).
23.	 Hochberg, M. C. et al. Rheumatology (Elsevier, 2023).
24.	 Fletcher, A. L., Acton, S. E. & Knoblich, K. Lymph node fibroblastic reticular cells in health 
and disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15, 350–361 (2015).
25.	 Perez-Shibayama, C., Gil-Cruz, C. & Ludewig, B. Fibroblastic reticular cells at the nexus  
of innate and adaptive immune responses. Immunol. Rev. 289, 31–41 (2019).
26.	 Li, L., Wu, J., Abdi, R., Jewell, C. M. & Bromberg, J. S. Lymph node fibroblastic 
reticular cells steer immune responses. Trends Immunol. 42, 723–734 (2021).
27.	
Onder, L. & Ludewig, B. A fresh view on lymph node organogenesis. Trends Immunol. 39, 
775–787 (2018).
28.	 van de Pavert, S. A. & Mebius, R. E. New insights into the development of lymphoid 
tissues. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 10, 664–674 (2010).
29.	 Katakai, T. et al. Organizer-like reticular stromal cell layer common to adult secondary 
lymphoid organs. J. Immunol. 181, 6189–6200 (2008).
30.	 Roozendaal, R. et al. Conduits mediate transport of low-molecular-weight antigen to 
lymph node follicles. Immunity 30, 264–276 (2009).
31.	
Cremasco, V. et al. B cell homeostasis and follicle confines are governed by fibroblastic 
reticular cells. Nat. Immunol. 15, 973–981 (2014).
32.	 Tew, J. G. et al. Follicular dendritic cells and presentation of antigen and costimulatory 
signals to B cells. Immunol. Rev. 156, 39–52 (1997).
33.	 Qin, D. et al. Fcγ receptor IIB on follicular dendritic cells regulates the B cell recall 
response. J. Immunol. 164, 6268–6275 (2000).
34.	 Link, A. et al. Fibroblastic reticular cells in lymph nodes regulate the homeostasis of 
naive T cells. Nat. Immunol. 8, 1255–1265 (2007).
35.	 Acton, SophieE. et al. Podoplanin-rich stromal networks induce dendritic cell motility via 
activation of the C-type lectin receptor CLEC-2. Immunity 37, 276–289 (2012).
36.	 Lee, J.-W. et al. Peripheral antigen display by lymph node stroma promotes T cell 
tolerance to intestinal self. Nat. Immunol. 8, 181–190 (2007).
37.	
Magnusson, F. C. et al. Direct presentation of antigen by lymph node stromal cells 
protects against CD8 T-cell-mediated intestinal autoimmunity. Gastroenterology 134, 
1028–1037 (2008).
38.	 Fletcher, A. L. et al. Lymph node fibroblastic reticular cells directly present peripheral 
tissue antigen under steady-state and inflammatory conditions. J. Exp. Med. 207, 
689–697 (2010).
39.	 Baptista, A. P. et al. Lymph node stromal cells constrain immunity via MHC class II 
self-antigen presentation. eLife 3, e04433 (2014).
40.	 Lukacs-Kornek, V. et al. Regulated release of nitric oxide by nonhematopoietic stroma 
controls expansion of the activated T cell pool in lymph nodes. Nat. Immunol. 12, 
1096–1104 (2011).
41.	
Siegert, S. et al. Fibroblastic reticular cells from lymph nodes attenuate T cell expansion 
by producing nitric oxide. PLoS ONE 6, e27618 (2011).
42.	 Pinchuk, I. V. et al. PD-1 ligand expression by human colonic myofibroblasts/fibroblasts 
regulates CD4+ T-cell activity. Gastroenterology 135, 1228–1237 (2008).
43.	 Owens, B. M. et al. CD90+ stromal cells are non-professional innate immune effectors  
of the human colonic mucosa. Front. Immunol. 4, 307 (2013).
44.	 Das, A. et al. Follicular dendritic cell activation by TLR ligands promotes autoreactive 
B cell responses. Immunity 46, 106–119 (2017).
45.	 Zeng, Q. et al. Spleen fibroblastic reticular cell-derived acetylcholine promotes lipid 
metabolism to drive autoreactive B cell responses. Cell Metab. 35, 837–854 e838 (2023).
46.	 Karouzakis, E. et al. Molecular characterization of human lymph node stromal cells 
during the earliest phases of rheumatoid arthritis. Front. Immunol. 10, 1863 (2019).
47.	
Mellors, R. C., Heimer, R., Corcos, J. & Korngold, L. Cellular origin of rheumatoid factor.  
J. Exp. Med. 110, 875–886 (1959).
48.	 Nosanchuk, J. S. & Schintzier, B. Follicular hyperplasia in lymph nodes from patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis. A clinicopathologic study. Cancer 24, 343–354 (1969).
49.	 Shapira, Y., Weinberger, A. & Wysenbeek, A. J. Lymphadenopathy in systemic lupus 
erythematosus. Prevalence and relation to disease manifestations. Clin. Rheumatol. 15, 
335–338 (1996).
50.	 Cook, M. The size and histological appearances of mesenteric lymph nodes in Crohn’s 
disease. Gut 13, 970 (1972).
51.	
Nguyen, H. N. et al. Autocrine loop involving IL-6 family member LIF, LIF receptor, and 
STAT4 drives sustained fibroblast production of inflammatory mediators. Immunity 46, 
220–232 (2017).
52.	 West, N. R. et al. Oncostatin M drives intestinal inflammation and predicts response to 
tumor necrosis factor-neutralizing therapy in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. 
Nat. Med. 23, 579–589 (2017).
53.	 Zhang, F. et al. Defining inflammatory cell states in rheumatoid arthritis joint synovial 
tissues by integrating single-cell transcriptomics and mass cytometry. Nat. Immunol. 20, 
928–942 (2019).
54.	 Ivashkiv, L. B. Cytokine expression and cell activation in inflammatory arthritis.  
Adv. Immunol. 63, 337–376 (1996).
55.	 Sponheim, J. et al. Inflammatory bowel disease-associated interleukin-33 is preferentially 
expressed in ulceration-associated myofibroblasts. Am. J. Pathol. 177, 2804–2815 (2010).
56.	 Boots, A. M., Wimmers-Bertens, A. J. & Rijnders, A. W. Antigen-presenting capacity of 
rheumatoid synovial fibroblasts. Immunology 82, 268–274 (1994).
57.	
Tran, C. N. et al. Presentation of arthritogenic peptide to antigen-specific T cells by 
fibroblast-like synoviocytes. Arthritis Rheum. 56, 1497–1506 (2007).
58.	 Ogura, H. et al. Interleukin-17 promotes autoimmunity by triggering a positive-feedback 
loop via interleukin-6 induction. Immunity 29, 628–636 (2008).
59.	 Öhlund, D. et al. Distinct populations of inflammatory fibroblasts and myofibroblasts in 
pancreatic cancer. J. Exp. Med. 214, 579–596 (2017).
60.	 Elyada, E. et al. Cross-species single-cell analysis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma 
reveals antigen-presenting cancer-associated fibroblasts. Cancer Discov. 9, 1102–1123 
(2019).
61.	
Friedman, G. et al. Cancer-associated fibroblast compositions change with breast cancer 
progression linking the ratio of 100A4+ and PDPN+ CAFs to clinical outcome. Nat. Cancer 
1, 692–708 (2020).
62.	 Kerdidani, D. et al. Lung tumor MHCII immunity depends on in situ antigen presentation 
by fibroblasts. J. Exp. Med. 219, e20210815 (2022).
63.	 DeLeon-Pennell, K. Y., Barker, T. H. & Lindsey, M. L. Fibroblasts: the arbiters of 
extracellular matrix remodeling. Matrix Biol. 91–92, 1–7 (2020).
64.	 Lu, P., Takai, K., Weaver, V. M. & Werb, Z. Extracellular matrix degradation and remodeling 
in development and disease. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 3, a005058 (2011).
65.	 Valencia, X. et al. Cadherin-11 provides specific cellular adhesion between fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes. J. Exp. Med. 200, 1673–1679 (2004).
66.	 Eckes, B. et al. Mechanical tension and integrin ɑ2β1 regulate fibroblast functions.  
J. Investig. Dermatol. Symp. Proc. 11, 66–72 (2006).
67.	
Li, B. & Wang, J. H. Fibroblasts and myofibroblasts in wound healing: force generation 
and measurement. J. Tissue Viability 20, 108–120 (2011).
68.	 Levick, J. R. & McDonald, J. N. Fluid movement across synovium in healthy joints: role of 
synovial fluid macromolecules. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 54, 417–423 (1995).
69.	 Gretz, J. E., Anderson, A. O. & Shaw, S. Cords, channels, corridors and conduits: critical 
architectural elements facilitating cell interactions in the lymph node cortex. Immunol. 
Rev. 156, 11–24 (1997).
70.	 Astarita, J. L. et al. The CLEC-2–podoplanin axis controls fibroblastic reticular cell 
contractility and lymph node microarchitecture. Nat. Immunol. 16, 75–84 (2015).
71.	
Desmouliere, A., Chaponnier, C. & Gabbiani, G. Tissue repair, contraction, and the 
myofibroblast. Wound Repair Regen. 13, 7–12 (2005).
72.	 Distler, J. H. W. et al. Shared and distinct mechanisms of fibrosis. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 15, 
705–730 (2019).
73.	 Zeisberg, M. & Kalluri, R. Cellular mechanisms of tissue fibrosis. 1. Common and 
organ-specific mechanisms associated with tissue fibrosis. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 
304, C216–C225 (2013).
74.	 Tolboom, T. C. et al. Invasive properties of fibroblast-like synoviocytes: correlation with 
growth characteristics and expression of MMP-1, MMP-3, and MMP-10. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 
61, 975–980 (2002).
75.	 Tunyogi-Csapo, M. et al. Cytokine-controlled RANKL and osteoprotegerin expression by 
human and mouse synovial fibroblasts: fibroblast-mediated pathologic bone resorption. 
Arthritis Rheum. 58, 2397–2408 (2008).
76.	 Gregorieff, A. et al. Expression pattern of Wnt signaling components in the adult 
intestine. Gastroenterology 129, 626–638 (2005).
77.	
McCarthy, N. et al. Distinct mesenchymal cell populations generate the essential 
intestinal BMP signaling gradient. Cell Stem Cell 26, 391–402.e395 (2020).
78.	 Brugger, M. D., Valenta, T., Fazilaty, H., Hausmann, G. & Basler, K. Distinct populations  
of crypt-associated fibroblasts act as signaling hubs to control colon homeostasis.  
PLoS Biol. 18, e3001032 (2020).
79.	 Liu, Y. et al. Hedgehog signaling reprograms hair follicle niche fibroblasts to a 
hyper-activated state. Dev. Cell 57, 1758–1775.e1757 (2022).
80.	 Wei, K. et al. Notch signalling drives synovial fibroblast identity and arthritis pathology. 
Nature 582, 259–264 (2020).
81.	
Rinn, J. L. et al. A dermal HOX transcriptional program regulates site-specific epidermal 
fate. Genes Dev. 22, 303–307 (2008).
82.	 Frank-Bertoncelj, M. et al. Epigenetically-driven anatomical diversity of synovial 
fibroblasts guides joint-specific fibroblast functions. Nat. Commun. 8, 14852 (2017).
83.	 Knosp, W. M., Scott, V., Bachinger, H. P. & Stadler, H. S. HOXA13 regulates the expression 
of bone morphogenetic proteins 2 and 7 to control distal limb morphogenesis. 
Development 131, 4581–4592 (2004).
84.	 Dieu-Nosjean, M. C., Goc, J., Giraldo, N. A., Sautes-Fridman, C. & Fridman, W. H.  
Tertiary lymphoid structures in cancer and beyond. Trends Immunol. 35, 571–580 (2014).
85.	 Barone, F. et al. Stromal fibroblasts in tertiary lymphoid structures: a novel target in 
chronic inflammation. Front. Immunol. 7, 477 (2016).
86.	 Nayar, S. et al. Immunofibroblasts are pivotal drivers of tertiary lymphoid structure 
formation and local pathology. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 116, 13490–13497 (2019).
87.	
Manzo, A. et al. Systematic microanatomical analysis of CXCL13 and CCL21 in situ 
production and progressive lymphoid organization in rheumatoid synovitis. Eur. J. 
Immunol. 35, 1347–1359 (2005).
88.	 Pitzalis, C., Jones, G. W., Bombardieri, M. & Jones, S. A. Ectopic lymphoid-like structures 
in infection, cancer and autoimmunity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 447–462 (2014).
89.	 Kobayashi, I. & Ziff, M. Electron microscopic studies of the cartilage-pannus junction in 
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 18, 475–483 (1975).
90.	 Kuhn, C. & McDonald, J. A. The roles of the myofibroblast in idiopathic pulmonary 
fibrosis. Ultrastructural and immunohistochemical features of sites of active extracellular 
matrix synthesis. Am. J. Pathol. 138, 1257–1265 (1991).
91.	
Rodriguez, A. B. et al. Immune mechanisms orchestrate tertiary lymphoid structures in 
tumors via cancer-associated fibroblasts. Cell Rep. 36, 109422 (2021).
92.	 Zhang, Y. et al. CCL19-producing fibroblasts promote tertiary lymphoid structure 
formation enhancing anti-tumor IgG response in colorectal cancer liver metastasis. 
Cancer Cell 42, 1370–1385.e9 (2024).
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
352
Review article
93.	 Yang, C. Y. et al. Trapping of naive lymphocytes triggers rapid growth and remodeling 
of the fibroblast network in reactive murine lymph nodes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 
E109–E118 (2014).
94.	 Hecker, L., Jagirdar, R., Jin, T. & Thannickal, V. J. Reversible differentiation of 
myofibroblasts by MyoD. Exp. Cell Res. 317, 1914–1921 (2011).
95.	 Garrison, G. et al. Reversal of myofibroblast differentiation by prostaglandin E2. Am. J. 
Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 48, 550–558 (2013).
96.	 Plikus, M. V. et al. Regeneration of fat cells from myofibroblasts during wound healing. 
Science 355, 748–752 (2017).
97.	
Filer, A. & Buckley, C. D. et al. in Rheumatology (ed. Hochberg, M. C.) 1–7 (Elsevier, 2023).
98.	 Mizoguchi, F. et al. Functionally distinct disease-associated fibroblast subsets in 
rheumatoid arthritis. Nat. Commun. 9, 789 (2018).
99.	 Croft, A. P. et al. Distinct fibroblast subsets drive inflammation and damage in arthritis. 
Nature 570, 246–251 (2019).
100.	 Donlin, L. T. et al. Methods for high-dimensional analysis of cells dissociated from 
cryopreserved synovial tissue. Arthritis Res. Ther. 20, 139 (2018).
101.	 Buechler, M. B. et al. Cross-tissue organization of the fibroblast lineage. Nature 593, 
575–579 (2021).
102.	 Armaka, M. et al. Single-cell multimodal analysis identifies common regulatory programs 
in synovial fibroblasts of rheumatoid arthritis patients and modeled TNF-driven arthritis. 
Genome Med. 14, 78 (2022).
103.	 Mueller, A. A. et al. Wnt signaling drives stromal inflammation in inflammatory arthritis. 
Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.01.06.631510 (2025).
104.	 MacLauchlan, S. et al. Genetic deficiency of Wnt5a diminishes disease severity in a 
murine model of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res. Ther. 19, 166 (2017).
105.	 Lewis, M. J. et al. Molecular portraits of early rheumatoid arthritis identify clinical and 
treatment response phenotypes. Cell Rep. 28, 2455–2470.e2455 (2019).
106.	 Faust, H. J. et al. Adipocyte associated glucocorticoid signaling regulates normal 
fibroblast function which is lost in inflammatory arthritis. Nat. Commun. 15, 9859 (2024).
107.	 Rauber, S. et al. CD200+ fibroblasts form a pro-resolving mesenchymal network in 
arthritis. Nat. Immunol. 25, 682–692 (2024).
108.	 Korsunsky, I. et al. Cross-tissue, single-cell stromal atlas identifies shared pathological 
fibroblast phenotypes in four chronic inflammatory diseases. Med 3, 481–518.e14 (2022).
109.	 Tian, L., Chen, F. & Macosko, E. Z. The expanding vistas of spatial transcriptomics.  
Nat. Biotechnol. 41, 773–782 (2023).
110.	 Lake, B. B. et al. An atlas of healthy and injured cell states and niches in the human 
kidney. Nature 619, 585–594 (2023).
111.	 Wu, H. et al. High resolution spatial profiling of kidney injury and repair using RNA 
hybridization-based in situ sequencing. Nat. Commun. 15, 1396 (2024).
112.	 Madissoon, E. et al. A spatially resolved atlas of the human lung characterizes a 
gland-associated immune niche. Nat. Genet. 55, 66–77 (2023).
113.	 Vannan, A. et al. Spatial transcriptomics identifies molecular niche dysregulation 
associated with distal lung remodeling in pulmonary fibrosis. Nat. Genet. 57, 647–658 
(2025).
114.	 Fawkner-Corbett, D. et al. Spatiotemporal analysis of human intestinal development at 
single-cell resolution. Cell 184, 810–826.e823 (2021).
115.	 Qi, J. et al. Single-cell and spatial analysis reveal interaction of FAP+ fibroblasts and SPP1+ 
macrophages in colorectal cancer. Nat. Commun. 13, 1742 (2022).
116.	 Reis Nisa, P. et al. Spatial programming of fibroblasts promotes resolution of tissue 
inflammation through immune cell exclusion. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/ 
2024.09.20.614064 (2024).
117.	 Periyakoil, P. K. et al. Deep topic modeling of spatial transcriptomics in the rheumatoid 
arthritis synovium identifies distinct classes of ectopic lymphoid structures. Preprint at 
bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.01.08.631928 (2025).
118.	 Bhamidipati, K. et al. Spatial patterning of fibroblast TGFβ signaling underlies  
treatment resistance in rheumatoid arthritis. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/ 
2025.03.14.642821 (2025).
119.	 Vickovic, S. et al. Three-dimensional spatial transcriptomics uncovers cell type 
localizations in the human rheumatoid arthritis synovium. Commun. Biol. 5, 129 (2022).
120.	 Smith, M. H. et al. Drivers of heterogeneity in synovial fibroblasts in rheumatoid arthritis. 
Nat. Immunol. 24, 1200–1210 (2023).
121.	 Zheng, L. et al. ITGA5+ synovial fibroblasts orchestrate proinflammatory niche formation 
by remodelling the local immune microenvironment in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann. Rheum. 
Dis. 84, 232–252 (2025).
122.	 Zhao, S. et al. Effect of JAK inhibition on the induction of proinflammatory 
HLA–DR+CD90+ rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts by interferon-γ. Arthritis 
Rheumatol. 74, 441–452 (2022).
123.	 Seibl, R. et al. Expression and regulation of Toll-like receptor 2 in rheumatoid arthritis 
synovium. Am. J. Pathol. 162, 1221–1227 (2003).
124.	 Kim, K. W. et al. Human rheumatoid synovial fibroblasts promote osteoclastogenic 
activity by activating RANKL via TLR-2 and TLR-4 activation. Immunol. Lett. 110, 54–64 
(2007).
125.	 Goh, F. G. & Midwood, K. S. Intrinsic danger: activation of Toll-like receptors in 
rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology 51, 7–23 (2012).
126.	 Chabaud, M., Fossiez, F., Taupin, J. L. & Miossec, P. Enhancing effect of IL-17 on 
IL-1-induced IL-6 and leukemia inhibitory factor production by rheumatoid arthritis 
synoviocytes and its regulation by Th2 cytokines. J. Immunol. 161, 409–414 (1998).
127.	 Zrioual, S. et al. Genome-wide comparison between IL-17A- and IL-17F-induced effects  
in human rheumatoid arthritis synoviocytes. J. Immunol. 182, 3112–3120 (2009).
128.	 Slowikowski, K. et al. CUX1 and IκBζ (NFKBIZ) mediate the synergistic inflammatory 
response to TNF and IL-17A in stromal fibroblasts. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 
5532–5541 (2020).
129.	 Hartupee, J., Liu, C., Novotny, M., Li, X. & Hamilton, T. IL-17 enhances chemokine gene 
expression through mRNA stabilization. J. Immunol. 179, 4135–4141 (2007).
130.	 MacNaul, K. L., Chartrain, N., Lark, M., Tocci, M. J. & Hutchinson, N. I. Discoordinate 
expression of stromelysin, collagenase, and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 in 
rheumatoid human synovial fibroblasts. Synergistic effects of interleukin-1 and tumor 
necrosis factor-ɑ on stromelysin expression. J. Biol. Chem. 265, 17238–17245 (1990).
131.	 Ainola, M. M. et al. Pannus invasion and cartilage degradation in rheumatoid arthritis: 
involvement of MMP-3 and interleukin-1β. Clin. Exp. Rheumatol. 23, 644–650 (2005).
132.	 Schafer, S. et al. IL-11 is a crucial determinant of cardiovascular fibrosis. Nature 552, 
110–115 (2017).
133.	 Kuo, D. et al. HBEGF+ macrophages in rheumatoid arthritis induce fibroblast invasiveness. 
Sci. Transl. Med. 11, eaau8587 (2019).
134.	 Yan, M. et al. ETS1 governs pathological tissue-remodeling programs in 
disease-associated fibroblasts. Nat. Immunol. 23, 1330–1341 (2022).
135.	 Nguyen, H. N. et al. Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) receptor amplifies pathogenic 
activation of fibroblasts in lung fibrosis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 121, e2401899121 
(2024).
136.	 Xiao, Y. & MacRae, I. J. Toward a comprehensive view of microRNA biology. Mol. Cell 75, 
666–668 (2019).
137.	 Trenkmann, M. et al. Tumor necrosis factor α-induced microRNA-18a activates 
rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts through a feedback loop in NF-κB signaling. 
Arthritis Rheum. 65, 916–927 (2013).
138.	 Stanczyk, J. et al. Altered expression of microRNA in synovial fibroblasts and synovial 
tissue in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 58, 1001–1009 (2008).
139.	 Nakasa, T. et al. Expression of microRNA-146 in rheumatoid arthritis synovial tissue. 
Arthritis Rheum. 58, 1284–1292 (2008).
140.	 Long, L. et al. Upregulated microRNA-155 expression in peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells and fibroblast-like synoviocytes in rheumatoid arthritis. J. Immunol. 
Res. 2013, 296139 (2013).
141.	 Saferding, V. et al. MicroRNA-146a governs fibroblast activation and joint pathology in 
arthritis. J. Autoimmun. 82, 74–84 (2017).
142.	 Churov, A. V., Oleinik, E. K. & Knip, M. MicroRNAs in rheumatoid arthritis: altered 
expression and diagnostic potential. Autoimmun. Rev. 14, 1029–1037 (2015).
143.	 Iborra, M., Bernuzzi, F., Invernizzi, P. & Danese, S. MicroRNAs in autoimmunity and 
inflammatory bowel disease: crucial regulators in immune response. Autoimmun. Rev. 11, 
305–314 (2012).
144.	 O’Reilly, S. MicroRNAs in fibrosis: opportunities and challenges. Arthritis Res. Ther. 18, 11 
(2016).
145.	 Aprelikova, O. & Green, J. E. MicroRNA regulation in cancer-associated fibroblasts. 
Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 61, 231–237 (2012).
146.	 Eckes, B. et al. Fibroblast-matrix interactions in wound healing and fibrosis. Matrix Biol. 
19, 325–332 (2000).
147.	 Janmey, P. A., Fletcher, D. A. & Reinhart-King, C. A. Stiffness sensing by cells. Physiol. Rev. 
100, 695–724 (2020).
148.	 Lee, D. M. et al. Cadherin-11 in synovial lining formation and pathology in arthritis. 
Science 315, 1006–1010 (2007).
149.	 Chang, S. K. et al. Cadherin-11 regulates fibroblast inflammation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 108, 8402–8407 (2011).
150.	 Vandooren, B. et al. Tumor necrosis factor ɑ drives cadherin 11 expression in rheumatoid 
inflammation. Arthritis Rheum. 58, 3051–3062 (2008).
151.	 Schneider, D. J. et al. Cadherin-11 contributes to pulmonary fibrosis: potential role in 
TGF-β production and epithelial to mesenchymal transition. FASEB J. 26, 503–512  
(2012).
152.	 Wu, M. et al. Identification of cadherin 11 as a mediator of dermal fibrosis and possible 
role in systemic sclerosis. Arthritis Rheumatol. 66, 1010–1021 (2014).
153.	 Schroer, A. K. et al. Cadherin-11 blockade reduces inflammation-driven fibrotic 
remodeling and improves outcomes after myocardial infarction. JCI Insight 4, e131545 
(2019).
154.	 Stanford, S. M. et al. Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase α–mediated enhancement 
of rheumatoid synovial fibroblast signaling and promotion of arthritis in mice.  
Arthritis Rheumatol. 68, 359–369 (2016).
155.	 Sendo, S. et al. Clustering of phosphatase RPTPɑ promotes Src signaling and the 
arthritogenic action of synovial fibroblasts. Sci. Signal. 16, eabn8668 (2023).
156.	 Lo, C.-M., Wang, H.-B., Dembo, M. & Wang, Y.-l. Cell movement is guided by the rigidity  
of the substrate. Biophys. J. 79, 144–152 (2000).
157.	 Gu, Z. et al. Soft matrix is a natural stimulator for cellular invasiveness. Mol. Biol. Cell 25, 
457–469 (2014).
158.	 Liu, F. et al. Mechanosignaling through YAP and TAZ drives fibroblast activation and 
fibrosis. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol. 308, L344–L357 (2015).
159.	 Southern, B. D. et al. Matrix-driven myosin II mediates the pro-fibrotic fibroblast 
phenotype. J. Biol. Chem. 291, 6083–6095 (2016).
160.	 Cambré, I. et al. Mechanical strain determines the site-specific localization of 
inflammation and tissue damage in arthritis. Nat. Commun. 9, 4613 (2018).
161.	 Müller-Ladner, U. et al. Synovial fibroblasts of patients with rheumatoid arthritis attach  
to and invade normal human cartilage when engrafted into SCID mice. Am. J. Pathol. 
149, 1607–1615 (1996).
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
353
Review article
162.	 Bartok, B. & Firestein, G. S. Fibroblast-like synoviocytes: key effector cells in rheumatoid 
arthritis. Immunol. Rev. 233, 233–255 (2010).
163.	 Whitaker, J. W. et al. An imprinted rheumatoid arthritis methylome signature reflects 
pathogenic phenotype. Genome Med. 5, 40 (2013).
164.	 Lefevre, S. et al. Synovial fibroblasts spread rheumatoid arthritis to unaffected joints.  
Nat. Med. 15, 1414–1420 (2009).
165.	 Orange, D. E. et al. RNA identification of PRIME cells predicting rheumatoid arthritis 
flares. N. Engl. J. Med. 383, 218–228 (2020).
166.	 Nile, C. J., Read, R. C., Akil, M., Duff, G. W. & Wilson, A. G. Methylation status of a single 
CpG site in the IL6 promoter is related to IL6 messenger RNA levels and rheumatoid 
arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 58, 2686–2693 (2008).
167.	 Karouzakis, E. et al. DNA methylation regulates the expression of CXCL12 in rheumatoid 
arthritis synovial fibroblasts. Genes. Immun. 12, 643–652 (2011).
168.	 Nakano, K., Whitaker, J. W., Boyle, D. L., Wang, W. & Firestein, G. S. DNA methylome 
signature in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 72, 110–117 (2013).
169.	 de la Rica, L. et al. Identification of novel markers in rheumatoid arthritis through 
integrated analysis of DNA methylation and microRNA expression. J. Autoimmun. 41, 
6–16 (2013).
170.	 Araki, Y. et al. Histone methylation and STAT-3 differentially regulate interleukin-6-
induced matrix metalloproteinase gene activation in rheumatoid arthritis synovial 
fibroblasts. Arthritis Rheumatol. 68, 1111–1123 (2016).
171.	 Lee, A. et al. Tumor necrosis factor ɑ induces sustained signaling and a prolonged and 
unremitting inflammatory response in rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts. Arthritis 
Rheum. 65, 928–938 (2013).
172.	 Loh, C. et al. TNF-induced inflammatory genes escape repression in fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes: transcriptomic and epigenomic analysis. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 78, 1205–1214 
(2019).
173.	 Sohn, C. et al. Prolonged tumor necrosis factor alpha primes fibroblast-like synoviocytes 
in a gene-specific manner by altering chromatin. Arthritis Rheumatol. 67, 86–95 (2015).
174.	 Friščić, J. et al. The complement system drives local inflammatory tissue priming  
by metabolic reprogramming of synovial fibroblasts. Immunity 54, 1002–1021.e10  
(2021).
175.	 Weinand, K. et al. The chromatin landscape of pathogenic transcriptional cell states in 
rheumatoid arthritis. Nat. Commun. 15, 4650 (2024).
176.	 Ai, R. et al. Comprehensive epigenetic landscape of rheumatoid arthritis fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes. Nat. Commun. 9, 1921 (2018).
177.	 Ai, R. et al. DNA methylome signature in synoviocytes from patients with early 
rheumatoid arthritis compared to synoviocytes from patients with longstanding 
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheumatol. 67, 1978–1980 (2015).
178.	 Karouzakis, E. et al. Analysis of early changes in DNA methylation in synovial fibroblasts 
of RA patients before diagnosis. Sci. Rep. 8, 7370 (2018).
179.	 Ai, R. et al. Joint-specific DNA methylation and transcriptome signatures in rheumatoid 
arthritis identify distinct pathogenic processes. Nat. Commun. 7, 11849 (2016).
180.	 Hammaker, D. et al. Joint location–specific JAK-STAT signaling in rheumatoid arthritis 
fibroblast-like synoviocytes. ACR Open Rheumatol. 1, 640–648 (2019).
181.	 Carter, P. J. & Lazar, G. A. Next generation antibody drugs: pursuit of the ‘high-hanging 
fruit. Nat. Rev. Drug. Discov. 17, 197–223 (2018).
182.	 Cappell, K. M. & Kochenderfer, J. N. Long-term outcomes following CAR T cell therapy: 
what we know so far. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 20, 359–371 (2023).
183.	 van de Donk, N. & Zweegman, S. T-cell-engaging bispecific antibodies in cancer. Lancet 
402, 142–158 (2023).
184.	 Fenis, A., Demaria, O., Gauthier, L., Vivier, E. & Narni-Mancinelli, E. New immune cell 
engagers for cancer immunotherapy. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 24, 471–486 (2024).
185.	 Busek, P., Mateu, R., Zubal, M., Kotackova, L. & Sedo, A. Targeting fibroblast activation 
protein in cancer — prospects and caveats. Front. Biosci. 23, 1933–1968 (2018).
186.	 Xin, L. et al. Fibroblast activation protein-ɑ as a target in the bench-to-bedside diagnosis 
and treatment of tumors: a narrative review. Front. Oncol. 11, 648187 (2021).
187.	 Scott, A. M. et al. A phase I dose-escalation study of sibrotuzumab in patients with 
advanced or metastatic fibroblast activation protein-positive cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 9, 
1639–1647 (2003).
188.	 McConathy, J. et al. 671P LuMIERE: a phase I/II study evaluating safety, dosimetry, and 
preliminary activity of [177Lu]Lu-FAP-2286 in patients with advanced solid tumors.  
Ann. Oncol. 35, S526 (2024).
189.	 Shahvali, S., Rahiman, N., Jaafari, M. R. & Arabi, L. Targeting fibroblast activation protein 
(FAP): advances in CAR-T cell, antibody, and vaccine in cancer immunotherapy.  
Drug. Deliv. Transl. Res. 13, 2041–2056 (2023).
190.	 Chai, X. P. et al. Tumor-targeting efficacy of a BF211 prodrug through hydrolysis by 
fibroblast activation protein-ɑ. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 39, 415–424 (2018).
191.	 Cui, X. Y. et al. Covalent targeted radioligands potentiate radionuclide therapy. Nature 
630, 206–213 (2024).
192.	 Loureiro, L. R. et al. Immunotheranostic target modules for imaging and navigation of 
UniCAR T-cells to strike FAP-expressing cells and the tumor microenvironment. J. Exp. 
Clin. Cancer Res. 42, 341 (2023).
193.	 de Sostoa, J. et al. Targeting the tumor stroma with an oncolytic adenovirus secreting a 
fibroblast activation protein-targeted bispecific T-cell engager. J. Immunother. Cancer 7, 
19 (2019).
194.	 Hiltbrunner, S. et al. Local delivery of CAR T cells targeting fibroblast activation protein is 
safe in patients with pleural mesothelioma: first report of FAPME, a phase I clinical trial. 
Ann. Oncol. 32, 120–121 (2021).
195.	 Bocci, M. et al. In vivo activation of FAP-cleavable small molecule-drug conjugates 
for the targeted delivery of camptothecins and tubulin poisons to the tumor 
microenvironment. J. Control. Rel. 367, 779–790 (2024).
196.	 Aghajanian, H. et al. Targeting cardiac fibrosis with engineered T cells. Nature 573, 
430–433 (2019).
197.	 Rurik, J. G. et al. CAR T cells produced in vivo to treat cardiac injury. Science 375, 91–96 
(2022).
198.	 Dorst, D. N. et al. Targeting of fibroblast activation protein in rheumatoid arthritis 
patients: imaging and ex vivo photodynamic therapy. Rheumatology 61, 2999–3009 
(2022).
199.	 Mori, Y. et al. FAPI PET: fibroblast activation protein inhibitor use in oncologic and 
nononcologic disease. Radiology 306, e220749 (2023).
200.	Chavula, T., To, S. & Agarwal, S. K. Cadherin-11 and its role in tissue fibrosis. Cell Tissues 
Organs 212, 293–303 (2023).
201.	 Schett, G. et al. Advancements and challenges in CAR T cell therapy in autoimmune 
diseases. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 20, 531–544 (2024).
202.	Chung, J. B., Brudno, J. N., Borie, D. & Kochenderfer, J. N. Chimeric antigen receptor T cell 
therapy for autoimmune disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 24, 830–845 (2024).
203.	Michaelson, J. S. & Baeuerle, P. A. CD19-directed T cell-engaging antibodies for the 
treatment of autoimmune disease. J. Exp. Med. 221, e20240499 (2024).
204.	Shah, K. et al. Disrupting B and T-cell collaboration in autoimmune disease: T-cell 
engagers versus CAR T-cell therapy? Clin. Exp. Immunol. 217, 15–30 (2024).
205.	Parayath, N. N., Stephan, S. B., Koehne, A. L., Nelson, P. S. & Stephan, M. T.  
In vitro-transcribed antigen receptor mRNA nanocarriers for transient expression  
in circulating T cells in vivo. Nat. Commun. 11, 6080 (2020).
206.	Zhao, Y. et al. Multiple injections of electroporated autologous T cells expressing a 
chimeric antigen receptor mediate regression of human disseminated tumor. Cancer 
Res. 70, 9053–9061 (2010).
207.	 Bucci, L. et al. Bispecific T cell engager therapy for refractory rheumatoid arthritis.  
Nat. Med. 30, 1593–1601 (2024).
208.	Hagen, M. et al. BCMA-targeted T-cell-engager therapy for autoimmune disease. N. Engl. 
J. Med. 391, 867–869 (2024).
209.	Alexander, T., Kronke, J., Cheng, Q., Keller, U. & Kronke, G. Teclistamab-induced remission 
in refractory systemic lupus erythematosus. N. Engl. J. Med. 391, 864–866 (2024).
210.	 Heipertz, E. L. et al. Current perspectives on “off-the-shelf” allogeneic NK and CAR-NK  
cell therapies. Front. Immunol. 12, 732135 (2021).
211.	 Younesi, F. S., Miller, A. E., Barker, T. H., Rossi, F. M. V. & Hinz, B. Fibroblast and 
myofibroblast activation in normal tissue repair and fibrosis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 25, 
617–638 (2024).
212.	 Bhattacharya, M. & Ramachandran, P. Immunology of human fibrosis. Nat. Immunol. 24, 
1423–1433 (2023).
213.	 Zhao, M. et al. Targeting fibrosis, mechanisms and clinical trials. Signal. Transduct. 
Target. Ther. 7, 206 (2022).
214.	 Klein, K. et al. The bromodomain protein inhibitor I-BET151 suppresses expression of 
inflammatory genes and matrix degrading enzymes in rheumatoid arthritis synovial 
fibroblasts. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 75, 422–429 (2016).
215.	 Neidhart, M., Karouzakis, E., Jungel, A., Gay, R. E. & Gay, S. Inhibition of 
spermidine/spermine N1-acetyltransferase activity: a new therapeutic concept in 
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheumatol. 66, 1723–1733 (2014).
216.	 Kehrberg, R. J., Bhyravbhatla, N., Batra, S. K. & Kumar, S. Epigenetic regulation of 
cancer-associated fibroblast heterogeneity. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Rev. Cancer 1878, 
188901 (2023).
217.	 Ulukan, B., Sila Ozkaya, Y. & Zeybel, M. Advances in the epigenetics of fibroblast biology 
and fibrotic diseases. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 49, 102–109 (2019).
218.	 Liu, Y. et al. Epigenetics as a versatile regulator of fibrosis. J. Transl. Med. 21, 164  
(2023).
219.	 Fearon, U., Hanlon, M. M., Wade, S. M. & Fletcher, J. M. Altered metabolic pathways 
regulate synovial inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 197, 170–180 
(2019).
220.	Hu, Z. et al. Metabolic changes in fibroblast-like synoviocytes in rheumatoid arthritis: 
state of the art review. Front. Immunol. 15, 1250884 (2024).
221.	 Sahai, E. et al. A framework for advancing our understanding of cancer-associated 
fibroblasts. Nat. Rev. Cancer 20, 174–186 (2020).
222.	 Zhang, F. et al. Cancer associated fibroblasts and metabolic reprogramming: unraveling 
the intricate crosstalk in tumor evolution. J. Hematol. Oncol. 17, 80 (2024).
223.	 Hamanaka, R. B. & Mutlu, G. M. Metabolic requirements of pulmonary fibrosis: role of 
fibroblast metabolism. FEBS J. 288, 6331–6352 (2021).
224.	 Wang, S., Liang, Y. & Dai, C. Metabolic regulation of fibroblast activation and proliferation 
during organ fibrosis. Kidney Dis. 8, 115–125 (2022).
225.	 Noom, A., Sawitzki, B., Knaus, P. & Duda, G. N. A two-way street — cellular metabolism 
and myofibroblast contraction. NPJ Regen. Med. 9, 15 (2024).
226.	 Takahashi, S. et al. Glutaminase 1 plays a key role in the cell growth of fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res. Ther. 19, 76 (2017).
227.	 Song, G. et al. Inhibition of hexokinases holds potential as treatment strategy for 
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res. Ther. 21, 87 (2019).
228.	 Ahmed, S. et al. Dual inhibition of glycolysis and glutaminolysis for synergistic therapy  
of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res. Ther. 25, 176 (2023).
229.	 Garcia-Carbonell, R. et al. Critical role of glucose metabolism in rheumatoid arthritis 
fibroblast-like synoviocytes. Arthritis Rheumatol. 68, 1614–1626 (2016).
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | June 2025 | 336–354
354
Review article
230.	Koedderitzsch, K., Zezina, E., Li, L., Herrmann, M. & Biesemann, N. TNF induces glycolytic 
shift in fibroblast like synoviocytes via GLUT1 and HIF1A. Sci. Rep. 11, 19385 (2021).
231.	 Becker, L. M. et al. Epigenetic reprogramming of cancer-associated fibroblasts 
deregulates glucose metabolism and facilitates progression of breast cancer. Cell Rep. 
31, 107701 (2020).
232.	 Broz, M. T. et al. Metabolic targeting of cancer associated fibroblasts overcomes T-cell 
exclusion and chemoresistance in soft-tissue sarcomas. Nat. Commun. 15, 2498 (2024).
233.	Cho, S. J., Moon, J. S., Lee, C. M., Choi, A. M. & Stout-Delgado, H. W. Glucose transporter 
1-dependent glycolysis is increased during aging-related lung fibrosis, and phloretin 
inhibits lung fibrosis. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 56, 521–531 (2017).
234.	Yin, X. et al. Hexokinase 2 couples glycolysis with the profibrotic actions of TGF-β. Sci. 
Signal. 12, eaax4067 (2019).
235.	 Wagner, A. et al. Metabolic modeling of single Th17 cells reveals regulators of 
autoimmunity. Cell 184, 4168–4185.e21 (2021).
236.	Huynh, N. C.-N. et al. Oncostatin M-driven macrophage-fibroblast circuits as a drug 
target in autoimmune arthritis. Inflamm. Regen. 44, 36 (2024).
237.	 Tsaltskan, V. & Firestein, G. S. Targeting fibroblast-like synoviocytes in rheumatoid 
arthritis. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 67, 102304 (2022).
238.	Finch, R. et al. Op0224 results of a phase 2 study of Rg6125, an anti-cadherin-11 
monoclonal antibody, in rheumatoid arthritis patients with an inadequate response  
to anti-TNFalpha therapy. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 78, 189–189 (2019).
239.	 Scheller, J., Grötzinger, J. & Rose‐John, S. Updating interleukin‐6 classic‐and trans‐signaling. 
Signal. Transduct. 6, 240–259 (2006).
240.	Choy, E. H. et al. Translating IL-6 biology into effective treatments. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 
16, 335–345 (2020).
241.	 Rose-John, S., Jenkins, B. J., Garbers, C., Moll, J. M. & Scheller, J. Targeting IL-6 trans-
signalling: past, present and future prospects. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 23, 666–681 (2023).
242.	 Ruderman, E. M. Rheumatoid arthritis: IL-6 inhibition in RA-deja vu all over again?  
Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 11, 321–322 (2015).
243.	Danese, S. et al. Randomised trial and open-label extension study of an anti-interleukin-6 
antibody in Crohn’s disease (ANDANTE I and II). Gut 68, 40–48 (2019).
244.	Haringman, J. J. et al. A randomized controlled trial with an anti-CCL2 (anti-monocyte 
chemotactic protein 1) monoclonal antibody in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. 
Arthritis Rheum. 54, 2387–2392 (2006).
245.	 Vergunst, C. E. et al. Modulation of CCR2 in rheumatoid arthritis: a double-blind, 
randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Arthritis Rheum. 58, 1931–1939 (2008).
246.	Szekanecz, Z. & Koch, A. E. Successes and failures of chemokine-pathway targeting in 
rheumatoid arthritis. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 12, 5–13 (2016).
247.	 Cambier, S., Gouwy, M. & Proost, P. The chemokines CXCL8 and CXCL12: molecular and 
functional properties, role in disease and efforts towards pharmacological intervention. 
Cell Mol. Immunol. 20, 217–251 (2023).
248.	Kurowska-Stolarska, M. & Alivernini, S. Synovial tissue macrophages in joint homeostasis, 
rheumatoid arthritis and disease remission. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 18, 384–397 (2022).
249.	Hitchon, C. A. & El-Gabalawy, H. S. The synovium in rheumatoid arthritis.  
Open Rheumatol. J. 5, 107–114 (2011).
250.	Raychaudhuri, S. et al. Five amino acids in three HLA proteins explain most of the 
association between MHC and seropositive rheumatoid arthritis. Nat. Genet. 44, 291–296 
(2012).
251.	 Nielen, M. M. et al. Specific autoantibodies precede the symptoms of rheumatoid 
arthritis: a study of serial measurements in blood donors. Arthritis Rheum. 50, 380–386 
(2004).
252.	 Firestein, G. S. & McInnes, I. B. Immunopathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. Immunity 
46, 183–196 (2017).
253.	Snir, O. et al. Identification and functional characterization of T cells reactive to 
citrullinated vimentin in HLA-DRB1*0401-positive humanized mice and rheumatoid 
arthritis patients. Arthritis Rheum. 63, 2873–2883 (2011).
254.	Moon, J. S. et al. Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells target citrullinated antigens in rheumatoid 
arthritis. Nat. Commun. 14, 319 (2023).
255.	 Rao, D. A. et al. Pathologically expanded peripheral T helper cell subset drives B cells  
in rheumatoid arthritis. Nature 542, 110–114 (2017).
256.	Donado, C. A. et al. Granzyme K activates the entire complement cascade. Nature 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-08713-9 (2025).
257.	 Kongpachith, S. et al. Affinity maturation of the anti-citrullinated protein antibody 
paratope drives epitope spreading and polyreactivity in rheumatoid arthritis.  
Arthritis Rheumatol. 71, 507–517 (2019).
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the members of the Brenner laboratory for helpful discussions. A.E.Z. 
received grant support from the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) (F30AI174699, 
T32GM007753 and T32GM144273). A.A.M. received grant support from the NIH 
(K08AR083513, T32AR007530 and P30AR070253) and the Rheumatology Research 
Foundation. M.B.B. received grant support from the NIH (R01AR0637039 and P01AI148102).
Author contributions
The authors contributed equally to all aspects of the article.
Competing interests
M.B.B. is on the scientific advisory board of GSK and Moderna, is a consultant to 4F0 Ventures 
and is a founder of Mestag Therapeutics. However, this Review does not discuss any of the 
therapeutics of their pipelines.
Additional information
Peer review information Nature Reviews Rheumatology thanks George Kalliolias,  
Samuel Kemble and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the  
peer review of this work.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this 
article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author 
self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the 
terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
© Springer Nature Limited 2025

===== Matta2025_NatRevRheumatol_ChondrocytePopulations+scRNAseq =====

Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | August 2025 | 465–477
465
nature reviews rheumatology
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41584-025-01275-0
Review article
 Check for updates
Insights into chondrocyte 
populations in cartilaginous 
tissues at the single-cell level
Csaba Matta 
  1,12, Roland Takács 
  1,12, Mona Dvir-Ginzberg 
  2, Stephen M. Richardson 
  3, Karoliina Pelttari 
  4, 
Girish Pattappa 
  5, Makarand V. Risbud 
  6,7 & Ali Mobasheri 
  8,9,10,11 
Abstract
Chondrocyte biology is being revolutionized by single-cell multi-omics 
technologies, revealing cellular heterogeneity within cartilaginous 
tissues. Although past research has implicated cellular heterogeneity  
in chondrocyte populations, advances over the past decade in single- 
cell transcriptomics now enable a more granular, functionally 
annotated classification of chondrocyte subtypes. These analyses 
provide crucial insights into the role of these subtypes in cartilage 
formation, maintenance and disease progression. Chondrocyte 
populations are implicated in tissue homeostasis, pathogenesis and 
responses to external stimuli, including pro-inflammatory mediators 
and novel therapeutic agents. This knowledge opens pathways for 
developing targeted treatments for diseases such as osteoarthritis 
and intervertebral disc disease. Insights into the molecular signatures 
of disease-critical chondrocyte populations provide a foundation for 
biomarker discovery and therapeutic targeting, and there are exciting 
opportunities for leveraging these findings to progress regenerative 
therapies. Spatial and temporal profiling of cellular markers, behaviour 
and metabolic activity will enhance understanding of disease 
pathogenesis and chondrosenescence and could possibly enable 
early intervention for osteoarthritis, thereby preventing irreversible 
joint damage. Future research must integrate advanced single-cell 
techniques with computational modelling to unravel the dynamic 
interplay of chondrocyte populations. These efforts could transform 
precision medicine in rheumatology, addressing the unmet clinical 
needs in cartilage-related diseases.
Sections
Introduction
Cell phenotype and 
phenotypic markers at 
the single-cell level
Ageing, inflammation and 
chondrosenescence
Future prospects
Conclusions
A full list of affiliations appears at the end of the paper.
 e-mail: ali.mobasheri@oulu.fi
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | August 2025 | 465–477
466
Review article
populations that are associated with both healthy and diseased tissue, 
providing insights into their specific roles in cartilage formation and 
maintenance14. Defining the cell populations present in different types 
of cartilage, which we summarize in this Review article, is indispen-
sable for future cartilage tissue engineering strategies, and provides 
important insights related to pathogenesis. Such insights are critical for 
identifying potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets for OA, IVDD 
and other cartilage-related disorders15. Moreover, integrating spatial 
transcriptomics and subcellular proteomics could provide a more 
comprehensive view of chondrocyte behaviour within their native 
microenvironment. Mapping the spatial distribution of chondrocyte 
subtypes and their associated signalling pathways in developing (Box 1 
and Fig. 1) and mature cartilage will improve understanding of how 
these cells contribute to cartilage homeostasis and the progression of 
degenerative diseases and could also facilitate development of targeted 
therapies for these conditions.
In this Review we provide a comprehensive update on chondrocyte 
populations in cartilaginous tissues at the single-cell level in health, 
disease and senescence, and highlight the applications for these tech-
nologies for deciphering the phenotypic cues that could be developed 
into sensitive, specific biomarkers and therapeutic targets for cartilage 
disorders in synovial joints or in the IVD.
Cell phenotype and phenotypic markers at the 
single-cell level
Understanding the diversity of cell phenotypes in joint and spinal tis-
sues is crucial for interpreting their roles in development, homeostasis 
and disease. Notably, in addition to chondrocytes, synoviocytes and 
synovial fibroblasts have emerged as central regulators of synovitis in 
OA, interacting dynamically with chondrocytes to propagate inflamma-
tory mediators and cartilage-degrading pathways under mechanical 
or metabolic stress16. This crosstalk exacerbates disease progression, 
positioning synoviocytes and synovial fibroblasts as important ther-
apeutic targets alongside chondrocytes. Over the past decade, the 
integration of high-resolution techniques such as scRNA-seq, spatial 
transcriptomics and proteomics has enabled unprecedented insight 
into cell populations across cartilaginous tissues. This section explores 
how these tools have revealed tissue-specific heterogeneity and phe-
notypic markers in hyaline cartilage, the meniscus and the IVD, with 
emphasis on both healthy and pathological contexts.
Cellular complexity in hyaline cartilage
The morphology of chondrocytes within hyaline cartilage varies 
depending on their function and location within the tissue. In articu-
lar cartilage, the characteristic roundish cell morphology is predomi-
nantly observed in the chondrocytes of the middle layer, where cells 
are sparse. These cells are embedded in an ECM that is rich in proteo-
glycans and collagen type II, which aids in the absorption and distri-
bution of mechanical compressions applied to the joint. By contrast, 
chondrocytes in the deep zone exhibit an enlarged pre-hypertrophic or 
hypertrophic appearance and are often arranged in columns oriented 
perpendicular to the surface. In the superficial layer, which faces the 
synovial fluid of the joint space and shields the deeper layers from 
shear stress, chondrocytes are abundant, have a flattened morphol-
ogy and are tangentially oriented relative to the cartilage surface, as 
demonstrated by 3D synchrotron imaging of the intact tissue11,17 (Fig. 2).
In contrast to other cell types, such as mesenchymal stem cells 
(MSCs), which are recognized by the presence or absence of a defined 
set of surface markers18, there is no widely acknowledged set of surface 
Key points
	
• Musculoskeletal disorders, particularly osteoarthritis and 
intervertebral disc disease, remain therapeutic challenges owing to a 
focus on symptom management rather than mechanistic targeting.
	
• Single-cell RNA sequencing analysis has identified distinct 
chondrocyte subpopulations in healthy and diseased tissues, 
overturning the paradigm of chondrocyte homogeneity.
	
• Cellular diversity mapping through single-cell transcriptomics 
enables molecular stratification of cartilage degeneration, which forms 
the basis for disease-modifying therapies.
	
• Integrating spatial transcriptomics and subcellular proteomics will 
reveal microenvironment-specific chondrocyte behaviours that are 
critical for the maintenance of tissue homeostasis, which could better 
explain how chondrocyte subtypes contribute to tissue homeostasis.
	
• Machine learning-driven analysis of multi-omics data accelerates 
the discovery of network-level therapeutic targets for personalized 
treatment strategies.
Introduction
The increasing prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders, particularly 
osteoarthritis (OA) and intervertebral disc (IVD) degeneration (IVDD), 
represents a considerable public health challenge globally1. These 
conditions not only lead to chronic pain and disability but also impose 
a substantial economic burden on healthcare systems2. Current treat-
ment options focus on symptomatic relief rather than addressing the 
underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. As the population ages, 
the incidence of these musculoskeletal disorders is expected to rise, 
necessitating a deeper understanding of their underlying mechanisms 
to develop effective therapeutic strategies3.
Chondrocytes, the most abundant and functionally important cell 
type in cartilage, are essential for skeletal development and muscu-
loskeletal function4–6. Chondrocyte phenotypes in developmental 
cartilage disorders (such as chondrodysplasia) and cartilage following 
traumatic joint injuries have been reviewed elsewhere7,8; however, 
their specific roles in developmental cartilage disorders remain poorly 
understood. This Review focuses on how single-cell technologies 
are unravelling chondrocyte heterogeneity in prevalent degenera-
tive disorders such as OA and IVDD, with implications for biomarker 
discovery and targeted therapies. Chondrocyte phenotype is deter-
mined and maintained by the local physio-chemical microenviron-
ment provided by the cartilage-specific extracellular matrix (ECM)9. 
Previous conceptions of cartilage structure portrayed chondrocytes 
as nearly uniformly distributed within the ECM, with limited appre-
ciation for their spatial organization or functional diversity. Over the 
past two decades, imaging-based studies have revealed heterogeneity 
in cell morphology and distribution, including fibroblast-like chon-
drocytes with cytoplasmic processes, particularly in non-degenerate 
cartilage10–12. However, advances over the past 5–10 years in multi-omics 
approaches, which integrate single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) 
and proteomics, have transformed the understanding of the complex-
ity of cellular heterogeneity in cartilage and IVD13. Studies using these 
approaches have uncovered previously unrecognized chondrocyte 
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | August 2025 | 465–477
467
Review article
markers for identifying chondrocytes. Some of the proposed markers 
(such as CD44, CD73, CD90 and CD105) are non-specific and overlap 
with MSCs and fibroblasts, and donor variability and methodological 
challenges hinder consensus19–21. This lack of distinct markers might, in 
part, reflect the unique niche in which chondrocytes reside (embedded 
within a dense ECM and largely isolated from direct cell–cell contact), 
which might result in limited biological pressure to maintain a robust 
repertoire of cell-surface proteins for intercellular communication. 
Instead, depending on their location, chondrocytes from various 
zones exhibit differences in the expression of specific markers associ-
ated with their unique ECM. Mature chondrocytes in the middle layer 
express characteristic cartilage components such as collagen type II, 
IX and XI, aggrecan and link protein22. By contrast, pre-hypertrophic 
and hypertrophic chondrocytes in the deep zone and calcified zone 
are marked by the presence of collagen type X23. Cells in the superficial 
zone are exclusive producers of lubricin (also known as proteoglycan-4 
(PRG4)), a surface protein crucial for joint lubrication. A small propor-
tion of superficial zone chondrocytes in non-degenerate cartilage 
express collagen type I and largely lack expression of the collagen 
types typical of deeper layers of articular cartilage, such as collagen 
type II24, which challenges earlier assumptions about the absence of 
collagen type I in healthy hyaline cartilage10. In addition to zonal vari-
ation, transcriptomic evidence from OA cartilage reveals the presence 
of METRNL+ and PRG4+ chondrocyte subtypes, which seem to reflect 
early and intermediate states of dedifferentiation and are regulated by 
Hippo signalling via Yes-associated protein (YAP) and transcriptional 
coactivator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ), a key pathway in cartilage 
remodelling25.
Although a small number of studies previously described cells in 
cartilage with progenitor-like features26,27, the dominant paradigm for 
many years viewed cartilage as being composed of a nearly uniform cell 
population28. Therefore, the recognition that chondrocytes are in fact 
not a uniform population predates single-cell sequencing. Previous 
morphological and immunohistochemical studies using confocal 
microscopy, cytoskeletal staining and protein-level markers have 
highlighted heterogeneity in chondrocyte morphology and phenotype 
in situ10–12,29,30. These investigations revealed differences in cell volume, 
cytoplasmic projections and differential expression of collagen 
types I and VI, IL-1β and ECM-degrading enzymes, such as ADAMTS4, 
within macroscopically healthy cartilage.
Although these foundational studies underscored the func-
tional diversity of chondrocytes, the advent of single-cell and spatial 
multi-omics has dramatically enhanced the resolution of this het-
erogeneity, revealing transcriptionally distinct subtypes and their 
roles in homeostasis, inflammation and degeneration. Only advance-
ments in scRNA-seq technologies over the past decade have revealed 
the full extent of heterogeneity within cartilaginous tissues. Fur-
ther supporting this heterogeneity, seven transcriptionally distinct 
chondrocyte subpopulations were identified in OA cartilage, includ-
ing stress-metabolizing and ECM-synthesis-related subtypes that 
dominate at early and late stages of damage, respectively31; these 
shifts highlight functional transitions during OA progression. Cellu-
lar subpopulations with distinct phenotypes have been identified in 
the different layers of articular cartilage32,33 but also from weight and 
non-weight-bearing areas of articular cartilage tissues34. In rheuma-
toid arthritis (RA), studies using single-cell transcriptomics have also 
revealed immune-associated chondrocyte populations with distinct 
spatial distributions depending on mechanical load, which emphasizes 
the relevance of tissue location even under inflammatory conditions35.
A separate scRNA-seq study that focused on healthy and OA 
human articular cartilage also identified seven distinct chondro-
cyte subpopulations, providing a high-resolution transcriptional 
map of cell types within macroscopically healthy tissue36. In addi-
tion, single-cell transcriptomic advances enable a more granular and 
functionally annotated classification of chondrocyte subtypes than 
previous in situ immunolabelling-based studies that suggested phe-
notypic heterogeneity among chondrocytes12. These seven clusters 
were classified as fibrocartilage chondrocytes-1 and fibrocartilage 
chondrocytes-2 (expressing SH3BGRL3, S100A6, MYL9 and IGFBP5, 
LMCD1, respectively), cartilage progenitor cells-1 and cartilage progeni-
tor cells-2 (which express KIAA0101, BIRC5 and CDC20, UBE2C, CENPF, 
KIAA0101, BIRC5, respectively), regulatory chondrocytes (express-
ing EIF5A, PGK1, ANXA1, TUBA1A), pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes 
(expressing SOX9, COL9A3, COL11A1) and homeostatic chondrocytes 
(expressing TXNIP, IFITM3, GDF15 and TIMP1). The most apparent dif-
ferences between healthy and OA cartilage were an enrichment of regu-
latory and pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes in OA and an abundance 
of cartilage progenitor cells in healthy cartilage. A subpopulation of 
hypertrophic chondrocytes (expressing SLC39A14 and COL10A1) and 
distinct from hypertrophic chondrocytes in healthy cartilage was fur-
ther identified in the superficial region of damaged cartilage in human 
OA tissue36 (Supplementary Table 1).
Single-cell and spatial transcriptomic analysis of healthy and OA 
human knee articular cartilage identified 33 cell population-specific 
marker genes that define 11 chondrocyte populations, including 9 
known populations and 2 newly defined populations: pre-inflammatory 
and inflammatory chondrocytes37. This study established that the 
Box 1 | Signalling pathways involved 
in chondrogenesis
 
Cartilage development starts with cartilage progenitor cells 
differentiating from mesenchymal stem cells. Limb cartilage 
originates from the sclerotome, whereas head cartilage derives 
from the cranial neural crest. Articular cartilage progenitors 
arise from the interzone at future joint sites. Limb development 
begins with the condensation of cartilage progenitor cells into 
chondrogenic nodules (a process mediated by cell junctions), which 
enhances local gradients of chondrogenic growth factors (Fig. 1). 
This condensation commits mesenchymal cells to the chondrogenic 
lineage, a process that requires the activation of numerous 
signalling pathways.
Meniscus fibrocartilage development starts with interzone cells 
derived from embryonic mesenchyme. The gene signature 
associated with meniscus development is unique and differs from 
that of cartilage and ligament development, with the IGF1, GDF5, 
LGR5, SCX and GLI1 pathways having prominent roles.
Intervertebral disc formation shares regulatory factors with 
chondrogenesis, but shows key differences in cell types and tissue 
composition. The annulus fibrosus and cartilaginous endplates are 
mesenchymal in origin, whereas the nucleus pulposus develops 
from the notochord, initially containing notochordal cells replaced 
by chondrocyte-like cells (Fig. 1). SOX9 is essential for nucleus 
pulposus and annulus fibrosus development, with annulus fibrosus 
and cartilaginous endplate cells derived from SCX and SOX9 
double-positive progenitors.
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | August 2025 | 465–477
468
Review article
pre-hypertrophic chondrocyte and hypertrophic chondrocyte popu-
lations are potentially essential for disease progression in OA, and 
that the pre-fibrocartilage chondrocyte population, a distinct entity 
from the previously described fibrocartilage chondrocytes, is a major 
contributor to the stratification of patients with OA37. Another study 
investigated OA human knee articular chondrocyte populations 
under different mechanical loading conditions via scRNA-seq38. In 
line with previous studies, 12 chondrocyte subtypes were identified, 
and their functions, development and interactions with other cells were 
described. The study also identified a new chondrocyte subset, termed 
hypertrophic chondrocytes-C. These findings underscore the impor-
tance of delineating major cell populations within healthy cartilage and 
comparing them with pathological cells; such comparisons are key for 
comprehending the distinct roles of various chondrocyte populations 
and their respective pathogenic mechanisms, which contribute to the 
development of diseases such as OA.
In a 2023 study, a subset of chondrocytes with high expression of 
SPP1 (also known as osteopontin) was identified in human OA cartilage 
using scRNA-seq39. These SPP1+ chondrocytes exhibited the highest 
SenMayo score, a transcriptomic index used to quantify cellular 
senescence, among all chondrocyte subgroups and demonstrated 
strong angiogenic potential. Furthermore, the SPP1 signalling network 
was more abundant in OA cartilage than in healthy cartilage, and the 
receptor–ligand binding pattern of SPP1–CD44 appeared to have an 
important role in this network.
A 2024 single-cell study further refined the understanding of 
chondrocyte populations that are critical for the progression of OA. 
In a post-traumatic model of OA, pre-inflammatory and inflammatory 
chondrocyte subtypes emerge early and contribute to disease progres-
sion through cytokine-mediated crosstalk37. In parallel, angiogenic 
(Smoc2+Angptl7+) and osteogenic (Col1a1+) chondrocytes have been 
identified as drivers of pathological vascularization and subchondral 
bone remodelling in later stages of disease40. These findings align with 
trajectory analyses that reveal time-dependent shifts in chondrocyte 
states following joint injury, with inflammatory and ECM-degrading 
signatures progressively dominating the transcriptomic landscape41.
Mesenchymal cells
Notochord
Meniscal fibrochondrocytes
SOX9, SCX, LGR5, IHH, SHH, 
GDF5, IGF1, FGF7, COL1A1, 
COL22A1 and ACAN
Hyaline articular chondrocytes
SOX9, SOX5, SOX6, FMOD, 
BMP, TGFβ, FGF, IGF1, MAPK, 
PI3K–Akt, IHH, SHH, WNT, 
PTHRP, GDF5, COL2A1, COL6A1, 
COL9A1, COL11A2, PRG4 and 
ACAN
Nucleus pulposus cells
TBXT, SOX9, FOXF1, CD24, 
CA12, SLC2A1, NCDN, NRP1, 
HIF1A, SHH, WNT, TGFβ, BMP 
(including GDF5 and GDF6), 
IGF1, COL2A1 and ACAN
Notochordal cell
NOTO, TBXT and FOXA2
Annulus fibrosus cells
MKX, SCX, SOX9, SFRP2, 
CD146, SM22, TNMD, TGFβ, 
COL1A1, COL5A1 and ACAN
Cartilaginous endplate cells
SOX9, RUNX2, GATA4, CYTL1, 
IBSP, IHH, BMP, PTN, COL6A1, 
COL10A1 and FBLN1
Fig. 1 | Main signalling pathways and markers that regulate the development 
of cartilaginous tissues. Mesenchymal cells differentiate into progenitor 
cells giving rise to various chondrogenic lineages, characterized by partially 
overlapping signalling pathways, and the expression of transcription factors 
and extracellular matrix (ECM) components. Nucleus pulposus cells are derived 
from the notochord. Hyaline articular chondrocytes: SOX9, SOX5 and SOX6 
(chondrogenesis); FMOD (collagen organization); BMP, TGFβ, FGF, IGF1, MAPK, 
PI3K–Akt and WNT (proliferation and differentiation); IHH, SHH and PTHRP (also 
known as PTHLH) (homeostasis and differentiation); GDF5 (joint development); 
COL2A1, COL6A1, COL9A1, COL11A2, PRG4 and ACAN (ECM components). Meniscal 
fibrochondrocytes: SOX9 and SCX (differentiation); LGR5 (progenitor marker); 
IHH and SHH (homeostasis and differentiation); GDF5 (joint development); IGF1 
(proliferation and differentiation); FGF7 (differentiation); COL1A1, COL22A1 
and ACAN (ECM components). Annulus fibrosus cells: MKX, SCX and SOX9 
(differentiation); SFRP2 (ECM remodelling); CD146 (also known as MCAM; 
progenitor marker); SM22 (also known as TAGLN; contractile phenotype); 
TNMD (tenomodulin, tendon-like identity); TGFβ (developmental signalling); 
COL1A1 and COL5A1 (tensile strength); ACAN (ECM components). Cartilaginous 
endplate cells: SOX9 and RUNX2 (differentiation); GATA4 and CYTL1 (boundary 
formation); IBSP (mineralization inhibition); IHH, BMP and PTN (ossification 
signals, hypertrophy and ECM remodelling); COL6A1 and COL10A1 (ECM 
components); FBLN1 (ECM organization and mechanical stability). Nucleus 
pulposus cells: TBXT, SOX9 and FOXF1 (differentiation); CD24, CA12 and SLC2A1 
(involved in hypoxic and microenvironmental adaptation); NCDN (lineage 
maintenance and ECM stability); NRP1 (developmental patterning); HIF1A 
(hypoxia response); SHH, WNT, TGFβ and BMP (including GDF5 and GDF6), IGF1 
(developmental signalling); COL2A1 and ACAN (ECM components).
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | August 2025 | 465–477
469
Review article
Similar to single-cell transcriptomics data, cytometry by time 
of flight (CyTOF) single-cell proteomics using a panel of 33 markers 
(which included cell-surface receptors, adhesion molecules, signal-
ling mediators and transcription factors) revealed three cartilage 
progenitor cell (CPC) variants (CPC I–III) in healthy and OA human 
cartilage42, which also included the previously identified migratory 
CPCs. CPC I was characterized by low CD105 and high CD54 (also known 
as ICAM-1) expression, and very active ERK1–2 signalling; CPC II had 
high levels of CD73 expression and the CPC III population was enriched 
for pro-inflammatory pathways, including nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), 
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), β-catenin 
and hypoxia-inducible factor 2α (HIF2α). Furthermore, a rare chon-
drocyte population, termed inflammation-amplifying (Inf-A) chondro-
cytes, was identified in patients with OA using CyTOF-based single-cell 
proteomics. Despite their atypical signalling profile, these cells were 
confirmed to express classical chondrogenic markers such as CD44 
and SOX9, affirming their chondrocyte identity. They exhibited high 
levels of IL1R1 (also known as CD121a) and TNFRII (also known as 
CD120b), as well as exclusive activation of JNK and SMAD1–5 signal-
ling pathways, and accounted for ~2% of the chondrocyte popula-
tion based on single-cell proteomic and transcriptomic analyses33. 
Owing to the established role of CD24 in mitigating inflammation, 
CD24-enriched chondrocytes were termed inflammation-dampening 
chondrocytes and displayed enrichment of inflammation and 
immune cell trafficking-related pathways. Thus, a combination strategy 
of enhancing these rare inflammation-dampening chondrocytes and 
inhibiting the inflammation-amplifying chondrocyte populations 
could be effective in mitigating inflammation in OA cartilage42. In a 
follow-up study, four senescent CPC populations were identified in 
human OA cartilage based on p16INK4a expression43. These senescent 
subsets, which included and expanded upon the previously defined 
CPC I–III populations, exhibited distinct inflammatory and catabolic 
signalling profiles.
Cellular complexity in the meniscus
The meniscus comprises three zones, the avascular (white) inner zone, 
the outer vascular (red) zone, and a transitional red–white zone. The 
avascular inner zone is subject to compressive loading, whereas the 
outer vascular zone is under tensile and torsional loading44. Cells within 
the meniscus have historically been described as fibrochondrocytes, 
a mixed phenotype reflecting both fibroblastic and chondrogenic fea-
tures, although microarray and scRNA-seq analyses have since uncov-
ered specific cell types and gene signatures, both within healthy and 
OA meniscus and across its distinct inner and outer zones.
In a study in which microarray analysis was used to investigate 
the differences in transcriptomes between OA and non-OA human 
meniscal tissues, bone-related genes such as SPARCL1, COL10A1 and 
WIF1 were upregulated, whereas VEGFA and POSTN were downregu-
lated within OA meniscal tissues. Cluster analysis of the array data 
showed that pro-inflammatory genes were highly expressed in the 
Red zone
White zone
Red–white zone
Superficial
zone
Middle zone
Deep zone
Tidemark
Calcified
zone
Epiphyseal
bone
Cell subpopulations in nucleus pulposus:
Adhesion nucleus pulposus cells
Nucleus pulposus progenitor cells
CD24+ nucleus pulposus progenitor cells
Eﬀector nucleus pulposus cells
Fibrotic nucleus pulposus cells
Homeostatic nucleus pulposus cells
Hypertrophic nucleus pulposus cells 
MK167+ nucleus pulposus progenitor cells
Regulatory nucleus pulposus cells
Cell subpopulations in hyaline 
articular cartilage:
Chondrocyte progenitor cells
Eﬀector chondrocytes
Fibrochondrocytes
Homeostatic chondrocytes
Hypertrophic chondrocytes
Inflammatory chondrocytes
MirC cells
Pre-fibrochondrocytes
Pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes
Proliferative chondrocytes
Regulatory chondrocytes
Reparative chondrocytes
SnC cells
SpC cells
Cell subpopulations in the 
meniscus: 
Cartilage progenitor cells
Endothelial cells
Fibrochondrocyte progenitor cells
Fibrochondrocytes
Pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes
Proliferative fibrochondrocytes
Regulatory chondrocytes 
a
b
Hyaline articular cartilage
Intervertebral disc
Knee joint
Meniscus
Cell subpopulations in the annulus
fibrosus:
Endothelial cells
Endothelial progenitor cells
Homeostatic annulus fibrosus cells
Hypertrophic annulus fibrosus cells
Immune cells
Inner annulus fibrosus cells
MCAM+ annulus fibrosus progenitor cells
Outer annulus fibrosus cells
Pro-inflammatory annulus fibrosus cells
Regulatory annulus fibrosus cells
Cartilaginous endplate
Annulus fibrosus
Nucleus pulposus
Cell subpopulations in the 
cartilaginous endplate:
Chondroblasts
Regulatory chondrocytes
Homeostatic chondrocytes 
Pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes
Fibrochondrocytes 
Proliferative chondrocytes
Macrophages
T cells
NK cells
Fig. 2 | Cell populations in cartilaginous tissues. Single-cell RNA sequencing 
has identified numerous cell populations (only the main populations are 
shown in this figure) in hyaline articular cartilage and the meniscus (a) and the 
intervertebral disc (b). MirC, metal ion-related chondrocyte; NK cell, natural 
killer cell; SnC, senescent cluster; SpC, splicing chondrocyte.
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | August 2025 | 465–477
470
Review article
OA meniscus, whereas genes associated with tissue regeneration 
were more prominently expressed in the non-OA meniscus45. Healthy 
(non-OA) meniscus samples were taken from patients with partial 
meniscus tears that showed no macroscopic evidence for OA or other 
joint diseases; however, even a partial tear can influence the expres-
sion of specific genes, as there could be upregulation or downregula-
tion in post-traumatic inflammation-associated genes upon injury. 
In one study, scRNA-seq analysis of healthy human meniscus from 
patients undergoing amputation (mean Kellgren–Lawrence grade 0) 
compared with OA meniscus (mean Kellgren–Lawrence grade 3) was 
used to identify specific markers for OA meniscus. In contrast to the 
microarray analysis discussed earlier in this article, LCN2, RAB27B, 
PRDM1 and SERPINB2 were upregulated in human OA meniscal tis-
sues compared with healthy tissues, with LCN2 and RAB27B emerging 
from gene ontology as potential early-stage OA meniscus-specific 
markers46. The expression of both Lcn2 and Rab27b was increased for 
up to 6 months in spontaneously aged mice with OA46. However, the 
authors did not evaluate human meniscus at different disease stages 
of OA to observe whether these genes can be used as specific meniscus 
markers for early OA. Owing to meniscus tears being a potential start 
point for OA, finding an early-stage marker within the meniscus is vital 
to prevent the onset of disease47.
scRNA-seq analysis has also provided a greater understand-
ing of the cell types within the meniscus. Specifically, studies have 
identified seven cellular populations within the human meniscus: 
endothelial cells, cartilage progenitor cells, regulatory chondrocytes, 
fibrochondrocytes, pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes, fibrochondrocyte 
progenitors (also described as CD146+ pericyte-like cells) and prolif-
erative fibrochondrocytes48,49 (Supplementary Table 2). The avascular 
zone of the tissue also contains lymphocytes and myeloid cells, whereas 
the vascular zone has a greater proportion of endothelial cells and 
also Schwann cells that correlate with the presence of nerves within 
this region48. In both of the aforementioned studies, the presence of 
fibrochondrocyte progenitors within the tissue indicates the presence 
of regenerative populations within both the healthy and degenerative 
meniscus. A CD146+ (a typical pericyte marker, also known as MCAM) 
population that was isolated from healthy human meniscus had a 
multilineage differentiation capacity and expressed stem cell markers; 
however, within the degenerative meniscus, a loss of CD146+ cells led 
to an increase in a CD318+ (also known as CDCP1) cell population that 
displayed progenitor-like characteristics. The latter population could 
have a crucial role in meniscal degeneration and has been proven to be 
a marker for meniscus progenitor populations isolated from degen-
erative meniscus50. CD318 expression in injured meniscus tissue was 
reduced upon treatment with TGFβ; thus, CD138 could be a potential 
marker for meniscal degeneration49. The study supports the presence 
of progenitor populations within the meniscus described in previous 
human and bovine in vitro studies50–53.
At the tissue level, in vivo post-traumatic destabilized medial 
meniscus (DMM) mouse models of OA have demonstrated pathologi-
cal mineralization in the lateral joint compartment, a process known 
as lateral chondrocalcinosis, which can drive medial articular cartilage 
damage via LEF1 signalling54. These findings highlight the relevance 
of Wnt signalling, as LEF1 acts as a key downstream effector in the 
canonical Wnt beta-catenin pathway, in regulating meniscal stiffness 
and pathological mineralization. The data also suggest that alterations 
originating in the lateral compartment, such as chondrocalcinosis, 
might contribute to degenerative changes in adjacent joint structures, 
including the medial articular cartilage.
Cellular complexity in the intervertebral disc
Phenotyping studies using omics technologies at the transcriptome 
and proteome level have identified a wide range of markers of human 
notochordal cells55–58, healthy nucleus pulposus, annulus fibrosus, and 
cartilaginous endplate (CEP) cells and tissues59,60, as well as markers 
of degeneration59,61–64. These efforts to understand the nucleus pul-
posus cell phenotype resulted in the publication of an international 
consensus statement in 2015 on markers to distinguish nucleus pulpo-
sus cells from annulus fibrosus and CEP cells65. Nucleus pulposus cells 
express markers found in human and bovine notochordal cells66,67, sug-
gesting that at least a proportion of human nucleus pulposus cells are 
notochord-derived. However, additional progenitor cell populations 
have been identified within the human and mouse IVD (most notably 
Tie2+ GD2+ nucleus pulposus progenitor cells68), including cells from the 
nucleus pulposus, annulus fibrosus and CEP, which possess MSC-like 
properties such as multipotency69. Although some of these populations 
have been proposed to have regenerative potential, they highlight the 
complexity of IVD formation and the diversity of cells that exist within 
the disc during development, ageing and degeneration.
scRNA-seq is beginning to provide a more detailed understand-
ing of the cell subpopulations within the human IVD. Comparisons of 
the cells within the healthy human IVD have revealed differences in 
transcriptional profiles between nucleus pulposus cells and annulus 
fibrosus cells70, and comparisons of non-degenerate and degener-
ate IVD cells from the same donor have revealed a panel of potential 
biomarkers of disease71. Additionally, multiple distinct cell sub-types 
within both the human nucleus pulposus and annulus fibrosus have 
been identified72–77, with studies showing a shift in IVDD tissues towards 
populations with a more fibrotic phenotype, populations that might 
drive angiogenesis and an increased presence of immune cell-like 
populations, most notably macrophages, when compared with 
non-degenerate discs. Although the function of these subpopulations 
requires further investigation and functional validation, the alterations 
in cell populations might underpin the tissue-level changes observed 
during degeneration, and these studies highlight the diversity of cell 
phenotypes present within the human IVD throughout ageing and 
degeneration (Supplementary Table 3).
Alongside studies investigating cell populations associated with 
degeneration, scRNA-seq has also enabled identification of a puta-
tive PROCR+ progenitor cell population within the human nucleus 
pulposus78. Additionally, transcriptomic and protein-level analyses 
of human and mouse IVD during early embryonic development have 
identified populations during early (SOX10+) and late (cathepsin K+ 
(encoded by CTSK)) IVD formation as well as populations that are 
responsible for ECM homeostasis (CTSK+ and brachyury+ (encoded 
by TBXT))79. An integrated analysis of proteome sequencing, bulk RNA 
sequencing and scRNA-seq data identified SERPINA1 as a biomarker to 
regulate or predict the progress of IVDD80. Identification and functional 
characterization of these subpopulations within the adult human IVD 
could further elucidate their roles in tissue homeostasis and identify 
progenitor cell populations with potential for therapeutic application.
Ageing, inflammation and chondrosenescence
With age, cartilaginous tissues might gradually become damaged, 
which can lead to prevalent joint diseases such as OA and IVDD81. 
Notably, these degenerate tissues do not present a widespread apop-
totic phenotype82, leading researchers to investigate causal drivers of 
structural damage. In the past decade, research has focused on elu-
cidating the role of senescence in OA and IVDD pathophysiology83. 
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | August 2025 | 465–477
471
Review article
Cell  senescence (also termed chondrosenescence in articular 
cartilage) is characterized by an irreversible halt in cell division84,85. 
Cell senescence increases with age and correlates with progressive 
tissue degeneration and functional loss86–89.
Senescence in hyaline cartilage
Senescent cells often display dramatic changes in structure, metabo-
lism and secretory profile, indicating that senescent cells have a pleo-
tropic phenotype. These cells often display an increase in cell volume, 
senescence-associated β-galactosidase activity, senescence-associated 
heterochromatic foci and the expression of cell-cycle-related proteins, 
such as p16INK4a, p19ARF, p14ARF and p21CIP1 (refs. 85,89,90). Moreover, 
senescent cells contribute to a systemic increase in pro-inflammatory 
mediators88, as they secrete exosomes (known as senescence-associated 
secretory phenotype (SASP)) that contain pro-inflammatory mediators, 
chemokines (IL-1β, IL6 and CXCL8) and ECM-degrading enzymes, such 
as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and cathepsins88,91. In addition 
to the systemic effect of senescent cells, it has been suggested that 
SASP-secreting senescent cells confer a ‘bystander effect’ that affects 
neighbouring cells, resulting in further induction or reinforcement of 
tissue senescence92,93 (Fig. 3). This process seems to be mediated by 
SASP-related factors and cytokines, which also contribute to age-related 
chronic inflammation90,94. Notably, mechanical insults to human hyaline 
articular cartilage contribute to senescence in the superficial zones, dis-
playing telomere erosion and reduced cell doubling95. In line with these 
observations, data from animal models of ageing and post-traumatic 
OA (such as those that use the anterior cruciate ligament transection 
procedure) show that the number of senescent cells is highest in the 
superficial zone (which is directly exposed to mechanical loading)96. 
Given that the superficial zone is enriched in stem-cell populations, 
the accumulation of senescent chondrocytes might interfere with the 
regenerative potential of the tissue after loading97. Cumulatively, these 
data suggest that mechanical loading entices the initial emergence of 
superficial senescent chondrocytes, which could be further increased 
with time via the SASP-mediated ‘bystander effect’. To this end, ageing 
and the inflammaging process can only contribute to the proportion 
of chondrosenescence in articular cartilage.
Humans and rodents exhibit a chronological increase in the 
senescence biomarkers p14ARF and p16INK4a, respectively; but these 
changes are not associated with increased levels of SASP, nor does loss 
of murine p16INK4a result in a mitigated OA phenotype98. Notably, the 
gradual acquisition of the chondrosenescent phenotype is suggested 
to be accompanied by chondrocyte hypertrophy and mineralization99, 
posing a specialized profile of senescent chondrocytes. Mechanis-
tically, this hypertrophy-related chondrosenescent feature is not 
fully understood, but evidence shows that cartilage-specific abla-
tion of SIRT1 (which is known to repress senescence100) resulted in 
severe post-traumatically induced ectopic osteophyte formation, 
meniscal mineralization and cartilage damage54, accompanied by 
increased chondrosenescent p16INK4a staining101. In a recent study, 
age-associated transcriptional changes, such as GATA4 upregulation, 
impaired chondrocyte ECM synthesis and amplified pro-inflammatory 
responses, providing a mechanistic link between cellular ageing and 
OA susceptibility102.
The relationship between inflammation and cellular senescence 
in the context of musculoskeletal disorders remains unclear, with both 
chronic and acute inflammation potentially contributing to the accumu-
lation of senescent cells in ageing tissues or after injury96,101. Although 
chronic inflammation can induce senescence, and anti-inflammatory 
treatments might clear senescent cells (Fig. 3), the effects of acute 
injury-related inflammation on senescence are not fully understood, 
suggesting a complex interplay between these processes.
Most in vivo studies, including studies describing cartilage senes-
cence, are traditionally performed in male mice given that they are 
reported to harbour a more severe OA phenotype than female mice103, 
and therefore the male models better support this chronological accu-
mulation in SASP and senescent cell phenotype96,104. In a 2024 study that 
examined a targeted treatment to enhance SIRT1 activity, aged female 
mice did not display a senescent phenotype, whereas aged male mice 
did have the senescent hallmark of H2Aγ105. These data insinuate that, 
at least in preclinical models, different phenotypes of senescence can 
occur owing to sex-related differences, which should be addressed in 
future research.
Senescence in the meniscus
The specific association of senescence in meniscal tissues has pre-
dominantly focussed on its association with articular cartilage. Thus, 
studies specifically examining senescence in meniscus are rare and 
more commonly related to studies investigating the aged meniscus106. 
A study that used gene databases from previous microarray analyses 
identified four genes (RRM2, AURKB, CDK1 and TIMP1) and microRNAs 
associated with these genes in senescent human meniscal tissues107, 
whereas another study showed that downregulation of FOXO1 and 
FOXO3 transcription factors in aged meniscal tissues increased 
susceptibility to OA108.
A study that aimed to identify specific OA markers using scRNA-seq 
analysis of healthy and OA human meniscal tissues, found a subset 
of cells with upregulated expression of fibroblast activating protein 
and the transcription factor ZEB1, and promoted ECM degradation 
and senescence109. Senotherapeutic drugs (therapies that target 
senescent cells) have yet to be directly applied to meniscal tissues, 
although the specific mechanisms that induce senescence remain to 
be elucidated.
Senescence in the intervertebral disc
Senescence often correlates with skeletal ageing, a major risk factor for 
IVDD and OA90. Other pathogenic factors, including oxidative, geno-
toxic and inflammatory stress, along with nutritional constraints that 
contribute to IVDD, all correlate with cell senescence. Consequently, 
senescence has an important role in the pathophysiology of IVDD110.
Early work showed a positive correlation between p16INK4a expres-
sion levels and disc degeneration in patients87. Later studies, using 
p16tdTOM reporter mice, showed increased levels of p16INK4A, p21 and 
senescence burden in aged mouse IVD111. These authors, using a 
model of conditional deletion of p16INK4A (AcancreERT2;p16INK4a), showed 
a compensatory role of p19ARF in the senescence process. Although 
p16INK4A was dispensable for the induction and maintenance of senes-
cence, this study established a causal relationship between p16INK4A 
with SASP and altered ECM homeostasis. These findings aligned with 
studies of a mouse model of cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 2A 
(Cdkn2a; encoding p16INK4A) germline deletion, which showed a reduc-
tion in oxidative stress and disc degeneration following tail suspen-
sion injury112. Furthermore, a study using a genetically engineered 
p16INK4A-3MR transgenic mouse model showed that systemic clearance 
of p16INK4a-positive cells ameliorated age-related disc degeneration113; 
mice that lacked p16INK4A-positive senescent cells had decreased ECM 
catabolism and reduced inflammation. These findings support the 
causal relationship between senescent cells and IVD degeneration114,115.
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | August 2025 | 465–477
472
Review article
Another study used scRNA-seq to identify compartment-specific 
changes in human IVDD and observed gene signatures of cell senes-
cence, as well as a notable reduction in cells, particular stem cells and 
fibroblast progenitors, expressing markers of immature cell types in 
both the annulus fibrosus and the nucleus pulposus116. Other stud-
ies that investigated the cellular heterogeneity during human IVDD 
have observed changes in processes such as ferroptosis, which, simi-
lar to senescence, are linked to oxidative stress and inflammation117. 
A 2024 study using scRNA-seq, identified autophagy-related protein 
9 A (ATG9A) as a key marker associated with IVDD, whereby ATG9A 
expression is diminished during degeneration, which suggests reduced 
autophagic flux118. Notably, basal autophagy has a protective func-
tion during ageing-related pathologies, and dysregulated autophagy 
contributes to many pathologies that affect the spinal column119,120. 
However, a 2021 study also showed the importance of autophagy in 
establishing full senescence through regulated protein stability and 
the importance of this process during human OA121. Further investiga-
tions are needed to understand this relationship in the context of IVDD. 
Although similarities have been noted between other skeletal tissues 
and the IVD, pathways (such as cGAS–STING) that are linked to cell 
senescence did not contribute to senescence burden in the ageing 
mouse with IVD, highlighting the cell and tissue type specificity of the 
mechanisms driving cell senescence122.
Senotherapeutic agents are therapies that target cellular senes-
cence and include both senolytics (which reduce inflammation and 
improve tissue function by removing senescent cells) and senomor-
phics (which help maintain tissue function by reducing the negative 
impact of senescent cells, such as chronic inflammation, without elimi-
nating these cells). These therapies show great potential for treating OA 
and IVDD by targeting senescent cells in affected tissues. However, fur-
ther research is needed to elucidate the broader effects of senescence 
on joint health, to develop reliable biomarkers for patient selection 
and to optimize treatment protocols for disease models and cell-based 
therapies. For developing novel senotherapeutic strategies, single-cell 
analysis could be instrumental in identifying specific cellular sub-
populations and their roles in senescence, thereby allowing for tar-
geted interventions to mitigate age-related tissue dysfunction. This 
approach could help to elucidate the complex interactions between 
senescent cells and their native niche, potentially leading to novel 
senotherapeutic agents that could improve tissue regeneration and 
function (Box 2).
Future prospects
Although genomic and transcriptomic analyses, including single-cell 
transcriptomic analyses, have transformed the understanding of 
chondrocyte heterogeneity, their use in predicting functional ECM 
outcomes remains limited. For instance, transcript levels of ACAN or 
COL2A1 alone do not reflect the sulfation patterns of glycosaminogly-
cans or the cross-linking density of collagen fibrils, both of which are 
critical for load-bearing capacity123–125. This example highlights the need 
to better integrate single-cell multi-omics approaches with tissue-level 
multi-omics analyses, as well as to complement transcriptomics data 
with direct assessments of ECM biomechanics and post-translational 
modifications, as gene expression alone might not faithfully predict 
tissue-level functionality126.
Notably, differences in study outcomes often arise from meth-
odological and biological variables; for instance, time points can 
critically influence results: early-stage OA tends to involve tran-
sient inflammatory or proliferative chondrocyte states, whereas 
late-stage disease predominantly exhibits catabolic or senescent 
populations127. Species-specific differences (such as rodent versus 
human cartilage)128 and OA induction methods (such as surgical desta-
bilization versus chemical injury)129 yield distinct pathophysiology, 
which influences the observed transcriptional profiles. For example, 
c  Local and systemic inflammation
d Attenuation of senescence signalling
by senotherapeutics
a  Local SASP signalling
b  Expansion of pre-senescent cells
Healthy, non-senescent cell
Pre-senescent cell (DNA damage)
Stress signals from senescent cells (’bystander eﬀect’)
Stress signals from systemic circulation (systemic inflammation)
Apoptosing cell
Senescent cell
Senotheraputic agents (such as senolytics and senomorphics)
Modulation by senotheraputic agents
Fig. 3 | Senescence in cartilaginous tissues. A proposed trajectory wherein 
the frequency of cellular senescence in cartilage increases in proportion to 
both chronic and acute inflammation. Although the frequency of senescent 
cells in the tissue is initially low (a), healthy cells accumulate DNA damage 
over time with increasing levels of inflammation and oxidative stress (b). 
Moreover, senescent cells negatively affect neighbouring healthy cells through 
the production and secretion of senescence-associated secretory phenotype 
(SASP) factors (known as the ‘bystander effect’), which predisposes them to 
senescence. Various external stimuli, such as trauma, injury and infection, 
promote further inflammation and amplify the bystander effect, causing healthy, 
non-senescent cells to undergo apoptosis, whereas senescent cells are more 
resistant to inflammatory conditions and instead undergo cellular dysfunction. 
Local (that is, intra-articular) and systemic inflammatory mediators arising 
from chronic co-morbidities (such as obesity, diabetes and cardiovascular 
disease) further exacerbate the process (c). Senotherapeutic agents selectively 
induce apoptosis in senescent cells or modulate their secretory phenotype, 
thereby reducing their accumulation and mitigating the harmful effects of their 
pro-inflammatory secretome, especially the senescence-inducing effects of 
SASP factors (d).
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | August 2025 | 465–477
473
Review article
mechanical injury models predominantly activate mechanosensitive 
pathways (such as YAP and TAZ)130, whereas inflammatory models 
(such as collagenase-induced OA) amplify cytokine-driven responses131. 
Sex-specific differences in hormone signalling and immune regula-
tion might underlie divergent cellular subpopulations in men and 
women132. Furthermore, technical variables such as cell isolation proto-
cols (for example, the effects of enzymatic digestion on stress-response 
genes) and sequencing depth can skew population distributions133. 
Acknowledging these factors is essential for understanding differences 
across studies and advancing translational insights into chondrocyte 
heterogeneity.
Despite advances in the field, several critical questions remain 
unanswered. The precise molecular mechanisms that regulate the 
transition of chondrocytes from healthy to pathological states are still 
poorly understood. Additionally, the role of systemic factors, such as 
age, sex, metabolic health and mechanical loading, in shaping chon-
drocyte subtype distributions necessitates further investigation134. 
Addressing these gaps could substantially refine the understanding of 
cartilage degeneration and inform the development of targeted thera-
peutic strategies. Longitudinal single-cell analyses of post-traumatic 
OA models are needed to resolve temporal shifts in chondrocyte sub-
types (such as fibrocartilage and pre-inflammatory chondrocytes) and 
their causal roles in fibrosis and inflammation37,135.
Critically evaluating the translatability of animal models to human 
OA, particularly given the anatomical disparities in cartilage thickness 
and biomechanical loading patterns between quadrupedal rodents 
and bipedal humans136, is crucial. Although animal models such as 
anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) rupture or DMM provide controlled 
systems for studying OA progression, they often fail to replicate the 
chronic, multifactorial nature of human disease, which involves age-
ing, systemic inflammation and cumulative mechanical stress136,137. 
Notably, cartilage that is classified as ‘non-degenerate’ in OA joints 
might still exhibit molecular alterations owing to prolonged exposure 
to pro-inflammatory mediators and abnormal mechanical stresses, 
as evidenced by proteomic and transcriptomic profiling34,138. Even 
in macroscopically intact regions, osteoarthritic chondrocytes can 
display upregulated catabolic pathways (such as MMPs, ADAMTS4 and 
ADAMTS5) and reduced anabolic activity138, highlighting the need for 
cautious interpretation of ‘healthy’ cartilage.
Looking to the future, integrating spatially resolved multi-omics 
technologies, such as spatial transcriptomics and proteomics, will 
enable chondrocyte subsets to be mapped within their native niches. 
Such approaches could reveal dynamic changes in cellular behaviour 
during disease progression and provide insights into the molecu-
lar drivers of cartilage disorders. Moreover, longitudinal studies 
using these technologies might help to identify biomarkers for early 
detection of joint diseases, offering opportunities for timely and more 
effective interventions.
We propose that future applications of machine learning and 
artificial intelligence for the analysis of complex multi-omics datasets 
will uncover previously unrecognized patterns in chondrocyte gene 
expression and interactions, potentially leading to the discovery of 
novel therapeutic networks and safer druggable targets. Furthermore, 
developing predictive models on the basis of patient-specific data 
could facilitate personalized medicine approaches, tailoring treat-
ments to individual disease trajectories. From a translational perspec-
tive, these findings have the potential to substantially improve clinical 
outcomes for patients affected by conditions such as OA and IVDD. 
Distinct chondrocyte phenotypes could offer new opportunities to 
refine current therapeutic strategies. In OA, inflammatory chondro-
cyte subsets represent potential targets for biologic therapies aimed 
at suppressing catabolic signalling, whereas progenitor-like popula-
tions could be harnessed for regeneration. Therapies that target these 
inflammatory chondrocyte subtypes could mitigate cartilage degrada-
tion in OA and enhancing the regenerative potential of homeostatic or 
reparative subpopulations could improve cartilage repair. Conversely, 
failed OA trials targeting broad-spectrum MMPs highlight the need 
for subtype-specific approaches to avoid disrupting homeostatic 
ECM maintenance. For meniscus-tissue engineering, hypertrophic 
chondrocyte subsets, which drive calcification in degenerated menisci, 
could be selectively inhibited, whereas ECM-producing phenotypes 
might be expanded to enhance graft integration. Similarly, in IVDD, 
nucleus pulposus cells with notochord-like signatures show enhanced 
proteoglycan synthesis139, suggesting their potential in cell-based 
IVD regeneration. Therefore, future efforts should explore combined 
approaches that simultaneously suppress pro-inflammatory pathways 
and activate regenerative ones, optimizing therapeutic efficacy (Box 3).
Conclusions
Single-cell technologies are transforming the understanding of chon-
drocyte heterogeneity and functionality across cartilage types and 
disease states. Distinct chondrocyte subtypes have been identified in 
Box 2 | Senotherapeutic agents for 
joint diseases
 
Senotherapeutic agents, which aim to modulate or eliminate 
senescent cells, are emerging as potential treatments for osteoarthritis 
(OA) and intervertebral disc (IVD) degeneration (IVDD). Intra-articular 
administration of senotherapeutic modulators has shown promise 
in reducing OA severity by modulating senescent chondrocytes in 
preclinical rodent models. Additionally, senolytics can also induce 
apoptosis in senescent IVD cells, thereby mitigating IVDD.
Most research focuses on the effects of senescence on 
chondrocytes during OA and IVDD but less is known about its 
role in other joint tissues or pain transmission. Senotherapeutic 
drugs have yet to show notable progression in clinical trials, which 
suggests that improved patient selection using senescence-related 
biomarkers is needed for more effective and quantifiable clinical 
outcomes.
Acute post-traumatic OA models might require different 
senotherapeutic drug dosages or administration methods 
compared with age-induced OA models. However, it should be 
noted that intra-articular administration of senotherapeutic agents 
is likely to target the senescent chondrocyte population that is 
located in the superficial zone, eliminating their detrimental effects 
on the tissue and promoting a pro-regeneration milieu. Similarly, 
the efficacy of cell transplantation approaches could be affected 
by the chondrosenescent environment, highlighting the need to 
consider the ‘seno-severity’ of the host. Future research should 
focus on understanding the broader effects of senescence on the 
entire joint and use biomarkers to identify suitable candidates for 
senotherapeutic therapies. Pretreatment with senotherapeutic 
agents could potentially enhance the outcomes of cell-based 
therapies by creating a more favourable environment for 
transplanted cells.
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | August 2025 | 465–477
474
Review article
hyaline articular cartilage, meniscal cartilage and the IVD, which exhibit 
unique gene expression profiles that correlate with their functional 
roles in health and disease. Understanding how these cells interact 
within their native niches and with cells in other joint compartments is 
crucial for developing more effective regenerative therapies. A deeper 
understanding of the cellular and molecular diversity of these cell 
populations, their crosstalk and relative influence can help to develop 
therapeutic candidates that can tilt the inflammatory and catabolic 
balance towards restoration of homeostasis and tissue regeneration. 
This approach will be particularly beneficial in the early stages of 
disease pathogenesis and progression. An enhanced knowledge of 
cartilage biology and its molecular regulation is invaluable, not only 
for understanding joint disorders but also for bone trauma repair. 
This paradigm shift will open up new avenues for targeted therapeutic 
strategies in diseases such as OA and IVDD. The identification of key 
molecular markers associated with specific chondrocyte states could 
lead to novel biomarkers for early diagnosis and therapeutic targets 
for these disorders.
Published online: 10 July 2025
References
1.	
Liu, S. et al. Global burden of musculoskeletal disorders and attributable factors 
in 204 countries and territories: a secondary analysis of the global burden of disease 
2019 study. BMJ Open 12, e062183 (2022).
2.	
Nguyen, A. T. et al. Musculoskeletal health: an ecological study assessing disease burden 
and research funding. Lancet Reg. Health Am. 29, 100661 (2024).
3.	
Zhang, Y. & Zhou, Y. Advances in targeted therapies for age-related osteoarthritis: 
a comprehensive review of current research. Biomed. Pharmacother. 179, 117314 (2024).
4.	
Archer, C. W. & Francis-West, P. The chondrocyte. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 35, 401–404 
(2003).
5.	
Goldring, M. B. Update on the biology of the chondrocyte and new approaches to 
treating cartilage diseases. Best. Pract. Res. Clin. Rheumatol. 20, 1003–1025 (2006).
6.	
Muir, H. The chondrocyte, architect of cartilage. Biomechanics, structure, function and 
molecular biology of cartilage matrix macromolecules. Bioessays 17, 1039–1048 (1995).
7.	
Pretemer, Y. et al. Differentiation of hypertrophic chondrocytes from human iPSCs for the 
in vitro modeling of chondrodysplasias. Stem Cell Rep. 16, 610–625 (2021).
8.	
Riegger, J. & Brenner, R. E. Pathomechanisms of posttraumatic osteoarthritis: 
chondrocyte behavior and fate in a precarious environment. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 1560 
(2020).
9.	
Cancedda, R., Castagnola, P., Cancedda, F. D., Dozin, B. & Quarto, R. Developmental 
control of chondrogenesis and osteogenesis. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 44, 707–714 (2000).
10.	
Styczynska-Soczka, K., Amin, A. K. & Hall, A. C. Cell-associated type I collagen  
in nondegenerate and degenerate human articular cartilage. J. Cell Physiol. 236, 
7672–7681 (2021).
11.	
Murray, D. H., Bush, P. G., Brenkel, I. J. & Hall, A. C. Abnormal human chondrocyte 
morphology is related to increased levels of cell-associated IL-1β and disruption to 
pericellular collagen type VI. J. Orthop. Res. 28, 1507–1514 (2010).
12.	
Hall, A. C. The role of chondrocyte morphology and volume in controlling phenotype —  
implications for osteoarthritis, cartilage repair, and cartilage engineering. Curr. Rheumatol. 
Rep. 21, 38 (2019).
13.	
Wang, T. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing in orthopedic research. Bone Res. 11, 10 (2023).
14.	
Huang, C. et al. Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of chondrocytes in cartilage and 
pathogenesis of osteoarthritis. Genes. Dis. 12, 101241 (2025).
15.	
Pandey, A. & Bhutani, N. Profiling joint tissues at single-cell resolution: advances and 
insights. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 20, 7–20 (2024).
16.	
Liu, Z. et al. Single-cell profiling uncovers synovial fibroblast subpopulations associated 
with chondrocyte injury in osteoarthritis. Front. Endocrinol. 15, 1479909 (2024).
17.	
Danalache, M. et al. Exploration of changes in spatial chondrocyte organisation in human 
osteoarthritic cartilage by means of 3D imaging. Sci. Rep. 11, 9783 (2021).
18.	
Dominici, M. et al. Minimal criteria for defining multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells. 
The International Society for Cellular Therapy position statement. Cytotherapy 8, 315–317 
(2006).
19.	
Campbell, D. D. & Pei, M. Surface markers for chondrogenic determination: a highlight  
of synovium-derived stem cells. Cells 1, 1107–1120 (2012).
20.	 Studle, C. et al. Challenges toward the identification of predictive markers for human 
mesenchymal stromal cells chondrogenic potential. Stem Cell Transl. Med. 8, 194–204 
(2019).
21.	
Sober, S. A., Darmani, H., Alhattab, D. & Awidi, A. Flow cytometric characterization of cell 
surface markers to differentiate between fibroblasts and mesenchymal stem cells of 
different origin. Arch. Med. Sci. 19, 1487–1496 (2023).
22.	 Sandell, L. J. & Aigner, T. Articular cartilage and changes in arthritis. An introduction: cell 
biology of osteoarthritis. Arthritis Res. 3, 107–113 (2001).
23.	 Chen, N., Wu, R. W. H., Lam, Y., Chan, W. C. W. & Chan, D. Hypertrophic chondrocytes at 
the junction of musculoskeletal structures. Bone Rep. 19, 101698 (2023).
24.	 Schumacher, B. L., Hughes, C. E., Kuettner, K. E., Caterson, B. & Aydelotte, M. B. 
Immunodetection and partial cDNA sequence of the proteoglycan, superficial 
zone protein, synthesized by cells lining synovial joints. J. Orthop. Res. 17, 110–120 
(1999).
25.	 Sun, Z. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals different chondrocyte states in femoral 
cartilage between osteoarthritis and healthy individuals. Front. Immunol. 15, 1407679 
(2024).
26.	 Fickert, S., Fiedler, J. & Brenner, R. E. Identification of subpopulations with characteristics 
of mesenchymal progenitor cells from human osteoarthritic cartilage using triple 
staining for cell surface markers. Arthritis Res. Ther. 6, R422–432 (2004).
27.	
Tallheden, T. et al. Phenotypic plasticity of human articular chondrocytes. J. Bone Jt  
Surg. Am. 85, 93–100 (2003).
28.	 Jiang, Y. & Tuan, R. S. Origin and function of cartilage stem/progenitor cells in 
osteoarthritis. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 11, 206–212 (2015).
29.	 Herren, A. O. F., Amin, A. K. & Hall, A. C. A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with 
thrombospondin motifs-4 levels in chondrocytes of different morphology within 
nondegenerate and early osteoarthritic human femoral head cartilage. Cartilage 15, 
278–282 (2024).
30.	 Lauer, J. C., Selig, M., Hart, M. L., Kurz, B. & Rolauffs, B. Articular chondrocyte phenotype 
regulation through the cytoskeleton and the signaling processes that originate from 
or converge on the cytoskeleton: towards a novel understanding of the intersection 
between actin dynamics and chondrogenic function. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22, 3279 (2021).
31.	
Gao, H. et al. Identification of chondrocyte subpopulations in osteoarthritis using 
single-cell sequencing analysis. Gene 852, 147063 (2023).
32.	 Chou, C. H. et al. Synovial cell cross-talk with cartilage plays a major role in the 
pathogenesis of osteoarthritis. Sci. Rep. 10, 10868 (2020).
33.	 Ji, Q. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq analysis reveals the progression of human osteoarthritis. 
Ann. Rheum. Dis. 78, 100–110 (2019).
34.	 Di, J. et al. Cartilage tissue from sites of weight bearing in patients with osteoarthritis 
exhibits a differential phenotype with distinct chondrocytes subsets. RMD Open 9, 
e003255 (2023).
35.	 Yan, M. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals distinct chondrocyte states in femoral 
cartilage under weight-bearing load in rheumatoid arthritis. Front. Immunol. 14, 1247355 
(2023).
36.	 Wang, X. et al. Comparison of the major cell populations among osteoarthritis, 
Kashin-Beck disease and healthy chondrocytes by single-cell RNA-seq analysis.  
Cell Death Dis. 12, 551 (2021).
Box 3 | Exploiting chondrocyte 
heterogeneity for cartilaginous tissue 
regeneration
 
Current cartilage repair strategies, such as microfracture, autologous 
chondrocyte implantation and matrix-assisted chondrocyte 
implantation, face issues with tissue quality and durability. Future 
tissue engineering approaches that leverage the functional 
diversity of chondrocyte subpopulations that are emerging could 
be promising targeted therapies. Using mesenchymal stem cells 
or engineered cells that have been differentiated into specific 
chondrocyte subtypes could also enhance cartilage regeneration.
Meniscal regeneration focuses on stem cells and meniscal 
progenitor cells, potentially involving culturing these cells in 3D 
bioprinted scaffolds. Discovering specific progenitor populations 
within the meniscus, particularly from healthy and osteoarthritis 
tissues, could lead to better translational therapies for treating small 
defects or even whole meniscal tissues.
Approaches to intervertebral disc regeneration include intradiscal 
injections, gene therapies and cell implantation. Autologous and  
allogeneic cells, including nucleus pulposus and annulus fibrosus  
cells, chondrocytes and stem cells, are currently being tested; 
however, the harsh microenvironment of the degenerate disc poses 
challenges, necessitating pre-conditioning to improve cell survival. 
Future strategies might involve regenerative therapies without cell 
implantation and building on the secretome of notochordal cells.
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | August 2025 | 465–477
475
Review article
37.	
Fan, Y. et al. Unveiling inflammatory and prehypertrophic cell populations as key 
contributors to knee cartilage degeneration in osteoarthritis using multi-omics data 
integration. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 83, 926–944 (2024).
38.	 Wang, J. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals the impact of mechanical loading  
on knee tibial cartilage in osteoarthritis. Int. Immunopharmacol. 128, 111496 (2024).
39.	 Qu, Y. et al. A comprehensive analysis of single-cell RNA transcriptome reveals unique 
SPP1+ chondrocytes in human osteoarthritis. Comput. Biol. Med. 160, 106926 (2023).
40.	 Liu, Y. et al. Single-cell transcriptomics reveals novel chondrocyte and osteoblast 
subtypes and their role in knee osteoarthritis pathogenesis. Signal. Transduct. Target. Ther. 
10, 40 (2025).
41.	
Guang, Z., Min, Z., Jun-Tan, L., Tian-Xu, D. & Xiang, G. Single-cell protein activity analysis 
reveals a novel subpopulation of chondrocytes and the corresponding key master 
regulator proteins associated with anti-senescence and OA progression. Front. Immunol. 
14, 1077003 (2023).
42.	 Grandi, F. C. et al. Single-cell mass cytometry reveals cross-talk between inflammation- 
dampening and inflammation-amplifying cells in osteoarthritic cartilage. Sci. Adv. 6, 
eaay5352 (2020).
43.	 Sahu, N., Grandi, F. C. & Bhutani, N. A single-cell mass cytometry platform to map the 
effects of preclinical drugs on cartilage homeostasis. JCI Insight 7, e160702 (2022).
44.	 Day, B., Mackenzie, W. G., Shim, S. S. & Leung, G. The vascular and nerve supply of the 
human meniscus. Arthroscopy 1, 58–62 (1985).
45.	 Brophy, R. H. et al. Transcriptome comparison of meniscus from patients with and without 
osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 26, 422–432 (2018).
46.	 Jiang, Z. et al. Whole-transcriptome sequence of degenerative meniscus cells unveiling 
diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets for osteoarthritis. Front. Genet. 12, 754421 
(2021).
47.	
Englund, M., Guermazi, A. & Lohmander, S. L. The role of the meniscus in knee 
osteoarthritis: a cause or consequence? Radiol. Clin. North. Am. 47, 703–712 (2009).
48.	 Fu, W. et al. Cellular features of localized microenvironments in human meniscal 
degeneration: a single-cell transcriptomic study. eLife 11, e79585 (2022).
49.	 Sun, H. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq analysis identifies meniscus progenitors and reveals 
the progression of meniscus degeneration. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 79, 408–417 (2020).
50.	 Korpershoek, J. V. et al. Selection of highly proliferative and multipotent meniscus 
progenitors through differential adhesion to fibronectin: a novel approach in meniscus 
tissue engineering. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22, 8614 (2021).
51.	
Pattappa, G. et al. Fibronectin adherent cell populations derived from avascular and 
vascular regions of the meniscus have enhanced clonogenicity and differentiation 
potential under physioxia. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 9, 789621 (2021).
52.	 Muhammad, H. et al. Human migratory meniscus progenitor cells are controlled via the 
TGF-β pathway. Stem Cell Rep. 3, 789–803 (2014).
53.	 Mauck, R. L., Martinez-Diaz, G. J., Yuan, X. & Tuan, R. S. Regional multilineage differentiation 
potential of meniscal fibrochondrocytes: implications for meniscus repair. Anat. Rec. 
290, 48–58 (2007).
54.	 Elayyan, J. et al. Lef1 ablation alleviates cartilage mineralization following posttraumatic 
osteoarthritis induction. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 119, e2116855119 (2022).
55.	 Rajasekaran, S. et al. Profiling extra cellular matrix associated proteome of human fetal 
nucleus pulposus in search for regenerative targets. Sci. Rep. 11, 19013 (2021).
56.	 Rajasekaran, S. et al. Proteomic signature of nucleus pulposus in fetal intervertebral disc. 
Asian Spine J. 14, 409–420 (2020).
57.	
Diaz-Hernandez, M. E. et al. Derivation of notochordal cells from human embryonic stem  
cells reveals unique regulatory networks by single cell-transcriptomics. J. Cell Physiol. 
235, 5241–5255 (2020).
58.	 Rodrigues-Pinto, R. et al. Human notochordal cell transcriptome unveils potential 
regulators of cell function in the developing intervertebral disc. Sci. Rep. 8, 12866 (2018).
59.	 Tam, V. et al. DIPPER, a spatiotemporal proteomics atlas of human intervertebral discs for 
exploring ageing and degeneration dynamics. eLife 9, e64940 (2020).
60.	 Minogue, B. M., Richardson, S. M., Zeef, L. A., Freemont, A. J. & Hoyland, J. A. Characterization 
of the human nucleus pulposus cell phenotype and evaluation of novel marker gene 
expression to define adult stem cell differentiation. Arthritis Rheum. 62, 3695–3705 (2010).
61.	
Yee, A. et al. Fibrotic-like changes in degenerate human intervertebral discs revealed  
by quantitative proteomic analysis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 24, 503–513 (2016).
62.	 Ye, D. et al. Comparative and quantitative proteomic analysis of normal and degenerated 
human annulus fibrosus cells. Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. 42, 530–536 (2015).
63.	 Qiu, C. et al. Differential proteomic analysis of fetal and geriatric lumbar nucleus 
pulposus: immunoinflammation and age-related intervertebral disc degeneration.  
BMC Musculoskelet. Disord. 21, 339 (2020).
64.	 Riester, S. M. et al. RNA sequencing identifies gene regulatory networks controlling 
extracellular matrix synthesis in intervertebral disk tissues. J. Orthop. Res. 36, 1356–1369 
(2018).
65.	 Risbud, M. V. et al. Defining the phenotype of young healthy nucleus pulposus cells: 
recommendations of the spine research interest group at the 2014 annual ORS meeting. 
J. Orthop. Res. 33, 283–293 (2015).
66.	 Richardson, S. M. et al. Notochordal and nucleus pulposus marker expression is 
maintained by sub-populations of adult human nucleus pulposus cells through  
aging and degeneration. Sci. Rep. 7, 1501 (2017).
67.	
Minogue, B. M., Richardson, S. M., Zeef, L. A., Freemont, A. J. & Hoyland, J. A. 
Transcriptional profiling of bovine intervertebral disc cells: implications for identification 
of normal and degenerate human intervertebral disc cell phenotypes. Arthritis Res. Ther. 
12, R22 (2010).
68.	 Sakai, D. et al. Exhaustion of nucleus pulposus progenitor cells with ageing and 
degeneration of the intervertebral disc. Nat. Commun. 3, 1264 (2012).
69.	 Lyu, F. J. et al. IVD progenitor cells: a new horizon for understanding disc homeostasis 
and repair. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 15, 102–112 (2019).
70.	 Fernandes, L. M. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq identifies unique transcriptional landscapes 
of human nucleus pulposus and annulus fibrosus cells. Sci. Rep. 10, 15263 (2020).
71.	
Cherif, H. et al. Single-Cell RNA-seq analysis of cells from degenerating and 
non-degenerating intervertebral discs from the same individual reveals new biomarkers 
for intervertebral disc degeneration. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23, 3993 (2022).
72.	 Wang, D. et al. Single-cell transcriptomics reveals heterogeneity and intercellular 
crosstalk in human intervertebral disc degeneration. iScience 26, 106692 (2023).
73.	 Guo, S. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq analysis reveals that immune cells induce human 
nucleus pulposus ossification and degeneration. Front. Immunol. 14, 1224627 (2023).
74.	 Li, Z. et al. Single-Cell RNA sequencing reveals the difference in human normal and 
degenerative nucleus pulposus tissue profiles and cellular interactions. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 
10, 910626 (2022).
75.	 Wang, H. et al. Decoding the annulus fibrosus cell atlas by scRNA-seq to develop an 
inducible composite hydrogel: a novel strategy for disc reconstruction. Bioact. Mater. 14, 
350–363 (2022).
76.	 Ling, Z. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq analysis reveals macrophage involved in the 
progression of human intervertebral disc degeneration. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 9, 833420 
(2021).
77.	
Han, S. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing of the nucleus pulposus reveals chondrocyte 
differentiation and regulation in intervertebral disc degeneration. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 10, 
824771 (2022).
78.	 Gan, Y. et al. Spatially defined single-cell transcriptional profiling characterizes diverse 
chondrocyte subtypes and nucleus pulposus progenitors in human intervertebral discs. 
Bone Res. 9, 37 (2021).
79.	 Zhou, T. et al. Spatiotemporal characterization of human early intervertebral disc 
formation at single-cell resolution. Adv. Sci. 10, e2206296 (2023).
80.	 Yang, X., Lu, Y., Zhou, H., Jiang, H. T. & Chu, L. Integrated proteome sequencing, bulk 
RNA sequencing and single-cell RNA sequencing to identify potential biomarkers in 
different grades of intervertebral disc degeneration. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 11, 1136777 
(2023).
81.	
Glyn-Jones, S. et al. Osteoarthritis. Lancet 386, 376–387 (2015).
82.	 Aigner, T. et al. Apoptotic cell death is not a widespread phenomenon in normal 
aging and osteoarthritis human articular knee cartilage: a study of proliferation, 
programmed cell death (apoptosis), and viability of chondrocytes in normal and 
osteoarthritic human knee cartilage. Arthritis Rheum. 44, 1304–1312 (2001).
83.	 Coryell, P. R., Diekman, B. O. & Loeser, R. F. Mechanisms and therapeutic implications 
of cellular senescence in osteoarthritis. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 17, 47–57 (2021).
84.	 Mobasheri, A., Matta, C., Zakany, R. & Musumeci, G. Chondrosenescence: definition, 
hallmarks and potential role in the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis. Maturitas 80, 237–244 
(2015).
85.	 Campisi, J. Aging, cellular senescence, and cancer. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 75, 685–705 
(2013).
86.	 Gruber, H. E., Ingram, J. A., Norton, H. J. & Hanley, E. N. Jr. Senescence 
in cells of the aging and degenerating intervertebral disc: immunolocalization of 
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase in human and sand rat discs. Spine 32, 
321–327 (2007).
87.	
Le Maitre, C. L., Freemont, A. J. & Hoyland, J. A. Accelerated cellular senescence in 
degenerate intervertebral discs: a possible role in the pathogenesis of intervertebral disc 
degeneration. Arthritis Res. Ther. 9, R45 (2007).
88.	 Tchkonia, T., Zhu, Y., van Deursen, J., Campisi, J. & Kirkland, J. L. Cellular senescence 
and the senescent secretory phenotype: therapeutic opportunities. J. Clin. Invest. 123, 
966–972 (2013).
89.	 Childs, B. G., Durik, M., Baker, D. J. & van Deursen, J. M. Cellular senescence in aging and 
age-related disease: from mechanisms to therapy. Nat. Med. 21, 1424–1435 (2015).
90.	 Silwal, P. et al. Cellular senescence in intervertebral disc aging and degeneration: 
molecular mechanisms and potential therapeutic opportunities. Biomolecules 13, 686 
(2023).
91.	
Vamvakas, S. S., Mavrogonatou, E. & Kletsas, D. Human nucleus pulposus intervertebral 
disc cells becoming senescent using different treatments exhibit a similar transcriptional 
profile of catabolic and inflammatory genes. Eur. Spine J. 26, 2063–2071 (2017).
92.	 Nelson, G. et al. A senescent cell bystander effect: senescence-induced senescence. 
Aging Cell 11, 345–349 (2012).
93.	 Aigner, T., Soder, S., Gebhard, P. M., McAlinden, A. & Haag, J. Mechanisms of disease: 
role of chondrocytes in the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis — structure, chaos and 
senescence. Nat. Clin. Pract. Rheumatol. 3, 391–399 (2007).
94.	 Franceschi, C. & Campisi, J. Chronic inflammation (inflammaging) and its potential 
contribution to age-associated diseases. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 69, S4–S9 
(2014).
95.	 Martin, J. A., Brown, T., Heiner, A. & Buckwalter, J. A. Post-traumatic osteoarthritis: the role 
of accelerated chondrocyte senescence. Biorheology 41, 479–491 (2004).
96.	 Jeon, O. H. et al. Local clearance of senescent cells attenuates the development of 
post-traumatic osteoarthritis and creates a pro-regenerative environment. Nat. Med. 23, 
775–781 (2017).
97.	
Dowthwaite, G. P. et al. The surface of articular cartilage contains a progenitor cell 
population. J. Cell Sci. 117, 889–897 (2004).
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | August 2025 | 465–477
476
Review article
98.	 Diekman, B. O. et al. Expression of p16INK4a is a biomarker of chondrocyte aging but does 
not cause osteoarthritis. Aging Cell 17, e12771 (2018).
99.	 Rim, Y. A., Nam, Y. & Ju, J. H. The role of chondrocyte hypertrophy and senescence in 
osteoarthritis initiation and progression. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 2358 (2020).
100.	 Langley, E. et al. Human SIR2 deacetylates p53 and antagonizes PML/p53-induced  
cellular senescence. EMBO J. 21, 2383–2396 (2002).
101.	 Batshon, G. et al. Serum NT/CT SIRT1 ratio reflects early osteoarthritis and 
chondrosenescence. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 79, 1370–1380 (2020).
102.	 Makarczyk, M. J. et al. Aging-associated increase of GATA4 levels in articular cartilage 
is linked to impaired regenerative capacity of chondrocytes and osteoarthritis. 
Osteoarthritis Cartilage https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2025.02.556 (2025).
103.	 Ma, H. L. et al. Osteoarthritis severity is sex dependent in a surgical mouse model. 
Osteoarthritis Cartilage 15, 695–700 (2007).
104.	 Zhra, M. et al. The expression of a subset of aging and antiaging markers following the 
chondrogenic and osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells of placental 
origin. Cells 13, 1022 (2024).
105.	 Maatuf, Y. H. et al. Diverse response to local pharmacological blockade of Sirt1 cleavage 
in age-induced versus trauma-induced osteoarthritis female mice. Biomolecules 14, 81 
(2024).
106.	 Tsujii, A., Nakamura, N. & Horibe, S. Age-related changes in the knee meniscus. Knee 24, 
1262–1270 (2017).
107.	 Chen, M. et al. Identification and validation of pivotal genes related to age-related 
meniscus degeneration based on gene expression profiling analysis and in vivo and 
in vitro models detection. BMC Med. Genomics 14, 237 (2021).
108.	 Lee, K. I. et al. FOXO1 and FOXO3 transcription factors have unique functions in meniscus 
development and homeostasis during aging and osteoarthritis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
117, 3135–3143 (2020).
109.	 Swahn, H. et al. Senescent cell population with ZEB1 transcription factor as its main 
regulator promotes osteoarthritis in cartilage and meniscus. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 82, 
403–415 (2023).
110.	 Novais, E. J. et al. Long-term treatment with senolytic drugs dasatinib and quercetin 
ameliorates age-dependent intervertebral disc degeneration in mice. Nat. Commun. 12, 
5213 (2021).
111.	 Novais, E. J., Diekman, B. O., Shapiro, I. M. & Risbud, M. V. p16Ink4a deletion in cells of the 
intervertebral disc affects their matrix homeostasis and senescence associated secretory 
phenotype without altering onset of senescence. Matrix Biol. 82, 54–70 (2019).
112.	 Che, H. et al. p16 deficiency attenuates intervertebral disc degeneration by adjusting 
oxidative stress and nucleus pulposus cell cycle. eLife 9, e52570 (2020).
113.	 Patil, P. et al. Systemic clearance of p16INK4a-positive senescent cells mitigates 
age-associated intervertebral disc degeneration. Aging Cell 18, e12927 (2019).
114.	 Cherif, H. et al. Senotherapeutic drugs for human intervertebral disc degeneration and 
low back pain. eLife 9, e54693 (2020).
115.	 Cherif, H. et al. Curcumin and o-vanillin exhibit evidence of senolytic activity in human 
IVD cells in vitro. J. Clin. Med. 8, 433 (2019).
116.	 Swahn, H. et al. Shared and compartment-specific processes in nucleus pulposus 
and annulus fibrosus during intervertebral disc degeneration. Adv. Sci. 11, e2309032 
(2024).
117.	 Zhang, Y. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq analysis identifies unique chondrocyte subsets 
and reveals involvement of ferroptosis in human intervertebral disc degeneration. 
Osteoarthritis Cartilage 29, 1324–1334 (2021).
118.	 Tang, X. et al. ATG9A as a potential diagnostic marker of intervertebral disc degeneration: 
Inferences from experiments and bioinformatics analysis incorporating sc-RNA-seq data. 
Gene 897, 148084 (2024).
119.	 Madhu, V. et al. The mitophagy receptor BNIP3 is critical for the regulation of metabolic 
homeostasis and mitochondrial function in the nucleus pulposus cells of the 
intervertebral disc. Autophagy 19, 1821–1843 (2023).
120.	 Madhu, V., Guntur, A. R. & Risbud, M. V. Role of autophagy in intervertebral disc and 
cartilage function: implications in health and disease. Matrix Biol. 100–101, 207–220 (2021).
121.	 Lee, Y. et al. Coordinate regulation of the senescent state by selective autophagy.  
Dev. Cell 56, 1512–1525.e7 (2021).
122.	 Ottone, O. K., Kim, C. J., Collins, J. A. & Risbud, M. V. The cGAS-STING pathway 
affects vertebral bone but does not promote intervertebral disc cell senescence or 
degeneration. Front. Immunol. 13, 882407 (2022).
123.	 Hatami-Marbini, H. On the mechanical roles of glycosaminoglycans in the tensile 
properties of porcine corneal stroma. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 64, 3 (2023).
124.	 Sarrigiannidis, S. O. et al. A tough act to follow: collagen hydrogel modifications to 
improve mechanical and growth factor loading capabilities. Mater. Today Bio 10, 100098 
(2021).
125.	 Gama, C. I. et al. Sulfation patterns of glycosaminoglycans encode molecular recognition 
and activity. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2, 467–473 (2006).
126.	 Vogel, C. & Marcotte, E. M. Insights into the regulation of protein abundance from 
proteomic and transcriptomic analyses. Nat. Rev. Genet. 13, 227–232 (2012).
127.	 Yao, Q. et al. Osteoarthritis: pathogenic signaling pathways and therapeutic targets. 
Signal. Transduct. Target. Ther. 8, 56 (2023).
128.	 Ferguson, G. B. et al. Mapping molecular landmarks of human skeletal ontogeny and 
pluripotent stem cell-derived articular chondrocytes. Nat. Commun. 9, 3634 (2018).
129.	 Sulaiman, S. Z. S. et al. Comparison of bone and articular cartilage changes in 
osteoarthritis: a micro-computed tomography and histological study of surgically  
and chemically induced osteoarthritic rabbit models. J. Orthop. Surg. Res. 16, 663  
(2021).
130.	 Vincent, T. L. Mechanoflammation in osteoarthritis pathogenesis. Semin. Arthritis Rheum. 
49, S36–S38 (2019).
131.	 Weber, P. et al. The collagenase-induced osteoarthritis (CIOA) model: where mechanical 
damage meets inflammation. Osteoarthritis Cartilage Open 6, 100539 (2024).
132.	 Colbath, A. & Haubruck, P. Closing the gap: sex-related differences in osteoarthritis and 
the ongoing need for translational studies. Ann. Transl. Med. 11, 339 (2023).
133.	 Sebastian, A. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals transcriptomic heterogeneity and 
post-traumatic osteoarthritis-associated early molecular changes in mouse articular 
chondrocytes. Cells 10, 1462 (2021).
134.	 Dvir-Ginzberg, M., Maatuf, Y. H. & Mobasheri, A. Do we understand sex-related differences 
governing dimorphic disease mechanisms in preclinical animal models of osteoarthritis? 
Osteoarthritis Cartilage 32, 1054–1057 (2024).
135.	 Pan, B. et al. Identification of key biomarkers related to fibrocartilage chondrocytes for 
osteoarthritis based on bulk, single-cell transcriptomic data. Front. Immunol. 15, 1482361 
(2024).
136.	 Chapman, J. H., Ghosh, D., Attari, S., Ude, C. C. & Laurencin, C. T. Animal models 
of osteoarthritis: updated models and outcome measures 2016-2023. Regen. Eng. 
Transl. Med. 10, 127–146 (2024).
137.	 Dou, H. et al. Osteoarthritis models: from animals to tissue engineering. J. Tissue Eng. 14, 
20417314231172584 (2023).
138.	 Sengprasert, P., Kamenkit, O., Tanavalee, A. & Reantragoon, R. The immunological  
facets of chondrocytes in osteoarthritis: a narrative review. J. Rheumatol. https://doi.org/ 
10.3899/jrheum.2023-0816 (2023).
139.	 Aguiar, D. J., Johnson, S. L. & Oegema, T. R. Notochordal cells interact with nucleus 
pulposus cells: regulation of proteoglycan synthesis. Exp. Cell Res. 246, 129–137 (1999).
Acknowledgements
A.M. wishes to acknowledge the generous financial support of Suomen Akatemia/Research 
Council of Finland Profi6 grant number 336449 and grant number 351568 awarded to the 
University of Oulu. A.M. also acknowledges funding from Horizon Europe (PROTO-Advanced 
PeRsOnalized Therapies for Osteoarthritis-TACKLING INFLAMMATION TO IMPROVE PATIENT 
OUTCOMES, grant agreement ID: 101095635 and ENgineered CArtilage from Nose for the 
Treatment of Osteoarthritis [ENCANTO], grant agreement ID: 101137315). C.M. was supported 
by the Young Researcher Excellence Programme (grant number: FK-134304) of the National 
Research, Development and Innovation Office, Hungary. C.M. was also supported by the 
Bolyai János Research Fellowship of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. This research 
was supported by the EKÖP-24-4 University Research Fellowship Programme of the Ministry 
for Culture and Innovation from the source of the National Research, Development and 
Innovation Fund, Hungary, awarded to R.T. (EKÖP-24-4-II-DE-58). C.M., R.T., G.P., M.D.-G. and 
A.M. also acknowledge financial support from the European Cooperation in Science and 
Technology COST Association Action CA21110 — Building an open European Network on 
OsteoArthritis research (NetwOArk). M.D.-G. acknowledges support from the Israeli Ministry 
of Science, Space, and Technology grant number [#3-17335], Israeli Science Foundation 
(ISF), grant number [#165/23] and the US–Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) grant # 
2021049. M.V.R. is supported by NIH grants R01AG073349, R01AR074813; R56AR055655-16A1; 
and R01AR082460. K.P. wishes to acknowledge funding received from the European Research 
Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program 
(grant agreement no. 810111-EpiCrest2Reg). S.M.R. acknowledges funding received from the 
UK Medical Research Council (MRC) [MR/W019418/1].
Author contributions
The authors contributed equally to all aspects of the article.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41584-025-01275-0.
Peer review information Nature Reviews Rheumatology thanks Frank Zaucke and the other, 
anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this 
article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author 
self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the 
terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
© Springer Nature Limited 2025
Nature Reviews Rheumatology | Volume 21 | August 2025 | 465–477
477
Review article
1Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. 2Laboratory of Cartilage Biology, 
Institute of Bio-Medical and Oral Research, Faculty of Dental Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel. 3Manchester Cell-Matrix 
Centre, Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, Manchester 
Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. 4Department of Biomedicine, University Hospital Basel, University of Basel, 
Basel, Switzerland. 5Department of Musculoskeletal Tissue Regeneration, Orthopaedic Hospital König-Ludwig-Haus, University of Wuerzburg, Wurzburg, 
Germany. 6Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 7Graduate Program 
in Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 8Research Unit of Health Sciences and Technology, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. 9Department of Regenerative Medicine, State Research Institute Centre for Innovative Medicine, 
Vilnius, Lithuania. 10Department of Joint Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. 11Université de Liège, 
Liège, Belgium. 12These authors contributed equally: Csaba Matta, Roland Takács.

===== Edwards2015_JRAMC_HeterotopicOssification =====

Heterotopic ossiﬁcation: a systematic review
Dafydd S Edwards,1 J C Clasper2
1Centre for Blast Injury Studies,
Imperial College London,
London, UK
2Defence Professor of Trauma
& Orthopaedics, Academic
Department of Military Surgery
and Trauma, RCDM
Birmingham, UK
Correspondence to
Maj Dafydd S Edwards,
Centre for Blast Injury Studies,
Imperial College London,
South Kensington, London
SW7 2AZ, UK;
taffedwards100@hotmail.com
Received 27 March 2014
Revised 25 May 2014
Accepted 10 June 2014
Published Online First
11 July 2014
To cite: Edwards DS,
Clasper JC. J R Army Med
Corps 2015;161:315–321.
ABSTRACT
Heterotopic ossiﬁcation (HO) is the formation of mature
lamellar bone in extraskeletal soft tissues. It was ﬁrst
described 1000 years ago in the healing of fractures,
and in relation to military wounds, texts from the
American Civil War and World War I refer to HO speciﬁc-
ally. It continues to cause problems to injured service
personnel; the consequences of wound and soft tissue
complications in traumatic amputations pose particular
problems to rehabilitation and prosthetic use. While HO
is seen in rare genetic conditions, it is most prevalent
after joint replacement surgery and trauma. In the civil-
ian setting HO has been commonly described in patients
after traumatic brain injuries, spinal cord injuries and
burns. Militarily, as a consequence of recent operations,
and the characteristic injury of blast-related amputations,
a renewed interest in HO has emerged due to an
increased incidence seen in casualties. The heteroge-
neous nature of a blast related amputation makes it difﬁ-
cult for a single aetiological event to be identiﬁed,
although it is now accepted that blast, amputation
through the zone of injury, increased injury severity and
associated brain injuries are signiﬁcant risk factors in HO
formation. The exact cellular event leading to HO has yet
to be identiﬁed, and as a consequence its prevention is
restricted to the use of anti-inﬂammatory medication and
radiation, which is often contraindicated in the acute
complex
military
casualty.
A
systematic
review
in
PubMed and the Cochrane Database identiﬁed research
articles related to HO to illustrate the military problem of
HO and its management, current research concepts and
experimental theories regarding HO. This also served as
a gap analysis providing the researchers detail of any
knowledge deﬁcit in this ﬁeld, in particular to the mili-
tary aspects of HO; 637 out of 7891 articles initially
identiﬁed that referenced HO were relevant to this
review.
INTRODUCTION
Heterotopic ossiﬁcation (HO) (Figure 1) is the for-
mation of mature lamellar bone in extraskeletal soft
tissues. It was ﬁrst described in the literature nearly
1000 years ago in the healing of fractures,1 and in
relation to military wounds, and complications of
amputations, texts from the American Civil War
and World War I make speciﬁc reference to it.2 To
date HO continues to cause problems to the
injured service personnel3 4 with its consequences
posing particular difﬁculties to rehabilitation5 6 and
long-term prosthetic use.3
It can be classiﬁed into congenital or acquired;
the latter usually being associated with trauma. In
the military and the civilian settings traumatic brain
injury (TBI) and traumatic amputations are recog-
nised risk factors for HO7–9; despite these associa-
tions the exact pathogenic mechanism remains
elusive.
The prevalence of HO in the military setting is
reported to be increasing.10 This is thought to be
due to increased survivorship of casualties with
more severe extremity injuries seen in recent opera-
tions.11 In addition the characteristic mechanism of
injury seen in operations in Afghanistan, and the
latter stages in Iraq, has been blast from improvised
explosive devices (IEDs). Many studies have tried
to identify causal factors from the mechanism of
injury, management of wounds and complications
and the subsequent formation of HO.4 9 However
with so many variables involved in the formation
and treatment of a complex military wound, it is
difﬁcult to isolate a single aetiological event.
Due to the injury severity of the casualty, and the
complexity
and
highly
contaminated
wounds,
primary prevention is unlikely to be possible; there-
fore the military surgeon is left with little in his
armoury apart from surgical excision, after the for-
mation of HO. Case series of individual depart-
ment experiences in the management of HO are
seen in the literature10 12 but there is no consistent
management consensus.
Until recently research and evidence concerning
HO has been led by civilian academic departments,
however the increased prevalence and functional
compromise has driven the military requirement
for further work on its aetiology, structure, biology,
prevention and treatment. To identify scientiﬁc
needs and future research directions, a systematic
review of literature related to HO was performed.
METHODS
We employed ‘PRISMA’ systematic review guide-
lines; searching the PubMed database for references
using the search terms ‘heterotopic’ and ‘ossiﬁca-
tion’ as keywords, and limiting our search to the
last 100 years. Primary and secondary exclusion cri-
teria were then used to ﬁlter the results (Table 1)
after a secondary ﬁlter, further ﬁltering, or the use
of additional keywords, was found to over-reﬁne
our
search
and
signiﬁcant
articles
excluded.
Therefore it was felt that further searches should
be done manually. Manual strategies employed to
establish relevance, in order of hierarchical import-
ance, were (1) Title review, (2) MeSH term review,
(3) Abstract review and ﬁnally (4) Full article
review. A ﬂow chart of the search is demonstrated
in Figure 2. Relevant articles were subsequently
grouped into related subjects (Table 2).
RESULTS
Initially 7891 articles related to HO (Figure 3)
were identiﬁed which was reduced to 637 after
reﬁning the search using the primary, secondary
and manual exclusion strategies. The number of
articles published in the last 10 years increased
from 54 to 88, between 2003 and 2013. Three
Review
Edwards DS, Clasper JC. J R Army Med Corps 2015;161:315–321. doi:10.1136/jramc-2014-000277
315
 on February 4, 2023 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://militaryhealth.bmj.com/
J R Army Med Corps: first published as 10.1136/jramc-2014-000277 on 11 July 2014. Downloaded from 
distinct groups of research were evident, elective surgery,
trauma surgery and scientiﬁc basis of disease, representing 54%,
25% and 21%, respectively, of the articles published. The most
common publication subject was that of HO related to hip
arthroplasty (n=218, 34.2%). Only 26 articles were found
referring to HO in the military trauma setting.
One limitation encountered in the systematic review was a
change in nomenclature of HO. Terms such as ectopic bone for-
mation, myositis ossiﬁcans and heterotopic ossiﬁcation were
used interchangeably in history.
Normal bone formation
Prerequisites for bone formation are inductive signalling path-
ways, consisting of chemical mediators (chemokines and cyto-
kines), including bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), platelet
derived growth factors, ﬁbroblast growth factors, prostaglandins
(PGs) and interleukins, all of which trigger bone formation;
inducible osteoprogenitor cells which are cells capable of being
differentiated into bone forming osteoblasts and ﬁnally an envir-
onment conducive to osteogenesis (a scaffold for the deposition
of new bone).7 10 (Figure 4) In the normal physiological state
these prerequistes exist, together with osteoclast resorption, to
allow a slow metabolic turnover of normal bone. This enables
the skeletal system to continuously adapt to changes in normal
physiological loads, such as growth or increased physical activity
Scientiﬁc basis of disease
Genetics
HO can be divided into congenital (or genetic) and acquired.
Acquired causes are by far the most common; however, genetic
causes provide evidence of the genetic basis for the formation
of HO. Two congenital conditions exist speciﬁcally related to
the formation of ectopic bone. Fibrodysplasia ossiﬁcans progres-
siva (FOP) and progressive osseous hyperplasia are rare genetic
conditions which result in severe disability secondary to exten-
sive bone formation in all soft tissues.13 In FOP the exact
mutated gene has yet to be identiﬁed and is usually a spontan-
eous occurrence, but where familial tendency exists it seems to
confer an autosomal dominant pattern.14 In the early stages of
the disease a lymphocyte-associated mechanism has been identi-
ﬁed thereby inferring an inﬂammatory pathogenic process.15
Geneticists have demonstrated that the expression of BMP-4, an
inﬂammatory mediator, is signiﬁcantly increased in cases of
FOP.16 The downregulation of Noggin, a BMP-4 antagonist has
also been shown in FOP.17
An autosomal inheritance pattern is seen in progressive
osseous hyperplasia with the heterozygous inactivation of the
GNAS1 gene exclusively inherited from the father.18 This
results in decreased expression of the stimulatory G protein of
adenylyl cyclase, another inﬂammatory mediator. BMP-4 and
stimulatory G protein are associated with bone formation.
Pathological bone formation
The relevance of normal bone formation to pathological bone
formation is summarised by Kirsch who states that the molecu-
lar mechanisms that are normally found regulating physiological
bone formation and turnover are present in pathological condi-
tions of ectopic bone formation in the skeletal system, and
extraosseous soft tissues such as cartilage, blood vessels and
muscles.19 How this is achieved in the soft tissues of blast
related patients is unknown. However, with the release of cyto-
kines and chemokines seen in blast related tissues,20 which are
capable of the stimulation of osteogenesis and the recruitment
of bone forming units, an inﬂammatory mediated cellular mech-
anism is likely. Proinﬂammatory mediators, platelet derived
growth
factors,21
ﬁbroblast
growth
factors,22
transforming
growth factor-β,23 insulin-like growth factor I24 and insulin-like
growth factor–II,25 epidermal growth factors,26 and PGs27 have
all been implicated in osteoblast DNA synthesis and are present
in bone matrix. Analysis of wounds further details that certain
inﬂammatory cytokines and chemokines were upregulated as a
consequence of high energy penetrating extremity wounds.
Serum factors identiﬁed were IL-6, IL-10 and human monocyte
chemotactic protein-1. Wound efﬂuent proteins upregulated
were
macrophage
inﬂammatory
protein-1α
and
interferon-γ-inducible protein-10.28 This biochemical evidence
suggests that the formation of HO is associated with a systemic
and localised hyperinﬂammatory response to the index injury.
Laboratory manipulation of local and systemic cytokines have
been proven to inﬂuence stem cell differentiation. Progenitor
cells from muscle, periosteum and capillaries are capable of dif-
ferentiation into osteoprogenitor cells thereby providing osteo-
blast precursors in the generetaion of new bone.29 Further
modulation of local stem cells is possible by the intrinsic nature
Table 1
Filter levels and elements
Filter
Filter elements
Primary exclusions
Audio-visual
Newspaper
Lectures
Books
Biographies
Secondary exclusions
Letters
Retracted articles
Comments
Editorials
Conference articles
Manual search/exclusions
Anomalous articles
Duplicated articles
FOP/POH
OPLL/DISH
DISH, diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis; FOP, fibrodysplasia ossificans
progressiva; OPLL, ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament; POH,
progressive osseous hyperplasia.
Figure 1
Heterotopic ossiﬁcation in a transfemoral amputee.
Review
316
Edwards DS, Clasper JC. J R Army Med Corps 2015;161:315–321. doi:10.1136/jramc-2014-000277
 on February 4, 2023 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://militaryhealth.bmj.com/
J R Army Med Corps: first published as 10.1136/jramc-2014-000277 on 11 July 2014. Downloaded from 
of the local tissue. It has been recently reported that a strict
acidic environment is capable of reprogramming pluripotent
cells from one cell lineage to another, thereby demonstrating
bidirectional manipulation.30 31
Experimental models of heterotopic ossiﬁcation
Urist reported an experimental model of new bone formation
after trauma in the 1930s.32 Prior to that Blessig published the
ossiﬁcation of the kidney in response to ischaemia caused by
ligation of the renal artery in rabbits. Subsequently the identiﬁ-
cation, and isolation, of BMPs have allowed controlled osteoin-
duction within animal soft tissue models.
Broadly speaking three basic models of HO formation are
now
described33:
Trauma-induced
animal
models;
animal
osteoinductive models (the interaction of native undifferentiated
cells and implanted BMPs) and osteogenetic cell transplantation
models.
With the recognition that the formation of HO is related to a
blast injury and amputation through the zone of injury, labora-
tory experiments, including cellular and animal models, have
been designed.34–36 A physiological model aims to combine all
three basic models of HO formation where the blast wave
causes localised injury and ischaemia, amputation results in
release of mesenchymal stem cells residing in the bone canal
and subsequent inﬂammation causing the release of inﬂamma-
tory mediators, including BMPs. The heterogeneous events sur-
rounding
HO
formation
lead
to
experimental
difﬁculties.
Tannous reported good results from a Sprague-Dawley rat
animal model, however concerns lay in the delivery of the blast
(water column) and relatively low survival rate.36
Elective surgery related heterotopic ossiﬁcation
Hip arthroplasty
Over the last 50 years, total hip arthroplasty (THA) has become
increasingly common in the management of hip arthritis. The for-
mation of HO post surgery is frequently noted20 and its incidence
has been reported to range from 8%37 to 90%.38 However,
Figure 2
A ﬂow chart of the review
process.
Table 2
Relevant article grouping
Relevant articles by group
Filter elements
Elective surgery
Hip
Spine
Shoulder
Elbow
Trauma surgery
Civilian
Military
Burns
TBI/SCI
Amputations
Scientific basis of disease
Cellular
Animal
Human
TBI, traumatic brain injury.
Review
Edwards DS, Clasper JC. J R Army Med Corps 2015;161:315–321. doi:10.1136/jramc-2014-000277
317
 on February 4, 2023 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://militaryhealth.bmj.com/
J R Army Med Corps: first published as 10.1136/jramc-2014-000277 on 11 July 2014. Downloaded from 
Brooker et al report the incidence of HO resulting in signiﬁcant
disability is limited to those with high grades of HO and demon-
strate, using their classiﬁcation, that it is the ﬁnal stage of ankylosis
(Grade 4) that is most problematic for the patient.39 In the civilian
setting the principles of management of HO is that of primary pre-
vention in higher risk patients. The recognised methods of preven-
tion are the use of non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs, or
cyclo-oxygenase-2
(COX-2)
selective
non-steroidal
anti-
inﬂammatory drug, and radiation therapy.40
Heterotopic ossiﬁcation prophylaxis
A Cochrane Review, which included 16 Level 1 trials, demon-
strated the beneﬁt of regular indomethacin use during THA
reporting a 59% reduction in the incidence of HO.40–42 The
mechanism of action is via a combined effect of inhibition of
mesenchymal stem cells and the suppression of inﬂammation by
the inhibition of PG.43 However it was noted in these articles
that the side effects of gastrointestinal ulcers and increased risk
of postoperative bleeding were not benign. This has led to a
preference for COX-2 inhibitors.
The inhibition of bone growth by radiation was established
over 50 years ago.44 Doses in excess of 20 Grays resulted in the
suppression of vertebral growth in children. This has been
exploited in orthopaedics during THA.45 Preoperative or early
postoperative local exposure of 7–8 Grays has been demon-
strated to prevent the formation of HO45–47; however the
timing is relevant. By the 3rd postoperative day the mesenchy-
mal stem cells have already differentiated, and treatment after
this time is ineffective.48
Trauma related heterotopic ossiﬁcation
Civilian
Post-traumatic HO, traumatic myositis ossiﬁcans and myositis ossiﬁ-
cans circumspecta are all terms that have been used to deﬁne the
same problem—that of bone formation outside the skeletal system
following trauma. In general the trauma in which HO is formed
ranges from muscle sprains and contusions through to open frac-
tures of long bone.49 HO is seen in civilian, as well as military prac-
tice; its formation is often subclinical and noted incidentally on
radiographs. However, in particular during major trauma, the for-
mation of HO may compromise rehabilitation if formed around
large joints or dependent limbs. In the trauma environment, the lit-
erature demonstrates that plastic surgeons have referenced, and
investigated, that in patients with TBI and spinal cord injury (SCI),
HO is a well-recognised phenomenon and its incidence ranges from
10% to 20% of patients suffering a TBI and 20% to 30% of
patients with SCI.50–52 Neurogenic HO (NHO) has been demon-
strated to have a genetic element; the injury dictating the temporal
relation to its formation while the presence of HLA B27 identifying
the population at risk of HO.53 The absence of HLA B27 does not
preclude the formation of NHO.53 HLA B27 is associated with
inﬂammatory arthropathies such as ankylosing spondylitis and sero-
negative spondyloarthropathies such as Reiter’s disease.54 Despite
the fact that a genetic predisposition is present, centrally released
Figure 3
Numbers of published articles on heterotopic ossiﬁcation by year.
Figure 4
Biological prerequisites for heterotopic ossiﬁcation.
Review
318
Edwards DS, Clasper JC. J R Army Med Corps 2015;161:315–321. doi:10.1136/jramc-2014-000277
 on February 4, 2023 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://militaryhealth.bmj.com/
J R Army Med Corps: first published as 10.1136/jramc-2014-000277 on 11 July 2014. Downloaded from 
humoral factors previously described continue to be shown to drive
bone formation.55
Military
HO has been described in history for over a 1000 years56; observed
in amputees from the American Civil war,51 World War I2 and the
recent conﬂicts in Iraq and Afghanistan.4 28 57–59 Contemporary
military operations have demonstrated an increased prevalence
of HO in military wounds, when compared with civilian
counterparts.4 51 52 The increase in its incidence from veterans
serving in the US forces during Operation Iraqi Freedom and
Operation Enduring Freedom has resulted in a renewed interest
in HO and its extent documented in American and British mili-
tary literature.4 9 The increased prevalence in recent conﬂicts
may be due to increased survivor rates due to enhanced body
armour, rapid medical care to the severely injured solider and
subsequent increased survivorship, as well as the mechanism of
injury, particularly the IED. Speciﬁc wound related factors that
correlated with the development of HO included impaired
healing and bacterial colonisation.28 Disturbance of local micro-
vasculature renders the soft tissues susceptible to HO formation.
Localised changes in the arterial supply and reduced oxygen
tension render the soft tissues hypoxic and acidic. This favours
mineralisation and bone formation as the oxygen tension is
recovered through surgery or ventilation.60
61 The acidic
environment may also be capable of modulating the cell lineage
in soft tissues.30 31
In recent operations, the incidence of HO has been reported as
60–64%.4 58 Box 1 details the factors that, demonstrated in a com-
parative paper between the UK and USA, place the military casualty
at risk for the development of HO.4 It is likely that systematic and
local factors come into play in the formation of HO (Figure 5).
Current and potential future military issues
With amputees seen from operations in Afghanistan11 and a high
rate of HO, rehabilitation may be compromised in this casualty
group to a greater extent than previously seen. Signiﬁcant disabil-
ity has been reported in casualties from Vietnam with unilateral
transfemoral amputations and the majority of bilateral transfe-
moral amputees in the Vietnam cohort abandoned their prosthe-
tics and rely on a wheelchair for mobility; it was prosthetic related
issues that led the patient abandoning a prosthetic.3 62
The current management of HO is restricted to operative
excision in symptomatic patients who have failed non-operative
management such as rest, adjustment of pain medication,
selected injections, and nerve ablation of neuromas, socket
modiﬁcation
and
physiotherapy.10
63
Separately
published
British and American military experience in surgical excision
appears similar.58 63 Multiple centres in the UK and the USA
report the necessity of primary excision of symptomatic HO
within the 1st year after injury, combined with indomethacin or
COX-2 use. Good functional outcome and no signiﬁcant recur-
rence at 12 months after surgery with this approach are seen.59
Additionally, British Plastic and Reconstructive surgeons at the
Royal Centre of Defence Medicine described a technique of
serial operations to elevate, protect or excise overlying skin and
soft tissues to improve the weight bearing surface.63
REQUIRED RESEARCH
Animal heterotopic ossiﬁcation model
HO formation in rodents has been achieved but included cyto-
kine modulation of the animal.35 The model produced by
Tannous et al used local blast to the lower limb and therefore
systemic causes of blast related HO were not taken into
account.36 However, Alﬁeri et al describe ongoing work at
Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, of a reliable
reproducible systemic blast model with open fractures, wound
ischaemia, a large zone of injury, an appropriate bioburden and
amputations through the zone of injury.58 The required experi-
mental animal model for HO formation is a complex one.
However, a reliable small animal model requires validation and
to be expanded to larger species. Once established, individual
variables, such as blast magnitude and morphology, infection,
Figure 5
Interaction of local and systemic factors in the formation of
heterotopic ossiﬁcation.
Box 1
Casualty factors leading to increased risk of
heterotopic ossiﬁcation (HO)4
▸Age
▸Blast mechanism of injury (MOI)
▸Zone of injury (ZOI) and subsequent amputation
▸Injury severity score >16
▸Topical negative pressure (TNP) dressings
▸Traumatic brain injury (TBI)
▸Multiple extremity injuries
▸Number of debridements before closure
Review
Edwards DS, Clasper JC. J R Army Med Corps 2015;161:315–321. doi:10.1136/jramc-2014-000277
319
 on February 4, 2023 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://militaryhealth.bmj.com/
J R Army Med Corps: first published as 10.1136/jramc-2014-000277 on 11 July 2014. Downloaded from 
surgical debridement zones and local biomechanics, can be
manipulated to help in the prevention and management of HO.
Cellular level
To date a reliable cellular model of HO formation secondary to
blast has yet to be published. Detailed structural evaluation is
still lacking in the literature. Limited imaging techniques are
described, however, detailed structure of the cortex and lamellar
conﬁguration of HO, in comparison with normal bone, is yet to
be seen. This would also provide control data to samples
retrieved from experimental models.
Military aetiological factors
The comparative study by Brown et al showed signiﬁcant simi-
larities between the UK and US experiences of wounds and sub-
sequent
HO
formation
in
Iraq
and
the
early
years
in
Afghanistan.4 However, the UK data set only included casualties
up to 2008. It is well recognised that the modus operandi of the
Taliban and insurgents changed at this time to the use of IEDs
of greater magnitude.
Muscle ischaemia and necrosis are believed to be related to
HO formation.64 Therefore tourniquet related data requires
comparison in these subjects and larger subject numbers are
required to further evaluate the link to topical negative dressings
and HO, that was noted previously.4
Management of HO in military population
Military amputees requiring surgery for wound and residuum
related problems during rehabilitation, such as those seen in
limbs complicated by HO, are referred from their rehabilitation
centre to secondary care specialists for surgical management
throughout the UK. This provides an opportunity for data ana-
lysis on protocols used and complication/recurrence rates after
HO surgery at different centres. Ideally a prospective cohort
study in the use of medical and surgical strategies in manage-
ment of HO should be considered. However, a retrospective
comparative multiarm case series would give direction to future
research. The timing of HO excision may be the key; as detailed
previously, surgery is contemplated when rehabilitation is com-
promised. However, once risk stratiﬁcation is analysed, and
when HO can be clinically recognised early in its development,
surgery may be expedited to prevent rehabilitation delays.
CONCLUSION
It is likely that HO will continue to compromise the rehabilita-
tion and long-term outcome of the cohort of traumatic ampu-
tees from operations in Afghanistan, the magnitude of which,
while at present is unknown, is likely to reﬂect the experience in
Iraq and the early stages of Afghanistan. As noted, there remain
signiﬁcant gaps in the understanding of this condition. Work is
required in this ﬁeld to fully understand its pathogenesis from
the triggering traumatic event, cellular inception to primary pre-
vention. Understanding the key to unlocking its formation is
likely to help its prevention and/or subsequent management.
Contributors DSE: main researcher and author. JCC: research supervisor and
guarantor.
Competing interests None.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
REFERENCES
1
Abū’l-Qāsim Halaf b.’Abbās az-Zahrāwī. Albucasis: on surgery and instruments.
Translated by Spink MS and Lewis GL. Berkeley: University of California Press,
1973.
2
Dejerne A, Ceillier A. Para-osteo-arthropathies des paraplegiques par lesion
medullaire; etude clinique et radiographique. Ann Med 1918;5:497.
3
Dougherty PJ, McFarland LV, Smith DG, et al. Multiple traumatic limb loss: a
comparison of Vietnam veterans to OIF/OEF servicemembers. J Rehabil Res Dev
2010;47:333–48.
4
Brown KV, Dharm-Datta S, Potter BK, et al. Comparison of development of
heterotopic ossiﬁcation in injured US and UK Armed Services personnel with
combat-related amputations: preliminary ﬁndings and hypotheses regarding
causality. J Trauma 2010;69:S116–22.
5
Masini BD, Waterman SM, Wenke JC, et al. Resource utilization and disability
outcome assessment of combat casualties from Operation Iraqi Freedom and
Operation Enduring Freedom. J Orthop Trauma 2009;23:261–6.
6
Gajewski D, Granville R. The United States Armed Forces Amputee Patient Care
Program. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2006;14(10 Spec No.):S183–7.
7
Chalmers J, Gray DH, Rush J. Observations on the induction of bone in soft tissues.
J Bone Joint Surg Br 1975;57:36–45.
8
Cipriano CA, Pill SG, Keenan MA. Heterotopic ossiﬁcation following traumatic brain
injury and spinal cord injury. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2009;17:689–97.
9
Potter BK, Burns TC, Lacap AP, et al. Heterotopic ossiﬁcation in the residual limbs
of traumatic and combat-related amputees. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2006;14(10
Spec No.):S191–7.
10
Potter BK, Burns TC, Lacap AP, et al. Heterotopic ossiﬁcation following traumatic
and combat-related amputations. Prevalence, risk factors, and preliminary results of
excision. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2007;89:476–86.
11
Brown KV, Clasper JC. The changing pattern of amputations. J R Army Med Corps
2013;159:300–3.
12
Ramasamy A, Harrisson SE, Clasper JC, et al. Injuries from roadside improvised
explosive devices. J Trauma 2008;65:910–14.
13
Connor JM, Evans DA. Fibrodysplasia ossiﬁcans progressiva. The clinical features
and natural history of 34 patients. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1982;64:76–83.
14
Kaplan FS, McCluskey W, Hahn G, et al. Genetic transmission of ﬁbrodysplasia
ossiﬁcans progressiva. Report of a family. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1993;75:1214–20.
15
Gannon FH, Valentine BA, Shore EM, et al. Acute lymphocytic inﬁltration in an
extremely early lesion of ﬁbrodysplasia ossiﬁcans progressiva. Clin Orthop Relat Res
1998(346):19–25.
16
Shafritz AB, Shore EM, Gannon FH, et al. Overexpression of an osteogenic
morphogen in ﬁbrodysplasia ossiﬁcans progressiva. N Engl J Med
1996;335:555–61.
17
Ahn J, Serrano de la Pena L, Shore EM, et al. Paresis of a bone morphogenetic
protein-antagonist response in a genetic disorder of heterotopic skeletogenesis.
J Bone Joint Surg Am 2003;85-A:667–74.
18
Shore EM, Ahn J, Jan de Beur S, et al. Paternally inherited inactivating mutations
of the GNAS1 gene in progressive osseous heteroplasia. N Engl J Med
2002;346:99–106.
19
Kirsch T. Determinants of pathological mineralization. Curr Opin Rheumatol
2006;18:174–80.
20
Kaplan FS, Glaser DL, Hebela N, et al. Heterotopic ossiﬁcation. J Am Acad Orthop
Surg 2004;12:116–25.
21
Canalis E. Effect of platelet-derived growth factor on DNA and protein synthesis in
cultured rat calvaria. Metabolism 1981;30:970–5.
22
Rodan SB, Wesolowski G, Thomas K, et al. Growth stimulation of rat calvaria
osteoblastic cells by acidic ﬁbroblast growth factor. Endocrinology
1987;121:1917–23.
23
Centrella M, McCarthy TL, Canalis E. Transforming growth factor beta is a
bifunctional regulator of replication and collagen synthesis in osteoblast-enriched
cell cultures from fetal rat bone. J Biol Chem 1987;262:2869–74.
24
Hock JM, Centrella M, Canalis E. Insulin-like growth factor I has independent
effects on bone matrix formation and cell replication. Endocrinology
1988;122:254–60.
25
Mohan S, Jennings JC, Linkhart TA, et al. Primary structure of human skeletal
growth factor: homology with human insulin-like growth factor-II. Biochim Biophys
Acta 1988;966:44–55.
26
Canalis E, Raisz LG. Effect of epidermal growth factor on bone formation in vitro.
Endocrinology 1979;104:862–9.
27
Nauth A, Giles E, Potter BK, et al. Heterotopic ossiﬁcation in orthopaedic trauma.
J Orthop Trauma 2012;26:684–8.
28
Evans KN, Forsberg JA, Potter BK, et al. Inﬂammatory cytokine and chemokine
expression is associated with heterotopic ossiﬁcation in high-energy penetrating war
injuries. J Orthop Trauma 2012;26:e204–13.
29
Davis TA, O’Brien FP, Anam K, et al. Heterotopic ossiﬁcation in complex
orthopaedic combat wounds: quantiﬁcation and characterization of osteogenic
precursor cell activity in traumatized muscle. J Bone Joint Surg Am
2011;93:1122–31.
30
Obokata H, Sasai Y, Niwa H, et al. Bidirectional developmental potential in
reprogrammed cells with acquired pluripotency. Nature 2014;505:676–80.
31
Obokata H, Wakayama T, Sasai Y, et al. Stimulus-triggered fate conversion
of somatic cells into pluripotency. Nature 2014;505:641–7.
32
Urist MR. Bone: formation by autoinduction. Science 1965;150:893–9.
Review
320
Edwards DS, Clasper JC. J R Army Med Corps 2015;161:315–321. doi:10.1136/jramc-2014-000277
 on February 4, 2023 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://militaryhealth.bmj.com/
J R Army Med Corps: first published as 10.1136/jramc-2014-000277 on 11 July 2014. Downloaded from 
33
Ekelund A, Brosjo O, Nilsson OS. Experimental induction of heterotopic bone. Clin
Orthop Relat Res 1991(263):102–12.
34
Liu X, Kang H, Shahnazari M, et al. A novel mouse model of trauma induced
heterotopic ossiﬁcation. J Orthop Res 2014;32:183–8.
35
Zotz TG, Paula JB, Moser AD. Experimental model of heterotopic ossiﬁcation in
Wistar rats. Braz J Med Biol Res 2012;45:497–501.
36
Tannous O, Grifﬁth C, O’Toole RV, et al. Heterotopic ossiﬁcation after extremity blast
amputation in a Sprague-Dawley rat animal model. J Orthop Trauma 2011;25:506–10.
37
Amstutz HC. Complications of total hip replacement. Clin Orthop Relat Res
1970;72:123–37.
38
Rosendahl S, Christoffersen JK, Norgaard M. Para-articular ossiﬁcation following hip
replacement. 70 arthroplasties ad modum Moore using McFarland’s approach. Acta
Orthop Scand 1977;48:400–4.
39
Brooker AF, Bowerman JW, Robinson RA, et al. Ectopic ossiﬁcation following total
hip replacement. Incidence and a method of classiﬁcation. J Bone Joint Surg Am
1973;55:1629–32.
40
Fransen M, Neal B. Non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs for preventing
heterotopic bone formation after hip arthroplasty. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2004;(3):CD001160.
41
Matta JM, Siebenrock KA. Does indomethacin reduce heterotopic bone formation
after operations for acetabular fractures? A prospective randomised study. J Bone
Joint Surg Br 1997;79:959–63.
42
Haran M, Bhuta T, Lee B. Pharmacological interventions for treating acute
heterotopic ossiﬁcation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2004;(4):CD003321.
43
Sell S, Willms R, Jany R, et al. The suppression of heterotopic ossiﬁcations: radiation
versus NSAID therapy--a prospective study. J Arthroplasty 1998;13:854–9.
44
Neuhauser EB, Wittenborg MH, Berman CZ, et al. Irradiation effects of roentgen
therapy on the growing spine. Radiology 1952;59:637–50.
45
Coventry MB, Scanlon PW. The use of radiation to discourage ectopic bone. A
nine-year study in surgery about the hip. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1981;63:201–8.
46
Anthony P, Keys H, Evarts CM, et al. Prevention of heterotopic bone formation with
early post operative irradiation in high risk patients undergoing total hip
arthroplasty: comparison of 10.00 Gy vs 20.00 Gy schedules. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1987;13:365–9.
47
Healy WL, Lo TC, DeSimone AA, et al. Single-dose irradiation for the prevention
of heterotopic ossiﬁcation after total hip arthroplasty. A comparison of doses of ﬁve
hundred and ﬁfty and seven hundred centigray. J Bone Joint Surg Am
1995;77:590–5.
48
Lo TC, Healy WL, Covall DJ, et al. Heterotopic bone formation after hip surgery:
prevention with single-dose postoperative hip irradiation. Radiology
1988;168:851–4.
49
Garland DE. A clinical perspective on common forms of acquired heterotopic
ossiﬁcation. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1991(263):13–29.
50
Garland DE, Blum CE, Waters RL. Periarticular heterotopic ossiﬁcation in
head-injured adults. Incidence and location. J Bone Joint Surg Am
1980;62:1143–6.
51
Garland DE. Clinical observations on fractures and heterotopic ossiﬁcation in the
spinal cord and traumatic brain injured populations. Clin Orthop Relat Res
1988:86–101.
52
Wittenberg RH, Peschke U, Botel U. Heterotopic ossiﬁcation after spinal cord injury.
Epidemiology and risk factors. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1992;74:215–18.
53
Larson JM, Michalski JP, Collacott EA, et al. Increased prevalence of HLA-B27 in
patients with ectopic ossiﬁcation following traumatic spinal cord injury. Rheumatol
Rehabil 1981;20:193–7.
54
Moll JM, Haslock I, Macrae IF, et al. Associations between ankylosing spondylitis,
psoriatic arthritis, Reiter’s disease, the intestinal arthropathies, and Behcet’s
syndrome. Medicine (Baltimore) 1974;53:343–64.
55
Toffoli AM, Gautschi OP, Frey SP, et al. From brain to bone: evidence for the
release of osteogenic humoral factors after traumatic brain injury. Brain Inj
2008;22:511–18.
56
Chao ST, Joyce MJ, Suh JH. Treatment of heterotopic ossiﬁcation. Orthopedics
2007;30:457–64; quiz 65–6.
57
Melcer T, Belnap B, Walker GJ, et al. Heterotopic ossiﬁcation in combat amputees
from Afghanistan and Iraq wars: ﬁve case histories and results from a small series
of patients. J Rehabil Res Dev 2011;48:1–12.
58
Alﬁeri KA, Forsberg JA, Potter BK. Blast injuries and heterotopic ossiﬁcation. Bone
Joint Res 2012;1:192–7.
59
Forsberg JA, Pepek JM, Wagner S, et al. Heterotopic ossiﬁcation in high-energy
wartime extremity injuries: prevalence and risk factors. J Bone Joint Surg Am
2009;91:1084–91.
60
Pape HC, Marsh S, Morley JR, et al. Current concepts in the development of
heterotopic ossiﬁcation. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2004;86:783–7.
61
Hewitt MS, Garland DE, Ayyoub Z. Heterotopic ossiﬁcation complicating prolonged
intubation: case report and review of the literature. J Spinal Cord Med
2002;25:46–9.
62
Dougherty PJ. Armored vehicle crew casualties. Mil Med 1990;155:417–20.
63
Evriviades D, Jeffery S, Cubison T, et al. Shaping the military wound: issues
surrounding the reconstruction of injured servicemen at the Royal Centre for
Defence Medicine. Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci 2011;366:219–30.
64
Stein DA, Patel R, Egol KA, et al. Prevention of heterotopic ossiﬁcation at the
elbow following trauma using radiation therapy. Bull Hosp Jt Dis 2003;61:
151–4.
Review
Edwards DS, Clasper JC. J R Army Med Corps 2015;161:315–321. doi:10.1136/jramc-2014-000277
321
 on February 4, 2023 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://militaryhealth.bmj.com/
J R Army Med Corps: first published as 10.1136/jramc-2014-000277 on 11 July 2014. Downloaded from

===== Ayturk2019_CurrOsteoporosRep_RNAseq+SkeletalBiology =====

SKELETAL BIOLOGY AND REGULATION (M FORWOOD AND A ROBLING, SECTION EDITORS)
RNA-seq in Skeletal Biology
Ugur Ayturk1
Published online: 15 May 2019
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2019
Abstract
Purpose of Review The goal of this paper is to review state-of-the-art transcriptome profiling methods and their recent applica-
tions in the field of skeletal biology.
Recent Findings Next-generation sequencing of mRNA (RNA-seq) methods have been established and routinely used in skeletal
biology research. RNA-seq has led to the identification of novel genes and transcription factors involved in skeletal development
and disease, through its application in small and large animal models, as well as human tissue and cells. With the availability of
advanced techniques such as single-cell RNA-seq, novel cell types in skeletal tissues are being identified.
Summary As the sequencing technologies are rapidly evolving, the exciting discoveries supported by transcriptomics will
continue to emerge and improve our understanding of the biology of the skeleton.
Keywords RNA-seq . Single-cell RNA-seq . Bone . Cartilage . Ligament . Wnt signaling
Introduction
Over the last two decades, transcriptional profiling methods
have evolved from targeted quantification of one or few tran-
scripts (e.g., qRT-PCR) to unbiased, simultaneous profiling of
thousands of transcripts (e.g., microarrays and RNA-seq). The
targeted approaches such as qRT-PCR are still commonly
used, as they are rapid, affordable, and do not require bioin-
formatics expertise. However, next-generation sequencing–
based techniques, mainly RNA-seq, have quickly become a
powerful alternative to the conventional techniques. RNA-seq
allows profiling of the whole transcriptome and can therefore
reveal alterations in the entire signaling networks, and poten-
tially lead to the identification of novel genes of significance
that could not be predicted a priori. With the availability of a
large array of wet-lab and dry-lab tools, RNA-seq has become
one of the standard techniques in molecular biology research.
Since the initial application of next-generation sequencing
technology to complementary DNA (cDNA) [1–3], RNA-seq
has been widely used in skeletal biology research. Today,
RNA-seq continues to hold significant potential to answer
some of the pressing questions regarding skeletal develop-
ment and disease. The origin of skeletal tissues, such as bone,
cartilage, ligament, and tendon, remains incompletely under-
stood with respect to the mesenchymal cell populations in-
volved in their development. At the same time, our under-
standing of prevalent skeletal disorders, such as osteoporosis
and osteoarthritis, is limited in terms of the molecular events
underlying disease initiation, progression, and treatment with
existing therapies. RNA-seq has provided insight into some of
the aforementioned issues in studies evaluating clinically
available and experimental therapies in animal models, and
will continue to do so with the emergence of advanced tech-
niques such as single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) and spatial
transcriptomics.
In this paper, I will review the typical RNA-seq
workflow commonly used to evaluate messenger RNA
(mRNA) expression, while highlighting the specific chal-
lenges associated with studying skeletal tissues and the
solutions that have been proposed in the literature. I will
provide a brief overview of recent studies on bone, carti-
lage, ligament, and tendon tissues that benefited from
RNA-seq analyses. I will also review more recently devel-
oped technologies such as scRNA-seq, whose application
have so far been limited but holds potential to provide
deeper insight into the biology of the skeleton.
This article is part of the Topical Collection on Skeletal Biology and
Regulation
* Ugur Ayturk
ayturku@hss.edu
1
Musculoskeletal Integrity Program, Hospital for Special Surgery, 515
East 71st St. Suite 403, New York, NY 10021, USA
Current Osteoporosis Reports (2019) 17:178–185
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11914-019-00517-x
Generation and Analysis of RNA-seq Data
A typical RNA-seq experiment has two components: Library
preparation (wet-lab) and computational data analysis (dry-
lab). For the preparation of high-quality RNA-seq libraries,
high-quality RNA samples are required. The use of degraded
RNA results in uneven coverage of transcript sequences with
a bias towards the 3′ untranslated region (UTR), and the com-
plexity of the transcriptome is reduced when the degradation
is severe [4]. A standard method for determining RNA quality
is to calculate the RNA integrity number (RIN, within a range
of 0 to 10), based on the length distribution of RNA transcripts
and the relative abundances of 18S and 28S ribosomal RNA in
each specimen. However, isolation of RNA with sufficient
quality (i.e., high RIN) and quantity can be challenging when
dealing with matrix-rich skeletal tissues, especially those from
small animal models. Post-mortem RNA preservation tech-
niques (e.g., RNAlater) that can chemically stabilize highly
cellular tissues such as brain, liver, or kidney are not necessar-
ily compatible with skeletal tissues [5]; these solutions are not
capable of fully penetrating the extracellular matrix to reach
the cells, especially in the case of mineralized tissues.
Alternatively, de-activation of RNA-degrading enzymes by
rapidly cooling tissue specimens following harvest can be a
viable approach [6, 7]. This problem has been recognized in
the field of skeletal biology, and multiple tissue-specific RNA
isolation protocols have been described for bone, cartilage,
ligament, and tendon [8–10, 11•, 12, 13•, 14•,15–17]. Laser
capture microdissection (LCM), which allows extraction of
cells from precise anatomic locations, typically yields degrad-
ed RNA. However, specialized approaches for sequencing
LCM-derived RNA have also been described [18–20]. A typ-
ical library preparation pipeline involves enrichment of
mRNA (or conversely, depletion of ribosomal RNA), frag-
mentation, reverse transcription of mRNA, double-stranded
cDNA generation, blunting of 5′ and 3′ regions of the cDNA
molecules, barcoded adapter ligation (which allow combining
multiple samples in downstream sequencing steps), amplifi-
cation, and purification of the cDNA libraries (Fig. 1). Pooled
libraries can then be sequenced with single- or paired-end
settings; in other words, one or two-paired reads can be gen-
erated by sequencing the transcripts, each with typically 50–
100 bp length.
The appropriate number of reads per library depends on the
desired downstream application; however, for standard
mRNA expression analyses, 10–25 million reads per library
have been reported to be sufficient to detect significant differ-
ences between treatment and control groups in skeletal biolo-
gy studies on animal models [21••, 22]. Importantly, the num-
ber of genes whose expression could be reliably detected with
RNA-seq depends on the transcriptional complexity of the
source tissue. While evaluating multiple mouse tissues with
RNA-seq, we have previously shown that less than 5000
transcripts can be detected above the detectability threshold
(RPKM> 5) for skeletal muscle and whole blood, whereas >
8000 transcripts can be detected above the same threshold in
bone marrow and > 9000 transcripts in long bone tissue [21••].
Furthermore, increasing the number of sequencing reads does
not necessarily lead to a meaningful increase in the number of
genes whose expressions are detected. Conversely, when gene
expression differences between two or more groups are
sought, increasing the number of replicates in each group
can substantially enhance the statistical power of the experi-
ment, and might help detect subtler changes in transcriptional
activity [23, 24]. So how many biologic replicates does one
need in an experiment? The answer depends on the expected
variability in each group (which can be lower when testing a
cell line vs fresh frozen tissue) and the desired power (e.g.,
detecting threefold changes in expression vs 1.5-fold). Power
analysis tools for RNA-seq experiments have been developed
([25–28]). Furthermore, whole tissue RNA-seq experiments
on long bone and ligament tissue have reported the detection
of gene expression changes as low as twofold with n = 6–8
biologic replicates [21••, 22, 29]. With cultured cells, where
the variability within each biologic group might be limited
relative to fresh frozen tissue, it could be possible to attain a
similar level of statistical power with less replicates.
Following quality control of sequencing reads (FastQC is a
commonly employed tool for this [30]), the first step of bio-
informatics analysis is the alignment of the reads to a reference
genome. Using paired and long reads can increase the speci-
ficity of alignment, but even with 50 bp single-end reads,
high-quality RNA-seq libraries can generate reads ~ 99% of
which can be successfully aligned (~ 80–85% uniquely) to a
position in the well-defined mouse or human genomes [19,
31, 32]. Then, the mapped reads are annotated; in other words,
reads that correspond to the exonic sequences of each gene are
identified and gene-specific read counts are calculated (Fig.
1). In experiments where unconventional model organisms are
utilized, familiarity with the genetics of the model organism
might be helpful, as available sequence and gene annotation
data may be limited. This problem could be circumvented
with de novo transcriptome assembly tools, which do not re-
quire the existence of a reference genome, but come at the cost
of additional computational effort [33]. Once total read counts
per gene are calculated, these values can be normalized for
downstream analyses in a number of ways. In order to rank
genes based on their expression levels, reads/fragments per
kilobase million (RPKM/FPKM) values are calculated by nor-
malizing the read counts with respect to (1) the total number of
reads in each library and (2) the length of the exonic sequence
in each gene.
For statistical evaluations where two or more groups of
libraries are compared, more sophisticated approaches are re-
quired, which take the transcriptional complexity of libraries
into account. edgeR and DESeq are two very commonly used
Curr Osteoporos Rep (2019) 17:178–185
179
R subroutine packages that offer advanced normalization and
differential expression algorithms [34, 35]. In addition to
these, an important consideration in RNA-seq data analysis
is the utilization of algorithms for multiple hypothesis testing
correction. Performing thousands of simultaneous statistical
tests on gene expression leads to an increased number of in-
correct significance calls (i.e., type I error). In order to address
this problem, the concept of false discovery rate (FDR) [36] is
incorporated into differential expression analysis packages
(including edgeR and DESeq) and can be controlled through
conservative adjustment of p values, which results in a reduc-
tion in the aforementioned error. More “user friendly” soft-
ware with a graphic user interface, such as Galaxy, are also
available [37]. Finally, gene set enrichment analysis software
can assist in evaluating differences between multiple groups
of samples, especially when a large number of genes are found
to be differentially expressed.
Applications of RNA-seq on Skeletal Tissues
As an unbiased molecular profiling method, RNA-seq has
been applied to a very diverse set of problems in the field of
skeletal biology. The broad scope of the studies reviewed
herein demonstrates the power and range of RNA-seq, and
that it is widely utilized as a molecular analysis tool by skeletal
researchers.
Recent studies utilizing RNA-seq have revealed specific
transcriptional changes in osteoblasts during differentiation
towards an osteocyte-like phenotype. These studies highlight-
ed the role of epigenetic events in osteocytogenesis, such as
alterations in vitamin D receptor binding [38•, 39•], and de-
termined the stage-specific transcriptomes of differentiating
calvarial osteoblasts in vitro [40]. Further work on the epige-
nome of differentiating osteoblasts through combined CHIP-
seq and RNA-seq analyses identified Ezh2 as a negative reg-
ulator of osteoblast maturation and skeletal development [41,
42]. RNA-seq–based transcriptional profiling also led to iden-
tification of novel molecules involved in PTH signaling such
as Cdc73 [43], and verified the similarity of molecular chang-
es induced by intermittent PTH treatment and salt inducible
kinase (SIK) inhibition in osteocyte-like Ocy454 cells [44].
Studies on mice with altered Lrp5-mediated Wnt signaling
have also identified novel transcripts (in addition to Col1a1
and Bglap), whose abundance in long bone tissue correlates
with Wnt signaling activity in mice [45]. Altogether, these
findings indicate that transcriptome profiling with RNA-seq
has the power to identify novel molecules involved in bone
cell differentiation, as well as anabolic bone formation in-
duced by PTH and Wnt signaling.
One particular area of bone biology where RNA-seq has
been used in pursuit of novel genes and mechanisms is bone
mechanotransduction. That bone tissue remodels itself and
positively responds to mechanical loading has been known
for a long time [46], and canonical Wnt signaling has been
identified as a key molecular event in bone tissue’s ability to
respond to mechanical loads [47, 48]. With the ability to
screen the entire transcriptome in an unbiased manner, a num-
ber of studies evaluated mechanically loaded long bones
[49••, 50], osteocyte-like MLO-Y4 cells stimulated with fluid
flow [51] and bone marrow stem cells subjected to
Fig. 1 The typical RNA-seq workflow entails mRNA isolation from cells
or tissues, fragmentation, reverse transcription, barcoding, and
amplification of cDNA. The short reads generated using the cDNA
libraries are mapped to a reference genome, counted, and normalized to
gene-specific expression data. These data can then be utilized in
differential expression analyses comparing two or more groups of
libraries, or identification of novel genes or pathways of interest
180
Curr Osteoporos Rep (2019) 17:178–185
microgravity [52], in order to determine transcriptome-wide
changes in gene expression in response to alterations in me-
chanical environment. These studies identified time- and
compartment-dependent changes in tissue-level gene expres-
sion in bone, while verifying the involvement of Wnt signal-
ing through changes in the expression of canonical and non-
canonical Wnt ligands. Yet, novel genes and signaling events
outside the Wnt pathway are yet to be definitively associated
with mechanotransduction in bone cells. Further validation
experiments will be necessary to demonstrate the mechano-
responsiveness of any gene that is identified in future RNA-
seq experiments, such as those performed on mice with Lrp5
mutations [53, 54] that demonstrate inhibited or enhanced
bone formation following mechanical stimulation.
Unlike bone tissue, the cellular and genetic make-up of
tendons and ligaments remain largely uncharacterized.
Transcriptional profiling has therefore been utilized in order
to better understand the development of connective tissues, as
well disease- or trauma-induced changes. Specifically, the in-
volvement of mTORC1 signaling [55] and transcription factor
Foxf2 [56] in regulating mouse tendon development has been
shown with RNA-seq. A large body of literature in ligament
research focuses on anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries,
as they tend to trigger post-traumatic osteoarthritis (PTOA).
RNA-seq experiments on torn ACL tissue from patients have
revealed that the extent of injury to the joint, specifically the
presence of meniscal tears, significantly influence the tran-
scriptome of damaged ACL cells [57]. Further, work on
mouse models shows that genetic background has a signifi-
cant effect on the severity of PTOA phenotype which appears
to be correlated with inflammatory cytokine expression in
damaged ACL tissue [58, 59]. Experiments on large animal
models of ACL transection also show that dramatic transcrip-
tional changes occur in several joint tissues, including the
synovium, ACL, and articular cartilage, in a time-dependent
manner [22, 29, 60]. Consistent with studies on mouse and
human patient-derived tissues, the aforementioned experi-
ments identified transcriptional changes in inflammation and
cell cycle–related genes in multiple joint tissues.
RNA-seq has revealed novel aspects of transcriptional reg-
ulation of growth plate cartilage development as well.
Specifically, in the growth plate, RNA-seq experiments sug-
gested that PTPN11/SHP2 loss results in disorganization of
the hierarchy of growth plate chondrocytes [61]. Disruption of
epigenetic regulators alter the transcriptome of chondrocytes,
leading to an osteogenic gene expression repertoire with the
loss of Ezh2 [42] and reduced expression chondrogenic genes
(including Acan and Sox9) with the loss of Kdm6b [62].
Multiple studies identified novel targets of transcription fac-
tors Sox9 and Pitx1 in chondrocytes [63–65]. RNA-seq has
also identified disease-related changes in articular cartilage,
specifically within the context of osteoarthritis. Comparative
evaluation of damaged and intact cartilage specimens from
patients going under total joint replacement surgery, as well
as assessment of post-mortem tissue and primary
chondrocytes, has revealed alterations in cartilage tran-
scriptome, specifically in the expression of cartilage-
associated genes Sox9, Col11a2, Acan, and other novel tran-
scription factors [66]. A recent study by Ji et al. utilized a
scRNA-seq approach, and identified multiple transcriptionally
distinct chondrocyte populations in diseased cartilage tissue
[67].
Regardless of the tissue of interest, a common challenge in
most RNA-seq studies in skeletal biology is the inherent cel-
lular heterogeneity. When a transcriptional change is identi-
fied between two biologic groups, is it due to changes in the
relative quantity of a specific cell type, or changes in the
transcriptomes of all cells? If specific markers for cells of
interest are available, flow cytometry might offer a potential
solution to this problem, provided that cells will have to go
under additional processing such as enzymatic and/or me-
chanical dissociation from the source tissue. scRNA-seq,
which allows transcriptional profiling of individual cells, will
likely offer solutions to this persisting problem of cellular
complexity. A better understanding of the cellular complexity
of skeletal tissues will likely be possible in the near future,
through the combined use of complimentary methods such as
scRNA-seq, flow cytometry, and immunohistochemistry-
based lineage tracing.
Single-Cell RNA-seq and New Possibilities in Skeletal
Biology
scRNA-seq offers the ability to profile the transcriptomes of
individual cells, and therefore makes it possible to evaluate the
cellular diversity of complex tissues such as bone and bone
marrow. The advances in the field of scRNA-seq have been
accelerated by the advent of droplet-based single cell capture
technologies [68••], followed by the rapid emergence of sev-
eral platforms that facilitate cell capture and single cell mRNA
library preparation. The commercially available technologies
can be classified into two categories: droplet-based cell cap-
ture techniques (originally termed “Drop-seq” by the inven-
tors of the technique [68••]) and plate-based capture and se-
quencing techniques [69, 70]. While the former technology
allows processing of tens of thousands of cells from a single
specimen, the number of transcripts detected per cell and the
sequence coverage of each transcript (heavily enriched at 3′
UTR) are limited. The plate-based techniques on the other
hand rely on the separation of individual cells into wells of
96- or 384-well plates, and are therefore limited in terms of the
cells that can be processed to a few hundred cells at one time.
However, with plate-based techniques, it is possible to se-
quence the transcriptome of each cell in greater depth, and
potentially evaluate the whole sequence of each transcript,
rather than solely the 3′ UTR.
Curr Osteoporos Rep (2019) 17:178–185
181
The applications of scRNA-seq have been relatively
limited in the field of skeletal biology so far; however,
this is likely to change thanks to the availability of the
technique through various commercial platforms that uti-
lize the aforementioned approaches. One of the biggest
challenges associated with scRNA-seq remains its cost,
which can easily surpass $1000 per specimen only to cap-
ture cells and prepare libraries. However, with the advent
of novel multiplexing technologies such as CITE-seq
(which allows antibody-mediated labeling of cells, and
therefore multiplexing cells with distinct origin prior to
processing [71••]), scRNA-seq will likely become afford-
able and accessible to a growing community of scientists.
Earliest studies in the field of scRNA-seq focused on
the biology of developing organisms and tissues, in an
effort to better characterize the biology of actively differ-
entiating cell populations [72]. Starting with Drop-seq, it
became apparent that novel cell types could be transcrip-
tionally defined in tissues with high cellular diversity,
such as the retina [68••, 73]. Debnath et al. have shown
that multiple mesenchymal cell populations in the long
bone periosteum are labeled with Ctsk expression, which
until recently was thought to be unique to osteoclasts
[74••]. scRNA-seq experiments have identified n = 4 dis-
tinct populations within the aforementioned cell pool, one
of which exhibits characteristics of stem cells. Going for-
ward, scRNA-seq will likely improve our understanding
of the biology of the developing skeleton (as the mesen-
chymal origins of osteoblasts remain incompletely char-
acterized, and the same is true for connective tissue ten-
dons and ligaments and their interfaces with bone and
muscle), and also the changes that an injured tissue goes
under during repair (such as a bone fracture callus, a torn
ligament, or articular cartilage at the onset of post-
traumatic osteoarthritis). scRNA-seq could be utilized in
multiple different ways to gain further insight into these
problems. It remains to be seen if scRNA-seq can identify
gene expression changes in individual skeletal cell popu-
lations following perturbation. The number of genes de-
tected per cell is typically limited compared to conven-
tional RNA-seq, which may limit the statistical power of
the assay. However, scRNA-seq has been utilized in iden-
tifying novel cell types that only arise in disease state (for
example, during cystic fibrosis in the lung [75, 76]). A
recent study by Ji et al. has reported the presence of mul-
tiple transcriptionally distinct chondrocyte populations in
diseased human articular cartilage [63]; however, it is un-
clear if any of these populations are unique to the osteo-
arthritic phenotype. One potential approach to delineating
the origin and fate of cell populations of interest could be
to utilize classic lineage tracing approaches, in combina-
tion with flow cytometry and scRNA-seq. Specific cell
populations could be marked in a mouse model using
the inducible Cre-recombinase system, after which the
labeled cells and their descendants are harvested, sorted,
and finally evaluated with scRNA-seq. Takahashi et al.
[77•] and Mizuhashi et al. [78•] have recently utilized this
strategy to label and describe mesenchymal cell popula-
tions in the dental follicle and long bone growth plate,
respectively. Whatever the approach might be, scRNA-
seq will surely enhance the molecular biology toolset of
skeletal researchers and help characterize the complexity
of tissues at a resolution that was not possible until
recently.
Conclusions
RNA-seq has facilitated new discoveries in skeletal biol-
ogy and will likely lead to more in the future. Availability
of single-cell RNA-seq will accelerate these discoveries,
especially as it becomes more affordable and accessible.
As transcriptome profiling methods rapidly advance, the
challenges remain in interpretation, rather than generation
of data. In bulk RNA-seq studies, wherein thousands of
genes are simultaneously evaluated, multiple results may
be generated that fit the predicted paradigm just by
chance. For this reason, follow-up validation experiments
that use orthogonal techniques are crucial. Rather than
reaching definitive conclusions, the objective of a good
RNA-seq experiment is to generate new, testable hypoth-
eses. Therefore, one design criteria when planning a tran-
scriptome profiling experiment might be to ensure the
availability of in vivo or in vitro platforms, wherein genes
and pathways could be conveniently manipulated within
the context of the biologic question of interest. More ad-
vanced techniques, such as scRNA-seq, still pose a num-
ber of technical challenges, such as isolation of a suffi-
cient number of viable cells that are accurately represen-
tative of the cellular diversity of tissues in vivo.
Furthermore, while multiple data analysis tools are avail-
able, the analysis pipelines are yet to be standardized,
especially towards identifying novel cell populations and
cell type–specific gene expression changes. Yet, the initial
examples of scRNA-seq have shown that it can signifi-
cantly contribute to exploratory efforts in skeletal devel-
opment and disease. More studies will surely follow that
will unravel the cellular complexity of the skeleton.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of Interest
Ugur Ayturk declares no conflict of interest.
Human and Animal Rights and Informed Consent
This article does not
contain any studies with human or animal subjects performed by any of
the authors.
182
Curr Osteoporos Rep (2019) 17:178–185
References
Papers of particular interest, published recently, have been
highlighted as:
• Of importance
•• Of major importance
1.
Mortazavi A, Williams BA, McCue K, Schaeffer L, Wold B.
Mapping and quantifying mammalian transcriptomes by RNA-
Seq. Nat Methods. 2008;5(7):621–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nmeth.1226.
2.
Nagalakshmi U, Wang Z, Waern K, Shou C, Raha D, Gerstein M,
et al. The transcriptional landscape of the yeast genome defined by
RNA sequencing. Science. 2008;320(5881):1344–9. https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.1158441.
3.
Wilhelm BT, Marguerat S, Watt S, Schubert F, Wood V, Goodhead
I, et al. Dynamic repertoire of a eukaryotic transcriptome surveyed
at single-nucleotide resolution. Nature. 2008;453(7199):1239–43.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07002.
4.
Gallego Romero I, Pai AA, Tung J, Gilad Y. RNA-seq: impact of
RNA degradation on transcript quantification. BMC Biol. 2014;12:
42. https://doi.org/10.1186/1741-7007-12-42.
5.
Choi S, Ray HE, Lai SH, Alwood JS, Globus RK. Preservation of
multiple mammalian tissues to maximize science return from
ground based and spaceflight experiments. PLoS One.
2016;11(12):e0167391. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0167391.
6.
Li D, Ren W, Wang X, Wang F, Gao Y, Ning Q, et al. A modified
method using TRIzol reagent and liquid nitrogen produces high-
quality RNA from rat pancreas. Appl Biochem Biotechnol.
2009;158(2):253–61. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12010-008-8391-0.
7.
Auer H, Mobley JA, Ayers LW, Bowen J, Chuaqui RF, Johnson
LA, et al. The effects of frozen tissue storage conditions on the
integrity of RNA and protein. Biotech Histochem. 2014
Oct;89(7):518–28. https://doi.org/10.3109/10520295.2014.
904927.
8.
Carter LE, Kilroy G, Gimble JM, Floyd ZE. An improved method
for isolation of RNA from bone. BMC Biotechnol. 2012;12:5.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6750-12-5.
9.
Cepollaro S, Della Bella E, de Biase D, Visani M, Fini M.
Evaluation of RNA from human trabecular bone and identification
of stable reference genes. J Cell Physiol. 2018;233(6):4401–7.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.26319.
10.
Clements DN, Vaughan-Thomas A, Peansukmanee S, Carter SD,
Innes JF, Ollier WE, et al. Assessment of the use of RNA quality
metrics for the screening of articular cartilage specimens from clin-
ically normal dogs and dogs with osteoarthritis. Am J Vet Res.
2006;67(8):1438–44. https://doi.org/10.2460/ajvr.67.8.1438.
11.• Grinstein M, Dingwall HL, Shah RR, Capellini TD, Galloway JL.
A robust method for RNA extraction and purification from a single
adult mouse tendon. PeerJ. 2018;6:e4664. https://doi.org/10.7717/
peerj.4664 This paper describes methods for extracting RNA
from tendon.
12.
Hughes A, Stewart TL, Mann V. Extraction of nucleic acids from
bone. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;816:249–59. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-1-61779-415-5_17.
13.• Kelly NH, Schimenti JC, Patrick Ross F, van der Meulen MC. A
method for isolating high quality RNA from mouse cortical and
cancellous bone. Bone. 2014;68:1–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bone.2014.07.022 This paper describes methods for extracting
RNA from cortical and cancellous bone.
14.• Le Bleu HK, Kamal FA, Kelly M, Ketz JP, Zuscik MJ, Elbarbary
RA. Extraction of high-quality RNA from human articular carti-
lage. Anal Biochem. 2017;518:134–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ab.2016.11.018 This paper describes methods for extracting
RNA from articular cartilage.
15.
Li X, Qin L, Partridge NC. In vivo parathyroid hormone treatments
and RNA isolation and analysis. Methods Mol Biol. 2008;455:79–
87. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-59745-104-8_5.
16.
McKenna LA, Gehrsitz A, Soder S, Eger W, Kirchner T, Aigner T.
Effective isolation of high-quality total RNA from human adult
articular cartilage. Anal Biochem. 2000;286(1):80–5. https://doi.
org/10.1006/abio.2000.4779.
17.
Ruettger A, Neumann S, Wiederanders B, Huber R. Comparison of
different methods for preparation and characterization of total RNA
from cartilage samples to uncover osteoarthritis in vivo. BMC Res
Notes. 2010;3:7. https://doi.org/10.1186/1756-0500-3-7.
18.
Bandyopadhyay U, Fenton WA, Horwich AL, Nagy M. Production
of RNA for transcriptomic analysis from mouse spinal cord motor
neuron cell bodies by laser capture microdissection. J Vis Exp.
2014;83:e51168. https://doi.org/10.3791/51168.
19.
Farris S, Wang Y, Ward JM, Dudek SM. Optimized method for
robust transcriptome profiling of minute tissues using laser capture
microdissection and low-input RNA-Seq. Front Mol Neurosci.
2017;10:185. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnmol.2017.00185.
20.
Lovatt D, Bell T, Eberwine J. Single-neuron isolation for RNA
analysis using pipette capture and laser capture microdissection.
Cold Spring Harb Protoc. 2015;2015(1):pdb prot072439. https://
doi.org/10.1101/pdb.prot072439.
21.•• Ayturk UM, Jacobsen CM, Christodoulou DC, Gorham J, Seidman
JG, Seidman CE, et al. An RNA-seq protocol to identify mRNA
expression changes in mouse diaphyseal bone: applications in mice
with bone property altering Lrp5 mutations. J Bone Miner Res.
2013;28(10):2081–93. https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.1946 This
paper outlines computational methods to filter cortical bone
RNA-seq data.
22.
Sieker JT, Proffen BL, Waller KA, Chin KE, Karamchedu NP,
Akelman MR, et al. Transcriptional profiling of synovium in a
porcine model of early post-traumatic osteoarthritis. J Orthop Res.
2018;36:2128–39. https://doi.org/10.1002/jor.23876.
23.
Liu Y, Zhou J, White KP. RNA-seq differential expression studies:
more sequence or more replication? Bioinformatics. 2014;30(3):
301–4. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt688.
24.
Rapaport F, Khanin R, Liang Y, Pirun M, Krek A, Zumbo P, et al.
Comprehensive evaluation of differential gene expression analysis
methods for RNA-seq data. Genome Biol. 2013;14(9):R95. https://
doi.org/10.1186/gb-2013-14-9-r95.
25.
Busby MA, Stewart C, Miller CA, Grzeda KR, Marth GT. Scotty: a
web tool for designing RNA-Seq experiments to measure differen-
tial gene expression. Bioinformatics. 2013;29(5):656–7. https://doi.
org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt015.
26.
Ching T, Huang S, Garmire LX. Power analysis and sample size
estimation for RNA-Seq differential expression. RNA.
2014;20(11):1684–96. https://doi.org/10.1261/rna.046011.114.
27.
Vieth B, Ziegenhain C, Parekh S, Enard W, Hellmann I. powsimR:
power analysis for bulk and single cell RNA-seq experiments.
Bioinformatics. 2017;33(21):3486–8. https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/btx435.
28.
Yu L, Fernandez S, Brock G. Power analysis for RNA-Seq differ-
ential expression studies. BMC Bioinformatics. 2017;18(1):234.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-017-1648-2.
29.
Sieker JT, Proffen BL, Waller KA, Chin KE, Karamchedu NP,
Akelman MR, et al. Transcriptional profiling of articular cartilage
in a porcine model of early post-traumatic osteoarthritis. J Orthop
Res. 2018;36(1):318–29. https://doi.org/10.1002/jor.23644.
30.
Andrews S. https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/
fastqc/.
31.
Dobin A, Davis CA, Schlesinger F, Drenkow J, Zaleski C, Jha S,
et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics.
Curr Osteoporos Rep (2019) 17:178–185
183
2013;29(1):15–21. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts635.
Accessed 7 May 2019.
32.
Grant GR, Farkas MH, Pizarro AD, Lahens NF, Schug J, Brunk BP,
et al. Comparative analysis of RNA-Seq alignment algorithms and
the RNA-Seq unified mapper (RUM). Bioinformatics.
2011;27(18):2518–28. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/
btr427.
33.
Haas BJ, Papanicolaou A, Yassour M, Grabherr M, Blood PD,
Bowden J, et al. De novo transcript sequence reconstruction from
RNA-seq using the Trinity platform for reference generation and
analysis. Nat Protoc. 2013;8(8):1494–512. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nprot.2013.084.
34.
Anders S, Huber W. Differential expression analysis for sequence
count data. Genome Biol. 2010;11(10):R106. https://doi.org/10.
1186/gb-2010-11-10-r106.
35.
Robinson MD, McCarthy DJ, Smyth GK. edgeR: a bioconductor
package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expres-
sion data. Bioinformatics. 2010;26(1):139–40. https://doi.org/10.
1093/bioinformatics/btp616.
36.
Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling false discovery rate: a prac-
tical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J R Statist Soc B.
1995;57:289–300.
37.
Goecks J, Nekrutenko A, Taylor J, Galaxy T. Galaxy: a compre-
hensive approach for supporting accessible, reproducible, and trans-
parent computational research in the life sciences. Genome Biol.
2010;11(8):R86. https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2010-11-8-r86.
38.• St John HC, Bishop KA, Meyer MB, Benkusky NA, Leng N,
Kendziorski C, et al. The osteoblast to osteocyte transition: epige-
netic changes and response to the vitamin D3 hormone. Mol
Endocrinol. 2014;28(7):1150–65. https://doi.org/10.1210/me.
2014-1091 This paper describes the changes in osteoblast
transcriptome during in vitro differentiation.
39.• St John HC, Meyer MB, Benkusky NA, Carlson AH, Prideaux M,
Bonewald LF, et al. The parathyroid hormone-regulated tran-
scriptome in osteocytes: parallel actions with 1,25-
dihydroxyvitamin D3 to oppose gene expression changes during
differentiation and to promote mature cell function. Bone.
2015;72:81–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2014.11.010 This
paper describes the changes in osteoblast transcriptome
during in vitro differentiation.
40.
Khayal LA, Grunhagen J, Provaznik I, Mundlos S, Kornak U,
Robinson PN, et al. Transcriptional profiling of murine osteoblast
differentiation based on RNA-seq expression analyses. Bone.
2018;113:29–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2018.04.006.
41.
Khani F, Thaler R, Paradise CR, Deyle DR, Kruijthof-de Julio M,
Galindo M, et al. Histone H4 methyltransferase Suv420h2 main-
tains fidelity of osteoblast differentiation. J Cell Biochem.
2017;118(5):1262–72. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.25787.
42.
Camilleri E, Dudakovic A, Riester SM, Galeano-Garces C,
Paradise CR, Bradley EW, et al. Loss of histone methyltransferase
Ezh2 stimulates an osteogenic transcriptional program in
chondrocytes but does not affect cartilage development. J Biol
Chem. 2018;293:19001–11. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA118.
003909.
43.
Droscha CJ, Diegel CR, Ethen NJ, Burgers TA, McDonald MJ,
Maupin KA, et al. Osteoblast-specific deletion of Hrpt2/Cdc73 re-
sults in high bone mass and increased bone turnover. Bone.
2017;98:68–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2016.12.006.
44.
Wein MN, Liang Y, Goransson O, Sundberg TB, Wang J, Williams
EA, et al. SIKs control osteocyte responses to parathyroid hormone.
Nat Commun. 2016;7:13176. https://doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms13176.
45.
Kedlaya R, Veera S, Horan DJ, Moss RE, Ayturk UM, Jacobsen
CM, et al. Sclerostin inhibition reverses skeletal fragility in an Lrp5-
deficient mouse model of OPPG syndrome. Sci Transl Med.
2013;5(211):211ra158. https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.
3006627.
46.
Robling AG, Castillo AB, Turner CH. Biomechanical and molecu-
lar regulation of bone remodeling. Annu Rev Biomed Eng. 2006;8:
455–98. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.bioeng.8.061505.095721.
47.
Robling AG, Niziolek PJ, Baldridge LA, Condon KW, Allen MR,
Alam I, et al. Mechanical stimulation of bone in vivo reduces oste-
ocyte expression of Sost/sclerostin. J Biol Chem. 2008;283(9):
5866–75. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M705092200.
48.
Sawakami K, Robling AG, Ai M, Pitner ND, Liu D, Warden SJ,
et al. The Wnt co-receptor LRP5 is essential for skeletal
mechanotransduction but not for the anabolic bone response to
parathyroid hormone treatment. J Biol Chem. 2006;281(33):
23698–711. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M601000200.
49.•• Kelly NH, Schimenti JC, Ross FP, van der Meulen MC.
Transcriptional profiling of cortical versus cancellous bone from
mechanically-loaded murine tibiae reveals differential gene ex-
pression. Bone. 2016;86:22–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.
2016.02.007 This paper describes the mechanical loading-
induced transcriptional changes in cortical and cancellous
bone.
50.
Morse A, Schindeler A, McDonald MM, Kneissel M, Kramer I,
Little DG. Sclerostin antibody augments the anabolic bone forma-
tion response in a mouse model of mechanical tibial loading. J Bone
Miner Res. 2018;33(3):486–98. https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.3330.
51.
Govey PM, Kawasawa YI, Donahue HJ. Mapping the osteocytic
cell response to fluid flow using RNA-Seq. J Biomech.
2015;48(16):4327–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2015.10.
045.
52.
Li L, Zhang C, Chen JL, Hong FF, Chen P, Wang JF. Effects of
simulated microgravity on the expression profiles of RNA during
osteogenic differentiation of human bone marrow mesenchymal
stem cells. Cell Prolif. 2018;52:e12539. https://doi.org/10.1111/
cpr.12539.
53.
Niziolek PJ, Warman ML, Robling AG. Mechanotransduction in
bone tissue: the A214V and G171V mutations in Lrp5 enhance
load-induced osteogenesis in a surface-selective manner. Bone.
2012;51(3):459–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2012.05.023.
54.
Zhao L, Shim JW, Dodge TR, Robling AG, Yokota H. Inactivation
of Lrp5 in osteocytes reduces young’s modulus and responsiveness
to the mechanical loading. Bone. 2013;54(1):35–43. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bone.2013.01.033.
55.
Lim J, Munivez E, Jiang MM, Song IW, Gannon F, Keene DR,
et al. mTORC1 signaling is a critical regulator of postnatal tendon
development. Sci Rep. 2017;7(1):17175. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-017-17384-0.
56.
Liu H, Xu J, Liu CF, Lan Y, Wylie C, Jiang R. Whole transcriptome
expression profiling of mouse limb tendon development by using
RNA-seq. J Orthop Res. 2015;33(6):840–8. https://doi.org/10.
1002/jor.22886.
57.
Brophy RH, Rothermich MA, Tycksen ED, Cai L, Rai MF.
Presence of meniscus tear alters gene expression profile of anterior
cruciate ligament tears. J Orthop Res. 2018;36(10):2612–21.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jor.24025.
58.
Rai MF, Tycksen ED, Sandell LJ, Brophy RH. Advantages of
RNA-seq compared to RNA microarrays for transcriptome profil-
ing of anterior cruciate ligament tears. J Orthop Res. 2018;36(1):
484–97. https://doi.org/10.1002/jor.23661.
59.
Sebastian A, Chang JC, Mendez ME, Murugesh DK, Hatsell S,
Economides AN, et al. Comparative transcriptomics identifies nov-
el genes and pathways involved in post-traumatic osteoarthritis de-
velopment and progression. Int J Mol Sci. 2018;19(9). https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijms19092657.
60.
Sieker JT, Ayturk UM, Proffen BL, Weissenberger MH, Kiapour
AM, Murray MM. Immediate administration of intraarticular triam-
cinolone acetonide after joint injury modulates molecular outcomes
184
Curr Osteoporos Rep (2019) 17:178–185
associated with early synovitis. Arthritis Rheum. 2016;68(7):1637–
47. https://doi.org/10.1002/art.39631.
61.
Bowen ME, Ayturk UM, Kurek KC, Yang W, Warman ML. SHP2
regulates chondrocyte terminal differentiation, growth plate archi-
tecture and skeletal cell fates. PLoS Genet. 2014;10(5):e1004364.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1004364.
62.
Dai J, Yu D, Wang Y, Chen Y, Sun H, Zhang X, et al. Kdm6b
regulates cartilage development and homeostasis through anabolic
metabolism. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017;76(7):1295–303. https://doi.
org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-210407.
63.
Oh CD, Lu Y, Liang S, Mori-Akiyama Y, Chen D, de Crombrugghe
B, et al. SOX9 regulates multiple genes in chondrocytes, including
genes encoding ECM proteins, ECM modification enzymes, recep-
tors, and transporters. PLoS One. 2014;9(9):e107577. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0107577.
64.
Ohba S, He X, Hojo H, McMahon AP. Distinct transcriptional
programs underlie Sox9 regulation of the mammalian chondrocyte.
Cell Rep. 2015;12(2):229–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.
2015.06.013.
65.
Wang JS, Infante CR, Park S, Menke DB. PITX1 promotes chon-
drogenesis and myogenesis in mouse hindlimbs through conserved
regulatory targets. Dev Biol. 2018;434(1):186–95. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ydbio.2017.12.013.
66.
Dunn SL, Soul J, Anand S, Schwartz JM, Boot-Handford RP,
Hardingham TE. Gene expression changes in damaged osteoarthrit-
ic cartilage identify a signature of non-chondrogenic and mechan-
ical responses. Osteoarthr Cartil. 2016;24(8):1431–40. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.joca.2016.03.007.
67.
Ji Q, Zheng Y, Zhang G, Hu Y, Fan X, Hou Y, et al. Single-cell
RNA-seq analysis reveals the progression of human osteoarthritis.
Ann Rheum Dis. 2018;78:100–10. https://doi.org/10.1136/
annrheumdis-2017-212863.
68.•• Macosko EZ, Basu A, Satija R, Nemesh J, Shekhar K, Goldman M,
et al. Highly parallel genome-wide expression profiling of individ-
ual cells using nanoliter droplets. Cell. 2015;161(5):1202–14.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.002 This paper describes
the droplet-based single cell capture and sequencing
techniques.
69.
Picelli S, Bjorklund AK, Faridani OR, Sagasser S, Winberg G,
Sandberg R. Smart-seq2 for sensitive full-length transcriptome pro-
filing in single cells. Nat Methods. 2013;10(11):1096–8. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nmeth.2639.
70.
Ramskold D, Luo S, Wang YC, Li R, Deng Q, Faridani OR, et al.
Full-length mRNA-Seq from single-cell levels of RNA and indi-
vidual circulating tumor cells. Nat Biotechnol. 2012;30(8):777–82.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2282.
71.•• Stoeckius M, Hafemeister C, Stephenson W, Houck-Loomis B,
Chattopadhyay PK, Swerdlow H, et al. Simultaneous epitope and
transcriptome measurement in single cells. Nat Methods.
2017;14(9):865–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4380 This
paper describes a multiplexing technique in the preparation
of scRNA-seq libraries.
72.
Hashimshony T, Wagner F, Sher N, Yanai I. CEL-Seq: single-cell
RNA-Seq by multiplexed linear amplification. Cell Rep. 2012;2(3):
666–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2012.08.003.
73.
Shekhar K, Lapan SW, Whitney IE, Tran NM, Macosko EZ,
Kowalczyk M, et al. Comprehensive classification of retinal bipolar
neurons by single-cell transcriptomics. Cell. 2016;166(5):1308–23
e30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.054.
74.•• Debnath S, Yallowitz AR, McCormick J, Lalani S, Zhang T, Xu R,
et al. Discovery of a periosteal stem cell mediating
intramembranous bone formation. Nature. 2018;562(7725):133–9.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0554-8 This paper
demonstrates how scRNA-seq can be utilized in describing a
novel stem cell population.
75.
Montoro DT, Haber AL, Biton M, Vinarsky V, Lin B, Birket SE,
et al. A revised airway epithelial hierarchy includes CFTR-
expressing ionocytes. Nature. 2018;560(7718):319–24. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41586-018-0393-7.
76.
Plasschaert LW, Zilionis R, Choo-Wing R, Savova V, Knehr J,
Roma G, et al. A single-cell atlas of the airway epithelium reveals
the CFTR-rich pulmonary ionocyte. Nature. 2018;560(7718):377–
81. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0394-6.
77.• Takahashi A, Nagata M, Gupta A, Matsushita Y, Yamaguchi T,
Mizuhashi K, et al. Autocrine regulation of mesenchymal progen-
itor cell fates orchestrates tooth eruption. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2019;116(2):575–80. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1810200115
This study utilizes single cell RNA-seq to complement lineage
tracing experiments.
78.• Mizuhashi K, Nagata M, Matsushita Y, Ono W, Ono N. Growth
plate borderline chondrocytes behave as transient mesenchymal
precursor cells. J Bone Miner Res. 2019. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jbmr.3719 This study utilizes single cell RNA-seq to complement
lineage tracing experiments.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic-
tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Curr Osteoporos Rep (2019) 17:178–185
185

===== Couto2022_FrontGenet_OPLL+DISH+Genetics =====

Evidence for a genetic
contribution to the ossiﬁcation of
spinal ligaments in Ossiﬁcation of
Posterior Longitudinal Ligament
and Diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis: A narrative review
Ana Rita Couto1,2†, Bruna Parreira1,2†, Deborah M. Power3,
Luís Pinheiro4, João Madruga Dias 5,6, Irina Novofastovski7,
Iris Eshed8, Piercarlo Sarzi-Puttini9, Nicola Pappone10,
Fabiola Atzeni11, Jorrit-Jan Verlaan12, Jonneke Kuperus13,
Amir Bieber7, Pasquale Ambrosino14, David Kiefer15,
Muhammad Asim Khan16, Reuven Mader7,17,18,
Xenofon Baraliakos18 and Jácome Bruges-Armas 1,2*
1Hospital de Santo Espirito da Ilha Terceira EPER, SEEBMO, Angra do Heroísmo, Portugal, 2CHRC
Campus Nova Medical School, Lisboa, Portugal, 3University of Algarve, Center of Marine Science
(CCMAR), Faro, Portugal, 4Hospital de Santo Espirito da Ilha Terceira EPER, Orthopedics Service, Angra
do Heroísmo, Portugal, 5Centro Hospitalar Do Medio Tejo EPE Unidade de Torres Novas,
Rheumatology Department, Santarém, Portugal, 6CHRC Campus Nova Medical School, EpiDoc
Research Unit, CEDOC, Lisboa, Portugal, 7Emek Medical Center, Rheumatology Unit, Afula, Israel,
8Sheba Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 9Luigi Sacco University Hospital, Rheumatology Unit, Milano,
Italy, 10Istituti Clinici Scientiﬁci Maugeri IRCCS, Neuromotor Rehabilitation Unit of Telese Terme
Institute, Pavia, Italy, 11Universita Degli Studi di Messina, Rheumatology Unit, Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, Messina, Italy, 12University Medical Centre, Department of Orthopedics, Utrecht,
Netherlands, 13Universitair Medisch Centrum Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 14Istituti Clinici Scientiﬁci
Maugeri IRCCS, Cardiac Rehabilitation Unit of Telese Terme Institute, Pavia, Italy, 15Ruhr-Universitat
Bochum, Rheumazentrum Ruhrgebiet, Bochum, Germany, 16Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH, United States, 17Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel, 18Ruhr
University Bochum, Rheumazentrum Ruhrgebiet, Herne, Germany
Diffuse Idiopathic Skeletal Hyperostosis (DISH) and Ossiﬁcation of the Posterior
Longitudinal Ligament (OPLL) are common disorders characterized by the
ossiﬁcation of spinal ligaments. The cause for this ossiﬁcation is currently
unknown but a genetic contribution has been hypothesized. Over the last
decade, many studies on the genetics of ectopic calciﬁcation disorders have
been performed, mainly on OPLL. Most of these studies were based on linkage
analysis and case control association studies. Animal models have provided
some clues but so far, the involvement of the identiﬁed genes has not been
conﬁrmed in human cases. In the last few years, many common variants in
several genes have been associated with OPLL. However, these associations
have not been at deﬁnitive levels of signiﬁcance and evidence of functional
signiﬁcance is generally modest. The current evidence suggests a multifactorial
aetiopathogenesis for DISH and OPLL with a subset of cases showing a stronger
genetic component.
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Jordi Pérez-Tur,
Institute of Biomedicine of Valencia
(CSIC), Spain
REVIEWED BY
Michael G. Fehlings,
Toronto Western Hospital, Canada
Caterina Licini,
Università Politecnica delle Marche, Italy
*CORRESPONDENCE
Jácome Bruges-Armas,
brugesarmas@gmail.com
†These authors have contributed equally
to this work
SPECIALTY SECTION
This article was submitted to Genetics of
Common and Rare Diseases,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Genetics
RECEIVED 06 July 2022
ACCEPTED 16 September 2022
PUBLISHED 07 October 2022
CITATION
Couto AR, Parreira B, Power DM,
Pinheiro L, Madruga Dias J,
Novofastovski I, Eshed I, Sarzi-Puttini P,
Pappone N, Atzeni F, Verlaan J-J,
Kuperus J, Bieber A, Ambrosino P,
Kiefer D, Khan MA, Mader R, Baraliakos X
and Bruges-Armas J (2022), Evidence
for a genetic contribution to the
ossiﬁcation of spinal ligaments in
Ossiﬁcation of Posterior Longitudinal
Ligament and Diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis: A narrative review.
Front. Genet. 13:987867.
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
COPYRIGHT
© 2022 Couto, Parreira, Power,
Pinheiro, Madruga Dias, Novofastovski,
Eshed, Sarzi-Puttini, Pappone, Atzeni,
Verlaan, Kuperus, Bieber, Ambrosino,
Kiefer, Khan, Mader, Baraliakos and
Bruges-Armas. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License
(CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is
permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are
credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in
accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does
not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
01
TYPE Review
PUBLISHED 07 October 2022
DOI 10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
KEYWORDS
ossiﬁcation, genetics, ectopic calciﬁcation, diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis,
ossiﬁcation of posterior longitudinal ligament
1 Introduction
The spine is a columnar structure composed of bony
vertebrae interconnected by intervertebral discs and supported
by ligaments, such as the anterior and posterior longitudinal
ligaments, ligament nuchae and ligamentum ﬂavum. The spinal
canal, enclosed within the foramen of the vertebrae, contains the
spinal cord. In the intervertebral spaces, the canal is protected by
the ligament ﬂavum posteriorly and the posterior longitudinal
ligament anteriorly. Spinal stenosis consists in the reduction of
the area of the spinal canal, leading to motor neuron deﬁcits and
related neurological symptoms, depending on the location of the
stenosis (Bai et al., 2022). In the elderly population, the most
common cause of spinal cord impairment is the degenerative
cervical myelopathy (DCM). DCM can be secondary to
osteoarthritic degeneration or to ligamentous ossiﬁcations
such
as
the
Ossiﬁcation
of
the
Posterior
Longitudinal
Ligament (OPLL) or the ossiﬁcation of the Ligament Flavum
(OLF) (Nouri et al., 2015). OPLL, frequently in association with
DISH, can result in various degrees of neurological complications
that can range from a slowly progressive painless myelopathy to a
rapid progression of a neurological deﬁcit even after minor injury
(Takayuki et al., 2021; Prabhu et al., 2022). The physical and
socioeconomic burden of disability associated with DCM is
expected to grow evenly, due to the ageing population
(Badhiwala et al., 2020). It is thus crucial to improve the
diagnosis and assessment of disorders involved in DCM for
early detection and swift intervention.
This review will focus on genetic studies of the ossiﬁcation
of the anterior and posterior longitudinal ligaments, the
Diffuse Idiopathic Skeletal Hyperostosis (DISH) [MIM:
106400] and the Ossiﬁcation of the Posterior Longitudinal
Ligament (OPLL) [MIM: 602475], respectively. A short
outline of DISH, OPLL and OLF can be seen in Table 1.
These conditions may co-occur in some patients suggesting
possible common etiopathogenic factors (Nouri et al., 2015;
Takayuki et al., 2021). The objective was to collect and present
evidences that supports a genetic foundation, based on the
following observations: 1) familial aggregation reports, 2)
animal
models,
3)
associated
genetic
variants
and
4)
genetics of associated disorders.
2 Familial aggregation reports
2.1 DISH
Reports of familial DISH are scarce. Beardwell, A. in 1969
(Beardwell,
1969),
describes
a
family
with
Ankylosing
Vertebral Hyperostosis (AVH), by the third decade, with
many family members also presenting tylosis (punctuate
hyperkeratosis). As demonstrated by the author, the X-ray
of the affected family members showed ossiﬁcation of
paraspinal distribution, mainly in the lower thoracic region
and also some osteophytosis and marginal sclerosis of the
sacroiliac joints.
TABLE 1 Brief characterization, main symptoms and epidemiology of DISH, OPLL and OLF.
Disorder
Characterized by
Main symptom
Epidemiology
DISH
Calciﬁcation and ossiﬁcation of the anterior
longitudinal ligament affecting, in particular, the
right side of the spine with preservation of the
intervertebral disc space. Peripheral joints, such as
elbow, shoulder, hip, knee and heel are commonly
affected (Okazaki et al., 1976; Gorman et al., 2005;
Bruges-Armas et al., 2006; Couto et al., 2017;
Parreira et al., 2020)
Dysphagia (Beardwell, 1969). Axial pain, elbow,
knee and metacarpophalangeal pain, swelling and
deformity (Okazaki et al., 1976)
Elderly males are mostly affected. DISH
prevalence is 17.6% using x-ray and ranges from
17.4% to 27,2% using computed tomography [33,
(Ikuma et al., 2022)
OPLL
Ectopic hyperostosis and calciﬁcation of the
posterior longitudinal ligament at the cervical,
thoracic and lumbar spine (Fornaciari et al., 2009)
Myelopathy and/or radiculopathy (Fornaciari and
Giuffra, 2013)
More common in males of asian populations, with
a prevalence of 2–4% in japan as compared with
0.01–2% in non-Asian populations (Matsunaga
et al., 2006)
OLF
Calciﬁcation of the ligamentum ﬂavum (LF) not
extending to the closed spinal bony arch
(Yamagami et al., 2000). Calcium pyrophosphate
dehydrate (CPPD) and hidroxyapatite are thought
to be main players in this calciﬁcation (Ellman
et al., 1978; Brown et al., 1991)
Thoracic myelopathy and spinal stenosis (Miyasaka
et al., 1982)
Higher prevalence in males of Asian populations,
especially the Japanese, with the incidence of 12%
in thoracic OLF (Caswell et al., 1987)
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
02
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
Another report of familial DISH, described 2 families; one
had 4 siblings showing AVH by the fourth decade and two other
family members had probably AVH. The second family was
dentiﬁed after hip surgery of two sisters aged 71 and 82 years.
The proband had ﬁve daughters, two of them affected by AVH
and other two with a mild phenotype, classiﬁed as possible AVH
(Abiteboul et al., 1985). An unusual DISH-like phenotype was
described in a family with severe cervical disease lacking the
extensive dorsal involvement (Gorman et al., 2005).
In Azores region, twelve families were identiﬁed presenting early
onset (third decade) of DISH and/or Chondrocalcinosis (CC). The
affected members had a pyrophosphate arthropathy showing
exuberant axial and peripheral enthesopathic calciﬁcations, meaning
calciﬁcation of the connective tissues in the attachments of tendons or
ligaments to the bones, in joints other than the spine (Bruges-Armas
etal.,2006).Geneticstudiesinthesefamiliessuggestthatthephenotype
DISH/CC is polygenic and inﬂuenced by the interaction of several,
small-effect gene variants and possibly by unidentiﬁed environmental
factors (Couto et al., 2017; Parreira et al., 2020). Similar cases, of
patients with CPPD and/or CC and DISH, were mentioned in other
studies (Okazaki et al., 1976), also showing familial aggregation (van
der Korst et al., 1974; Bruges-Armas et al., 2006).
A postmortem examination of a skeleton allowed the diagnosis
of DISH and ankylosing spondylitis in the same patient (Jordana
et al., 2009). An extensive radiographic survey on several members
of the Medici family (15th–17th century), demonstrated that DISH,
rheumatoid arthritis and uric acid gout affected several family
members (Fornaciari et al., 2009; Fornaciari and Giuffra, 2013).
A study of 13 royal Egyptian mummies detected ossiﬁcations at the
anterior aspects of the spines in ﬁve male mummies but only four
fulﬁlled the criteria for DISH (Saleem and Hawass, 2014).
2.2 OPLL
The cause of OPLL is unclear but people of Asian heritage, have a
higher likelihood of developing this condition (Choi et al., 2011).
Familial aggregation of cervical OPLL was ﬁrst demonstrated in a
study assessing 347 families (Terayama, 1989); the relative risk of ﬁrst
degreerelativescametohaveOPLLwasﬁvetimesgreaterthanexpected
inthegeneralpopulation.Anotherstudyshowsaprevalenceof27%with
arelativeriskseventimesthatofthegeneralpopulation(Tanikawaetal.,
1986).OtherOPLLfamilialcasesincludedthereportoffamilialthoracic
OPLL in Caucasian siblings (Tanabe et al., 2002) (Terayama, 1989).
The mode of inheritance for OPLL is still poorly deﬁned due to
the absence of large families, late onset of the disorder, environmental
effects and sex differences (Koga et al., 1998). However, segregation
studies shows that OPLL have both autosomal dominant (Tanikawa
et al., 1986) and autosomal recessive (Hamanishi et al., 1995) patterns
of inheritance. As discussed later, ectopic ossiﬁcation resembling
OPLL, as seen in the tiptoe walking mouse (ttw) or also called tiptoe
walking of Yoshimura (twy), is inherited as an autosomal recessive
disease with complete penetrance (Ikegawa et al., 2007).
3 Animal models for Ossiﬁcation of
Spinal Ligaments
The study of mouse strain models and the progress of strategies
to ﬁnd genetic mutations, affecting the mineralization pattern, have
permitted the discovery of many genes and proteins to be evaluated.
3.1 DISH
Natural cases—unknown gene
Some natural cases of DISH have been observed in dogs (Kranenburg et al., 2010; Kranenburg et al., 2014; Togni et al., 2014; Bossens et al., 2016) and, as in humans, the disease is
more common in older male animals and is more frequent in the boxer breed (Kranenburg et al., 2010). The high occurrence of DISH in one dog breed and the low or absence
occurrence in the other breeds is suggestive of a genetic mechanism (Ostrander et al., 2000). In 2016 Bossens et al. (2016), reported the presence of DISH, in a nine year old
female cat. According to the authors the phenotype was very similar to canine DISH displayed contiguous ossiﬁcation ventral and lateral to the vertebra prolonging from
thoracic area to the lumbosacral junction. As far as we know, there are no reports of OPLL in dogs or other types of companion animals
Gene involved in humans—ENT1
ENT1 (6p21.1) in humans is known as solute carrier family 29 member 1 (SLC29A1). The gene encodes one of the four equilibrative nucleoside transporters which transfers hydrophilic
nucleosides across the plasma membrane (Bicket et al., 2016). The protein is ubiquitously expressed and is involved in purine metabolism being responsible for transporting the majority of
adenosine. It is known that adenosine signaling regulate bone formation (Carroll et al., 2012). Currently no human phenotype or disease has been directly linked with this gene
ENT1−/−mice
Mice lacking ENT1 (ENT1−/−) exhibit progressive ectopic calciﬁcation of the paraspinal tissues in the cervical and thoracic area homologous to human DISH. In intervertebral
discs, these mice also present a signiﬁcant downregulation of Enpp1, Ank and Alpl genes (Warraich et al., 2013). Another study, showed that ENT1−/−mice presented low bone
density in the midshaft of the femur and in the lower half of the spinal column. Additionally, the authors conﬁrmed that ENT1−/−mice presented osteoid formations in the
thoracic and cervical portions of the spinal column (Hinton et al., 2014)
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
03
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
3.2 OPLL
4 Genetic variants associated with
OSL in humans
4.1 Genetic studies of DISH
Some of the earliest genetic studies were performed on genes
belonging to Major Histocompatibility complex, speciﬁcally
Human Leucocyte Antigens (HLA) (Brewerton et al., 1973;
Schlosstein et al., 1973), but this association was never conﬁrmed.
In a small study, polymorphisms of the Collagen Type I
Iα1 (COL1A1), and Vitamin D Receptor (VDR) were
investigated, but the authors concluded that these genes do
not seem to be related to DISH etiology (Havelka et al., 2002).
One more study, investigated polymorphisms of the collagen
6A1 gene (COL6A1) in Czech and Japanese DISH patients and
the polymorphism, in intron 32, was associated with the
disorder in Japanese patients but failed the association test
with DISH Czech patients (Table 2). However, the authors
suggested that COL6A1 could be related to ectopic bone
formation in spinal ligaments (Tsukahara et al., 2005). Due
to the possible common aetiopathogenesis of OPLL and
DISH, a genotyping study (intron 6; −4) on the COL11A2
gene was performed, and no signiﬁcant difference was
observed between both cohorts (Havelka et al., 2001). Jun
et al (Jun and Kim, 2012) described that two polymorphisms
in the FGF2 gene were associated with DISH (Table 2).
Another study identiﬁed a genetic variant in the PPP2R2D
gene signiﬁcantly associated with a phenotype characterized
by DISH and CC. It was proposed that PPP2R2D may
contribute to the development of this disorder (Parreira
et al., 2020). Although these variants are signiﬁcantly
associated with DISH, the direct evidence for pathogenicity
is lacking.
4.2 Genetic studies in OPLL
Many genetic studies of OPLL have been performed and it is
now well established that genetic factors are implicated in its
etiology (Terayama, 1989) (Table 3). In the same way as DISH,
the initial genetic studies of OPLL were performed on HLA and
the possible association is much discussed in the literature (Sakou
et al., 1991; Yamaguchi, 1991; Matsunaga et al., 1999). Very close
to the HLA region on the chromosome 6 is COL11A2 and
common variants of this gene have been associated with
OPLL
(Koga
et
al.,
1998;
Maeda
et
al.,
2001a).
The
Gene involved—ENPP1
In humans, ENPP1 (6q23.2) encodes one of the seven members of the ectonucleotide pyrophosphate phosphodiesterase family (Buckley et al., 1990). ENPP1 is a membrane
glycoprotein responsible to hydrolysing extracellular nucleotide triphosphates (ATP) to generate pyrophosphate, thereby working as a physiological inhibitor of calciﬁcation
(Stefan et al., 2005) (Kato et al., 2012). The protein is expressed in various tissues, including bone and cartilage (Caswell et al., 1987; Caswell and Russell, 1988). Some human
diseases are linked to this gene. It is known that mutations in ENPP1 gene are the cause of Generalized arterial Calciﬁcation of Infancy (GACI) (Rutsch et al., 2003),
Hypophosphatemic rickets (Levy-Litan et al., 2010), Cole disease (Eytan et al., 2013) and Pseudoxanthoma elasticum, since in some GACI cases, mutations in ENPP1 also caused
a characteristic pseudoxanthoma skin lesions and angioid streaks of the retina (Nitschke and Rutsch, 2012)
Twy walking Yoshimura mouse
The spinal hyperostotic mouse twy develop spontaneous ossiﬁcation of the spinal ligaments very similar to human OPLL. The ossiﬁcation also occurs in joint capsules, chondral
tissues, tendon entheses and peripheral ligaments (Yamazaki et al., 1991) (Okawa et al., 1998). The twy phenotype is caused by a nonsense mutation in NPPS also called ENPP1
gene, resulting in a minor expression and consequently less protein activity (Okawa et al., 1998). According to Hajjawi et al. (2014), ENPP1−/−knock-out mice also shown a lower
bone density and calciﬁcation of joints, vertebrae and soft tissues including trachea, ear pinna and whisker follicles.This mouse model has also been used for studies on the
contribution of Fas-mediated cell death and inﬂammation to the pathobiology of cervical spondylotic myelopathy (Yu et al., 2011)
Gene involved - LEP/LEPR
In humans, LEP (7q32.1) encodes a protein responsible to regulate energy homeostasis. The protein is related to bone metabolism since is a potent inhibitor of bone in vivo
(Elefteriou et al., 2004). In female mice, the protein promotes the transdifferentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells to osteoblasts by increasing RANKL expression (Liu et al.,
2014) In humans, mutations in LEP gene cause morbid obesity (Montague et al., 1997)
ZFR rat
The Zucker fatty rat (ZFR) was originally used to study obesity, hyperinsulinemia, hypercholesterolemia and hyperlipidemia. This murine model also displays ossiﬁcation of the
spinal ligaments, histopathologically similar to human OPLL (Okano et al., 1997). The ZFR phenotype is caused by a mutation in the leptin receptor gene (LEPR) (Phillips et al.,
1996)
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
04
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
polymorphism in intron 6 (-4A) seems to confer protection to
OPLL furthermore, it was proven that this polymorphism of
COL11A2 affects the splicing of exon 6 in cells obtained from
spinal ligaments from OPLL patients (Maeda et al., 2001b).
According to Nakamura et al. (1999) the deletion of T,
11 nucleotides upstream of the splice acceptor site of intron
20 (IVS20-11delT) of ENPP1 is associated with OPLL. However,
He et al. (2013) described that the polymorphism TT genotype of
C973T and IVS15-14T as well as the wild type IVS20 (lack of
deletion) were related with disease severity. Another study found
a polymorphism (IVS15-14T-- > C) in ENPP1 gene associated
with OPLL susceptibility and severity (Koshizuka et al., 2002).
Interestingly,
in
one
study
the
authors
found
that
the
ENPP1 variant (IVS20-11delT) and the SNP (A861G) in the
leptin receptor gene (LEPR) were more frequent in OPLL
patients affected in the thoracic spine compared to patients
whose OPLL was restricted to cervical spine. The authors
suggested that the two variants (IVS20-11delT and A861G)
are associated with more extensive OPLL, but not with
frequency of its occurrence (Tahara et al., 2005).
The COL6A1 gene is intensely associated to OPLL and
polymorphisms in this gene are considered useful markers of
OPLL (Tanaka et al., 2003; Kong et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2018a).
However this association is not always conﬁrmed in all the
studies performed (Furushima et al., 2002; Liu et al., 2010).
Polymorphisms in COL6A1 gene were associated with DISH
in the Japanese population (Tsukahara et al., 2005) suggesting
that COL6A1 may contribute in pathological ectopic ossiﬁcation.
Positive associations of BMP2, an important regulator of bone
metabolism, with OPLL were found with the SNPs rs3178250
(Wang et al., 2008), rs2273073 (Chen et al., 2008; Yan et al., 2013)
and rs1949007 (Chen et al., 2008) (Table 3). Yan et al. (2013),
conﬁrmed that the SNP rs227373 in the BMP2 gene is associated
with the higher level of Smad4 protein expression and with activity
of alkaline phosphatase. On the other hand, according to Kim et al.
(2014a) the SNPs rs2273073 and rs1949007, in Korean patients, are
not associated with OPLL. Other study (Liu et al., 2010), performed in
Chinese Han population, also failed to show association between BMP2
gene and OPLL. A genome-wide linkage study performed with
214 OPLL affected sib-pairs identiﬁed a chromosome region
(20p12), linked with OPLL (Karasugi et al., 2013). This region
contains 25 genes, of which two are good candidates: Jagged 1
(JAG1), which is involved in endochondral bone formation (Nobta
et al., 2005) and BMP2. Furthermore, deleterious coding variants of
BMP2 in peripheral blood samples was recently demonstrated (Chen
et al., 2016). Three other polymorphisms (rs996544, rs965291 and
rs1116867) were screened in Han Chinese subjects and the authors
found that rs1116867 and rs965291 were related with the manifestation
and extend of OPLL (Yan et al., 2010).
Other bone morphogenetic protein genes have been
associated with OPLL; two SNPs in BMP-9 were found to
be associated with OPLL: rs75024165 and rs34379100 (Ikuma
et al., 2022). BMP-4 SNPs rs17563 (Mader et al., 2013; Cudrici
et al., 2021), rs76335800 and a speciﬁc haplotype, TGGGCTT
(Mader et al., 2013), were identiﬁed as risk factors for
developing OPLL in the Chinese population. Furushima
et al. (Ramos et al., 2015) also conﬁrmed the association of
BMP-4 with OPLL, in a large scale screening study, in which
only BMP-4 reached criteria of suggestive evidence of linkage.
In a recent study, BMP-4 has even been proposed as a new
therapeutic option for treating bone diseases due to its role on
a RUNX2/CHRDLI/BMP4 pathway. Several SNPs in gene
TABLE 2 Genes and genetic variants associated with DISH. The protein physiological function is also mentioned. Gene function was obtained from
GeneCards database.
Gene
Chr
Gene function
Type of
study
SNVs
Molecular
mechanism
Ref
COL6A1
21
Collagen VI is a main structural component of
microﬁbrils. Mutations in this gene may result in
Bethlem Myopathy
Case control association study in
Japanese individuals (97 DISH
patients and 298 controls)
rs2236486 (p =
0.0022)
Frequent polymorphism
(MAF 0.39)
Tsukahara
et al. (2005)
Unclear association
FGF2
4
FGF2 protein has been involved in diverse
biological processes, such as limb and nervous
system development, tumour growing and
wound healing
Case control association study
(154 OPLL patients -3 patients
with DISH)
rs1476217 (p =
0.003)
3 prime UTR variant
(MAF 0.48)
Jun and Kim,
(2012)
rs3747676 (p =
0.002)
3 prime UTR variant
(MAF 0.35)Unclear
association
PPP2R2D
10
PPP2R2D protein is a crucial serine/threonine
protein phosphatase that controls basal cellular
activities by dephosphorylating substrates. Its is
known that phosphatases
Whole exome sequencing
(4 patients) and case control study
(n = 65)
rs34473884
(p = 0.028)
Missense variant
(MAF 0.18)
Parreira et al.
(2020)
inﬂuence the transforming growth factor beta
(TGF-beta) superfamily signalling, which
regulates numerous cellular responses
Unclear association
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
05
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
TABLE 3 Genes and genetic variants associated with OPLL predisposition. The protein physiological function is also mentioned. Protein function was
obtained from GeneCards database.
Gene
Chr
Physiological
function
Study type
SNP ID -
signiﬁcantly
associated
Association
explained?
References
IL-1β
2
Stimulates thymocyte
proliferation by promoting the
IL-2 release, B-cell maturation
and proliferation and ﬁbroblast
growth factor activity
Case-control association study
with 120 OPLL (43 Female)
patients and 306 controls
(140 Female) (unrelated
Japanese)
IL1B AbaI variant (gender
speciﬁc—female) (p = 0.001)
Intronic polymorphism
Ogata et al.
(2002)
Assessed 5 candidate gene
polymorphisms
Unclear association
AHSG
3
Promotes endocytosis,
possesses opsonic properties
and inﬂuences the mineral
phase of bone. AHSG protein
have afﬁnity for barium ions
and calcium
Large Scale Case-control study
in Japanese individuals.
711 OPLL patients and
896 controls
rs2077119 (p = 0.0011)
SNP in Promoter region
Horikoshi et al.
(2006)
Assessed 35 candidate genes;
109 SNPs
MAF 0.36 Unclear association
ACE
17
Angiotensin converting
enzyme-2 is important in the
renin-angiotensin system
Case control association study
in Korean individuals. 95 OPLL
patients and 274 controls
rs4646994 (genotype DD p <
0.001; D allele p = 0.009)
SNP in intronic region
Kim et al. (2014b)
Assessed I/D polymorphism
in ACE
Unclear association
BMP2
20
Induces bone and cartilage
formation; member of TGFβ
superfamily
Case control study with
192 OPLL patients and
304 controls
rs3178250 (p = 0.003 gender
speciﬁc—males)
3 prime UTR variant
Wang et al.
(2008)
Assessed 2 SNPs in Exon 3 of
BMP2
MAF 0.27 Unclear association
Case control study with
57 OPLL patients and
135 controls
rs2273073 (p <0.001)
susceptibility to OPLL
Missense variant
Chen et al. (2008)
Assessed 2 SNPs in exon 2 of
BMP2 gene
rs1049007 (p=<0.001) severity
of OPLL
MAF 0.03 Synonymous variant MAF
0.25 Unclear association
Case control study with
420 OPLL patients and
506 controls
rs2273073 (p < 0.001)
Missense mutation (MAF 0.03)
Yan et al. (2013)
Assessed all coding sequencing
of BMP2 gene
rs235768 (p = 0.005)
Missense—Deleterious (MAF 0.23)
This study provides evidence that the
mutation (rs2273073) is associated
with level of Smad4 protein
expression and activity of ALP.
BMP4
14
BMP4 protein promotes bone
and cartilage formation
Nonparametric linkage study
with 126 affected sib-pairs
Only BMP4 gene reached
criteria of suggestive evidence
of linkage (NPL = 2.23; p =
0.035)
Molecular variants not identiﬁed
Furushima et al.
(2002)
Used microsatellite markers in
88 candidate genes
Unclear association
Case control association study
in Chinese individuals.
179 OPLL patients and
298 controls
rs17563 (genotype: p = 0.039;
Allele: p = 0.014)
Missense variant
Meng et al. (2010)
Assessed 2 polymorphisms in
BMP4 gene
MAF 0.33Unclear Association
Association study in Chinese
individuals. 450 OPLL patients
and 550 matched controls
rs17563
Missense variant
Ren et al. (2012a)
rs76335800
MAF 0.33 (benign)
3 prime UTR variant MAF 0.30
(Benign)
Complete genomic BMP4
coding
Unclear association
(Continued on following page)
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
06
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
TABLE 3 (Continued) Genes and genetic variants associated with OPLL predisposition. The protein physiological function is also mentioned. Protein
function was obtained from GeneCards database.
Gene
Chr
Physiological
function
Study type
SNP ID -
signiﬁcantly
associated
Association
explained?
References
BMP9
10
BMP9 has been called as a
osteogenic, and chondrogenic
factor and it could be involved
in bone formation
Association study in Chinese
individuals. 450 OPLL patients
and 550 matched controls
rs75024165 (p < 0.001)
Missense variant
Ren et al. (2012b)
Complete genomic BMP9
coding
rs34379100 (p < 0.001)
MAF <0.01 (Benign)
3 prime UTR variant MAF 0.17 (3′
Region) Unclear association
COL11A2
6
COL11A2 protein may promote
ectopic bone formation by
enhancing endochondral
ossiﬁcation. In addition
COL11A2 also play a role in
ﬁbrillogenesis
Genetic linkage, association
and haplotype analysis study in
53 Japanese families containing
91 OPLL affected sib pairs
Promoter (−182) (p = 0.02)
Linkage, association and haplotype
analysis suggestive of a genetic locus
for OPLL susceptibility in
chromosome 6p, within or near
COL11A2
Koga et al. (1998)
rs1799907 (p = 0.0004)
rs1799910 (p = 0.02)
rs1799911 (p = 0.03)
Haplotypes
Association study (Haplotype
association) in 161 OPLL
patients and 163 controls
rs1799907 (p = 0.0003)
This study provides evidence of the
functional impact of rs1799907 as a
splice site mutation (MAF 0.32)
which confers protection against
ossiﬁcation
Maeda et al.
(2001a)
Haplotype with 4 SNPs, male
association
COL17A1
10
COL17A1 is involved in the
integrity of the
hemidesmosome and the
attachment of basal
keratinocytes to the underlying
basement membrane
WES and association studies in
Chinese individuals.
28 unrelated OPLL patients
and 100 healthy controls
rs805698 (p = 0.00023)
Missense variant (MAF 0.18)
Tolerated effect
Wei et al. (2014)
rs4918079 (p = 0.003)
Synonymous variant (MAF 0.33)
Unclear association
COL6A1
21
COL6A1 is a cell binding
protein involved in the increase
of bone mass
Genomewide linkage study
followed by ﬁne mapping and
haplotype analysis of
142 affected sib pairs.
280 OPLL patients and
210 controls
intron 32 (−29) (p = 0.000003)
Identiﬁed COL6A1 as strongly
associated with OPLL but did not ﬁnd
any functional impact of the
identiﬁed polymorphisms
(Tanaka et al.,
2003; Kong et al.,
2007)
rs2236485 (p = 0.0002)
(MAF 0.13)
rs2236486 (p = 0.00005)
(MAF 0.39)
rs2236487 (p = 0.00006)
(MAF 0.37)
Case control association study
with 90 OPLL patients and
155 controls
Promoter (−572) (p =
0.000215)
Promoter variant
Kong et al. (2007)
Intron 32 (−29) rs2236486
(p = 0.00483)
Frequent Intronic variant - MAF
0.39 Unclear association
Association study with
100 OPLL patients and
100 controls (Han Chinese).
Assessed 3 SNPs, previous
identiﬁed by whole genome
sequencing, in 30 OPLL
patients (Wang et al., 2018b)
rs201153092 (p = 0.000114)
Missense, MAF<0.01
Wang et al.
(2018a)
rs13051496 (p = 0.01116)
Missense, MAF 0.11
ENPP1
6
ENPP1 play a key role in bone
mineralization and soft tissue
calciﬁcation by controling
pyrophosphate levels
ttw mouse studies
Gly568stop
Mouse Model for OPLL with
nonsense mutation originating a
truncated protein with loss of
enzymatic activity
Okawa et al.
(1998)
Association study using
323 OPLL patients and
332 controls
IVS20-11delT (p = 0.0029)
Frequent polymorphism
Nakamura et al.
(1999)
Assessed all coding sequencing
of ENPP1 gene
Unknow pathological mechanism of
association with disease
Case-control association study
with 180 OPLL patients and
265 controls
IVS15-14T-- > C (p < 0.0001)
Highly Signiﬁcate in Young female
and severe OPLL patients. Unknown
Koshizuka et al.
(2002)
(Continued on following page)
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
07
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
TABLE 3 (Continued) Genes and genetic variants associated with OPLL predisposition. The protein physiological function is also mentioned. Protein
function was obtained from GeneCards database.
Gene
Chr
Physiological
function
Study type
SNP ID -
signiﬁcantly
associated
Association
explained?
References
pathological mechanism of
association with disease
Association study with
95 OPLL Chinese patients and
90 controls. Assessed 4 SNPs in
ENPP1
C973T (p < 0.001)
Unclear association
He et al. (2013)
IVS15-14T-C (p = 0.026)
ESR1
6
ESR1 protein play a role in bone
tissues and is essential for sexual
development and reproductive
function
Case-control association study
with 120 OPLL patients
(43Female) and 306 controls
(140Female)—unrelated
Japanese
ER (XbaI) female gender
speciﬁc
Intronic polymorphism
Ogata et al.
(2002)
Assessed 5 genes; 5 SNPs
(p = 0.007)
Unclear association
Large Scale Case-control study
of 711 Japanese OPLL patients
and 896 controls
rs9340799 (p = 0.017), no
correction
Frequent Intronic polymorphism
Horikoshi et al.
(2006)
Assessed 35 candidate genes;
109 SNPs
rs2228480 (p = 0.034, no
correction
Unclear association
HLA
6
HLA is closely related in the
presentation of foreign antigens
to the immune system
Family based association study
in 33 families of patients with
OPLL.
Unclear Association
Sakou et al.
(1991)
Family based association study
in 24 families of patients with
OPLL.
Unclear Association
Matsunaga et al.
(1999)
IL-15RA
10
Increase cell proliferation and
expression of an apoptosis
inhibitor
A case control study in Chinese
individuals. 235 OPLL patients
and 250 controls
rs2228059
Tolerated missense variant MAF 0.45
Guo et al. (2014)
Unclear association
Association study in Korean
individuals. 166 OPLL patients
and 230 controls
rs2228059
Tolerated missense variant MAF 0.45
Kim et al. (2011)
Unclear association
IL-17RC
3
IL-17RC is involved in
regulation of bone metabolism
by accelerating osteoblast
differentiation
Association study in Han
Chinese individuals. 100 OPLL
patients and 100 controls
rs199772854 (p = 0.006515)
rs76999397 (p = 0.003234)
rs189013166 (p = 0.01827)
Missense variant
MAF<0.01 Synonymous variant
MAF 0.03 Synonymous variant
MAF 0.02
Wang et al.
(2018a)
Assessed 3 SNPs, previously
identiﬁed by whole genome
sequencing, in 30 OPLL
patients (Wang et al., 2018b)
RUNX2
6
RUNX2 play a role in
osteoblastic differentiation and
skeletal morphogenesis
Case control study (Sequenom
system) in Chinese individuals.
82 OPLL patients and
118 controls
rs1321075 (p = 0.043)
Intron Variant
Liu et al. (2010)
Assessed 19 SNPs in
4 candidate genes
rs12333172 (p = 0.034)
MAF 0.18 Intronic variant MAF
0.13 Unclear association
Association study with
80 OPLL patients and
80 controls
rs1321075
Intron variant, MAF 0.18 Intron
variant, MAF 0.13 Intron variant,
MAF 0.47
Chang et al.
(2017)
Assessed 3 SNPs
rs12333172 rs1406846
RXRB
6
RXRB protein is a member of
retinoid receptor family,
involved in regulation of a wide
variety of biological processes
Association study and
haplotype analysis in Japanese
individuals. 134 OPLL patients
and 158 controls
3′UTR (+140) (p = 0.0028)
Unclear association
Numasawa et al.
(1999)
3′UTR (+561) (p = 0.034)
(Continued on following page)
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
08
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
TABLE 3 (Continued) Genes and genetic variants associated with OPLL predisposition. The protein physiological function is also mentioned. Protein
function was obtained from GeneCards database.
Gene
Chr
Physiological
function
Study type
SNP ID -
signiﬁcantly
associated
Association
explained?
References
including development,
differentiation, and cellular
metabolism
TGFB1
19
TGFB1 mediates bone
development and metabolism
A case control with 46 OPLL
patients and 273 controls
rs1982073 (p =)
Frequent Polymorphism
Kamiya et al.
(2001)
MAF 0.45
Unclear association
TGFB3
14
Involved in embryogenesis and
cell differentiation
Large Scale Case-control study
in Japanese individuals.
711 OPLL patients and
896 controls
rs2268624 (p = 0.00040/p =
0.044 after Bonferoni
Correction)
Intronic polymorphisms with high
MAFs
Horikoshi et al.
(2006)
Assessed 35 candidate genes;
109 SNPs
rs2284792 (p = 0.037) no
correction
Unclear association
VDR
12
Plays a central role in calcium
homeostasis
Case-control study with
63 OPLL patients and
126 controls
VDR FF genotype
Unclear association
Kobashi et al.
(2008)
RSPH9
6
Plays a role in membranous
ossiﬁcation
Genome Wide association
study in Japanese individuals.
1130 OPLL patients and
7135 controls followed by an
association study (for
replication) in 548 OPLL
Japanese patients and
6469 controls
rs927485 (p = 9.4 × 10–9)
Trough Gene expression analysis in
and around OPLL associated loci
authors suggest that RSPH9 and
STK38L genes might be linked in
OPLL aetiology through the
membranous ossiﬁcation process.
Furthermore, HAO1, RSPO2 and
CCDC91 genes might be involved
through the endochondral
ossiﬁcation process
(Nakajima et al.,
2014; Nakajima
et al., 2016)
STK38L
12
Plays a role in the membranous
ossiﬁcation process
rs11045000 (p = 2.95 × 10–11)
RSPO2
8
Implicated in the endochondral
ossiﬁcation process
rs374810 (p = 1.88 × 10–13)
rs13279799 (p = 1.28 × 10–10)
CCDC91
12
rs1979679 (p = 4.34 × 10–12)
HAO1
20
Implicated in the endochondral
ossiﬁcation process
rs2423294 (p = 1.10 × 10–13)
FGFR1
8
Plays an essential role in the
regulation of embryonic
development, cell proliferation,
differentiation and migration
Association study with
157 OPLL patients and
222 controls
rs13317 (p = 0.02)
3 prime UTR variant
Jun and Kim,
(2012)
Assessed 9 SNPs in 3 genes
MAF 0.23 Unclear Association
BID
22
Has a role in apoptosis signaling
Association study with
157 Korean OPLL patients and
209 controls
rs8190315 (p = 0.0052)
Tolerated Missense Variant MAF
0.05 Synonymous variant
Chon et al. (2014)
Assessed 2 coding SNPs in BID
rs2072392 (p = 0.0052)
MAF 0.05 Unclear association
TGFBR2
3
TGFBR2 protein is a regulator
of transcription of several genes
related to cell proliferation
Association study with
21 OPLL patients and
42 controls
rs11466512 (p = 0.007)
Splice region variant MAF 0.27 Rare
Benign Missense Variant
MAF <0.01 Unclear Association
Jekarl et al. (2013)
rs56105708 (p = 0.024)
VKORC1
16
Involved in vitamin K
metabolism
Association study with
98 Korean OPLL patients and
200 controls
rs9923231 (p = 0.004)
(female)
Uppstream gene variant MAF 0.36
Chin et al. (2013)
Unclear Association
IFNG
12
IFNG is a protein that activates
the macrophages
Association study with
135 OPLL patients and
222 controls
rs2430561
Intronic Variant MAF 0.28 Tandem
repeat Unclear association
Kim et al. (2012)
rs3138557
BMPR-IA
10
Bone morphogenetic protein
receptor responsible for the
initiation of osteogenic
differentiation
Association study with
356 OPLL patients and
617 controls. (Han Chinese)
rs11528010 (4A < C) (p <
0.001)
Missense variant MAF 0.50 5′UTR
MAF 0.35
Wang et al.
(2018c)
(Continued on following page)
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
09
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
RUNX2 have also been associated with OPLL (Liu et al., 2010;
Chang et al., 2017).
Another important gene with contradictory results is
TGFβ1,
that
according
to
Kamiya
et
al.
(2001),
is
genetically associated to OPLL (869T > C; rs1982073).
However, Han et al. (2013) showed that the SNP previously
associated with OPLL (rs1982073) and the SNP located in the
promoter region (rs1800469) are not associated with OPLL in
TABLE 3 (Continued) Genes and genetic variants associated with OPLL predisposition. The protein physiological function is also mentioned. Protein
function was obtained from GeneCards database.
Gene
Chr
Physiological
function
Study type
SNP ID -
signiﬁcantly
associated
Association
explained?
References
Assessed all exon regions of
BMPR-IA gene
rs34755052 (-349C > T) (p <
0.001)
MiR-199
19
Involved in regulation of
inﬂammation and
chondrogenic differentiation
Association study in Korean
individuals. 207 OPLL patients
and 200 controls
rs3746444 (p = 0.039)
Non-coding transcript exon variant
Lim et al. (2016)
Assessed 4 genes/SNPs
MAF 0.18
Abbreviations: IL-1β: Interleukin 1 Beta, AHSG: Alpha 2-Heremans-Schmid glycoprotein, ACE: Angiotensin I Converting Enzyme, BMP2: Bone Morphogenetic Protein 2, BMP4: Bone
Morphogenetic Protein 4, BMP9: Bone Morphogenetic Protein 9, COL11A2: Collagen Type XI, Alpha 2, COL17A1: Collagen Type XVII, Alpha 1, COL6A1: Collagen Type VI, Alpha 1,
ENPP1: Ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1, ESR1: Estrogen Receptor 1, HLA: Human Leukocyte antigen, IL-15RA: Interleukin 15 Receptor Alpha, IL-17RC: Interleukin-
17, receptor C, RUNX2: Run-Related Transcription Factor 2, RXRB: Retinoid X Receptor Beta, TGFβ1: Transforming Growth factor Beta 1, TGFβ3: Transforming Growth factor Beta 3,
VDR: Vitamin D Receptor, RSPH9: radial spoke head 9 homolog, STK38L: serine/threonine kinase 38 like, RSPO2: R-spontin 2, CCDC91: Coiled-coil domain containing 91, HOA1:
Hydroxyacid oxidase 1, FGFR1: Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor 1, BID: BH3 Interacting Domain Death Agonist, TGFBR2: Transforming Growth Factor Beta Receptor II, VKORC1:
Vitamin K epoxide reductase complex subunit 1, IFNG: Interferon Gamma, BMPR-IA: Bone morphogenetic protein receptor type IA. NA: Not applicable. * This polymorphisms was found
in all OPLL, patients and according to the authors is a novel nucleotide variation.
FIGURE 1
Disorders associated with a higher prevalence of OSL. GH: growth hormone, PTH: parathormone, IGF-A: insulin growth factor 1, HGA:
homogentisic acid.
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
10
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
Korean populations. Interestingly, in the chondrocytes of
adjacent cartilaginous areas and in the ossiﬁed matrix of
OPLL the TGF-β1 gene is overexpressed. The same authors
tested the association between rs1982073 and the radiological
appearance of OPLL, and they veriﬁed that SNP rs1982073 is
associated to the speciﬁc area of the ossiﬁed lesion, and not to
the onset of OPLL. The “C” allele could be a risk factor for
patients with OPLL in cervical, thoracic, and/or lumbar spine
(Kawaguchi et al., 2003).
In relation to ossiﬁcation of the ligamentum ﬂavum several
genes and loci have been associated with thoracic Ossiﬁcation of
Ligamentum Flavum (OLF) (Kong et al., 2007; Liu et al., 2010;
Qu et al., 2017; Qu et al., 2021).
5 Associated disorders
The presence of OSL has been described in association with
numerous diseases of diverse etiologies. The type of disorders, the
main pathways affected and the consequences, including the main
anomalies identiﬁed in laboratory analysis, are outlined in Figure 1.
The OSL associated disorders can be of endocrine, nutritional
or
metabolic
nature.
The
main
endocrine
associated
disorders—diabetes
mellitus,
acromegaly
and
hypoparathyroidism—are characterized by disturbances in the
metabolism of glucose, growth hormone (GH), and parathyroid
hormone (PTH), leading to hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia,
hyperglycemia
and
hyperinsulinemia.
These
endocrine
anomalies are often linked to obesity, which can also have a
strong genetic basis. The excessive intake of ﬂuoride and vitamin
A leads to OSL resembling DISH. Disturbances in mineral
metabolism namely phosphorus phosphatase and calcium can
also originate disorders that have been reported in association
with
OSL:
familial
hypocalciuric
hypercalcemia,
hypophosphatemic rickets and hypophosphatasia.
5.1 Monogenic disorders
Table 4 lists a subset of DISH and OPLL cases originated by
monogenic disorders. With the exception of alkaptonuria,
characterized by the levels of Homogentisic acid, all of the
other disorders are directly involved in calcium and phosphate
homeostasis. As expected, genes related in hypophosphatemic
rickets and hypophosphatasia are directly involved in phosphate
homeostasis. However, the reports of OSL are not related to all
TABLE 4 Monogenic disorders previously associated with OSL. Lack of inheritance means that it is still unconﬁrmed.
Disorder
Inheritance
OMIM
Gene/Locus involved
Hypophosphatemic rickets/osteomalacia
AD
193100
FGF23
AR
241520
DMP1
AR
613312
ENPP1
AR
241530
SLC34A3
XLD
307800
PHEX
XLR
300554
CLCN5
Hypophosphatasia
AR
241500
ALPL
AR
241510
AR, AD
146300
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
AD
103580
GNAS1
Hypoparathyroidism
AD
146200
GCM2
AD/AR
146200
PTH
Alkaptonuria
AR
203500
HGD
Acromegaly
Somatic/AD
102200
AIP
102200
GNAS1
X linked
300943
GPR101
AD
610755
CDKN1B
AD
131100
MEN1
Somatic
174800
GNAS
AD
160980
PRKAR1A
Familial Hypocalciuric Hypercalcemia
AD
145980
CASR
AD
145981
GNA11
AD
600740
AP2S1
AbbreviationsAD -Autosomal Dominant, AR- Autosomal Recessive, XLD, and XLR - X-linked Dominant and Recessive.
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
11
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
types of hypophosphatasia disorders. Saito et al. (2011), reported
a case of OPLL with hypophosphatemic rickets/osteomalacia
caused by a splice donor site mutation in the ENPP1 gene.
Cases of hypoparathyroidism associated with changes similar
to DISH are also reported in the literature (Lambert and Becker,
1989; Unverdi et al., 2009; John and Suthar, 2016). The genes
GNAS, GCM2 and PTH, closely related to hypoparathryroidism,
play a role in both calcium and phosphorus metabolism.
According to what we know, there is only one case described
of a patient with DISH and familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia
(FHH). The patient, a 45-year-old diabetic woman, have
hypercalcemia secondary to FHH and developed dysphagia
because of external esophageal compression from DISH.
According to the authors, the relationship between FHH and
DISH
remains
unproven
(Rivas
and
Lado-Abeal,
2013).
Acromegaly is a rare condition of high elevated somatic
growth and distorted proportions arising from hypersecretion
of growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-
1) due to adenomas and pathogenic pituitary secretion (Ben-
Shlomo and Melmed, 2008). According to Altomonte et al.
(1992), GH levels may act as bone promoting factors in DISH.
5.2 “Risk-factor” complex disorders
The etiology of “risk-factor” OSL disorders is complex, and
determined by the interaction of inherited and environmental
factors, such as age, smoking, alcohol consumption, diet and
physical inactivity. These factors, as already know, effect type
2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) and obesity, two of the known risk
factor for developing DISH. Even though heterogeneous, there
are some monogenic forms of these OSL disorders; see Table 5
for more details. Diabetes mellitus is considered to be a
heterogeneous
group
of
disorders
having
as
a
main
characteristic persistent hyperglycemia (Pillai and Littlejohn,
2014). Obesity is considered a complex and a multifactorial
disease, however there are monogenic cases reported that are
related to mutations in genes of the leptin/melanocortin system
involved in food intake regulation (Huvenne et al., 2016). It is
interesting to see that genetic variants in LEPR gene, as occurs in
the ZFR murine model, can cause obesity, hypercholesterolemia,
hyperinsulinemia, hyperlipidemia and also ossiﬁcation of spinal
ligaments, similar to human OPLL (Okano et al., 1997).
Furthermore, there are studies reporting increased levels of
serum leptin in female patients with OPLL (Ikeda et al., 2011)
(Feng et al., 2018) as well as in DISH patients (Tenti et al., 2017).
The osteogenic effects of leptin/leptin receptor (LepR) in
conjunction with mechanical stress, on the ossiﬁcation of the
posterior ligament, through its interaction with osteogenic
markers such as osteopontin, osteocalcin and RUNX2, were
also recently shown (Chen et al., 2018). It is also pertinent to
mention that ENPP1 is a predisposition gene for both obesity and
type 2 diabetes. The importance of leptin/LEPR in disorders such
as DISH, with an important metabolic association, remain to be
revealed.
5.3 Other rheumatic disorders coexisting
with Ossiﬁcation of Spinal Ligaments
The co-existence of DISH with other rheumatic disorders was
ﬁrst reported in 1950 by Forestier and Rotes Querol (Forrestier,
1950). Subsequentstudies indicate, insome cases thatupto50% of
DISH patients also have OPLL proposing that they share common
etiopathogenic factors. Simultaneous OPLL and OLF are also very
common in the literature (Li et al., 2012; Onishi et al., 2016). In
addition, the co-existence of the three OSL disorders—DISH;
OPLL and OLF has also been described in the literature (Guo
et al., 2011). The association of DISH with psoriatic arthritis in the
literature(Ben-ShlomoandMelmed,2008)iscommonbutstudies
TABLE 5 Complex disorders previously associated with OSL. AD stands for Autosomal Dominant, AR for Autosomal Recessive. Lack of inheritance
means that it is not conﬁrmed.
Disorder
Type
Inheritance
OMIM
Gene/Locus involved
Non-insulin-dependent Type 2 Diabetes
mellitus
Monogenic - MODY
AD
606391
Genetically Heterogeneous—associated with mutations in 13 genes
Polygenic
125853
Many susceptibility locus identiﬁed, including in ENPP1
Abdominal Obesity - Metabolic Syndrome
Monogenic
AR
615812
DYRK1B
200100
MTP
Polygenic
605552
AOMS1
AOMS2
Obesity
Monogenic
AR
614962
LEP
AR
614963
LEPR
AR
600955
PCSK1
AR
609734
POMC
Polygenic
601665
Genetically heterogeneous but including ENPP1 as susceptibility
gene
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
12
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
concludedthatisasideeffectofretinoidstreatment(Bolognaetal.,
1991). Other rheumatic diseases co-existing with DISH include:
hyperostosis frontalis interna (Arlet et al., 1978; Mazières et al.,
1978; Ciocci et al., 1985; Fukunishi et al., 1987; Fukunishi and
Hosokawa, 1988),CPPDand/orCC(Resnicketal.,1978a;Bruges-
Armas et al., 2006), gout (Resnick et al., 1978a; Littlejohn and Hall,
1982; Constantz, 1983; Fornaciari et al., 2009), rheumatoid
arthritis (Resnick et al., 1978a; Resnick et al., 1978b; Forster
et al., 1981; Mata et al., 1995), osteoarthritis (Resnick et al.,
1978a), Heberden and Bouchard nodes (Schlapbach et al., 1992)
and Paget’s disease (Mazières et al., 1978; Morales et al., 1993).
DISH and Ankylosing Spondylitis (AS) generally have a
distinct radiographic appearance but sometimes, possibly in
the early disease stages, they are difﬁcult to distinguish
radiologically (Williamson and Reginato, 1984; Olivieri et al.,
1987; Olivieri et al., 1989; Rillo et al., 1989; Troise Rioda and
Ferraccioli, 1990; Olivieri, 1991; Passiu et al., 1991; Maertens
et al., 1992; Tishler and Yaron, 1992; Jattiot et al., 1995; Moreno
et al., 1996; Kozanoglu et al., 2002; Jordana et al., 2009; Wooten,
2009; Macia-Villa et al., 2016; Kuperus et al., 2018). OPLL has
also been observed in patients with AS but this coexistence is
probably coincidental (Kim et al., 2007). Chondrocalcinosis, is
characterized by the deposition of calcium containing crystals in
synovial membranes, articular cartilage and, sometimes it can
also affect periarticular soft tissues. Curiously, in some patients,
the
deposition
of
calcium
crystals—hydroxyapatite
or
CPPD—can also occur in the spinal ligaments (Resnick and
Pineda, 1984; Muthukumar et al., 2000) but this is usually
difﬁcult to differentiate from ossiﬁcation (Ehara et al., 1998).
ANKH is the only monogenic cause identiﬁed for CC (Table 6); a
recent study described a gain-of-function mutation in the gene
TNFRSF11B, which resulted in early-onset osteoarthritis and CC
(Ramos et al., 2015). A recently described hereditary autosomal
recessive ectopic mineralization syndrome in patients with
arterial Calciﬁcation due to deﬁciency of CD73 (ACDC), was
the result of a loss of function mutations in the 5′-nucleoside Ecto
(NT5E) gene. These patients had erosive peripheral arthropathy
and axial enthesopathic calciﬁcations, resembling DISH although
with decreased disc space height and the presence of large
intervertebral disk calciﬁcations (Cudrici et al., 2021). The
similarities to both DISH and AS of the outcome of spine
imaging of ACDC patients are noteworthy.
6 Discussion
6.1 Familial aggregation reports
The existence of a small number of family reports, with early-
onset and exuberant phenotypes, in which the genetic cause was not
identiﬁed and most of the times was not even investigated, raises the
possibility that there are some cases of monogenic DISH and OPLL.
There are possibly three main types of OSL: A sporadic form, a type
that is secondary to associated metabolic disorders and a hereditary
type. It is now clear that most OSL cases do not follow a simple,
single gene Mendelian inheritance pattern, but instead are
multifactorial disorders developing in individuals with a genetic
predisposition from a variety of genetic variants in different genes.
6.2 Animal models
The existence of spontaneous and manipulated animal models
for both DISH and OPLL could facilitate the identiﬁcation of causal
humangeneticfactors.Itseemsprobablethatthehumanphenotype
ofOPLLandDISHarelikelytobecausedbymutationsingenesthat
underlie the animal models for these disorders. As far as we know,
there are no reports of SLC29A1 (ENT1 mice model for DISH)
humangenemutationsinassociationwithDISH.Theassociationof
ENPP1 with OPLL susceptibility (31, 47–49) is still unsubstantiated
(50). Interestingly, in one study the authors found that the
combination of variants in ENPP1 and LEPR genes was
associated with the location and extension of OPLL (51). An
interesting report about hypophosphatemic rickets in an OPLL
patient due to a homozygous mutation in the ENPP1 gene (53),
substantiatesthelikelyimportanceofthisgeneintheetiopathogenic
mechanism of OSL.
The case of the ank mouse has been quite different. In humans,
analysis in the ANKH gene has identiﬁed several mutations that
segregate with CC phenotype but only in a very limited subset of
TABLE 6 Rheumatic disorders previously seen coexisting with OSL. AD stands for Autosomal Dominant, AR for Autosomal Recessive. Lack of
inheritance means that it is not conﬁrmed.
Disorder
Inheritance
OMIM
Gene/Locus involved
Mechanism
ACDC
AR
211800
NT5E
Pyrophosphate metabolism
Ankylosing Spondylitis
Multifactorial
106300
HLA-B
MHC Peptide presentation
AD
183840
SPDA2 locus
613238
SPDA3 locus
Chondrocalcinosis
AD
118600
ANKH
Pyrophosphate metabolism
AD
600668
CCAL1 locus
AR
602643
TNFRSB1
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
13
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
pedigrees. The co-coexistence of spinal ossiﬁcation with CC is well
supported in the literature (10, 12, 13), indicating a strong genetic
link between these disorders. The genetic conﬁrmation between
spinal ossiﬁcation and CC comes from two animal models—twy
and ankh mice—the mouse models for OPLL and CC, develop
spinal ossiﬁcation and hydroxyapatite arthropathy. Both genes,
ENPP1 and ANKH, regulate PPi levels thus having an essential role
in bone mineralization and soft tissue calciﬁcation. The association
of ENPP1 variants with Chondrocalcinosis, is considered a minor
determinant of the disease (58, 59).
6.3 Genetic variants association
Three different genetic variants in COL6A1 have been associated
with both DISH and OPLL. Results from these studies are
inconsistent due to the type of variant associated, the lack of
explanation of the pathogenic mechanism and the low numbers
of individuals studied. Further progress in investigation of DISH
requires a concerted approach, similar to the ones used to target the
genetic basis of OPLL. In the latter case linkage studies, candidate
gene association studies and even genome wide association
studies were performed and revealed that OPLL is genetically
heterogenous. Despite all the studies, and the large number of
genes that have been associated with OSL, most of the
associations are still inconsistent because genetic variants
were localized in non-coding regions. Several genes involved
many potential low risk effects in OSL inheritance, so there is
insufﬁcient power and analysis for their detection.
6.4 Genetics of associated disorders
The higher prevalence of OSL in patients with endocrine,
nutritional and metabolic disorders made us wonder if the known
genetic cause for these associated disorders could help to clarify the
putative genetic pathways involved in the etiology of OSL. The
ectopic calciﬁcation occurring is most probably predisposed by the
balance between the expression of speciﬁc genes that act directly or
indirectly on the phosphorus to calcium ratio. The crucial role of
angiogenesis in DISH etiology has also been suggested, as it might
be the common pathogenic background of some conditions
included in metabolic syndrome. Nonetheless, there are several
case reports of patients with monogenic metabolic disorders with
the occurrence of DISH and OPLL.
7 Conclusion
A validated set of classiﬁcation criteria for diseases
characterized by ectopic mineralization of spinal tissues is of
utmost importance for genetic studies so homogeneous
phenotype groups can be established for investigation. This
is particularly important in DISH because this disease is
characterized by the ossiﬁcation of the anterior spinal
ligaments
and
generalized
symmetrical
enthesopathic
calciﬁcations,
which
may
well
be
among
the
ﬁrst
manifestations of the disease or the main evidence of the
disease in a subset of patients. At this time, DISH disease is
requiring a validated set of criteria to robustly describe and
establish
homogeneous
cohorts
of
patients.
A
more
comprehensive designation of DISH, including patients with
early phase disease, are clearly indispensable for genetic studies
(Mader et al., 2013). On the other hand, great advances have
been made in understanding the presentation of different types
of OPLL.
Taken together the collected evidence suggests OSL has a
heterogeneous genetic basis. The rapid advance in methods for
genetic studies has brought new and interesting insights into
ectopic calciﬁcation, and is providing conﬁrmation about the
importance of genes for the regulation of Pi/PPi levels, which
control mineralization. Future genome-scale approaches will
contribute
to
pinpoint
susceptibility
genes.
However,
to
provide sufﬁcient analytical power, the number of patients
needs to be enlarged and the clinical/radiological disease
classiﬁcation, especially in DISH patients, needs substantial
improvement. International collaborations are essential to
increase
sample
size
and
overcome
analytical
challenges
caused by the genetic heterogeneity of these complex diseases
of calciﬁcation.
Author contributions
BPandACwrotethemanuscript;alltheauthorsprovidedcritical
revision and contributed to the ﬁnal version of the manuscript.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their afﬁliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
14
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
References
Abiteboul, M., Mazières, B., and Ménard, H. (1985). [2 new familial cases of
ankylosing vertebral hyperostosis]. Rev. Rhum. Mal. Osteoartic. 52, 645–647.
Altomonte, L., Zoli, A., Mirone, L., Marchese, G., Scolieri, P., Barini, A., et al.
(1992). Growth hormone secretion in diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. Ann.
Ital. Med. Int. 7 (1), 30–33.
Arlet, P., Le Tallec, Y., Mazieres, B., Arlet, J., Timbal, X., and Boulard, C. (1978).
Association between ankylosing vertebral hyperostosis and frontalis interna
hyperostosis. Nouv. Presse Med. 7 (33), 2968.
Badhiwala, J. H., Ahuja, C. S., Akbar, M. A., Witiw, C. D., Nassiri, F., Furlan, J. C.,
et al. (2020). Degenerative cervical myelopathy - update and future directions. Nat.
Rev. Neurol. 16 (2), 108–124. doi:10.1038/s41582-019-0303-0
Bai, Q., Wang, Y., Zhai, J., Wu, J., Zhang, Y., and Zhao, Y. (2022). Current
understanding of tandem spinal stenosis: Epidemiology, diagnosis, and surgical
strategy. EFORT Open Rev. 7 (8), 587–598. doi:10.1530/EOR-22-0016
Beardwell, A. (1969). Familial ankylosing vertebral hyperostosis with tylosis. Ann.
Rheum. Dis. 28, 518–523. doi:10.1136/ard.28.5.518
Ben-Shlomo, A., and Melmed, S. (2008). Endocrinol. Metab. Clin. North Am. 37
(1), 101–122. doi:10.1016/j.ecl.2007.10.002
Bicket, A., Mehrabi, P., Naydenova, Z., Wong, V., Donaldson, L., Stagljar, I., et al.
(2016). Novel regulation of equlibrative nucleoside transporter 1 (ENT1) by
receptor-stimulated Ca2+-dependent calmodulin binding. Am. J. Physiol. Cell
Physiol. 310 (10), C808–C820. doi:10.1152/ajpcell.00243.2015
Bologna, C., Poirier, J. L., Herisson, C., and Simon, L. (1991). Hip and spinal
ossiﬁcation enthesopathies induced by etretinate therapy in peripheral psoriatic
arthritis. Rev. Rhum. Mal. Osteoartic. 58 (9), 595–599.
Bossens, K., Bhatti, S., Van Soens, I., Gielen, I., and Van Ham, L. (2016). Diffuse
idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis of the spine in a nine-year-old cat. J. Small Anim.
Pract. 57 (1), 33–35. doi:10.1111/jsap.12371
Brewerton, D. A., Hart, F. D., Nicholls, A., Caffrey, M., James, D. C., and Sturrock,
R. D. (1973). Ankylosing spondylitis and HL-A 27. Lancet 1, 904–907. doi:10.1016/
s0140-6736(73)91360-3
Brown, T. R., Quinn, S. F., and D’Agostino, A. N. (1991). Deposition of calcium
pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals in the ligamentum ﬂavum: Evaluation with MR
imaging and CT. Radiology 178 (3), 871–873. doi:10.1148/radiology.178.3.1994435
Bruges-Armas, J., Couto, A. R., Timms, A., Santos, M. R., Bettencourt, B. F.,
Peixoto, M. J., et al. (2006). Ectopic calciﬁcation among families in the Azores:
Clinical and radiologic manifestations in families with diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis and chondrocalcinosis. Arthritis Rheum. 54 (4), 1340–1349. doi:10.
1002/art.21727
Buckley, M. F., Loveland, K. A., McKinstry, W. J., Garson, O. M., and Goding,
J. W. (1990). Plasma cell membrane glycoprotein PC-1. cDNA cloning of the
human molecule, amino acid sequence, and chromosomal location. J. Biol. Chem.
265 (29), 17506–17511. doi:10.1016/s0021-9258(18)38193-6
Carroll, S. H., Wigner, N. A., Kulkarni, N., Johnston-Cox, H., Gerstenfeld, L. C.,
and Ravid, K. (2012). A2B adenosine receptor promotes mesenchymal stem cell
differentiation to osteoblasts and bone formation in vivo. J. Biol. Chem. 287 (19),
15718–15727. doi:10.1074/jbc.M112.344994
Caswell, A. M., Ali, S. Y., and Russell, R. G. (1987). Nucleoside triphosphate
pyrophosphatase of rabbit matrix vesicles, a mechanism for the generation of
inorganic pyrophosphate in epiphyseal cartilage. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 924 (2),
276–283. doi:10.1016/0304-4165(87)90023-7
Caswell, A. M., and Russell, R. G. (1988). Evidence that ecto-nucleoside-
triphosphate pyrophosphatase serves in the generation of extracellular inorganic
pyrophosphate in human bone and articular cartilage. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 966
(3), 310–317. doi:10.1016/0304-4165(88)90080-3
Chang, F., Li, L., Gao, G., Ding, S., Yang, J., Zhang, T., et al. (2017). Role of
Runx2 polymorphisms in risk and prognosis of ossiﬁcation of posterior longitudinal
ligament. J. Clin. Lab. Anal. 31 (4), e22068. doi:10.1002/jcla.22068
Chen, S., Zhu, H., Wang, G., Xie, Z., Wang, J., and Chen, J. (2018). Combined use
of leptin and mechanical stress has osteogenic effects on ossiﬁcation of the posterior
longitudinal ligament. Eur. Spine J. 27 (8), 1757–1766. doi:10.1007/s00586-018-
5663-4
Chen, X., Guo, J., Cai, T., Zhang, F., Pan, S., Zhang, L., et al. (2016). Targeted next-
generation sequencing reveals multiple deleterious variants in OPLL-associated
genes. Sci. Rep. 6, 26962. doi:10.1038/srep26962
Chen, Z., Meng, H., Xing, G., Yuan, H., Zhao, F., Liu, R., et al. (2008). Age-related
differences in pulmonary and cardiovascular responses to SiO2 nanoparticle
inhalation: Nanotoxicity has susceptible population. Environ. Sci. Technol. 42
(23), 8985–8992. doi:10.1021/es800975u
Chin, D. K., Han, I. B., Ropper, A. E., Jeon, Y. J., Kim, D. H., Kim, Y. S., et al.
(2013). Association of VKORC1-1639g>A polymorphism with susceptibility to
ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine: A Korean study. Acta
Neurochir. 155 (10), 1937–1942. doi:10.1007/s00701-013-1747-4
Choi, B. W., Song, K. J., and Chang, H. (2011). Ossiﬁcation of the posterior
longitudinal ligament: A review of literature. Asian Spine J. 5 (4), 267–276. doi:10.
4184/asj.2011.5.4.267
Chon, J., Hong, J. H., Kim, J., Han, Y. J., Lee, B. W., Kim, S. C., et al. (2014).
Association
between
BH3
interacting
domain
death
agonist
(BID)
gene
polymorphism and ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament in Korean
population. Mol. Biol. Rep. 41 (2), 895–899. doi:10.1007/s11033-013-2933-4
Ciocci, A., Buratti, L., and Maurelli, G. (1985). Vertebral hyperostosis and
hyperostosis frontalis interna. Rev. Rhum. Mal. Osteoartic. 52 (4), 227–230.
Constantz, R., and B, R. (1983). Case report 237: Gout associated with diffuse
idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH). Skelet. Radiol. 10 (2), 117–120. doi:10.1007/
BF00360796
Couto, A. R., Parreira, B., Thomson, R., Soares, M., Power, D. M., Stankovich, J.,
et al. (2017). Combined approach for ﬁnding susceptibility genes in DISH/
chondrocalcinosis families: Whole-genome-wide linkage and IBS/IBD studies.
Hum. Genome Var. 4, 17041. doi:10.1038/hgv.2017.41
Cudrici, C. D., Newman, K. A., Ferrante, E. A., Huffstutler, R., Carney, K.,
Betancourt, B., et al. (2021). Multifocal calciﬁc periarthritis with distinctive clinical
and radiological features in patients with CD73 deﬁciency. Rheumatology 61,
163–173. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/keab270
Ehara, S., Shimamura, T., NakamuRa, R., and YamazaKi, K. (1998). Paravertebral
ligamentous ossiﬁcation: DISH, OPLL and OLF. Eur. J. Radiol. 27 (3), 196–205.
doi:10.1016/s0720-048x(97)00164-2
Elefteriou, F., Takeda, S., Ebihara, K., Magre, J., PataNoN.Kim, C. A., et al. (2004).
Serum leptin level is a regulator of bone mass. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101 (9),
3258–3263. doi:10.1073/pnas.0308744101
Ellman, M. H., Vazquez, T., Ferguson, L., and MaNdelN. (1978). Calcium
pyrophosphate deposition in ligamentum ﬂavum. Arthritis Rheum. 21 (5),
611–613. doi:10.1002/art.1780210512
Eytan, O., Morice-Picard, F., Sarig, O., Ezzedine, K., Isakov, O., Li, Q., et al.
(2013). Cole disease results from mutations in ENPP1. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 93 (4),
752–757. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.08.007
Feng, B., Cao, S., Zhai, J., Ren, Y., Hu, J., Tian, Y., et al. (2018). Roles and
mechanisms of leptin in osteogenic stimulation in cervical ossiﬁcation of the
posterior longitudinal ligament. J. Orthop. Surg. Res. 13 (1), 165. doi:10.1186/
s13018-018-0864-4
Fornaciari, G., Giuffra, V., Giusiani, S., Fornaciari, A., Villari, N., and
Vitiello, A. (2009). The ’gout’ of the Medici, grand dukes of ﬂorence: A
palaeopathological study. Rheumatol. Oxf. 48 (4), 375–377. doi:10.1093/
rheumatology/ken493
Fornaciari, G., and Giuffra, V. (2013). The "gout of the Medici": Making the
modern diagnosis using paleopathology. Gene 528 (1), 46–50. doi:10.1016/j.gene.
2013.04.056
Forrestier, J., and R.-Q, J. (1950). Senile ankylosing hyperostosis of the spine. Ann.
Rheum. Dis. 9, 321–330. doi:10.1136/ard.9.4.321
Forster, T. J., Leek, J. C., and Robbins, D. L. (1981). Peripheral hyperostosis in
rheumatoid arthritis in the absence of axial involvement. J. Rheumatol. 8 (4),
653–657.
Fukunishi, I., Hayabara, T., and Hosokawa, K. (1987). A case of diffuse idiopathic
skeletal
hyperostosis
(DISH)
with
hyperostosis
frontalis
interna.
Rinsho
Shinkeigaku 27 (8), 1013–1016.
Fukunishi, I., and Hosokawa, K. (1988). Schizophrenic psychosis with a tendency
of systemic ossiﬁcation. Jpn. J. Psychiatry Neurol. 42 (2), 217–222. doi:10.1111/j.
1440-1819.1988.tb01973.x
Furushima, K., Shimo-Onoda, K., Maeda, S., Nobukuni, T., Ikari, K., Koga, H.,
et al. (2002). Large-scale screening for candidate genes of ossiﬁcation of the
posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. J. Bone Min. Res. 17 (1), 128–137.
doi:10.1359/jbmr.2002.17.1.128
Gorman, C., Jawad, A. S. M., and Chikanza, I. (2005). A family with diffuse
idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 64, 1794–1795. doi:10.1136/ard.
2004.033852
Guo, Q., Lv, S. Z., Wu, S. W., Tian, X., and Li, Z. Y. (2014). Association between
single nucleotide polymorphism of IL15RA gene with susceptibility to ossiﬁcation
of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. J. Orthop. Surg. Res. 9, 103.
doi:10.1186/s13018-014-0103-6
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
15
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
Guo, Q., Ni, B., Yang, J., Zhu, Z., and Yang, J. (2011). Simultaneous ossiﬁcation of
the posterior longitudinal ligament and ossiﬁcation of the ligamentum ﬂavum
causing upper thoracic myelopathy in DISH: Case report and literature review. Eur.
Spine J. 20 (2), S195–S201. doi:10.1007/s00586-010-1538-z
Hajjawi, M. O., MacRae, V. E., Huesa, C., Boyde, A., Millan, J. L., Arnett, T. R.,
et al. (2014). Mineralisation of collagen rich soft tissues and osteocyte lacunae in
Enpp1(-/-) mice. Bone 69, 139–147. doi:10.1016/j.bone.2014.09.016
Hamanishi, C., Tan, A., Yamane, T., ToMiharaM.FuKuda, K., and Tanaka, S.
(1995). Ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament. Autosomal recessive
trait. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 20 (2), 205–207. doi:10.1097/00007632-199501150-
00014
Han, I. B., Ropper, A. E., Jeon, Y. J., Park, H. S., Shin, D. A., Teng, Y. D., et al.
(2013). Association of transforming growth factor-beta 1 gene polymorphism with
genetic susceptibility to ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament in Korean
patients. Genet. Mol. Res. 12 (4), 4807–4816. doi:10.4238/2013.February.28.26
Havelka, S., Uitterlinden, A. G., Fang, Y., Arp, P. P., Pavelkova, A., VeselaM., et al.
(2002). Collagen type I(alpha 1) and vitamin D receptor polymorphisms in diffuse
idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. Clin. Rheumatol. 21 (4), 347–348. doi:10.1007/
s100670200093
Havelka, S., VeselaM.Pavelkova, A., Ruzickova, S., Koga, H., Maeda, S., et al.
(2001). Are DISH and OPLL genetically related? Ann. Rheum. Dis. 60 (9), 902–903.
He, Z., Zhu, H., Ding, L., Xiao, H., Chen, D., and XueF. (2013). Association of
NPP1 polymorphism with postoperative progression of ossiﬁcation of the posterior
longitudinal ligament in Chinese patients. Genet. Mol. Res. 12 (4), 4648–4655.
doi:10.4238/2013.October.18.3
Hinton, D. J., McGee-Lawrence, M. E., Lee, M. R., Kwong, H. K., Westendorf, J. J.,
and Choi, D. S. (2014). Aberrant bone density in aging mice lacking the adenosine
transporter ENT1. PLoS One 9 (2), e88818. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0088818
Horikoshi, T., Maeda, K., Kawaguchi, Y., Chiba, K., Mori, K., Koshizuka, Y., et al.
(2006). A large-scale genetic association study of ossiﬁcation of the posterior
longitudinal ligament of the spine. Hum. Genet. 119 (6), 611–616. doi:10.1007/
s00439-006-0170-9
Huvenne, H., Dubern, B., Clement, K., and Poitou, C. (2016). Rare genetic forms
of obesity: Clinical approach and current treatments in 2016. Obes. Facts 9 (3),
158–173. doi:10.1159/000445061
Ikeda, Y., Nakajima, A., Aiba, A., Koda, M., Okawa, A., Takahashi, K., et al.
(2011). Association between serum leptin and bone metabolic markers, and the
development of heterotopic ossiﬁcation of the spinal ligament in female patients
with ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament. Eur. Spine J. 20 (9),
1450–1458. doi:10.1007/s00586-011-1688-7
Ikegawa, S. (2007). in Tiptoe walking (ttw) mouse in OPLL: Ossiﬁcation of the
posterior longitundinal ligament. Editors K. Yonenobu, K. Nakamura, and
Y. Toyama (Hicom, Japan: Springer), 71–76.
Ikuma, H., Hirose, T., Nakamura, D., Yamashita, K., Ueda, M., Sasaki, K., et al.
(2022). The prevalence and characteristics of diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis
(DISH): A cross-sectional study of 1519 Japanese individuals. Diagn. (Basel) 12 (5),
1088. doi:10.3390/diagnostics12051088
Jattiot, F., Goupille, P., and Valat, J. P. (1995). Coexistence of diffuse idiopathic
skeletal
hyperostosis
and
ankylosing
spondylitis
in
two
patients.
Clin.
Exp. Rheumatol. 13 (3), 405–406.
Jekarl, D. W., Paek, C. M., An, Y. J., Kim, Y. J., Kim, M., Kim, Y., et al. (2013).
TGFBR2 gene polymorphism is associated with ossiﬁcation of the posterior
longitudinal ligament. J. Clin. Neurosci. 20 (3), 453–456. doi:10.1016/j.jocn.2012.
05.031
John, D. R., and Suthar, P. P. (2016). Radiological features of long-standing
hypoparathyroidism. Pol. J. Radiol. 81, 42–45. doi:10.12659/PJR.896104
Jordana, X., Galtes, I., Couto, A. R., Gales, L., Damas, M., Lima, M., et al. (2009).
The coexistence of ankylosing spondylitis and diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis--a postmortem diagnosis. Clin. Rheumatol. 28 (3), 353–356. doi:10.
1007/s10067-008-1068-9
Jun, J. K., and Kim, S. M. (2012). Association study of ﬁbroblast growth factor
2 and ﬁbroblast growth factor receptors gene polymorphism in Korean ossiﬁcation
of the posterior longitudinal ligament patients. J. Korean Neurosurg. Soc. 52 (1),
7–13. doi:10.3340/jkns.2012.52.1.7
Kamiya, M., HarAdA, A., MizunoM.Iwata, H., and Yamada, Y. (2001).
Association between a polymorphism of the transforming growth factor-beta1
gene and genetic susceptibility to ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament
in Japanese patients. Spine 1976 26 (11), 1264–1266. doi:10.1097/00007632-
200106010-00017
Karasugi, T., Nakajima, M., Ikari, K., Tsuji, T., Matsumoto, M., and Chiba, K.
(2013). A genome-wide sib-pair linkage analysis of ossiﬁcation of the posterior
longitudinal ligament of the spine. J. Bone Min. Metab. 31 (2), 136–143. doi:10.
1007/s00774-012-0404-y
Kato, K., Nishimasu, H., Okudaira, S., Mihara, E., Ishitani, R., Takagi, J., et al.
(2012). Crystal structure of Enpp1, an extracellular glycoprotein involved in bone
mineralization and insulin signaling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 109 (42),
16876–16881. doi:10.1073/pnas.1208017109
Kawaguchi, Y., Furushima, K., Sugimori, K., Inoue, I., and Kimura, T. (2003).
Association between polymorphism of the transforming growth factor-beta1
gene with the radiologic characteristic and ossiﬁcation of the posterior
longitudinal ligament. Spine 1976 28 (13), 1424–1426. doi:10.1097/01.
BRS.0000068245.27017.9F
Kim, D. H., Jeong, Y. S., Chon, J., Yoo, S. D., Kim, H. S., Kang, S. W., et al. (2011).
Association between interleukin 15 receptor, alpha (IL15RA) polymorphism and
Korean patients with ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament. Cytokine 55
(3), 343–346. doi:10.1016/j.cyto.2011.05.016
Kim, D. H., Yun, D. H., Kim, H. S., Min, S. K., Yoo, S. D., Lee, K. H., et al. (2014).
The insertion/deletion polymorphism of Angiotensin I converting Enzyme gene is
associated with ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament in the Korean
population. Ann. Rehabil. Med. 38 (1), 1–5. doi:10.5535/arm.2014.38.1.1
Kim, K. H., Kuh, S. U., Park, J. Y., Lee, S. J., Park, H. S., Chin, D. K., et al. (2014).
Association between BMP-2 and COL6A1 gene polymorphisms with susceptibility
to ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the cervical spine in Korean
patients and family members. Genet. Mol. Res. 13 (1), 2240–2247. doi:10.4238/2014.
March.31.4
Kim, K. T., Kim, D. H., Chung, J. Y., Lee, S., Joo, J., Nah, S. S., et al. (2012).
Association of interferon gamma polymorphism with ossiﬁcation of the posterior
longitudinal ligament in the Korean population. Immunol. Invest. 41 (8), 876–887.
doi:10.3109/08820139.2012.714437
Kim, T. J., Jun, J. B., Joo, K. B., and Uhm, W. S. (2007). Prevalence of ossiﬁcation
of posterior longitudinal ligament in patients with ankylosing spondylitis.
J. Rheumatol. 34 (12), 2460–2462.
Kobashi, G., Ohta, K., Washio, M., Okamoto, K., Sasaki, S., Yokoyama, T., et al.
(2008). FokI variant of vitamin D receptor gene and factors related to
atherosclerosis associated with ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament
of the spine: A multi-hospital case-control study. Spine 1976 33 (16), E553–E558.
doi:10.1097/BRS.0b013e31817e9de2
Koga, H., Sakou, T., TakEtomi, E., Hayashi, K., Numasawa, T., Harata, S., et al.
(1998). Genetic mapping of ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the
spine. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62 (6), 1460–1467. doi:10.1086/301868
Kong,
Q.,
Ma,
X.,
Li,
F.,
Guo,
Z.,
Qi,
Q.,
Li,
W.,
et
al.
(2007).
COL6A1 polymorphisms associated with ossiﬁcation of the ligamentum ﬂavum
and ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament. Spine 1976 32 (25),
2834–2838. doi:10.1097/BRS.0b013e31815b761c
Koshizuka, Y., Kawaguchi, H., Ogata, N., Ikeda, T., Mabuchi, A., Seichi, A., et al.
(2002).
Nucleotide
pyrophosphatase
gene
polymorphism
associated
with
ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. J. Bone Min. Res.
17 (1), 138–144. doi:10.1359/jbmr.2002.17.1.138
Kozanoglu, E., Guzel, R., Guler-UysalF.and Goncu, K. (2002). Coexistence of
diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis and ankylosing spondylitis: A case report.
Clin. Rheumatol. 21 (3), 258–260. doi:10.1007/pl00011224
Kranenburg, H. C., Westerveld, L. A., Verlaan, J. J., Oner, F. C., Dhert, W. J. A.,
Voorhout, G., et al. (2010). The dog as an animal model for DISH? Eur. Spine J. 19
(8), 1325–1329. doi:10.1007/s00586-010-1280-6
Kranenburg, H. J., Hazewinkel, H. A., and Meij, B. P. (2014). Naturally occurring
spinal hyperostosis in dogs as a model for human spinal disorders. ILAR J. 55 (1),
150–163. doi:10.1093/ilar/ilu012
Kuperus, J. S., Waalwijk, J. F., Regan, E. A., van der Horst-Bruinsma, I. E., Oner, F.
C., de Jong, P. A., et al. (2018). Simultaneous occurrence of ankylosing spondylitis
and diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis: A systematic review. Rheumatol. Oxf.
57 (12), 2120–2128. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/key211
Lambert, R. G., and Becker, E. J. (1989). Diffuse skeletal hyperostosis in idiopathic
hypoparathyroidism. Clin. Radiol. 40 (2), 212–215. doi:10.1016/s0009-9260(89)80101-1
Levy-Litan, V., Hershkovitz, E., Avizov, L., Leventhal, N., Bercovich, D., Chalifa-
Caspi, V., et al. (2010). Autosomal-recessive hypophosphatemic rickets is associated
with an inactivation mutation in the ENPP1 gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 86 (2),
273–278. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.01.010
Li, M., Meng, H., Du, J., Tao, H., Luo, Z., and Wang, Z. (2012). Management of
thoracic myelopathy caused by ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament
combined with ossiﬁcation of the ligamentum ﬂavum-a retrospective study. Spine J.
12 (12), 1093–1102. doi:10.1016/j.spinee.2012.10.022
Lim, J. J., Shin, D. A., Jeon, Y. J., Kumar, H., Sohn, S., Min, H. S., et al. (2016).
Association of miR-146a, miR-149, miR-196a2, and miR-499 polymorphisms with
ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the cervical spine. PLoS One 11
(7), e0159756. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0159756
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
16
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
Littlejohn, G. O., and Hall, S. (1982). Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis and
new bone formation in male gouty subjects. A radiologic study. Rheumatol. Int. 2
(2), 83–86. doi:10.1007/BF00541250
Liu, G. Y., Liang, Q. H., Cui, R. R., Liu, Y., Wu, S. S., Shan, P. F., et al. (2014).
Leptin promotes the osteoblastic differentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells
from female mice by increasing RANKL expression. Endocrinology 155 (2),
558–567. doi:10.1210/en.2013-1298
Liu, Y., Zhao, Y., Chen, Y., Shi, G., and Yuan, W. (2010). RUNX2 polymorphisms
associated with OPLL and OLF in the Han population. Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 468
(12), 3333–3341. doi:10.1007/s11999-010-1511-5
Macia-Villa, C. C., Sifuentes-Giraldo, W. A., and Medina-Luezas, J. (2016).
Simultaneous occurrence of ankylosing spondylitis and diffuse idiopathic
skeletal
hyperostosis
(Forestier-Rotes-Querol
disease).
Reumatol.
Clin.
57,
2120–2128. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/key211
Mader, R., Verlaan, J. J., and Buskila, D. (2013). Diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis: Clinical features and pathogenic mechanisms. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 9
(12), 741–750. doi:10.1038/nrrheum.2013.165
Maeda, S., Ishidou, Y., Koga, H., TakEtomi, E., Ikari, K., Komiya, S., et al. (2001).
Functional impact of human collagen alpha2(XI) gene polymorphism in
pathogenesis of ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine.
J. Bone Min. Res. 16 (5), 948–957. doi:10.1359/jbmr.2001.16.5.948
Maeda, S., Koga, H., MatSunaga, S., Numasawa, T., Ikari, K., Furushima, K., et al.
(2001). Gender-speciﬁc haplotype association of collagen alpha2 (XI) gene in
ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. J. Hum. Genet.
46 (1), 1–4. doi:10.1007/s100380170117
Maertens, M., Mielants, H., Verstraete, K., and Veys, E. M. (1992). Simultaneous
occurrence of diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis and ankylosing spondylitis in
the same patient. J. Rheumatol. 19 (12), 1978–1983.
Mata, S., WolFeF.Joseph, L., and Esdaile, J. M. (1995). Absence of an association
of rheumatoid arthritis and diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis: A case-control
study. J. Rheumatol. 22 (11), 2062–2064.
Matsunaga, S., and Sakou, T. (2006). in Opll: Disease entity, incidence, literature
search, and prognosis. Editors K. Y. OPLL, K. Nakamura, and Y. Toyama (Tokyo:
Springer).
Matsunaga, S., YaMaguchiM.Hayashi, K., and Sakou, T. (1999). Genetic analysis
of ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 24 (10),
937–938. doi:10.1097/00007632-199905150-00002
Mazières, B., Jung-Rozenfarb, M., and Arlet, J. (1978). Paget’s disease, ankylosing
vertebral hyperostosis and hyperostosis frontalis interna. Sem. Hop. 54 (13-16),
521–525.
Meng, X. L., Wang, H., Yang, H., Hai, Y., Tian, B. p., and Lin, X. (2010). T allele at
site 6007 of bone morphogenetic protein-4 gene increases genetic susceptibility to
ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament in male Chinese Han population.
Chin. Med. J. 123 (18), 2537–2542.
Miyasaka, K., Kaneda, K., Ito, T., Takei, H., Sugimoto, S., and TsuruM. (1982).
Ossiﬁcation of spinal ligaments causing thoracic radiculomyelopathy. Radiology
143 (2), 463–468. doi:10.1148/radiology.143.2.7071348
Montague, C. T., Farooqi, I. S., Whitehead, J. P., Soos, M. A., Rau, H., Wareham,
N. J., et al. (1997). Congenital leptin deﬁciency is associated with severe early-onset
obesity in humans. Nature 387 (6636), 903–908. doi:10.1038/43185
Morales, A. A., Valdazo, P., Corres, J., Talbot, J. R., PerezF.and Baylink, D. J.
(1993). Coexistence of Paget’s bone disease and diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis in males. Clin. Exp. Rheumatol. 11 (4), 361–365.
Moreno, A. C., Gonzalez, M. L., DufﬁnM.Lopez-Longo, F. J., Carreno, L., and
Forrester, D. M. (1996). Simultaneous occurrence of diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis and ankylosing spondylitis. Rev. Rhum. Engl. Ed. 63 (4), 292–295.
Muthukumar, N., Karuppaswamy, U., and Sankarasubbu, B. (2000). Calcium
pyrophosphate dihydrate deposition disease causing thoracic cord compression:
Case report. Neurosurgery 46 (1), 222–225. doi:10.1097/00006123-200001000-
00047
Nakajima, M., Kou, I., Ohashi, H., and Ikegawa, S. (2016). Identiﬁcation and
functional characterization of RSPO2 as a susceptibility gene for ossiﬁcation of the
posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 99 (1), 202–207.
doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.05.018
Nakajima, M., Takahashi, A., Tsuji, T., Karasugi, T., Baba, H., Uchida, K., et al.
(2014). A genome-wide association study identiﬁes susceptibility loci for
ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. Nat. Genet. 46
(9), 1012–1016. doi:10.1038/ng.3045
Nakamura, I., Ikegawa, S., OkAwA, A., Okuda, S., Koshizuka, Y., KawagucHi, H.,
et al. (1999). Association of the human NPPS gene with ossiﬁcation of the posterior
longitudinal ligament of the spine (OPLL). Hum. Genet. 104 (6), 492–497. doi:10.
1007/s004390050993
Nitschke, Y., and Rutsch, F. (2012). Generalized arterial calciﬁcation of infancy
and pseudoxanthoma elasticum: Two sides of the same coin. Front. Genet. 3, 302.
doi:10.3389/fgene.2012.00302
Nobta, M., Tsukazaki, T., Shibata, Y., Xin, C., Moriishi, T., Sakano, S., et al. (2005).
Critical
regulation
of
bone
morphogenetic
protein-induced
osteoblastic
differentiation by Delta1/Jagged1-activated Notch1 signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 280
(16), 15842–15848. doi:10.1074/jbc.M412891200
Nouri, A., Tetreault, L., Singh, A., Karadimas, S. K., and Fehlings, M. G. (2015).
Degenerative cervical myelopathy: Epidemiology, genetics, and pathogenesis. Spine
(Phila Pa 1976) 40 (12), E675–E693. doi:10.1097/BRS.0000000000000913
Numasawa, T., Koga, H., Ueyama, K., Maeda, S., Sakou, T., Harata, S., et al.
(1999). Human retinoic X receptor beta: Complete genomic sequence and mutation
search for ossiﬁcation of posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. J. Bone Min.
Res. 14 (4), 500–508. doi:10.1359/jbmr.1999.14.4.500
Ogata, N., Koshizuka, Y., Miura, T., Iwasaki, M., Hosoi, T., Shiraki, M., et al. (2002).
Association of bone metabolism regulatory factor gene polymorphisms with
susceptibility to ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine and
its severity. Spine 1976 27 (16), 1765–1771. doi:10.1097/00007632-200208150-00015
Okano, T., Ishidou, Y., KatoM.Imamura, T., Yonemori, K., OriguchiN., et al.
(1997). Orthotopic ossiﬁcation of the spinal ligaments of zucker fatty rats: A
possible animal model for ossiﬁcation of the human posterior longitudinal
ligament. J. Orthop. Res. 15 (6), 820–829. doi:10.1002/jor.1100150606
Okawa, A., Goto, S., Moriya, H., Nakamura, Y., and Ikegawa, S. (1998). Mutation
in Npps in a mouse model of ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament of
the spine. Nat. Genet. 19 (3), 271–273. doi:10.1038/956
Okazaki, T., SaiTo, T., MiTomo, T., and Siota, Y. (1976). Pseudogout:
Clinical observations and chemical analyses of deposits. Arthritis Rheum.
19
(3),
293–305.
doi:10.1002/1529-0131(197605/06)19:3+<293:aid-
art1780190704>3.0.co;2-r
Olivieri, I. (1991). Coexisting diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis and
ankylosing spondylitis. Clin. Rheumatol. 10 (1), 95. doi:10.1007/BF02208043
Olivieri, I., Trippi, D., Gherardi, S., and Pasero, G. (1987). Coexistence of
ankylosing spondylitis and diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis: Another
report. J. Rheumatol. 14 (5), 1058–1060.
Olivieri, I., Vitali, C., GemiGnani, G., and Pasero, G. (1989). Concomitant
ankylosing spondylitis and DISH. J. Rheumatol. 16 (8), 1170–1172.
Onishi, E., Sano, H., and Matsushita, M. (2016). Surgical treatment for thoracic
myelopathy due to simultaneous ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament
and ligamentum ﬂavum at the same level. Clin. Spine Surg. 29, E389–E395. doi:10.
1097/BSD.0000000000000059
Ostrander, E. A., Galibert, F., and Patterson, D. F. (2000). Canine genetics comes
of age. Trends Genet. 16 (3), 117–124. doi:10.1016/s0168-9525(99)01958-7
Parreira, B., Couto, A. R., Rocha, F., Sousa, M., Faustino, V., Power, D. M., et al.
(2020). Whole exome sequencing of patients with diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis
and
calcium
pyrophosphate
crystal
chondrocalcinosis.
Acta
Reumatol. Port. 45 (2), 116–126.
Passiu, G., Sebastiani, G. D., and Tuveri, M. A. (1991). Diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis of the cervical spine in a patient with ankylosing spondylitis.
Description of a personal case. Ann. Ital. Med. Int. 6 (1), 61–64.
Phillips, M. S., Liu, Q., Hammond, H. A., Dugan, V., Hey, P. J., Caskey, C. J., et al.
(1996). Leptin receptor missense mutation in the fatty Zucker rat. Nat. Genet. 13 (1),
18–19. doi:10.1038/ng0596-18
Pillai, S., and Littlejohn, G. (2014). Metabolic factors in diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis - a review of clinical data. Open Rheumatol. J. 8, 116–128. doi:10.2174/
1874312901408010116
Prabhu, R. M., Rathod, T. N., Mohanty, S. S., Hadole, B. S., Marathe, N. A., and
Rai, A. K. (2022). A case of cervical OPLL and DISH mimicking stroke. Surg.
Neurol. Int. 13, 158. doi:10.25259/SNI_247_2022
Qu, X., Chen, Z., Fan, D., Xiang, S., Sun, C., Zeng, Y., et al. (2017). Two novel
BMP-2 variants identiﬁed in patients with thoracic ossiﬁcation of the ligamentum
ﬂavum. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 25 (5), 565–571. doi:10.1038/ejhg.2017.2
Qu, X., Hou, X., Chen, Z., Chen, G., Fan, T., and Yang, X. (2021). Association
analysis and functional study of COL6A1 single nucleotide polymorphisms in
thoracic ossiﬁcation of the ligamentum ﬂavum in the Chinese Han population. Eur.
Spine J. 30 (10), 2782–2790. doi:10.1007/s00586-021-06932-y
Ramos, Y. F., Bos, S. D., van der Breggen, R., Kloppenburg, M., Ye, K., Lameijer, E.
W. E. M. W., et al. (2015). A gain of function mutation in TNFRSF11B encoding
osteoprotegerin causes osteoarthritis with chondrocalcinosis. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 74
(9), 1756–1762. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-205149
Ren, Y., Feng, J., Liu, Z. z., Wan, H., Li, J. h., and Lin, X. (2012). A new haplotype
in BMP4 implicated in ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL) in
a Chinese population. J. Orthop. Res. 30 (5), 748–756. doi:10.1002/jor.21586
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
17
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867
Ren, Y., Liu, Z. z., Feng, J., Wan, H., Li, J. h., Wang, H., et al. (2012). Association
of a BMP9 haplotype with ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament
(OPLL) in a Chinese population. PLoS One 7 (7), e40587. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0040587
Resnick, D., Curd, J., Shapiro, R. F., and Wiesner, K. B. (1978). Radiographic
abnormalities of rheumatoid arthritis in patients with diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis. Arthritis Rheum. 21 (1), 1–5. doi:10.1002/art.1780210101
Resnick, D., and Pineda, C. (1984). Vertebral involvement in calcium
pyrophosphate dihydrate crystal deposition disease. Radiographic-pathological
correlation. Radiology 153 (1), 55–60. doi:10.1148/radiology.153.1.6089266
Resnick, D., Shapiro, R. F., Wiesner, K. B., Niwayama, G., Utsinger, P. D., and
Shaul, S. R. (1978). Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) [ankylosing
hyperostosis of Forestier and Rotes-Querol]. Semin. Arthritis Rheum. 7 (3),
153–187. doi:10.1016/0049-0172(78)90036-7
Rillo, O. L., Scheines, E. J., Moreno, C., Barreira, J. C., Porrini, A. A., and
Maldonado Cocco, J. A. (1989). Coexistence of diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis and ankylosing spondylitis. Clin. Rheumatol. 8 (4), 499–503.
doi:10.1007/BF02032103
Rivas, A. M., and Lado-Abeal, J. (2013). Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis
and familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia: A unique association in a young female.
Am. J. Med. Sci. 346 (3), 247–249. doi:10.1097/MAJ.0b013e31828b663b
Rutsch, F., Ruf, N., Vaingankar, S., Toliat, M. R., Suk, A., Hohne, W., et al. (2003).
Mutations in ENPP1 are associated with ’idiopathic’ infantile arterial calciﬁcation.
Nat. Genet. 34 (4), 379–381. doi:10.1038/ng1221
Saito, T., Shimizu, Y., Hori, M., Taguchi, M., Igarashi, T., Fukumoto, S., et al.
(2011). A patient with hypophosphatemic rickets and ossiﬁcation of posterior
longitudinal ligament caused by a novel homozygous mutation in ENPP1 gene.
Bone 49 (4), 913–916. doi:10.1016/j.bone.2011.06.029
Sakou, T., TakEtomi, E., MatSunaga, S., YaMaguchiM.Sonoda, S., and YaShiki, S.
(1991). Genetic study of ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament in the
cervical spine with human leukocyte antigen haplotype. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 16
(11), 1249–1252. doi:10.1097/00007632-199111000-00001
Saleem, S. N., and Hawass, Z. (2014). Ankylosing spondylitis or diffuse idiopathic
skeletal hyperostosis in royal Egyptian mummies of 18th -20th dynasties? CT and
archaeology studies. Arthritis Rheumatol. 66 (12), 3311–3316. doi:10.1002/art.
38864
Schlapbach, P., Beyeler, C., Gerber, N. J., van der Linden, S., Burgi, U., Fuchs, W.
A., et al. (1992). The prevalence of palpable ﬁnger joint nodules in diffuse idiopathic
skeletal hyperostosis (DISH). A controlled study. Br. J. Rheumatol. 31 (8), 531–534.
doi:10.1093/rheumatology/31.8.531
Schlosstein, L., Terasaki, P. I., Bluestone, R., and Pearson, C. M. (1973). High
association of an HL-A antigen, W27, with ankylosing spondylitis. N. Engl. J. Med.
288 (14), 704–706. doi:10.1056/NEJM197304052881403
Stefan, C., Jansen, S., and Bollen, M. (2005). NPP-Type ectophosphodiesterases:
Unity in diversity. Trends biochem. Sci. 30 (10), 542–550. doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2005.
08.005
Tahara, M., Aiba, A., Yamazaki, M., Ikeda, Y., Goto, S., Moriya, H., et al. (2005).
The extent of ossiﬁcation of posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine associated
with nucleotide pyrophosphatase gene and leptin receptor gene polymorphisms.
Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 30 (8), 877–880. doi:10.1097/01.brs.0000160686.18321.ad
Takayuki, M., Takashi, H., Toshitaka, Y., Hiroyuki, I., Yu, M., Satoru, E., et al.
(2021). Association between diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis and thoracic
kyphosis in patients with cervical myelopathy: A retrospective observational study.
BMC Musculoskelet. Disord. 22 (1), 964. doi:10.1186/s12891-021-04851-z
Tanabe, J., Sarin, H., and Kindt, G. (2002). Familial ossiﬁcation of the posterior
longitudinal ligament (OPLL) in the thoracic spine: Case report. Surg. Neurol. 58
(6), 403–405. doi:10.1016/s0090-3019(02)00927-8
Tanaka, T., Ikari, K., Furushima, K., Okada, A., Tanaka, H., Furukawa, K. I., et al.
(2003). Genomewide linkage and linkage disequilibrium analyses identify COL6A1,
on chromosome 21, as the locus for ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal
ligament of the spine. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73 (4), 812–822. doi:10.1086/378593
Tanikawa, E., Furuya, K., and Nakajima, H. (1986). Genetic study on ossiﬁcation
of posterior longitudinal ligament. Bull. Tokyo Med. Dent. Univ. 33 (3), 117–128.
Tenti, S., Palmitesta, P., GiordaNoN.GaleazziM.and FiorAvAnti, A. (2017).
Increased serum leptin and visfatin levels in patients with diffuse idiopathic
skeletal hyperostosis: A comparative study. Scand. J. Rheumatol. 46 (2),
156–158. doi:10.1080/03009742.2016.1188981
Terayama, K. (1989). Genetic studies on ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal
ligament of the spine. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 14 (11), 1184–1191. doi:10.1097/
00007632-198911000-00009
Tishler, M., and Yaron, M. (1992). Two cases of diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis and ankylosing spondylitis. Br. J. Rheumatol. 31 (8), 569–571.
doi:10.1093/rheumatology/31.8.569-b
Togni, A., Morgan, J. P., and SteFFenF. (2014). Radiographic and MRI
characteristics of lumbar disseminated idiopathic spinal hyperostosis and
spondylosis deformans in dogs. J. Small Anim. Pract. 55 (7), 343–349. doi:10.
1111/jsap.12218
Troise Rioda, W., and Ferraccioli, G. F. (1990). DISH and ankylosing spondylitis.
Case report and review of the literature. Clin. Exp. Rheumatol. 8 (6), 591–593.
Tsukahara, S., Miyazawa, N., Akagawa, H., Forejtova, S., Pavelka, K., Tanaka, T.,
et al. (2005). COL6A1, the candidate gene for ossiﬁcation of the posterior
longitudinal ligament, is associated with diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis
in Japanese. Spine 30 (20), 2321–2324. doi:10.1097/01.brs.0000182318.47343.6d
Unverdi,S.,Ozturk,M.A.,Inal,S.,Selek,H.,Goker,B.,Haznedaroglu,C.,etal.(2009).
Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism mimicking diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis.
J. Clin. Rheumatol. 15 (7), 361–362. doi:10.1097/RHU.0b013e3181bb9865
van der Korst, J. K., Geerards, J., and Driessens, F. C. (1974). A hereditary type of
idiopathic articular chondrocalcinosis. Survey of a pedigree. Am. J. Med. 56 (3),
307–314. doi:10.1016/0002-9343(74)90612-3
Wang, H., Jin, W., and Li, H. (2018). Genetic polymorphisms in bone morphogenetic
protein receptor type IA gene predisposes individuals to ossiﬁcation of the posterior
longitudinal ligament of the cervical spine via the smad signaling pathway. BMC
Musculoskelet. Disord. 19 (1), 61. doi:10.1186/s12891-018-1966-1
Wang, H., Yang, Z. h., Liu, D. m., Wang, L., Meng, X. l., and Tian, B. p. (2008).
Association between two polymorphisms of the bone morpho-genetic protein-2
gene with genetic susceptibility to ossiﬁcation of the posterior longitudinal ligament
of the cervical spine and its severity. Chin. Med. J. 121 (18), 1806–1810. doi:10.1097/
00029330-200809020-00010
Wang, P., Liu, X., Zhu, B., Ma, Y., Yong, L., Teng, Z., et al. (2018). Association of
IL17RC and COL6A1 genetic polymorphisms with susceptibility to ossiﬁcation of
the thoracic posterior longitudinal ligament in Chinese patients. J. Orthop. Surg.
Res. 13 (1), 109. doi:10.1186/s13018-018-0817-y
Wang, P., Liu, X., Zhu, B., Ma, Y., Yong, L., Teng, Z., et al. (2018). Identiﬁcation of
susceptibilitylocifor thoracicossiﬁcationof theposterior longitudinalligament by whole-
genome sequencing. Mol. Med. Rep. 17 (2), 2557–2564. doi:10.3892/mmr.2017.8171
Warraich, S., Bone, D. B. J., Quinonez, D., Ii, H., Choi, D. S., Holdsworth, D. W.,
et al. (2013). Loss of equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1 in mice leads to
progressive ectopic mineralization of spinal tissues resembling diffuse idiopathic
skeletal hyperostosis in humans. J. Bone Min. Res. 28 (5), 1135–1149. doi:10.1002/
jbmr.1826
Wei, W., He, H. L., Chen, C. Y., Zhao, Y., Jiang, H. L., Liu, W. T., et al. (2014).
Whole exome sequencing implicates PTCH1 and COL17A1 genes in ossiﬁcation of
the posterior longitudinal ligament of the cervical spine in Chinese patients. Genet.
Mol. Res. 13 (1), 1794–1804. doi:10.4238/2014.March.17.7
Williamson, P. K., and Reginato, A. J. (1984). Diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis of the cervical spine in a patient with ankylosing spondylitis.
Arthritis Rheum. 27 (5), 570–573. doi:10.1002/art.1780270514
Wooten, M. (2009). The coexistence of ankylosing spondylitis and diffuse
idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. Clin. Rheumatol. 28 (5), 619. doi:10.1007/
s10067-009-1111-5
Yamagami, T., Kawano, N., and Nakano, H. (2000). Calciﬁcation of the cervical
ligamentum ﬂavum--case report. Neurol. Med. Chir. 40 (4), 234–238. doi:10.2176/
nmc.40.234
Yamaguchi, M. (1991). Genetic study on OPLL in the cervical spine with HLA
haplotype. Nihon Seikeigeka Gakkai Zasshi 65 (8), 527–535.
Yamazaki, M., Moriya, H., Goto, S., Saitoh, Y., Arai, K., and Nagai, Y. (1991).
Increased type XI collagen expression in the spinal hyperostotic mouse (TWY/
TWY). Calcif. Tissue Int. 48, 182–189. doi:10.1007/bf02570553
Yan, L., Chang, Z., Liu, Y., Li, Y. B., He, B. R., and Hao, D. J. (2013). A single
nucleotide polymorphism in the human bone morphogenetic protein-2 gene (109T >
G) affects the Smad signaling pathway and the predisposition to ossiﬁcation of the
posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. Chin. Med. J. 126 (6), 1112–1118.
Yan, L., Zhao, W. g., Li, J. j., Yang, H., Wang, H., and Lin, X. (2010). Linkage of
three polymorphisms on chromosome 20p12 to ossiﬁcation of the posterior
longitudinal ligament of spine and its severity in Han Chinese patients. Chin.
Med. J. 123 (17), 2341–2346.
Yu, W. R., Liu, T., Kiehl, T. R., and Fehlings, M. G. (2011). Human
neuropathological and animal model evidence supporting a role for Fas-
mediated apoptosis and inﬂammation in cervical spondylotic myelopathy. Brain
134 (5), 1277–1292. doi:10.1093/brain/awr054
Frontiers in Genetics
frontiersin.org
18
Couto et al.
10.3389/fgene.2022.987867

===== Huang2021_FrontCellDevBiol_TendonStemCell =====

REVIEW
published: 18 February 2021
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.631272
Edited by:
Simone Pacini,
University of Pisa, Italy
Reviewed by:
Chavaunne T. Thorpe,
Royal Veterinary College (RVC),
United Kingdom
Denitsa Docheva,
University Medical Center
Regensburg, Germany
*Correspondence:
Weiliang Shen
wlshen@zju.edu.cn
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Stem Cell Research,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental
Biology
Received: 19 November 2020
Accepted: 27 January 2021
Published: 18 February 2021
Citation:
Huang Z, Yin Z, Xu J, Fei Y,
Heng BC, Jiang X, Chen W and
Shen W (2021) Tendon
Stem/Progenitor Cell Subpopulations
and Their Implications in Tendon
Biology.
Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 9:631272.
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.631272
Tendon Stem/Progenitor Cell
Subpopulations and Their
Implications in Tendon Biology
Zizhan Huang1,2,3, Zi Yin3,4,5, Jialu Xu6, Yang Fei1,2,3, Boon Chin Heng7, Xuesheng Jiang8,
Weishan Chen1,2 and Weiliang Shen1,2,3,4,5*
1 Department of Orthopedic Surgery, The Second Afﬁliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China, 2 Orthopedics Research Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, 3 Institute of Sports Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China, 4 Dr. Li Dak Sum and Yip Yio Chin Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China, 5 China Orthopedic Regenerative Medicine (CORMed), Hangzhou, China, 6 Department
of Infectious Diseases, The First Afﬁliated Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China, 7 School of Stomatology,
Peking University, Beijing, China, 8 Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Huzhou Hospital, Zhejiang University, Huzhou, China
Tendon harbors a cell population that possesses stem cell characteristics such
as clonogenicity, multipotency and self-renewal capacity, commonly referred to as
tendon stem/progenitor cells (TSPCs). Various techniques have been employed to
study how TSPCs are implicated in tendon development, homeostasis and healing.
Recent advances in single-cell analysis have enabled much progress in identifying and
characterizing distinct subpopulations of TSPCs, which provides a more comprehensive
view of TSPCs function in tendon biology. Understanding the mechanisms of
physiological and pathological processes regulated by TSPCs, especially a particular
subpopulation, would greatly beneﬁt treatment of diseased tendons. Here, we
summarize the current scientiﬁc literature on the various subpopulations of TSPCs,
and discuss how TSPCs can contribute to tissue homeostasis and pathogenesis, as
well as examine the key modulatory signaling pathways that determine stem/progenitor
cell state. A better understanding of the roles that TSPCs play in tendon biology may
facilitate the development of novel treatment strategies for tendon diseases.
Keywords: tendon stem/progenitor cells, subpopulation, niche, healing, TGFβ
INTRODUCTION
Tendon tissues have a hierarchical structure with unique mechanical properties, and serve to
connect embryologically distinct musculoskeletal tissues, bone and muscle, and mainly function to
transmit mechanical forces to enable skeletal locomotion. Tendons consist of ﬁbrillar arrangement
where type I collagen form ﬁbrils, ﬁbrils assemble into ﬁbers, and then ﬁbers assemble into
fascicles (Nourissat et al., 2015). Bundles of fascicles form the fascicular matrix (FM) (Zhang et al.,
2019). Endotenon or interfascicular matrix (IFM), a connective tissue compartment envelops each
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
1
February 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 631272
Huang et al.
Tendon Stem/Progenitor Cell Subpopulations
fascicle and is encompassed by the epitenon, which is covered
by another layer of connective tissue, paratenon (Zhang et al.,
2019). Together, the epitenon and paratenon are called peritenon
(Mienaltowski et al., 2014). Tendon proper, refers to the
remaining tendon tissue that comprises both FM and IFM after
removing the peritenon (Mienaltowski et al., 2013; Zhang et al.,
2019; Figure 1).
Tendon injuries remains a formidable challenge in the clinic,
as disrupted tendon structure compromises tendon function and
may lead to ﬂawed healing, such as heterotopic ossiﬁcation (HO)
(Agarwal et al., 2016; Millar et al., 2017). Although surgical
treatment can restore tendon tissue integrity, the injured tendon
often cannot revert back to pre-injury conditions because of
scar formation and ﬁbrosis, which leads to higher risks of
re-rupture (Andarawis-Puri et al., 2015). Multiple therapeutic
modalities have been proposed to treat the disease such as
platelet-rich plasma, hyaluronic acid, corticosteroid injection and
so on (Osti et al., 2015; Frizziero et al., 2019; Kaux et al., 2019).
Amongst these, stem cell-based treatment shows great promise,
and tendon-derived stem cells (TDSCs) have aroused much
interest due to their origin (Schneider et al., 2018).
Tendon stem cells (TSCs), commonly referred to as tendon
stem/progenitor cells (TSPCs) due to their heterogeneity,
exhibit varying propensities in diﬀerentiation potential. When
these cells were ﬁrst discovered, they were deﬁned by their
clonogenicity, self-renewal potential and multipotency (Bi
et al., 2007). Since then, TSPCs have attracted a lot of
attention because current treatment modalities for tendon
diseases often fail to yield a satisfactory outcome. TSPCs
play key roles in tendon development, homeostasis and
healing (Bi et al., 2007). Transplantation of exogenous stem
cells or activation of the endogenous population has already
shown pro-regenerative eﬀects on injured or diseased tendons
(Schneider et al., 2018). Investigating the role of TSPCs
in
tendon
biology
is
critical
for
unveiling
the
peculiar
characteristics of tendon tissues. Better understanding and in-
depth analysis of their identities, interaction with the local
niche and involvement in the reparative process could promote
optimized manipulation of TSPCs and hasten progress of future
clinical applications.
Advancement in high-throughput sequencing and lineage
tracing has made isolation and identiﬁcation of distinct
tendon
stem
cell
subpopulations
tangible,
which
further
reveals distinct properties of TSPCs (Yin et al., 2016; Harvey
et al., 2019). Other state-of-the-art technologies including
genetic
models
and
three-dimensional
imaging,
provide
a means of dissecting the role of TSPCs in physiological
and
pathological
processes
of
tendon
tissues.
Moreover,
accumulating scientiﬁc evidence support the key roles of the
TGFβ superfamily in determining the lineage fate of TSPCs
(Tan et al., 2020).
This
review
will
primarily
focus
on:
(1)
diﬀerent
subpopulations of TSPCs, (2) an overview of how TSPCs
maintain tendon integrity, (3) the role of the TGFβ superfamily
in regulating TSPCs lineage fate. We would like to address the
latest discoveries of the emerging roles of TSPCs in tendon
biology and pathology. Under most circumstances, TSCs, tendon
progenitor cells (TPCs) or TDSCs should be included within the
generic term of TSPCs.
SUBPOPULATIONS OF TSPCs
Niches of TSPCs
Stem cell niches dynamically orchestrate cell behavior and cell
fate thorough physical interaction and regulatory factors. The
native environment is critical for maintaining the stemness
of TSPCs due to their topography and biological properties
(Ning et al., 2015). Inherent topographical patterns, biochemical
composition and biomechanical properties of native tendon
matrix could facilitate homogeneous distribution and alignment,
promote proliferation, and favor tenogenic phenotype instead
of non-tenogenic diﬀerentiation of TSPCs (Yin et al., 2013;
Ning et al., 2015).
Biglycan (Bgn) and ﬁbromodulin, two critical extracellular
matrix (ECM) components, have been shown to be crucial in
regulating the lineage fate of TSPCs, since their depletion in
double knock-out animal led instead to bone-like tissues being
formed (Bi et al., 2007). Biglycan also enhances proliferation
and tenogenic diﬀerentiation of TSPCs (Bi et al., 2007).
Tenomodulin (Tnmd), a transmembrane glycoprotein with
cleavable C-terminus localized on the ECM, is essential for
adhesion to collagen I, and maintaining the self-renewal capacity,
cell senescence and matrix remodeling capacity of TSPCs
(Dex et al., 2017; Yin et al., 2019). But TSPCs still possess
the multipotency after loss of tenomodulin (Alberton et al.,
2015). Decellularized tendon matrix are superior in promoting
proliferation and preserving stemness of TSPCs than other
engineered biomaterial, which conﬁrms the supportive role of
tendon ECM in TSPCs maintenance (Zhang et al., 2011). Tendon
ECM also favors the tenogenic disposition of TSPCs, which
could be attributed to the niche signals of the tendon matrix
(Yin et al., 2013). Alteration to ECM composition is frequently
observed in tendinopathy, and aberrant diﬀerentiation of TSPCs
could be induced by inﬂammatory and biomechanical cues,
which accounts for the regulatory roles of local niches and their
functions in tendinopathy (Xu and Murrell, 2008; Zhang and
Wang, 2010c). The cellular component is critical in constituting
the microenvironment as well, since non-stem/progenitor cells
could secret paracrine factors to regulate the diﬀerentiation of
TSPCs (Lee et al., 2015).
Perivascular regions have often been proposed as a potential
niche for TSPCs. An early study had found that cells in the
perivascular niche express stem cell-like characteristics (Tempfer
et al., 2009). In fact, predominantly perivascular CD146-positive
cells have been identiﬁed to constitute a fraction of the
whole stem/progenitor population (Lee et al., 2015). CD146
is a commonly used marker to identify pericyte population
(Gumucio et al., 2020). By utilizing Monocle pseudotime analysis,
recent research has conﬁrmed that pericytes form a part of the
TSPCs population (De Micheli et al., 2020). Moreover, Xu et al.,
have reported a P75 (p75 neurotrophin receptor) expressing
cell subpopulation with stem cell characteristics within the
perivascular regions which could proliferate within the peritenon
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
2
February 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 631272
Huang et al.
Tendon Stem/Progenitor Cell Subpopulations
FIGURE 1 | Schematic representation of tendon hierarchical structure and various subpopulations of TSPCs with speciﬁc markers harvested from different niches,
including tendon proper, peritenon and perivascular region. Tenocytes are aligned between ﬁbers. It should be noted that some of these subpopulations might
overlap with each other and perivascular TSPCs may be present in endotenon as well as the peritenon. What’s more, the exact location of proper-derived TSPCs is
not well determined. Figures were produced using Servier Medical Art (https://smart.servier.com/).
and migrate to interstitial space in response to injury (Xu
et al., 2015). Finally, single-cell surface proteomics identiﬁed
a perivascular niche where a tendon cell cluster expressed
high levels of CD90 and CD146 (Kendal et al., 2020). Taken
together, these results support the perivascular areas as a tendon
stem cell niche.
In general, tendon stem cell niche is essential for TSPCs to
maintain their properties and determine tenogenic fate.
Early Insight of the Presence of
Subpopulations Within the TSPCs Niche
Initial study had observed that TSPCs isolated from tendon
proper actually consist of various phenotypes with heterogenous
proliferation and diﬀerentiation capacities (Bi et al., 2007).
The TSPCs’ lines of quadra-potential cells (i.e., tenogenesis,
chondrogenesis, osteogenesis, and adipogenesis), yielded the
highest expression levels of Scleraxis (Scx) and Mohawk
(Mkx), probably suggesting their optimal tenogenic lineage
commitment (Rajpar and Barrett, 2020). TSPCs derived from
diﬀerent anatomical origins at diﬀerent developmental stages also
exhibited distinct response to bioactive molecules, suggesting
the heterogenicity of TSPCs (Brown et al., 2014). In addition,
TSPCs extracted from discrete locations, in both the endotenon
and peritenon, have diﬀerent capabilities to form tendon-like
construct (Mienaltowski et al., 2014).
Traditionally, TSPCs have been isolated from the tendon
proper (Bi et al., 2007; Rui et al., 2010). However, cell population
from the peritenon has been demonstrated to be capable of
multipotent diﬀerentiation and migration (Cadby et al., 2014).
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
3
February 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 631272
Huang et al.
Tendon Stem/Progenitor Cell Subpopulations
They expressed higher amounts of progenitor cell markers
including CD45, CD90, CD105, and Oct-4, and despite their
relatively lower proportions, peritenon-derived stem/progenitor
cells have higher proliferative capacity (Mienaltowski et al.,
2013; Cadby et al., 2014). Upon labeling stem cells with
Iododeoxyuridine (IdU), more label-retaining stem cells were
found in the peritenon than in mid-substances, particularly at the
perivascular region (Tan et al., 2013). Cells from the peritenon
would activate Scleraxis expression in response to mechanical
loading and could form primitive tendons in vitro (Mendias et al.,
2012; Mienaltowski et al., 2013). Furthermore, following tendon
injury, cells from the surrounding peritenon would proliferate,
migrate and contribute to tenogenesis (Dyment et al., 2013; Tan
et al., 2013; Sakabe et al., 2018). These phenomena are a reminder
that TSPCs constitute heterogenous groups of cells with distinct
characteristics.
Recent Identiﬁcation of Subpopulations
Within the TSPCs Niche
The conﬁrmation and lineage mapping of distinct TSPC
subpopulations have been achieved by lineage tracing and single-
cell sequencing (Figure 1). Early attempts at understanding the
origin and identity of resident tendon progenitors mainly depend
on lineage-tracing and alpha smooth muscle actin (αSMA)
labeling revealed that SMA+ Scx+ cells located within the tendon
mid-substance as an amplifying resident progenitor population
that contribute to postnatal growth and healing (Dyment et al.,
2014). Thus SMA+ cells could be a source of TSPCs. In a later
study, Harvey et al. (2019) proposed that SMA+ cells are not
TSPCs, as they did not convert to tenocytes with longitudinally
aligned collagen matrix with second harmonic generation signals.
However, a signiﬁcant fraction of the SMA+ population did
turn on Scx expression, which is a hallmark for tenogenesis
(Dyment et al., 2014).
During the reparative process, diverse subpopulations of
TSPCs could also be noticed, as TSPCs integrated into the
injury site and they mainly constituted two subpopulations,
with or without surface marker CD105 (Asai et al., 2014). The
CD105-positive subpopulation perform better with regard to
expressing Scx and avoiding chondroid degenerative lesions than
the CD105-negative subpopulation (Asai et al., 2014). However,
their speciﬁc origin is unclear.
Since then, intense eﬀorts have been made to characterize
subtleties
within
the
tendon
stem
cell
population.
Our
understanding
of
subpopulations
of
resident
TSPCs
has
been improved greatly as potent single-cell sequencing method
emerges and render a panoramic view of their composition.
An important ﬁnding is that a nestin+ subpopulation of
TSPCs, which is more capable of self-renewal and tenogenic
diﬀerentiation than the nestin−
subpopulation, has been
identiﬁed by single-cell analysis and is involved in the
development and endogenous repair of tendon tissues (Yin
et al., 2016). The majority of the nestin+ subpopulation reside in
the endotenon and peritenon, particularly within the perivascular
area (Yin et al., 2016). Additionally, nestin has been shown to
be essential for maintaining the tenocyte-lineage phenotype and
reparative capacities of TSPCs (Yin et al., 2016).
Transcriptome proﬁles revealed that peritenon harbors a
collection of cell population and might be an abundant source
of TSPCs (Mienaltowski et al., 2019). Indeed, Osteocalcin-
expressing cells whose proliferation and diﬀerentiation are
regulated by Hedgehog (Hh) signaling, have been found in the
peritenon,
demonstrating
stem/progenitor
cell
properties
comparable
to
TSPCs
isolated
from
the
mid-substance
(Wang et al., 2017).
Tubulin polymerization-promoting protein family member 3
(Tppp3) is the ﬁrst discovered molecular marker that is expressed
in the developing epitenon and paratenon (Staverosky et al.,
2009). Recently, a paratenon-derived cell cluster expressing both
Tppp3 and platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (Pdgfra)
has been identiﬁed as a novel subpopulation of tendon stem
cells by utilizing single-cell transcriptomics, which are capable
of self-renewal and generating de novo tenocytes (Harvey et al.,
2019). Tppp3+Pdgfra+ cells dwell in the tendon sheath and are
present from embryo to adulthood (Harvey et al., 2019). Unlike
previously described TSPCs, the Tppp3+Pdgfra+ subpopulation
express high levels of CD34 and rarely Scx (Harvey et al., 2019).
Tendon sheathes normally envelop areas of tendon ﬁbers
subjected to high levels of friction, and are conventionally
believed to function as lubrication during movement. The pool
and regenerative potential of tendon sheath stem/progenitor cells
could add extra protection for vulnerable tendon.
The proper-derived and peritenon-derived stem/progenitor
cells showed some diﬀerences. Proper-derived progenitors have
greater potential in forming tendon-like structures compared
to peritenon-derived progenitors (Mienaltowski et al., 2014).
The peritenon-derived population has also been shown to
secrete stimulatory factors that regulate tendon-related gene
expression, such as Scx, Tnmd and Bgn (Mienaltowski et al.,
2014). Furthermore, tendon proper-derived stem cells expressed
genes related to cartilage and chondrocyte development, while
peritenon-derived stem cells expressed genes related to positive
regulation of endothelial cell proliferation and angiogenesis
(Mienaltowski et al., 2019).
Recently, a report noted that the rat model to study tendon
biology possess a diﬀerent hierarchical structure compared to
larger species, which lacks the structure of fascicle and hence the
structure of endotenon (Lee and Elliott, 2019). Considering this,
the TSPCs niche found in murine model might be diﬀerent from
that of larger species and future researchers should be cautious
about animal model choice when they attempt to locate TSPCs
niche in a more detailed scale.
Potential New Source of TSPCs
Subpopulations
A previous study has shown some evidence that adjoining
tissues might provide a pool of stem/progenitor cells for tendon
maintenance. The expanded SMA+ cells with negative Scx
expression were initially present within surrounding structures
(i.e., retinaculum and periosteum), then they migrated to
the paratenon and later diﬀerentiated into the tenogenic
lineage in response to injury, which indicates that adjacent
paratendinous structures may serve as reservoirs of TSPCs
(Dyment et al., 2014).
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
4
February 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 631272
Huang et al.
Tendon Stem/Progenitor Cell Subpopulations
Recently,
a
research
based
on
the
zebra
ﬁsh
model
demonstrated that progenitors from neighboring tissues are
able to regenerate well-organized tendons after total ablation of
embryonic tendon cells (Niu et al., 2020). At the surrounding
cartilage or muscle attachment site, sox10+
perichondral
cells and nkx2.5+ cells could generate a pool of progenitors
capable of coordinating tendon regeneration (Niu et al., 2020).
Since zebraﬁsh tendons are structurally, molecularly and
mechanically similar to mammalian tendons, the regenerative
mechanism might shed light on the potential existence of
adjoining tissues-derived stem cell subpopulations. Indeed, a
recent study has deﬁned an interstitial Scx+ cell subpopulations
capable of tenogenic diﬀerentiation in adult skeletal muscles
by single-cell analysis, which suggests a potential reservoir for
tendon regeneration (Giordani et al., 2019). Furthermore, Hic1
successfully deﬁned a subpopulation of vasculature-related Scx
positive cells expressing Col22a1 within the peritenon near
the myotendinous junction (MTJ), and they share unique but
overlapping transcriptional properties with that of tendon
progenitors (Scott et al., 2019). This very subpopulation is found
to expand and are present within the tendon after muscle injury
(Scott et al., 2019).
In tendon tissues, clusters of ITGA7+ cells, which are highly
similar to those smooth muscle-mesenchymal cells found in
muscle are situated around vessels and they also express surface
markers CD90 and CD146 (Giordani et al., 2019; Kendal et al.,
2020). Actually, developmental evidence suggests that TGFβ
signaling emanating from muscles and cartilage are critical
for tendon progenitors recruitment, implicating the cross-talk
between diﬀerent tissues of the musculoskeletal system (Pryce
et al., 2009). Scx+Sox9+ progenitors give rise to the junction
between the cartilage and tendon (Blitz et al., 2013; Sugimoto
et al., 2013). The aforementioned evidences corroborate that
musculoskeletal tissues might contain respective stem/progenitor
populations. Future studies could investigate whether bone
or muscle tissues from human or mouse contain a reserve
cell population that share something in common with TSPCs,
and which could restore functional tendon after injury. These
eﬀorts may provide novel cell sources for developing cell-
based treatment.
The Need for Novel Biomarkers to Trace
TSPCs Subpopulations
Scx alone labels most but not all tendon cells (Sakabe et al.,
2018). Besides Scx, tendon cells also express S100a4 which
may help mark subsets of resident tendon stem cells, as
S100a4 combined with Scx, label distinct but overlapping
tendon cell subpopulations during homeostasis and healing (Best
and Loiselle, 2019). Recent single-cell sequencing and Cellular
Indexing of Transcriptomes and Epitopes by Sequencing (CITE-
seq) results unveiled other previously unidentiﬁed tendon cell
populations (De Micheli et al., 2020; Kendal et al., 2020).
Canonical tenogenic markers Scx, Mkx and tenomodulin were
only observed to be expressed in a subset of tenocytes and
not necessarily co-expressed, which suggests great heterogenicity
in tendon cells with diﬀerent origins or functions (De Micheli
et al., 2020). Characterization and classiﬁcation of TSPCs by
reliable and deﬁnitive markers are strongly needed to further
map their distinct subpopulations and biological functions in
tendon, because current markers including Oct-4, Nanog, Sox2,
CD44 and Sca-1 are not very speciﬁc for labeling TSPCs (Tan
et al., 2013; Table 1). Speciﬁc surface markers are also required
to better isolate, sort and purify TSPCs, and thus to achieve better
clinical applications.
Hierarchically-expressed markers that can reveal the origin
and development of stem/progenitor cells might be uncovered.
TSPCs exhibit diﬀerent characteristics on the spatiotemporal
scale, which might correlate to speciﬁc stages of development
(Chen et al., 2016). Combined single-cell RNA sequencing with
genetic-based lineage tracing, stemness markers and spatial
information would enable us to better understand the various
subpopulations, their characteristics and functions in vivo
and sequential stem cell states. Elucidation of how diﬀerent
subpopulations contribute to regeneration and most importantly
the role that they play in yielding non-functional scar formation
and heterotopic ossiﬁcation, might enable formulation of more
targeted strategies to improve tendon healing.
It must however be noted that viable markers for the
identiﬁcation of TSPCs in vitro are not necessarily useful for
tracking TSPCs in situ. Tendon tissues across the body and
between diﬀerent species diﬀer in architecture, biomechanics
and transcriptome (Disser et al., 2020). Much caution should
be exercised in classifying TSPCs subpopulations, considering
the inﬂuence of diﬀerent cell sources and contamination.
More speciﬁc markers would allow precise fate-mapping of
ambiguous stem/progenitor populations. A more speciﬁc culture
system should be developed, as the traditional culture system
fails to maintain the phenotype of TSPCs (Yan et al., 2018;
Zhang et al., 2018).
TSPCs IN TENDON BIOLOGY
TSPCs Participate in Tendon
Homeostasis
Tendon maintenance involves not only its extracellular matrix,
but also the cells that reside within it. The cell-ECM interaction
is essential for maintaining tendon homeostasis as ECM could
generate cell signals that regulate proliferation, diﬀerentiation,
adhesion and migration (Screen et al., 2015). Although TSPCs
were previously thought to be dormant in healthy adult
tendon without injury, the shifted postnatal cell turnover
activity of tendon unveiled the possibility of resident tendon
stem/progenitor population participating in the homeostatic
renewal mechanism (Runesson et al., 2013; Grinstein et al.,
2019). A recent study showed a transitional cell division rate
and dynamic tendon-related gene expression in postnatal tendon
tissues (Grinstein et al., 2019). In fact, TSPCs are capable of
adjusting gene expression and modifying ECM in response to
diﬀerent mechanical loadings, which favors the expression of
tenocyte-related genes at moderate levels (Zhang and Wang,
2010b). The in vivo roles of TSPCs within intact tendon remain
largely elusive since most studies investigating TSPCs activity are
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
5
February 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 631272
Huang et al.
Tendon Stem/Progenitor Cell Subpopulations
TABLE 1 | Niches and Markers of TSPCs.
Species
Anatomical location
Niches
Markers
References
Human
Hamstring tendon
Not determined
Tnmd, Stro1, CD146, CD44, CD90
Bi et al., 2007
Human
Hamstring tendon
Not determined
CD44, CD146, Stro1, αSMA, Tnmd
Ruzzini et al., 2014
Human
Supraspinatus tendon
Perivascular region
Musashi1, Nestin, Scx, SMA,
Prominin1/CD133, Col I, Col III, Smad8,
CD29, CD44
Tempfer et al., 2009
Human
Supraspinatus tendon
Not determined
CD90, CD105, CD73
Menon et al., 2018
Human
Patellar tendon
Tendon proper
CD44, CD73, CD90, CD105
Lee et al., 2012
Human
Achilles tendon
Not determined
CD105, CD90, CD44, CD146
Yin et al., 2010
Human
Achilles tendon
Not determined
CD73, CD90, CD105, Stro1, CD146,
CD44, Musashi1
Kohler et al., 2013
Human
Achilles tendon
Not determined
Nestin, Scx, CD146, CD44, CD90
Yin et al., 2016
Human
Achilles tendon
Not determined
CD44, CD90
Hu et al., 2017
Human
Achilles tendon
Not determined
CD44, CD29, CD105, CD90
Qin et al., 2020
Mouse
Patellar tendon
Tendon proper
Comp, Scx, Sca1, Tenascin C, Col I,
CD90.2, CD44, Sox9, Runx2
Bi et al., 2007
Mouse
Patellar tendon
Peritenon
Tppp3, Pdgfra, CD34
Harvey et al., 2019
Mouse
Achilles tendon
Tendon proper
Sca1, CD90.2, CD44, Tnmd, Scx,
nucleostemin
Mienaltowski et al.,
2013
Mouse
Achilles tendon
Peritenon
Sca1, CD90.2, CD44, endomucin,
CD133, nucleostemin, Musashi1
Mienaltowski et al.,
2013
Mouse
Achilles tendon
Not determined
CD29, CD44, CD49e, Sca1
Asai et al., 2014
Mouse
Achilles tendon
Tendon proper
Nestin, Scx, CD146, CD105, CD90,
CD44, CD29, CD51
Yin et al., 2016
Mouse
Achilles tendon
Tendon proper
Fmod, Mkx, Gdf5, Scx, Thbs4, Wnt10a
Mienaltowski et al.,
2019
Mouse
Achilles tendon
Peritenon
Prominin1/CD133
Mienaltowski et al.,
2019
Mouse
Achilles tendon
Tendon proper
Ctsk, Nestin, Sca-1, CD44, CD105,
CD24, CD200
Feng et al., 2020
Mouse
Tail tendon
Not determined
CD146, CD105, CD90.2, CD73, CD44,
Sca1, Nestin, Nanog
Alberton et al.,
2015
Mouse
Tail tendon
Not determined
CD90.2, Sca1
Liu et al., 2017
Mouse
Tibialis Anterior Tendon
Peritenon
Osteocalcin
Wang et al., 2017
Mouse
Limb tendon
Peritenon
Sca1, CD34, CD44
Tan et al., 2020
Rat
Flexor tendon
Tendon proper
CD44, CD90, Tenascin C, Tnmd,
Aggrecan, αSMA
Rui et al., 2010
Rat
Patellar tendon
Tendon proper
Nucleostemin, Scx, Tnmd, Oct4,
SSEA4, CD44, CD90.1
Zhou et al., 2010
Rat
Patellar tendon
Tendon proper
CD73, CD90, Scx, Tnmd
Tan et al., 2012
Rat
Patellar tendon
Not determined
CD146, CD44, Sca1, Scx, Tnmd,
Smad8, Oct4, Nanog, Sox2,
nucleostemin
Tan et al., 2013
Rat
Patellar Tendon
Perivascular region
CD29, CD90, P75, Vimentin, Sox10,
Snail
Xu et al., 2015
Rat
Achilles tendon
Not determined
Nucleostemin, Oct 3/4, Dyn2
Runesson et al.,
2015
Rat
Achilles tendon
Not determined
CD29, CD44, CD90
Chen et al., 2016
Rat
Achilles tendon
Tendon proper
CD90, CD73, nucleostemin
Guo et al., 2016
Rat
Achilles tendon
Not determined
CD44, Stro1
Hu et al., 2016
Rabbit
Patellar tendon and
Achilles tendon
Tendon proper
Oct4, SSEA4, nucleostemin
Zhang and Wang,
2010a
Horse
Superﬁcial digital ﬂexor
tendon
Tendon proper
Scx, CD90, CD105, Oct4
Cadby et al., 2014
Horse
Superﬁcial digital ﬂexor
tendon
Peritenon
CD45, CD90, CD105, Oct4
Cadby et al., 2014
Horse
Superﬁcial digital ﬂexor
tendon
Tendon proper
CD44, CD90, CD29
Durgam et al., 2019
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
6
February 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 631272
Huang et al.
Tendon Stem/Progenitor Cell Subpopulations
conducted in the context of injury or ex vivo models. Further
exploration into their in vivo activities is needed.
TSPCs Plays an Essential Role in Tendon
Regeneration
The origin or source of cells that contribute to the tendon
healing process have not been fully elucidated. TSPCs from
both the tendon proper and surrounding peritenon are known
to participate in the process of tendon repair, representing the
intrinsic and extrinsic response to tendon injuries (Bi et al.,
2007; Harvey et al., 2019). Intrinsic recruitment of Scx+ cells
are critical for restoring tendon, which accounts for the superior
regeneration observed in neonates compared to adults, since
adult Scx+ cells are not mobilized properly and transdiﬀerentiate
into ectopic cartilage (Howell et al., 2017). A nestin+Scx+
subpopulation would be recruited to the injury site within a
short time period (Yin et al., 2016). TSPCs are supposed to
diﬀerentiate into the tenogenic-lineage in response to tendon
injury. As expected, at 14 days post-injury, Scx-positive lineage
cells have been integrated into the aligned bridging tissues that
connect two ends of transected sites (Best and Loiselle, 2019).
The paratenon transforms from a quiescent state to an active
state, generating multiple cell layers and bridging the wound site
and cells within it, which would turn on expression of tenogenic
markers, such as Scx (Dyment et al., 2013). The cells from the
periphery of the struts would also express Scx, which indicates
a possible Scx-negative stem cell subpopulation (Dyment et al.,
2013). Following injury, an expanded SMA+ population within
paratenon would form a collagenous bridge and permeate nearby
tendon struts where high level tenascin-C could be detected as
they remodel the tendon body (Dyment et al., 2014). The collagen
ﬁbers of the bridge would transform from loose and thin to dense
and thick as time progresses (Dyment et al., 2014). There are
almost no Scx-positive lineage cells, which indicates the origin of
tendon proper, exhibiting αSMA staining in normal tendon and
bridging scar tissues (Howell et al., 2017; Best and Loiselle, 2019).
Furthermore, sheath osteocalcin-expressing stem/progenitor
cells will congregate at the injury site, diﬀerentiate into tenocytes,
and engender ﬁber-like structures, during which activated
Hh signaling is critical for the reparative capacity of sheath
stem/progenitor cells (Wang et al., 2017; Table 2).
The majority of the Tppp3+ lineage inhabits the paratenon
sheath and mostly remain quiescent in the homeostatic
state (Harvey et al., 2019). Likewise, once tendon is injured,
Tppp3+Pdgfra+
cells
would
migrate
and
inﬁltrate
the
mid-substance to repair the damaged region, where they
diﬀerentiate into tenocytes and lose their stem cell signature
(Harvey et al., 2019). Tppp3+Pdgfra+ stem cells left within
sheath
would proliferate
and
maintain
their
proportions
(Harvey et al., 2019). During the healing process, PDGFRα
signaling is indispensable for tenogenic diﬀerentiation of the
Tppp3+Pdgfra+ subpopulation, but not necessary for their
Scx expression (Harvey et al., 2019). Also, a small fraction of
this subpopulation might contribute to ﬁbrosis during tendon
healing (Harvey et al., 2019). Inﬂammation is a vital part of
the tendon healing process which could eventually impact
TABLE 2 | Behaviors of tendon cells during regeneration.
Tendon cell
populations
Events
References
Paratenon cells
3 d.p.i. Cells proliferate and
produce tenascin-C and
ﬁbromodulin
7 d.p.i. Migrate toward the lesion
and express Scx and smooth
muscle actin alpha, maintain
tenascin-C and ﬁbromodulin
expression
14 d.p.i. Bridge the lesion
Dyment et al., 2013
SMA+ cells
7 d.p.i. Partly Migrate from adjacent
structure, expanded in the
paratenon and synthesize collagen
in paratenon bridge
14 d.p.i. Extend over the lesion,
inﬁltrate adjacent region to remodel
and mostly differentiate into Scx+
cells; Bridge formed
35 d.p.i. Reduced SMA+Scx+ cells
Dyment et al., 2014
P75+ cells
0–7 d.p.i. Cells proliferate
2 d.p.i. Capillaries formed; contact
with endothelial cells in the peg and
socket arrangement; detached
from basal lamina encasement;
deposit ECM
28 d.p.i. Cell number decreases
Xu et al., 2015
Nestin+Scx+
cells
7 d.p.i. Accumulated at the injury
site
7–21 d.p.i. Cell number decreased
Yin et al., 2016
Osteocalcin+
cells
14 d.p.i. Migrate to lesion; Express
Mkx
45 d.p.i. Form tendon-ﬁber-like
construct, Mkx. Scx, ECM
components signiﬁcantly
upregulated
Wang et al., 2017
Tppp3+Pdgfra+
cells
3–14 d.p.i. Migrate to lesion
3–7 d.p.i. Turn on Scx
14 d.p.i. Located deep within
mid-substance
1–14 d.p.i. Primarily proliferate,
peak at 7 d.p.i., cease at 28 d.p.i.
Harvey et al., 2019
Scx+ lineage
cells
0–2 d.p.i No Scx+. Present within
the scar tissue
14 d.p.i. Present at the injury site
21 d.p.i. Speciﬁc to the tendon
stubs and form aligned bridging
region of the scar tissue
Sakabe et al.,
2018; Best and
Loiselle, 2019
d.p.i., days post injury.
the reparative outcome. TSPCs were demonstrated to play a
regulatory role during inﬂammation and remodeling when
encountering acute tendon injuries by upregulating IL-10 and
TIMP-3 via the JNK/STAT signaling pathway (Tarafder et al.,
2017). Inﬂammation could determine the fate of TSPCs as
inﬂammatory signaling and mediators were shown to have
eﬀects on TSPCs (Hu et al., 2016). Abnormal upregulation of
HIF-2α in proinﬂammatory milieu directs TSPCs commitment
into osteochondral-lineage (Hu et al., 2016). Prostaglandin E2
decreases the proliferation capacity of TSPCs, and induces their
non-tenogenic diﬀerentiation (Zhang and Wang, 2010c). IL-1β
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
7
February 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 631272
Huang et al.
Tendon Stem/Progenitor Cell Subpopulations
could promote the motility of TSPCs and also cause phenotype
loss of TSPCs, which is associated with altered expression of
tendon-related genes (Zhang et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2019;
Wang et al., 2019b). Altogether, these evidences reveal a dynamic
interplay between inﬂammation and TSPCs.
Notably, the proportions of TSPCs subpopulations vary
according to tendon tissue types, which might determine
the corresponding reparative outcome (Dyment et al., 2014;
Harvey et al., 2019). Also, diﬀerent populations display distinct
regional and temporal expressions during the reparative process,
whereby Oct3/4 positive cells are enriched at the injury site
and nucleostemin positive cells are dispersed throughout tendon
(Runesson et al., 2015).
It is also worth noting that embryonic and early postnatal
tendons regenerate better than late postnatal tendons, which
may be caused by the diﬀerences between embryonic and
postnatal TSPCs (Beredjiklian et al., 2003; Howell et al., 2017).
After inﬂammatory stimuli treatment, embryonic and postnatal
tendon cells share similar tenogenic commitment but the
latter upregulate expression of inﬂammatory mediators and
catabolic enzymes (Li J. et al., 2019). TSPCs from embryo
reside in a mechanically diﬀerent tendon compared with
TSPCs from postnatal stage and during development embryonic
TSPCs become more tenogenesis guided (Nguyen et al., 2018).
Additionally, mechanical loading alone hardly regulates the
behavior of embryonic TSPCs while it can change the dynamic
of postnatal TSPCs (Zhang et al., 2010; Brown et al., 2014).
In general, TSPCs would migrate to the injury site, proliferate
and express tendon-related, pluripotency and pericyte-related
markers to modulate tendon healing and remodeling (Tan et al.,
2013). Also, exosomes from TSPCs are capable of regulating
matrix metabolism and promoting tenogenesis of TSPCs, which
could further boost tendon healing (Wang et al., 2019a; Figure 2).
Accumulating scientiﬁc evidence shows that the treatment of
TSPCs combined with proper delivery vehicle could promote
tendon regeneration (Shen et al., 2012; Lui et al., 2014;
Komatsu et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2018). These validate
the potential therapeutic eﬃcacy of stem-cell based treatment.
Investigating the mechanism that drives the switch from the
quiescent to active state of TSPCs could beneﬁt translational
application. Spatiotemporal distribution and cellular dynamics of
diﬀerent subpopulations during the reparative process should be
addressed, which will help us develop more precise manipulation
of stem-cell based therapy to overcome the clinical barriers.
TSPCs in Tendon Pathology
TSPCs from tendinopathic tissues exhibit altered characteristics,
such as proliferation and diﬀerentiation capacity (Kim et al.,
2018; Chang et al., 2020). The tendinopathic region showed
strong expression of MKX and GLI1, protein product of
the Hh target gene, indicating that Hh signaling is activated
(Wang et al., 2017). The expression of higher collagen III to
collagen I ratio is observed in a TSPCs phenotype, which is a
pattern usually seen in tendinopathy (Rajpar and Barrett, 2020).
Additionally, general factors related to tendinopathy also reshape
TSPCs (Scott et al., 2015; Ranger et al., 2016). Hyperglycemia
decreases the proliferation capacity of TSPCs as well as promotes
FIGURE 2 | Schematic representation of how TSPCs are implicated in tendon homeostasis and regeneration. TSPCs remain mostly dormant in homeostatic state
and surrounding non-stem/progenitor cells could secret factors to regulate their differentiation. Upon injury, TSPCs would be activated and mobilized. TSPCs
self-renew, proliferate, migrate to the lesion and differentiate into tenocytes as well as modify the inﬂammatory process by increasing regulatory molecules such as
IL-10. Figures were produced using Servier Medical Art (https://smart.servier.com/).
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
8
February 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 631272
Huang et al.
Tendon Stem/Progenitor Cell Subpopulations
their osteochondrogenic diﬀerentiation potential (Shi et al.,
2019). High cholesterol not only inhibits tendon-related gene
expressions in TSPCs but also initiates their apoptosis and
autophagy (Li K. et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020).
Scx+ lineage progenitor cells have been recognized as the
origin of ectopic bone formation (Dey et al., 2016; Agarwal et al.,
2017). Rigorous studies on various subpopulations of TSPCs
deepen our understanding of the elusive mechanism of tendon
pathological healing. A Cathepsin K (Ctsk) expressing TSPCs
subpopulation present at mid-substance had been identiﬁed,
which contribute to heterotopic ossiﬁcation (Feng et al., 2020).
Ctsk is a proven marker of osteoclasts, periosteal stem cells and
perichondrial progenitors (Nakamura et al., 2007; Yang et al.,
2013; Debnath et al., 2018). Ctsk+Scx+ TSPCs possess great
self-renewal capacity and diﬀerentiation potentials with enriched
progenitor cell markers (Feng et al., 2020). The depletion of
the Suppressor of fused followed by activation of Hh signaling
would trigger subsequent chondrogenesis and osteogenesis of
Ctsk+Scx+ TSPCs (Feng et al., 2020).
Aging has also been revealed as a contributor to the altered
properties of TSPCs (Zhou et al., 2010). TSPCs isolated from
aged or degenerated tendon exhibit early sign of senescence
and shifted transcriptomic proﬁling with impaired self-renewal
and clonogenic ability (Kohler et al., 2013; Ruzzini et al., 2014).
Besides, aged TSPCs show reduced migratory capacity, slower
actin turnover, and dysregulated gene expressions related to cell-
matrix interactions (Kohler et al., 2013). These eﬀects are at
least partly caused by augmented Rho-associated protein kinases
(ROCK), inhibition of which could restore the phenotype of
aged TSPCs to one similar to young TSPCs (Kohler et al.,
2013; Kiderlen et al., 2019). Additionally, downregulation of
nuclear regulator CITED2 and Aquaporin 1(AQP1) are also
reported to be correlated with TSPCs aging (Hu et al., 2017;
Chen et al., 2020). Functionally incompetent aged TSPCs
will assemble into a less cell-populated, poorly organized and
biomechanically inferior three-dimensional tendon organoids
(Yan et al., 2020). With advancing age, osteogenic diﬀerentiation
potential and BMP expression are enhanced in TSPCs, which
consequently contribute to increased heterotopic ossiﬁcation
in tendons (Dai et al., 2020). These researches conﬁrm the
profound eﬀects of aging on the phenotype of TSPCs and explain
the higher incidence of tendon disorders in elderly population
(Gumucio et al., 2014).
Generally, TSPCs display shifted properties in tendon diseases
and account for key processes in pathogenesis. How TSPCs
transform and transdiﬀerentiate under pathological conditions
need to be addressed utilizing single-cell sequencing and lineage
tracing, so as to identify diseases-speciﬁc TSPCs phenotype and
develop more targeted therapeutic strategies.
Major Roles of TGFβ Superfamily
Signaling in TSPCs
The TGF superfamily include Transforming Growth Factor-
beta (TGFβ), Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMPs), and
Growth/diﬀerentiation Factor (GDF). The ligand-receptor model
charting cell-interaction found that the TGFβ family and their
ligands were among the most abundantly expressed growth
factors within tendon tissues, indicating their signiﬁcant roles in
tendon biology (De Micheli et al., 2020).
TGFβ signaling enables tenocytes to retain a stable cellular
phenotype (Theiss et al., 2015; Tan et al., 2020). TSPCs treated
with TGFβ2 tend to undergo tenogenesis as TGFβ2 treatment
increase both Col1a and Scx expression (Guerquin et al., 2013;
Brown et al., 2014; Havis et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2015). It was
reported that Mkx regulates tenogenesis by directly activating
TGFβ2 in TSPCs (Liu et al., 2015). Additionally, transcription of
EGR1 also directs tenogenic diﬀerentiation partially via TGFβ2
signaling (Guerquin et al., 2013). Endogenous microRNA MiR-
378a could bind to TGFβ2, suppressing tenogenic diﬀerentiation
of TSPCs and impeding tendon healing (Liu et al., 2019).
Transcriptome analysis reveals that during the developmental
process of mouse limbs, TGFβ is the most predominant signaling
pathway in tendon cells and shows the highest upregulation
of TGFβ in diﬀerentiated tenocytes, as compared with TSPCs
(Havis et al., 2014). TGFβ/SMAD2/3 signaling is required
for Scx expression in undiﬀerentiated tendon progenitors and
essential for tendon development, which might regulate later
recruitment of tendon cells (Pryce et al., 2009; Havis et al.,
2016). Other than serving as a potent inducer of Scleraxis
expression and a strong recruiter of tendon progenitors,
TGFβ also maintained Scx expression of TSPCs in vitro (Asai
et al., 2014; Feng et al., 2020). Additionally, TGFβ balance
the expression of Sox9 and Scx expression within a pool of
progenitor cells and thus modulate their chondrogenic and
tenogenic diﬀerentiation (Blitz et al., 2013; Sugimoto et al.,
2013).
After abrogation of TGFβ signaling, committed and functional
tendon cells lost their diﬀerentiation markers and revert to a
more stem/progenitor cell-like state, acquiring expression of
stem cell markers such as Sca-1 and CD44 (Tan et al., 2020).
Immediately after reintroduction of the TGFβ type II receptor,
the mutant cells are able to recover diﬀerentiated fate (Tan
et al., 2020). Nevertheless, a mere loss of TGFβ signaling alone
is not suﬃcient to induce tendon cell dediﬀerentiation, since
the microenvironment may also participate in the process (Tan
et al., 2020). As is the case of early embryonic development,
continuous TGFβ signaling with external factors is essential for
tendon progenitors to undergo commitment to the tendon cell
fate (Pryce et al., 2009). TGFβ would also be released in response
to mechanical forces and thus modulate ECM production and
sensory projections of tenocytes (Subramanian et al., 2018).
All in all, TGFβ acts to maintain tenocyte morphology and
diﬀerentiation fate (Subramanian et al., 2018; Tan et al., 2020).
CD105 has been marked to be a coreceptor of the TGFβ
superfamily (Sakamoto et al., 2020). CD105-negative TSPCs
collected from the injury site exhibited a stronger chondrogenic
ability than the CD105-postive subpopulation, which are closely
related to activated TGFβ/BMP signaling (Asai et al., 2014).
Transforming Growth Factor B Induced Gene Human Clone
3 (βig-h3), an extracellular matrix protein induced by TGFβ,
were found to be upregulated in Achilles tendon HO (Zhang
et al., 2020). βig-h3 could bind to TSPCs and inhibit their
attachment to collagen I, as well as accelerate the condensation
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
9
February 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 631272
Huang et al.
Tendon Stem/Progenitor Cell Subpopulations
of TSPCs and promote mesenchymal chondrogenesis (Zhang
et al., 2020). Inhibition of TGFβ eﬀectively attenuates HO
progression at multiple stages (Wang et al., 2018). Amelioration
of HO progression could also be achieved by inhibiting Hh
signaling (Feng et al., 2020). However, Hh signaling promotes
tendon healing by inducing Mkx and Collagen I expression
of tendon sheath stem cell through the TGFβ pathway (Wang
et al., 2017).These evidences show the complicated roles of TGFβ
signaling in the context of TSPCs.
BMP signaling is critical to TSPCs. A complete ECM
niche mediates TSPC fate by BMP signaling (Bi et al.,
2007). The absence of biglycan and ﬁbromodulin increased
sensitivity of TSPCs to BMP2, and consequently promote
osteochondrogenic diﬀerentiation (Bi et al., 2007). BMP2 could
stimulate non-tenogenic diﬀerentiation of TSPCs and elevated
BMPs are observed in tendinopathic samples (Rui et al.,
2011, 2012, 2013). Scleraxis-lineage cells contribute to all
stages of heterotopic ossiﬁcation of tendon and hyperactive
BMP receptor has been shown to be involved in the process
of chondrogenesis (Dey et al., 2016; Agarwal et al., 2017).
BMP signaling has also been shown to contribute to enthesis
development in mouse embryos (Blitz et al., 2009). BMP signaling
is active in zebraﬁsh Sternohyoideus tendon formation and
regeneration (Niu et al., 2020). Pharmacological or genetic
inhibition of BMP signaling have been demonstrated to reduce
the number of tendon cells and impede the attachment
progenitor cells being recruited and becoming tendon cells
(Niu et al., 2020).
GDF
signaling
exerts
eﬀects
on
TSPCs
as
well.
Growth/diﬀerentiation factor 5 (GDF5) labeled progenitor
population also participate in tendon formation as they extend
from the tendon proper to enthesis (Dyment et al., 2014).
GDF5 promotes the transition of TSPCs toward tenocytes
(Holladay et al., 2016).
In general, members of the TGFβ superfamily are essential
molecular regulators of the orchestrated diﬀerentiation of tendon
progenitors and tendon formation (Figure 3).
CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS
Tendon stem/progenitor cells are heterogenous and consist
of several distinct but overlapping subpopulations. They are
actively involved in tendon development, homeostasis and
pathogenesis. Signiﬁcantly, various members of the TGFβ
superfamily play multiple roles in regulating TSPCs. Cutting-
edge technology such as single-cell sequencing, multi-omics
analyses
and
three-dimensional
imaging,
could
provide
researchers more potent tools to deﬁne and determine the
dynamics and functions of the various TSPCs subpopulations.
A full illustrative map would greatly beneﬁt the development
of
more
eﬀective
cell-based
therapies
and
likely
enable
precision medicine.
Future studies could explore how TSPCs interact with
neighboring cells, and the tissue environment to establish
properly patterned tendon tissue and inﬂuence the regenerative
process. Identifying other undiscovered TSPCs subpopulations
and which of these is responsible for certain physiological
or pathological process, are of great importance as well.
FIGURE 3 | Schematic representation of the complex regulatory roles of the TGFβ superfamily in TSPCs. TGFβ signaling has been shown to maintain the
differentiated fate of tenocytes, without which tenocytes would revert to a more TSPC-like state. TGFβ signaling directs distinct lineage commitment of
TSPCs by different mechanisms. BMP signaling contributes to erroneous differentiation of TSPCs. TGFβ superfamily members, including TGFβ signaling,
BMP signaling, and GDF signaling are all vital in deﬁning the fate of tendon progenitors during tendon formation. Figures were produced using Servier Medical Art
(https://smart.servier.com/).
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
10
February 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 631272
Huang et al.
Tendon Stem/Progenitor Cell Subpopulations
Scientists could also elucidate more speciﬁc roles of the TGF-
β superfamily and thus design corresponding strategies to
address the clinical challenges brought by tendon rupture
or tendinopathy.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
ZH: original draft writing. ZY: conception and design. JX:
visualization.
YF:
table
preparation.
BH,
WC,
and
WS:
review and editing draft. XJ: referenced manuscript analysis.
All authors contributed to the article and approved the
submitted version.
FUNDING
This work was supported by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China (2017YFA0104900), the NSFC
grants (81874019), the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science
Foundation of China (LR20H060002), and the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities (2019QNA7040).
REFERENCES
Agarwal, S., Loder, S., Brownley, C., Cholok, D., Mangiavini, L., Li, J., et al.
(2016). Inhibition of Hif1α prevents both trauma-induced and genetic
heterotopic ossiﬁcation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113, E338–E347. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.1515397113
Agarwal, S., Loder, S. J., Cholok, D., Peterson, J., Li, J., Breuler, C., et al. (2017).
Scleraxis-lineage cells contribute to ectopic bone formation in muscle and
tendon. Stem Cells 35, 705–710. doi: 10.1002/stem.2515
Alberton, P., Dex, S., Popov, C., Shukunami, C., Schieker, M., and Docheva, D.
(2015). Loss of tenomodulin results in reduced self-renewal and augmented
senescence of tendon stem/progenitor cells. Stem Cells Dev. 24, 597–609. doi:
10.1089/scd.2014.0314
Andarawis-Puri, N., Flatow, E. L., and Soslowsky, L. J. (2015). Tendon basic
science: development, repair, regeneration, and healing. J. Orthop. Res. 33,
780–784. doi: 10.1002/jor.22869
Asai, S., Otsuru, S., Candela, M. E., Cantley, L., Uchibe, K., Hofmann,
T. J., et al. (2014). Tendon progenitor cells in injured tendons have
strong chondrogenic potential: the CD105-negative subpopulation induces
chondrogenic degeneration. Stem Cells 32, 3266–3277. doi: 10.1002/stem.1847
Beredjiklian, P. K., Favata, M., Cartmell, J. S., Flanagan, C. L., Crombleholme, T. M.,
and Soslowsky, L. J. (2003). Regenerative versus reparative healing in tendon: a
study of biomechanical and histological properties in fetal sheep. Ann. Biomed.
Eng. 31, 1143–1152. doi: 10.1114/1.1616931
Best, K. T., and Loiselle, A. E. (2019). Scleraxis lineage cells contribute to organized
bridging tissue during tendon healing and identify a subpopulation of resident
tendon cells. FASEB J. 33, 8578–8587. doi: 10.1096/fj.201900130RR
Bi, Y., Ehirchiou, D., Kilts, T. M., Inkson, C. A., Embree, M. C., Sonoyama, W.,
et al. (2007). Identiﬁcation of tendon stem/progenitor cells and the role of
the extracellular matrix in their niche. Nat. Med. 13, 1219–1227. doi: 10.1038/
nm1630
Blitz, E., Sharir, A., Akiyama, H., and Zelzer, E. (2013). Tendon-bone attachment
unit is formed modularly by a distinct pool of Scx- and Sox9-positive
progenitors. Development 140, 2680–2690. doi: 10.1242/dev.093906
Blitz, E., Viukov, S., Sharir, A., Shwartz, Y., Galloway, J. L., Pryce, B. A., et al. (2009).
Bone ridge patterning during musculoskeletal assembly is mediated through
SCX regulation of Bmp4 at the tendon-skeleton junction. Dev. Cell 17, 861–873.
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.10.010
Brown, J. P., Finley, V. G., and Kuo, C. K. (2014). Embryonic mechanical and
soluble cues regulate tendon progenitor cell gene expression as a function
of developmental stage and anatomical origin. J. Biomech. 47, 214–222. doi:
10.1016/j.jbiomech.2013.09.018
Cadby, J. A., Buehler, E., Godbout, C., van Weeren, P. R., and Snedeker, J. G.
(2014). Diﬀerences between the cell populations from the peritenon and the
tendon core with regard to their potential implication in tendon repair. PLoS
One 9:e92474. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092474
Chang, W., Callan, K. T., and Dragoo, J. L. (2020). The behavior of tendon
progenitor cells from tendinopathic tendons: implications for treatment. Tissue
Eng. Part A 26, 38–46. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2019.0042
Chen, J., Zhang, W., Liu, Z., Zhu, T., Shen, W., Ran, J., et al. (2016).
Characterization and comparison of post-natal rat Achilles tendon-derived
stem cells at diﬀerent development stages. Sci. Rep. 6:22946. doi: 10.1038/
srep22946
Chen, M., Li, Y., Xiao, L., Dai, G., Lu, P., Wang, Y., et al. (2020). AQP1 modulates
tendon stem/progenitor cells senescence during tendon aging. Cell Death Dis.
11:193. doi: 10.1038/s41419-020-2386-3
Chen, Y., Xie, Y., Liu, M., Hu, J., Tang, C., Huang, J., et al. (2019). Controlled-
release curcumin attenuates progression of tendon ectopic calciﬁcation by
regulating the diﬀerentiation of tendon stem/progenitor cells. Mater. Sci. Eng.
C Mater. Biol. Appl. 103:109711. doi: 10.1016/j.msec.2019.04.090
Dai, G., Li, Y., Liu, J., Zhang, C., Chen, M., Lu, P., et al. (2020). Higher
BMP expression in tendon stem/progenitor cells contributes to the increased
heterotopic ossiﬁcation in Achilles tendon with aging. Front. Cell Dev. Biol.
8:570605. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.570605
De Micheli, A. J., Swanson, J. B., Disser, N. P., Martinez, L. M., Walker, N. R.,
Oliver, D. J., et al. (2020). Single-cell transcriptomic analyses identiﬁes extensive
heterogeneity in the cellular composition of mouse Achilles tendons. Am. J.
Physiol. Cell Physiol. 319, C885–C894. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00372.2020
Debnath, S., Yallowitz, A. R., McCormick, J., Lalani, S., Zhang, T., Xu, R., et al.
(2018). Discovery of a periosteal stem cell mediating intramembranous bone
formation. Nature 562, 133–139. doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0554-8
Dex, S., Alberton, P., Willkomm, L., Söllradl, T., Bago, S., Milz, S., et al. (2017).
Tenomodulin is required for tendon endurance running and collagen I ﬁbril
adaptation to mechanical load. EBioMedicine 20, 240–254. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.
2017.05.003
Dey, D., Bagarova, J., Hatsell, S. J., Armstrong, K. A., Huang, L., Ermann, J.,
et al. (2016). Two tissue-resident progenitor lineages drive distinct phenotypes
of heterotopic ossiﬁcation. Sci. Transl. Med. 8:366ra163.
doi: 10.1126/
scitranslmed.aaf1090
Disser, N. P., Ghahramani, G. C., Swanson, J. B., Wada, S., Chao, M. L., Rodeo,
S. A., et al. (2020). Widespread diversity in the transcriptomes of functionally
divergent limb tendons. J. Physiol. 598, 1537–1550. doi: 10.1113/JP27
9646
Durgam, S. S., Altmann, N. N., Coughlin, H. E., Rollins, A., and Hostnik, L. D.
(2019). Insulin enhances the in Vitro osteogenic capacity of ﬂexor tendon-
derived progenitor cells. Stem Cells Int. 2019:1602751. doi: 10.1155/2019/
1602751
Dyment, N. A., Hagiwara, Y., Matthews, B. G., Li, Y., Kalajzic, I., and Rowe, D. W.
(2014). Lineage tracing of resident tendon progenitor cells during growth and
natural healing. PLoS One 9:e96113. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096113
Dyment, N. A., Liu, C. F., Kazemi, N., Aschbacher-Smith, L. E., Kenter, K.,
Breidenbach, A. P., et al. (2013). The paratenon contributes to scleraxis-
expressing cells during patellar tendon healing. PLoS One 8:e59944. doi: 10.
1371/journal.pone.0059944
Feng, H., Xing, W., Han, Y., Sun, J., Kong, M., Gao, B., et al. (2020). Tendon-
derived cathepsin K-expressing progenitor cells activate hedgehog signaling to
drive heterotopic ossiﬁcation. J. Clin. Investig. 130, 6354–6365. doi: 10.1172/
JCI132518
Frizziero, A., Oliva, F., Vittadini, F., Vetrano, M., Bernetti, A., Giordan, N., et al.
(2019). Eﬃcacy of ultrasound-guided hyaluronic acid injections in Achilles
and patellar tendinopathies: a prospective multicentric clinical trial. Muscles
Ligaments Tendons J. 9, 305–313. doi: 10.32098/mltj.03.2019.01
Giordani, L., He, G. J., Negroni, E., Sakai, H., Law, J. Y. C., Siu, M. M., et al.
(2019). High-dimensional single-cell cartography reveals novel skeletal muscle-
resident cell populations. Mol. Cell 74, 609–621.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.
02.026
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
11
February 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 631272
Huang et al.
Tendon Stem/Progenitor Cell Subpopulations
Grinstein, M., Dingwall, H. L., O’Connor, L. D., Zou, K., Capellini, T. D., and
Galloway, J. L. (2019). A distinct transition from cell growth to physiological
homeostasis in the tendon. Elife 8:e48689. doi: 10.7554/eLife.48689
Guerquin, M. J., Charvet, B., Nourissat, G., Havis, E., Ronsin, O., Bonnin,
M. A., et al. (2013). Transcription factor EGR1 directs tendon diﬀerentiation
and promotes tendon repair. J. Clin. Investig. 123, 3564–3576. doi: 10.1172/
JCI67521
Gumucio, J. P., Korn, M. A., Saripalli, A. L., Flood, M. D., Phan, A. C., Roche,
S. M., et al. (2014). Aging-associated exacerbation in fatty degeneration and
inﬁltration after rotator cuﬀtear. J. Shoulder Elb. Surg. 23, 99–108. doi: 10.1016/
j.jse.2013.04.011
Gumucio, J. P., Schonk, M. M., Kharaz, Y. A., Comerford, E., and Mendias, C. L.
(2020). Scleraxis is required for the growth of adult tendons in response to
mechanical loading. JCI Insight 5:e138295. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.138295
Guo, J., Chan, K. M., Zhang, J. F., and Li, G. (2016). Tendon-derived stem cells
undergo spontaneous tenogenic diﬀerentiation. Exp. Cell Res. 341, 1–7. doi:
10.1016/j.yexcr.2016.01.007
Harvey, T., Flamenco, S., and Fan, C. M. (2019). A Tppp3+Pdgfra+ tendon stem
cell population contributes to regeneration and reveals a shared role for PDGF
signalling in regeneration and ﬁbrosis. Nat. Cell Biol. 21, 1490–1503. doi: 10.
1038/s41556-019-0417-z
Havis, E., Bonnin, M. A., Esteves de Lima, J., Charvet, B., Milet, C., and Duprez, D.
(2016). TGFβ and FGF promote tendon progenitor fate and act downstream
of muscle contraction to regulate tendon diﬀerentiation during chick limb
development. Development 143, 3839–3851. doi: 10.1242/dev.136242
Havis, E., Bonnin, M. A., Olivera-Martinez, I., Nazaret, N., Ruggiu, M., Weibel,
J., et al. (2014). Transcriptomic analysis of mouse limb tendon cells during
development. Development 141, 3683–3696. doi: 10.1242/dev.108654
Holladay, C., Abbah, S. A., O’Dowd, C., Pandit, A., and Zeugolis, D. I. (2016).
Preferential tendon stem cell response to growth factor supplementation.
J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 10, 783–798. doi: 10.1002/term.1852
Howell, K., Chien, C., Bell, R., Laudier, D., Tufa, S. F., Keene, D. R., et al.
(2017). Novel model of tendon regeneration reveals distinct cell mechanisms
underlying regenerative and ﬁbrotic tendon healing. Sci. Rep. 7:45238. doi:
10.1038/srep45238
Hu, C., Zhang, Y., Tang, K., Luo, Y., Liu, Y., and Chen, W. (2017). Downregulation
of CITED2 contributes to TGFβ-mediated senescence of tendon-derived stem
cells. Cell Tissue Res. 368, 93–104. doi: 10.1007/s00441-016-2552-1
Hu, J. J., Yin, Z., Shen, W. L., Xie, Y. B., Zhu, T., Lu, P., et al. (2016).
Pharmacological regulation of in situ tissue stem cells diﬀerentiation for soft
tissue calciﬁcation treatment. Stem Cells 34, 1083–1096. doi: 10.1002/stem.2306
Kaux, J. F., Dardenne, N., Deroisy, R., Samson, A., Roberjot, M., Croisier, J. L., et al.
(2019). Comparison between platelet-rich plasma injections and hyaluronic
acid injections in the treatment of patellar tendinopathies: a randomized trial.
Muscles Ligaments Tendons J. 9, 322–327.
Kendal, A. R., Layton, T., Al-Mossawi, H., Appleton, L., Dakin, S., Brown, R., et al.
(2020). Multi-omic single cell analysis resolves novel stromal cell populations
in healthy and diseased human tendon. Sci. Rep. 10:13939. doi: 10.1038/s41598-
020-70786-5
Kiderlen, S., Polzer, C., Rädler, J. O., Docheva, D., Clausen-Schaumann, H.,
and Sudhop, S. (2019). Age related changes in cell stiﬀness of tendon
stem/progenitor cells and a rejuvenating eﬀect of ROCK-inhibition. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 509, 839–844. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.01.027
Kim, S. J., Song, D. H., and Kim, S. J. (2018). Characteristics of tendon derived stem
cells according to diﬀerent factors to induce the tendinopathy. J. Cell. Physiol.
233, 6196–6206. doi: 10.1002/jcp.26475
Kohler, J., Popov, C., Klotz, B., Alberton, P., Prall, W. C., Haasters, F., et al. (2013).
Uncovering the cellular and molecular changes in tendon stem/progenitor
cells attributed to tendon aging and degeneration. Aging Cell 12, 988–999.
doi: 10.1111/acel.12124
Komatsu, I., Wang, J. H. C., Iwasaki, K., Shimizu, T., and Okano, T. (2016).
The eﬀect of tendon stem/progenitor cell (TSC) sheet on the early tendon
healing in a rat Achilles tendon injury model. Acta Biomater. 42, 136–146.
doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2016.06.026
Lee, A. H., and Elliott, D. M. (2019). Comparative multi-scale hierarchical structure
of the tail, plantaris, and Achilles tendons in the rat. J. Anat. 234, 252–262.
doi: 10.1111/joa.12913
Lee, C. H., Lee, F. Y., Tarafder, S., Kao, K., Jun, Y., Yang, G., et al. (2015). Harnessing
endogenous stem/progenitor cells for tendon regeneration. J. Clin. Invest. 125,
2690–2701. doi: 10.1172/JCI81589
Lee, W. Y. W., Lui, P. P. Y., and Rui, Y. F. (2012). Hypoxia-mediated eﬃcient
expansion of human tendon-derived stem cells in vitro. Tissue Eng. Part A 18,
484–498. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2011.0130
Li, J., Stoppato, M., Schiele, N. R., Graybeal, K. L., Nguyen, P. K., and Kuo,
C. K. (2019). Embryonic and postnatal tendon cells respond diﬀerently to
interleukin-1β. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1442, 118–127. doi: 10.1111/nyas.14013
Li, K., Deng, G., Deng, Y., Chen, S., Wu, H., Cheng, C., et al. (2019). High
cholesterol inhibits tendon-related gene expressions in tendon-derived stem
cells through reactive oxygen species-activated nuclear factor-κB signaling.
J. Cell. Physiol. 234, 18017–18028. doi: 10.1002/jcp.28433
Li, K., Deng, Y., Deng, G., Chen, P., Wang, Y., Wu, H., et al. (2020). High
cholesterol induces apoptosis and autophagy through the ROS-activated
AKT/FOXO1 pathway in tendon-derived stem cells. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 11:131.
doi: 10.1186/s13287-020-01643-5
Liu, H., Zhang, C., Zhu, S., Lu, P., Zhu, T., Gong, X., et al. (2015). Mohawk
promotes the tenogenesis of mesenchymal stem cells through activation of the
TGFβ signaling pathway. Stem Cells 33, 443–455. doi: 10.1002/stem.1866
Liu, Y., Feng, L., Xu, J., Yang, Z., Wu, T., Zhang, J., et al. (2019). MiR-378a
suppresses tenogenic diﬀerentiation and tendon repair by targeting at TGF-β2.
Stem Cell Res. Ther. 10:108. doi: 10.1186/s13287-019-1216-y
Liu, Y., Xu, J., Xu, L., Wu, T., Sun, Y., Lee, Y. W., et al. (2017). Cystic ﬁbrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator mediates tenogenic diﬀerentiation of
tendon-derived stem cells and tendon repair: accelerating tendon injury healing
by intervening in its downstream signaling. FASEB J. 31, 3800–3815. doi: 10.
1096/fj.201601181R
Lui, P. P. Y., Kong, S. K., Lau, P. M., Wong, Y. M., Lee, Y. W., Tan, C., et al. (2014).
Allogeneic tendon-derived stem cells promote tendon healing and suppress
immunoreactions in hosts: in vivo model. Tissue Eng. Part A 20, 2998–3009.
doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2013.0713
Mendias, C. L., Gumucio, J. P., Bakhurin, K. I., Lynch, E. B., and Brooks,
S. V. (2012). Physiological loading of tendons induces scleraxis expression in
epitenon ﬁbroblasts. J. Orthop. Res. 30, 606–612. doi: 10.1002/jor.21550
Menon, A., Creo, P., Piccoli, M., Bergante, S., Conforti, E., Banﬁ, G., et al.
(2018). Chemical activation of the hypoxia-inducible factor reversibly reduces
tendon stem cell proliferation, inhibits their diﬀerentiation, and maintains cell
undiﬀerentiation. Stem Cells Int. 2018:9468085. doi: 10.1155/2018/9468085
Mienaltowski, M. J., Adams, S. M., and Birk, D. E. (2013). Regional diﬀerences
in stem cell/progenitor cell populations from the mouse achilles tendon. Tissue
Eng. Part A 19, 199–210. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2012.0182
Mienaltowski, M. J., Adams, S. M., and Birk, D. E. (2014). Tendon proper- and
peritenon-derived progenitor cells have unique tenogenic properties. Stem Cell
Res. Ther. 5:86. doi: 10.1186/scrt475
Mienaltowski, M. J., Cánovas, A., Fates, V. A., Hampton, A. R., Pechanec, M. Y.,
Islas-Trejo, A., et al. (2019). Transcriptome proﬁles of isolated murine Achilles
tendon proper- and peritenon-derived progenitor cells. J. Orthop. Res. 37,
1409–1418. doi: 10.1002/jor.24076
Millar, N. L., Murrell, G. A. C., and McInnes, I. B. (2017). Inﬂammatory
mechanisms in tendinopathy – towards translation. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 13,
110–122. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2016.213
Nakamura, T., Imai, Y., Matsumoto, T., Sato, S., Takeuchi, K., Igarashi, K., et al.
(2007). Estrogen prevents bone loss via estrogen receptor alpha and induction
of Fas ligand in osteoclasts. Cell 130, 811–823.
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.
07.025
Nguyen, P. K., Pan, X. S., Li, J., and Kuo, C. K. (2018). Roadmap of molecular,
compositional, and functional markers during embryonic tendon development.
Connect. Tissue Res. 59, 495–508. doi: 10.1080/03008207.2018.1511710
Ning, L. J., Zhang, Y. J., Zhang, Y., Qing, Q., Jiang, Y. L., Yang, J. L., et al.
(2015). The utilization of decellularized tendon slices to provide an inductive
microenvironment for the proliferation and tenogenic diﬀerentiation of stem
cells. Biomaterials 52, 539–550. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.02.061
Niu, X., Subramanian, A., Hwang, T. H., Schilling, T. F., and Galloway, J. L. (2020).
Tendon cell regeneration is mediated by attachment site-resident progenitors
and BMP signaling. Curr. Biol. 30, 3277–3292.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2020.
06.016
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
12
February 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 631272
Huang et al.
Tendon Stem/Progenitor Cell Subpopulations
Nourissat, G., Berenbaum, F., and Duprez, D. (2015). Tendon injury: from biology
to tendon repair. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 11, 223–233. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.
2015.26
Osti, L., Buda, M., Buono, A. D., Osti, R., and Massari, L. (2015). Clinical evidence
in the treatment of rotator cuﬀtears with hyaluronic acid. Muscles Ligaments
Tendons J. 5, 270–275. doi: 10.11138/mltj/2015.5.4.270
Pryce, B. A., Watson, S. S., Murchison, N. D., Staverosky, J. A., Dünker, N., and
Schweitzer, R. (2009). Recruitment and maintenance of tendon progenitors
by TGFbeta signaling are essential for tendon formation. Development 136,
1351–1361. doi: 10.1242/dev.027342
Qin, S., Wang, W., Liu, Z., Hua, X., Fu, S., Dong, F., et al. (2020).
Fibrochondrogenic diﬀerentiation potential of tendon-derived stem/progenitor
cells from human patellar tendon. J. Orthop. Translat. 22, 101–108. doi: 10.1016/
j.jot.2019.08.006
Rajpar, I., and Barrett, J. G. (2020). Multi-diﬀerentiation potential is necessary
for optimal tenogenesis of tendon stem cells. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 11:152. doi:
10.1186/s13287-020-01640-8
Ranger, T. A., Wong, A. M., Cook, J. L., and Gaida, J. E. (2016). Is there an
association between tendinopathy and diabetes mellitus? a systematic review
with meta-analysis. Br. J. Sports Med. 50, 982–989. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2015-
094735
Rui, Y. F., Lui, P. P. Y., Li, G., Fu, S. C., Lee, Y. W., and Chan, K. M. (2010). Isolation
and characterization of multipotent rat tendon-derived stem cells. Tissue Eng.
Part A 16, 1549–1558. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2009.0529
Rui, Y. F., Lui, P. P. Y., Ni, M., Chan, L. S., Lee, Y. W., and Chan, K. M. (2011).
Mechanical loading increased BMP-2 expression which promoted osteogenic
diﬀerentiation of tendon-derived stem cells. J. Orthop. Res. 29, 390–396. doi:
10.1002/jor.21218
Rui, Y. F., Lui, P. P. Y., Rolf, C. G., Wong, Y. M., Lee, Y. W., and Chan, K. M.
(2012). Expression of chondro-osteogenic BMPs in clinical samples of patellar
tendinopathy. Knee Surg. Sports Traumatol. Arthrosc. 20, 1409–1417. doi: 10.
1007/s00167-011-1685-8
Rui, Y. F., Lui, P. P. Y., Wong, Y. M., Tan, Q., and Chan, K. M. (2013).
BMP-2 stimulated non-tenogenic diﬀerentiation and promoted proteoglycan
deposition of tendon-derived stem cells (TDSCs) in vitro. J. Orthop. Res. 31,
746–753. doi: 10.1002/jor.22290
Runesson, E., Ackermann, P., Brisby, H., Karlsson, J., and Eriksson, B. I. (2013).
Detection of slow-cycling and stem/progenitor cells in diﬀerent regions of rat
Achilles tendon: response to treadmill exercise. Knee Surg. Sports Traumatol.
Arthrosc. 21, 1694–1703. doi: 10.1007/s00167-013-2446-7
Runesson, E., Ackermann, P., Karlsson, J., and Eriksson, B. I. (2015).
Nucleostemin- and Oct 3/4-positive stem/progenitor cells exhibit disparate
anatomical and temporal expression during rat Achilles tendon healing. BMC
Musculoskelet. Disord. 16:212. doi: 10.1186/s12891-015-0658-3
Ruzzini, L., Abbruzzese, F., Rainer, A., Longo, U. G., Trombetta, M., Maﬀulli, N.,
et al. (2014). Characterization of age-related changes of tendon stem cells from
adult human tendons. Knee Surg. Sports Traumatol. Arthrosc. 22, 2856–2866.
doi: 10.1007/s00167-013-2457-4
Sakabe, T., Sakai, K., Maeda, T., Sunaga, A., Furuta, N., Schweitzer, R., et al. (2018).
Transcription factor scleraxis vitally contributes to progenitor lineage direction
in wound healing of adult tendon in mice. J. Biol. Chem. 293, 5766–5780.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.001987
Sakamoto, R., Kajihara, I., Miyauchi, H., Maeda-Otsuka, S., Yamada-Kanazawa,
S., Sawamura, S., et al. (2020). Inhibition of endoglin exerts antitumor
eﬀects through the regulation of non-smad TGF-β signaling in Angiosarcoma.
J. Invest. Dermatol. 140, 2060–2072. doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2020.01.031
Schneider, M., Angele, P., Jarvinen, T. A. H., and Docheva, D. (2018). Rescue plan
for Achilles: therapeutics steering the fate and functions of stem cells in tendon
wound healing. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 129, 352–375. doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2017.
12.016
Scott, A., Zwerver, J., Grewal, N., de Sa, A., Alktebi, T., Granville, D. J., et al. (2015).
Lipids, adiposity and tendinopathy: is there a mechanistic link? critical review.
Br. J. Sports Med. 49, 984–988. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2014-093989
Scott, R. W., Arostegui, M., Schweitzer, R., Rossi, F. M. V., and Underhill, T. M.
(2019). Hic1 deﬁnes quiescent mesenchymal progenitor subpopulations with
distinct functions and fates in skeletal muscle regeneration. Cell Stem Cell 25,
797–813. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2019.11.004
Screen, H. R. C., Berk, D. E., Kadler, K. E., Ramirez, F., and Young, M. F. (2015).
Tendon functional extracellular matrix. J. Orthop. Res. 33, 793–799. doi: 10.
1002/jor.22818
Shen, W., Chen, J., Yin, Z., Chen, X., Liu, H., Heng, B. C., et al. (2012). Allogenous
tendon stem/progenitor cells in silk scaﬀold for functional shoulder repair. Cell
Transplant. 21, 943–958. doi: 10.3727/096368911X627453
Shi, L., Li, Y. J., Dai, G. C., Lin, Y. C., Li, G., Wang, C., et al. (2019). Impaired
function of tendon-derived stem cells in experimental diabetes mellitus rat
tendons: implications for cellular mechanism of diabetic tendon disorder. Stem
Cell Res. Ther. 10:27. doi: 10.1186/s13287-018-1108-6
Staverosky, J. A., Pryce, B. A., Watson, S. S., and Schweitzer, R. (2009). Tubulin
polymerization-promoting protein family member 3, Tppp3, is a speciﬁc
marker of the diﬀerentiating tendon sheath and synovial joints. Dev. Dyn. 238,
685–692. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21865
Subramanian, A., Kanzaki, L. F., Galloway, J. L., and Schilling, T. F. (2018).
Mechanical force regulates tendon extracellular matrix organization and
tenocyte morphogenesis through TGFbeta signaling. Elife 7:e38069. doi: 10.
7554/eLife.38069
Sugimoto, Y., Takimoto, A., Akiyama, H., Kist, R., Scherer, G., Nakamura, T.,
et al. (2013). Scx+/Sox9+ progenitors contribute to the establishment of the
junction between cartilage and tendon/ligament. Development 140, 2280–2288.
doi: 10.1242/dev.096354
Tan, G. K., Pryce, B. A., Stabio, A., Brigande, J. V., Wang, C., Xia, Z., et al. (2020).
Tgfβ signaling is critical for maintenance of the tendon cell fate. eLife 9:e52695.
doi: 10.7554/eLife.52695
Tan, Q., Lui, P. P. Y., and Lee, Y. W. (2013). In vivo identity of tendon stem cells
and the roles of stem cells in tendon healing. Stem Cells Dev. 22, 3128–3140.
doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0073
Tan, Q., Lui, P. P. Y., and Rui, Y. F. (2012). Eﬀect of in vitro passaging on the
stem cell-related properties of tendon-derived stem cells-implications in tissue
engineering. Stem Cells Dev. 21, 790–800. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0160
Tarafder, S., Chen, E., Jun, Y., Kao, K., Sim, K. H., Back, J., et al. (2017). Tendon
stem/progenitor cells regulate inﬂammation in tendon healing JNK and STAT3
signaling. FASEB J. 31, 3991–3998. doi: 10.1096/fj.201700071R
Tempfer, H., Wagner, A., Gehwolf, R., Lehner, C., Tauber, M., Resch, H., et al.
(2009). Perivascular cells of the supraspinatus tendon express both tendon-
and stem cell-related markers. Histochem. Cell Biol. 131, 733–741. doi: 10.1007/
s00418-009-0581-5
Theiss, F., Mirsaidi, A., Mhanna, R., Kümmerle, J., Glanz, S., Bahrenberg, G.,
et al. (2015). Use of biomimetic microtissue spheroids and speciﬁc growth
factor supplementation to improve tenocyte diﬀerentiation and adaptation
to a collagen-based scaﬀold in vitro. Biomaterials 69, 99–109. doi: 10.1016/j.
biomaterials.2015.08.013
Wang, X., Li, F., Xie, L., Crane, J., Zhen, G., Mishina, Y., et al. (2018). Inhibition
of overactive TGF-β attenuates progression of heterotopic ossiﬁcation in mice.
Nat. Commun. 9:551. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-02988-5
Wang, Y., He, G., Guo, Y., Tang, H., Shi, Y., Bian, X., et al. (2019a). Exosomes from
tendon stem cells promote injury tendon healing through balancing synthesis
and degradation of the tendon extracellular matrix. J. Cell. Mol. Med. 23,
5475–5485. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.14430
Wang, Y., He, G., Tang, H., Shi, Y., Kang, X., Lyu, J., et al. (2019b). Aspirin
inhibits inﬂammation and scar formation in the injury tendon healing through
regulating JNK/STAT-3 signalling pathway. Cell Prolif. 52:e12650. doi: 10.1111/
cpr.12650
Wang, Y., Zhang, X., Huang, H., Xia, Y., Yao, Y., Mak, A. F. T., et al. (2017).
Osteocalcin expressing cells from tendon sheaths in mice contribute to tendon
repair by activating Hedgehog signaling. eLife 6:e30474. doi: 10.7554/eLife.
30474
Xu, W., Sun, Y., Zhang, J., Xu, K., Pan, L., He, L., et al. (2015). Perivascular-derived
stem cells with neural crest characteristics are involved in tendon repair. Stem
Cells Dev. 24, 857–868. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0036
Xu, Y., and Murrell, G. A. (2008). The basic science of tendinopathy. Clin. Orthop.
Relat. Res. 466, 1528–1538. doi: 10.1007/s11999-008-0286-4
Yan, Z., Yin, H., Brochhausen, C., Pfeifer, C. G., Alt, V., and Docheva, D. (2020).
Aged tendon stem/progenitor cells are less competent to form 3D tendon
organoids due to cell autonomous and matrix production deﬁcits. Front. Bioeng.
Biotech. 8:406. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.00406
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
13
February 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 631272
Huang et al.
Tendon Stem/Progenitor Cell Subpopulations
Yan, Z., Yin, H., Nerlich, M., Pfeifer, C. G., and Docheva, D. (2018). Boosting
tendon repair: interplay of cells, growth factors and scaﬀold-free and gel-based
carriers. J. Exp. Orthop. 5:1. doi: 10.1186/s40634-017-0117-1
Yang, W., Wang, J., Moore, D. C., Liang, H., Dooner, M., Wu, Q., et al. (2013).
Ptpn11 deletion in a novel progenitor causes metachondromatosis by inducing
hedgehog signalling. Nature 499, 491–495. doi: 10.1038/nature12396
Yin, H., Caceres, M. D., Yan, Z., Schieker, M., Nerlich, M., and Docheva, D. (2019).
Tenomodulin regulates matrix remodeling of mouse tendon stem/progenitor
cells in an ex vivo collagen I gel model. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 512,
691–697. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.03.063
Yin, Z., Chen, X., Chen, J. L., Shen, W. L., Hieu Nguyen, T. M., Gao, L., et al.
(2010). The regulation of tendon stem cell diﬀerentiation by the alignment
of nanoﬁbers. Biomaterials 31, 2163–2175. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.
11.083
Yin, Z., Chen, X., Zhu, T., Hu, J. J., Song, H. X., Shen, W. L., et al. (2013). The eﬀect
of decellularized matrices on human tendon stem/progenitor cell diﬀerentiation
and tendon repair. Acta Biomater. 9, 9317–9329. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2013.
07.022
Yin, Z., Hu, J. J., Yang, L., Zheng, Z. F., An, C. R., Wu, B. B., et al. (2016). Single-
cell analysis reveals a nestin tendon stem/progenitor cell population with strong
tenogenic potentiality. Sci. Adv. 2:e1600874. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1600874
Zhang, C., Zhang, E., Yang, L., Tu, W., Lin, J., Yuan, C., et al. (2018). Histone
deacetylase inhibitor treated cell sheet from mouse tendon stem/progenitor
cells promotes tendon repair. Biomaterials 172, 66–82. doi: 10.1016/j.
biomaterials.2018.03.043
Zhang, C., Zhu, J., Zhou, Y., Thampatty, B. P., and Wang, J. H. C. (2019).
Tendon stem/progenitor cells and their interactions with extracellular matrix
and mechanical loading. Stem Cells Int. 2019:3674647. doi: 10.1155/2019/367
4647
Zhang, J., Li, B., and Wang, J. H. C. (2011). The role of engineered tendon
matrix in the stemness of tendon stem cells in vitro and the promotion of
tendon-like tissue formation in vivo. Biomaterials 32, 6972–6981. doi: 10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2011.05.088
Zhang, J., Pan, T., Liu, Y., and Wang, J. H. C. (2010). Mouse treadmill running
enhances tendons by expanding the pool of tendon stem cells (TSCs) and
TSC-related cellular production of collagen. J. Orthop. Res. 28, 1178–1183.
doi: 10.1002/jor.21123
Zhang, J., and Wang, J. H. C. (2010a). Characterization of diﬀerential properties
of rabbit tendon stem cells and tenocytes. BMC. Musculoskele. Disord. 11:10.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-11-10
Zhang, J., and Wang, J. H. C. (2010b). Mechanobiological response of tendon stem
cells: implications of tendon homeostasis and pathogenesis of tendinopathy.
J. Orthop. Res. 28, 639–643. doi: 10.1002/jor.21046
Zhang, J., and Wang, J. H. C. (2010c). Production of PGE(2) increases in tendons
subjected to repetitive mechanical loading and induces diﬀerentiation of tendon
stem cells into non-tenocytes. J. Orthop. Res. 28, 198–203. doi: 10.1002/jor.
20962
Zhang, K., Asai, S., Yu, B., and Enomoto-Iwamoto, M. (2015). IL-1beta irreversibly
inhibits tenogenic diﬀerentiation and alters metabolism in injured tendon-
derived progenitor cells in vitro. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 463, 667–672.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.05.122
Zhang, Q., Zhang, Y., Yan, M., Zhu, K., Su, Q., Pan, J., et al. (2020). βig-h3
enhances chondrogenesis via promoting mesenchymal condensation in rat
Achilles tendon heterotopic ossiﬁcation model. Aging 12, 7030–7041. doi: 10.
18632/aging.103060
Zhou, Z., Akinbiyi, T., Xu, L., Ramcharan, M., Leong, D. J., Ros, S. J., et al. (2010).
Tendon-derived stem/progenitor cell aging: defective self-renewal and altered
fate. Aging Cell 9, 911–915. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2010.00598.x
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Huang, Yin, Xu, Fei, Heng, Jiang, Chen and Shen. This is an
open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,
provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply
with these terms.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
14
February 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 631272

===== Asahara2017_JBMR_Tendon+Ligament+Development =====

Tendons and Ligaments: Connecting Developmental
Biology to Musculoskeletal Disease Pathogenesis
Hiroshi Asahara,1,2 Masafumi Inui,3 and Martin K Lotz1
1Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA
2Department of Systems BioMedicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan
3Laboratory of Animal Regeneration Systemology, Department of Life Science, School of Agriculture, Meiji University, Kanagawa, Japan
ABSTRACT
Tendons and ligaments provide connections between muscle and bone or bone and bone to enable locomotion. Damage to
tendons and ligaments caused by acute or chronic injury or associated with aging and arthritis is a prevalent cause of disability.
Improvements in approaches for the treatment of these conditions depend on a better understanding of tendon and ligament
development, cell biology, and pathophysiology. This review focuses on recent advances in the discovery of transcription factors
that control ligament and tendon cell differentiation, how cell and extracellular matrix homeostasis are altered in disease, and how
this new insight can lead to novel therapeutic approaches. © 2017 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.
KEY WORDS: TENDON; LIGAMENT; ARTHRITIS; Mkx; Scx; Egr1/2
Introduction
D
espite the unique and important roles of tendons and
ligaments in the musculoskeletal function and musculo-
skeletal diseases, research in this area is not as advanced as in
other skeletal tissues. This is partly because, until recently, the
transcription factors critical for the formation and maintenance
of these tissues were unknown. The recent identiﬁcation of
Scleraxis (Scx), Mohawk (Mkx), and early growth response factor
1 (Egr1) and their speciﬁc roles in tendon and ligament
development, maturation, homeostasis, and repair of mature
tissues has substantially advanced the ﬁeld of tendon and
ligament research. This review summarizes the current knowl-
edge and concepts regarding the development, function, and
disease-associated changes in tendon and ligament cells and
extracellular matrix (ECM) with a focus on Mkx, Scx, and Egr1.
Tendons and ligaments are distinct but closely related tissues.
Although developmental processes of tendon and ligament
tissues and the phenotypes of mice with genetic deletion of the
key transcription factors are different (see the sections Biology of
Mature Tendon and Ligament Tissues and Cells, and Develop-
mental Biology of Tendon and Ligament Tissues and Cells), the
basic structures of these tissues and the gene expression proﬁles
of their major cell type (tenocytes) are rather similar.
We, therefore, focus this report on the common basis between
tendons and ligaments uncovered in recent research and use
anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries as a representative
example of tendon and ligament injuries (see below).
Clinical Significance of Tendon and Ligament
Tissue Damage
Tendon and ligament damage caused by injury or overuse or
associated with aging and arthritis is a common clinical problem
because damaged tissues heal very slowly and rarely recover
completely.(1) Damage to the glenohumeral ligaments and the
rotator cuff tendons of the shoulder joint, which can lead to
shoulder pain and functional limitations, are highly prevalent,
with >50% of individuals older than age 60 years being
affected.(2) The success of surgical treatment is limited, as up to
50% of rotator cuff repair procedures fail.
The Achilles tendon is the most frequently ruptured tendon
in humans.(3) Injury and aging-related changes in cells and the
ECM of tendon and ligament in the knee joints, particularly the
ACL, represent major risk factors for the development of
osteoarthritis (OA).(4,5) The ACL is essential for knee kinematics,
especially in rotation, and functions as an anterior/posterior
stabilizer.(6,7) In the setting of ACL deﬁciency, the articular
cartilage as well as the menisci are more susceptible to
arthritic changes. A large number of OA patients without a
history of ligament injury have ACL deﬁciency at the time of
total knee arthroplasty,(8) and a correlation between the
Received in original form February 14, 2017; revised form June 8, 2017; accepted June 14, 2017. Accepted manuscript online June 16, 2017.
Address correspondence to: Hiroshi Asahara, MD, PhD, Department of Molecular Medicine, MEM-161, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA, and Department of Systems BioMedicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-
8510, Japan. E-mail: asahara@scripps.edu; Masafumi Inui, PhD, Laboratory of Animal Regeneration Systemology, Department of Life Science, School of
Agriculture, Meiji University, Kanagawa, 214-8571, Japan. E-mail: inui_m@meiji.ac.jp; Martin K Lotz, MD, Department of Molecular and Experimental
Medicine, MEM-161, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. E-mail: mlotz@scripps.edu
REVIEW
JBMR
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research, Vol. 32, No. 9, September 2017, pp 1773–1782
DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.3199
© 2017 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research
1773
radiologic OA grade and the histological grade of ACL
degeneration has been reported in end-stage OA.(9) In
addition, ACL rupture is more common among patients with
symptomatic knee OA than in those without. It has been
reported that fewer than half of subjects with ACL rupture
recall a knee injury, suggesting that this risk factor for knee
OA
is
underrecognized.(8)
These
ﬁndings
indicate
that
substantial changes occur in tendons and ligaments in
arthritic knees that are not related to major trauma but are
presumably caused by mediators, such as cytokines or matrix
degrading enzymes, in the arthritic joints that affect tendon
and ligament cells and the ECM.
Biology of Mature Tendon and Ligament Tissues
and Cells
Structure of mature tendon and ligament tissue
Tendon and ligament are dense, ﬁbrous connective tissues that
connect muscle and bone or bone and bone and transmit the
mechanical forces that stabilize the skeleton and allow for body
movement.(10,11) The ECM of the main part of the tendon and
ligament (Fig. 1A) consists predominantly of type I collagen(12,13)
and small amounts of other collagens, including types III, IV, V,
and VI.(14,15) The proteoglycans found in tendon and ligament
include decorin, ﬁbromodulin, biglycan, and lumican. Their main
function is to organize and lubricate collagen ﬁber bundles.(14)
Targeted disruption of these proteoglycans in mice leads to
abnormal collagen ﬁbrils in tendons.(12,13) The ECM of tendons
and ligaments is hierarchically organized in several distinct
layers (Fig. 1A).(11,16) Collagen microﬁbrils, the primary unit of
mature tendon and ligament tissues, are ﬁrst formed from
collagen I molecules, organized as triple-helix polypeptide
chains. Lateral and longitudinal stacking of microﬁbrils leads to
the assembly of ﬁbrils, which are arrayed in a parallel fashion to
form collagen ﬁbers with increasing diameter and mechanical
strength. The ﬁbers are then packed into larger units, termed
fascicles, which are bundled by endotenon, and these bundles
are wrapped by epitenon to form the complete tendon.
Endotenon and epitenon are vascularized and innervated,
Fig. 1. (A) A schematic drawing showing the hierarchal structure of tendon/ligament tissue. Tropocollagens synthesized in tenocytes covalently bind
and become collagen ﬁbrils. The arrays of the collagen ﬁbrils form collagen ﬁbers. Tenocytes reside in the gaps of the ﬁbers, connecting to one another
through cellular channels. The collagen ﬁbers are packed into fascicles that are bundled by endotenon. The fascicles are wrapped by epitenon to form
the complete tendon/ligament tissue. (B) The expression period of the transcription factors and the signal input during the tendon development.
Tenocytes are speciﬁed from mesenchymal progenitor cells by signaling cues, such as TGFb or FGF, from neighboring tissues and marked by the
expression of Scx. The expression of Egr1 and Mkx follow soon after and support the differentiation of tenocytes into embryonic tendon tissue. Although
the expression of Scx decreases after birth, the expression of Egr1 and Mkx persists throughout the postnatal maturation period and is essential for tissue
maintenance during adult life. The panels are adopted from Itoh and colleagues(38) and show in situ hybridization of Mkx that indicates the embryonic
tendon (left) and the tail tendon tissue from 10-week-old mice (right).
1774
ASAHARA ET AL.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
which is essential for tendon homeostasis and response to
injury.(11,16) The hierarchical structure of tendons and ligaments
determines their biomechanical properties. The sharp ends of
the ﬁbrils, which on microscopy appear in wavelike or crimp
patterns, provide tensile strength. The elasticity of tendons and
ligaments is due to the large amount of type I collagen.(17)
Biology of mature and progenitor tendon and ligament
cells
The principal cell types in tendon and ligament are ﬁbroblast-
like cells, termed tenocytes, or ligament ﬁbroblasts that are
located between parallel chains of collagen ﬁbrils.(14,18) Under
normal conditions, tendon and ligament cells are thought to be
quiescent and have very low rates of proliferation, whereas ECM
production is responsive to changes in the mechanical load.(19)
These upregulated genes in tendon and ligament cells include
types I, III, IV, V, and VI collagen, which are also produced during
embryogenesis to form tendon and ligament tissues. Although
these matrix genes are not speciﬁc to tendon and ligament cells,
tenomodulin (Tnmd) is speciﬁcally expressed in mature tendon
and ligament cells.(20) However, its function in tendons and
ligaments is not well characterized, and Tnmd knockout mice
appear grossly normal.(15)
The cell populations in tendon and ligament also include
small subsets of progenitor cells.(21) The deletion of biglycan and
ﬁbromodulin in mice causes the depletion of tendon progenitor
cells, suggesting that these extracellular matrix components
provide a niche environment for stem cells.(12) The identiﬁcation
of speciﬁc molecular markers for tendon progenitor cells in adult
tissues will help elucidate the contribution of this subset to
tendon homeostasis and regeneration.
Developmental Biology of Tendon and Ligament
Tissues and Cells
Developmental biology of tendon and ligament tissues
Differentiation of tenocytes is tightly regulated by a series of
growth factors and transcription factors (Fig. 1B). The develop-
mental origins of tenocytes and their interacting cells that initiate
tenocyte differentiation differ in the trunk, limbs, and craniofacial
region.(16) In the trunk, the tenocyte progenitor cells originate
from the sclerotome, which is derived from somite, and they are
condensed in a subregion called syndetome where Scx is
expressed.(22–24) The myotome, which is also derived from somite
and the source of myocytes, is essential for the induction of
tendon progenitor cells in the syndetome via FGF signals.(24–26) In
contrast, tenocytes in limbs arise from the lateral plate mesoderm
and interact with migrating myoblasts from the ventrolateral lip
of the dermomyotome.(22,27) In this process, tenocyte progenitor
cell induction does not depend on myocytes or myocyte-derived
factors.(28) At later stages, however, the absence of myoblasts
causes disruption of tenocyte survival and tendon forma-
tion.(22,25,29) In this process, TGFb and FGF signals in limb play a
critical role in tenocyte differentiation by promoting Scx
expression.(25,30) In addition, recent ﬁndings have revealed that
the tendons in autopods differ signiﬁcantly from those in
zeugopods.(31) Although the development of the tendons in
autopods depends on limb cartilage, that in zeugopods requires
limb muscles to form properly.
An essential role of TGFb for tendon progenitor cell
recruitment and maintenance during embryogenesis has been
revealed by studies in mutant mice.(25,30) Tgfb2 and Tgfb3
double mutant mice or mice with TGFBR2 inactivation show
the loss of tendons and ligaments in both the limbs and
trunk.(30) Because TGFb and FGF are also involved in muscle
and cartilage development,(32) the speciﬁcity of these
effects
for
tenogenic
differentiation
remains
unclear;
however, the focal and interactive effects of these multiple
growth factor signals are integrated to promote proper
tendon development.(16) This notion is supported by the
ﬁndings of a transcriptome analysis of limb tendons, which
revealed that the expression of TGFb and FGF signaling
related genes
was
highly upregulated during
tendon
differentiation and maturation.(33)
Improvements
in
serial
block
face-scanning
electron
microscopy technology have shed new light on how the tendon
anlage, which mainly consists of progenitor cells but less ECM,
evolves into a mature tendon structure where tenocytes are
embedded in collagen ﬁbers. Kalson and colleagues stated that
tendon development could be divided into two distinct stages:
During the ﬁrst stage (embryonic stage), tendon progenitors
form cellular channels that deﬁne the extracellular space where
collagen ﬁbrils are deposited. This serves as the template for the
second postnatal stage when the number of cells or collagen
bundles remains constant and tissue growth depends on the
increase in the diameter of collagen ﬁbers.(34)
Roles of transcription factors during tendon and
ligament development
Major advances in research on tendon and ligament biology
include the recent identiﬁcation of three transcription factors—
Scx, Mkx, and Egr1—as critical regulators of tendon and
ligament development and potentially homeostasis (Fig. 1B).
Scx is a helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor that is
expressed in tendon progenitors(22,23) and is required for the
development of limb tendons. Scx/ mice show severe
disruption of force-transmitting tendons.(35) Although the
induction of tendon progenitor cells is normal in Scx/ mice,
the formation of distinct tendons in the limbs, tail, or trunk is
disrupted. However, short tendons or ligaments that mainly act
as anchors of bones or muscles are not affected by the loss of
Scx, indicating an as-yet-undeﬁned difference in the formation
process of tendons and ligaments.(35) The currently known
targets of Scx-dependent transcription are Col1a1, Col1a2, Acan,
and Tnmd.(20,35–37) However, the Scx expression is strongly
downregulated after birth,(16) suggesting that Scx is essential for
early stages of tendon development but may not be as
important in the homeostasis of tendons and ligaments in
adulthood.
The phenotypes of Scx and Mkx mutant mice are different.
Although Scx/ mutants exhibit loss of segments or of
complete tendons,(35) Mkx/ mice have reduced tendon
mass without a decrease in the number of tendon cells.(38–40)
These data suggest that Scx is essential for the initiation of
tendon differentiation, whereas Mkx plays a critical role in
tendon maturation. Recently, Mkx/ rats have been generated
using the CRISPR/Cas9 system.(41) Mkx/ rats showed systemic
hypoplasia of tendons similar to Mkx/ mice, and by virtue of
their larger sizes, the physiological functions of tendon and
ligament tissues were able to be evaluated in this model animal.
A gait analysis revealed a signiﬁcant decrease in the maximum
ankle plantar ﬂexion of Mkx/ rats.(41) In addition, earlier
heterotopic
ossiﬁcation
of
the
Achilles
tendon
was
observed in Mkx/ rats,(41) which is discussed further in the
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
TENDONS AND LIGAMENTS
1775
Chondrogenic/Osteogenic Alteration of Tendon and Ligament
Cell section below.
Egr1 belongs to a family of zinc ﬁnger transcription factors
named
after
the
immediate
response
to
growth
factor
stimulation.(42) Among the four family members, Egr1 and 2
are expressed in developing tendon tissue and play essential
roles in tendon and ligament formation.(43) Mice with mutations
in either Egr1 or Egr2 showed a reduction of collagen ﬁbrils
numbers in embryonic tendons associated with a reduced
expression of tenogenic genes, whereas misexpression of these
genes led to the ectopic expression of Scx and Col1a1 in a chick
model.(43) Interestingly, although the loss of Egr1 resulted in a
reduction in both Scx and Mkx expression in embryonic tendons,
only the Scx expression and not the Mkx expression was
impaired in adult Egr1/ injured tendon.(44) These results
indicate dynamic differences in the mutual regulation of these
three transcription factors between embryonic and adult
tendon and ligament tissue. Furthermore, no mice with
knockout for these transcription factors showed complete loss
of tendon or ligament tissue, implying that some functions may
be shared among these factors or that as-yet-unknown factors
ensuring the formation of tendon/ligament tissues may exist.
Transition zones between bone and tendon or ligament
The enthesis, which directly inserts into the metaphysis or
diaphysis of long bones, is a heterogeneous composite of four
zones (tendon and ligament ECM, ﬁbrocartilage, mineralized
ﬁbrocartilage, and bone), each having unique ECM and cell
phenotypes.(45,46) This gradual change in structure is crucial to
avoid rupture between two tissues upon application of a
mechanical load. Signaling mechanisms that control the
formation of the enthesis are being discovered. During the
initiation stage of enthesis formation, Scx-dependent BMP4
expression
in
tenocytes
is
essential,(47)
and
subsequent
biomechanical stress caused by muscle contraction on this
bone ridge area promotes further development of the tendon-
bone connection.(48) In addition, hedgehog (Hh) signaling is also
indispensable for the proper maturation of enthesis tissue.
Thomopoulos and colleagues found that the Hh signal is
activated in a subpopulation of cells in the enthesis, and
inactivation of Hh signaling in Scx-expressing cells impaired
enthesis maturation.(49)
Sox9 is a master regulator of chondrocyte differentiation and
cartilage development. It starts appearing in mesenchymal
condensations at the limb buds and induces chondrocyte
progenitors by regulating cartilage-speciﬁc genes, such as
Col2a1. In limbs, this chondrogenesis status is linked to tenocyte
differentiation.(50,51) In the initiation phase, Sox9 and Scx
double-positive cells transiently appear in the mesenchyme
and then transform to Sox9 or Scx single-positive cells.(50,51) The
Sox9-Scx double-positive cells show delayed expression of the
chondrocyte marker Col2, and molecular lineage tracing studies
have shown that Sox9 and Scx double-positive cells mainly
contribute to the tendon-bone ridge area, where Sox9 and Scx
expression are speciﬁcally and exclusively restricted to chon-
drocytes and tenocytes at this stage. Loss of Sox9(50,51) and
Scx(52) impaired the formation of the bone ridge and enthesis,
indicating that both transcription factors are functionally
essential for the formation of this transitional zone. This
suggests that the balance between Sox9 and Scx regulates
cell differentiation and the formation of the tendon-bone
junction.(50,51)
Recently, Hh-activated and GDF5-positive cells were identiﬁed
as enthesis progenitors.(49,53) Whether the classiﬁcation of cell
populations based on transcription factors (Sox9/Scx) and
signaling molecules (GDF5/Hh) overlaps or represents different
subsets is unclear at present. In this regard, GDF5-positive cells
were found to be not a stable population but rather dynamically
replaced by continuous recruitment and exit during joint
formation (inﬂux model).(54) Further investigation based on these
ﬁndings will provide a more comprehensive understanding of
enthesis development.
Transition zones between muscle and tendon
The transition zone between tendon and muscle is called the
myotendinous junction (MTJ), a layer of ECMs including laminin,
types I and IV collagen, and thrombospondins.(55) Cells in these
areas interact with the ECM via transmembrane proteins, such as
integrins and utrophin, that mediate intracellular signaling via
dystrophin complex, talin/vinculin, or integrin-linked kinase.(56)
Structurally, the MTJ forms a ﬁnger-like process between muscle
sarcolemma and tendon collagen ﬁbers to increase the
attachment interface and provide resistance to the mechanical
force. In mammalian MTJ, the ultrastructure of the ﬁnger-like
process and its postnatal maturation is well described(57) (Fig. 2),
but the corresponding molecular and cellular mechanisms are
less
well
understood.
Other
model
organisms,
such
as
Drosophila and zebraﬁsh, provide insight into this process. In
zebraﬁsh myosepta, secretion and accumulation of ECM
between
muscle
segments
occur
ﬁrst,
followed
by
the
recruitment of tenocytes and further maturation of ECM
structure and binding with the muscle cells.(58) Myosepta can
be considered an analog of the mammalian MTJ. Most ECM
components are common, and thus molecular mechanisms can
also be conserved.(58) For example, the functional importance of
Col22a1 or thrombospondin4, ECM components found in
mammalian MTJ, has also been proven in the zebraﬁsh model
system.(59,60) The craniofacial tendon of zebraﬁsh can also serve
as a model for mammalian long tendons.(61) In addition to tissue
formation, the mechanisms underlying the correct positioning
and orientation of tendons and muscles, which derive from
distinct progenitors, remain unclear in vertebrates.(16) In
Drosophila, an elaborate guiding system employing secreted
Slit protein and Robo receptors governs muscle-tendon
attachment.(16) Slit ligand secreted from tendon cells is cleaved
by the Robo2 receptor and oligomerized/stabilized on the
tendon cell membrane, providing a repulsion/halt signal to
muscle cells through Robo1/3 receptors.(62)
Mechanobiology of tendon and ligament cells
Tenocytes respond to mechanical strain by increasing collagen
production,(19) and mechanical signals promote MSC differenti-
ation into tenocytes.(63) Mechanical stimulation also promotes
collagen ﬁber thickening along with increased ﬁber density.(64)
The three major tendon/ligament transcription factors (Scx,
Mkx, and Egr1) are also responsive to mechanical stimulation.(65)
Scx expression was promoted in bioartiﬁcial tendons composed
of mouse mesenchymal stem cells after stretching in vitro and in
the epitenon cells of mouse Achilles tendon after treadmill
running in vivo.(66) Mechanical force and misexpression of Scx
synergistically promoted the differentiation of human MSCs to
tenocytes.(67) Egr1/2 was also increased after short treadmill
exercise in rats,(68) and the forced expression of Egr1 rescued
1776
ASAHARA ET AL.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
tendon gene downregulation during tendon healing under
conditions of a reduced mechanical load.(69)
Mkx is also responsive to mechanical stimulation both in vitro
and in vivo. In moderate treadmill exercise, the effects of
mechanical loading on collagen ﬁber thickening are not
observed in Mkx-deﬁcient mice, suggesting that Mkx is critical
in the response to mechanical stimuli.(64) Interestingly, general
transcription factor II-I repeat domain-containing protein 1
(Gtf2ird1) was found to play an important role in translating
mechanical stress to Mkx expression.(64) Gtf2ird1 is localized in
the cytoplasm of unstressed tenocytes and translocated into the
nucleus upon mechanical stretching to activate the Mkx
expression, thereby acting as a mechano-sensor.(64) GTF2IRD1
is 1 of 28 genes located in the Williams syndrome critical
region,(70) implying that this syndrome may be caused in part by
dysfunction in this new mechano-signal cascade.
Pathogenesis of Tendon and Ligament Tissues
and Cells
Aging and arthritis-associated changes in tendon and
ligament tissues and cells
Histological abnormalities in ACL are highly prevalent in OA-
affected knees and include cystic changes, the disorientation of
collagen ﬁbers, and mucoid degeneration(9) (Fig. 3). ACL
degeneration can be initiated before or progress more rapidly
than cartilage degeneration, at least in a subpopulation of
individuals.(71)
The earliest and most prevalent age-related change in the ACL
extracellular matrix is the disorganization of collagen ﬁbers,
which can be found in ACL from young donors without cartilage
degeneration or inﬂammation.(71) An aging-related decrease in
the diameter of the collagen ﬁbrils and a corresponding increase
in the concentration of small ﬁbrils have also been described for
the human ACL.(72)
The Mkx expression is maintained in murine and human
mature tendon and ligament cells, and its expression is reduced
in ACL cells from OA-affected joints.(73) Indeed, Mkx knockdown
in the ACL cells or annulus ﬁbrosus cell, ligament-like cells in the
intervertebral disc [IVD], resulted in decreased tendon ECM gene
expression(73,74) (Fig. 3). These ﬁndings suggest the potential
role of Mkx in maintaining the tendon and ligament cell
functions in adult tissues.
Chondrogenic/osteogenic alteration of tendon and
ligament cells
The alteration of cell phenotypes is a main feature of injured or
degraded tendons and ligaments (Fig. 4). Chondroid metaplasia
is a well-known feature of degenerated ACL.(9) In this regard, Mkx
mutant rats showed early heterotopic ossiﬁcation in the Achilles
tendon with elevated osteogenic and chondrogenic gene
expressions.(41) An analysis of tendon-derived cells revealed
Fig. 2. The transition zones between tendon and muscle (MTJ) and tendon and bone (enthesis). Top panel: a schematic drawing of the muscle-tendon-
bone unit. Muscle, tendon, and bone are depicted in red, yellow, and gray, respectively. Bottom panel, left: MTJ. Muscle and tendon are illustrated on the
left and right, respectively. Muscle sarcomeres are depicted as black horizontal lines, with vertical bars indicating Z lines. Collagen ﬁbers are indicated as
yellow lines, with tenocytes (orange cells) embedded. MTJ is the ECM layer with ﬁnger-like protrusions to increase the surface area between the muscle
and tendon and is shown as a blue line. Bottom panel, right: enthesis. Tendon and bone are illustrated on the left and right, respectively. The ECM
contents and deposited minerals change gradually within the enthesis, resulting in the continuous shift of tissue elasticity and stiffness.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
TENDONS AND LIGAMENTS
1777
that Mkx deﬁciency accelerated chondrogenic and osteogenic
differentiation, whereas Mkx overexpression suppressed chon-
drogenic, osteogenic, and adipogenic differentiation(41) (Fig. 4).
Under chondrogenic differentiation conditions, the stem/
progenitor cells (TSPCs) from Mkx mutant rat tendon tissues(12)
showed enhanced osteogenic and chondrogenic differentia-
tion, and Mkx overexpression rescued this phenotype.(41) These
data suggest that Mkx has a dual function: maintain the
production of tendon/ligament ECM components but also
prevent the trans-differentiation of tendon/ligament cells to
related lineage cells by inhibiting chondrogenic genes, includ-
ing Sox9, and chondrogenesis. In support of this notion, a
chromatin immunoprecipitation-seq analysis with rat primary
tendon cells revealed that both tenogenic-related genes, such as
Col1a1 and Col3a1, and chondrogenic differentiation-related
genes, such as Sox5, Sox6, and Sox9, could be targets of Mkx.(41)
Inflammatory signals in tendon and ligament cells
Biochemical mediators, such as cytokines and growth and
differentiation factors, that are part of the abnormal synovial
ﬂuid composition in arthritic joints may also lead to alterations in
the ligament cell phenotype. For example, IL-33 expression at
the onset of tendinopathy leads to early tissue remodeling
through type 1 to 3 collagen transition. Interestingly, IL-33
negatively regulates the expression of microRNA29a, which
targets the IL-33 receptor mST2 and Col3a1.(75) Other studies
have also addressed the role of inﬂammatory cytokines in
tendon/ligament cell homeostasis and regeneration,(76) mainly
with regard to stimulating the production of inﬂammatory
mediators and ECM-degrading enzymes.
IL-1b is a main OA-related inﬂammatory cytokine and inhibits
the expression of Mkx as well as the expression of critical
tendon/ligament-speciﬁc genes in cultured ligament cells. As
described above, the expression of Mkx is reduced in human ACL
from aged and OA-affected knees. One potential mechanism
behind
the
suppression
of
Mkx
is
the
involvement
of
inﬂammatory cytokines, such as IL-1.(73) Thus, the loss of Mkx,
driven by proinﬂammatory cytokines such as IL-1b, can lead to
the abnormal chondrocyte-like differentiation of ligament cells
and a reduced production of ECM with deﬁcient biomechanical
properties.
Pathogenic mechanical stress in tendon and ligament
cells
Under ideal conditions, mechanical loading has a positive
effect on gene expression and subsequent tendon and
Fig. 3. Mkx is relevant for both the differentiation and the identity of tenocytes. Left: During embryonic development, mesenchymal progenitor cells
acquire a tendon/ligament or chondrocyte cell fate, depending on lineage-speciﬁc transcription factors, such as Mkx or Sox9. In the adult tissue, the
tendon/ligament cells continue to express Mkx, which is indispensable for the maintenance of their cellular identity, in part through the repression of
Sox9 transcription. Right: When Mkx is genetically deleted or decreased by aging/OA, the SOX9 expression increases in tendon/ligament cells and these
cells transform into chondrocyte-like cells.
1778
ASAHARA ET AL.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
ligament tissue homeostasis. Tendon and ligament cells are
highly sensitive to mechanical stimuli, and excess mechanical
stimulation results in damaging the tendon and ligament
tissues with a reduction in the tendon-related gene expres-
sions. Indeed, extreme stretching and intense exercise have
been reported to increase osteogenic and chondrogenic
marker expression in tendons.(66,77)
Although mild stretching of tenocytes in vitro increases the
expression of Mkx and tendon-associated genes, such as Col1a1
and Col3a1, the same mechanical stretching stimulation of Mkx-/-
tendon-derived cells leads to chondrogenic differentiation with
increased expression of chondrogenic markers, such as Sox6,
Sox9, and Acan.(41)
The type of mechanical loading also affects the stiffness of
tendons; stochastic strains are more likely to cause micro-
damage and decreased stiffness than cyclic strains.(78) The
mechanical loading factors, including amplitude, frequency,
duration, and period, are coordinately orchestrated for tendon
homeostasis, and an imbalance in these mechanical signals
leads to tendon and ligament tissue damage, partially via
tendon and ligament cell catabolic gene and the Mkx
transcription factor network.
Tendon and Ligament Tissue Engineering
Although tendon tissue has a regenerative capacity after injury
at the neonatal stage, its potential to restore functional tissue
is very limited in adults.(79) Recent ﬁndings in tendon and
ligament biology as summarized above have provided new
opportunities to develop solid tissue engineering approaches
to treating ligaments and tendons in adult (Fig. 5). Bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) transplantation can
promote tendon injury repair.(80,81) To stabilize the trans-
planted MSCs and accelerate tissue regeneration, collagen
scaffolds are successfully utilized both in tendon(80) and
ligament(82) injury models.
Fig. 4. (A) Osteoarthritis (OA)-associated changes in the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL). Histological images of ACL from human knee joints illustrating
changes in the collagen ﬁber orientation and chondroid metaplasia, the two most frequent changes. Chondroid metaplasia represents a shift in the
ligament cell phenotype toward a more chondrocytic cell morphology. In normal ACL, only fusiform (white arrow) and ovoid cells (white arrow head) are
observed. In mild cases, only a few spheroid cells are found. In moderate cases, spheroid cells are dominantly observed. In severe cases, only spheroid
cells (black arrow) and pseudo-cloning (black arrow head) that suggests chondroid metaplasia is observed and associated with mucoid degeneration.
These histological changes in the ACL correlate with the severity of changes in the articular cartilage. (B) MKX is expressed in normal ACL ligament cells.
The numbers of ligament cells expressing MKX are reduced in OA ACL. HE staining (A, C) and MKX immunohistochemistry (B, D) (modiﬁed from Nakahara
and colleagues(73)).
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
TENDONS AND LIGAMENTS
1779
To acquire more efﬁcient regeneration of tendon and
ligament tissues, pretreatment of MSCs with growth factors
such as GDF5 and GDF7 (also known as BMP12) has been used to
enhance the tenogenic differentiation of MSCs.(80,83–85)
The introduction of key transcription factors into MSCs is
another promising strategy. MSCs with forced expression of Mkx
gain tendon and ligament cell shape and gene expression
proﬁles and become resistant to the differentiation cues for the
other cell types.(74,86,87) When Mkx-overexpressing MSCs were
transplanted into injured IVDs in vivo, transplanted cells formed
collagen ﬁbrils with a similar diameter to the endogenous
annulus ﬁbrosus (AF) cells, the ligament-like cells in IVDs, and
restored tissues were then protected against the mechanical
stress to a similar degree as native tissue.(74) These in vitro and in
vivo ﬁndings indicate the potential utility of Mkx in cell-based
tendon and ligament tissue repair and engineering.
Egr1 also plays an important role in tendon and ligament
differentiation(37) and in tendon gene expression.(44) Further-
more, Egr1-expressing mesenchymal stem cells regenerated
tendon tissue in a rat tendon injury model more efﬁciently than
control mesenchymal stem cells.(44) Scx, which had been
considered to be more involved in the embryonic period than
in later periods, also promoted more efﬁcient tendon repair by
TDSCs.(88)
Mkx, Scx, and Egr1 may promote tendon/ligament cell
differentiation of MSC not only by promoting tendon- and
ligament-speciﬁc gene expression proﬁles but also by changing
cellular responsiveness to other signaling cues. Egr1 may
therefore contribute to Tgfb2 and Scx but not Mkx expres-
sion.(44) Mkx-expressing MSCs showed increased responsiveness
for TGFb signaling and reduced responsiveness for BMP
signaling, which promotes chondrogenic or osteogenic pro-
grams.(74) The more optimized utilization of hierarchically or
temporally controlled combinations of growth factors and
transcription factors may substantially improve the tendon and
ligament regeneration.
Conclusions and Future Directions
Recent advances in research on the biology of tendon and
ligament cells, especially the identiﬁcation and functional
analyses of tissue-speciﬁc transcription factors, have shown
novelmechanismsthatcontroltheirdifferentiationandactivation
(Fig. 5). However, important questions remain to be answered,
such as how the hierarchal structure of tendon and ligament
tissue is formed by tenocytes and how the precise and robust
tissue integration occurs betweentendon andligamentand bone
or muscle. Emerging approaches such as mechano-transduction
or knockout rat models should also provide new insight in the
near future. Although the myogenesis molecular program has
been clariﬁed by genome-wide analysesof DNA methylation with
DNMT3A conditional knockout mice,(89) further analyses of the
tendon and ligament cell differentiation at the epigenetic level
will be needed to establish a basis for tendon physiology and
tissue engineering.(89,90) Progress in research on tendon and
ligament biology will also shed light on its future therapeutic
applications to musculoskeletal injuries and diseases. For
example, correcting abnormal Mkx expression may be a useful
new approach to addressing tissue repair after injury and during
chronic processes, such as OA. Pharmacological approaches to
correcting abnormal differentiation through the inhibition of
inﬂammatory signals or enhancement of differentiation cues can
also be applied, such as using Mkx expression as a parameter
when screening for drug candidates. Further studies will be
necessary, both in basic tendon and ligament biology as well as
animal models of injury and disease, to achieve effective
approaches for the treatment of tendon and ligament pathology.
Disclosures
The authors have no conﬂicts of interest directly relevant to the
content of this article.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the NIH AR050631 (HA),
AR065379 (HA), AG007996 (MKL) and CREST funding from AMED
(HA), JSPS KAKENHI (grant no. 26113008, 15H02560, 15K15544)
(HA).
Authors’ roles: HA, MI, and MKL wrote the article.
References
1. Sharma P, Maffulli N. Biology of tendon injury: healing, modeling
and remodeling. J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact. 2006;6(2):
181–90.
Fig. 5. A summary of the tendon/ligament biology discussed in this
review. The expressions of Scx, Mkx, and Egr1 are induced by signaling
cues, such as TGFb or FGFs (see also Fig. 1), and promoted by mechanical
cues. These transcription factors activate the transcription of tendon
structural elements, such as collagens and SLRPs, which are indispens-
able for proper tendon and ligament tissue formation during embryonic
development as well as tissue regeneration. They also play major roles in
the maintenance of the tendon and ligament cell identity during aging
or pathogenic processes (see also Fig. 3), partly by repressing the factors,
which promote other cell fates (see also Fig. 4).
1780
ASAHARA ET AL.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
2. Yamaguchi K, Ditsios K, Middleton WD, Hildebolt CF, Galatz LM,
Teefey SA. The demographic and morphological features of rotator
cuff disease. A comparison of asymptomatic and symptomatic
shoulders. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2006;88(8):1699–704.
3. Longo UG, Ronga M, Maffulli N. Acute ruptures of the achilles
tendon. Sports Med Arthrosc. 2009;17(2):127–38.
4. Nelson F, Billinghurst RC, Pidoux I, et al. Early post-traumatic
osteoarthritis-like changes in human articular cartilage following
rupture of the anterior cruciate ligament. Osteoarthritis Cartilage.
2006;14(2):114–9.
5. Fleming BC, Hulstyn MJ, Oksendahl HL, Fadale PD. Ligament injury,
reconstruction and osteoarthritis. Curr Opin Orthop. 2005;16(5):
354–62.
6. Fleming BC. Biomechanics of the anterior cruciate ligament.
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2003;33(8):A13–5.
7. Woo SL, Livesay GA, Engle C. Biomechanics of the human anterior
cruciate ligament. Muscle stabilization and ACL reconstruction.
Orthop Rev. 1992;21(8):935–41.
8. Hill CL, Seo GS, Gale D, Totterman S, Gale ME, Felson DT. Cruciate
ligament integrity in osteoarthritis of the knee. Arthritis Rheum.
2005;52(3):794–9.
9. Mullaji AB, Marawar SV, Simha M, Jindal G. Cruciate ligaments in
arthritic knees: a histologic study with radiologic correlation.
J Arthroplasty. 2008;23(4):567–72.
10. Birk DE, Trelstad RL. Extracellular compartments in tendon
morphogenesis:
collagen
ﬁbril,
bundle,
and
macroaggregate
formation. J Cell Biol. 1986;103(1):231–40.
11. Connizzo BK, Yannascoli SM, Soslowsky LJ. Structure-function
relationships of postnatal tendon development: a parallel to
healing. Matrix Biol. 2013;32(2):106–16.
12. Bi Y, Ehirchiou D, Kilts TM, et al. Identiﬁcation of tendon stem/
progenitor cells and the role of the extracellular matrix in their niche.
Nat Med. 2007;13(10):1219–27.
13. Jepsen KJ, Wu F, Peragallo JH, et al. A syndrome of joint laxity and
impaired tendon integrity in lumican- and ﬁbromodulin-deﬁcient
mice. J Biol Chem. 2002;277(38):35532–40.
14. Kannus P. Structure of the tendon connective tissue. Scand J Med Sci
Sports. 2000;10(6):312–20.
15. Docheva D, Hunziker EB, Fassler R, Brandau O. Tenomodulin is
necessary for tenocyte proliferation and tendon maturation. Mol
Cell Biol. 2005;25(2):699–705.
16. Schweitzer R, Zelzer E, Volk T. Connecting muscles to tendons:
tendons and musculoskeletal development in ﬂies and vertebrates.
Development. 2010;137(17):2807–17.
17. Thompson MS. Tendon mechanobiology: experimental models
require mathematical underpinning. Bull Math Biol. 2013;75(8):
1238–54.
18. Kjaer M. Role of extracellular matrix in adaptation of tendon and
skeletal
muscle
to
mechanical
loading.
Physiol
Rev.
2004;84(2):649–98.
19. Yang G, Crawford RC, Wang JH. Proliferation and collagen
production of human patellar tendon ﬁbroblasts in response to
cyclic uniaxial stretching in serum-free conditions. J Biomech.
2004;37(10):1543–50.
20. Shukunami C, Takimoto A, Oro M, Hiraki Y. Scleraxis positively
regulates the expression of tenomodulin, a differentiation marker of
tenocytes. Dev Biol. 2006;298(1):234–47.
21. Steinert AF, Kunz M, Prager P, et al. Mesenchymal stem cell
characteristics of human anterior cruciate ligament outgrowth cells.
Tissue Eng Part A. 2011;17(9–10):1375–88.
22. Schweitzer R, Chyung JH, Murtaugh LC, et al. Analysis of the tendon
cell fate using Scleraxis, a speciﬁc marker for tendons and ligaments.
Development. 2001;128(19):3855–66.
23. Brent AE, Schweitzer R, Tabin CJ. A somitic compartment of tendon
progenitors. Cell. 2003;113(2):235–48.
24. Brent AE, Tabin CJ. FGF acts directly on the somitic tendon
progenitors through the Ets transcription factors Pea3 and Erm to
regulate
scleraxis
expression.
Development.
2004;131(16):
3885–96.
25. Eloy-Trinquet S, Wang H, Edom-Vovard F, Duprez D. Fgf signaling
components are associated with muscles and tendons during limb
development. Dev Dyn. 2009;238(5):1195–206.
26. Brent AE, Braun T, Tabin CJ. Genetic analysis of interactions between
the somitic muscle, cartilage and tendon cell lineages during mouse
development. Development. 2005;132(3):515–28.
27. Tozer S, Duprez D. Tendon and ligament: development, repair and
disease. Birth Defects Res C, Embryo Today. 2005;75(3):226–36.
28. Edom-Vovard F, Duprez D. Signals regulating tendon formation
during chick embryonic development. Dev Dyn. 2004;229(3):
449–57.
29. Edom-Vovard F, Schuler B, Bonnin MA, Teillet MA, Duprez D. Fgf4
positively regulates scleraxis and tenascin expression in chick limb
tendons. Dev Biol. 2002;247(2):351–66.
30. Pryce BA, Watson SS, Murchison ND, Staverosky JA, Dunker N,
Schweitzer R. Recruitment and maintenance of tendon progenitors
by TGFbeta signaling are essential for tendon formation. Develop-
ment. 2009;136(8):1351–61.
31. Huang AH, Riordan TJ, Pryce B, et al. Musculoskeletal integration at
the wrist underlies the modular development of limb tendons.
Development. 2015;142(14):2431–41.
32. Kawakami Y, Rodriguez-Leon J, Izpisua Belmonte JC. The role of
TGFbetas and Sox9 during limb chondrogenesis. Curr Opin Cell Biol.
2006;18(6):723–9.
33. Havis E, Bonnin MA, Olivera-Martinez I, et al. Transcriptomic analysis
of mouse limb tendon cells during development. Development.
2014;141(19):3683–96.
34. Kalson NS, Lu Y, Taylor SH, Starborg T, Holmes DF, Kadler KE.
A structure-based extracellular matrix expansion mechanism of
ﬁbrous tissue growth. eLife. 2015;4:e05958.
35. Murchison ND, Price BA, Conner DA, et al. Regulation of tendon
differentiation by scleraxis distinguishes force-transmitting tendons
from
muscle-anchoring
tendons.
Development.
2007;134(14):
2697–708.
36. Cserjesi P, Brown D, Ligon KL, et al. Scleraxis: a basic helix-loop-helix
protein that preﬁgures skeletal formation during mouse embryo-
genesis. Development. 1995;121(4):1099–110.
37. Lejard V, Brideau G, Blais F, et al. Scleraxis and NFATc regulate the
expression of the pro-alpha1(I) collagen gene in tendon ﬁbroblasts.
J Biol Chem. 2007;282(24):17665–75.
38. Ito Y, Toriuchi N, Yoshitaka T, et al. The Mohawk homeobox gene is a
critical regulator of tendon differentiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2010;107(23):10538–42.
39. Liu W, Watson SS, Lan Y, et al. The atypical homeodomain
transcription factor Mohawk controls tendon morphogenesis. Mol
Cell Biol. 2010;30(20):4797–807.
40. Onizuka N, Ito Y, Inagawa M, et al. The Mohawk homeobox
transcription factor regulates the differentiation of tendons and
volar plates. J Orthop Sci. 2014;19(1):172–80.
41. Suzuki H, Ito Y, Shinohara M, et al. Gene targeting of the transcription
factor Mohawk in rats causes heterotopic ossiﬁcation of Achilles
tendon via failed tenogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2016;113(28):7840–5.
42. Sheng M, Greenberg ME. The regulation and function of c-fos and
other immediate early genes in the nervous system. Neuron.
1990;4(4):477–85.
43. Lejard V, Blais F, Guerquin MJ, et al. EGR1 and EGR2 involvement in
vertebrate tendon differentiation. J Biol Chem. 2011;286(7):5855–67.
44. Guerquin MJ, Charvet B, Nourissat G, et al. Transcription factor EGR1
directs tendon differentiation and promotes tendon repair. J Clin
Invest. 2013;123(8):3564–76.
45. Cooper RR, Misol S. Tendon and ligament insertion. A light and
electron microscopic study. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1970;52(1):1–20.
46. Lu HH, Thomopoulos S. Functional attachment of soft tissues to
bone: development, healing, and tissue engineering. Ann Rev
Biomed Eng. 2013;15:201–26.
47. Blitz E, Viukov S, Sharir A, et al. Bone ridge patterning during
musculoskeletal assembly is mediated through SCX regulation of
Bmp4 at the tendon-skeleton junction. Dev Cell. 2009;17(6):861–73.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
TENDONS AND LIGAMENTS
1781
48. ThomopoulosS,KimHM,RothermichSY,BiederstadtC,DasR,GalatzLM.
Decreased muscle loading delays maturation of the tendon enthesis
during postnatal development. J Orthop Res. 2007;25(9):1154–63.
49. Schwartz AG, Long F, Thomopoulos S. Enthesis ﬁbrocartilage cells
originate from a population of Hedgehog-responsive cellsmodulated
by the loading environment. Development. 2015;142(1):196–206.
50. Sugimoto Y, Takimoto A, Akiyama H, et al. Scxþ/Sox9þ progenitors
contribute to the establishment of the junction between cartilage
and tendon/ligament. Development. 2013;140(11):2280–8.
51. Blitz E, Sharir A, Akiyama H, Zelzer E. Tendon-bone attachment unit is
formed modularly by a distinct pool of Scx- and Sox9-positive
progenitors. Development. 2013;140(13):2680–90.
52. Killian ML, Thomopoulos S. Scleraxis is required for the development
of a functional tendon enthesis. FASEB J. 2016;30(1):301–11.
53. Dyment NA, Breidenbach AP, Schwartz AG, et al. Gdf5 progenitors
give rise to ﬁbrocartilage cells that mineralize via hedgehog
signaling to form the zonal enthesis. Dev Biol. 2015;405(1):96–107.
54. Shwartz Y, Viukov S, Krief S, Zelzer E. Joint development involves a
continuous inﬂux of Gdf5-positive cells. Cell Rep. 2016;15(12):2577–87.
55. Subramanian A, Schilling TF. Tendon development and musculo-
skeletal assembly: emerging roles for the extracellular matrix.
Development. 2015;142(24):4191–204.
56. Charvet B, Ruggiero F, Le Guellec D. The development of the
myotendinous junction. A review. Muscles Ligaments Tendons J.
2012;2(2):53–63.
57. Kostrominova TY, Calve S, Arruda EM, Larkin LM. Ultrastructure of
myotendinous junctions in tendon-skeletal muscle constructs
engineered in vitro. Histol Histopathol. 2009;24(5):541–50.
58. Charvet B, Malbouyres M, Pagnon-Minot A, Ruggiero F, Le Guellec D.
Development of the zebraﬁsh myoseptum with emphasis on the
myotendinous junction. Cell Tissue Res. 2011;346(3):439–49.
59. Charvet B, Guiraud A, Malbouyres M, et al. Knockdown of col22a1
gene in zebraﬁsh induces a muscular dystrophy by disruption of the
myotendinous junction. Development. 2013;140(22):4602–13.
60. Subramanian A, Schilling TF. Thrombospondin-4 controls matrix
assembly
during
development
and
repair
of
myotendinous
junctions. eLife. 2014;3:e02372.
61. Chen JW, Galloway JL. The development of zebraﬁsh tendon and
ligament progenitors. Development. 2014;141(10):2035–45.
62. Ordan E, Volk T. A non-signaling role of Robo2 in tendons is essential
for Slit processing and muscle patterning. Development. 2015;
142(20):3512–8.
63. Zhang L, Kahn CJ, Chen HQ, Tran N, Wang X. Effect of uniaxial
stretching on rat bone mesenchymal stem cell: orientation and
expressions of collagen types I and III and tenascin-C. Cell Biol Int.
2008;32(3):344–52.
64. Kayama T, Mori M, Ito Y, et al. Gtf2ird1-dependent mohawk
expression regulates mechanosensing properties of the tendon. Mol
Cell Biol. 2016;36(8):1297–309.
65. Scott A, Sampaio A, Abraham T, Duronio C, Underhill TM. Scleraxis
expression is coordinately regulated in a murine model of patellar
tendon injury. J Orthop Res. 2011;29(2):289–96.
66. Mendias CL, Gumucio JP, Bakhurin KI, Lynch EB, Brooks SV.
Physiological loading of tendons induces scleraxis expression in
epitenon ﬁbroblasts. J Orthop Res. 2012;30(4):606–12.
67. Chen X, Yin Z, Chen JL, et al. Force and scleraxis synergistically
promote the commitment of human ES cells derived MSCs to
tenocytes. Sci Rep. 2012;2:977.
68. Reumann MK, Strachna O, Yagerman S, et al. Loss of transcription
factor early growth response gene 1 results in impaired endochon-
dral bone repair. Bone. 2011;49(4):743–52.
69. Gaut L, Robert N, Delalande A, Bonnin MA, Pichon C, Duprez D. EGR1
regulates transcription downstream of mechanical signals during
tendon formation and healing. PLoS One. 2016;11(11):e0166237.
70. Pober BR. Williams-Beuren syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(3):
239–52.
71. Hasegawa A, Otsuki S, Pauli C, et al. Anterior cruciate ligament
changes in the human knee joint in aging and osteoarthritis.
Arthritis Rheum. 2012;64(3):696–704.
72. Strocchi R, De Pasquale V, Facchini A, Raspanti M, Zaffagnini S,
Marcacci M. Age-related changes in human anterior cruciate
ligament (ACL) collagen ﬁbrils. Ital J Anat Embryol. 1996;101(4):
213–20.
73. Nakahara H, Hasegawa A, Otabe K, et al. Transcription factor
mohawk and the pathogenesis of human anterior cruciate ligament
degradation. Arthritis Rheum. 2013;65(8):2081–9.
74. Nakamichi R, Ito Y, Inui M, et al. Mohawk promotes the maintenance
and regeneration of the outer annulus ﬁbrosus of intervertebral
discs. Nat Commun. 2016;7:12503.
75. Millar NL, Gilchrist DS, Akbar M, et al. MicroRNA29a regulates IL-33-
mediated tissue remodelling in tendon disease. Nat Commun.
2015;6:6774.
76. John T, Lodka D, Kohl B, et al. Effect of pro-inﬂammatory and
immunoregulatory cytokines on human tenocytes. J Orthop Res.
2010;28(8):1071–7.
77. Zhang J, Wang JH. The effects of mechanical loading on tendons--an
in vivo and in vitro model study. PLoS One. 2013;8:8–e71740.
78. Steiner TH, Burki A, Ferguson SJ, Gantenbein-Ritter B. Stochastic
amplitude-modulated stretching of rabbit ﬂexor digitorum profun-
dus tendons reduces stiffness compared to cyclic loading but does
not affect tenocyte metabolism. BMC Musculoskelet Disord.
2012;13:222.
79. Howell K, Chien C, Bell R, et al. Novel model of tendon regeneration
reveals distinct cell mechanisms underlying regenerative and
ﬁbrotic tendon healing. Sci Rep. 2017;7:45238.
80. Lee JY, Zhou Z, Taub PJ, et al. BMP-12 treatment of adult
mesenchymal stem cells in vitro augments tendon-like tissue
formation and defect repair in vivo. PLoS One. 2011;6(3):e17531.
81. Chong AK, Ang AD, Goh JC, et al. Bone marrow-derived mesenchy-
mal stem cells inﬂuence early tendon-healing in a rabbit achilles
tendon model. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2007;89(1):74–81.
82. Vavken P, Fleming BC, Mastrangelo AN, Machan JT, Murray MM.
Biomechanical outcomes after bioenhanced anterior cruciate
ligament repair and anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction are
equal in a porcine model. Arthroscopy. 2012;28(5):672–80.
83. Wolfman NM, Hattersley G, Cox K, et al. Ectopic induction of tendon
and ligament in rats by growth and differentiation factors 5, 6, and 7,
members of the TGF-beta gene family. J Clin Invest. 1997;100(2):
321–30.
84. Wang QW, Chen ZL, Piao YJ. Mesenchymal stem cells differentiate
into tenocytes by bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) 12 gene
transfer. J Biosci Bioeng. 2005;100(4):418–22.
85. Haddad-Weber M, Prager P, Kunz M, et al. BMP12 and BMP13 gene
transfer induce ligamentogenic differentiation in mesenchymal
progenitor and anterior cruciate ligament cells. Cytotherapy.
2010;12(4):505–13.
86. Otabe K, Nakahara H, Hasegawa A, et al. Transcription factor Mohawk
controls tenogenic differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal
stem cells in vitro and in vivo. J Orthop Res. 2015;33(1):1–8.
87. Liu H, Zhang C, Zhu S, et al. Mohawk promotes the tenogenesis of
mesenchymal stem cells through activation of the TGFbeta
signaling pathway. Stem Cells. 2015;33(2):443–55.
88. Tan C, Lui PP, Lee YW, Wong YM. Scx-transduced tendon-derived
stem cells (tdscs) promoted better tendon repair compared to mock-
transduced cells in a rat patellar tendon window injury model. PLoS
One. 2014;9(5):e97453.
89. Naito M, Mori M, Inagawa M, et al. Dnmt3a regulates proliferation of
muscle satellite cells via p57Kip2. PLoS Genet. 2016;12(7):e1006167.
90. Miyata K, Miyata T, Nakabayashi K, et al. DNA methylation analysis of
human myoblasts during in vitro myogenic differentiation: de novo
methylation of promoters of muscle-related genes and its involvement
in transcriptional down-regulation. Hum Mol Genet. 2015;24(2):
410–23.
1782
ASAHARA ET AL.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research

===== Jiang2021_FrontCardiovascMed_VascularCalcification+Osteoclast =====

REVIEW
published: 23 April 2021
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.639740
Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine | www.frontiersin.org
1
April 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 639740
Edited by:
Hiroshi Iwata,
Juntendo University, Japan
Reviewed by:
Joshua D. Hutcheson,
Florida International University,
United States
Daiju Fukuda,
Tokushima University, Japan
*Correspondence:
Xiao Qin
dr_qinxiao@hotmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Atherosclerosis and Vascular
Medicine,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine
Received: 09 December 2020
Accepted: 24 March 2021
Published: 23 April 2021
Citation:
Jiang W, Zhang Z, Li Y, Chen C,
Yang H, Lin Q, Hu M and Qin X (2021)
The Cell Origin and Role of
Osteoclastogenesis and
Osteoblastogenesis in Vascular
Calciﬁcation.
Front. Cardiovasc. Med. 8:639740.
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.639740
The Cell Origin and Role of
Osteoclastogenesis and
Osteoblastogenesis in Vascular
Calciﬁcation
Wenhong Jiang, Zhanman Zhang, Yaodong Li, Chuanzhen Chen, Han Yang, Qiuning Lin,
Ming Hu and Xiao Qin*
Department of Vascular Surgery, The First Afﬁliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, China
Arterial calciﬁcation refers to the abnormal deposition of calcium salts in the arterial wall,
which results in vessel lumen stenosis and vascular remodeling. Studies increasingly
show that arterial calciﬁcation is a cell mediated, reversible and active regulated process
similar to physiological bone mineralization. The osteoblasts and chondrocytes-like
cells are present in large numbers in the calciﬁed lesions, and express osteogenic
transcription factor and bone matrix proteins that are known to initiate and promote
arterial calciﬁcation. In addition, osteoclast-like cells have also been detected in calciﬁed
arterial walls wherein they possibly inhibit vascular calciﬁcation, similar to the catabolic
process of bone mineral resorption. Therefore, tilting the balance between osteoblast-
like and osteoclast-like cells to the latter maybe a promising therapeutic strategy against
vascular calciﬁcation. In this review, we have summarized the current ﬁndings on the
origin and functions of osteoblast-like and osteoclast-like cells in the development and
progression of vascular progression, and explored novel therapeutic possibilities.
Keywords: vascular calciﬁcation, osteoblast-like cells, osteoclast-like cells, origin, reversibe, cell therapy
INTRODUCTION
Vascular calciﬁcation, or the pathological accumulation of calcium phosphate crystals in the
intimal and medial layers of vessel walls, is the pathological basis of many cardiovascular diseases
(1, 2). It decreases blood vessel compliance and leads to lumen stenosis, eventually aggravating
the cardiovascular symptoms. More than 60% of the middle-aged and elderly individuals in the
40–75 years age group, and more than 70% of patients undergoing chronic dialysis exhibit aortic
calciﬁcation (3, 4). Furthermore, the prevalence of vascular calciﬁcation reaches as high as 80%
in the patients with atherosclerosis, aged 80 and above (5). Although the mechanisms underlying
vascular calciﬁcation have been elucidated to a large extent, there is still a dearth of eﬀective
pharmacological therapies. Thus, there is an urgent need to further clarify its molecular and
cellular basis.
Vascular calciﬁcation was initially recognized as a passive and degenerative pathological process.
However, recent ﬁndings indicate a cell mediated, active and reversible process that is similar
to physiological bone mineralization (6). For instance, chondroblast-like cells, osteoblast-like
cells, and even complete lamellar bone and regenerated bone marrow have been observed in
the walls of calciﬁed arteries (7–9). Furthermore, several bone-speciﬁc transcription factors and
Jiang et al.
Osteoclastogenesis and Osteoblastogenesis in Vascular Calciﬁcation
bone
matrix
proteins
are
overexpressed
during
vascular
calciﬁcation,
and
their
inhibition
blocks
osteoblast-like
transdiﬀerentiation and calciﬁcation (10, 11). In addition,
calcium salts released from osteoporotic bones are deposited
in the vascular lesions, which further points to a crosstalk
between the osteogenic and vascular systems (12–15). Therefore,
researchers are increasingly recognizing a novel bone-vascular
axis in the pathogenesis of vascular calciﬁcation (16, 17), wherein
osteoblast-like cells play a central role. Although there are no
osteoblast-like cells in the normal arterial walls, studies show
that vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) can diﬀerentiate
into chondroblast/osteoblast-like cells in the presence of
high calcium levels (18, 19). In addition, endothelial cells,
ﬁbroblasts, pericytes, mesenchymal stem cells, and progenitor
cells can also transdiﬀerentiate into osteoblast-like cells (20–24).
Therefore, the exact origin of osteoblast-like cells in the calciﬁed
arterial walls and the subsequent phenotypic remodeling are
largely unknown.
Interestingly, vascular calciﬁcation may be reversible. For
instance, calciﬁcation scores of both coronary and carotid artery
are signiﬁcantly declined in several patients with end-stage renal
disease after they undergo subtotal parathyroidectomy (25).
Additionally, aortic calciﬁcation induced in uremic rats with
calcitriol and high phosphorus diet can be partially resolved
when reducing phosphorus intake or using calcimimetics or
phosphate binders, which may be involved in increase of
mineral phagocytes and urinary calcium excretion (26–29).
Rat medial elastocalcinosis that is induced by warfarin-rich
diet feeding would also be inhibited when they are feeding
with vitamin K-rich diet, with content in the aorta decreased
by 50% (30). Interesting, aortic mineral loss of rat with
medial elastocalcinosis is associated with activation of carbonic
anhydrase IV that plays an important role in bone resorption,
suggesting vascular mineral loss has a similar mechanism with
bone resorption (31). Medial artery calciﬁcation is induced
with calcitriol. It will regress rapidly, displaying a 75% decline
of aortic calcium and phosphorus in 9 weeks. Furthermore,
the reversibility of calcitriol induced vascular calciﬁcation may
be mediated by macrophages (32). Apart from these, the
phenotype of osteoblast-like VSMCs can be also reversed. It
is reported that the initial deposition of hydroxyapatite-like
mineral in medical arterial calciﬁcation occurs on degraded
elastin ﬁrst and that causes VSMCs transdiﬀerentiation into
osteogenic phenotype expressing bone related proteins and
contribute to VSMCs calciﬁcation in vitro, but these VSMCs
will return to original phenotype of VSMC after calciﬁed
conditions are removed (33). These researches indicate vascular
calciﬁcation is reversible that is possibly involved in mineral
loss similar to bone resorption, but the reversal process is still
largely unknown.
Under
physiological
conditions,
the
osteoblasts
and
osteoclasts
maintain
the
balance
between
bone
calcium
absorption and resorption, which is essential for proper
bone mineralization (34, 35). There is evidence showing the
involvement of osteoclast-like cells in vascular calciﬁcation (36).
Ge et al. reported the increased expression of TRAP, which
is a osteoclast phenotypic marker in the calciﬁc vessels from
hypertensive patients (37). Qiao et al. also identify osteoclast-
like cells are present in carotid artery atheromatous lesions
containing calciﬁed plaque based on cell morphology, TRAP-
positivity, and osteoclast-associated marker genes. Furthermore,
they think osteoclast-like cells absorb deposited minerals
preventing vascular calciﬁcation and counteract the eﬀects of
osteoblasts (38). In addition, osteoclasts cultured in vitro with
calciﬁed elastin reduced the extent of calciﬁcation and restored
the structural integrity of elastin, indicating that these cells
have an inhibitory role in vascular calciﬁcation as well (39, 40).
Therefore, enhancing the proportion of osteoclast-like cells in
the calciﬁed arteries might be a suitable therapeutic intervention.
However, the origin, phenotypic transformation and functions of
the osteoclast-like cells during vascular calciﬁcation also remain
to be elucidated.
Therefore, we have summarized the current knowledge
regarding
the
osteoblast/osteoclast-like
cells
in
vascular
calciﬁcation, and discussed their potential as therapeutic targets.
MOLECULAR MECHANISM UNDERLYING
OSTEOBLAST-LIKE CELLS-MEDIATED
VASCULAR CALCIFICATION
Studies show that the initiation and progression of vascular
calciﬁcation likely involve both active and passive mechanisms
(41–43). Passive calciﬁcation depends on the natural aﬃnity
of elastin and collagen in the extracellular matrix (ECM) for
calcium ions. These proteins bind to calcium ions and increase
their deposition in the ECM, resulting in extracellular calcium
and phosphorus imbalance. The positively charged calcium ions
adsorb the negatively charged phosphoric acid or carbonate ions
to form amorphous calcium salt, which continuously adsorbs
more mineral ions to form large mineral deposits and eventually
lead to vascular calciﬁcation (41, 44, 45). Active vascular
calciﬁcation resembles physiological bone mineralization. The
cells in the vessel walls diﬀerentiate or transdiﬀerentiate into
chondroblast/osteoblast-like cells in the pro-calciﬁc milieu of
diabetes, chronic kidney disease, aging, and atherosclerosis.
The osteoblast-like cells express osteogenic transcription factors
and genes, such as runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2),
osterix, Msh homeobox (Msx), SRY-box transcription factor 9
(SOX9), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP), bone sialoprotein (BSP)
and osteocalcin (OC), all of which play a central role in bone
mineralization. Knocking down RUNX2, osterix, SOX9, MSX1,
or MSX2 suppressed osteogenic diﬀerentiation and subsequent
vascular calciﬁcation (10, 46–49). The osteoblast/chondroblast-
like cells initiate vascular calciﬁcation by releasing matrix vesicles
(MV) (50) that are loaded with mineral crystals and are
deposited in the ECM. Mineralized MVs have been detected in
the calciﬁed lesions of chronic kidney disease, atherosclerosis
and diabetes. Furthermore, VSMCs cultured with high levels
of phosphorus, calcium synthesize and secrete MVs harboring
calcium, and phosphorus crystal-like structures (51, 52). MVs
from osteoclast-like VSMCs and osteoblasts and hypertrophic
chondrocytes have similar morphology and proteomics, which
bind to collagen and induce apatite nucleation, resulting
Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine | www.frontiersin.org
2
April 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 639740
Jiang et al.
Osteoclastogenesis and Osteoblastogenesis in Vascular Calciﬁcation
in endochondral and membranous osteogenesis (53–55). A
recent study showed that hydroxyapatite nanocrystals reversibly
induced osteogenic diﬀerentiation and calciﬁcation of VSMCs
in vitro, and removal of the nanocrystals restored the original
phenotype of the VSMCs and prevented calciﬁcation (33, 56).
In a CKD rat model, inhibition of hydroxyapatite growth by
sevelamer or pyrophosphate also slowed the progression of
moderate to severe aortic calciﬁcation (57). Thus, osteoblast-
like cells may also initiate vascular calciﬁcation through
hydroxyapatite. Interestingly, the MVs from osteoblast-like cells
express lower levels of calciﬁcation inhibitors like matrix gla
protein (MGP) and fetuin A compared to normal VSMCs-
derived MVs, whereas ALP, biomineralization-associated TNAP
and phosphatidylserine (PS) are overexpressed in the former.
TNAP hydrolyzes pyrophosphate, an inhibitor of vascular
calciﬁcation, to produce inorganic phosphorus and PS that
adhere to MV surface and adsorb calcium and phosphorus
ions. Furthermore, the MVs secreted by osteoblast-like cells
also express the annexins 2, 5, and 6, which function as
calcium channels and allow ion inﬂux (51, 58). Since MVs
and exosomes aid intercellular communication, osteoblast-like
cells may promote vascular calciﬁcation by secreting MVs
that express aberrantly high levels of pro-calciﬁcation factors.
Indeed, normal VSMCs co-cultured with osteoblast-like cell-
derived MVs internalize the latter and undergo phenotypic
transition characterized by the loss of contractile markers
like smooth muscle 22 alpha (SM22a), and acquisition of the
osteogenic markers (59). Microarray and bioinformatics analysis
have identiﬁed signiﬁcantly dysregulated non-coding RNAs in
these MVs, which are enriched in signaling pathways closely
related to osteogenic diﬀerentiation and calciﬁcation (60). Taken
together, osteoblast-like cells in the vascular wall synthesize and
secrete calciﬁed MVs, which not only provide a site for calcium
salt deposition but also initiate the phenotypic transition and
calciﬁcation of adjacent cells in a paracrine manner.
ORIGIN OF OSTEOBLAST-LIKE CELLS IN
VASCULAR CALCIFICATION
Although there are no osteoblast-like cells in the normal artery
wall, several resident cells like VSMCs, vascular endothelial cells
(VECs), pericytes, ﬁbroblasts, calciﬁed vascular cells (CVCs),
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), or progenitor cells have the
potential to diﬀerentiate or transdiﬀerentiate into osteoblast-like
cells in response to pathological stimuli (61).
VSMCs AND OSTEOBLAST-LIKE CELLS IN
VASCULAR CALCIFICATION
VSMCs are the main cell type in the arterial wall, and
maintain vascular elasticity and contractility. Although VSMCs
are terminally diﬀerentiated cells, they exhibit highly plastic
phenotypes (62). The contractile VSMCs in the normal arterial
wall are characterized by low growth, migration and protein
synthesis, and express contractile markers such as SM22a,
SMA, and SMM-HC. They can transdiﬀerentiate into the
synthetic phenotype that exhibits higher growth and migrations
rates, produces more proteins, and expresses osteoblast and
chondroblast markers (63). The calciﬁed arterial lesions from
humans and animal models also overexpress osteogenic and
chondrogenic genes as a function of calciﬁcation degree,
and have low levels of contractile markers. Furthermore, the
osteogenic or chondrogenic markers are co-expressed with the
VSMC contractile proteins, which indicates that VSMC can
diﬀerentiate into osteogenic and chondrogenic cells as well (64–
66). Consistent with this, osteoblast genes were upregulated and
VSMC contractile genes were downregulated in human and
animal VSMCs exposed to high levels calcium or phosphorus,
which also formed massive alizarin red-staining calcium nodules.
Likewise, hydroxyapatite and calciﬁed elastin induced cultured
VSMCs to lose the contractile phenotype and transdiﬀerentiate
into osteogenic cells, and removal of both restored the contractile
phenotype and down-regulated bone-related genes, indicating
that transdiﬀerentiation of VSMCs is a reversible process (33).
VSMCs expressing SM22α-Cre recombinase and Rosa26-LacZ
Cre reporter alleles transdiﬀerentiated into osteochondrogenic
precursors and chondrocytes in MGP–/– or LDLr–/– and
ApoE–/– mice, resulting in atherosclerotic medial and intimal
calciﬁcation (67). Furthermore, calcium deposition and vascular
calciﬁcation occur prior to the osteogenic phenotypic switch
of VSMCs (42), and blocking the latter can inhibit or even
reverse vascular calciﬁcation both in vitro and in vivo. There
is evidence indicating that the diﬀerent phenotypes of VSMCs
have distinct embryonic origins (68, 69). It is possible that the
contractile VSMCs ﬁrst transdiﬀerentiate into stem cells or other
intermediate phenotypes prior to the osteoblast-like stage rather
than diﬀerentiate directly. Thus, phenotypic reprogramming of
VSMCs is a complex process and the regulatory pathways are
largely unknown.
VECs AND OSTEOBLAST-LIKE CELLS IN
VASCULAR CALCIFICATION
VECs are derived from the mesoderm, and are the main cell
type in the vascular intima. Under physiological conditions,
VECs form a vascular barrier through tight junctions with
endothelial-speciﬁc proteins. However, pathological stimuli can
trigger endothelial-mesenchymal transition (EndMT) in the
VECs, resulting in the acquisition of MSC-like multipotent
diﬀerentiation
capacity.
Human
aortic
ECs
cultured
in
hyperglycemic conditions express low levels of EC marker
genes like CD31, and gain MSC markers like CD44 and CD10.
Furthermore, the chondrocyte genes SOX9 and type II collagen,
cartilage proteoglycan and calcium nodules are induced in VECs
cultured in osteogenic media (70). Calcium nodules are also
formed in MGP–/– human aortic ECs induced with high glucose
and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), as well as in human
and bovine aortic ECs stimulated with BMP6 and oxidized low-
density lipoprotein (LDL), or tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a)
and interleukin-β (IL-β) (22, 71, 72). Furtherly, the research of
Malhotra et al. shows EndMT and vascular calciﬁcation in vitro
and in vivo are dependent upon BMP signaling in MGP-deﬁcient
Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine | www.frontiersin.org
3
April 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 639740
Jiang et al.
Osteoclastogenesis and Osteoblastogenesis in Vascular Calciﬁcation
mice, while the other hand, also suggests that activation of BMP
signaling inhibits atherosclerosis in MGP-deﬁcient mice fed
a standard diet when compared to LDLR–/– mice fed a high
fat diet, a murine model of atherosclerosis (73). These results
indicate that VECs can transdiﬀerentiate into osteoblast-like
cells and promote vascular calciﬁcation. Mechanistically, BMP
signal activation induces the phenotypic switch of VECs via
EndMT. Consistent with this, calciﬁed arteries from Mgp–/– and
Ins2Akita/+ mice express CD31, multipotent markers like SOX2,
Nanog and Oct3/4, and Runx2 and Osterix (74, 75). Interestingly,
MGP–/– human VECs cultured with osteogenic medium or
BMP2 show upregulation of SOX2, Nanog and Oct3/4 prior to
that of Runx2 and Osterix, indicating that multipotent marker
appear earlier in the endothelium. Lineage tracing in the Mgp–/–
and Tie2-Gfp transgenic mice conﬁrmed the localization of
GFP-labeled ECs in calciﬁed lesions, along with increased
expression of Runx2 and Osterix, which further demonstrated
that osteogenic cells can originate from VECs (74). In addition,
VECs can also regulate vascular calciﬁcation in a paracrine
manner by activating the VSMCs, MSCs, and ﬁbroblasts. VSMCs
and MSCs co-cultured with RANKL-expressing ECs or their
conditioned medium transdiﬀerentiated into osteoblast-like cells
expressing Runx2 and ALP (76). Likewise, ﬁbroblasts co-cultured
with mechanically stimulated ECs or the conditioned medium
also underwent calciﬁcation (77). Furthermore, the conditioned
medium from inorganic phosphorus or indoxyl sulfate-induced
umbilical vein ECs inhibited expression of osteopontin in MSCs
and induced calciﬁcation in the presence of IL-8 (78). Finally,
the MVs and exosomes secreted by aging or inﬂammatory
factor-stimulated ECs express high amounts of calcium, BMP2,
annexin and Notch3, and promote calciﬁcation of recipient cells
following internalization (79).
PERICYTES AND OSTEOBLAST-LIKE
CELLS IN VASCULAR CALCIFICATION
Pericytes are part of the microvascular system and closely
related to endothelial cells. Recent studies show that pericytes
or pericyte-like cells are abundant in the intima, media
and adventitia of large, medium and small arteries, and
can diﬀerentiate into osteoblasts, chondroblast-like cells and
adipocytes. Furthermore, atherosclerotic calciﬁed plaques of
carotid and femoral arteries have signiﬁcantly more pericytes
compared to the non-calciﬁed lesions, suggesting that these
cells are involved in the formation of calciﬁed plaques (80, 81).
Consistent with the above, pericytes cultured with high content
of advanced glycation end products, beta- glycerophosphate or
glucocorticoid diﬀerentiate into osteoblast-like cells expressing
Runx2, ALP, OC and other bone-related genes, and form
calcium nodules. The latter may block MGP, an inhibitor of
BMP4 and OPN, and activate the Axl signaling pathway (82–
84). In addition, collagen glycosaminoglycan scaﬀolds loaded
with pericytes gave rise to bone-like tissues in mice at the
site of implantation, indicating that pericytes have spontaneous
osteogenic potential (85, 86). Indeed, pericytes grown in normal
medium can form multicellular nodules with a mineralized
matrix containing extensive calcium salt deposits, and express
high levels of Runx2 and the other osteogenic genes (21,
85). Therefore, pericytes have the potential to diﬀerentiate
into osteoblast-like cells both spontaneously and in a stimuli-
responsive manner, and contribute to mineralization.
FIBROBLASTS AND OSTEOBLAST-LIKE
CELLS IN VASCULAR CALCIFICATION
Fibroblasts are the major cell type located in the outer arterial
membrane, and a potential source of osteoblast-like cells during
vascular calciﬁcation. This is supported by the signiﬁcant
calciﬁcation seen in the aorta adventitia of high fat diet-fed
ApoE–/– mice and individuals older than 60 years of age (87).
Shao et al. found that transgenic mice expressing the osteoblast
gene Msx2 in the adventitial cells developed extensive vascular
calciﬁcation (88). Furthermore, primary ﬁbroblasts cultured
in the presence of recombinant transforming growth factor-1
(TGF-β) and beta-glycerophosphoric acid transformed into
myoﬁbroblasts and formed calcium nodules (89, 90). Lai et al.
also conﬁrmed that MSX2 expression levels increased in the
myoﬁbroblasts and subsequently contributed to calciﬁcation
(91). Simionescu et al. found rat ﬁbroblasts induced by
elastin degradation products and/or TGF-β expressed high
levels of Runx2, ALP, OC, and other bone-related genes, and
formed calcium deposits that stained with the von Kossa
dye (89). Likewise, Runx2 and OC were upregulated and
calcium deposition was increased in the three dimensional
cultures of Wistar rat ﬁbroblasts after 2 weeks of exposure
to high levels of inorganic phosphate or β-glycerophosphate
(92). Therefore, adventitial ﬁbroblasts are likely to transform
into
myoﬁbroblasts
and
osteoblast-like
cells
to
regulate
vascular calciﬁcation.
MSCs AND OSTEOBLAST-LIKE CELLS IN
VASCULAR CALCIFICATION
MSCs are adult stem cells derived from the early mesoderm, and
are characterized by high proliferation rates, self-renewal ability,
multipotent diﬀerentiation potential, and immunosuppressive
ability. Therefore, MSCs are the ideal biological tool for
tissue repair and regeneration. The bone marrow-derived
MSCs (BMSCs) diﬀerentiate into multiple cell types that
are involved in cardiovascular pathologies, including vascular
calciﬁcation. BMSCs transplanted into high cholesterol diet-fed
rats with balloon injury in the abdominal aorta migrated to the
BMP2-overexpressing arterial intima, and resulted in extensive
calciﬁcation. Thus, MSCs can promote vascular calciﬁcation via
the BMP2 signaling pathway (93). Kramann et al. implanted
MSC-loaded collagen gels in the peritoneal cavity of rats
with 5/6th nephrectomy or HFD-induced CKD, and detected
Runx2, ALP, and sclerostin in the circulating MSCs, indicating
osteogenic diﬀerentiation. Furthermore, a similar degree of
calciﬁcation was observed after 8 weeks in the MSC-loaded
gels as well as the arteries, both in terms of X-ray images
and calcium content, indicating that MSCs contributed to
Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine | www.frontiersin.org
4
April 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 639740
Jiang et al.
Osteoclastogenesis and Osteoblastogenesis in Vascular Calciﬁcation
vascular calciﬁcation after phenotypic conversion to osteoblast-
like cells (94). Leszczynska et al. also conﬁrmed the subcutaneous
implantation of MSCs pretreated with chondrogenic medium
gave rise to bone tissue in ApoE-/- and wild-type mice, and the
extent of calciﬁcation was greater in the former (95). In addition,
MSCs cultured in osteogenesis medium express osteogenic
transcription factors and form calcium deposits in vitro. The
MSCs isolated from ApoE–/– mice have greater osteogenic
and chondrogenic capacity compared to wild-type cells, and is
likely associated with the activation of uPAR-C5aR/Erk1/2/NF-
kB axis (23). Wang et al. found that ﬂuorescently labeled
MSCs migrated to the calciﬁed lesions in the HFD-fed LDLr–/–
mice, and expressed osteogenic genes via TGF-β/SMAD2/4
signal activation (96). Interestingly, several groups have reported
an inhibitory eﬀect of MSCs on vascular calciﬁcation. For
instance, intravenously injected MSCs signiﬁcantly inhibited
calcium and phosphorus deposition in the aortic walls, and
also decreased serum phosphorus levels in the adenine-fed rat
model of CKD (97). Similarly, conditioned medium from MSCs
inhibited the osteogenic phenotypic switch and calciﬁcation of
VSMCs even in the presence of β-glycerophosphate, and this
eﬀect was reversed by recombinant BMP2 via activation of the
SMAD1/5/8 pathway. In addition, MSCs reduced calciﬁcation of
co-cultured VSMCs in the osteogenic medium by inactivating the
Wnt5a/β-catenin pathway (98). Therefore, the role of MSCs in
vascular calciﬁcation is highly complex, and may depend on the
environmental cues.
PROGENITOR CELLS AND
OSTEOBLAST-LIKE CELLS IN VASCULAR
CALCIFICATION
Progenitor cells are precursors with multipotent diﬀerentiation
potential. Studies increasingly show that both endothelial and
VSMC progenitors are closely related to arterial calciﬁcation.
For instance, circulating endothelial progenitor cells expressing
the late osteoblast diﬀerentiation marker osteocalcin (OC)
are abundant in patients with diabetes, CKD and coronary
atherosclerosis. Furthermore, the number of OC+ circulating
endothelial progenitor cells correlates positively with the
calcium score and spotty calciﬁcation in coronary artery disease
and hemodialysis patients (99, 100). Endothelial progenitors
isolated from the peripheral blood of hemodialysis patients
showed signiﬁcantly increased calcium deposition in vitro.
However, adding vitamin D receptor activator into medium
of serum from uremia patients would inhibit calciﬁcation of
endothelial progenitor cells (99). Similarly, the number of
circulating OC+ endothelial progenitor cells in postmenopausal
women
and
hemodialysis
patients
decreased
signiﬁcantly
by administering bisphosphonates and vitamin D receptor
activator, which also reduced vascular calciﬁcation (20). Taken
together, OC+ endothelial progenitor cells can diﬀerentiate
into osteoblast-like cells and promote vascular calciﬁcation.
The CD10+ human perivascular progenitor cells, also known
as adventitial cells due to their anatomical location, also show
osteogenic potential. CD10 is signiﬁcantly upregulated in the
calciﬁed vs. normal arteries. The CD10+ progenitor cells isolated
from human abdominal white adipose tissue and placenta
expressed osteoblastic transcription factors and other proteins
in an NF-κB-dependent manner when cultured in osteogenic
medium for 28 days, and formed mineralized nodules. Silencing
the CD10 gene signiﬁcantly decreased the bone forming
ability of these progenitors (101). Kramann et al. detected
abundant Gli1+ VSMC progenitors in the arterial adventitia,
media and intima of mice with acute femoral artery injury
or CKD, which promoted tissue repair (102). Furthermore,
genetic fate tracing indicated that Gli1+ progenitor cells
migrated from the adventitia into the intima and media of
ApoE–/– mice with CKD, and expressed osteogenic genes
that promoted arterial calciﬁcation. Furthermore, knocking
down Gli1 inhibited arterial calciﬁcation (102). Cho et al.
discovered Sca-1+/PDGFRα- progenitor cells in the bone
marrow and blood vessel walls that diﬀerentiated into both
osteoblasts and osteoclasts. Subcutaneous transplantation of
Sca-1+/PDGFRα- progenitor cells and bone matrix in C57
mice resulted in a highly mineralized bone-like structure
after 8 weeks. However, simultaneous injection of PPARγ
signiﬁcantly
decreased
calciﬁcation
volume
and
calcium
scores by inducing the diﬀerentiation of Sca-1+/PDGFRα-
progenitor cells into osteoclasts. Consistent with the above,
Sca-1+/PDGFRα- progenitor cells also aggravated arterial
calciﬁcation in atherosclerotic ApoE–/– mice, which was
reversed by PPARγ (39, 103).
CVCs AND OSTEOBLAST-LIKE CELLS IN
VASCULAR CALCIFICATION
CVCs are a subset of VSMCs that characteristically express
a modiﬁed form of ganglioside sialyllactose ceramide, along
with osteogenic and chondrogenic markers. The CVCs can
form calcium nodules following stimulation with transforming
growth factor-β or 25-hydroxycholesterol. Similarly, mechanical
stimulation or cAMP treatment also promotes osteogenic
diﬀerentiation and mineralization of the CVCs. Overexpression
of liver X receptor enhanced CVC mineralization by increasing
fatty acid synthesis and lipid accumulation. In addition,
subcutaneously transplanted CVCs formed calcium nodules akin
to calciﬁed atherosclerotic plaques in the Apoe–/– mice (104).
Mechanistically, osteogenic diﬀerentiation and calciﬁcation of
CVCs is mediated by the heat shock protein (HSP) 70,
which binds to MGP and activates the BMP2/P-SMAD1/3/5
pathway (105). In addition, macrophages stimulated with
ultraﬁne particles or their conditioned media induced osteogenic
diﬀerentiation and mineralization of CVCs by partially activating
the NF-κB signaling pathway (106). Conversely, the spontaneous
diﬀerentiation and calciﬁcation of CVCs were inhibited by
the protein kinase A-speciﬁc inhibitor KT5720, or insulin-
like growth factor I, which are known to activate the
ERK and PI3K pathways (107). Abedin et al. found that
activation of p38-MAPK and PPARγ pathways decreased both
spontaneous and IL-6-mediated osteogenesis of CVCs (108).
These results indicate that CVCs can not only form calcium
Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine | www.frontiersin.org
5
April 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 639740
Jiang et al.
Osteoclastogenesis and Osteoblastogenesis in Vascular Calciﬁcation
nodules spontaneously, but also be induced to exacerbate
vascular calciﬁcation.
ORIGIN AND FUNCTION OF
OSTEOCLAST-LIKE CELLS IN VASCULAR
CALCIFICATION
Bone formation depends on the balance between the osteoblasts
and osteoclasts. The osteoclasts mediate bone mineral matrix
resorption and prevent excessive bone mineralization by
producing various enzymes. While excessive bone resorption by
osteoclast activity leads to osteoporosis, aberrant bone formation
by hyperactive osteoblasts result in osteopetrosis. Osteoblast-
like cells are abundant in calciﬁed blood vessels and promotes
vascular calciﬁcation, although the role of osteoclast-like cells are
poorly understood.
Osteoclast-like cells have been detected in both atherosclerotic
plaques and calciﬁed medial layer, although the number is small
and mainly concentrated in the heavily calciﬁed lesions. Qiao
et al. found osteoclast-like cells in human carotid plaques
(38). Han et al. analyzed the calciﬁed media and intima of 282
lower extremity artery samples, and detected bone tissue and
osteoclasts in some heavily calciﬁed regions (109). Similarly,
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP), an osteoclast-
speciﬁc marker gene, was also detected in the calciﬁed vessels of
hypertensive patients (37). Carbonic anhydrase, the key enzyme
involved in osteoclast-mediated bone resorption, is signiﬁcantly
up-regulated in the atherosclerotic plaques of carotid, femoral
and aortic vessels, and co-expressed with TRAP (110). These
ﬁndings indicate that osteoclast-like cells regulate atherosclerosis
and vascular calciﬁcation, although the mechanisms remain
unknown. Monocytes and macrophages can diﬀerentiate into
osteoclasts in the presence of inﬂammatory cytokines such
as IL-6, IL-1, and TNF-α via activation of the RANKL/Akt
signaling pathway. Osteoclastogenic diﬀerentiation of these
cells is inhibited by oxidized low density lipoprotein or high
levels of inorganic phosphate (111, 112). In the atherogenic
ApoE–/– mice as well, macrophages transdiﬀerentiate into
osteoclasts
via
the
Runx2/RANKL
axis.
Consistent
with
this, macrophages derived from human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells diﬀerentiate into osteoclasts expressing
cathepsin K and TRAP, and their calcium resorption activity
is controlled by N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphate transferase
alpha and beta subunits (113). In addition, macrophages
can eﬀectively decalcify ectopic deposits by overexpressing
carbonic anhydrase 2, which is silenced in mice with medial
calciﬁcation in small arteries (114). Vascular progenitor cells
also diﬀerentiate into osteoclast-like cells in the calciﬁed
lesions. The Sca-1+/PDGFRa- progenitor cells from mouse
aorta diﬀerentiate into functional osteoclast-like cells in vitro
in the presence of suitable factors, indicating their bipotent
diﬀerentiation potential. In addition, Sca-1+/PDGFRa- cells
implanted
subcutaneously
in
C57
mice
and
atherogenic
ApoE–/– mice diﬀerentiated into osteoclast-like cells in the
presence of PPARγ, resulting in reduced calcium scores and
calciﬁcation volume, suggesting a suitable therapeutic strategy
for vascular calciﬁcation (39). Co-culture of calciﬁed elastin
and
bone-marrow-derived
osteoclast-like
cells
decreased
signiﬁcantly calcium content of the calciﬁed elastin without
elastin degradation and subcutaneous transplantation in rat of
the mixture containing pure aortic elastin and osteoclast-like
cells limited elastin calciﬁcation compared to control group
(40). Bas et al. and Qiao et al. also found that osteoclast-like
cells and macrophages inhibited and reversed calciﬁcation
through mineral resorption (32, 38). However, the exact
role of osteoclast-like cells in vascular calciﬁcation is largely
ambiguous. RNA-seq analysis of rabbit atherosclerotic plaques
showed enrichment of genes and KEGG pathways related to
osteoclast diﬀerentiation, which have a bidirectional impact
on osteoblast diﬀerentiation (115). In another study, knocking
out Runx2 in VSMCs decreased RANKL expression, osteoclast
numbers
and
the
severity
of
calciﬁcation.
Furthermore,
VSMCs
co-cultured
with
RANKL-overexpressing
bone
marrow-derived macrophages diﬀerentiated into osteoclast-
like cells and increased vascular calciﬁcation (116). Thus,
the role of osteoclast-like cells in vascular calciﬁcation needs
further clariﬁcation.
THE POTENTIAL OF CELL-BASED
THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES FOR
VASCULAR CALCIFICATION
Over the years, great progress has been obtained about
the pathogenesis of vascular calciﬁcation, but the treatment
strategies for vascular calciﬁcation are limited. As discussion
above, osteoblast-like cells play an important role in vascular
calciﬁcation. Owning the role of osteoblast-like cells, many
researches showed inhibition of osteogenic diﬀerentiation of
VSMCs or recovery of contractile phenotype of VSMCs
ameliorated vascular calciﬁcation both in vitro and in vivo
(117–119). Lin et al. also reported SMC-speciﬁc Runx2
knockout signiﬁcantly reduced vascular osteochondrogenesis
and calciﬁcation in mouse (10). These results suggest it is possible
to treat vascular calciﬁcation at cellular level by regulating
phenotype changes of VSMCs. In addition, owing mineral
resorption capacity of osteoclast-like cells, osteoclasts eﬃciently
remove deposited minerals from calciﬁed elastin both in vitro and
in vivo (40). Co-culture of macrophages and VSMCs, inhibition
of macrophages diﬀerentiated into osteoclasts contributed to
VSMCs calciﬁcation. Furthermore, Barinda et al. found also
macrophages reversed ectopic calciﬁcation in extracellular matrix
through overexpressing carbonic anhydrase 2, which mediates
hydrogen ions formation inducing mineral dissolution (114).
In a mouse model of ectopic calciﬁcation, promoting the
diﬀerentiation of Sca-1(+)/PDGFRα (-) progenitor cells with
a PPARγ agonist into osteoclast-like cells attenuated ectopic
calciﬁcation severity (39). These studies indicate osteoclast-
like cells—and macrophage-based vascular calciﬁcation cell
therapy has potential. However, Gbaguidi et al. reported
Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine | www.frontiersin.org
6
April 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 639740
Jiang et al.
Osteoclastogenesis and Osteoblastogenesis in Vascular Calciﬁcation
macrophages near calcium deposits were deﬁcient in RANKL-
RANK axis and cathepsin K hindering their ability to reabsorb
minerals in human atherosclerotic plaques (120). Recently,
MSC therapy has been developed in many areas, which is a
new strategy for treatment of vascular calciﬁcation. Calciﬁed
VSMCs induced with β-GP were cultured with conditioned
media from MSCs and mineral deposition in VSMCs was
inhibited, which was associated with inactivation of the BMP2–
Smad1/5/8 signaling pathway and suppression of osteogenic
phenotype, inﬂammation, and apoptosis (97, 98). Exosomes
from MSCs were used to culture VSMCs and inhibited high
phosphorus-induced VSMCs calciﬁcation (121). To similar these
studies, indirect co-culture of VSMCs and MSCs in a transwell
system reduced also VSMCs calciﬁcation involving in inhibiting
of wnt signaling pathways (122). These researches suggest
MSCs regulate vascular calciﬁcation in a paracrine manner.
In vivo, adipose-derived MSCs were injected into a rat model
of chronic kidney disease, which inhibited the progression
of vascular calciﬁcation (123). However, some studies also
reported MSCs have the potential of osteogenic diﬀerentiation
(124). BMSCs transplantation promoted vascular calciﬁcation
in hyperlipidemic rats subjected balloon injury and MSCs were
implanted in c57BL/6 mice and Apoe–/– mice can form bone
(93, 95). Taken together, cell treatment for vascular calciﬁcation
based on osteoclast-like cells or macrophages and even MSCs is
possible, but there are still some controversies and more research
is needed.
FUTURE RESEARCH
Although the potential sources of osteoblast-like cells in calciﬁed
lesions have been identiﬁed, the transdiﬀerentiation of vascular
cells into osteoblast-like cells is more complex and needs
further research. Diﬀerent subsets of VSMCs and ECs had been
identiﬁed in vascular walls, and the VSMCs located in diﬀerent
segments of the aorta originate from diﬀerent embryo layers.
The obvious question herein is whether speciﬁc VSMC and
ECs subsets are wired to diﬀerentiate into osteoblast-like cells.
Both VSMCs and ECs undergo a phenotypic trajectory during
transdiﬀerentiation into osteoblast-like cells. The underlying
molecular mechanisms remain to be elucidated, especially during
early phenotypic transition. Limited number of osteoclast-like
cells have also been identiﬁed in calciﬁed arteries, especially
in areas of severe calciﬁcation. Recent studies show that
osteoclast-like cells promote atherosclerotic calciﬁcation in
Apoe–/– mice and rabbits, although others have correlated
increased number of osteoclast-like cells with atherosclerotic
decalciﬁcation. Therefore, the exact role and origin of these cells
are ambiguous, and have to be elucidated. Osteoclasts have bone
resorptive activity, and an imbalance between osteoblastogenesis
and osteoclastogenesis is present in vascular calciﬁcation. It
remains to be seen whether osteoclasts or osteoclast-like cells
are a promising therapeutic strategy for vascular calciﬁcation,
and the most pressing question in this regard is to optimize the
diﬀerentiation of vascular wall cells into osteoclast-like cells.
FIGURE 1 | Summary of the origin and role of osteoblast-like cells and osteoclast-like-cells in vascular calciﬁcation. Vascular calciﬁcation is common in older adults,
patients with chronic kidney disease, diabetes, and atherosclerosis. During the formation of vascular calciﬁcation, many cells differentiated into osteoblast-like cells or
chondrocytes-like cells, including VSMCs, ECs, ﬁbroblasts, pericytes, MSCs and progenitors. They express osteoblastic differentiation transcription factors and bone
matrix proteins as well as secrete exosomes and matrix vesicles contributing to the development and progression of vascular calciﬁcation. Some cells can also
differentiate into osteoclast—like cells, including some MSCs or progenitors, macrophages. They play a role in demineralization of the vascular calciﬁcation. The
reduction of osteogenic phenotype cells and the increase of mineral reabsorption cells may be a strategy for vascular calciﬁcation cell therapy. VSMCs, vascular
smooth muscle cells; ECs, endothelial cells; MSCs, mesenchymal stem cells; MV, matrix vesicles; RUNX2, RUNX family transcription factor 2; MSX, msh homeobox;
SOX9, SRY-related high mobility group-box gene9; OSX, Sp7 transcription factor; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; OC, osteocalcin; BSP, bone sialoprotein; OPN,
osteopontin; TRAP, acid phosphatase 5, tartrate resistant; CA2, carbonic anhydrase 2.
Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine | www.frontiersin.org
7
April 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 639740
Jiang et al.
Osteoclastogenesis and Osteoblastogenesis in Vascular Calciﬁcation
CONCLUSIONS
Vascular calciﬁcation is a cell-mediated, reversible and active
regulated process resembled to bone mineralization. Osteoblast-
like cells and limited number of osteoclast-like cells have been
identiﬁed in calciﬁed lesions (Figure 1). While the former
promote calciﬁcation of the arterial walls, the latter have a
demineralizing eﬀect. Therefore, tracing the origin of these
cells and the trajectory of their phenotypic remodeling, along
with identiﬁcation of core regulatory molecules, can further
elucidate the mechanism of vascular calciﬁcation and reveal new
therapeutic targets.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
WJ, ZZ, YL, CC, HY, QL, and MH: literature search and
analysis. WJ: writing the manuscript. XQ and WJ: review
and revise the manuscript. XQ: the funding acquisition.
All authors contributed to the article and approved the
submitted version.
FUNDING
This work was supported in part by the National Nature Science
Foundation of China (no. 81960091).
REFERENCES
1. Strauss HW, Nakahara T, Narula N, Narula J. Vascular calciﬁcation: the
evolving relationship of vascular calciﬁcation to major acute coronary
events.
J
Nucl
Med.
(2019)
60:1207–12.
doi:
10.2967/jnumed.119.
230276
2. Joshi
FR,
Rajani
NK,
Abt
M,
Woodward
M,
Bucerius
J,
Mani
V,
et
al.
Does
vascular
calciﬁcation
accelerate
inﬂammation?:
a
substudy
of
the
dal-PLAQUE
trial.
J
Am
Coll
Cardiol.
(2016)
67:69–78. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.10.050
3. Kalsch H, Lehmann N, Mohlenkamp S, Hammer C, Mahabadi AA, Moebus
S, et al. Prevalence of thoracic aortic calciﬁcation and its relationship
to cardiovascular risk factors and coronary calciﬁcation in an unselected
population-based cohort: the Heinz Nixdorf Recall Study. Int J Cardiovasc
Imaging. (2013) 29:207–16. doi: 10.1007/s10554-012-0051-3
4. Liu ZH, Yu XQ, Yang JW, Jiang AL, Liu BC, Xing CY, et al. Prevalence and
risk factors for vascular calciﬁcation in Chinese patients receiving dialysis:
baseline results from a prospective cohort study. Curr Med Res Opin. (2018)
34:1491–1500. doi: 10.1080/03007995.2018.1467886
5. Wong ND, Sciammarella M, Arad Y, Miranda-Peats R, Polk D, Hachamovich
R, et al. Relation of thoracic aortic and aortic valve calcium to coronary
artery calcium and risk assessment. Am J Cardiol. (2003) 92:951–
5. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9149(03)00976-7
6. Chen Y, Zhao X, Wu H. Arterial stiﬀness: a focus on vascular calciﬁcation
and its link to bone mineralization. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. (2020)
40:1078–93. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.120.313131
7. Neven E, Dauwe S, De Broe ME, D’Haese PC, Persy V. Endochondral bone
formation is involved in media calciﬁcation in rats and in men. Kidney Int.
(2007) 72:574–81. doi: 10.1038/sj.ki.5002353
8. Neven E, Persy V, Dauwe S, De Schutter T, De Broe ME, D’Haese PC.
Chondrocyte rather than osteoblast conversion of vascular cells underlies
medial calciﬁcation in uremic rats. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. (2010)
30:1741–50. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.204834
9. Schmidt N, Brandsch C, Schutkowski A, Hirche F, Stangl GI. Dietary vitamin
D inadequacy accelerates calciﬁcation and osteoblast-like cell formation in
the vascular system of LDL receptor knockout and wild-type mice. J Nutr.
(2014) 144:638–46. doi: 10.3945/jn.113.189118
10. Lin ME, Chen TM, Wallingford MC, Nguyen NB, Yamada S, Sawangmake
C, et al. Runx2 deletion in smooth muscle cells inhibits vascular
osteochondrogenesis and calciﬁcation but not atherosclerotic lesion
formation. Cardiovasc Res. (2016) 112:606–16. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvw205
11. Rashdan
NA,
Sim
AM,
Cui
L,
Phadwal
K,
Roberts
FL,
Carter
R,
et
al.
Osteocalcin
regulates
arterial
calciﬁcation
via
altered
Wnt signaling and glucose metabolism. J Bone Miner Res. (2020)
35:357–67. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.3888
12. Lampropoulos CE, Kalamara P, Konsta M, Papaioannou I, Papadima
E,
Antoniou
Z,
et
al.
Osteoporosis
and
vascular
calciﬁcation
in
postmenopausal women: a cross-sectional study. Climacteric. (2016)
19:303–7. doi: 10.3109/13697137.2016.1164134
13. De Schutter TM, Neven E, Persy VP, Behets GJ, Postnov AA, De Clerck NM,
et al. Vascular calciﬁcation is associated with cortical bone loss in chronic
renal failure rats with and without ovariectomy: the calciﬁcation paradox.
Am J Nephrol. (2011) 34:356–66. doi: 10.1159/000331056
14. Kiel DP, Kauppila LI, Cupples LA, Hannan MT, O’Donnell CJ, Wilson
PW. Bone loss and the progression of abdominal aortic calciﬁcation over
a 25 year period: the Framingham Heart Study. Calcif Tissue Int. (2001)
68:271–6. doi: 10.1007/BF02390833
15. Choi SH, An JH, Lim S, Koo BK, Park SE, Chang HJ, et al. Lower bone
mineral density is associated with higher coronary calciﬁcation and coronary
plaque burdens by multidetector row coronary computed tomography
in pre- and postmenopausal women. Clin Endocrinol. (2009) 71:644–
51. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2265.2009.03535.x
16. Sotomayor CG, Benjamens S, Gomes-Neto AW, Pol RA, Groothof
D, Te Velde-Keyzer CA, et al. Bone mineral density and aortic
calciﬁcation: evidence for a bone-vascular axis after kidney transplantation.
Transplantation. (2020) 105:231–9. doi: 10.1097/TP.0000000000003226
17. De Mare A, Maudsley S, Azmi A, Hendrickx JO, Opdebeeck B, Neven E, et
al. Sclerostin as regulatory molecule in vascular media calciﬁcation and the
bone-vascular axis. Toxins. (2019) 11:70428. doi: 10.3390/toxins11070428
18. Fakhry M, Roszkowska M, Briolay A, Bougault C, Guignandon A, Diaz-
Hernandez JI, et al. TNAP stimulates vascular smooth muscle cell trans-
diﬀerentiation into chondrocytes through calcium deposition and BMP-2
activation: Possible implication in atherosclerotic plaque stability. Biochimica
et Biophysica Acta. (2017) 1863:643–53. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2016.12.003
19. Kurozumi A, Nakano K, Yamagata K, Okada Y, Nakayamada S, Tanaka Y.
IL-6 and sIL-6R induces STAT3-dependent diﬀerentiation of human VSMCs
into osteoblast-like cells through JMJD2B-mediated histone demethylation
of RUNX2. Bone. (2019) 124:53–61. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2019.04.006
20. Peris P, Atkinson EJ, Gossl M, Kane TL, McCready LK, Lerman A, et al.
Eﬀects of bisphosphonate treatment on circulating osteogenic endothelial
progenitor cells in postmenopausal women. Mayo Clin Proc. (2013) 88:46–
55. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2012.08.019
21. Doherty MJ, Ashton BA, Walsh S, Beresford JN, Grant ME, Canﬁeld AE.
Vascular pericytes express osteogenic potential in vitro and in vivo. J Bone
Miner Res. (1998) 13:828–38. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.1998.13.5.828
22. Sánchez-Duﬀhues G, García de Vinuesa A, van de Pol V, Geerts ME, de Vries
MR, Janson SGT, et al. Inﬂammation induces endothelial-to-mesenchymal
transition and promotes vascular calciﬁcation through downregulation of
BMPR2. J Pathol. (2019) 247:333–46. doi: 10.1002/path.5193
23. Kalbasi Anaraki P, Patecki M, Larmann J, Tkachuk S, Jurk K, Haller H, et
al. Urokinase receptor mediates osteogenic diﬀerentiation of mesenchymal
stem cells and vascular calciﬁcation via the complement C5a receptor. Stem
Cells Dev. (2014) 23:352–62. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0318
24. Lu Z, Chiu J, Lee LR, Schindeler A, Jackson M, Ramaswamy Y, et
al. Reprogramming of human ﬁbroblasts into osteoblasts by insulin-like
growth factor-binding protein 7. Stem Cells Transl Med. (2020) 9:403–
15. doi: 10.1002/sctm.19-0281
25. Bleyer AJ, Burkart J, Piazza M, Russell G, Rohr M, Carr JJ. Changes in
cardiovascular calciﬁcation after parathyroidectomy in patients with ESRD.
Am J Kidney Dis. (2005) 46:464–9. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2005.04.035
26. Lopez I, Mendoza FJ, Guerrero F, Almaden Y, Henley C, Aguilera-Tejero
E, et al. The calcimimetic AMG 641 accelerates regression of extraosseous
Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine | www.frontiersin.org
8
April 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 639740
Jiang et al.
Osteoclastogenesis and Osteoblastogenesis in Vascular Calciﬁcation
calciﬁcation in uremic rats. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. (2009) 296:F1376-
85. doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.90737.2008
27. De Schutter TM, Behets GJ, Geryl H, Peter ME, Steppan S, Gundlach K, et al.
Eﬀect of a magnesium-based phosphate binder on medial calciﬁcation in a
rat model of uremia. Kidney Int. (2013) 83:1109–17. doi: 10.1038/ki.2013.34
28. Finch JL, Lee DH, Liapis H, Ritter C, Zhang S, Suarez E, et al.
Phosphate restriction signiﬁcantly reduces mortality in uremic rats
with established vascular calciﬁcation. Kidney Int. (2013) 84:1145–
53. doi: 10.1038/ki.2013.213
29. Yamada S, Tatsumoto N, Tokumoto M, Noguchi H, Ooboshi H, Kitazono
T, et al. Phosphate binders prevent phosphate-induced cellular senescence
of vascular smooth muscle cells and vascular calciﬁcation in a modiﬁed,
adenine-based uremic rat model. Calcif Tissue Int. (2015) 96:347–
58. doi: 10.1007/s00223-014-9929-5
30. Schurgers
LJ,
Spronk
HM,
Soute
BA,
Schiﬀers
PM,
DeMey
JG,
Vermeer
C.
Regression
of
warfarin-induced
medial
elastocalcinosis
by
high
intake
of
vitamin
K
in
rats.
Blood.
(2007)
109:2823–
31. doi: 10.1182/blood-2006-07-035345
31. Essalihi R, Dao HH, Gilbert LA, Bouvet C, Semerjian Y, McKee
MD, et al. Regression of medial elastocalcinosis in rat aorta: a new
vascular function for carbonic anhydrase. Circulation. (2005) 112:1628–
35. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.104.528984
32. Bas A, Lopez I, Perez J, Rodriguez M, Aguilera-Tejero E. Reversibility
of calcitriol-induced medial artery calciﬁcation in rats with intact renal
function. J Bone Mineral Res. (2005) 21:484–90. doi: 10.1359/JBMR.051211
33. Lei Y, Sinha A, Nosoudi N, Grover A, Vyavahare N. Hydroxyapatite
and
calciﬁed
elastin
induce
osteoblast-like
diﬀerentiation
in
rat
aortic
smooth
muscle
cells.
Exp
Cell
Res.
(2014)
323:198–
208. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.01.011
34. Arthur A, Nguyen TM, Paton S, Klisuric A, Zannettino ACW, Gronthos
S. The osteoprogenitor-speciﬁc loss of ephrinB1 results in an osteoporotic
phenotype aﬀecting the balance between bone formation and resorption. Sci
Rep. (2018) 8:12756. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-31190-2
35. Wang X, Wu J, Shidoji Y, Muto Y, Ohishi N, Yagi K, et al. Eﬀects
of geranylgeranoic acid in bone: induction of osteoblast diﬀerentiation
and inhibition of osteoclast formation. J Bone Miner Res. (2002) 17:91–
100. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.2002.17.1.91
36. Li J, Xing G, Zhang L, Shang J, Li Y, Li C, et al. Satb1 promotes
osteoclastogenesis by recruiting CBP to upregulate miR-223 expression
in chronic kidney disease-mineral and bone disorder. Pharmazie. (2017)
72:680–6. doi: 10.1691/ph.2017.7606
37. Ge
Q,
Ruan
CC,
Ma
Y,
Tang
XF,
Wu
QH,
Wang
JG,
et
al.
Osteopontin regulates macrophage activation and osteoclast formation
in hypertensive patients with vascular calciﬁcation. Sci Rep. (2017)
7:40253. doi: 10.1038/srep40253
38. Qiao JH, Mishra V, Fishbein MC, Sinha SK, Rajavashisth TB. Multinucleated
giant cells in atherosclerotic plaques of human carotid arteries: identiﬁcation
of osteoclast-like cells and their speciﬁc proteins in artery wall. Exp Mol
Pathol. (2015) 99:654–62. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.11.010
39. Cho HJ, Cho HJ, Lee HJ, Song MK, Seo JY, Bae YH, et al. Vascular calcifying
progenitor cells possess bidirectional diﬀerentiation potentials. PLoS Biol.
(2013) 11:e1001534. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001534
40. Simpson CL, Lindley S, Eisenberg C, Basalyga DM, Starcher BC, Simionescu
DT, et al. Toward cell therapy for vascular calciﬁcation: osteoclast-mediated
demineralization of calciﬁed elastin. Cardiovasc Pathol. (2007) 16:29–
37. doi: 10.1016/j.carpath.2006.07.001
41. Urry
DW.
Neutral
sites
for
calcium
ion
binding
to
elastin
and
collagen:
a
charge
neutralization
theory
for
calciﬁcation
and
its
relationship
to
atherosclerosis.
Proc
Natl
Acad
Sci
USA.
(1971)
68:810–4. doi: 10.1073/pnas.68.4.810
42. Speer MY, Yang HY, Brabb T, Leaf E, Look A, Lin WL, et al.
Smooth
muscle
cells
give
rise
to
osteochondrogenic
precursors
and
chondrocytes
in
calcifying
arteries.
Circ
Res.
(2009)
104:733–41. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.183053
43. Montezano AC, Zimmerman D, Yusuf H, Burger D, Chignalia AZ, Wadhera
V, et al. Vascular smooth muscle cell diﬀerentiation to an osteogenic
phenotype involves TRPM7 modulation by magnesium. Hypertension.
(2010) 56:453–62. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.110.152058
44. Silver FH, Landis WJ. Deposition of apatite in mineralizing vertebrate
extracellular matrices: a model of possible nucleation sites on type I collagen.
Connect Tissue Res. (2011) 52:242–54. doi: 10.3109/03008207.2010.551567
45. Kuzan A, Chwilkowska A, Pezowicz C, Witkiewicz W, Gamian A,
Maksymowicz K, et al. The content of collagen type II in human arteries is
correlated with the stage of atherosclerosis and calciﬁcation foci. Cardiovasc
Pathol. (2017) 28:21–7. doi: 10.1016/j.carpath.2017.02.003
46. Taylor J, Butcher M, Zeadin M, Politano A, Shaughnessy SG. Oxidized
low-density lipoprotein promotes osteoblast diﬀerentiation in primary
cultures of vascular smooth muscle cells by up-regulating Osterix
expression in an Msx2-dependent manner. J Cell Biochem. (2011) 112:581–
8. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22948
47. Xu Z, Ji G, Shen J, Wang X, Zhou J, Li L. SOX9 and myocardin counteract
each other in regulating vascular smooth muscle cell diﬀerentiation.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. (2012) 422:285–90. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.
04.149
48. Hayashi K, Nakamura S, Nishida W, Sobue K. Bone morphogenetic
protein-induced
MSX1
and
MSX2
inhibit
myocardin-dependent
smooth
muscle
gene
transcription.
Mol
Cell
Biol.
(2006)
26:9456–70. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00759-06
49. Zhao YG, Meng FX, Li BW, Sheng YM, Liu MM, Wang B, et al. Gelatinases
promote calciﬁcation of vascular smooth muscle cells by up-regulating bone
morphogenetic protein-2. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. (2016) 470:287–
93. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.01.067
50. Zazzeroni L, Faggioli G, Pasquinelli G. Mechanisms of arterial calciﬁcation:
the role of matrix vesicles. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. (2018) 55:425–
32. doi: 10.1016/j.ejvs.2017.12.009
51. Kapustin AN, Davies JD, Reynolds JL, McNair R, Jones GT, Sidibe A,
et al. Calcium regulates key components of vascular smooth muscle cell-
derived matrix vesicles to enhance mineralization. Circ Res. (2011) 109:e1–
12. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.238808
52. Kapustin
AN,
Chatrou
ML,
Drozdov
I,
Zheng
Y,
Davidson
SM,
Soong
D,
et
al.
Vascular
smooth
muscle
cell
calciﬁcation
is
mediated
by
regulated
exosome
secretion.
Circ
Res.
(2015)
116:1312–23. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.305012
53. Chaudhary SC, Khalid S, Smethurst V, Monier D, Mobley J, Huet A,
et al. Proteomic proﬁling of extracellular vesicles released from vascular
smooth muscle cells during initiation of phosphate-induced mineralization.
Connect Tissue Res. (2018) 59(supp.1):55–61. doi: 10.1080/03008207.2018.14
44759
54. Balcerzak M, Malinowska A, Thouverey C, Sekrecka A, Dadlez M, Buchet R,
et al. Proteome analysis of matrix vesicles isolated from femurs of chicken
embryo. Proteomics. (2008) 8:192–205. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200700612
55. Cui L, Houston DA, Farquharson C, MacRae VE. Characterisation of matrix
vesicles in skeletal and soft tissue mineralisation. Bone. (2016) 87:147–
58. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2016.04.007
56. Nahar-Gohad P, Gohad N, Tsai CC, Bordia R, Vyavahare N. Rat aortic
smooth muscle cells cultured on hydroxyapatite diﬀerentiate into osteoblast-
like cells via BMP-2-SMAD-5 pathway. Calcif Tissue Int. (2015) 96:359–
69. doi: 10.1007/s00223-015-9962-z
57. Neven E, Opdebeeck B, De Mare A, Bashir-Dar R, Dams G, Marynissen
R, et al. Can intestinal phosphate binding or inhibition of hydroxyapatite
growth in the vascular wall halt the progression of established aortic
calciﬁcation in chronic kidney disease? Calcif Tissue Int. (2016) 99:525–
34. doi: 10.1007/s00223-016-0178-7
58. Kirsch T, Harrison G, Golub EE, Nah HD. The roles of annexins and types
II and X collagen in matrix vesicle-mediated mineralization of growth plate
cartilage. J Biol Chem. (2000) 275:35577–83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M005648200
59. Chen NX, O’Neill KD, Moe SM. Matrix vesicles induce calciﬁcation of
recipient vascular smooth muscle cells through multiple signaling pathways.
Kidney Int. (2017) 93:343–54. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.07.019
60. Chaturvedi P, Chen NX, O’Neill K, McClintick JN, Moe SM, Janga SC.
Diﬀerential miRNA expression in cells and matrix vesicles in vascular
smooth muscle cells from rats with kidney disease. PLoS ONE. (2015)
10:e0131589. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131589
61. Hortells
L,
Sur
S,
St
Hilaire
C.
Cell
phenotype
transitions
in
cardiovascular
calciﬁcation.
Front
Cardiovasc
Med.
(2018)
5:27. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2018.00027
Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine | www.frontiersin.org
9
April 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 639740
Jiang et al.
Osteoclastogenesis and Osteoblastogenesis in Vascular Calciﬁcation
62. Owens
GK.
Molecular
control
of
vascular
smooth
muscle
cell
diﬀerentiation and phenotypic plasticity. Novartis Found Symp. (2007)
283:174–91. doi: 10.1002/9780470319413.ch14
63. Frismantiene A, Philippova M, Erne P, Resink TJ. Smooth muscle cell-driven
vascular diseases and molecular mechanisms of VSMC plasticity. Cell Signal.
(2018) 52:48–64. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2018.08.019
64. Lee GL, Yeh CC, Wu JY, Lin HC, Wang YF, Kuo YY, et al. TLR2 promotes
vascular smooth muscle cell chondrogenic diﬀerentiation and consequent
calciﬁcation via the concerted actions of osteoprotegerin suppression and
IL-6-mediated RANKL induction. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. (2019)
39:432–45. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.118.311874
65. Shen J, Yang M, Jiang H, Ju D, Zheng JP, Xu Z, et al. Arterial injury promotes
medial chondrogenesis in Sm22 knockout mice. Cardiovasc Res. (2011)
90:28–37. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvq378
66. McRobb LS, McGrath KCY, Tsatralis T, Liong EC, Tan JTM, Hughes G,
et al. Estrogen receptor control of atherosclerotic calciﬁcation and smooth
muscle cell osteogenic diﬀerentiation. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. (2017)
37:1127–37. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.117.309054
67. Naik V, Leaf EM, Hu JH, Yang HY, Nguyen NB, Giachelli CM, et al.
Sources of cells that contribute to atherosclerotic intimal calciﬁcation:
an in vivo genetic fate mapping study. Cardiovasc Res. (2012) 94:545–
54. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvs126
68. Wirka RC, Wagh D, Paik DT, Pjanic M, Nguyen T, Miller CL, et al.
Atheroprotective roles of smooth muscle cell phenotypic modulation and
the TCF21 disease gene as revealed by single-cell analysis. Nat Med. (2019)
25:1280–9. doi: 10.1038/s41591-019-0512-5
69. Espitia O, Chatelais M, Steenman M, Charrier C, Maurel B, Georges S, et
al. Implication of molecular vascular smooth muscle cell heterogeneity
among
arterial
beds
in
arterial
calciﬁcation.
PLoS
ONE.
(2018)
13:e0191976. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0191976
70. Tang R, Gao M, Wu M, Liu H, Zhang X, Liu B. High glucose mediates
endothelial-to-chondrocyte transition in human aortic endothelial cells.
Cardiovasc Diabetol. (2012) 11:113. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-11-113
71. Derwall M, Malhotra R, Lai CS, Beppu Y, Aikawa E, Seehra JS, et
al. Inhibition of bone morphogenetic protein signaling reduces vascular
calciﬁcation and atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. (2012)
32:613–22. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.242594
72. Yung L-M, Sánchez-Duﬀhues G, ten Dijke P, Yu PB. Bone morphogenetic
protein 6 and oxidized low-density lipoprotein synergistically recruit
osteogenic diﬀerentiation in endothelial cells. Cardiovasc Res. (2015)
108:278–87. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvv221
73. Malhotra
R,
Burke
MF,
Martyn
T,
Shakartzi
HR,
Thayer
TE,
O’Rourke
C,
et
al.
Inhibition
of
bone
morphogenetic
protein
signal
transduction
prevents
the
medial
vascular
calciﬁcation
associated
with
matrix
Gla
protein
deﬁciency.
PLoS
ONE.
(2015)
10:e0117098. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117098
74. Yao Y, Jumabay M, Ly A, Radparvar M, Cubberly MR, Boström KI. A role
for the endothelium in vascular calciﬁcation. Circulat Res. (2013) 113:495–
504. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.301792
75. Guihard PJ, Yao J, Blazquez-Medela AM, Iruela-Arispe L, Bostrom KI, Yao Y.
Endothelial-mesenchymal transition in vascular calciﬁcation of Ins2Akita/+
mice. PLoS ONE. (2016) 11:e0167936. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0167936
76. Davenport C, Harper E, Forde H, Rochfort KD, Murphy RP, Smith D, et
al. RANKL promotes osteoblastic activity in vascular smooth muscle cells
by upregulating endothelial BMP-2 release. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. (2016)
77:171–80. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2016.06.009
77. Rutkovskiy A, Lund M, Siamansour TS, Reine TM, Kolset SO, Sand KL, et
al. Mechanical stress alters the expression of calciﬁcation-related genes in
vascular interstitial and endothelial cells. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg.
(2019) 28:803–11. doi: 10.1093/icvts/ivy339
78. Bouabdallah J, Zibara K, Issa H, Lenglet G, Kchour G, Caus T,
et al. Endothelial cells exposed to phosphate and indoxyl sulphate
promote vascular calciﬁcation through interleukin-8 secretion. Nephrol Dial
Transplant. (2019) 34:1125–34. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfy325
79. Alique M, Ruiz-Torres MP, Bodega G, Noci MV, Troyano N, Bohorquez
L, et al. Microvesicles from the plasma of elderly subjects and from
senescent endothelial cells promote vascular calciﬁcation. Aging. (2017)
9:778–89. doi: 10.18632/aging.101191
80. Davaine JM, Quillard T, Chatelais M, Guilbaud F, Brion R, Guyomarch
B, et al. Bone like arterial calciﬁcation in femoral atherosclerotic
lesions: prevalence and role of osteoprotegerin and pericytes. Eur
J
Vasc
Endovasc
Surg.
(2016)
51:259–67.
doi:
10.1016/j.ejvs.2015.1
0.004
81. Aikawa E, Davaine J-M, Quillard T, Brion R, Lapérine O, Guyomarch
B, et al. Osteoprotegerin, pericytes and bone-like vascular calciﬁcation
are
associated
with
carotid
plaque
stability.
PLoS
ONE.
(2014)
9:e107642. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107642
82. Kirton JP, Wilkinson FL, Canﬁeld AE, Alexander MY. Dexamethasone
downregulates calciﬁcation-inhibitor molecules and accelerates osteogenic
diﬀerentiation of vascular pericytes: implications for vascular calciﬁcation.
Circ Res. (2006) 98:1264–72. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000223056.68892.8b
83. Collett
G,
Wood
A,
Alexander
MY,
Varnum
BC,
Boot-Handford
RP,
Ohanian
V,
et
al.
Receptor
tyrosine
kinase
Axl
modulates
the
osteogenic
diﬀerentiation
of
pericytes.
Circ
Res.
(2003)
92:1123–9. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000074881.56564.46
84. Yamagishi
S,
Fujimori
H,
Yonekura
H,
Tanaka
N,
Yamamoto
H.
Advanced
glycation
endproducts
accelerate
calciﬁcation
in
microvascular
pericytes.
Biochem
Biophys
Res
Commun.
(1999)
258:353–7. doi: 10.1006/bbrc.1999.0625
85. Canﬁeld AE, Doherty MJ, Wood AC, Farrington C, Ashton B, Begum N,
et al. Role of pericytes in vascular calciﬁcation: a review. Z Kardiol. (2000)
89(Suppl.2):20–7. doi: 10.1007/s003920070096
86. Schor AM, Allen TD, Canﬁeld AE, Sloan P, Schor SL. Pericytes derived
from the retinal microvasculature undergo calciﬁcation in vitro. J Cell Sci.
(1990) 97:449–61.
87. Li N, Cheng W, Huang T, Yuan J, Wang X, Song M. Vascular
adventitia calciﬁcation and its underlying mechanism. PLoS ONE. (2015)
10:e0132506. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132506
88. Shao
J-S,
Cheng
S-L,
Pingsterhaus
JM,
Charlton-Kachigian
N,
Loewy AP, Towler DA. Msx2 promotes cardiovascular calciﬁcation
by
activating
paracrine
Wnt
signals.
J
Clin
Investig.
(2005)
115:1210–20. doi: 10.1172/JCI24140
89. Simionescu A, Simionescu DT, Vyavahare NR. Osteogenic responses in
ﬁbroblasts activated by elastin degradation products and transforming
growth factor-beta1: role of myoﬁbroblasts in vascular calciﬁcation. Am J
Pathol. (2007) 171:116–23. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2007.060930
90. Watanabe Y, Suzuki M, Oyama Y, Kusano E, Tamba K, Iimura O,
et al. Cellular component of vascular calciﬁcation. Fibroblasts are
essential for calcium deposition in cultured cells. Nephron. (2002) 92:840–
5. doi: 10.1159/000065461
91. Towler DA, Cheng S-L, Krchma K, Behrmann A, Shao J-S, Lai C-F.
TNFR1-activated reactive oxidative species signals up-regulate osteogenic
Msx2 programs in aortic myoﬁbroblasts. Endocrinology. (2012) 153:3897–
910. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1216
92. Suyama T, Hatta M, Hata S, Ishikawa H, Yamazaki J. Diﬀerentiation of rat
dermal mesenchymal cells and calciﬁcation in three-dimensional cultures.
Tissue Eng Regen Med. (2016) 13:527–37. doi: 10.1007/s13770-016-9124-z
93. Liao J, Chen X, Li Y, Ge Z, Duan H, Zou Y, et al. Transfer of bone-
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells inﬂuences vascular remodeling and
calciﬁcation after balloon injury in hyperlipidemic rats. J Biomed Biotechnol.
(2012) 2012:165296. doi: 10.1155/2012/165296
94. Kramann R, Kunter U, Brandenburg VM, Leisten I, Ehling J, Klinkhammer
BM, et al. Osteogenesis of heterotopically transplanted mesenchymal stromal
cells in rat models of chronic kidney disease. J Bone Miner Res. (2013)
28:2523–34. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1994
95. Leszczynska A, O’Doherty A, Farrell E, Pindjakova J, O’Brien FJ, O’Brien T, et
al. Diﬀerentiation of vascular stem cells contributes to ectopic calciﬁcation of
atherosclerotic plaque. Stem Cells. (2016) 34:913–23. doi: 10.1002/stem.2315
96. Wang W, Li C, Pang L, Shi C, Guo F, Chen A, et al. Mesenchymal stem cells
recruited by active TGFβ contribute to osteogenic vascular calciﬁcation. Stem
Cells Dev. (2014) 23:1392–404. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0528
97. Wang S, Tong M, Hu S, Chen X. The bioactive substance secreted by MSC
retards mouse aortic vascular smooth muscle cells calciﬁcation. Biomed Res
Int. (2018) 2018:6053567. doi: 10.1155/2018/6053567
98. Wang S, Hu S, Wang J, Liu Y, Zhao R, Tong M, et al. Conditioned
medium from bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells inhibits
Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine | www.frontiersin.org
10
April 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 639740
Jiang et al.
Osteoclastogenesis and Osteoblastogenesis in Vascular Calciﬁcation
vascular calciﬁcation through blockade of the BMP2-Smad1/5/8 signaling
pathway. Stem Cell Res Ther. (2018) 9:160. doi: 10.1186/s13287-018-0894-1
99. Cianciolo G, La Manna G, Della Bella E, Cappuccilli ML, Angelini
ML, Dormi A, et al. Eﬀect of vitamin D receptor activator therapy on
vitamin D receptor and osteocalcin expression in circulating endothelial
progenitor cells of hemodialysis patients. Blood Purif. (2013) 35:187–
95. doi: 10.1159/000347102
100. Zhang H, Wang LJ, Si DL, Wang C, Yang JC, Jiang P, et al. Correlation
between osteocalcin-positive endothelial progenitor cells and spotty
calciﬁcation in patients with coronary artery disease. Clin Exp Pharmacol
Physiol. (2015) 42:734–9. doi: 10.1111/1440-1681.12366
101. Ding L, Vezzani B, Khan N, Su J, Xu L, Yan G, et al. CD10 expression
identiﬁes a subset of human perivascular progenitor cells with high
proliferation and calciﬁcation potentials. Stem Cells. (2019) 38:261–
75. doi: 10.1002/stem.3112
102. Kramann R, Goettsch C, Wongboonsin J, Iwata H, Schneider RK, Kuppe C,
et al. Adventitial MSC-like cells are progenitors of vascular smooth muscle
cells and drive vascular calciﬁcation in chronic kidney disease. Cell Stem Cell.
(2016) 19:628–42. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2016.08.001
103. Cho HJ, Lee JW, Cho HJ, Lee CS, Kim HS. Identiﬁcation of adult mesodermal
progenitor cells and hierarchy in atherosclerotic vascular calciﬁcation. Stem
Cells. (2018) 36:1075–96. doi: 10.1002/stem.2814
104. Li R, Mittelstein D, Lee J, Fang K, Majumdar R, Tintut Y, et al. A dynamic
model of calciﬁc nodule destabilization in response to monocyte- and
oxidized lipid-induced matrix metalloproteinases. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol.
(2012) 302:C658–65. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00313.2011
105. Yao Y, Watson AD, Ji S, Boström KI. Heat shock protein 70 enhances vascular
bone morphogenetic protein-4 signaling by binding matrix Gla protein.
Circulat Res. (2009) 105:575–84. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.202333
106. Li R, Mittelstein D, Kam W, Pakbin P, Du Y, Tintut Y, et al.
Atmospheric ultraﬁne particles promote vascular calciﬁcation via the NF-
kappaB signaling pathway. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. (2013) 304:C362–
9. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00322.2012
107. RadcliﬀK, Tang TB, Lim J, Zhang Z, Abedin M, Demer LL, et al. Insulin-
like growth factor-I regulates proliferation and osteoblastic diﬀerentiation
of calcifying vascular cells via extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase
and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathways. Circ Res. (2005) 96:398–
400. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000157671.47477.71
108. Abedin M, Lim J, Tang TB, Park D, Demer LL, Tintut Y. N-3 fatty acids
inhibit vascular calciﬁcation via the p38-mitogen-activated protein kinase
and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma pathways. Circ Res.
(2006) 98:727–9. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000216009.68958.e6
109. Han
KH,
Hennigar
RA,
O’Neill
WC.
The
association
of
bone
and
osteoclasts
with
vascular
calciﬁcation.
Vasc
Med.
(2015)
20:527–33. doi: 10.1177/1358863X15597076
110. Oksala N, Levula M, Pelto-Huikko M, Kytomaki L, Soini JT, Salenius J, et
al. Carbonic anhydrases II and XII are up-regulated in osteoclast-like cells in
advanced human atherosclerotic plaques-Tampere Vascular Study. Ann Med.
(2010) 42:360–70. doi: 10.3109/07853890.2010.486408
111. Itou
T,
Maldonado
N,
Yamada
I,
Goettsch
C,
Matsumoto
J,
Aikawa M, et al. Cystathionine
gamma-lyase accelerates
osteoclast
diﬀerentiation: identiﬁcation of a novel regulator of osteoclastogenesis
by
proteomic
analysis.
Arterioscler
Thromb
Vasc
Biol.
(2014)
34:626–34. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.302576
112. Maziere C, Louvet L, Gomila C, Kamel S, Massy Z, Maziere JC.
Oxidized low density lipoprotein decreases Rankl-induced diﬀerentiation of
osteoclasts by inhibition of Rankl signaling. J Cell Physiol. (2009) 221:572–
8. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21886
113. Lei Y, Iwashita M, Choi J, Aikawa M, Aikawa E. N-acetylglucosamine-
1-phosphate transferase suppresses lysosomal hydrolases in dysfunctional
osteoclasts: a potential mechanism for vascular calciﬁcation. J Cardiovasc
Dev Dis. (2015) 2:31–47. doi: 10.3390/jcdd2020031
114. Barinda AJ, Ikeda K, Hirata KI, Emoto N. Macrophages highly express
carbonic anhydrase 2 and play a signiﬁcant role in demineralization of the
ectopic calciﬁcation. Kobe J Med Sci. (2017) 63:E45–50.
115. Tan L, Wang Z, Li Y. Rabbit models provide insights into bone formation
related biological process in atherosclerotic vascular calciﬁcation. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun. (2018) 496:1369–75. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.02.035
116. Byon
CH,
Sun Y,
Chen
J,
Yuan
K,
Mao
X,
Heath
JM,
et
al.
Runx2-upregulated
receptor
activator
of
nuclear
factor
kappaB
ligand
in
calcifying
smooth
muscle cells
promotes
migration
and
osteoclastic
diﬀerentiation
of
macrophages.
Arterioscler
Thromb
Vasc
Biol.
(2011)
31:1387–96.
doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.22
2547
117. Hodroge A, Trecherel E, Cornu M, Darwiche W, Mansour A, Ait-
Mohand K, et al. Oligogalacturonic acid inhibits vascular calciﬁcation
by
two
mechanisms:
inhibition
of
vascular
smooth
muscle
cell
osteogenic
conversion
and
interaction
with
collagen.
Arterioscler
Thromb Vasc Biol. (2017) 37:1391–401. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.117.30
9513
118. Shi Y, Lu W, Hou Y, Fu K, Gan F, Liu J. Fibroblast growth factor 21
ameliorates vascular calciﬁcation by inhibiting osteogenic transition in
vitamin D3 plus nicotine-treated rats. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. (2018)
495:2448–55. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2017.10.115
119. Sapkota M, Shrestha SK, Yang M, Park YR, Soh Y. Aloe-emodin inhibits
osteogenic diﬀerentiation and calciﬁcation of mouse vascular smooth muscle
cells. Eur J Pharmacol. (2019) 865:172772. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2019.172772
120. Chinetti-Gbaguidi G, Daoudi M, Rosa M, Vinod M, Louvet L, Copin C, et al.
Human alternative macrophages populate calciﬁed areas of atherosclerotic
lesions and display impaired RANKL-induced osteoclastic bone resorption
activity. Circ Res. (2017) 121:19–30. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.310262
121. Guo Y, Bao S, Guo W, Diao Z, Wang L, Han X, et al. Bone
marrow
mesenchymal
stem
cell-derived
exosomes
alleviate
high
phosphorus-induced
vascular
smooth
muscle
cells
calciﬁcation
by
modifying
microRNA
proﬁles.
Funct
Integr
Genomics.
(2019)
19:633–43. doi: 10.1007/s10142-019-00669-0
122. Zhu M, Fang X, Zhou S, Li W, Guan S. Indirect coculture of vascular smooth
muscle cells with bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells inhibits vascular
calciﬁcation and downregulates the Wnt signaling pathways. Mol Med Rep.
(2016) 13:5141–8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.5182
123. Yokote S, Katsuoka Y, Yamada A, Ohkido I, Yokoo T. Eﬀect of
adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cell transplantation
on vascular
calciﬁcation in rats with adenine-induced kidney disease. Sci Rep. (2017)
7:14036. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-14492-9
124. Xin H, Xin F, Zhou S, Guan S. The Wnt5a/Ror2 pathway is associated
with determination of the diﬀerentiation fate of bone marrow mesenchymal
stem cells in vascular calciﬁcation. Int J Mol Med. (2013) 31:583–
8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1242
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Jiang, Zhang, Li, Chen, Yang, Lin, Hu and Qin. This is an open-
access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,
provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply
with these terms.
Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine | www.frontiersin.org
11
April 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 639740

===== Nakamichi2021_Bone_Tendon+Ligament+Differentiation =====

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Bone
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/bone
Regulation of tendon and ligament differentiation
Ryo Nakamichia,b, Hiroshi Asaharaa,c,⁎
a Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, MBB-102, , La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
b Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, Okayama
700-8558, Japan
c Department of Systems Biomedicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Tendon/ligament development
Transcription factor
Signaling pathway
Mechanical stress
A B S T R A C T
Tendons transmit power from muscles to bones, and ligaments maintain the stability of joints, thus producing
smooth and flexible movements of articular joints. However, tendons have poor self-healing ability upon damage
due to injuries, diseases, or aging. To maintain homeostasis or promote regeneration of the tendon/ligament, it is
critical to understand the mechanism responsible for the coordination of tendon/ligament-specific gene ex-
pression and subsequent cell differentiation. In this review, we have discussed the core molecular mechanisms
involved in the development and homeostasis of tendons and ligaments, with particular focus on transcription
factors, signaling, and mechanical stress.
1. Introduction
Motility dysfunction caused by musculoskeletal system disorder is a
critical health problem [1]. Tendon/ligament tissue is among the tis-
sues that build up the musculoskeletal system and is composed of col-
lagen fibers and tendon sheaths. Collagen fibers are mainly made from
type 1 collagen, and tendon sheaths mainly contain type 3 collagen
[2–4]. Tendons are formed in multiple layers. In particular, Epitenon
and Endotenon functions facilitate the gliding of bundles against one
another during tendon movement (Fig. 1). Tendon tissues play im-
portant roles in the transmission of force by connecting muscles with
bones [5–7], whereas ligament tissues connect bones with other bones,
thereby providing mobility and stability to joints [8]. When these tis-
sues lose their functions due to trauma or degeneration caused by
various diseases such as osteoarthritis, the patients suffer from severe
pain and deterioration of the quality of life. These tissues have poor
self-healing capacity, and once they are damaged, regaining sufficient
mechanical strength is difficult [9,10]. Thus, it is important to reveal
the detailed mechanism by which the homeostasis of these tissues is
maintained [11,12].
Knowledge of tendon/ligament development and maturation has
important implications for medical treatment aimed at maintaining
homeostasis, healing, and regeneration of these tissues. Transcription
factors and growth factors play fundamental roles in these biological
processes. The molecular mechanisms of tendon/ligament formation
have largely been elucidated by accumulating research findings in this
field in recent years; however, many questions still remain unanswered.
In this review, we have focused on the functions of central transcription
factors, signaling pathways, and mechanical stimulation that co-
ordinate development and maintain homeostasis in the tendon and li-
gament tissues.
2. Transcription factors
Transcription factors are proteins involved in the initiation or reg-
ulation of transcription of their target genes via binding to their cor-
responding promoter regions. During development, transcription fac-
tors play critical roles for coordinating the expression of multiple genes,
thereby promoting the differentiation and maturation of cells [13]. For
musculoskeletal development, a series of transcription factors reg-
ulating bone and cartilage were identified in the first half of 1990.
Research on transcription factors involved in tendon and ligament de-
velopment began to appear in the late 1990s. First, Scleraxis (Scx) was
discovered as a transcription factor expressed in the syndetome [14],
and it was later reported as a tendon tissue-specific transcription factor
[15]; next, Mohawk (Mkx) [16,17] and early growth responce1/2
(Egr1/2) [18] were reported as critical transcription factors for tendon
formation. Importantly, mice with single deletion of each of these
transcription factors do not completely lose tendons [16–20], thereby
suggesting the possibility of existence of additional key transcription
factors involved in tendon/ligament development, or potential mutual
compensation between these factors. The following sections describe
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2020.115609
Received 9 July 2020; Received in revised form 6 August 2020; Accepted 17 August 2020
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, MBB-102, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
E-mail address: asahara.syst@tmd.ac.jp (H. Asahara).
Bone 143 (2021) 115609
Available online 20 August 2020
8756-3282/ © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
T
the functions of these transcription factors in tendon and ligament
regulation, as per published studies.
2.1. Scx
Scx, a helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, plays a critical
role in tendon differentiation and is the first transcription factor re-
ported as a marker for this process [14,15]. Studies in mouse embryos
have revealed that Scx-expressing cells, known as tendon progenitor
cells, differentiate into tendon cells [15]. In the development of axial
tendons, Scx-expressing cells appear between the sclerotome and
myotome at E9.5, which is known as the syndetome and serves as the
primordium of the tendon or ligament [14,21] (Fig. 2A). Subsequently,
Scx expression in the syndetome is induced by fibroblast growth factors
(FGFs) expressed from the myotome, indicating the interaction between
muscles and tendons during differentiation [21]. The transforming
growth factor (TGFβ) signal from differentiating muscle and cartilage is
involved in the development of both tendons and ligaments by inducing
Scx expression [22].
As a transcription factor, Scx binds to the cis element of type 1
collagen together with the transcription factor Nfatc4 to promote its
gene expression [23]. In addition, the expression of Tenomodulin
(Tnmd), which is known as a late marker of tendon development, is also
induced by Scx [24]. A recent study says that Scx binds to the cis ele-
ment of the mouse Tnmd together with E12 or E47 to promote its gene
expression [25]. These reports suggest that Scx plays an important role
not only in the early phase of tendon-related gene expression but also in
the late phase of tendon development.
Fig. 1. Tendon structure. A. Schematic illustration of the bone-tendon-muscle complex. B. Schematic illustration of the multi-layered structure of tendon. Tenocytes
are located on Endotenon. C. Representative axial and sagittal view of collagen fibril in transmission electron microscopy.
Fig. 2. Schematic illustrations of the development of
tendon/ligament. A. The current model of tendon
development in limb trunk. Syndetome is located
between Myotome and Sclerotome. Syndetome is
stimulated by FGFs and TGFβ from Myotome and
Sclerotome. B. The current model of force-transmit-
ting tendon development. The developmental phases
are divided into the “Anchoring” phase and the
“Elongation” phase. C. The current model of liga-
ment development.
R. Nakamichi and H. Asahara
Bone 143 (2021) 115609
2
Interestingly, Scx knockout mice show severe defects in force-
transmitting and intermuscular tendons, but the phenotypes of short
tendons anchoring muscle and ligaments connecting bones with other
bones are relatively weak [19]. The discrepancy between these phe-
notypes can be explained as follows. Developmental phases of force-
transmitting and intermuscular tendons are divided into muscle-in-
dependent “bone anchoring” phase and muscle-dependent “elongation”
phase, whereas in ligaments, muscle-dependent “elongation” phase
does not occur [26] (Fig. 2B, C), and Scx plays an essential role in
elongation. This is consistent with the observation that Scx knockout
mice have not been reported to have a severe phenotype in areas with
less elongation response such as ligaments [27]. However, in another
report, Scx null were assessed both tendons and ligaments after birth
and found that Col1 expression was present in the ligaments but Tnmd
expression was abolished [28,29]. Tnmd knockout mice exhibit a phe-
notype of premature senescence in tendons with reduced tendon cell
density and enlarged collagen fibrillar diameters though the absence of
changes in key tendon-related markers [30]. In vitro study of TSPCs in
Tnmd knockout mice showed no effect on pluripotency but reduced cell
proliferative capacity and increased cellular senescence, suggesting the
in vivo result of Tnmd knockout mice [31]. Tnmd also regulates cell
adhesion through the BRICHOS domain, suggesting that Tnmd is a
transcription factor involved in cell stability [32]. Furthermore, in-
duction of Tnmd using BMSCs and ASCs in Tet-on Tnmd-overexpressing
mice results in elevated tendon-related markers, including Scx, and loss
of multilineage capacity [33]. Recently, it has been reported that the
tendons of Tnmd knockout mice have increased elasticity, which affects
motor function [34]. These results suggest that the stable expression of
Tnmd may contribute to the properties as a tendon cell and tissue, so
the loss of Tnmd expression in the ligaments of Scx null mice suggests
that its function as a ligament may be affected. In summary, Scx is a
critical transcription factor, which is expressed in tendon-specific cells
(called tenocytes) during tendon formation, playing a central role in
tendon differentiation and development and partly regulating tendon-
related markers such as Col1a1 and Tnmd.
2.2. Mkx
Mkx encodes 353 amino acids and belongs to a new class of the
TALE superclass of atypical homeobox genes. Expression analysis in
mouse embryos has revealed that Mkx is expressed in tendons, muscles,
cartilage progenitor cells, male gonads, and renal ureteric bud tip
during early development; however, at E12.5, Mkx is expressed in the
syndetome [35]. Analysis of Mkx-Venus knock-in mice has shown that
Mkx is expressed in tendon and ligament tissues throughout the body of
adult mice [17]. An Mkx knockout mouse analysis has revealed that
although the number of tenocytes in the tendon tissue is not affected,
the tendon structure remains hypoplastic throughout the mouse body
[16,17]. Mechanical testing of this hypoplastic tendon has shown that
no change in tendon strength per unit area occurs, but a reduction in
overall tendon strength due to reduced mass is observed [17]. Scx
knockout mice show a severe phenotype in the force-transmitting
tendon, whereas in Mkx knockout mice, hyperplasia is observed not
only in force-transmitting and intermuscular tendons but also in liga-
ment-like tissues such as intervertebral disc annulus fibrosus and peri-
odontal ligament [36,37].
Expression of type 1 collagen and several tendon-related genes are
markedly decreased in tendons and ligaments of Mkx knockout mice
and rats [16,17,36,38]. Regarding the function of Mkx as a transcrip-
tion factor, Mkx may have a dual role as a repressor [39,40], and an
activator [36,38,41,42]. As a repressor, Mkx forms a complex with
sin3A/histone deacetylase, suppressing muscle differentiation [43,39].
In muscle satellite cells, the expression of Myh7 mediated by Sox6 was
suppressed, regulating the differentiation of fast and slow muscles [40].
In this regard, Mkx knockout rats show an early tendon ossification
phenotype by chondrogenic transdifferentiation of tenocytes [38].
As an activator, MKX overexpression in human mesenchymal stem
cells or C3H10T1/2 promotes Scx and Col1a1, and multiple small leu-
cine-rich proteins (SLRPs) are elevated [36,41,42]. As a more com-
prehensive approach, ChIP-seq analysis against Mkx in rat tenocytes
was performed, revealing that the genome-wide direct targets of Mkx
include both tenogenic genes, such as Col1a1, and chondrogenic genes,
such as Sox9 [38], supporting the idea that Mkx has dual functions as
an activator and a repressor. Interestingly, the factors involved in the
TGFβ signaling pathway are elevated in Mkx-induced mesenchymal
stem cells [36,42], suggesting that Mkx potentiates the TGFβ signaling
pathway in tenocytes.
As a functional difference between Mkx and Scx in tendon devel-
opment, Mkx and Scx are supposed to have independent molecular
roles; Scx plays its role in the early development of tendons, whereas
Mkx is involved in tendon maturation [15–17,19]. Recently, decreased
expression of Scx and Tnmd was reported in Mkx knockout mice and
rats [36,38]. In addition, in Mkx-induced mesenchymal stem cells, Scx
expression is elevated through the activation of the TGFβ signaling
pathway [36,42]. Although Mkx and Scx expression timing and patterns
do not completely overlap, these observations suggest a potential re-
ciprocal regulatory interaction between them in tenocyte differentia-
tion and tendon development. In summary, Mkx is a transcription factor
that is expressed in tenocytes as well as Scx, inducing a set of tenogenic
genes such as Col1a1 and various SLRPs as transcriptional activators,
and simultaneously suppressing chondrogenic genes as transcriptional
repressors.
2.3. Egr1
Egr1 is a transcription factor belonging to the zinc finger tran-
scription factor family that responds immediately to growth factor sti-
mulation [44]. There are two Egrs involved in tendon development:
Egr1 and Egr2 [18]. Egr1 is expressed in the syndetome at E12.5 during
mouse embryogenesis, when Mkx expression also begins in the synde-
tome [18,27]. Egr2 is transiently expressed in tendons at E14.5 [18].
These factors show enhanced expression in the mouse embryo upon
FGF4 stimulation; the overexpression of Egr1 and Egr2 enhances the
expression of Scx, Col1a1, and other tendon-related collagens [18].
Egr1 knockout mice show reduced expression of multiple tendon-
related genes, including Scx and Mkx, during embryogenesis and a re-
duced number of collagen fibrils in the tendon [18]. However, in adult
Egr1 knockout mice, decreased expression of Scx continues, but the
expression of Mkx is restored [20] and there is a discrepancy of genetic
changes between developmental phase and adult phase in Egr1
knockout mice. Overexpression of Egr1 in mesenchymal stem cells in-
duces the expression of tendon - and ligament-related genes, including
Scx [20]. The TGFβ signaling pathway is activated in Egr1-over-
expressing mesenchymal stem cells, resulting in the upregulation of Scx
expression [20]. As described above, both Mkx and Egr1 have similar
functions to activate the TGFβ pathway and induce a set of tendon-
related genes; however, Mkx and Egr1 do not affect the expression of
each other [20,36,41,42].
The difference between Mkx and Egr1, when introduced into me-
senchymal stem cells, is as follows. The expression level of genes in-
volved in the Smad1/5/8 pathway decreases in Mkx-overexpressing
cells, thus reducing the activity of the Bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP) pathway [36]. Conversely, in Egr1-overexpressing cells, in-
creased expression of endogenous Growth differerntiation factor 7 (GDF-
7) activates the BMP pathway [45]. Therefore, the molecular me-
chanisms that regulate the BMP signal sensitivity in tenocytes through
Mkx and Egr1 might be different and independent. In summary, Egr1 is
a transcription factor involved in tendon formation, which is expressed
in tenocytes at the same time as Mkx, slightly after Scx expression, and
induces the expression of a set of tendon-related genes including Col1a1
and various SLRPs. Although Egr1 shares functional similarity with
Mkx,
they
might
act
independently
to
coordinate
tenocyte
R. Nakamichi and H. Asahara
Bone 143 (2021) 115609
3
differentiation and tendon formation.
3. Signaling pathway
In cell biology, signaling pathway refers to the process in which one
signal is converted into another. For example, a ligand binds to a re-
ceptor on the cell membrane, and this stimulus is transmitted to in-
tracellular signal molecules one after another, and finally reaches the
nucleus to regulate the transcription of genes. In tendon development,
TGFβ, GDF, Fibroblast growth factor/Ras/mitogen-activated protein
kinase (FGF/MAPK), and Mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1
(mTORC1) pathways have been shown to play crucial roles, which are
described below (Fig. 3).
3.1. TGFβ signaling pathway
The TGFβ signaling pathway is the most well-studied major reg-
ulator of tendon development. Activation of TGFβ signaling induces Scx
and Tnmd expression [22,46,47]. In Tgfb2/Tgfb3 double knockout
mouse embryos, both Scx and Tnmd expression were completely abol-
ished, implying the loss of tendon progenitor cells in the mice [22].
Although the atrophied muscular structure existed, the tendon/liga-
ment structure completely disappeared [22]. This suggests that the
TGFβ signal is essential for the development of tendon tissue. Inter-
estingly, tendon progenitor cells in these embryos disappear from
E12.5, after the appearance of syndetome during early development
[22]. Since TGFβ2 expression is detected only in differentiating muscles
and cartilage, it is hypothesized that the TGFβ signal from differ-
entiating muscles and cartilage after E12.5 contributes to tendon de-
velopment. A comprehensive transcriptome analysis of Scx-positive
cells sorted at each developmental stage (E11.5, E12.5, and E14.5)
using Scx-GFP mice also indicated that the gene expression related to
TGFβ signaling pathway showed the most dynamic changes during
embryogenesis [48]. Consistent with these findings, when TGFβ
pathway inhibitors and Smad2/3 pathway inhibitors are administered
to mouse limb explants, tenogenic genes including Scx, Col1a1, and
Col1a2, are downregulated [48]. In the analysis of downstream mole-
cules of the TGFβ signaling pathway, Smad3 could physically interact
with Scx or Mkx to form a complex, suggesting that the potential mo-
lecular function of Smad3 is to enhance Scx or Mkx function in tendon
development [49]. Smad3 knockout mice show a tendon orientation
defective phenotype [49]; however, the Smad3 knockout mouse phe-
notype is not as severe as that of the Tgfb2/Tgfb3 double knockout
mouse embryo, thus it is suggested that other downstream molecules of
the TGFβ signaling pathway are also involved in tendon development.
In summary, the TGFβ signaling pathway plays a role in maintaining
Scx-positive tendon progenitor cells during tendon development and is
an essential pathway for tendon development.
3.2. GDF-5, -6, and -7
GDF-5, -6, and -7 are proteins belonging to the TGFβ superfamily.
GDF-5 is strongly expressed in many articular joint regions, including
the phalanx joint at E11.5 during mouse embryogenesis [50,51]. Con-
trastingly, GDF-6 and -7 have low levels of expression in the carpal joint
during development [51]. Therefore, GDF-5 is recognized as a joint
marker in embryonic development. However, implanting these factors
in rats subcutaneously forms tendon-like tissues [52], suggesting the
potential role of tendon development. Both GDF-5 deficient mice and
GDF-6 deficient mice show defects in joints, ligaments, cartilage, and
multiple tissue formation [51]. With respect to joints, GDF-5 deficient
mice have many bone defects, including the phalanx; moreover, GDF-6
deficient mice have bone defects in the carpal joint [51].
Additionally, among tendons, the Achilles tendon and tail tendon of
8-week-old GDF-5 deficient mice have altered collagen structure and
reduced biomechanical capacity compared to those of wild type mice
[53,54]. GDF-5 stimulation in rat tendon cells increase collagen
synthesis capacity [55], and GDF-5 stimulation in MSCs promotes Scx,
Tnc, Tnmd, and Col1a1 expression and decreases Sox9 expression
[56,57].
In GDF-6 deficient mice at 4 weeks of age, tendons are biomecha-
nically weakened with reduced collagen content in collagen fibers, si-
milar to GDF-5 deficient mice phenotype [58]. In GDF-7 deficient mice,
a significant tendon phenotype was not observed at 16 weeks of age;
however, the expression of GDF-5 in the tendon is upregulated ap-
proximately twice, suggesting that increased GDF-5 levels may com-
pensate for the reduced GDF-7 function [59]. In another study, upon
stimulation of mesenchymal stem cells with GDF-7, the cells differ-
entiated into spindle-shaped tendon-like cells, and the expression level
of Scx and Col1a1 was increased via Smad, as observed by TGFβ sti-
mulation [60]. Taken together, GDF-5, -6, and -7 play a role in proper
tendon formation.
3.3. GDF-8
GDF-8, known as myostatin, is a protein belonging to the TGFβ
superfamily [61]. Myostatin is expressed in muscle cells during em-
bryogenesis, acts as a negative regulator of muscle mass [62], and
suppresses proliferation of myoblasts and Satellite cells [63,64].
Myostatin deficient mice show increased muscle mass and maximal
isometric contraction force [62,65]; however, in tendons, both the mass
of tissue and cell numbers are reduced with decreased Scx and Tnmd
expression [66]. Myostatin stimulation of mouse limb tendon-derived
fibroblasts increased the expression of Scx and Tnmd [67], indicating
that Myostatin acts negatively for myogenesis but positively for tendon
development [66].
3.4. FGF/MAPK signaling pathway
In a study involving chick embryos, FGFs were expressed in the
Fig. 3. Current model of tenocyte development.
Fibroblast growth factor: FGF; Transforming growth
factor: TGF; Growth differentiation factor: GDF;
mammalian target of rapamycin complex: mTORC;
Scleraxis: Scx; Mohawk: Mkx; Early growth response:
Egr; Tenomodulin: Tnmd; Type 1 collagen alpha
chain:
Col1a1;
Small
leucine-rich
proteoglycan:
SLRP.
R. Nakamichi and H. Asahara
Bone 143 (2021) 115609
4
myotome during tendon development to induce the expression of Scx
by acting on the syndetome [21,67–70]. Inhibition of FGF/MAPK
pathway signaling in chick embryos reduced the expression of Scx [71].
However, inhibition of FGF/MAPK pathway signaling in mouse limb
explants significantly increased the expression of Scx, Col1a1, and
Col1a2. The discrepancy between the species might be clarified by more
detailed genetically modified animal model studies.
3.5. mTORC1
mTORC1 is a factor that regulates a wide range of biological pro-
cesses including cell metabolism, differentiation, and proliferation [71].
Tendon-specific mTORC1 loss-of-function mice using Scx-cre mice show
reduced tendon thickness, and tendon-specific mTORC1 gain-of-func-
tion mice show hyperproliferation of cells and angiogenesis in tendons
[72,73]. In both mice, malformation of collagen was observed in ten-
dons [72,73]. RNA-seq of Achilles tendon from these mice at 1 month of
age showed decreased expression of SLRPs, Mkx, Tnmd, Col1a1, Dcn,
and Fmod in loss-of-function mice [72,73] and decreased expression of
SLRPs, Col1a1, Dcn, and Fmod in gain-of-function mice [72]. These
findings suggest that stable functioning of mTORC1 in the tendon is
important for the expression of ECM [72].
3.6. Mechanical stress
Mechano-stimulation plays a major role in the formation of mus-
culoskeletal tissues [74–76]. Particularly, in tendons, proper exercise
load leads to an increase in the amount of type 1 collagen in tendons,
suggesting the importance of mechanical stress in tendon homeostasis
[77–80]. It is predicted that the mechano-sensing system in tenocytes
and tendon progenitor cells plays a critical role in these events. The
molecular mechanism of tendon development is different at the axial
level and at tendon development in the limb and head, with regard to
muscle contribution. Ablation of the dermomyotome before the for-
mation of Myotome completely diminishes Scx expression in somites
[21], and Myf5/Myod1 double knockout mice show loss of Scx-positive
cells in somites [81,82], suggesting that muscle development is essen-
tial from the early stages of axial tendon development. In contrast, Scx-
positive cells still exist in the early phase of limb and head tendon
development, even when muscle development is abolished; however,
subsequent late-phase tendon development is inhibited [15,26,82,83],
indicating that the role of muscles for tendon development in the ex-
tremities is to maintain Scx-positive cells during tendon elongation
[27]. When mechanical stress is applied to iPS cells derived from
tendon cells, Scx, Egr1, and other tendon-related genes are elevated
[84]. These observations support the idea that muscles may cause
mechanical stress to tendon progenitor cells during limb tendon de-
velopment and promote tendon elongation, while maintaining the ex-
pression of Scx in the cells.
Using tenocytes derived from mature tendons, type 1 collagen
production is induced by an increase in TGFβ expression in tenocytes
when moderate uniaxial mechanical stress is applied [85]. Mechanical
stress on tenocytes is also shown to maintain Scx expression through the
TGFβ/Smad2/3 pathway [86]. In addition, the expression of Scx is
upregulated by tension force rather than compression in mechanical
stress [87]. Furthermore, when mechanical stress is applied to tendon
stem/progenitor cells derived from mouse Achilles tendon and patella
tendon, Tnmd and Col1a1 expression increase [88], suggesting that the
mechanical stress signal cascade leads to Col1a1 induction in tenocytes
and tendon progenitor cells.
Focusing on Mkx, when tension is applied to tenocytes derived from
the patellar tendon of wild type rats using a cell stretcher, the expres-
sion of tendon-related genes such as Mkx, Col1a1, and SLRPs is in-
creased [38,89]. However, the expression of these tendon-related genes
is not increased in tenocytes from the patellar tendon of Mkx knockout
rats, but the expression of Sox6 and Sox9, which are genes associated
with cartilage differentiation, is increased [38]. Furthermore, Gtf2ird1
has been reported as a regulator of Mkx in response to mechanical stress
[89]. These findings suggest that mechano-signal may regulate teno-
genic gene expressions via Gtf2ird1–Mkx cascade in tenocytes.
Taken together, mechanical stress plays a crucial role both in the
development of tendons and in the maintenance of tendon homeostasis
by regulating the expression of tendon-specific transcription factors,
Scx and Mkx.
4. Conclusion
In this article, we have reviewed three transcription factors, four
signaling pathways, and mechanical stress in tendons, during tendon
development. Although cell signals and mechanical stress promote
differentiation of tenocytes, the detailed molecular mechanism of how
these stimuli could be integrated in tendon development and home-
ostasis remains to be elucidated. Further research in the field should
clarify the molecular network in tendons, which will provide ther-
apeutic targets and tools to solve tendon-related medical issues.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ryo Nakamichi:Writing - original draft.Hiroshi Asahara:Writing -
review & editing.
Acknowledgement
We thank all members of the Asahara Laboratory for many pro-
ductive discussions. This review was supported by the Japan Society for
the Promotion of Science (Grant Numbers: 20H00547 to H. A.), the
Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (Grant numbers:
JP20gm0810008 to H. A.), and grants from the National Institutes of
Health (Grant Numbers: AR050631 and AR065379 to H. A.).
References
[1] R. Horton, GBD 2010: understanding disease, injury, and risk, Lancet 380 (2012)
2053–2054.
[2] K. Kuhn, The structure of collagen, Essays Biochem. 5 (1969) 59–87.
[3] N. Ochiai, T. Matsui, N. Miyaji, et al., Vascular anatomy of flexor tendons. I.
Vincular system and blood supply of the profundus tendon in the digital sheath, J.
Hand. Surg. Am. 4 (1979) 321–330.
[4] D. Dykyj, K.T. Jules, The clinical anatomy of tendons, J. Am. Podiatr. Med. Assoc.
81 (1991) 358–365.
[5] D.H. Elliott, Structure and function of mammalian tendon, Biol. Rev. Camb. Philos.
Soc. 40 (1965) 392–421.
[6] P. Kannus, Structure of the tendon connective tissue, Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 10
(2000) 312–320.
[7] C.I. Buchanan, R.L. Marsh, Effects of exercise on the biomechanical, biochemical
and structural properties of tendons, Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A Mol. Integr.
Physiol. 133 (2002) 1101–1107.
[8] C.B. Frank, Ligament structure, physiology and function, J. Musculoskelet.
Neuronal Interact. 4 (2004) 199–201.
[9] P.R. Manske, R.H. Gelberman, J.S. Vande Berg, et al., Intrinsic flexor-tendon repair.
A morphological study in vitro, J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 66 (1984) 385–396.
[10] P. Sharma, N. Maffulli, Tendon injury and tendinopathy: healing and repair, J. Bone
Joint Surg. Am. 87 (2005) 187–202.
[11] A. Carbone, S. Rodeo, Review of current understanding of post-traumatic osteoar-
thritis resulting from sports injuries, J. Orthop. Res. 35 (2017) 397–405.
[12] L.J. Wang, N. Zeng, Z.P. Yan, et al., Post-traumatic osteoarthritis following ACL
injury, Arthritis Res. Ther. 22 (2020) 57.
[13] C.G. Lobe, Transcription factors and mammalian development, Curr. Top. Dev. Biol.
27 (1992) 351–383.
[14] P. Cserjesi, D. Brown, K.L. Ligon, et al., Scleraxis: a basic helix-loop-helix protein
that prefigures skeletal formation during mouse embryogenesis, Development 121
(1995) 1099–1110.
[15] R. Schweitzer, J.H. Chyung, L.C. Murtaugh, et al., Analysis of the tendon cell fate
using Scleraxis, a specific marker for tendons and ligaments, Development 128
(2001) 3855–3866.
[16] W. Liu, S.S. Watson, Y. Lan, et al., The atypical homeodomain transcription factor
Mohawk controls tendon morphogenesis, Mol. Cell. Biol. 30 (2010) 4797–4807.
[17] Y. Ito, N. Toriuchi, T. Yoshitaka, et al., The Mohawk homeobox gene is a critical
regulator of tendon differentiation, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107 (2010)
10538–10542.
[18] V. Lejard, F. Blais, M.J. Guerquin, et al., EGR1 and EGR2 involvement in vertebrate
R. Nakamichi and H. Asahara
Bone 143 (2021) 115609
5
tendon differentiation, J. Biol. Chem. 286 (2011) 5855–5867.
[19] N.D. Murchison, B.A. Price, D.A. Conner, et al., Regulation of tendon differentiation
by scleraxis distinguishes force-transmitting tendons from muscle-anchoring ten-
dons, Development 134 (2007) 2697–2708.
[20] M.J. Guerquin, B. Charvet, G. Nourissat, et al., Transcription factor EGR1 directs
tendon differentiation and promotes tendon repair, J. Clin. Invest. 123 (2013)
3564–3576.
[21] A.E. Brent, R. Schweitzer, C.J. Tabin, A somitic compartment of tendon progenitors,
Cell 113 (2003) 235–248.
[22] B.A. Pryce, S.S. Watson, N.D. Murchison, et al., Recruitment and maintenance of
tendon progenitors by TGFbeta signaling are essential for tendon formation,
Development 136 (2009) 1351–1361.
[23] V. Lejard, G. Brideau, F. Blais, et al., Scleraxis and NFATc regulate the expression of
the pro-alpha1(I) collagen gene in tendon fibroblasts, J. Biol. Chem. 282 (2007)
17665–17675.
[24] C. Shukunami, A. Takimoto, M. Oro, et al., Scleraxis positively regulates the ex-
pression of tenomodulin, a differentiation marker of tenocytes, Dev. Biol. 298
(2006) 234–247.
[25] C. Shukunami, A. Takimoto, Y. Nishizaki, et al., Scleraxis is a transcriptional acti-
vator that regulates the expression of Tenomodulin, a marker of mature tenocytes
and ligamentocytes, Sci. Rep. 8 (1) (2018) 3155.
[26] A.H. Huang, T.J. Riordan, B. Pryce, et al., Musculoskeletal integration at the wrist
underlies the modular development of limb tendons, Development 142 (2015)
2431–2441.
[27] A.H. Huang, S.S. Watson, L. Wang, et al., Requirement for scleraxis in the recruit-
ment of mesenchymal progenitors during embryonic tendon elongation,
Development 146 (2019).
[28] Y. Yoshimoto, A. Takimoto, H. Watanabe, et al., Scleraxis is required for maturation
of tissue domains for proper integration of the musculoskeletal system, Sci. Rep. 7
(2017) 45010.
[29] C. Shukunami, A. Takimoto, Y. Nishizaki, et al., Scleraxis is a transcriptional acti-
vator that regulates the expression of Tenomodulin, a marker of mature tenocytes
and ligamentocytes, Sci. Rep. 8 (1) (2018) 3155.
[30] D. Docheva, E.B. Hunziker, R. Fässler, et al., Tenomodulin is necessary for tenocyte
proliferation and tendon maturation, Mol. Cell. Biol. 25 (2) (2005) 699–705.
[31] P. Alberton, S. Dex, C. Popov, et al., Loss of tenomodulin results in reduced self-
renewal and augmented senescence of tendon stem/progenitor cells, Stem Cells
Dev. 24 (5) (2015) 597–609.
[32] Y. Komiyama, S. Ohba, N. Shimohata, et al., Tenomodulin expression in the peri-
odontal ligament enhances cellular adhesion, PLoS One 8 (4) (2013) e60203.
[33] Y. Shi, Y. Xiong, Y. Jiang, et al., Conditional tenomodulin overexpression favors
tenogenic lineage differentiation of transgenic mouse derived cells, Gene. 598
(2017) 9–19.
[34] S. Dex, P. Alberton, L. Willkomm, et al., Tenomodulin is required for tendon en-
durance running and collagen I fibril adaptation to mechanical load, EBioMedicine.
20 (2017) 240–254.
[35] D.M. Anderson, J. Arredondo, K. Hahn, et al., Mohawk is a novel homeobox gene
expressed in the developing mouse embryo, Dev. Dyn. 235 (2006) 792–801.
[36] R. Nakamichi, Y. Ito, M. Inui, et al., Mohawk promotes the maintenance and re-
generation of the outer annulus fibrosus of intervertebral discs, Nat. Commun. 7
(2016) 12503.
[37] N. Koda, T. Sato, M. Shinohara, et al., The transcription factor Mohawk homeobox
regulates homeostasis of the periodontal ligament, Development 144 (2017)
313–320.
[38] H. Suzuki, Y. Ito, M. Shinohara, et al., Gene targeting of the transcription factor
Mohawk in rats causes heterotopic ossification of Achilles tendon via failed teno-
genesis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 113 (2016) 7840–7845.
[39] D.M. Anderson, B.J. Beres, J. Wilson-Rawls, et al., The homeobox gene Mohawk
represses transcription by recruiting the sin3A/HDAC co-repressor complex, Dev.
Dyn. 238 (2009) 572–580.
[40] D.M. Anderson, R. George, M.B. Noyes, et al., Characterization of the DNA-binding
properties of the Mohawk homeobox transcription factor, J. Biol. Chem. 287 (2012)
35351–35359.
[41] K. Otabe, H. Nakahara, A. Hasegawa, et al., Transcription factor Mohawk controls
tenogenic differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells in vitro and in
vivo, J. Orthop. Res. 33 (2015) 1–8.
[42] H. Liu, C. Zhang, S. Zhu, et al., Mohawk promotes the tenogenesis of mesenchymal
stem cells through activation of the TGFbeta signaling pathway, Stem Cells 33
(2015) 443–455.
[43] H.N. Chuang, K.M. Hsiao, H.Y. Chang, et al., The homeobox transcription factor
Irxl1 negatively regulates MyoD expression and myoblast differentiation, FEBS J.
281 (2014) 2990–3003.
[44] M. Sheng, M.E. Greenberg, The regulation and function of c-fos and other im-
mediate early genes in the nervous system, Neuron 4 (1990) 477–485.
[45] X. Tao, J. Liu, L. Chen, et al., EGR1 induces tenogenic differentiation of tendon stem
cells and promotes rabbit rotator cuff repair, Cell. Physiol. Biochem. 35 (2015)
699–709.
[46] K. Oka, S. Oka, R. Hosokawa, et al., TGF-beta mediated Dlx5 signaling plays a
crucial role in osteo-chondroprogenitor cell lineage determination during mandible
development, Dev. Biol. 321 (2008) 303–309.
[47] C.I. Lorda-Diez, J.A. Montero, C. Martinez-Cue, et al., Transforming growth factors
beta coordinate cartilage and tendon differentiation in the developing limb me-
senchyme, J. Biol. Chem. 284 (2009) 29988–29996.
[48] E. Havis, M.A. Bonnin, I. Olivera-Martinez, et al., Transcriptomic analysis of mouse
limb tendon cells during development, Development 141 (2014) 3683–3696.
[49] E. Berthet, C. Chen, K. Butcher, et al., Smad3 binds Scleraxis and Mohawk and
regulates tendon matrix organization, J. Orthop. Res. 31 (2013) 1475–1483.
[50] A. Rafipay, A.L.R. Berg, L. Erskine, et al., Expression analysis of limb element
markers during mouse embryonic development, Dev. Dyn. 247 (2018) 1217–1226.
[51] S.H. Settle Jr., R.B. Rountree, A. Sinha, et al., Multiple joint and skeletal patterning
defects caused by single and double mutations in the mouse Gdf6 and Gdf5 genes,
Dev. Biol. 254 (2003) 116–130.
[52] N.M. Wolfman, G. Hattersley, K. Cox, et al., Ectopic induction of tendon and liga-
ment in rats by growth and differentiation factors 5, 6, and 7, members of the TGF-
beta gene family, J. Clin. Invest. 100 (1997) 321–330.
[53] B. Mikic, B.J. Schalet, R.T. Clark, et al., GDF-5 deficiency in mice alters the ultra-
structure, mechanical properties and composition of the Achilles tendon, J. Orthop.
Res. 19 (2001) 365–371.
[54] R.T. Clark, T.L. Johnson, B.J. Schalet, et al., GDF-5 deficiency in mice leads to
disruption of tail tendon form and function, Connect. Tissue Res. 42 (2001)
175–186.
[55] J.S. Dines, M.B. Cross, D. Dines, et al., In vitro analysis of an rhGDF-5 suture coating
process and the effects of rhGDF-5 on rat tendon fibroblasts, Growth Factors 29
(2011) 1–7.
[56] S.L. Tan, R.E. Ahmad, T.S. Ahmad, et al., Effect of growth differentiation factor 5 on
the proliferation and tenogenic differentiation potential of human mesenchymal
stem cells in vitro, Cells Tissues Organs 196 (2012) 325–338.
[57] Y. Qu, L. Zhou, B. Lv, et al., Growth differentiation factor5 induces tenomodulin
expression via phosphorylation of p38 and promotes viability of murine mesench-
ymal stem cells from compact bone, Mol. Med. Rep. 17 (2018) 3640–3646.
[58] B. Mikic, K. Rossmeier, L. Bierwert, Identification of a tendon phenotype in GDF6
deficient mice, Anat. Rec. (Hoboken) 292 (2009) 396–400.
[59] B. Mikic, R. Entwistle, K. Rossmeier, et al., Effect of GDF-7 deficiency on tail tendon
phenotype in mice, J. Orthop. Res. 26 (2008) 834–839.
[60] Q.W. Wang, Z.L. Chen, Y.J. Piao, Mesenchymal stem cells differentiate into teno-
cytes by bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) 12 gene transfer, J. Biosci. Bioeng. 100
(2005) 418–422.
[61] M.W. Hamrick, A.C. McPherron, C.O. Lovejoy, et al., Femoral morphology and
cross-sectional geometry of adult myostatin-deficient mice, Bone 27 (2000)
343–349.
[62] A.C. McPherron, A.M. Lawler, S.J. Lee, Regulation of skeletal muscle mass in mice
by a new TGF-beta superfamily member, Nature 387 (1997) 83–90.
[63] M. Thomas, B. Langley, C. Berry, et al., Myostatin, a negative regulator of muscle
growth, functions by inhibiting myoblast proliferation, J. Biol. Chem. 275 (2000)
40235–40243.
[64] S. McCroskery, M. Thomas, L. Maxwell, et al., Myostatin negatively regulates sa-
tellite cell activation and self-renewal, J. Cell Biol. 162 (2003) 1135–1147.
[65] C.L. Mendias, J.E. Marcin, D.R. Calerdon, et al., Contractile properties of EDL and
soleus muscles of myostatin-deficient mice, J. Appl. Physiol. (1985) 101 (2006)
898–905.
[66] C.L. Mendias, K.I. Bakhurin, J.A. Faulkner, Tendons of myostatin-deficient mice are
small, brittle, and hypocellular, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 105 (2008) 388–393.
[67] F. Edom-Vovard, B. Schuler, M.A. Bonnin, et al., Fgf4 positively regulates scleraxis
and tenascin expression in chick limb tendons, Dev. Biol. 247 (2002) 351–366.
[68] T.G. Smith, D. Sweetman, M. Patterson, et al., Feedback interactions between MKP3
and ERK MAP kinase control scleraxis expression and the specification of rib pro-
genitors in the developing chick somite, Development 132 (2005) 1305–1314.
[69] S. Eloy-Trinquet, H. Wang, F. Edom-Vovard, et al., Fgf signaling components are
associated with muscles and tendons during limb development, Dev. Dyn. 238
(2009) 1195–1206.
[70] E. Havis, M.A. Bonnin, J. Esteves de Lima, et al., TGFbeta and FGF promote tendon
progenitor fate and act downstream of muscle contraction to regulate tendon dif-
ferentiation during chick limb development, Development 143 (2016) 3839–3851.
[71] R.A. Saxton, D.M. Sabatini, mTOR signaling in growth, metabolism, and disease,
Cell 168 (2017) 960–976.
[72] J. Lim, E. Munivez, M.M. Jiang, et al., mTORC1 signaling is a critical regulator of
postnatal tendon development, Sci. Rep. 7 (2017) 17175.
[73] X.X. Cong, X.S. Rao, J.X. Lin, et al., Activation of AKT-mTOR signaling directs te-
nogenesis of mesenchymal stem cells, Stem Cells 36 (2018) 527–539.
[74] K.T. Palomares, R.E. Gleason, Z.D. Mason, et al., Mechanical stimulation alters
tissue differentiation and molecular expression during bone healing, J. Orthop. Res.
27 (2009) 1123–1132.
[75] M. Khoshgoftar, C.C. van Donkelaar, K. Ito, Mechanical stimulation to stimulate
formation of a physiological collagen architecture in tissue-engineered cartilage: a
numerical study, Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng. 14 (2011) 135–144.
[76] G. Candiani, S.A. Riboldi, N. Sadr, et al., Cyclic mechanical stimulation favors
myosin heavy chain accumulation in engineered skeletal muscle constructs, J. Appl.
Biomater. Biomech. 8 (2010) 68–75.
[77] H. Langberg, L. Rosendal, M. Kjaer, Training-induced changes in peritendinous type
I collagen turnover determined by microdialysis in humans, J. Physiol. 534 (2001)
297–302.
[78] H. Langberg, H. Ellingsgaard, T. Madsen, et al., Eccentric rehabilitation exercise
increases peritendinous type I collagen synthesis in humans with Achilles tendi-
nosis, Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 17 (2007) 61–66.
[79] T. Wang, Z. Lin, R.E. Day, et al., Programmable mechanical stimulation influences
tendon homeostasis in a bioreactor system, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 110 (2013)
1495–1507.
[80] T. Wang, Z. Lin, M. Ni, et al., Cyclic mechanical stimulation rescues achilles tendon
from degeneration in a bioreactor system, J. Orthop. Res. 33 (2015) 1888–1896.
[81] A.E. Brent, T. Braun, C.J. Tabin, Genetic analysis of interactions between the so-
mitic muscle, cartilage and tendon cell lineages during mouse development,
Development 132 (2005) 515–528.
R. Nakamichi and H. Asahara
Bone 143 (2021) 115609
6
[82] J.W. Chen, J.L. Galloway, The development of zebrafish tendon and ligament
progenitors, Development 141 (2014) 2035–2045.
[83] M.A. Bonnin, C. Laclef, R. Blaise, et al., Six1 is not involved in limb tendon de-
velopment, but is expressed in limb connective tissue under Shh regulation, Mech.
Dev. 122 (2005) 573–585.
[84] F. Yang, A. Zhang, D.W. Richardson, Regulation of the tenogenic gene expression in
equine tenocyte-derived induced pluripotent stem cells by mechanical loading and
Mohawk, Stem Cell Res. 39 (2019) 101489.
[85] G. Yang, R.C. Crawford, J.H. Wang, Proliferation and collagen production of human
patellar tendon fibroblasts in response to cyclic uniaxial stretching in serum-free
conditions, J. Biomech. 37 (2004) 1543–1550.
[86] T. Maeda, T. Sakabe, A. Sunaga, et al., Conversion of mechanical force into TGF-
beta-mediated biochemical signals, Curr. Biol. 21 (2011) 933–941.
[87] A. Takimoto, M. Kawatsu, Y. Yoshimoto, et al., Scleraxis and osterix antag-
onistically regulate tensile force-responsive remodeling of the periodontal ligament
and alveolar bone, Development. 142 (4) (2015) 787–796.
[88] J. Zhang, J.H. Wang, The effects of mechanical loading on tendons–an in vivo and
in vitro model study, PLoS One 8 (2013) e71740.
[89] T. Kayama, M. Mori, Y. Ito, et al., Gtf2ird1-dependent Mohawk expression regulates
mechanosensing properties of the tendon, Mol. Cell. Biol. 36 (2016) 1297–1309.
R. Nakamichi and H. Asahara
Bone 143 (2021) 115609
7

===== Scott2012_StemCellsDev_EctopicBoneFormation+Models =====

CONCISE REVIEW
Brief Review of Models of Ectopic Bone Formation
Michelle A. Scott,1 Benjamin Levi,2 Asal Askarinam,3 Alan Nguyen,3 Todd Rackohn,3 Kang Ting,3
Chia Soo,4 and Aaron W. James3
Ectopic bone formation is a unique biologic entity—distinct from other areas of skeletal biology. Animal research
models of ectopic bone formation most often employ rodent models and have unique advantages over ortho-
topic (bone) environments, including a relative lack of bone cytokine stimulation and cell-to-cell interaction with
endogenous (host) bone-forming cells. This allows for relatively controlled in vivo experimental bone formation.
A wide variety of ectopic locations have been used for experimentation, including subcutaneous, intramuscular,
and kidney capsule transplantation. The method, beneﬁts and detractions of each method are summarized in the
following review. Brieﬂy, subcutaneous implantation is the simplest method. However, the most pertinent
concern is the relative paucity of bone formation in comparison to other models. Intramuscular implantation is
also widely used and relatively simple, however intramuscular implants are exposed to skeletal muscle satellite
progenitor cells. Thus, distinguishing host from donor osteogenesis becomes challenging without cell-tracking
studies. The kidney capsule (perirenal or renal capsule) method is less widely used and more technically
challenging. It allows for supraphysiologic blood and nutrient resource, promoting robust bone growth. In
summary, ectopic bone models are extremely useful in the evaluation of bone-forming stem cells, new os-
teoinductive biomaterials, and growth factors; an appropriate choice of model, however, will greatly increase
experimental success.
What Is Ectopic Bone Formation?
E
ctopic bone, from the Greek word ektopos or ‘‘away
from a place,’’ refers to the ossiﬁcation of tissues outside
their usual origins. Ectopic bone formation is most often ex-
perimentally induced, but does also have clinical relevance. For
example, ectopic bone has long been described as a congenital
or inherited malformation [1–4], or a complication of various
conditions such as paraplegia [5,6], posthip arthroplasty [7,8],
postburn, or traumatic injury [9–11]. Such pathologic forma-
tion of endochondral bone in soft tissues such as muscle, sub-
cutaneous tissue, and ﬁbrous tissue adjacent to joints is called
heterotopic ossiﬁcation (HO). Up to 10% of patients who have
invasive surgery will develop this debilitating complication,
which is thought to be caused by local inﬂammation followed
by recruitment of skeletal progenitor cells [12,13]. Though less
frequently observed, hereditary forms of ectopic bone forma-
tion also exist. One such disease entity is called ﬁbrodysplasia
ossiﬁcans progressiva resulting from a mutation in the ACVR1
gene that causes upregulation of BMP1 [14]. Experimental in-
duction of bone tissue has been long-standing, ﬁrst in muscle
pouch and subcutaneous models [15,16], and more recently in
the kidney capsule model. Each of these experimental entities
offers distinct advantages and drawbacks that will be dis-
cussed below.
Ectopic Versus Orthotopic Bone Formation
The distinction between ectopic and orthotopic bone for-
mation is an important one. Orthotopic bone formation is
derived from the greek word orthos meaning ‘‘straight, right’’
and refers to studies in which bone is formed in its correct
anatomical location. Such studies can either be nonsurgical
(eg, the injection of materials into the long bone periosteum)
or surgical (eg, a calvarial defect in which material is grafted
in the defect site). In these instances, the distinct biochemical
and mechanical environment of an orthotopic bone model
should not be overlooked. Bone injury has long been un-
derstood to elicit a cascade of signaling pathway activation,
including ﬁbroblast growth factor [17], transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-b) [18], Hedgehog [19], and Wingless Pro-
tein (Wnt) signaling [20] among others. This upregulation of
1Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, Roseman University of Health Sciences, Henderson, Nevada.
2Division of Plastic Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
3Dental and Craniofacial Research Institute and Section of Orthodontics, School of Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles,
California.
4UCLA and Orthopaedic Hospital, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and the Orthopaedic Hospital Research Center, University of
California, Los Angeles, California.
STEM CELLS AND DEVELOPMENT
Volume 21, Number 5, 2012
 Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/scd.2011.0517
655
Table 1. Recent Studies Using Subcutaneous Implantation
Article
No.
PMID
Year
Author
Cell type
Scaffold
Protein Duration
Result
Host animal
1.
21702756 2011 Park52
—
bMBCP
BMP2
8 Weeks
Bone formation only observed with
the combination of bMBCP
scaffold and BMP2
Rat
2.
21118417 2011 Song53
hPDLSCs
Collagen
BMP2
5 Days
BMP2 promoted hPDLSCs to form
mineralized cementum and
downregulated organized
PDL tissue
Mice
3.
21710441 2011 Janicki54
Human BMSCs
B-TCP and ﬁbrin glue
—
8 Weeks
Variable ectopic bone formation
observed between human donors
Mice
4.
21303418 2011 Ma26
Predifferentiated cell sheets
from rabbit BMSCs
B-TCP cylinder
-
8 Weeks
Highly mineralized bone tissue
observed
Rabbit
5.
20666615 2010 Kempen56
—
PLGA/poly(propylene fumarate)/
gelatin composites
BMP2
8 Weeks
Bone only seen in BMP2-loaded
composites. Additional treatment
with PTH enhanced bone formation
in BMP2 groups
Rat
6.
20925348 2010 Seyedjafari57
Human cord blood
derived MSCs
PLLA and HA-coated PLLA
—
10 Weeks Higher ossiﬁcation and formation of
trabeculi observed in HA-coated
implants
Mice
7.
20638718 2010 Wu58
—
Titanium coated discs (collagen,
Ethisorb, PLGA or Polyactive)
BMP2
5 Weeks
Collagen and Ethisorb coating
increased bone formation
Rat
8.
20149447 2010 Lee59
—
aCS
BMP2
8 Weeks
BMP2 increased bone formation and
rate of bone growth across all
groups
Rat
9.
19866334 2010 Eguchi60
Mouse osteoblasts/
osteoclasts
Polymer discs
BMP2,
ETN
3 Weeks
ETN enhanced the bone-inducing
capacity of BMP2
Mouse
10.
19918912 2010 Bahar61
BMSCs
Demineralized (DBM), deproteinized
(HABM) or nontreated (MBM)
cortical bone cylinders
—
10 Weeks Demineralized or nontreated cortical
bone cylinders showed progressive
mineralization, while deproteinized
cylinders did not
Rat
11.
20636333 2010 Boos62
Sheep BMSCs
B-tricalcium phosphate/
hydroxyapatite granules
BMP2
12 Weeks Ectopic bone could be generated
using MSCs with b-TCP/HA granules
alone. BMP2 increased bone formation
Sheep
12.
19580831 2010 Zhao35
—
DBM with or without BMP2
cross-linking
BMP2
4 Weeks
The addition of BMP2 cross-linking
to DBM resulted in signiﬁcant
bone formation
Rat
13.
21478102 2010 Go¨tz64
—
Nano-crystalline hydroylapatite
embedded into a silica gel matrix
—
8 Months As early as 5 weeks, new bone
formation was observed
Mini pig
14.
20497064 2010 Cui65
D1 mouse osteoprogenitor
cell line overexpressing
VEGF or BMP6
PLGA
—
3 Weeks
Forced overexpression of VEGF + BMP6
combination led to greatest bone
formation
Mouse
15.
20438297 2010 Byeon66
cUCB MSCs
B-TCP
—
84 Days
cUCB MSCs form signiﬁcant osteoid
matrix with ALP positive precursor
Dog
(Table continued/)
656
Table 1. (Continued)
Article
No.
PMID
Year
Author
Cell type
Scaffold
Protein Duration
Result
Host animal
cells
16.
19540582 2009 Zhang67
C2C12 cells
Nanoparticulates of BSA/
polyethylenimine for BMP2 release
BMP2
3 Weeks
Nanoparticulate coating was not
effective due to cytoxicity. BMP2
alone induced robust ectopic bone
Rat
17.
19828890 2009 Yang68
DPSCs transfected with
BMP2
Ceramic
—
12 Weeks Only BMP2 transfected cells showed
obvious mineralization
Mouse
18.
19842114 2009 Ben-David69
Human BMSCs
Gelatin-based hydrogel and ceramic
(CaCO3/B-TCP)
—
8 Weeks
BMSCs showed substantial new
bone formation, while scaffolds
without cells
did not
Mouse
19.
19890976 2009 Ma31
Rabbit BMSCs
—
—
8 Weeks
Sheets of BMSCs without scaffold
and form ectopic bone
Mouse
20.
19335406 2009 Chang71
Bovine BMSCs
Alginate
—
30 Weeks BMSCs showed endochondral
bone formation, particularly at
high densities
Mouse
21.
19473144 2008 Matsushima72 Human BMSCs
HA ceramic or B-TCP
—
8 Weeks
Greater bone formation observed
with HA ceramic than B-TCP
Rat
22.
18458439 2007 Liu73
Human BMSCs
B-TCP
—
12 Weeks Predifferentiated BMSCs on B-TCP
resulted in woven bone as early
as 4 weeks
Mouse
23.
17324591 2007 Cai74
Mouse BMSCs
Alginate
—
8 Weeks
Predifferentiation of BMSCs
toward ostoegenesis or
chondrogenesis resulted in
ectopic bone or cartilage,
respectively
Mouse
bMBCP, macroporous biphasic calcium phosphate; BMP2, bone morphogenetic protein 2; hPDLSC, human periodontal ligament stem cell; BMSC, bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cell;
PLGA, poly-lactic-co-glycolic acid; TCP, tricalcium phosphate; PTH, parathyroid hormone; PLLA, poly-l-lactide acid; HA, hydroxyapatite; aCS, absorbable collagen sponge; ETN, etanercept; VEGF,
vascular endothelial growth factor; cUCB, canine umbilical cord blood; ALP, alkaline phosphate; BSA, bovine serum albumin; DPSC, dental pulp stem cell.
657
pro-osteogenic signaling cascades has been shown to be
critical for successful MSC-mediated osseous repair of bone
injury [21]. The bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signal-
ing pathway, for example, is acutely upregulated in a
mouse calvarial defect model. This upregulation enables
adipose-derived stem cells to successfully ossify a critical-
sized defect [21].
The mechanical forces exerted on a graft site should be
considered as well. MSC transplantation into a long bone
defect is subject to signiﬁcant stress/strain forces with
weight-bearing and locomotion [22]. In contrast, ectopic
models are largely void of mechanical force (perhaps slight
compression of the implant depending on its size can be
observed, especially in the kidney capsule model). Bio-
mechanical forces are well-studied, involving a cascade of
signaling events leading to bone formation, or ‘‘mechano-
transduction’’ [22–25]. It is important to realize that ectopic
bone models allow for near-complete removal of this po-
tential extraneous experimental variable. Thus, ectopic bone
formation models reduce the number of variables involved
in bone formation, eliminating (or reducing) the effects of
bone stimulating cytokines, bone forming cells, endogenous
stem
cells,
and
potentially
bone-stimulating
mechan-
otransduction. Each of the commonly used models discussed
below has signiﬁcant advantages and drawbacks.
Models of Ectopic Bone Formation
Subcutaneous implantation
Subcutaneous implantation is the most simplistic of all
experimental models of ectopic bone formation. Surgically, it
is the easiest of all models and a novice can perform this
procedure with success after learning basic suturing tech-
nique. Nearly any mammalian animal model can be chosen,
ranging from mouse and rat to rabbit, dog, and pig among
numerous others (see Table 1 for a review). Rodent models
are preferable and most widely used due to their low cost,
lax skin (which accommodates large-volume implants), and
availability of immunodeﬁcient rodents for xenograft-based
experiments. Generally, incisions should be made on the
dorsum of the rodent so as to prevent the animals from re-
moving their own sutures. Alternatively, intradermal stitches
can be placed which avoids the possible need to dress the
wound. Classically, bone marrow derived mesenchymal
stem cells (BMSCs) are the most commonly studied cell type
(Table 1). The availability of immunodeﬁcient rats and mice
makes possible and practical the transplantation of human-
derived cells for increased clinical relevance. Cells may be
transplanted immediately after derivation, after culture ex-
pansion, or after predifferentiation [26]. In such cases, pre-
differentiation may ensure adequate in vivo bone formation.
However, culture time and conditions may change the
overall composition of a cell population [27,28]. Further,
predifferentiation is less ideal for clinical translation as the
barrier for regulatory approval is higher if cells are taken
ex vivo before implantation. Mesenchymal cells have been
shown to have the ability to form bone when placed in an
osteogenic environment; however, subcutaneous implanta-
tion often requires cytokine supplementation or molecular
modiﬁcations [29,30]. Cell delivery methods are widely
variable, from stiff poly lactic glycolic acid, to composite gels
and other matrices. As an alternative to material scaffolds,
culture-expanded cell sheets can be rolled and implanted
without a carrier, showing new bone formation [31]. In ad-
dition, various growth factors and other stimuli have been
added such as BMP2 and vascular endothelial growth factor
to name a few (see again Table 1).
One of the more important considerations for subcutane-
ous bone models is a technical one. The physical identiﬁca-
tion of the implant can be challenging, especially as newly-
formed bone can be similar in color to the surrounding
dermal tissues. Moreover, the lax skin of rodents allows for
potentially signiﬁcant migration of an implant, a difﬁculty
that can be compounded by small implant sizes. The authors
suggest the use of colored scaffolds or the labeling of cells/
implants with a dye before implantation to facilitate identi-
ﬁcation upon removal. This becomes increasingly important
with longer-term studies with months separating implanta-
tion and harvest.
Another consideration for subcutaneous bone formation is
the theoretical lack of naturally bone-forming stem cells
within the intradermal environment. This is in direct contrast
to intramuscular bone formation (see below) in which stri-
ated muscle satellite progenitor cells are readily able to form
bone, given an appropriate osteogenic stimulus. This lack of
endogenous bone-forming cells may be a beneﬁt or a dis-
advantage depending on the experimental design. For ex-
ample, it may be a beneﬁt if an exogenous stem cell is
implanted, ensuring that in theory the predominant, newly-
formed bone is from exogenous origin. On the other hand, it
may be a detraction if the study is designed to expressly test
a biomaterial scaffold, in which case an endogenous bone-
forming stromal cell may be needed to ensure adequate bone
formation. A similar caveat should also be considered in
subcutaneous models: skin injury has been shown to result in
the honing of circulating progenitor cells to the defect site
[32], and one cannot deﬁnitively exclude these progenitor
cell types from participating in bone formation.
Finally, subcutaneous models may show inferior bone-
forming capacity in comparison to other experimental
models of ectopic bone formation. In general, relatively
greater ectopic bone formation is observed within the intra-
muscular compartment compared with intradermal com-
partment [33]. For example, in one study performed on dogs
and pigs, bone formation could be histologically observed
after 45 days after intramuscular transplantation in contrast
to 60 days after subcutaneous implantation [34]. However,
exceptions to this general observation do exist, where, for
example, a particular nano-crystalline hydroxyapatite scaf-
fold produced signiﬁcantly more subcutaneous rather than
intramuscular bone in minipigs [35]. In general, the reduced
ectopic bone formation in subcutaneous models may be due
to reduced vascularization and blood ﬂow—which is espe-
cially striking in comparison to the infrarenal capsule model
as discussed below. Therefore, a lack of robust subcutaneous
bone formation and the need for extended in vivo ‘‘incuba-
tion’’ times may limit the utility of subcutaneous models.
Muscle pouch implantation
Muscle Pouch (or intramuscular) implantation has a rich
history in bone formation. In fact, BMPs were ﬁrst studied
for their ability to induce bone formation in a muscle pouch
model [36]. Like subcutaneous ectopic bone formation,
658
SCOTT ET AL.
Table 2. Recent Studies Using Intramuscular Implantation
Article
No.
PMID
Author
Year
Site
Cell(s)
Protein(s)
Scaffold(s)
Duration
Results
Animal
1.
21241835 Barbieri75
2011 Dorsum
—
—
Biphasic calcium phosphate
particles combined with 5
different polymeric gels
12 Weeks
Bone formation was seen
with BCP alone or with
most polymeric gel
formulation excepting
polyvinyl alcohol
Sheep
2.
20967773 Qu76
2011 Hind limb
Rabbit neonatal
BMSCs
—
Poly vinyl alcohol/
gelatin-nano-
hydroxyapatite/
polyamide6 scaffold
12 Weeks
Use of novel bilayer
implant and BMSCs
produced a neocartilage
with subchondral bone
like structure
Rabbit
3.
21478102 Go¨tz35
2011 Trapezius
—
—
Nano-crystalline
hydroxyapatite/
silica gel matrix
8 Months
Early osteogenesis
detected as early as
5 weeks
Pig
4.
21569871 Billstro¨m78
2011 Thigh
—
BMP2
b-tricalcium phosphate
compared with 4
different ceramics
4 Weeks
Nano hydroxyapatite
yielded higher bone
density than other
scaffolds examined
Mouse
5.
21205997 Lee79
2011 Abdominal
Muscle
Human BMSCs
—
Hydroxyapatite/DBM
combined or alone
8 Weeks
Combination HA/DBM
showed more robust
ectopic bone formation
Mouse
6.
21105153 Luca80
2010 Quadriceps
—
BMP2
Chitosan hydrogel with
or without B-TCP
3 Weeks
B-TCP addition
signiﬁcantly enhanced
bone formation
Rat
7.
20526989 Barbieri81
2010 Paraspinal
—
—
Nano-sized calcium
phosphate apatite
particles in poly
(d,l-lactide)
12 Weeks
40% calcium apatite
content resulted in
signiﬁcant bone
formation in comparison
to other groups
Dog
8.
19944783 Habibovic48
2010 Paraspinal
—
—
Porous CA ceramics
12 Weeks
Larger porosity of scaffold
led to greater ectopic
bone formation
Goat
9.
19782780 Jeong83
2010 Thigh
—
Adenoviral delivered
Cartilage Oligomeric
Matrix Protein-
Angiopoietin 1
or BMP2
—
2 Weeks
Intramuscular injection
of COMP-Ang1 dose-
dependently enhanced
BMP2-induced ectopic
bone formation
Mouse
10.
19769525 van Gaalen84
2010 Paraspinal
Goat BMSCs
—
Biphasic calcium
phosphate porous
blocks
12 Weeks
BMSC seeded implants
showed 21% bone
formation in comparison
to minimal bone
formation with scaffold
alone
Goat
11.
19582839 Nan85
2010 Dorsum
Rabbit BMSCs
—
TCP ceramics
8 Weeks
New bone formation was
observed at 8 weeks
with degradation of the
Rabbit
(Table continued/)
659
Table 2. (Continued)
Article
No.
PMID
Author
Year
Site
Cell(s)
Protein(s)
Scaffold(s)
Duration
Results
Animal
TCP ceramic scaffold
12.
20600403 Luca86
2010 Quadriceps
—
BMP2
Chitosan and
hyaluronan
hydrogels
3 Weeks
Hyaluronan based
scaffolds showed greater
bone formation than
chitosan based
Mouse
13.
19374487 Geuze87
2009 Paraspinal
Goat BMSCs
Platelet-leukocyte gel
Ceramic scaffold
16 Weeks
Up to 16 weeks, ectopic
bone forming activity
was observed with
either autologous or
allogeneic BMSCs
Goat
14.
19324883 Jeong88
2009 Thigh
MC3T3-E1 or
C2Cl2 cells
overexpressing
ERRc or BMP2
—
—
5 Weeks
ERRg alone had no effect,
BMP2 alone increased
bone formation. ERRg
signiﬁcantly decreased
BMP2-induced bone
Mouse
15.
19255227 Lounev89
2009 Tibialis
anterior
—
BMP2
Matrigel
2 Weeks
Vascular endothelial cells
responded to BMP2
administration with
chondrogenic and
osteogenic differentiation
Mouse
16.
19029982 Yu39
2009 Hind limb
—
Adenoviral delivered
constitutively active
ALK2 (caALK2)
—
1 Week
caALK2 induces ectopic
ossiﬁcation only in the
setting of inﬂammation
Mouse
17.
19961269 Watanuki91
2009 Gastrocnemius
—
BMP4 expressing
plasmid
—
3 Weeks
Pulsed ultrasound led
to accelerated BMP4
induced ectopic bone
formation
Mouse
18.
19386665 Yao92
2009 Dorsum
Dog ASCs
—
BCP ceramic
12 Weeks
ASCs showed signiﬁcant
enhancement of bone
formation in comparison
to ceramic alone
Dog
19.
17619955 Le
Nihouannen93 2008 Paraspinal
—
—
Biphasic calcium phosphate
(MBCP) ceramic
granules/ﬁbrin glue
6 Months
Mature ectopic bone was
observed within the
MBCP/ﬁbrin composites
Sheep
20.
17182096 Kruyt94
2007 Paraspinal
Goat BMSCs
—
Porous BCP disks
9 Weeks
Abundant and homogenous
bone formation observed
with BMSCs in
comparison to little bone
in controls
Goat
21.
17605633 Corsi95
2007 Hind limb
BMP4 overexpressing
Mouse skeletal
muscle derived
stem cells
—
Sterile gelatin sponge
3 Weeks
Gender of cell derivation
and host inﬂuences BMP4
induced osteogenesis.
Male donors and hosts
induce greater and more
consistent bone formation
Mouse
(Table continued/)
660
Table 2. (Continued)
Article
No.
PMID
Author
Year
Site
Cell(s)
Protein(s)
Scaffold(s)
Duration
Results
Animal
22.
16961179 Kotajima96
2006 Gastrocnemius
—
BMP4 expressing
plasmid
—
2 Weeks
BMP4 induced
endochondral bone
formation with 100%
efﬁciency by 2 weeks
Mouse
23.
16808813 Kakudo97
2006 Hind limb
—
FGF2 and/or
BMP2
Atelopeptide type I
collagen
3 Weeks
Low concentration FGF2
promotes BMP2-induced
ectopic bone formation
Rat
24.
16510180 Trojani98
2006 Hind limb
Mouse BMSCs
—
HA/TCP particles
in self-hardening
HPMC hydrogel
8 Weeks
Undifferentiated BMSCs
with novel composite
scaffold induced
signiﬁcant woven bone
Mouse
25.
16846356 Yuan99
2006 Thigh (rabbits
and rats),
gluteus (dogs)
—
—
Biphasic calcium
phosphate and
HA scaffolds
3 Months
Biphasic calcium
phosphate scaffolds
induced greater bone
formation in comparison
to HA scaffolds
Rat, rabbit,
dog
26.
16857215 Kakudo100
2006 Calf
—
BMP2 – VEGF
Atelopeptide type I
collagen (CL)
3 Weeks
BMP2 induced
endochondral bone
formation and induced
VEGF expression. VEGF
increased BMP2-induced
ectopic bone
Rat
27.
16257511 Heliotis38
2006 Left Pectoralis
Major
—
Human BMP7
Hydroxyapatite
implant
6.5 Months Hydroxyapatite coated
with BMP7 can form a
replacement mandible
Human
28.
15337402 Warnke37
2004 Latissimus
Dorsi
Human BMSCs
Human BMP7
Titanium mesh
with recombinant
BMP7 and
bovine bone
7 Weeks
Successful ossiﬁcation of
a replacement mandible
Human
ASC, adipose-derived stem cell; CA, carbonated apatite; FGF2, ﬁbroblast growth factor 2.
661
intramuscular bone formation may also be used in nearly
any animal model (see Table 2). Although the mainstay re-
mains rodent models, intramuscular implantation is read-
ily translatable to larger animals (dog, pig, goat, and
sheep). Intramuscular implantation has also been used in the
human patient to successfully generate bone. For example, in
2004 Warnke et al. reported the intramuscular growth of a
replacement human mandible using autologous bone mar-
row and BMP7 [37]. As another example, Heliotis et al.
determined that even without added stem cells, BMP7 with
hydroxyapatite can lead to replacement mandible ossiﬁca-
tion [38].
In small animal models, the hind limb is preferentially
used. Generally, the authors suggest implantation in the
thigh complex that affords space for a large-volume implant.
In the thigh muscles of a mouse, for example, a maximum
volume of up to *150 mL can be implanted. By contrast, the
lower leg can be used for smaller volume implants. Beneﬁts
of using the lower leg are a readily palpable implant that can
be monitored for growth or imaged by surface ultrasound if
desired. Intramuscular implantation in a large animal is most
often in the dorsal musculature, including paraspinal mus-
cles or trapezius.
In recent years, BMP2 and other BMPs have been widely
studied in intramuscular ectopic bone models [39]. BMPs are
known to stimulate the osteogenic differentiation of native
skeletal muscle satellite cells. This reinforces an important
distinction between the intramuscular implantation model
and other ectopic bone models: the presence of a native
skeletal progenitor cells. If another osteoprogenitor cell
source is experimentally implanted in a muscle pouch envi-
ronment, it becomes critical to identify the cells on later
histological analysis. This can be achieved by transfection
with a reporter system, by gender mismatch of host and
donor, or by xenografting and detection of species-speciﬁc
antigens among other techniques. These techniques will al-
low for deﬁnitive identiﬁcation of hosts from donor-derived
bone. This extra step in analysis is vital for valid interpre-
tation of intramuscular bone formation and could be a con-
sideration to opt for another ectopic bone formation assay.
Another critical distinction to make for intramuscular
implantation experiments is that of the pro-osteogenic cyto-
kine elaboration from sites of muscle injury. BMP signaling
has been shown to be naturally upregulated postmuscle in-
jury via Smad activation [40,41]. Normally this is important
for the regulation of proliferation and myogenic differentia-
tion of skeletal muscle satellite cells and their descendants.
However, this heightened BMP signaling postmuscle injury
theoretically represents a potentially confounding factor in
intramuscular ectopic bone models. Like BMP signaling,
other signaling pathways known to be important in osteo-
genesis are also upregulated by muscular injury. These in-
clude TGF-b1 and insulin-like growth factor 1 to name a few
[42,43]. In light of these ﬁndings, it is important to utilize
blunt dissection rather than traumatic sheering of muscle
ﬁbers when creating the potential space for implant inser-
tion. A relatively atraumatic muscle pocket creation will
theoretically minimize this natural upregulation of BMP and
other pro-osteogenic cytokines. On that note, similar cyto-
kines are upregulated after cutaneous injury (most promi-
nently TGF-b1), and may also play a confounding role in
subcutaneous ectopic bone models.
Kidney capsule implantation
The kidney capsule model is a less frequently used
method of ectopic bone formation, primarily owing to its
relative technical difﬁculty in comparison to subcutaneous
or intramuscular transplantation. Material is placed be-
tween the thin, ﬁbrous capsule of the kidney and the un-
derlying renal parenchyma. This material can be inserted
either directly by injection with a small gauge needle, or
surgically by creating a small incision in the capsule and
gently inserting the material underneath the capsule. For
the insertion method, a space should be created using
blunt dissection (eg, using a melted Pasteur pipette). Un-
like in primates, the kidney of rodents is an intraperitoneal
organ and so the peritoneum must be incised before vi-
sualization of the kidney. The surgical insertion method is
more technically challenging than the injection method, so
prior practice is advisable. Most importantly, the capsule
should remain intact to ensure that the implant stays in
place and that proper vascularization will ensue. Material
should not be injected into the parenchyma of the organ.
Both the peritoneum and skin should be sutured after
implantation.
A list of recent citations using the kidney capsule model
for bone formation can be found in Table 3. The majority of
studies utilize mice (either wild-type or immunocompro-
mised), while a few use rats. BMSCs are the most commonly
studied cell type, while cells derived from the tooth are often
studied as well. A wide array of materials can be used for
implantation including gels, bone matrices, and biodegrad-
able sponges. A cell suspension or cell pellet can be injected
as well, without any scaffold or carrier. The majority of im-
plants are thereafter analyzed from 1 to 4 weeks post-
implantation, but studies even up to 10 months in length
have been described [44].
Signiﬁcant features of the renal capsule model include: (1)
increased blood ﬂow to the implant, (2) theoretical lack of
endogenous bone-forming stem cells, (3) size limitations of
the implant, and (4) compressive force on the implant. Each
will be considered in turn below. First, implants placed in the
subrenal capsular assay are exposed to signiﬁcant blood ﬂow
and likewise blood-borne nutrients. This has led in reports to
supraphysiologic bone growth in comparison to native bone
samples [45]. However, this can be considered a beneﬁt ra-
ther than a detraction as engrafted cells are likely to survive
and proliferate once in place. Moreover, the highly vascular
environment may allow for the development of complex
tissue types such as tooth-like structures in the ﬁeld of dental
research [46–48] and calvarial suture-like structures [45].
Secondly, the subrenal capsule microenvironment is theo-
retically free of bone-forming endogenous stem cells. While
trafﬁcking of endogenous stem cells is theoretical, it is almost
certain that the engrafted cells are responsible for any ob-
served bone formation. Third, limitations on the size of im-
plant can be of concern, as larger volumes can inadvertently
tear the capsule. While mice are most often used, rats can be
substituted for larger implants (Table 3). Fourth and ﬁnally,
the capsular tissue overlying the engrafted cells may be fairly
taut, especially if large-volume implants are used. This can
relay a compressive force onto the implant itself, which may
predispose to cartilage over bone formation depending on
the cell type [49–51].
662
SCOTT ET AL.
Table 3. Recent Studies Using Perirenal Implantation
Article
No.
PMID
Author
Year
Cell(s)
Protein
Scaffold
Duration
Results
Animal
1.
21427841 Zhang46
2011 Rat tooth germ cells
BMP2
Nanoscale B-TCP/
collagen particles
8 Weeks
Mature appearance and organized
structure of enamel-dentin
like tissue
Rat
2.
20695775 Chun47
2011 Embryonic tooth-forming primordia
and xenogenic murine apical bud
epithelium/human dental pulp
stem cell composites
EDTA soluble tooth
proteins (ESTP)
Fibrin glue
4 Weeks
ESTP-treated tooth buds developed
normal morphology whereas
untreated controls developed
abnormally
Mouse
3.
19078959 Chan105
2009 Mouse fetal osteoblasts
—
Matrigel
4 Weeks
Structural similarity to normal
bone was identiﬁed with regions
of cartilaginous, compact, and
trabecular bone
Mouse
4.
19590164 Lenton45
2009 Embryonic and early postnatal
calvarial bone
—
—
2 Weeks
Structural similarity to normal
cranial sutures was identiﬁed
among transplanted bone
Mouse
5.
18619727 Prigozhina107 2008 Mouse MSCs from bone marrow,
placenta, or umbilical cord
—
DBM
2 Weeks
All MSC types showed ectopic bone
formation in synergetic recipients
Mouse
6.
17198881 Gurevitch45
2007 Mouse BMSCs
—
—
10 Months Chronic blood loss led to
augmented production of
hematopoietic microenvironment,
reduction in bone formation and
activation of the bone resorption
Mouse
7.
17618464 Kim109
2007 Mouse dental follicle cells
—
—
3 Weeks
All dental mesenchymal/follicle
cells formed bone-like structures
Mouse
8.
17371295 Yu48
2007 Rat dental pulp stem cells, rat
BMSCs/apical bud cells
—
Gelatin
2 Weeks
Dental pulp stem cell/apical cell
combinations showed normal
morphology while BMSC/apical
bud cell showed atypical
morphology without enamel
Rat
9.
12755333 Braut111
2003 Mouse dental pulp cells
—
—
2 Weeks
Transplanted tissues contained
mineralized islands with
osteocyte - like cells embedded
within the atubular - mineralized
matrix
Mouse
10.
12202005 Gurevich112
2002 Rat and Mouse BMSCs
—
Fibrin-based
microbeads
4 Weeks
BMSCs without expansion
sporadically formed bone, while
BMSCs after expansion on ﬁbrin-
based microbeads reliably
formed bone
Mouse
11.
11341327 Berger113
2001 Mouse BMSCs
Estradiol 17b,
dihydrotestosterone
—
3 Weeks
BMSCs derived from male and female
donors and transplanted in the
kidney capsule respond to sex
hormones with gender speciﬁc
properties
Mouse
EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid.
663
Summary
Experimentally induced ectopic bone formation is a well-
studied, well-described entity with subcutaneous, intra-
muscular, and kidney capsule transplantation being the
most common models. Brieﬂy, the most pertinent concern
for subcutaneous implantation is the potential lack of ro-
bust bone growth, potentially attributable to poor blood
ﬂow. Intramuscular implantation exposes the implant to
satellite progenitor cells, which theoretically makes distin-
guishing host from donor osteogenesis difﬁcult. The kidney
capsule method allows for supraphysiologic blood and
nutrient resource, allowing for robust bone growth despite
being a technically challenging assay. All 3 models are valid
experimental entities; however, their distinct differences
should be taken into account when either constructing or
analyzing an experiment. Analyses of such models are
crucial to understand the osteogenic differentiation of cells
independent from an osseous environment. Thus, as skel-
etal tissue engineering progresses and the use of osteogenic
progenitor cells becomes more commonplace, such models
will hopefully allow for optimization of bone formation.
Conversely, understanding the biology of ectopic bone
formation might also allow for improved treatments of
debilitations such as HO.
Acknowledgment
A.W.J. was supported by 5T32DE007296-14.
Author Disclosure Statement
No competing ﬁnancial interests exist.
References
1. Edmonds HW, HE Coe and FL Tabrah. (1948). Bone for-
mation in skin and muscle; a localized tissue malformation
or heterotopia. J Pediatr 33:618–623.
2. Rosborough D. (1966). Ectopic bone formation associated
with multiple congenital anomalies. J Bone Joint Surg Br 48:
499–503.
3. Singh GK and V Verma. (2011). Progressive osseous het-
eroplasia in a 10-year-old male child. Indian J Orthop 45:
280–282.
4. Sarathi V, A Patil, R Wade, TR Bandgar and NS Shah.
(2011). Intraarticular heterotopic ossiﬁcation as the initial
manifestation in a child with pseudohypoparathyroidism
1a. Indian J Pediatr 78:745–748.
5. Roche MB and FA Jostes. (1948). Ectopic bone deposits; a
paraplegic complication. Am J Surg 75:633–636.
6. Furman R, JJ Nicholas and L Jivoff. (1970). Elevation of the
serum alkaline phosphatase coincident with ectopic-bone
formation in paraplegic patients. J Bone Joint Surg 52:
1131–1137.
7. Kromann-Andersen
C, TS Sorensen, K Hougaard, D
Zdravkovic and E Frigaard. (1980). Ectopic bone formation
following Charnley hip arthroplasty. Acta Orthop Scand
51:633–638.
8. Soballe K, F Christensen and SS Kristensen. (1988). Ectopic
bone formation after total hip arthroplasty. Clin Orthop
228: 57–62.
9. Holavanahalli RK, PA Helm, IS Parry, CA Dolezal and DG
Greenhalgh. (2011). Select practices in management and
rehabilitation of burns: a survey report. J Burn Care Res 32:
210–223.
10. Potter BK, JA Forsberg, TA Davis, KN Evans, JS Hawks-
worth, D Tadaki, TS Brown, NJ Crane, TC Burns, FP O’Brien
and EA Elster. (2010). Heterotopic ossiﬁcation following
combat-related trauma. J Bone Joint Surg 92(Suppl. 2):74–89.
11. Siemers F, PL Stollwerck, JA Lohmeyer, T Namdar and P
Mailander. (2010). [Heterotopic ossiﬁcations in major burn
injuries: an interdisciplinary challenge]. Chirurg 81:647–
652.
12. Shore EM and FS Kaplan. (2008). Insights from a rare genetic
disorder of extra-skeletal bone formation, ﬁbrodysplasia
ossiﬁcans progressiva (FOP). Bone 43:427–433.
13. Shimono K, WE Tung, C Macolino, AH Chi, JH Didizian, C
Mundy, RA Chandraratna, Y Mishina, M Enomoto-Iwa-
moto, M Paciﬁci and M Iwamoto. (2011). Potent inhibition of
heterotopic ossiﬁcation by nuclear retinoic acid receptor-
gamma agonists. Nat Med 17:454–460.
14. Kaplan FS, DL Glaser, N Hebela and EM Shore. (2004).
Heterotopic ossiﬁcation. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 12:
116–125.
15. Wlodarski KH and AH Reddi. (1986). Importance of skel-
etal muscle environment for ectopic bone induction in
mice. Folia Biol (Krakow) 34:425–434.
16. Heinen JH Jr., GH Dabbs and HA Mason. (1949). The ex-
perimental production of ectopic cartilage and bone in the
muscles of rabbits. J Bone Joint Sur 31A:765–775.
17. Schmid GJ, C Kobayashi, LJ Sandell and DM Ornitz. (2009).
Fibroblast growth factor expression during skeletal fracture
healing in mice. Dev Dyn 238:766–774.
18. Sarahrudi K, A Thomas, M Mousavi, G Kaiser, J Kott-
storfer, M Kecht, S Hajdu and S Aharinejad. (2011). Ele-
vated transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-beta1) levels
in human fracture healing. Injury 42:833–837.
19. James AW, P Leucht, B Levi, AL Carre, Y Xu, JA Helms and
MT Longaker. (2010). Sonic Hedgehog inﬂuences the bal-
ance of osteogenesis and adipogenesis in mouse adipose-
derived stromal cells. Tissue Eng Part A 16:2605–2616.
20. Secreto FJ, LH Hoeppner and JJ Westendorf. (2009). Wnt
signaling during fracture repair. Curr Osteoporos Rep 7:
64–69.
21. Levi B, AW James, ER Nelson, M Peng, DC Wan, GW
Commons, M Lee, B Wu and MT Longaker. (2011). Acute
skeletal injury is necessary for human adipose-derived
stromal cell-mediated calvarial regeneration. Plast Reconstr
Surg 127:1118–1129.
22. Allori AC, AM Sailon, JH Pan and SM Warren. (2008).
Biological basis of bone formation, remodeling, and repair-
part III: biomechanical forces. Tissue Eng Part B Rev
14:285–293.
23. Liedert A, D Kaspar, P Augat, A Ignatius and L Claes.
(2005). Mechanobiology of bone tissue and bone cells. In:
Mechanosensitivity in Cells and Tissues. Kamkin A, I Kiselva.
ed. Academia, Moscow.
24. Epari DR, GN Duda and MS Thompson. (2010). Mechan-
obiology of bone healing and regeneration: in vivo models.
Proc Inst Mech Eng H 224:1543–1553.
25. Chan MW, B Hinz and CA McCulloch. (2010). Mechanical
induction of gene expression in connective tissue cells.
Methods Cell Biol 98:178–205.
26. Ma D, H Yao, W Tian, F Chen, Y Liu, T Mao and L Ren.
(2011). Enhancing bone formation by transplantation of a
scaffold-free
tissue-engineered
periosteum
in
a
rabbit
model. Clin Oral Implants Res 22:1193–1199.
664
SCOTT ET AL.
27. Wan Safwani WK, S Makpol, S Sathapan and KH Chua.
(2011). The changes of stemness biomarkers expression in
human adipose-derived stem cells during long-term ma-
nipulation. Biotechnol Appl Biochem 58:261–270.
28. Izadpanah R, D Kaushal, C Kriedt, F Tsien, B Patel, J Du-
four and BA Bunnell. (2008). Long-term in vitro expansion
alters the biology of adult mesenchymal stem cells. Cancer
Res 68:4229–4238.
29. Levi B, ER Nelson, S Li, AW James, JS Hyun, DT Montoro,
M Lee, JP Glotzbach, GW Commons and MT Longaker.
(2011). Dura mater stimulates human adipose-derived
stromal cells to undergo bone formation in mouse calvarial
defects. Stem cells (Dayton, Ohio) 29:1241–1255.
30. Dragoo JL, JR Lieberman, RS Lee, DA Deugarte, Y Lee, PA
Zuk, MH Hedrick and P Benhaim. (2005). Tissue-en-
gineered bone from BMP-2-transduced stem cells derived
from human fat. Plast Reconstr Surg 115:1665–1673.
31. Ma D, L Ren, Y Liu, F Chen, J Zhang, Z Xue and T Mao.
(2010). Engineering scaffold-free bone tissue using bone
marrow stromal cell sheets. J Orthop Res 28:697–702.
32. Mansilla E, GH Marin, H Drago, F Sturla, E Salas, C Gar-
diner, S Bossi, R Lamonega, A Guzman, et al. (2006).
Bloodstream cells phenotypically identical to human mes-
enchymal bone marrow stem cells circulate in large
amounts under the inﬂuence of acute large skin damage:
new evidence for their use in regenerative medicine.
Transplantat Proc 38:967–969.
33. Habibovic P and K de Groot. (2007). Osteoinductive bio-
materials—properties and relevance in bone repair. J Tissue
Eng Med 1:25–32.
34. Yang Z, H Yuan, W Tong, P Zou, W Chen and X Zhang.
(1996). Osteogenesis in extraskeletally implanted porous
calcium phosphate ceramics: variability among different
kinds of animals. Biomaterials 17:2131–2137.
35. Gotz W, S Lenz, C Reichert, KO Henkel, V Bienengraber, L
Pernicka, KK Gundlach, T Gredes, T Gerber, T Gedrange
and F Heinemann. (2010). A preliminary study in os-
teoinduction by a nano-crystalline hydroxyapatite in the
mini pig. Folia Histochem Cytobiol 48:589–596.
36. Takaoka K, H Nakahara, H Yoshikawa, K Masuhara, T
Tsuda and K Ono. (1988). Ectopic bone induction on and in
porous hydroxyapatite combined with collagen and bone
morphogenetic protein. Clin Orthop 234: 250–254.
37. Warnke PH, IN Springer, J Wiltfang, et al. (2004). Growth
and transplantation of a custom vascularised bone graft in
a man. Lancet 364:766–770.
38. Heliotis M, KM Lavery, U Ripamonti, E Tsiridis and L di
Silvio. (2006). Transformation of a prefabricated hydroxy-
apatite/osteogenic protein-1 implant into a vascularised
pedicled bone ﬂap in the human chest. Int J Oral Maxillofac
Surg 35:265–269.
39. Yu PB, DY Deng, CS Lai, CC Hong, GD Cuny, ML Boux-
sein, DW Hong, PM McManus, T Katagiri, et al. (2008).
BMP type I receptor inhibition reduces heterotopic [cor-
rected] ossiﬁcation. Nat Med 14:1363–1369.
40. Clever JL, Y Sakai, RA Wang and DB Schneider. (2010).
Inefﬁcient skeletal muscle repair in inhibitor of differenti-
ation knockout mice suggests a crucial role for BMP sig-
naling during adult muscle regeneration. Am J Physiol
298:C1087–C1099.
41. Friedrichs M, F Wirsdoerfer, SB Flohe, S Schneider, M
Wuelling and A Vortkamp. (2011). BMP signaling balances
proliferation and differentiation of muscle satellite cell de-
scendants. BMC Cell Bio 12:26.
42. Schabort EJ, M van der Merwe and CU Niesler. (2011).
TGF-beta isoforms inhibit IGF-1-induced migration and
regulate terminal differentiation in a cell-speciﬁc manner. J
Muscle Res Cell Motil 31:359–367.
43. Ten Broek RW, S Grefte and JW Von den Hoff. (2010).
Regulatory factors and cell populations involved in skeletal
muscle regeneration. J Cell Physiol 224:7–16.
44. Gurevitch O, S Khitrin, A Valitov and S Slavin. (2007).
Osteoporosis of hematologic etiology. Exp Hematol 35:128–
136.
45. Slater BJ, KA Lenton, A James and MT Longaker. (2009).
Ex vivo model of cranial suture morphogenesis and fate.
Cells Tissues Organs 190:336–346.
46. Zhang W, J Liu, H Wang and Z Li. (2011). [Preparation of
recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein 2 deco-
rated beta tricalcium phosphate/collagen and preliminary
studies on its properties of inducing tooth formation].
Zhongguo Xiu Fu Chong Jian Wai Ke Za Zhi 25:149–154.
47. Chun SY, HJ Lee, YA Choi, KM Kim, SH Baek, HS Park, JY
Kim, JM Ahn, JY Cho, et al. (2011). Analysis of the soluble
human tooth proteome and its ability to induce dentin/
tooth regeneration. Tissue Eng Part A 17:181–191.
48. Yu J, Y Wang, Z Deng, L Tang, Y Li, J Shi and Y Jin. (2007).
Odontogenic capability: bone marrow stromal stem cells
versus dental pulp stem cells. Biol Cell 99:465–474.
49. Park SH, WY Sim, SW Park, SS Yang, BH Choi, SR Park, K
Park and BH Min. (2006). An electromagnetic compressive
force by cell exciter stimulates chondrogenic differentiation
of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells. Tissue
Eng 12:3107–3117.
50. Benjamin M and B Hillen. (2003). Mechanical inﬂuences on
cells, tissues and organs—‘Mechanical Morphogenesis’. Eur
J Morphol 41:3–7.
51. Saitoh S, I Takahashi, I Mizoguchi, Y Sasano, M Kagayama
and H Mitani. (2000). Compressive force promotes chon-
drogenic differentiation and hypertrophy in midpalatal
suture cartilage in growing rats. Anat Rec 260:392–401.
52. Park JC, SS So, IH Jung, JH Yun, SH Choi, KS Cho and CS
Kim. (2011). Induction of bone formation by Escherichia coli-
expressed recombinant human bone morphogenetic pro-
tein-2 using block-type macroporous biphasic calcium
phosphate in orthotopic and ectopic rat models. J Period-
ontal Res 46:682–690.
53. Song DS, JC Park, IH Jung, SH Choi, KS Cho, CK Kim and
CS Kim. (2011). Enhanced adipogenic differentiation and
reduced collagen synthesis induced by human periodontal
ligament stem cells might underlie the negative effect of
recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 on
periodontal regeneration. J Periodontal Res 46:193–203.
54. Janicki P, S Boeuf, E Steck, M Egermann, P Kasten and W
Richter. (2011). Prediction of in vivo bone forming potency
of bone marrow-derived human mesenchymal stem cells.
Eur Cell Mater 21:488–507.
55. Deleted.
56. Kempen DH, L Lu, TE Hefferan, LB Creemers, A Heijink, A
Maran, WJ Dhert and MJ Yaszemski. (2010). Enhanced
bone morphogenetic protein-2-induced ectopic and ortho-
topic bone formation by intermittent parathyroid hormone
(1–34) administration. Tissue Eng Part A 6:3769–3777.
57. Seyedjafari E, M Soleimani, N Ghaemi and I Shabani.
(2010). Nanohydroxyapatite-coated electrospunpoly(l-lac-
tide) nanoﬁbers enhance osteogenic differentiation of stem
cells and induce ectopic bone formation. Biomacromole-
cules 11:3118–3125.
ECTOPIC BONE FORMATION
665
58. Wu G, Y Liu, T Iizuka and EB Hunziker. (2010). The effect
of a slow mode of BMP-2 delivery on the inﬂammatory
response provoked by bone-defect-ﬁlling polymeric scaf-
folds. Biomaterials 29:7485–7493.
59. Lee JH, CS Kim, KH Choi, UW Jung, JH Yun, SH Choi and
KS Cho. (2010). The induction of bone formation in rat
calvarial defects and subcutaneous tissues by recombinant
human BMP-2, produced in Escherichia coli. Biomaterials
31:3512–3519.
60. Eguchi Y, S Wakitani, Y Imai, Y Naka, Y Hashimoto, H
Nakamura and K Takaoka. (2010). Antitumor necrotic
factor agent promotes BMP-2-induced ectopic bone for-
mation. J Bone Miner Metab 28:157–164.
61. Bahar H, A Yaffe, A Boskey and I Binderman. (2010). In-
ﬂuence of bone-derived matrices on generation of bone in
an ectopic rat model. J Orthop Res 28:664–670.
62. Boos AM, JS Loew, G Deschler, A Arkudas, O Bleiziffer, H
Gulle, A Dragu, U Kneser, RE Horch and JP Beier. (2010).
Directly auto-transplanted mesenchymal stem cells induce
bone formation in a ceramic bone substitute in an ectopic
sheep model. J Cell Mol Med 15:1364–1378.
63. Zhao Y, J Zhang, X Wang, B Chen, Z Xiao, C Shi, Z Wei, X
Hou, Q Wang and J Dai. (2010). Theosteogenic effect of
bone morphogenetic protein-2 on the collagen scaffold
conjugated with antibodies. J Control Release 141:30–37.
64. Deleted.
65. Cui F, X Wang, X Liu, AS Dighe, G Balian and Q Cui.
(2010). VEGF and BMP-6 enhance bone formation mediat-
ed by cloned mouse osteoprogenitor cells. Growth Factors
28:306–317.
66. Byeon YE, HH Ryu, SS Park, Y Koyama, M Kikuchi, WH
Kim, KS Kang and OK Kweon. (2010). Paracrine effect of
canine allogenic umbilical cord blood-derived mesenchy-
mal stromal cells mixed with beta-tricalcium phosphate on
bone regeneration in ectopic implantations. Cytotherapy
12:626–636.
67. Zhang S, MR Doschak and H Uludag˘ . (2009). Pharmaco-
kinetics and bone formation by BMP-2 entrapped in poly-
ethylenimine-coated albumin nanoparticles. Biomaterials
30:5143–5155.
68. Yang
X,
PM
van
der
Kraan,
Z
Bian,
M
Fan,
XF
Walboomers and JA Jansen. (2009). Mineralized tissue
formation by BMP2-transfected pulp stem cells. J Dent Res
88:1020–1025.
69. Ben-David D, T Kizhner, E Livne and S Srouji. (2010). A
tissue-like construct of human bone marrow MSCs com-
posite scaffold support in vivo ectopic bone formation. J
Tissue Eng Regen Med 4:30–37.
70. Deleted.
71. Chang SC, CL Tai, HY Chung, TM Lin and LB Jeng. (2009).
Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells form ectopic woven
bone in vivo through endochondral bone formation. Artif
Organs 33:301–308.
72. Matsushima A, N Kotobuki, M Tadokoro, K Kawate, H
Yajima, Y Takakura and H Ohgushi. (2008). In vivo osteo-
genic capability of human mesenchymal cells cultured on
hydroxyapatite and on beta-tricalcium phosphate. Artif
Organs 33:474–481.
73. Liu G, L Zhao, L Cui, W Liu and Y Cao. (2007). Tissue-
engineered bone formation using human bone marrow
stromal cells and novel beta-tricalcium phosphate. Biomed
Mater 2:78–86.
74. Cai X, Y Lin, G Ou, E Luo, Y Man, Q Yuan and P Gong.
(2007). Ectopic osteogenesis and chondrogenesis of bone
marrow stromal stem cells in alginate system. Cell Biol Int
31:776–783.
75. Barbieri D, H Yuan, F de Groot, WR Walsh and JD de
Bruijn. (2011). Inﬂuence of different polymeric gels on the
ectopic bone forming ability of an osteoinductive biphasic
calcium phosphate ceramic. Acta Biomater 7:2007–2014.
76. Qu D, J Li, Y Li, A Khadka, Y Zuo, H Wang, Y Liu and L
Cheng. (2011). Ectopic osteochondral formation of biomi-
metic porous
PVA-n-HA/PA6 bilayered scaffold and
BMSCs construct in rabbit. J Biomed Mater Res B Appl
Biomater 96:9–15.
77. Deleted.
78. Hulsart-Billstro¨m G, Q Hu, K Bergman, KB Jonsson, J
A˚ berg, R Tang, S Larsson and J Hilborn. (2011). Calcium
phosphates compounds in conjunction with hydrogel as
carrier for BMP-2: a study on ectopic bone formation in
rats. Acta Biomater 7:3042–3049.
79. Lee JH, KM Lee, HR Baek, SJ Jang, JH Lee and HS Ryu.
(2011). Combined effects of porous hydroxyapatite and
demineralized bone matrix on bone induction: in vitro and
in vivo study using a nude rat model. Biomed Mater
6:015008.
80. Luca L, AL Rougemont, BH Walpoth, L Boure, A Tami, JM
Anderson, O Jordan and R Gurny. (2010). Injectable
rhBMP-2-loaded
chitosan
hydrogel
composite:
os-
teoinduction at ectopic site and in segmental long bone
defect. J Biomed Mater Res A 96:66–74.
81. Barbieri D, AJ Renard, JD de Bruijn and H Yuan. (2010).
Heterotopic bone formation by nano-apatite containing
poly(D,L-lactide) composites. Eur Cell Mater 19:252–261.
82. Habibovic P, MV Juhl, S Clyens, R Martinetti, L Dolcini, N
Theilgaard and van CA Blitterswijk. (2010). Comparison of
two carbonated apatite ceramics in vivo. Acta Biomater
6:2219–2226.
83. Jeong BC, HJ Kim, IH Bae, KN Lee, KY Lee, WM Oh, SH
Kim, IC Kang, SE Lee, et al. (2010). COMP-Ang1, a chimeric
form of Angiopoietin 1, enhances BMP2-induced osteoblast
differentiation and bone formation. Bone 46:479–486.
84. van Gaalen SM, WJ Dhert, MC Kruyt, H Yuan, FC Oner,
CA van Blitterswijk, AJ Verbout and JD de Bruijn. (2010).
Goat bone tissue engineering: comparing an intramuscular
with a posterolateral lumbar spine location. Tissue Eng Part
A 16:685–693.
85. Nan K, S Sun, Y Li, H Chen, T Wu and F Lu. (2010). Ectopic
osteogenic ability of calcium phosphate scaffolds cultured
with osteoblasts. J Biomed Mater Res A 93:464–468.
86. Luca L, AL Rougemont, BH Walpoth, R Gurny and O
Jordan. (2010). The effects of carrier nature and pH on
rhBMP-2-induced ectopic bone formation. J Control Release
147:38–44.
87. Geuze RE, PA Everts, MC Kruyt, AJ Verbout, J Alblas and WJ
Dhert. (2009). Orthotopic location has limited beneﬁt from
allogeneic or autologous multipotent stromal cells seeded on
ceramic scaffolds. Tissue Eng Part A 15:3231–3239.
88. Jeong BC, YS Lee, YY Park, IH Bae, DK Kim, SH Koo, HR
Choi, SH Kim, RT Franceschi, et al. (2009). The orphan
nuclear receptor estrogen receptor-related receptor gamma
negatively regulates BMP2-induced osteoblast differentia-
tion and bone formation. J Biol Chem 284:14211–14218.
89. Lounev VY, R Ramachandran, MN Wosczyna, M Yama-
moto, AD Maidment, EM Shore, DL Glaser, DJ Goldhamer
and FS Kaplan. (2009). Identiﬁcation of progenitor cells that
contribute to heterotopic skeletogenesis. J Bone Joint Surg
Am 91:652–663.
666
SCOTT ET AL.
90. Deleted.
91. Watanuki M, KN Kishimoto, S Kotajima, S Iwabuchi and S
Kokubun. (2009). Effect of low-intensity pulsed ultrasound
on scaffold-free ectopic bone formation in skeletal muscle.
Ups J Med Sci 114:242–248.
92. Yao J, X Li, C Bao, C Zhang, Z Chen, H Fan and X Zhang.
(2009). Ectopic bone formation in adipose-derived stromal
cell-seeded osteoinductive calcium phosphate scaffolds. J
Biomater Appl 24:607–624.
93. Le Nihouannen D, A Saffarzadeh, O Gauthier, F Moreau, P
Pilet, R Spaethe, P Layrolle and G Daculsi. (2008). Bone
tissue formation in sheep muscles induced by a biphasic
calcium phosphate ceramic and ﬁbrin glue composite. J
Mater Sci Mater Med 19:667–675.
94. Kruyt MC, WJ Dhert, FC Oner, CA van Blitterswijk, AJ
Verbout and JD de Bruijn. (2007). Analysis of ectopic and
orthotopic bone formation in cell-based tissue-engineered
constructs in goats. Biomaterials 28:1798–1805.
95. Corsi KA, JB Pollett, JA Phillippi, A Usas, G Li and J Huard.
(2007). Osteogenic potential of postnatal skeletal muscle-
derived stem cells is inﬂuenced by donor sex. J Bone Miner
Res 22:1592–1602.
96. Kotajima S, KN Kishimoto, M Watanuki, M Hatori and S
Kokubun. (2006). Gene expression analysis of ectopic bone
formation induced by electroporatic gene transfer of BMP4.
Ups J Med Sci 111:231–241.
97. Kakudo N, K Kusumoto, A Kuro and Y Ogawa. (2006).
Effect of recombinant human ﬁbroblast growth factor-2 on
intramuscular ectopic osteoinduction by recombinant hu-
man bone morphogenetic protein-2 in rats. Wound Repair
Regen 14:336–342.
98. Trojani C, F Boukhechba, JC Scimeca, F Vandenbos, JF
Michiels, G Daculsi, P Boileau, P Weiss, GF Carle and Ro-
chet N. (2006). Ectopic bone formation using an injectable
biphasic calcium phosphate/Si-HPMC hydrogel composite
loaded with undifferentiated bone marrow stromal cells.
Biomaterials 27:3256–3264.
99. Yuan H, CA van Blitterswijk, K de Groot and JD de Bruijn.
(2006). Cross-species comparison of ectopic bone formation
in biphasic calcium phosphate (BCP) and hydroxyapatite
(HA) scaffolds. Tissue Eng 12:1607–1615.
100. Kakudo N, K Kusumoto, YB Wang, Y Iguchi and Y Ogawa.
(2006). Immunolocalization of vascular endothelial growth
factor on intramuscular ectopic osteoinduction by bone
morphogenetic protein-2. Life Sci 79:1847–1855.
101. Deleted.
102. Deleted.
103. Deleted.
104. Deleted.
105. Chan CK, CC Chen, CA Luppen, JB Kim, AT DeBoer, K
Wei, JA Helms, CJ Kuo, DL Kraft and IL Weissman. (2009).
Endochondral ossiﬁcation is required for haematopoietic
stem-cell niche formation. Nature 457:490–494.
106. Deleted.
107. Prigozhina TB, S Khitrin, G Elkin, O Eizik, S Morecki and S
Slavin. (2008). Mesenchymal stromal cells lose their im-
munosuppressive potential after allotransplantation. Exp
Hematol 36:1370–1376.
108. Deleted.
109. Kim JY, SW Cho, HJ Hwang, MJ Lee, JM Lee, J Cai, SH
Choi, CK Kim and HS Jung. (2007). Evidence for expan-
sion-based
temporal
BMP4/NOGGIN
interactions
in
specifying periodontium morphogenesis. Cell Tissue Res
330:123–132.
110. Deleted.
111. Braut A, EJ Kollar and M Mina. (2003). Analysis of the
odontogenic and osteogenic potentials of dental pulp in
vivo using a Col1a1-2.3-GFP transgene. Int J Dev Biol
47:281–292.
112. Gurevich O, A Vexler, G Marx, T Prigozhina, L Levdansky,
S Slavin, I Shimeliovich and R Gorodetsky. (2002). Fibrin
microbeads for isolating and growing bone marrow-de-
rived progenitor cells capable of forming bone tissue. Tis-
sue Eng 8:661–672.
113. Berger E, I Bleiberg, Y Weisman, B Lifschitz-Mercer, L
Leider-Trejo, A Harel, AM Kaye and D Somjen. (2001). The
hormonal milieu in early stages of bone cell differentiation
modiﬁes the subsequent sex-speciﬁc responsiveness of the
developing bone to gonadal steroids. J Bone Miner Res
16:823–831.
Address correspondence to:
Dr. Aaron W. James
Dental and Craniofacial Research Institute
and Section of Orthodontics
School of Dentistry
University of California
MRL 2641A, 675 Charles E. Young Drive South
Los Angeles, CA 90095
E-mail: aaronwjames1@gmail.com
Received for publication September 13, 2011
Accepted after revision November 14, 2011
Prepublished on Liebert Instant Online November 15, 2011
ECTOPIC BONE FORMATION
667

===== Wu2022_FrontBioengBiotechnol_TendonStrainModels =====

In Vitro Cellular Strain Models of
Tendon Biology and Tenogenic
Differentiation
Shannon Y. Wu 1, Won Kim 2 and Thomas J. Kremen Jr 3*
1David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Asan
Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea, 3Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, David Geffen
School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States
Research has shown that the surrounding biomechanical environment plays a signiﬁcant
role in the development, differentiation, repair, and degradation of tendon, but the
interactions between tendon cells and the forces they experience are complex. In vitro
mechanical stimulation models attempt to understand the effects of mechanical load on
tendon and connective tissue progenitor cells. This article reviews multiple mechanical
stimulation models used to study tendon mechanobiology and provides an overview of the
current progress in modelling the complex native biomechanical environment of tendon.
Though great strides have been made in advancing the understanding of the role of
mechanical stimulation in tendon development, damage, and repair, there exists no ideal
in vitro model. Further comparative studies and careful consideration of loading
parameters, cell populations, and biochemical additives may further offer new insight
into an ideal model for the support of tendon regeneration studies.
Keywords: mechanotransduction, tendon, tenogenic differentiation, bioreactor, 3D culture, model
INTRODUCTION
Tendons are connective tissues responsible for transmitting the force generated by muscles to bones.
Although their structure and composition allow them to tolerate repetitive forces during daily
activities, excessive or abnormal applications of force can cause tendon damage or rupture. Tendon
repair can be difﬁcult due to the hypocellular and avascular nature of tendon tissue. Emerging tissue
engineering strategies continue to be developed with the goal of augmenting current treatment
approaches as well as the development of novel therapies for the treatment of tendon injuries.
Although exposure to excessive force contributes to tendon injury, mechanical loading of tendon
tissue also plays an important role in appropriate tendon healing. As a result, in vitro mechanical
stimulation studies attempt to understand the effects of mechanical load on tendon and connective
tissue progenitor cells that have the potential to differentiate into tendon cells. These models have
allowed researchers to observe the effects of mechanical loading on these cells with regard to tendon
gene expression, cell morphology, protein production as well as more gross tissue properties
including cellular alignment and tensile strength. This review aims to summarize and compare
the different cellular mechanical loading models used in the study of tendon mechanobiology and
highlight how the designs of these models have evolved over time in the effort to recapitulate the
complexity of forces exerted upon tendon tissues in vivo. First, we contextualize our discussion with
an introduction to current understanding of native tendon structure and biomechanics. We then
discuss how explanted tendon, 2D, and 3D models have contributed to our understanding of the
effects of mechanical stimulation in the effort to recapitulate the native tendon architecture in the
Edited by:
Dmitriy Sheyn,
Cedars Sinai Medical Center,
United States
Reviewed by:
Scott Rodeo,
Hospital for Special Surgery,
United States
Anne Nichols,
University of Rochester, United States
Spencer Szczesny,
The Pennsylvania State University
(PSU), United States
*Correspondence:
Thomas J. Kremen Jr
tjkremen@mednet.ucla.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Biomaterials,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Bioengineering and
Biotechnology
Received: 01 December 2021
Accepted: 17 January 2022
Published: 15 February 2022
Citation:
Wu SY, Kim W and Kremen TJ (2022)
In Vitro Cellular Strain Models of
Tendon Biology and
Tenogenic Differentiation.
Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 10:826748.
doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2022.826748
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 826748
1
REVIEW
published: 15 February 2022
doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2022.826748
in vitro setting. We conclude by identifying existing gaps in
knowledge and possible directions for future work within the
ﬁeld of in vitro mechanical loading research.
STRUCTURE AND BIOMECHANICS OF
TENDON
Structure of Tendon
Tendons are hypocellular structures that largely consist of water
and extracellular matrix (ECM), with water making up 55–70% of
the tissue mass.(Jaiswal et al., 2020). ECM is predominantly
composed of various types of collagen protein molecules. Type
I collagen accounts for 60–85% of the total dry weight of tendon
tissue (Docheva et al., 2015), whereas type III collagen accounts
for 1–5% of the total collagen content.(Liu et al., 1995; Lim et al.,
2019). There are also small amounts of other collagen proteins,
such as type II, IV, V, XII and XIV collagen (Wang, 2006; Wang
et al., 2018a). Type III collagen plays an important role in
regulating the size of type I collagen ﬁbrils, while type V
collagen, found in the center of ﬁbrils, is thought to act as the
template for ﬁbrillogenesis. (Thorpe and Screen, 2016).
Tendon’s mechanical properties can be attributed to its
hierarchical structure of collagen ﬁbrils (Trelstad and Hayashi,
1979; Wang, 2006). At the molecular level, collagen’s triple helix
structure allows tendon tissues to have sufﬁcient mechanical
strength. (Fratzl et al., 1998). The intermolecular sliding of
collagen within tendon facilitates deformation in a linear
fashion with application of strain (Kelc et al., 2013). Collagen
ﬁbrillogenesis, or the formation of ﬁbrils from the collagen
molecules, is an important multi-step process that determines
the functionality of the overall tendon. There has been debate on
how this process unfolds as tendons mature. Some believe that
collagen molecules assemble to form ﬁbril intermediates, which
then assemble end-to-end to create longer and mechanically
functional ﬁbrils. These longer ﬁbrils then interact laterally,
forming ﬁbrils of a larger diameter. In contrast, Kalson et al.
have suggested that end-to-end and lateral fusion events do not
contribute to ﬁbril growth, as serial microscopy has revealed few
fusion events during development, and the number of ﬁbrils does
not decrease as expected with fusion. (Kalson et al., 2015). Rather,
collagen molecules may accrue on ﬁbril ends, growing in a
binding site- and structure-speciﬁc mechanism as described by
the surface-nucleation-and-propagation (SNP) model. (Holmes
et al., 1998). Collagen ﬁbril bundles form ﬁbers, which in turn
form the fascicles of tendon tissues. These structures are arranged
parallel to the long axis of tendon tissues, which give tendon tissue
its hallmark tensile strength (Wang, 2006). Some authors have
posited that fascicles are further organized into a spiral formation
(Kannus, 2000; Ottani et al., 2002). While some argue that such a
structure would make transference of force to bone less efﬁcient,
this architecture may be better suited to resisting ﬂexion,
compression, and multidirectional forces.
Non-collagenous proteins found within tendon extracellular
matrix (ECM) consist of a variety of proteoglycan (PG) molecules
(e.g.
decorin,
ﬁbromodulin,
lumican,
and
ﬁbromodulin),
glycoproteins
(e.g.
tenascin
C,
ﬁbronectin,
lubricin,
and
laminin) and glycosaminoglycans (Humphrey et al., 2014).
The hydrophilic nature of these proteins help the structure to
retain high water content, which provides some resistance to
physiologic compression forces and inter-fascicular sliding (Jozsa
et al., 1989; Kirkendall and Garrett, 1997; Martin et al., 2003;
Vogel, 2004; Kohrs et al., 2011; Docheva et al., 2015; Wunderli
et al., 2020). In addition, proteoglycans play important roles in
collagen ﬁbrillogenesis. Lumican, ﬁbromodulin, decorin, and
biglycan all play a role in stabilizing ﬁbril formation and
maturation, as knockout mouse models demonstrate that
elimination of these proteoglycans result in weaker tendons
and increased ﬁbrosis (Robbins et al., 1997; Ezura et al., 2000;
Zhang et al., 2009). Proteoglycans may also play a role in
attenuating strain experienced at the cellular level. Studies
have found that the levels of strain transferred to cells in
synthetic scaffolds differ from native levels, as signiﬁcant
strain attenuation occurs from the tissue level to the cell level
(Cheng and Screen, 2007). At times, levels of strain estimated on
synthetic scaffolds can overestimate native tissue strain by
20–60% (Han et al., 2013). The authors further found that
cells in the PG-rich portions of the sample experienced less
strain than those in more ﬁbrous areas, suggesting that PGs
may affect the local mechanical response, possibly through
support of collagen ﬁbrillogenesis or facilitation of resistance
to compression or sliding forces.
Biomechanical Properties of Tendon
Tendon tissues have specialized mechanical properties and have
features of linear elastic material models as well as viscoelastic
material models. In fact, mathematical methods termed quasi-
linear viscoelasticity models have been used to model tendon
tissue’s mechanical behavior (Woo et al., 2000).
The stress-strain curves of tendon tissues are of particular
interest because they demonstrate their intrinsic tensile strength
during pull-to-failure testing. When using linear elastic material
models to describe tendon mechanical properties, the stress-
strain curves have three regions, including the toe region, the
linear region, and the yield or failure region. (Hooley et al., 1980;
Lieber et al., 1991). The toe region corresponds with stretching of
crimped ﬁber bundles, which continues until 2% of strain (Wang,
2006). Within the toe region, the crimp pattern of tendon ﬁbers is
stretched; it is recovered when the stress disappears (Lim et al.,
2019). Within the linear region (2–6% strain), the slope of the
stress-strain curve appears to be constant as it is the inﬂection
point where the curve transitions from strain stiffening to strain
softening. This region is also the point at which the tangent
modulus reaches its maximum value. Studies have found that
over 4% strain can cause microscopic damage during the sliding
of collagen ﬁbrils (Thompson et al., 2017). The failure region of
the stress-strain curve demonstrates macroscopic tears associated
with strain values over 8–10% (Butler et al., 2000; Thompson
et al., 2017).
Viscoelastic
materials
demonstrate
different
mechanical
properties depending on the rate of loading (Woo et al., 2000;
Robi et al., 2013). One characteristic of viscoelastic materials such
as tendons is creep, the deformation of a material in response to
constant load (Jaiswal et al., 2020). Creep test or “fatigue” test is
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 826748
2
Wu et al.
In Vitro Tendon Strain Models
used to demonstrate response of tendon to continuous or
repetitive loading (Wang et al., 2018a). Creep testing helps
explain the relation between time and strain under constant
load (Wren et al., 2003). Upon exposure to initial load, the
deformation of tendon tissue is temporary, but as the load is
sustained, damage accumulates, and the subsequent strength and
stiffness of the damaged tendon tissue decreases (Wang et al.,
1995). It is also worth noting that the mechanical properties of
different tendons varies by tendon anatomic location and
function (Wang et al., 1995; Maganaris and Paul, 1999; Shani
et al., 2016).
Mechanical loading, even within the range of typical of daily
activities, can lead to tendon damage. In vitro mechanical loading
studies have reported that mechanical degradation can occur
within 24 h of exposure to very low levels of repetitive stress, at a
level less than 5% of the ultimate tensile strength of the tissue
(Parent et al., 2011). However, this observed in vitro degradation
would likely be different in vivo due to the repair mechanisms of
host tendon tissues and the associated supporting cells (e.g.
resident connective tissue progenitor cells and immune system
cells). Based on results of in vitro studies, Wang et al. have
suggested that physiologic loading triggers tendon repair, such
that the repair counteracts microscopic damage (Wang et al.,
2003; Wang et al., 2015). In particular, the therapeutic effects of
eccentric loading have been extensively studied in the context of
treating Achilles tendinopathy (Fahlström et al., 2003). While
human studies reveal that eccentric loading tends to increase the
maximum force and the maximum number of repetitions
tendons can sustain (Malliaras et al., 2013), the mechanism by
which this form of loading has been unclear (O’Neill et al., 2015).
A possible explanation can be attributed to complex muscle-
tendon interactions, by which the muscle shields tendon from
stress by storing energy or increasing tendon stiffness, thereby
reducing damage (Sugisaki et al., 2011; Roberts and Konow, 2013;
O’Neill et al., 2015). Neuromodulatory effects that facilitate
adaptive
or
protective
motor
patterns
may
also
explain
therapeutic effects of eccentric loading (Rees et al., 2008; Rio
et al., 2016). These interactions of the tendon with the
surrounding tissue have only been captured in live patients or
animal models. Therefore, effects of repair may be more
signiﬁcant in vivo, in the presence of supporting cells and
chemical signals which may more readily trigger healing. This
may explain the discrepancy between ruptures observed with
creep testing of explanted tendon tissues and the long-term
functionality of tendon tissues in vivo (Wang et al., 2018a).
However, some degree of mechanical stimulation is required
to maintain normal tendon structural and mechanical properties.
Live studies have revealed that stress shielding can cause
deterioration of tendon tissue. Early studies assessing the
effects of completely releasing stress in various live animal
models revealed that collagen bundles were less aligned, and
ﬁbrils tended to be smaller in diameter (Muellner et al., 2001;
Majima et al., 2003). Stress shielding also decreased the
mechanical strength and strain-at-failure of collagen fascicles
(Yamamoto et al., 1999). These studies reafﬁrm that some
level of mechanical stimulation may be essential to optimal
maintenance and repair of tendon structure in vivo; this
suggests that complete deprivation of stress in the in vitro
setting may cause tenocytes and tendon explants to lose
tendon-like properties as well.
While tensile loads are the main mechanical stress to which
tendon are exposed, other forces may contribute to physiologic or
pathologic responses to applied forces. Compressive forces have
been suggested as a cause of tendon damage.(Almekinders et al.,
2003; Hamilton and Purdam, 2004). In addition, interﬁbrillar
shear stress and ﬂuid shear stress also have been described in
tendon tissue (Arnoczky et al., 2002a; Lavagnino et al., 2008;
Szczesny and Elliott, 2014; Szczesny et al., 2015; Lee and Elliott,
2019). Low levels of ﬂuid shear stress resulted in lower levels of
collagenase mRNA inhibition, indicating that this form of
mechanical
stimulation
plays
a
signiﬁcant
role
in
the
preservation of collagen matrix integrity. (Lavagnino et al.,
2008). Sliding and rotational behaviors in the ﬁbers of tendon
samples have also been observed; studies investigating the
transference of applied force to cells also found that applied
levels of strain were signiﬁcantly attenuated at the ﬁber level,
suggesting that these sliding forces may play a role in attenuating
forces experienced by tendon. (Cheng and Screen, 2007; Lee and
Elliott, 2019). In energy-storing tendons such as ﬂexor tendons,
fascicular sliding and interfascicular matrix (IFM) elasticity
facilitated these tendons’ ability to resist and recover from
higher loads (Thorpe et al., 2015). Thus, sliding forces may
play an important role in tendon behavior at multiple levels of
organization and moderate the level of strain exerted at the
cellular level.
TENDON CELL RESPONSE TO
MECHANICAL LOAD
Mechanical stimulation is essential for tendon development,
maturation, and repair, but the underlying mechanisms of
tendon mechanoresponse elements remain poorly understood.
Tendon cell and progenitor cell biology are known to be
inﬂuenced by mechanical factors, (Engler et al., 2006), the
response
to
which
is
mediated
by
the
ECM
itself,
mechanosensors, and effector molecules (Banes et al., 1999).
Matrix stiffness, discussed later in 2D model studies, has been
shown to strongly inﬂuence stem cell differentiation, as
demonstrated by changes in cell morphology as well as gene
expression and protein production. In addition to general
mechanoresponse
pathways
via
membrane
proteins
and
signalling cascades, studies have added to a growing body of
knowledge of tendon-speciﬁc pathways.
Tendon-speciﬁc pathways for mechanoresponse have recently
been described. (Fang et al., 2020; Passini et al., 2021). At the
enthesis, cilia transduce biophysical activity via hedgehog (Hh)
signaling to facilitate adaptation to load in an inverse relationship
(Fang
et
al.,
2020).
Mechanical
stimulation
caused
cilia
disassembly, a process disrupted with the loss of Hh signaling.
Deletion of ciliary genes in mice resulted in weakened entheses
and decreased enthesis mineralization, suggesting that cilia may
play a role in the enthesis mechanoresponse mechanisms and
may also be inﬂuenced to affect pathology resulting from
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 826748
3
Wu et al.
In Vitro Tendon Strain Models
overloading. In late 2021, Passini et al. published their ﬁndings
that intracellular calcium signaling occurs among explanted rat
tendon fascicles in response to stretch (Passini et al., 2021). At low
strain rates (0.1% strain/second), tenocytes in their ex vivo model
exhibited multiple intracellular Ca2+ signals over a longer
duration, while at high strain rates (1.0% strain/second),
tenocytes displayed a single shorter duration intracellular
Ca2+ response. They also noted that, as strain rate increased,
higher tissue stretch was required to elicit a response among 50%
of the cells in their model. Passini et al. also demonstrated that
tenocytes, which reside between collagen ﬁbers and are thus
exposed to mechanical shear during tissue stretching, are able
to detected these shear-stress forces via the mechanosensitive ion
channel PIEZO1. The authors proposed that the Ca2+ signals
observed in their experiments may in turn activate enzymatic
cross linking of collagen, contributing to increased tendon
stiffness
and
strength
and,
ultimately,
affecting
physical
performance This pathway suggests a mechanism by which
tendon mechanoresponses to shearing and stretching forces
are optimized in order to maintain tendon morphology and
biomechanical properties.
More generally, cells, including those in tendon, may detect
mechanical stimulation via transmembrane proteins that are
integrated
with
cytoskeletal
elements
and
non-receptor
signaling molecules. Though studied in other mesenchymal
cell populations and not unique to tendon, these pathways
nevertheless play an important role in guiding the cellular
response to mechanical stimulation. These mechanosensing
cellular structures and surface molecules include integrins,
cadherins,
and
connexins.
(Chrzanowska-Wodnicka
and
Burridge, 1996; Lavagnino et al., 2011; Leckband et al., 2011;
Schiele et al., 2013). For example, forces on ECM-integrin-
cytoskeletal linkages may initiate signal pathways by altering
protein folding or binding afﬁnity. For example, studies have
shown that stretching forces can expose binding sites on
ﬁbronectin promoting self-assembly into ﬁbrils. (Morla and
Ruoslahti, 1992; Zhong et al., 1998). Cytoskeleton deformation
by mechanical stimulation can also alter transcriptional activities
within the cell.(Wang et al., 2009; Tajik et al., 2016). Integrins can
sense forces to which a cell is exposed and then propagate that
forces to the actin cytoskeleton, nuclear laminins and eventually
chromatin, which causes stretching and access to target genes for
transcription.(Tajik et al., 2016). Pathways for stem cell
differentiation may also be activated in this manner where
actin
ﬁlaments
rapidly
polymerize
and
depolymerize
in
response to mechanical loading, which in turn leads to
translocation of MKL1 (megakaryoblastic leukemia 1) into the
nucleus. MKL1 protein is shown to interact with the beta catenin
(Wnt) and Smads (TGF-beta) pathways, which can further guide
cellular
differentiation,
migration,
and
cell
cycle
regulation.(Scharenberg et al., 2014). Increased MKL1-actin
activity reduces chromatin access, leading to reduction of cell
pluripotency.(Hu et al., 2019).
The YAP/TAZ pathway may be another non-speciﬁc pathway
that may be activated in response to tendon mechanical
stimulation.
YAP
(Yes-associated
protein)
and
TAZ
(transcriptional co-activator with PDZ-binding motif) effector
proteins in the Hippo pathway have been found to be inﬂuenced
by ECM stiffness and cytoskeleton organization. (Dupont et al.,
2011). YAP/TAZ play a key role in regulating the quiescence,
proliferation, and differentiation of adult progenitor cells in
multiple tissues including tendon. (Heng et al., 2020). In an
environment with a stiff ECM or cellular attachment substrate,
increased integrin clustering and focal adhesion formation
increases F-actin polymerization, which in turn induces cell
spreading. This then promotes translocation of YAP/TAZ into
the nucleus, which consequently increases osteogenesis via
upregulation of RUNX2 and downregulation of PPAR-γ. On
soft substrates, cells retain a rounder shape due to less focal
adhesion formation and actin polymerization, which sequesters
YAP/TAZ to the cytosol. This sequestration consequently
downregulates RUNX2 (runt-related transcription factor 2)
and upregulates PPAR-γ (peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma), driving adipogenesis. In particular, TAZ
activation has been consistently reported to play a role in
osteogenesis,
while
the
role
of
YAP
remains
controversial.(Heng et al., 2020). However, Yeung et al. have
reported upregulation of YAP/TAZ target genes during tendon
development, possibly reﬂecting the concurrent deposition of
ECM components. (Yeung et al., 2015).
IN VITRO TENDON CELL LOADING
MODELS
Numerous loading models have been developed to study the
mechanobiology of tendon. The scope of this review is limited to
in vitro loading models, which can be grossly separated into
explant, 2-dimensional (2D), or 3-dimensional (3D) loading
models. The ideal in vitro model and loading conditions for
tendon tissue engineering recapitulates the various mechanical
forces transmitted through the ECM in vivo to native tendon
cells
while
also
maintaining
cell
viability.
Desirable
characteristics of optimal tendon tissue models include the
generation
of
a
well-aligned
cellular
morphology,
the
differentiation of progenitor cells towards a tendon-like
phenotype, and the production of ECM proteins commonly
observed among tendon tissues.(Butler et al., 2000; Brennan
et al., 2018). These models must also have the capacity to
tolerate the application of physiologically-relevant forces.
Tendon tissues in vivo are usually subjected to uniaxial
loading at a level of approximately 4–6% strain, (Screen
et al., 2004), though higher and lower amounts of uniaxial
loads may be utilized to replicate pathologic states. Tendon-
derived stem cells (TDSCs) are endogenous progenitor cells
within tendon tissues and have been isolated from both animal
and human sources (Rui et al., 2010; Lui and Chan, 2011). While
TDSCs may be the most relevant MSC population for tendon
regeneration research, studies have found that bone marrow or
adipose derived MSCs are robust alternatives.(Yin et al., 2016;
Youngstrom et al., 2016). The following two sections summarize
the main categories of in vitro tenogenic mechanical loading
models as well as key principles and ﬁndings associated with the
use of these models.
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 826748
4
Wu et al.
In Vitro Tendon Strain Models
Ex vivo Tendon Loading Models
Tendon explants as an ex vivo loading model provide useful
insight into the mechanical behavior of isolated tendons. Native
cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions are preserved and may thus
be investigated, providing information not otherwise available
through 2D and 3D models. 2D and 3D models also currently
lack the heterogeneity in cell population found in native
tendon.(Viganò
et
al.,
2017).
These
mechanical
studies
produced some of the earliest knowledge about cell-cell
interactions,
intrinsic
tendon
mechanical
properties,
cell
viability and growth, and gene expression.
Strain levels used in ex vivo studies range from 1 to 9%, though
strains
of
20–30% have been applied
to model
tendon
injury.(Scott et al., 2005; Legerlotz et al., 2013). A general
summary of the outcomes of different levels of applied strain
is given in Table 1, and loading parameters used in individual
studies are given in Supplementary Table S1. Cyclic strain from 1
to 3% on tendon fascicles and whole-tendon samples have been
sufﬁcient to preserve tenocyte-like morphology and tendon
speciﬁc gene expression, (Maeda et al., 2009; Wang et al.,
2013; Wunderli et al., 2018; Tohidnezhad et al., 2020), but
matrix deterioration and reduced maximum stress and energy
density were also noted at these levels of strain.(Devkota et al.,
2007; Wang et al., 2013). Physiologic loads of 5–6% also yielded
increased collagen production and can rescue unloaded tendon
samples
from
pathologic
changes.(Wang
et
al.,
2015).
Overloading of explants revealed degenerative changes in ECM
and increased apoptosis and inﬂammatory markers.(Legerlotz
et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2013). Failure-loaded samples were
notable for collagen ﬁber kinking and denaturation.(Szczesny
et al., 2018). Interestingly, the lack of change in tissue modulus
suggests that changes in tissue architecture initiate the ﬁrst
changes in tenocyte phenotype and cell viability during injury.
This hypothesis has been supported by Freedman et al.‘s work
which found that macroscale damage and matrix disorganization
caused by fatigue loading propagates down to cellular level;
damaged
matrix
may
transmit
forces
differently
than
uninjured
matrix,
thus
spurring
differential
cellular
responses.(Freedman
et
al.,
2018).
In
summary,
low
to
physiologic
loading
preserved
and
sometimes
rescued
tenogenic genes and ECM production in explants, while high
strains more consistently caused structural damage, which
consequently affects cellular responses due to changes in
detected mechanical strain.
Because researchers can avoid the challenges in ﬁnetuning
scaffold properties in ex vivo studies, important ﬁndings have
been produced from comparing different loads. Interestingly, ex
vivo studies of tendon explants from various species have revealed
that healthy tendons can demonstrate auxetic behavior when
placed under biaxial strain—that is, the tendons become thicker,
rather
than
thinner,
when
stretched.(Gatt
et
al.,
2015).
Furthermore, this auxetic behavior was highly inﬂuenced by
tendon
microstructure,
which
may
be
compromised
by
damage due to excessive loads or altered tendon biology. A
3D hydrogel scaffold with auxetic properties was developed to
aid in future tendon-to-muscle regeneration (Warner et al.,
2017), but beyond cell viability studies, there remains little
information about the effects of this scaffold with regard to
guiding
tenogenic
differentiation
among
mesenchymal
progenitor cells.
Two-Dimensional (2D) Loading Models
Two-dimensional loading models study the effects of mechanical
stimulation, with or without additional dynamic loading, on cells
grown in monolayer. In the case of dynamic loading, cells adhere
to a ﬂexible material to which mechanical strain can be applied.
The stiffness of the substrate on which cells are plated has also
been
shown
to
affect
tenogenic
gene
expression
among
progenitor cells.(Sharma and Snedeker, 2010). Most other
models, including commercially available units such as those
made by Flexcell®, use the cyclical application of negative pressure
(via a vacuum device) to homogenously apply mechanical strain
to the ﬂexible material and the attached cells. This provides
customizable loading conditions for experiments. 2D models
mainly
investigate
the
effects
of
deforming
cellular
cytoskeletons and nuclei, providing an approach to evaluate
certain cell differentiation and migration pathways. Depending
on the cell population seeded, the aim of the study may be to
study mechanical stimulation’s effects on the preservation of
tendon-speciﬁc genes or morphology in tendon cells or the
TABLE 1 | Overview of outcomes of applied mechanical strain to tendon explants and fascicles.
Level of strain
General outcomes
1–4%
Preservation of tendon and matrix genes including SCX, TNMD, Ctgf Wunderli et al. (2018), Tohidnezhad et al. (2020)
Downregulation of decorin Maeda et al. (2009)
Enhanced collagen production Maeda et al. (2007)
Matrix deterioration at 3% strain Wang et al. (2013)
Reduced maximum stress and energy density, increased cell death and collagenase activity; increased glycosaminoglycan
content, increased PGE2 Devkota et al. (2007)
Increased MMP3, MMP13, MMP9 (Maeda et al. (2009); Tohidnezhad et al. (2020)
5–8%
Retention of structural integrity, cellular function Wang et al. (2013)
Increased collagen production Wang et al. (2015)
Rescue of unloaded tendon samples from pathologic changes Wang et al. (2015)
Increased collagen synthesis Screen et al. (2005)
9%+
Increased COL1A1, IL-6Legerlotz et al. (2013)
Massive collagen bundle rupture, ﬁber kinking and denaturationWang et al.(2013);Szczesny et al. (2018)
Induced stretch overload injury with increased apoptosis and abnormal nuclear morphologyScott et al. (2005)
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 826748
5
Wu et al.
In Vitro Tendon Strain Models
differentiation of progenitor cells towards a tenogenic fate.
However, 2D models lack a substantial ECM component and
thus are not well-suited to replicate cell-ECM interactions, which
is a major limitation of these techniques.
2D Mechanical Stimulation
Static mechanical stimulation of cells in monolayer may be
achieved
via
specialized
plates
with
deﬁned
mechanical
properties. Culture plates composed of materials with different
degrees of mechanical stiffness, functionalized with type I
collagen or ﬁbronectin cellular adhesion molecules, have been
reported to guide the fate of bone marrow stem cells (BMSCs)
towards tendon or bone phenotypes. Snedeker et al. plated
BMSCs onto gel strips with stiffnesses ranging from 10 kPa to
100 kPa and found that increased RUNX2 expression was
associated with increased stiffness of a ﬁbronectin-coated
substrate. (Sharma and Snedeker, 2010). Gene expression of
scleraxis (SCX), tenascin-C (TNC), tenomodulin (TNMD), and
collagen III (COL3) have been noted to be increased among cells
plated on collagen substrates within a more narrow range of
stiffness (approximately 30–50 kPa), even in the absence of
additional dynamic mechanical load.(Sharma and Snedeker,
2010,
2012).
The
authors
hypothesize
that
since
SCX
expression can be affected by MAP kinase activity, and MAP
kinase can be inﬂuenced by mechanical stimulation, it is possible
that stiffer substrates stimulate a level of MAP kinase activity that
does not permit tenogenesis, while softer substrates may provide
insufﬁcient mechanical stimulation. Islam et al. found a similar
upregulation of tenogenic markers in mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) plated on type-1 collagen sheets of varying stiffness.
Higher levels of SCX were seen in cells on sheets with a modulus
of 100 MPa compared to 0.1 MPa.(Islam et al., 2017). In addition,
architectural organization of the substrate inﬂuenced tenogenesis
and ECM formation. 10 MPa collagen sheets with highly aligned
ﬁbers demonstrated comparable increases in type-III collagen
gene expression and cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP,
a protein involved in tendon load resistance) (Smith et al., 1997)
as an unaligned 100 MPa sheet.(Islam et al., 2017). Finally,
RUNX2 gene expression
was signiﬁcantly increased
after
21 days in cells seeded on the 100 MPa sheet, suggesting that
the same conditions for stiffness that promote tenogenesis also
promote osteogenesis over time.(Islam et al., 2017). Researchers
should be aware of the time-dependent and substrate-dependent
nature of tenogenic differentiation to achieve optimal conditions
for tendon or tendon-like tissue formation.
2D Dynamic Mechanical Loading
Studies of biaxial or uniaxial dynamic loading have also been
studied
on
2D
models.
Biaxial
loading
generates
a
multidirectional
strain
(e.g.
radial
strain
exerted
on
monolayer
of
cells
adherent
to
a
ﬂexible
substrate).
Although this strain model does not typically replicate
typical physiologic tendon loading, cells undergoing cyclic
biaxial strain have shown increased proliferation, collagen
production, and cell morphology changes similar to those
observed among tenocytes.(Zeichen et al., 2000; Goodman
et al., 2004; Deniz et al., 2020). Uniaxial strain more closely
replicates loads experienced by native tendon cells, and thus
the majority of mechanical loading research has focused on
the effects of uniaxial strain on tendon and stem cells. Similar
to cyclic biaxial strain, cyclic uniaxial strain has also increased
collagen
I
production,
cell
proliferation,
and
cell
alignment.(Yang et al., 2004; Riboh et al., 2008). As with
static loading, duration of application of strain appear to
inﬂuence cell behavior; for example, Jun N-terminal kinase
1 (JNK) pathway-mediated apoptosis was noted to be elevated
over brief applications of cyclic uniaxial strain, however, after
long-term exposure to strain, no differences in levels of
tenocyte apoptosis were found. This implies that tenocytes
may have the capacity to develop stress tolerance during
prolonged
periods
of
mechanical
loading
and
this
phenomenon
may
be
evolutionarily
and
functionally
beneﬁcial in vivo.(Skutek et al., 2003). Although few studies
have directly compared the effects of biaxial versus uniaxial
strain on cell behavior, Wall et al. found that biaxial substrate
strain induces lower levels of cellular strain compared to
uniaxial substrate strain.(Wall et al., 2007). Wang et al.
found that while uniaxial strain consistently increased
expression of SCX, Mohawk (MKX), and TNMD, biaxial
loading
actually
inhibited
expression
of
those
markers.(Wang et al., 2018b).
Customizable mechanical loads have afforded observation of
the effects of different levels of strain on tenogenic differentiation
and morphology. Though low and high strain generally model
tendon behavior seen in pathological conditions, results from
these studies have been varied (Tables 2, 3). Loading parameters
of studies discussed are included in Supplementary Table S2.
Low magnitude loads of 2–4% have increased early gene
expression of inﬂammatory factors and ECM degradation
enzymes, (Tsuzaki et al., 2003), and tendon-derived stem cells
under low strain have also demonstrated upregulated osteogenic
and chondrogenic markers, including bone morphogenic protein
(BMP-2) expression. (Chen et al., 2008; Rui et al., 2011).
Conversely, low strain loading also increased tenogenic gene
expression, including MKX, TNMD, and collagen, type 1,
alpha 1 and 2 (COL1A1, COL1A2).(Zhang and Wang, 2010;
Kayama et al., 2016). Of note, Kayama et al. did not ﬁnd an
increase in SCX expression with 2% cell strain.(Kayama et al.,
2016). It is possible that 2% strain, or the duration of 2% strain
used in the study, is insufﬁcient to increase expression of that
speciﬁc marker.
Moderate-to-high physiologic loads of approximately 4–8%
increased ECM and tenogenic gene expression, (Chen et al., 2007;
Nam et al., 2019), though some studies also noted a concomitant
increase
in
osteogenic,
adipogenic,
and
chondrogenic
markers.(Zhang and Wang, 2013; Nie et al., 2021). This may
be due to cell types used in the study. Zhang and Wang found that
tendon-derived stem cells stimulated by 8% strain expressed
higher levels of non-tendon genes, including transcription
factor SOX-9 and RUNX2, while tenocytes did not.(Zhang and
Wang, 2013). Upregulation of inﬂammatory cytokine genes
including COX-2 and PGE2 have also been noted at 8% strain
by Yang et al., (Yang et al., 2005), suggesting that moderate levels
of strain can spur some degree of inﬂammation and tendon
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 826748
6
Wu et al.
In Vitro Tendon Strain Models
matrix breakdown; conversely, the same study found that 4%
strain lowered levels of COX-2, matrix metalloproteinase 1
(MMP-1), and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2).
Studies of effects of higher levels of strain from 9 to 12% begin
to demonstrate inﬂammation and cell death thought to be
involved
in
tendinopathy.
Cyclic
10%
stretching
of
mesenchymal stem cells resulted in higher gene expression of
collagen I and III and tenascin C after 24 h, (Zhang et al., 2008),
but tendon cells also transiently upregulated gene expression of
angiogenic factors under 10% biaxial strain, suggesting that the
development of tendinopathy may involve angiogenesis driven by
tenocyte mechanoresponses. (Mousavizadeh et al., 2013). Higher
mechanical
loads
also
increased
tenocyte
apoptosis,
inﬂammatory markers, and pain modulators commonly seen
in tendinopathy.(Arnoczky et al., 2002b; Wang et al., 2003).
To highlight the complex interactions between tendon biology,
ultrastructure and biomechanical properties, interestingly, it has
been noted that fatigue loading of tendon explants which is
known to cause immediate changes in collagen organization
and molecular denaturation is not associated with immediate
changes
in
local
tissue
modulus
suggesting
that
despite
ultrastructural changes there is no immediate effect on tissue
mechanical properties.(Szczesny et al., 2018).
In summary, moderate levels of static mechanical stimulation
and dynamic load on 2D models may promote tenogenic
differentiation of progenitor cells and maintain a tenocyte-like
phenotype.
Both
low
and
high
levels
of
strain
induce
inﬂammatory changes or osteogenic marker upregulation,
demonstrating one way tendon may respond to pathological
loads with compensatory cellular changes. However, these
ﬁndings are not consistently reported across all studies,
emphasizing the importance of considering other experiment
factors. Both the strain level and the duration for which the strain
is applied can inﬂuence cell behavior. Furthermore, the type of
substrate in the extracellular environment can greatly inﬂuence
study results as the materials composing the substrate may
transmit applied forces differently, possibly even attenuating
the magnitude of applied forces. As Han et al. have discussed,
signiﬁcant strain attenuation occurs due to the tendon matrix
structure, and the direct application of strain to cells on 2D
substrates above 4% may be supraphysiologic (Han et al., 2013).
The overapplication of strain as a result may explain variable
ﬁndings in the studies that have explored higher levels of
mechanical loading.
Three-Dimensional (3D) in vitro Loading
Models
Although 2D models laid the foundation for the study of tendon
mechanobiology, the simplicity of the designs limits our
understanding
of
how
tendon
cells
are
affected
by
the
surrounding ECM. Compared to 2D models of the same
material and growth factors, stem cells seeded in 3D scaffolds
more consistently expressed higher levels of tenogenic gene
TABLE 2 | Overview of outcomes of applied mechanical strain to 2D loading studies using human cells (stem cells and tendon ﬁbroblasts).
Level of strain
General outcomes
1–4%
Increased collagen type I, TGF- β Yang et al. (2004)
Decreased COX-2, MMP-1, PGE2 gene expression Yang et al. (2005)
Increased COX-2, IL-1 β, MMP-3 gene expression Tsuzaki et al. (2003), Wang et al. (2003)
Transient increases in ALP, RUNX2, OCN gene expression Chen et al. (2008), Nam et al. (2019)
5–8%
Increased SCX, TNMD, TNC gene expression Nam et al. (2019)
Increased TGF- β Yang et al. (2004)
Increased collagen I, collagen III, ﬁbronectin, N-cadherin Yang et al.(2004); Nam et al. (2019)
Increased COX-2, MMP-1, PGE2 expression Yang et al. (2005)
Increased JNK activation and apoptosis of tendon ﬁbroblasts Skutek et al. (2003)
9%+
Increased TNC, SCX, TNMD gene expression in BMSCs Chen et al. (2008); Nam et al. (2019)
Increased collagen type I, collagen type III, ﬁbronectin, N-cadherin Chen et al. (2008); Nam et al. (2019)
Increased PGE2, COX-1, COX-2 Wang et al. (2003)
Transiently increased ANGPTL4, FGF-2, COX-2, SPHK1, TGF-alpha, VEGF-A and VEGF-C Mousavizadeh et al. (2013)
TABLE 3 | Overview of outcomes of applied mechanical strain to 2D loading studies using animal cells (stem cells and tendon ﬁbroblasts).
Level of strain
General outcomes
1–4%
Increased MKX, TNMD, COL1A1, COL1A2 gene expression in tenocytes Kayama et al. (2016)
Increased total collagen production Riboh et al. (2008), Zhang and Wang, (2010)
Increased BMP-2 production Rui et al. (2011)
5–8%
Increased SCX, MKX, TNMD, COL1A2 Wang et al. (2018b)
Increased SOX9, RUNX2 in TDSCs but not tenocytes Zhang and Wang, (2010); Zhang and Wang, (2013)
Increased collagen I, decorin Chen et al. (2007)
Increased BMP-2 production Rui et al. (2011)
9%+
Increased TNC Zhang et al. (2008)
Increased collagen I, collagen III Zhang et al. (2008)
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 826748
7
Wu et al.
In Vitro Tendon Strain Models
expression, suggesting that the additional cell-matrix interactions
play a signiﬁcant role in guiding cells down a more tenogenic fate
(Kuo and Tuan, 2008; James et al., 2011). Wang et al. have also
found that the osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation noted in
MSCs on a 2D model was inhibited in cells on a 3D scaffold
(Wang et al., 2018b). Generally, 3D models contain cells
homogenously seeded in a 3D material; scaffolds can be
designed such that their architecture promotes cell alignment.
Researchers may also apply additional strain by placing the cell-
seeded scaffolds in a bioreactor.
Effects of Differential Loading Parameters
on 3D Models
Similar to 2D model studies, cells seeded in 3D scaffolds have
responded differently to varying levels of strain. Available loading
conditions are summarized in Supplementary Table S3. Effects
of loading parameters are complicated by the inherent stiffnesses
of different scaffolds, but tenogenic markers have generally been
upregulated in stem cells at strains of 2.5–10% (Tables 4, 5).(Kuo
and Tuan, 2008; Scott et al., 2011) Patel et al. reported increased
gene expression of matrix metalloproteinases when tenocytes
seeded in a polyethylene glycol dimethacylate (PEGDM) ﬁber-
gel scaffold were placed under 5% strain (Patel et al., 2017).
Interestingly, the same authors later found that scaffold modulus
and stiffness played a more signiﬁcant role in inﬂuencing gene
expression than strain; cells seeded in softer ﬁber scaffolds with
lower
moduli
had
increased
interleukin
six
and
matrix
metalloproteinase 3 compared to those in stiffer ﬁbers (Patel
et al., 2018). Increased osteogenic gene expression was also seen
with extended underloading (3% strain) of tenocytes (Wang et al.,
2021). Conversely, underloading 3D models also offered insight
into tendon injury healing processes; a “tenostruct” created from
a combination of tendon explant, tendon progenitor cells, and
bone-derived macrophages in hydrogels revealed increased
macrophage recruitment and progenitor cell recruitment to
the underloaded explant (Stauber et al., 2021). Future research
may further examine the interactions of different cell populations
in 3D loading models.
Substrate Material and Architecture of 3D
Scaffolds
While the ﬁnding that moderate physiologic levels of mechanical
loading generally spurs tenogenesis or maintenance is not unique
to 3D models, these models have allowed for further study of
matrix-cell interactions. Scaffold materials and architecture can
signiﬁcantly affect the amount and type of force applied to cells
and are thus a main focus in the design of 3D models. Innovation
in this respect of bioreactor design, as a result, is considerably
higher than seen in the design of 2D loading experiments.
Anisotropic materials such as ﬁbrous scaffolds may transfer
force heterogeneously to cells, while isotropic materials like
hydrogels transfers force more homogenously. However, there
are useful applications for both types of materials, and current
mechanobiology research is focused on combining the properties
of both anisotropic and isotropic materials to capture the
complexity of native tendon environment. The following
section summarizes ﬁndings from studies using 3D loading
models.
Hydrogel 3D Models
Hydrogels are a popular 3D in vitro loading model used in tendon
engineering studies. Their ability to transfer mechanical strain
uniformly to all cells offers a more controlled environment of
study. Hydrogel biomaterials range from collagen I to ﬁbrin and
even decellularized plant tissue (Garvin et al., 2003; Feng et al.,
2006; Contessi Negrini et al., 2020; Herchenhan et al., 2020).
Decellularized tendon samples have also yielded an ECM scaffold
suitable for cell culture, possibly allowing for future researchers to
TABLE 4 | Overview of outcomes of applied mechanical strain to 3D loading studies using human cells (stem cells and tendon ﬁbroblasts).
Level of strain
General outcomes
1–4%
Increased cell alignmentKuo and Tuan, (2008)
Increased SCX, MKX, TNMD, TNC, COL3A1 gene productionKuo and Tuan, (2008);Wu et al. (2017);Herchenhan et al.
(2020)
Increased type I collagen, type III collagenKuo and Tuan, (2008)
Decreased type XII collagen, type XIV collagen, elastinKuo and Tuan, (2008)
9%+
Increased COL1A1, COL3A1, DCN, SCX, TNC gene expressionGovoni et al. (2017)
Increased EGR1, EGR2, FOS, COX-2 gene expressionHerchenhan et al. (2020)
TABLE 5 | Overview of outcomes of applied mechanical strain to 3D loading studies using animal cells (stem cells and tendon ﬁbroblasts).
Level of strain
General outcomes
1–4%
Increased TNC, SCX, COL1A1, matrix genes (aggrecan, ﬁbronectin, prolyl hydroxylase)Garvin et al. (2003); Scott et al.
(2011)
Increased RUNX2, ALP, OCN gene productionWang et al. (2021)
Increased type I collagen, type III collagen, type XII collagenBaker et al. (2011)
Increased heterotropic ossiﬁcation and decreased biomechanical strengthWang et al. (2021)
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 826748
8
Wu et al.
In Vitro Tendon Strain Models
conduct studies with a model that closely resembles native tendon
in both architecture and composition.(Youngstrom et al., 2013;
Youngstrom and Barrett, 2016). Synthetic hydrogels (e.g.,
polyethylene glycol, methacrylated gelatin) provide higher
control of the gels’ physical properties, but ﬁbrous architecture
is
lacking
in
these
substrates
without
additional
processing.(Hiraki et al., 2021). Seeding in hydrogels induced
longitudinal arrangement of cells, increased tenogenic gene
expression, and increased ECM production, with and without
additional growth factors.(Awad et al., 2000; Farhat et al., 2012;
Govoni et al., 2017; Herchenhan et al., 2020). Of note, compared
to static loading, cyclic application of mechanical strain was
found to upregulate tenogenic gene markers in multipotent
stem cells, particularly SCX.(Scott et al., 2011). Aspect ratio
and cell seeding density were also found to play important
roles in guiding cell phenotype, with longer MSC-collagen gels
resulting in more organized collagen ﬁber arrangement and
higher seeding densities yielding more aligned cells (Awad
et al., 2000; Nirmalanandhan et al., 2007). In addition to cell-
mediated matrix remodeling, various methods have been
developed to align matrix ﬁbers within hydrogels. One such
method includes embedding magnetic particles to provide cells
with aligned contact points (Guo and Kaufman, 2007; Hiraki
et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021, 2021).
Further development of 3D printing techniques later allowed
for printing of multilayered scaffolds that improve upon the
mechanical strength of hydrogels and support greater matrix
organization (Rinoldi et al., 2019; Ciardulli et al., 2020). In
addition, studies using gels made from extracellular matrix
directly derived from tendon and muscle have also offered
new insights into the role of tendon-muscle junction proteins
in tendon healing. Gaffney et al. found that compared to collagen
gels, ECM gels promoted higher expression of paxillin, an
intracellular protein linked to focal adhesion turnover; this
suggests
that
collagen
gels
may
lack
a
component
or
architecture that affords key cell-matrix interactions involved
in tendon healing (Gaffney et al., 2021).
3D Fibrous Scaffolds
Advancements in chemical and biological engineering have
brought forth the development of ﬁbrous scaffolds, which have
led to new 3D loading scaffolds for tendon regeneration. Fibrous
scaffolds provide higher levels of matrix alignment and model the
shearing forces created by the sliding and stretching of collagen
ﬁbers found in the native tendon (Wu et al., 2018). Today,
multiple researchers have used electrospinning methods to
create sophisticated, tunable knitted structures of nanoﬁbers
whose knitted architecture and ﬂexibility closely mimic the
environment created by the native extracellular matrix (Sahoo
et al., 2010; Baker et al., 2011). Highly aligned biocompatible
ﬁbers could be generated from high-speed spinning of polymer
solutions, and the resulting scaffolds also possess greater tensile
strength than 2D scaffolds of the same polymers (Bosworth et al.,
2013). A nanoﬁber scaffold facilitated proliferation of bone
marrow MSCs, upregulated tendon speciﬁc gene expression,
and
increased
collagen
1
and
tenascin-C
production;
moreover, a ﬁbrous scaffold generated tendon tissue of higher
strength, improved collagen structure, and greater cell density
and alignment (Sahoo et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2016; Tu et al.,
2020). Schoenenberger et al. found that a ﬁbrous topography
alone was sufﬁcient to promote upregulation of genes for
inﬂammatory markers (e.g., interleukin 1 beta (IL1B), tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)) in macrophages and tendon cells,
suggesting that nanoﬁber scaffolds may also be useful in
modulating
biological
responses
in
tendon
healing
(Schoenenberger et al., 2020).
To address the nanoﬁber model’s weak tensile strength,
heterogenous ﬁber architecture, and insufﬁcient mechanical
support
for
clinical
translation,
later
models
combined
multiple ﬁber substrates, embedded ﬁbers in a hydrogel, or
created
microﬁber/nanoﬁber
yarns
using
novel
spinning
techniques (Liu et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2017; Patel et al., 2018;
Lin et al., 2019; Cai et al., 2020). Patel et al. embedded PEGDM
ﬁbers in a hydrogel matrix, allowing researchers to replicate the
low-shear, high-tension strain experienced by collagen ﬁbers in
the native tissue and producing similar ﬁndings to collagen based
3D models (Patel et al., 2018). A self-assembling nanoﬁber
hydrogel made of RADA peptides has also been developed
and has been shown to promote alignment and growth of
tendon progenitor cells (Yin et al., 2020). A polycaprolactone/
Poly (L-lactide-co-ε-caprolactone) nanoﬁber “yarn” developed by
Cai et al. promoted tenogenic differentiation of bone marrow
MSCs and retained cytocompatibility and biomechanical strength
in in vivo rabbit studies (Cai et al., 2020). The nanoﬁber scaffold
thus shows promise as a clinically applicable model for tendon
tissue engineering. Further study of the effects of dynamic loading
conditions applied to electrospun scaffolds may reveal additional
ﬁndings about the biomechanical properties of tendon.
3D loading models have afforded researchers greater
control over the “matrix” architecture in which they are
seeding their cells for study. Consistent with 2D models,
moderate
levels
of
loading
yielded
results
indicating
tenogenic differentiation or tenocyte maintenance, but the
sophistication
of
the
scaffold
designs
offers
a
deeper
understanding of the effects of the elastic moduli of the
substrate itself and the additional forces experienced by
native tendon, such as shearing or sliding forces.
CONSIDERATIONS AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS
The
study
of
tendon
mechanobiology
using
mechanical
stimulation models has evolved substantially as researchers
develop new techniques to more closely model the native
tendon environment. The range of loading parameters, cell
types, and substrates used in these studies demonstrates the
complexity
with
which
researchers
must
contend.
As
mechanical
loading
models
grow
more
sophisticated,
researchers
must
consider
several
issues
when
designing
studies and translating these approaches from in vitro to in
vivo investigations.
As seen above, studies have employed a wide variety of cell
types, substrates, and loading parameters. Variability in
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 826748
9
Wu et al.
In Vitro Tendon Strain Models
loading protocols for both 2D and 3D loading models may
make it more difﬁcult for future researchers to reproduce
results from loading studies. Certain loading parameters that
may drive tenogenic differentiation in one study may not elicit
signiﬁcant changes in another. Moderate levels of strain from
4 to 10% more often yielded tenogenic gene expression, but it
was not consistently reported in studies whether other effects,
such as upregulation of inﬂammatory markers or osteogenic
genes, increased as well. Differences in results may be
attributed
to
cell
types
or
substrates
used
in
the
experiments, though there was no consistent trend in what
genes each study tested, making comparison between cell
types at the same levels of strain difﬁcult. Responses may
even vary by tendon type, which has been shown to have
variations on mechanical properties and responses to loading
(Zuskov et al., 2020). In addition, many bioreactors used in
these studies are custom-designed, and the parameters of the
reactor design may also inﬂuence cellular response. Future
bioreactor studies may explore the unique properties of
different tendon types, though it is unclear whether the
properties seen in explant studies can be replicated in vitro
models. Finally, although certain gene expression levels and
protein markers are commonly used to conﬁrm tenogenesis,
studies often differ in which markers they analyze. For
example, examination of ECM gene expression and protein
levels may be a useful but incomplete measure of tendon
differentiation, as these genes may also be upregulated in
chondrogenesis or osteogenesis.
Experimental designs are also increasing in complexity in
order
to
more
closely
recapitulate
the
biomechanical
environment of native tendon, but the ability to fully
capture the complexity of native biomechanical properties
remains limited. Tensile strain has proven sufﬁcient to spur
some degree of tenogenic differentiation. However, as recent
explant studies have revealed, there are still forces at the
fascicular level of tendon structure, such as shear stress or
sliding, that have not been deeply examined in vitro for their
role in governing cellular behavior (Thorpe et al., 2015; Lee
and Elliott, 2019). Non-explant in vitro models have yet to
reach the point where they can be used to study macroscale
responses to mechanical strain. While tensile strain has been
shown to sufﬁciently drive tenogenic differentiation or
preserve tendon-speciﬁc genes in a cell population, further
research
is
required
before
constructs
generated
from
bioreactors
are
comparable
to
the
gold
standard
of
autograft and/or allograft tissues used clinically for tendon
repair procedures today.
Current
research
continues
to
ﬁll
in
gaps
in
our
understanding of the cellular properties of tendon as well.
For example, we are now learning that cellular populations
found in tendon may be more diverse and heterogeneous than
previously thought, (De Micheli et al., 2020), and lineage
tracing has revealed variation in cell populations seen at
different severities, stages of tendon injury, and even age
may play a signiﬁcant role in tendon healing as well.
(Dyment et al., 2014; Howell et al., 2017; Moser et al.,
2018;
Nichols
et
al.,
2019).
Also
noteworthy
are
interactions within the musculotendinous unit and bone,
which may moderate tendon morphology and thus function
at the organ level. (O’Neill et al., 2015). In vitro studies have
yet to incorporate this level of cellular and structural
complexity into experimental design, but these may be
worthwhile to explore in future research as there remains
much to be understood about how the cell-level responses
seen in vitro studies may be modulated by higher level
interactions.
Tendons
are
ultimately
composed
of
hierarchical structures, and certain mechanical properties
may only manifest at higher levels of organization which
are not yet achieved through current bioreactor models.
In summary, in vitro mechanical loading models of
tenogenic
cell
phenotypes
have
advanced
our
understanding
of
tendon
mechanobiology
and
have
equipped
investigators
with
valuable
tools
to
further
explore tendon intracellular machinery, its interactions
with
extracellular
matrix
and
signaling
molecules.
As
discussed in this review, described models are widely
varied, offering researchers a diverse range of bioreactors
and loading parameters to reference for future research.
Each model and loading scheme are associated with unique
advantages and disadvantages that can be tailored to address
the desired research questions of interest. Moving forward,
more sophisticated mechanical loading models that better
recapitulate
physiologic
loading
will
allow
further
exploration
of
the
complex
interactions
between
surrounding tissues (bone, muscle, neurovasculature, etc.)
and
tendon
itself.
Ultimately,
this
may
deepen
our
understanding
of
the
relevant
molecular
mechanisms
associated with tendon development and pathogenesis and
may provide the foundation for future tendon tissue healing
and regeneration approaches.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
SW contributed to writing of the manuscript and composing the
tables. WK contributed to writing of the manuscript. TK
conceived the topic and contributed to writing of the manuscript.
FUNDING
Research support for TK, Jr is provided by US Department of
Veterans Affairs project # 2020-000059.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fbioe.2022.826748/
full#supplementary-material
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 826748
10
Wu et al.
In Vitro Tendon Strain Models
REFERENCES
Almekinders, L. C., Weinhold, P. S., and Maffulli, N. (2003). Compression Etiology
in Tendinopathy. Clin. Sports Med. 22, 703–710. doi:10.1016/s0278-5919(03)
00067-x
Arnoczky, S. P., Lavagnino, M., Whallon, J. H., and Hoonjan, A. (2002a). In Situ
cell Nucleus Deformation in Tendons under Tensile Load; a Morphological
Analysis Using Confocal Laser Microscopy. J. Orthop. Res. 20, 29–35. doi:10.
1016/s0736-0266(01)00080-8
Arnoczky, S. P., Tian, T., Lavagnino, M., Gardner, K., Schuler, P., and Morse, P.
(2002b). Activation of Stress-Activated Protein Kinases (SAPK) in Tendon
Cells Following Cyclic Strain: the Effects of Strain Frequency, Strain Magnitude,
and Cytosolic Calcium. J. Orthop. Res. 20, 947–952. doi:10.1016/s0736-
0266(02)00038-4
Awad, H. A., Butler, D. L., Harris, M. T., Ibrahim, R. E., Wu, Y., Young, R. G., et al.
(2000). In Vitro characterization of Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Seeded Collagen
Scaffolds for Tendon Repair: Effects of Initial Seeding Density on Contraction
Kinetics.
J.
Biomed.
Mater.
Res.
51,
233–240.
doi:10.1002/(sici)1097-
4636(200008)51:2<233:aid-jbm12>3.0.co;2-b
Baker, B. M., Shah, R. P., Huang, A. H., and Mauck, R. L. (2011). Dynamic Tensile
Loading Improves the Functional Properties of Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Laden
Nanoﬁber-Based Fibrocartilage. Tissue Eng. A 17, 1445–1455. doi:10.1089/ten.
tea.2010.0535
Banes, A. J., Horesovsky, G., Larson, C., Tsuzaki, M., Judex, S., Archambault, J.,
et al. (1999). Mechanical Load Stimulates Expression of Novel Genesin
Vivoandin Vitroin Avian Flexor Tendon Cells. Osteoarthritis and Cartilage
7, 141–153. doi:10.1053/joca.1998.0169
Bosworth, L. A., Alam, N., Wong, J. K., and Downes, S. (2013). Investigation of 2D
and 3D Electrospun Scaffolds Intended for Tendon Repair. J. Mater. Sci. Mater.
Med. 24, 1605–1614. doi:10.1007/s10856-013-4911-8
Brennan, D. A., Conte, A. A., Kanski, G., Turkula, S., Hu, X., Kleiner, M. T., et al.
(2018). Mechanical Considerations for Electrospun Nanoﬁbers in Tendon and
Ligament Repair. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 7, 1701277. doi:10.1002/adhm.
201701277
Butler, D. L., Goldstein, S. A., and Guilak, F. (2000). Functional Tissue Engineering:
the Role of Biomechanics. J. Biomech. Eng. 122, 570–575. doi:10.1115/1.
1318906
Cai, J., Xie, X., Li, D., Wang, L., Jiang, J., Mo, X., et al. (2020). A Novel Knitted
Scaffold Made of Microﬁber/nanoﬁber Core-Sheath Yarns for Tendon Tissue
Engineering. Biomater. Sci. 8, 4413–4425. doi:10.1039/d0bm00816h
Chen, C.-H., Marymont, J. V., Huang, M.-H., Geyer, M., Luo, Z.-P., and Liu, X.
(2007). Mechanical Strain Promotes Fibroblast Gene Expression in Presence of
Corticosteroid.
Connect.
Tissue
Res.
48,
65–69.
doi:10.1080/
03008200601090824
Chen, Y.-J., Huang, C.-H., Lee, I.-C., Lee, Y.-T., Chen, M.-H., and Young, T.-H.
(2008). Effects of Cyclic Mechanical Stretching on the mRNA Expression of
Tendon/Ligament-Related
and
Osteoblast-speciﬁc
Genes
in
Human
Mesenchymal Stem Cells. Connect. Tissue Res. 49, 7–14. doi:10.1080/
03008200701818561
Cheng, V. W. T., and Screen, H. R. C. (2007). The Micro-structural Strain Response
of Tendon. J. Mater. Sci. 42, 8957–8965. doi:10.1007/s10853-007-1653-3
Chrzanowska-Wodnicka,
M.,
and
Burridge,
K.
(1996).
Rho-stimulated
Contractility Drives the Formation of Stress Fibers and Focal Adhesions.
J. Cel Biol. 133, 1403–1415. doi:10.1083/jcb.133.6.1403
Ciardulli, M. C., Marino, L., Lovecchio, J., Giordano, E., Forsyth, N. R., Selleri, C.,
et al. (2020). Tendon and Cytokine Marker Expression by Human Bone
Marrow Mesenchymal Stem Cells in a Hyaluronate/poly-Lactic-Co-Glycolic
Acid (PLGA)/ﬁbrin Three-Dimensional (3D) Scaffold. Cells 9, 1268. doi:10.
3390/cells9051268
Contessi Negrini, N., Toffoletto, N., Farè, S., and Altomare, L. (2020). Plant Tissues
as 3D Natural Scaffolds for Adipose, Bone and Tendon Tissue Regeneration.
Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 8, 723. doi:10.3389/fbioe.2020.00723
De Micheli, A. J., Swanson, J. B., Disser, N. P., Martinez, L. M., Walker, N. R.,
Oliver, D. J., et al. (2020). Single-cell Transcriptomic Analysis Identiﬁes
Extensive Heterogeneity in the Cellular Composition of Mouse Achilles
Tendons. Am. J. Physiology-Cell Physiol. 319, C885–C894. doi:10.1152/
ajpcell.00372.2020
Deniz, P., Guler, S., Çelik, E., Hosseinian, P., and Aydin, H. M. (2020). Use of Cyclic
Strain Bioreactor for the Upregulation of Key Tenocyte Gene Expression on
Poly(glycerol-Sebacate) (PGS) Sheets. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 106, 110293. doi:10.
1016/j.msec.2019.110293
Devkota, A. C., Tsuzaki, M., Almekinders, L. C., Banes, A. J., and Weinhold, P. S.
(2007). Distributing a Fixed Amount of Cyclic Loading to Tendon Explants
over Longer Periods Induces Greater Cellular and Mechanical Responses.
J. Orthop. Res. 25, 1078–1086. doi:10.1002/jor.20389
Docheva, D., Müller, S. A., Majewski, M., and Evans, C. H. (2015). Biologics for
Tendon Repair. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 84, 222–239. doi:10.1016/j.addr.2014.
11.015
Dupont, S., Morsut, L., Aragona, M., Enzo, E., Giulitti, S., Cordenonsi, M., et al.
(2011). Role of YAP/TAZ in Mechanotransduction. Nature 474, 179–183.
doi:10.1038/nature10137
Dyment, N. A., Hagiwara, Y., Matthews, B. G., Li, Y., Kalajzic, I., and Rowe, D. W.
(2014). Lineage Tracing of Resident Tendon Progenitor Cells during Growth
and Natural Healing. PLoS One 9, e96113. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0096113
Engler, A. J., Sen, S., Sweeney, H. L., and Discher, D. E. (2006). Matrix Elasticity
Directs Stem Cell Lineage Speciﬁcation. Cell 126, 677–689. doi:10.1016/j.cell.
2006.06.044
Ezura, Y., Chakravarti, S., Oldberg, A., Chervoneva, I., and Birk, D. E. (2000).
Differential Expression of Lumican and Fibromodulin Regulate Collagen
Fibrillogenesis in Developing Mouse Tendons. J. Cel Biol. 151, 779–788.
doi:10.1083/jcb.151.4.779
Fahlstrom, M., Jonsson, P., Lorentzon, R., and Alfredson, H. k. (2003).
Chronic Achilles Tendon Pain Treated with Eccentric Calf-Muscle
Training. Knee Surg. Sports Traumatol. Arthrosc. 11, 327–333. doi:10.
1007/s00167-003-0418-z
Fang, F., Schwartz, A. G., Moore, E. R., Sup, M. E., and Thomopoulos, S. (2020).
Primary Cilia as the Nexus of Biophysical and Hedgehog Signaling at the
Tendon Enthesis. Sci. Adv. 6, eabc1799. doi:10.1126/sciadv.abc1799
Farhat, Y. M., Al-Maliki, A. A., Chen, T., Juneja, S. C., Schwarz, E. M., O’Keefe, R. J.,
et al. (2012). Gene Expression Analysis of the Pleiotropic Effects of TGF-B1 in
an In Vitro Model of Flexor Tendon Healing. PLoS One 7, e51411. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0051411
Feng, Z., Tateishi, Y., Nomura, Y., Kitajima, T., and Nakamura, T. (2006).
Construction of Fibroblast-Collagen Gels with Orientated Fibrils Induced by
Static or Dynamic Stress: toward the Fabrication of Small Tendon Grafts.
J. Artif. Organs 9, 220–225. doi:10.1007/s10047-006-0354-z
Fratzl, P., Misof, K., Zizak, I., Rapp, G., Amenitsch, H., and Bernstorff, S. (1998).
Fibrillar Structure and Mechanical Properties of Collagen. J. Struct. Biol. 122,
119–122. doi:10.1006/jsbi.1998.3966
Freedman, B. R., Rodriguez, A. B., Leiphart, R. J., Newton, J. B., Ban, E., Sarver, J. J.,
et al. (2018). Dynamic Loading and Tendon Healing Affect Multiscale Tendon
Properties and ECM Stress Transmission. Sci. Rep. 8, 10854. doi:10.1038/
s41598-018-29060-y
Gaffney, L. S., Davis, Z. G., Mora-Navarro, C., Fisher, M. B., and Freytes, D. O.
(2021). Extracellular Matrix Hydrogels Promote Expression of Muscle-Tendon
Junction Proteins. Tissue Eng. Part A. Online ahead of print. doi:10.1089/ten.
TEA.2021.0070
Garvin, J., Qi, J., Maloney, M., and Banes, A. J. (2003). Novel System for
Engineering Bioartiﬁcial Tendons and Application of Mechanical Load.
Tissue Eng. 9, 967–979. doi:10.1089/107632703322495619
Gatt, R., Vella Wood, M., Gatt, A., Zarb, F., Formosa, C., Azzopardi, K. M., et al.
(2015). Negative Poisson’s Ratios in Tendons: An Unexpected Mechanical
Response. Acta Biomater. 24, 201–208. doi:10.1016/j.actbio.2015.06.018
Goodman, S. A., May, S. A., Heinegård, D., and Smith, R. K. (2004). Tenocyte
Response to Cyclical Strain and Transforming Growth Factor Beta Is
Dependent upon Age and Site of Origin. Biorheology 41, 613–628.
Govoni, M., Berardi, A. C., Muscari, C., Campardelli, R., Bonafè, F., Guarnieri, C.,
et
al.
(2017).
An
Engineered
Multiphase
Three-Dimensional
Microenvironment to Ensure the Controlled Delivery of Cyclic Strain and
Human Growth Differentiation Factor 5 for the Tenogenic Commitment of
Human Bone Marrow Mesenchymal Stem Cells. Tissue Eng. Part A 23,
811–822. doi:10.1089/ten.tea.2016.0407
Guo, C., and Kaufman, L. J. (2007). Flow and Magnetic Field Induced
Collagen
Alignment.
Biomaterials
28,
1105–1114.
doi:10.1016/j.
biomaterials.2006.10.010
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 826748
11
Wu et al.
In Vitro Tendon Strain Models
Hamilton, B., and Purdam, C. (2004). Patellar Tendinosis as an Adaptive Process: a
New Hypothesis. Br. J. Sports Med. 38, 758–761. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2003.005157
Han, W. M., Heo, S.-J., Driscoll, T. P., Smith, L. J., Mauck, R. L., and Elliott, D. M.
(2013). Macro- to Microscale
Strain Transfer
in Fibrous Tissues Is
Heterogeneous and Tissue-speciﬁc. Biophysical J. 105, 807–817. doi:10.1016/
j.bpj.2013.06.023
Heng, B. C., Zhang, X., Aubel, D., Bai, Y., Li, X., Wei, Y., et al. (2020). Role of YAP/
TAZ in Cell Lineage Fate Determination and Related Signaling Pathways.
Front. Cel Dev. Biol. 8, 735. doi:10.3389/fcell.2020.00735
Herchenhan, A., Dietrich-Zagonel, F., Schjerling, P., Kjær, M., and Eliasson, P.
(2020). Early Growth Response Genes Increases Rapidly after Mechanical
Overloading and Unloading in Tendon Constructs. J. Orthop. Res. 38,
173–181. doi:10.1002/jor.24513
Hiraki, H. L., Matera, D. L., Rose, M. J., Kent, R. N., Todd, C. W., Stout, M. E., et al.
(2021). Magnetic Alignment of Electrospun Fiber Segments within a Hydrogel
Composite Guides Cell Spreading and Migration Phenotype Switching. Front.
Bioeng. Biotechnol. 9, 679165. doi:10.3389/fbioe.2021.679165
Holmes, D. F., Graham, H. K., and Kadler, K. E. (1998). Collagen Fibrils Forming in
Developing Tendon Show an Early and Abrupt Limitation in Diameter at the
Growing Tips. J. Mol. Biol. 283, 1049–1058. doi:10.1006/jmbi.1998.2153
Hooley, C. J., McCrum, N. G., and Cohen, R. E. (1980). The Viscoelastic
Deformation
of
Tendon.
J.
Biomech.
13,
521–528.
doi:10.1016/0021-
9290(80)90345-0
Howell, K., Chien, C., Bell, R., Laudier, D., Tufa, S. F., Keene, D. R., et al. (2017).
Novel Model of Tendon Regeneration Reveals Distinct Cell Mechanisms
Underlying Regenerative and Fibrotic Tendon Healing. Sci. Rep. 7, 45238.
doi:10.1038/srep45238
Hu, X., Liu, Z. Z., Chen, X., Schulz, V. P., Kumar, A., Hartman, A. A., et al. (2019).
MKL1-actin Pathway Restricts Chromatin Accessibility and Prevents Mature
Pluripotency Activation. Nat. Commun. 10, 1695. doi:10.1038/s41467-019-
09636-6
Humphrey,
J.
D.,
Dufresne,
E.
R.,
and
Schwartz,
M.
A.
(2014).
Mechanotransduction and Extracellular Matrix Homeostasis. Nat. Rev. Mol.
Cel Biol. 15, 802–812. doi:10.1038/nrm3896
Islam, A., Mbimba, T., Younesi, M., and Akkus, O. (2017). Effects of Substrate
Stiffness on the Tenoinduction of Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells. Acta
Biomater. 58, 244–253. doi:10.1016/j.actbio.2017.05.058
Jaiswal, D., Yousman, L., Neary, M., Fernschild, E., Zolnoski, B., Katebifar, S., et al.
(2020). Tendon Tissue Engineering: Biomechanical Considerations. Biomed.
Mater. 15, 052001. doi:10.1088/1748-605x/ab852f
James, R., Kumbar, S. G., Laurencin, C. T., Balian, G., and Chhabra, A. B. (2011).
Tendon Tissue Engineering: Adipose-Derived Stem Cell and GDF-5 Mediated
Regeneration Using Electrospun Matrix Systems. Biomed. Mater. 6, 025011.
doi:10.1088/1748-6041/6/2/025011
Jozsa, L., Lehto, M., Kannus, P., Kvist, M., Reffy, A., Vieno, T., et al. (1989).
Fibronectin and Laminin in Achilles Tendon. Acta Orthopaedica Scand. 60,
469–471. doi:10.3109/17453678909149322
Kalson, N. S., Lu, Y., Taylor, S. H., Starborg, T., Holmes, D. F., and Kadler, K. E.
(2015). A Structure-Based Extracellular Matrix Expansion Mechanism of
Fibrous Tissue Growth. Elife 4, e05958. doi:10.7554/eLife.05958
Kannus, P. (2000). Structure of the Tendon Connective Tissue. Scand. J. Med. Sci.
Sports 10, 312–320. doi:10.1034/j.1600-0838.2000.010006312.x
Kayama, T., Mori, M., Ito, Y., Matsushima, T., Nakamichi, R., Suzuki, H., et al.
(2016). Gtf2ird1 -Dependent Mohawk Expression Regulates Mechanosensing
Properties of the Tendon. Mol. Cel. Biol. 36, 1297–1309. doi:10.1128/mcb.
00950-15
Kirkendall, D. T., and Garrett, W. E. (1997). Function and Biomechanics of
Tendons. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 7, 62–66. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0838.1997.
tb00120.x
Kohrs, R. T., Zhao, C., Sun, Y.-L., Jay, G. D., Zhang, L., Warman, M. L., et al. (2011).
Tendon Fascicle Gliding in Wild Type, Heterozygous, and Lubricin Knockout
Mice. J. Orthop. Res. 29, 384–389. doi:10.1002/jor.21247
Kuo, C. K., and Tuan, R. S. (2008). Mechanoactive Tenogenic Differentiation of
Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells. Tissue Eng. Part A 14, 1615–1627. doi:10.
1089/ten.tea.2006.0415
Lavagnino, M., Arnoczky, S. P., and Gardner, K. (2011). In Situ deﬂection of
Tendon Cell-Cilia in Response to Tensile Loading: an In Vitro Study. J. Orthop.
Res. 29, 925–930. doi:10.1002/jor.21337
Lavagnino, M., Arnoczky, S. P., Kepich, E., Caballero, O., and Haut, R. C. (2008). A
Finite Element Model Predicts the Mechanotransduction Response of Tendon
Cells to Cyclic Tensile Loading. Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 7, 405–416.
doi:10.1007/s10237-007-0104-z
Leckband,
D.
E.,
le
Duc,
Q.,
Wang,
N.,
and
de
Rooij,
J.
(2011).
Mechanotransduction at Cadherin-Mediated Adhesions. Curr. Opin. Cel
Biol. 23, 523–530. doi:10.1016/j.ceb.2011.08.003
Lee, A. H., and Elliott, D. M. (2019). Multi-Scale Loading and Damage Mechanisms
of Plantaris and Rat Tail Tendons. J. Orthop. Res. 37, 1827–1837. doi:10.1002/
jor.24309
Legerlotz, K., Jones, G. C., Screen, H. R. C., and Riley, G. P. (2013). Cyclic Loading
of Tendon Fascicles Using a Novel Fatigue Loading System Increases
Interleukin-6 Expression by Tenocytes. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 23, 31–37.
doi:10.1111/j.1600-0838.2011.01410.x
Lieber, R. L., Leonard, M. E., Brown, C. G., and Trestik, C. L. (1991). Frog
Semitendinosis Tendon Load-Strain and Stress-Strain Properties during
Passive Loading. Am. J. Physiology-Cell Physiol. 261, C86–C92. doi:10.1152/
ajpcell.1991.261.1.c86
Lim, W. L., Liau, L. L., Ng, M. H., Chowdhury, S. R., and Law, J. X. (2019). Current
Progress in Tendon and Ligament Tissue Engineering. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med.
16, 549–571. doi:10.1007/s13770-019-00196-w
Lin, Y., Zhang, L., Liu, N. Q., Yao, Q., Van Handel, B., Xu, Y., et al. (2019). In Vitro
behavior of Tendon Stem/progenitor Cells on Bioactive Electrospun Nanoﬁber
Membranes for Tendon-Bone Tissue Engineering Applications. Ijn Vol. 14,
5831–5848. doi:10.2147/ijn.s210509
Liu, R., Patel, D., Screen, H. R. C., and Becer, C. R. (2017). A2B-miktoarm
Glycopolymer Fibers and Their Interactions with Tenocytes. Bioconjug.
Chem. 28, 1955–1964. doi:10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.7b00279
Liu, S. H., Yang, R. S., Al-Shaikh, R., and Lane, J. M. (1995). Collagen in Tendon,
Ligament, and Bone Healing. A Current Review. Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res.
265–278.
Lui, P. P. Y., and Chan, K. M. (2011). Tendon-derived Stem Cells (TDSCs): from
Basic Science to Potential Roles in Tendon Pathology and Tissue Engineering
Applications. Stem Cel Rev Rep 7, 883–897. doi:10.1007/s12015-011-9276-0
Maeda, E., Shelton, J. C., Bader, D. L., and Lee, D. A. (2009). Differential Regulation
of Gene Expression in Isolated Tendon Fascicles Exposed to Cyclic Tensile
Strain In Vitro. J. Appl. Physiol. 106, 506–512. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.90981.
2008
Maeda, E., Shelton, J. C., Bader, D. L., and Lee, D. A. (2007). Time Dependence of
Cyclic Tensile Strain on Collagen Production in Tendon Fascicles. Biochem.
Biophysical Res. Commun. 362, 399–404. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.08.029
Maganaris, C. N., and Paul, J. P. (1999). Vivo Human Tendon Mechanical
Properties. J. Physiol. 521 (1), 307–313. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7793.1999.00307.x
Majima, T., Yasuda, K., Tsuchida, T., Tanaka, K., Miyakawa, K., Minami, A., et al.
(2003). Stress Shielding of Patellar Tendon: Effect on Small-Diameter
Collagenﬁbrils in a Rabbit Model. J. Orthopaedic Sci. 8, 836–841. doi:10.
1007/s00776-003-0707-x
Malliaras, P., Kamal, B., Nowell, A., Farley, T., Dhamu, H., Simpson, V., et al.
(2013). Patellar Tendon Adaptation in Relation to Load-Intensity and
Contraction Type. J. Biomech. 46, 1893–1899. doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2013.
04.022
Martin, J. A., Mehr, D., Pardubsky, P. D., and Buckwalter, J. A. (2003). The Role of
Tenascin-C in Adaptation of Tendons to Compressive Loading. Biorheology 40,
321–329. Available at: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12454422/
Morla, A., and Ruoslahti, E. (1992). A Fibronectin Self-Assembly Site Involved in
Fibronectin Matrix Assembly: Reconstruction in a Synthetic Peptide. J. Cel Biol.
118, 421–429. doi:10.1083/jcb.118.2.421
Moser, H. L., Doe, A. P., Meier, K., Garnier, S., Laudier, D., Akiyama, H., et al.
(2018). Genetic Lineage Tracing of Targeted Cell Populations during Enthesis
Healing. J. Orthop. Res. 36, 3275–3284. doi:10.1002/jor.24122
Mousavizadeh, R., Duronio, V., McCormack, B., Khosravi, S., and Scott, A. (2013).
MECHANICAL LOADING MODULATES ANGIOGENIC FACTORS IN
TENDON CELLS. Br. J. Sports Med. 47, 4–e2. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-
092459.12
Muellner, T., Kwasny, O., Loehnert, V., Mallinger, R., Unfried, G., Schabus, R., et al.
(2001). Light and Electron Microscopic Study of Stress-Shielding Effects on Rat
Patellar Tendon. Arch. Orthopaedic Trauma Surg. 121, 561–565. doi:10.1007/
s004020100281
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 826748
12
Wu et al.
In Vitro Tendon Strain Models
Nam, H. Y., Pingguan-Murphy, B., Abbas, A. A., Merican, A. M., and Kamarul, T.
(2019). Uniaxial Cyclic Tensile Stretching at 8% Strain Exclusively Promotes
Tenogenic Differentiation of Human Bone Marrow-Derived Mesenchymal
Stromal Cells. Stem Cell Int 2019, 1–16. doi:10.1155/2019/9723025
Nichols, A. E. C., Best, K. T., and Loiselle, A. E. (2019). The Cellular Basis of
Fibrotic Tendon Healing: Challenges and Opportunities. Translational Res.
209, 156–168. doi:10.1016/j.trsl.2019.02.002
Nie, D., Zhou, Y., Wang, W., Zhang, J., and Wang, J. H.-C. (2021). Mechanical
Overloading Induced-Activation of mTOR Signaling in Tendon Stem/
Progenitor Cells Contributes to Tendinopathy Development. Front. Cel Dev.
Biol. 9, 687856. doi:10.3389/fcell.2021.687856
Nirmalanandhan, V. S., Rao, M., Sacks, M. S., Haridas, B., and Butler, D. L. (2007).
Effect of Length of the Engineered Tendon Construct on its Structure-Function
Relationships in Culture. J. Biomech. 40, 2523–2529. doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.
2006.11.016
O’Neill, S., Watson, P. J., and Barry, S. (2015). WHY ARE ECCENTRIC
EXERCISES EFFECTIVE FOR ACHILLES TENDINOPATHY? Int. J. Sports
Phys. Ther. 10, 552–562.
Ottani, V., Martini, D., Franchi, M., Ruggeri, A., and Raspanti, M. (2002).
Hierarchical Structures in Fibrillar Collagens. Micron 33, 587–596. doi:10.
1016/S0968-4328(02)00033-1
Parent, G., Huppé, N., and Langelier, E. (2011). Low Stress Tendon Fatigue Is a
Relatively Rapid Process in the Context of Overuse Injuries. Ann. Biomed. Eng.
39, 1535–1545. doi:10.1007/s10439-011-0254-0
Passini, F. S., Jaeger, P. K., Saab, A. S., Hanlon, S., Chittim, N. A., Arlt, M. J., et al.
(2021). Shear-stress Sensing by PIEZO1 Regulates Tendon Stiffness in Rodents
and Inﬂuences Jumping Performance in Humans. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 5,
1457–1471. doi:10.1038/s41551-021-00716-x
Patel, D., Sharma, S., Bryant, S. J., and Screen, H. R. C. (2017). Recapitulating the
Micromechanical Behavior of Tension and Shear in a Biomimetic Hydrogel for
Controlling Tenocyte Response. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 6, 1601095. doi:10.1002/
adhm.201601095
Patel, D., Sharma, S., Screen, H. R. C., and Bryant, S. J. (2018). Effects of Cell
Adhesion Motif, Fiber Stiffness, and Cyclic Strain on Tenocyte Gene Expression
in a Tendon Mimetic Fiber Composite Hydrogel. Biochem. Biophysical Res.
Commun. 499, 642–647. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.03.203
Rees, J. D., Lichtwark, G. A., Wolman, R. L., and Wilson, A. M. (2008). The
Mechanism for Efﬁcacy of Eccentric Loading in Achilles Tendon Injury; an In
Vivo
Study
in
Humans.
Rheumatology
47,
1493–1497.
doi:10.1093/
rheumatology/ken262
Riboh, J., Chong, A. K. S., Pham, H., Longaker, M., Jacobs, C., and Chang, J. (2008).
Optimization of Flexor Tendon Tissue Engineering with a Cyclic Strain
Bioreactor. J. Hand Surg. 33, 1388–1396. doi:10.1016/j.jhsa.2008.04.019
Rinoldi, C., Fallahi, A., Yazdi, I. K., Campos Paras, J., Kijeńska-Gawrońska, E.,
Trujillo-de Santiago, G., et al. (2019). Mechanical and Biochemical Stimulation
of 3D Multilayered Scaffolds for Tendon Tissue Engineering. ACS Biomater.
Sci. Eng. 5, 2953–2964. doi:10.1021/acsbiomaterials.8b01647
Rio, E., Kidgell, D., Moseley, G. L., Gaida, J., Docking, S., Purdam, C., et al. (2016).
Tendon Neuroplastic Training: Changing the Way We Think about Tendon
Rehabilitation: a Narrative Review. Br. J. Sports Med. 50, 209–215. doi:10.1136/
bjsports-2015-095215
Robbins, J. R., Evanko, S. P., and Vogel, K. G. (1997). Mechanical Loading and
TGF-β Regulate Proteoglycan Synthesis in Tendon. Arch. Biochem. Biophys.
342, 203–211. doi:10.1006/abbi.1997.0102
Roberts, T. J., and Konow, N. (2013). How Tendons Buffer Energy Dissipation by
Muscle. Exerc. Sport Sci. Rev. 41, 186–193. doi:10.1097/JES.0b013e3182a4e6d5
Robi, K., Jakob, N., Matevz, K., and Matjaz, V. (2013). The Physiology of Sports
Injuries and Repair Processes. Curr. Issues Sports Exerc. Med., 43–86. doi:10.
5772/54234
Robi, K., Jakob, N., Matevz, K., and Matjaz, V. (2013). The Physiology of Sports
Injuries and Repair Processes. Curr. Issues Sports Exerc. Med., 43–86. doi:10.
5772/54234
Rui, Y.-F., Lui, P. P. Y., Li, G., Fu, S. C., Lee, Y. W., and Chan, K. M. (2010).
Isolation and Characterization of Multipotent Rat Tendon-Derived Stem Cells.
Tissue Eng. Part A 16, 1549–1558. doi:10.1089/ten.tea.2009.0529
Rui, Y. F., Lui, P. P. Y., Ni, M., Chan, L. S., Lee, Y. W., and Chan, K. M. (2011).
Mechanical
Loading
Increased
BMP-2
Expression
Which
Promoted
Osteogenic Differentiation of Tendon-Derived Stem Cells. J. Orthop. Res. 29,
390–396. doi:10.1002/jor.21218
Sahoo, S., Ang, L. T., Goh, J. C., and Toh, S. L. (2010). Growth Factor
Delivery
through
Electrospun
Nanoﬁbers
in
Scaffolds
for
Tissue
Engineering Applications. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A. 93, 1539–1550.
doi:10.1002/jbm.a.32645
Scharenberg, M. A., Pippenger, B. E., Sack, R., Zingg, D., Ferralli, J., Schenk, S., et al.
(2014). TGF-β-induced Differentiation into Myoﬁbroblasts Involves Speciﬁc
Regulation of Two MKL1 Isoforms. J. Cel Sci. 127, 1079–1091. doi:10.1242/jcs.
142075
Schiele, N. R., Marturano, J. E., and Kuo, C. K. (2013). Mechanical Factors in
Embryonic Tendon Development: Potential Cues for Stem Cell Tenogenesis.
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 24, 834–840. doi:10.1016/j.copbio.2013.07.003
Schoenenberger, A. D., Tempfer, H., Lehner, C., Egloff, J., Mauracher, M., Bird, A.,
et al. (2020). Macromechanics and Polycaprolactone Fiber Organization Drive
Macrophage Polarization and Regulate Inﬂammatory Activation of Tendon In
Vitro and In Vivo. Biomaterials 249, 120034. doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.2020.
120034
Scott, A., Danielson, P., Abraham, T., Fong, G., Sampaio, A. V., and Underhill, T.
M. (2011). Mechanical Force Modulates Scleraxis Expression in Bioartiﬁcial
Tendons. J. Musculoskelet. Neuronal Interact. 11, 124–132.
Scott, A., Khan, K., Heer, J., Cook, J., Lian, O., and Duronio, V. (2005). High Strain
Mechanical Loading Rapidly Induces Tendon Apoptosis: an Ex Vivo Rat
Tibialis Anterior Model. Br. J. Sports Med. 39, e25. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2004.
015164
Screen, H. R. C., Lee, D. A., Bader, D. L., and Shelton, J. C. (2004). An Investigation
into the Effects of the Hierarchical Structure of Tendon Fascicles on
Micromechanical Properties. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. H 218, 109–119. doi:10.
1243/095441104322984004
Screen, H. R. C., Shelton, J. C., Bader, D. L., and Lee, D. A. (2005). Cyclic Tensile
Strain Upregulates Collagen Synthesis in Isolated Tendon Fascicles. Biochem.
Biophysical Res. Commun. 336, 424–429. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.08.102
Shani, R. H., Umpierez, E., Nasert, M., Hiza, E. A., and Xerogeanes, J. (2016).
Biomechanical Comparison of Quadriceps and Patellar Tendon Grafts in
Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction. Arthrosc. J. Arthroscopic Relat.
Surg. 32, 71–75. doi:10.1016/j.arthro.2015.06.051
Sharma, R. I., and Snedeker, J. G. (2010). Biochemical and Biomechanical
Gradients for Directed Bone Marrow Stromal Cell Differentiation toward
Tendon and Bone. Biomaterials 31, 7695–7704. doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.
2010.06.046
Sharma, R. I., and Snedeker, J. G. (2012). Paracrine Interactions between
Mesenchymal Stem Cells Affect Substrate Driven Differentiation toward
Tendon and Bone Phenotypes. PLoS One 7, e31504. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0031504
Skutek, M., van Griensven, M., Zeichen, J., Brauer, N., and Bosch, U. (2003). Cyclic
Mechanical Stretching of Human Patellar Tendon Fibroblasts: Activation of
JNK and Modulation of Apoptosis. Knee Surg. Sports Traumatol. Arthrosc. 11,
122–129. doi:10.1007/s00167-002-0322-y
Smith, R. K. W., Zunino, L., Webbon, P. M., and Heinegård, D. (1997). The
Distribution of Cartilage Oligomeric Matrix Protein (COMP) in Tendon and its
Variation with Tendon Site, Age and Load. Matrix Biol. 16, 255–271. doi:10.
1016/s0945-053x(97)90014-7
Stauber, T., Wolleb, M., Duss, A., Jaeger, P. K., Heggli, I., Hussien, A. A., et al.
(2021). Extrinsic Macrophages Protect while Tendon Progenitors Degrade:
Insights from a Tissue Engineered Model of Tendon Compartmental Crosstalk.
Adv. Healthc. Mater. 10, 2100741. doi:10.1002/adhm.202100741
Sugisaki, N., Kawakami, Y., Kanehisa, H., and Fukunaga, T. (2011). Effect of
Muscle Contraction Levels on the Force-Length Relationship of the Human
Achilles Tendon during Lengthening of the Triceps Surae Muscle-Tendon Unit.
J. Biomech. 44, 2168–2171. doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2011.05.015
Szczesny, S. E., Caplan, J. L., Pedersen, P., and Elliott, D. M. (2015). Quantiﬁcation
of Interﬁbrillar Shear Stress in Aligned Soft Collagenous Tissues via Notch
Tension Testing. Sci. Rep. 5, 14649–9. doi:10.1038/srep14649
Szczesny, S. E., Aeppli, C., David, A., and Mauck, R. L. (2018). Fatigue Loading of
Tendon Results in Collagen Kinking and Denaturation but Does Not Change
Local Tissue Mechanics. J. Biomech. 71, 251–256. doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2018.
02.014
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 826748
13
Wu et al.
In Vitro Tendon Strain Models
Szczesny, S. E., and Elliott, D. M. (2014). Interﬁbrillar Shear Stress Is the Loading
Mechanism of Collagen Fibrils in Tendon. Acta Biomater. 10, 2582–2590.
doi:10.1016/j.actbio.2014.01.032
Tajik, A., Zhang, Y., Wei, F., Sun, J., Jia, Q., Zhou, W., et al. (2016). Transcription
Upregulation via Force-Induced Direct Stretching of Chromatin. Nat. Mater 15,
1287–1296. doi:10.1038/nmat4729
Thompson, M. S., Bajuri, M. N., Khayyeri, H., and Isaksson, H. (2017).
Mechanobiological
Modelling
of
Tendons:
Review
and
Future
Opportunities.
Proc.
Inst.
Mech.
Eng.
H
231,
369–377.
doi:10.1177/
0954411917692010
Thorpe, C. T., Godinho, M. S. C., Riley, G. P., Birch, H. L., Clegg, P. D., and Screen,
H. R. C. (2015). The Interfascicular Matrix Enables Fascicle Sliding and
Recovery in Tendon, and Behaves More Elastically in Energy Storing
Tendons. J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 52, 85–94. doi:10.1016/j.jmbbm.
2015.04.009
Thorpe, C. T., and Screen, H. R. C. (2016). “Tendon Structure and Composition,”
in “Tendon Structure and Composition,” in Metabolic Inﬂuences On Risk For
Tendon Disorders. Editors P. W. Ackermann and D. A. Hart (Cham: Springer
International Publishing), 3–10.
Tohidnezhad, M., Zander, J., Slowik, A., Kubo, Y., Dursun, G., Willenberg, W.,
et al. (2020). Impact of Uniaxial Stretching on Both Gliding and Traction Areas
of Tendon Explants in a Novel Bioreactor. Ijms 21, 2925. doi:10.3390/
ijms21082925
Trelstad, R. L., and Hayashi, K. (1979). Tendon Collagen Fibrillogenesis:
Intracellular Subassemblies and Cell Surface Changes Associated with Fibril
Growth. Develop. Biol. 71, 228–242. doi:10.1016/0012-1606(79)90166-0
Tsuzaki, M., Bynum, D., Almekinders, L., Yang, X., Faber, J., and Banes, A. J.
(2003). ATP Modulates Load-Inducible IL-1?, COX 2, and MMP-3 Gene
Expression in Human Tendon Cells. J. Cel. Biochem. 89, 556–562. doi:10.
1002/jcb.10534
Tu, T., Shen, Y., Wang, X., Zhang, W., Zhou, G., Zhang, Y., et al. (2020). Tendon
ECM Modiﬁed Bioactive Electrospun Fibers Promote MSC Tenogenic
Differentiation and Tendon Regeneration. Appl. Mater. Today 18, 100495.
doi:10.1016/j.apmt.2019.100495
Viganò, M., Perucca Orfei, C., Colombini, A., Stanco, D., Randelli, P., Sansone, V.,
et al. (2017). Different Culture Conditions Affect the Growth of Human
Tendon Stem/progenitor Cells (TSPCs) within a Mixed Tendon Cells (TCs)
Population. J. Exp. Orthop. 4, 8–9. doi:10.1186/s40634-017-0082-8
Vogel, K. G. (2004). What Happens when Tendons bend and Twist? Proteoglycans.
J. Musculoskelet. Neuronal Interact. 4, 202–203. Available at: https://
europepmc.org/article/med/15615127
Wall, M. E., Weinhold, P. S., Siu, T., Brown, T. D., and Banes, A. J. (2007).
Comparison of Cellular Strain with Applied Substrate Strain In Vitro.
J. Biomech. 40, 173–181. doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2005.10.032
Wang, J. H.-C. (2006). Mechanobiology of Tendon. J. Biomech. 39, 1563–1582.
doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2005.05.011
Wang, J., Jia, F., Yang, G., Yang, S., Campbell, B., Stone, D., et al. (2003).
Cyclic Mechanical Stretching of Human Tendon Fibroblasts Increases the
Production
of
Prostaglandin
E
2
and
Levels
of
Cyclooxygenase
Expression: A Novel In Vitro Model Study. Connect. Tissue Res. 44,
128–133. doi:10.1080/713713684
Wang, N., Tytell, J. D., and Ingber, D. E. (2009). Mechanotransduction at a
Distance: Mechanically Coupling the Extracellular Matrix with the Nucleus.
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cel Biol. 10, 75–82. doi:10.1038/nrm2594
Wang, T., Chen, P., Zheng, M., Wang, A., Lloyd, D., Leys, T., et al. (2018a). In Vitro
loading Models for Tendon Mechanobiology. J. Orthop. Res. 36, 566–575.
doi:10.1002/jor.23752
Wang, T., Chen, P., Chen, L., Zhou, Y., Wang, A., Zheng, Q., et al. (2021).
Reduction of Mechanical Loading in Tendons Induces Heterotopic Ossiﬁcation
and Activation of the β-catenin Signaling Pathway. J. Orthopaedic Translation
29, 42–50. doi:10.1016/j.jot.2021.03.004
Wang, T., Lin, Z., Day, R. E., Gardiner, B., Landao-Bassonga, E., Rubenson, J., et al.
(2013).
Programmable
Mechanical
Stimulation
Inﬂuences
Tendon
Homeostasis in a Bioreactor System. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 110, 1495–1507.
doi:10.1002/bit.24809
Wang, T., Lin, Z., Ni, M., Thien, C., Day, R. E., Gardiner, B., et al. (2015). Cyclic
Mechanical Stimulation Rescues Achilles Tendon from Degeneration in a
Bioreactor System. J. Orthop. Res. 33, 1888–1896. doi:10.1002/jor.22960
Wang, T., Thien, C., Wang, C., Ni, M., Gao, J., Wang, A., et al. (2018b). 3D Uniaxial
Mechanical Stimulation Induces Tenogenic Differentiation of Tendon-derived
Stem Cells through a PI3K/AKT Signaling Pathway. FASEB j. 32, 4804–4814.
doi:10.1096/fj.201701384r
Wang, W., He, J., Feng, B., Zhang, Z., Zhang, W., Zhou, G., et al. (2016). Aligned
Nanoﬁbers Direct Human Dermal Fibroblasts to Tenogenic Phenotype In Vitro
and Enhance Tendon Regeneration In Vivo. Nanomedicine 11, 1055–1072.
doi:10.2217/nnm.16.24
Wang, X. T., Ker, R. F., and Alexander, R. M. (1995). Fatigue Rupture of Wallaby
Tail Tendons. J. Exp. Biol. 198, 847–852. doi:10.1242/jeb.198.3.847
Warner, J. J., Gillies, A. R., Hwang, H. H., Zhang, H., Lieber, R. L., and Chen, S.
(2017). 3D-printed Biomaterials with Regional Auxetic Properties. J. Mech.
Behav. Biomed. Mater. 76, 145–152. doi:10.1016/j.jmbbm.2017.05.016
Woo, S. L.-Y., Debski, R. E., Zeminski, J., Abramowitch, S. D., Chan Saw, Ms, S. S.,
Fenwick, J. A., et al. (2000). Injury and Repair of Ligaments and Tendons. Annu.
Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2, 83–118. doi:10.1146/annurev.bioeng.2.1.83
Wren, T. A. L., Lindsey, D. P., Beaupré, G. S., and Carter, D. R. (2003). Effects
of Creep and Cyclic Loading on the Mechanical Properties and Failure of
Human Achilles Tendons. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 31, 710–717. doi:10.1114/1.
1569267
Wu, S., Wang, Y., Streubel, P. N., and Duan, B. (2017). Living Nanoﬁber Yarn-
Based Woven Biotextiles for Tendon Tissue Engineering Using Cell Tri-culture
and Mechanical Stimulation. Acta Biomater. 62, 102–115. doi:10.1016/j.actbio.
2017.08.043
Wu, Y., Han, Y., Wong, Y. S., and Fuh, J. Y. H. (2018). Fibre-based Scaffolding
Techniques for Tendon Tissue Engineering. J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 12,
1798–1821. doi:10.1002/term.2701
Wunderli, S. L., Blache, U., and Snedeker, J. G. (2020). Tendon Explant Models for
Physiologically Relevant In Vitro Study of Tissue Biology - a Perspective.
Connect. Tissue Res. 61, 262–277. doi:10.1080/03008207.2019.1700962
Wunderli, S. L., Widmer, J., Amrein, N., Foolen, J., Silvan, U., Leupin, O., et al.
(2018). Minimal Mechanical Load and Tissue Culture Conditions Preserve
Native Cell Phenotype and Morphology in Tendon-A Novel Ex Vivo Mouse
Explant Model. J. Orthop. Res. 36, 1383–1390. doi:10.1002/jor.23769
Xu, Y., Yin, H., Chu, J., Eglin, D., Serra, T., and Docheva, D. (2021). An Anisotropic
Nanocomposite
Hydrogel
Guides
Aligned
Orientation
and
Enhances
Tenogenesis of Human Tendon Stem/progenitor Cells. Biomater. Sci. 9,
1237–1245. doi:10.1039/d0bm01127d
Yamamoto, E., Hayashi, K., and Yamamoto, N. (1999). Mechanical Properties of
Collagen Fascicles from Stress-Shielded Patellar Tendons in the Rabbit. Clin.
Biomech. 14, 418–425. doi:10.1016/S0268-0033(99)00006-6
Yang, G., Crawford, R. C., and Wang, J. H.-C. (2004). Proliferation and Collagen
Production of Human Patellar Tendon Fibroblasts in Response to Cyclic
Uniaxial Stretching in Serum-free Conditions. J. Biomech. 37, 1543–1550.
doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2004.01.005
Yang, G., Im, H.-J., and Wang, J. H.-C. (2005). Repetitive Mechanical Stretching
Modulates IL-1β Induced COX-2, MMP-1 Expression, and PGE2 Production
in Human Patellar Tendon Fibroblasts. Gene 363, 166–172. doi:10.1016/j.gene.
2005.08.006
Yeung, C.-Y. C., Zeef, L. A. H., Lallyett, C., Lu, Y., Canty-Laird, E. G., and Kadler, K.
E. (2015). Chick Tendon Fibroblast Transcriptome and Shape Depend on
whether the Cell Has Made its Own Collagen Matrix. Sci. Rep. 5, 13555. doi:10.
1038/srep13555
Yin, H., Strunz, F., Yan, Z., Lu, J., Brochhausen, C., Kiderlen, S., et al. (2020). Three-
dimensional Self-Assembling Nanoﬁber Matrix Rejuvenates Aged/degenerative
Human Tendon Stem/progenitor Cells. Biomaterials 236, 119802. doi:10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2020.119802
Yin, Z., Guo, J., Wu, T.-y., Chen, X., Xu, L.-l., Lin, S.-e., et al. (2016). Stepwise
Differentiation of Mesenchymal Stem Cells Augments Tendon-like Tissue
Formation and Defect Repair In Vivo. Stem Cell Transl. Med. 5, 1106–1116.
doi:10.5966/sctm.2015-0215
Youngstrom, D. W., Barrett, J. G., Jose, R. R., and Kaplan, D. L. (2013). Functional
Characterization of Detergent-Decellularized Equine Tendon Extracellular
Matrix for Tissue Engineering Applications. PLoS One 8, e64151. doi:10.
1371/journal.pone.0064151
Youngstrom, D. W., and Barrett, J. G. (2016). Tendon Differentiation on
Decellularized Extracellular Matrix under Cyclic Loading. Methods Mol.
Biol. 1502, 195–202. doi:10.1007/7651_2016_332
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 826748
14
Wu et al.
In Vitro Tendon Strain Models
Youngstrom, D. W., LaDow, J. E., and Barrett, J. G. (2016). Tenogenesis of
Bone Marrow-, Adipose-, and Tendon-Derived Stem Cells in a Dynamic
Bioreactor. Connect. Tissue Res. 57, 454–465. doi:10.3109/03008207.
2015.1117458
Zeichen, J., van Griensven, M., and Bosch, U. (2000). The Proliferative Response of
Isolated Human Tendon Fibroblasts to Cyclic Biaxial Mechanical Strain. Am.
J. Sports Med. 28, 888–892. doi:10.1177/03635465000280061901
Zhang, G., Chen, S., Goldoni, S., Calder, B. W., Simpson, H. C., Owens, R. T., et al.
(2009). Genetic Evidence for the Coordinated Regulation of Collagen
Fibrillogenesis in the Cornea by Decorin and Biglycan. J. Biol. Chem. 284,
8888–8897. doi:10.1074/jbc.m806590200
Zhang, J., and Wang, J. H.-C. (2010). Mechanobiological Response of Tendon Stem
Cells: Implications of Tendon Homeostasis and Pathogenesis of Tendinopathy.
J. Orthop. Res. 28, 639–643. doi:10.1002/jor.21046
Zhang, J., and Wang, J. H.-C. (2013). The Effects of Mechanical Loading on
Tendons - an In Vivo and In Vitro Model Study. PLoS One 8, e71740. doi:10.
1371/journal.pone.0071740
Zhang, L., Kahn, C. J. F., Chen, H.-Q., Tran, N., and Wang, X. (2008). Effect of
Uniaxial Stretching on Rat Bone Mesenchymal Stem Cell: Orientation and
Expressions of Collagen Types I and III and Tenascin-C. Cel Biol. Int. 32,
344–352. doi:10.1016/j.cellbi.2007.12.018
Zhong, C., Chrzanowska-Wodnicka, M., Brown, J., Shaub, A., Belkin, A. M., and
Burridge, K. (1998). Rho-mediated Contractility Exposes a Cryptic Site in
Fibronectin and Induces Fibronectin Matrix Assembly. J. Cel Biol. 141,
539–551. doi:10.1083/jcb.141.2.539
Zuskov, A., Freedman, B. R., Gordon, J. A., Sarver, J. J., Buckley, M. R., and
Soslowsky, L. J. (2020). Tendon Biomechanics and Crimp Properties Following
Fatigue Loading Are Inﬂuenced by Tendon Type and Age in Mice. J. Orthop.
Res. 38, 36–42. doi:10.1002/jor.24407
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their afﬁliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Wu, Kim and Kremen. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 826748
15
Wu et al.
In Vitro Tendon Strain Models

===== Li2021_FrontCellDevBiol_Tenocyte+TendonStemCell =====

REVIEW
published: 16 April 2021
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.629515
Edited by:
Ming Li,
Osaka University, Japan
Reviewed by:
Michel Puceat,
Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale (INSERM),
France
Gundula Gesine Schulze-Tanzil,
Paracelsus Medical University, Austria
Kang Xu,
Hubei University of Chinese Medicine,
China
Yun-feng Rui,
Southeast University, China
*Correspondence:
Tianyi Wu
xiaoxongwu@hotmail.com
Shen Liu
liushensjtu@sjtu.edu.cn
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Stem Cell Research,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental
Biology
Received: 15 November 2020
Accepted: 29 March 2021
Published: 16 April 2021
Citation:
Li Y, Wu T and Liu S (2021)
Identiﬁcation and Distinction
of Tenocytes and Tendon-Derived
Stem Cells.
Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 9:629515.
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.629515
Identiﬁcation and Distinction of
Tenocytes and Tendon-Derived Stem
Cells
Yuange Li, Tianyi Wu* and Shen Liu*
Department of Orthopaedics, Shanghai Sixth People’s Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China
Restoring the normal structure and function of injured tendons is one of the biggest
challenges in orthopedics and sports medicine department. The discovery of tendon-
derived stem cells (TDSCs) provides a novel perspective to treat tendon injuries, which is
expected to be an ideal seed cell to promote tendon repair and regeneration. Because
of the lack of speciﬁc markers, the identiﬁcation of tenocytes and TDSCs has not been
conclusive in the in vitro study of tendons. In addition, the morphology of tendon derived
cells is similar, and the comparison and identiﬁcation of tenocytes and TDSCs are
insufﬁcient, which causes some obstacles to the in vitro study of tendon. In this review,
the characteristics of tenocytes and TDSCs are summarized and compared based on
some existing research results (mainly in terms of biomarkers), and a potential marker
selection for identiﬁcation is suggested. It is of profound signiﬁcance to further explore
the mechanism of biomarkers in vivo and to ﬁnd more speciﬁc markers.
Keywords: tenocytes, TDSCs, identiﬁcation, biomarkers, tenogenesis
INTRODUCTION
Tendons, the connective tissue that connects muscle to bone, improve stability and promote
movement, but are also particularly vulnerable to damage (Elliott, 1965). Tendons are generally
hypocellular, thus may lack of adequate cellularity for suﬃcient healing (Tang et al., 2016). The
healing of tendon injuries is very slow and scar tissue forms easily, which reduces the toughness of
the tendon, thus aﬀecting the mechanical properties of the tendon (Evans, 2012). It is more likely for
injured tendons to be damaged again after repair (Longo et al., 2011). In addition, chronic injury can
result in many degenerative changes of the tendon, such as single or simultaneous lipid deposition,
proteoglycan accumulation and tissue calciﬁcation, and ﬁnally leads to tendinopathy (a chronic
tendon injury) (Kannus and Józsa, 1991). Moreover, tendon adhesion is a common complication
after tendon injury, which can seriously aﬀect the patient’s limb function. Our understanding of the
mechanism of tendon adhesion is still limited (Wong and Peck, 2014), making tendon adhesion a
complex clinical problem.
Bi et al. (2007) reported to isolate a cell population termed tendon stem/progenitor cells (TSPCs)
(also regarded as tendon-derived stem cells (TDSCs)] from human and mouse in 2007, which shows
characteristics of stem cells such as multipotency, clonogenicity, and self-renewal capacity. Since
then, how to eﬀectively activate the endogenous or transplanting TDSCs and promote the proper
diﬀerentiation has become a new way to treat tendon regeneration after injury (Leong and Sun,
2016). Although there are many studies on TDSCs, the identiﬁcation of TDSCs is lack of speciﬁcity
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
1
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 629515
Li et al.
Comparison of Tenocytes and TDSCs
and consensus (Walia and Huang, 2019). Besides, the isolation of
tenocytes and TDSCs follows the similar cell extraction protocol.
However, in most of the literature, no distinction is made between
the two types of cells (Cao et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2008; Chen
et al., 2012). Some authors suggest the acquired cells are tenocytes
while others think of them as TDSCs, making a conﬂict about
what the cells really are. And there is a lack of comparison of
tendon derived cells, with only three studies directly comparing
tenocytes and TDSCs in the horse (Williamson et al., 2015),the
rabbit (Zhang and Wang, 2010), and the mouse (Lee et al., 2018).
This leads to a lack of accurate awareness between tenocytes and
TDSCs, which is not conducive to further research.
This
article
aims
to
discuss
the
marker
expression,
morphology and application of tenocytes and TDSCs based
on current documents, and summarize the potential methods
for distinction and identiﬁcation of tenocytes and TDSCs.
According to the limitation of existing research, the future
direction is proposed.
TENOCYTES
Tenocytes are tendon-speciﬁc ﬁbroblasts and are considered
to be made up approximately 95% of tendon tissue (Kannus,
2000). How tenocytes are produced during embryo development
remains unclear (Ma et al., 2018). Tenocytes are transformed
from tenoblasts (Kannus, 2000). The tenoblasts are round cells
with large, oval nuclei (Luesma et al., 2020). Mature tenocytes are
spindle-shaped, 80–300 in diameter, and the processes are long
and thin (Franchi et al., 2007). The cellular processes extend away
from the body of the cell, making the tenocytes look like spiders
from transection view. Tenocytes are laid between collagen ﬁbrils
and are in charge of the production of extracellular matrix (ECM)
as well as maintenance and restore of tendon tissue (Hess et al.,
1989). Tenogenic diﬀerentiation markers are commonly used for
the identiﬁcation of tenocytes.
Scleraxis (Scx) and Tenomodulin (TNMD) are conﬁrmed to
be relatively speciﬁc molecular markers of tendons and make
a central role in the development and maturation of tendons
(Aslan et al., 2008). Scx is a basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH)
transcription factor, found by Cserjesi et al. (1995) using the yeast
two-hybrid system for cell-type-speciﬁc proteins in 1995. Brown
et al. (1999) used whole-mount in situ hybridization to show that
Scx could be detected in the blastocyst at 3.5 day at the earliest
and expressed in the mesoderm at 7.5 day, while after 11.5 day,
Scx was conﬁned to the cartilaginous primordia of axial and limb
bones and the primordia of connective tissues such as tendon
and ligament. Scx is widely expressed in connective tissue cells
and is a marker of connective tissue (Muir et al., 2005; Levay
et al., 2008). Murchison et al. (2007) produced Scx−/−mice
using gene knockout techniques, which showed severe defects
in force-transmitting tendon of paws, backs and tails. Lessened
and disorganized tendon matrix and disorder at the cellular
level were also found with histological observation. Scott et al.
(2011) constructed a murine patellar tendon injury model, and
results of qPCR revealed that the expressions of Scx and TNMD
were signiﬁcantly up-regulated, while the latter lagged behind the
former in time, indicating that Scx had eﬀect on TNMD. Thus it
can be seen that Scx begins to be expressed at the early stage of
embryonic development and produces a regulatory eﬀect on the
process of tendon maturation.
Tenomodulin
is
a
kind
of
type
II
transmembrane
protein ﬁrst reported by Shukunami et al. (2001). TNMD
and Chondromodulin-I (ChM-I) are similar in structural
conﬁguration, sharing a homologous domain C-terminus (Hiraki
et al., 1997). Its name comes from tenocytes, because TNMD is
mainly expressed in tendons, as well as in ligaments, epimysium
and skeletal muscle (Brandau et al., 2001). As mentioned above,
TNMD is identiﬁed as a late tendon diﬀerentiation marker
compared to Scx for early tendon diﬀerentiation (Takimoto
et al., 2012). Oshima et al. (2004) used the adenovirus expression
system to force expression and the following secretion of 116
amino acids at the TNMD C-terminus in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVECs) and evaluate the anti-angiogenetic
properties of TNMD. The result showed that the angiogenetic
ability of HUVECs was dramatically impaired. Meanwhile,
in vitro studies have found that TNMD and ChM-I can
signiﬁcantly reduce the vascular density in human melanoma.
Therefore, it is speculated that TNMD functions in inhibiting
angiogenesis in the highly expressed non-vascular tissues such
as ligaments and tendons. Docheva et al. (2005) bred TNMD-
defect mice by gene knockout technology, and found that the
proliferation of tenocytes in mice was observably reduced and
cell density was decreased. ECM, including collagen type I, II,
III, VI, and all sorts of proteoglycan content is not aﬀected,
but the diﬀerence between collagen ﬁber diameter increased,
appearing ﬁbers with an obviously large diameter. It can be seen
that TNMD can regulate the proliferation of tenocytes and the
maturation of collagen ﬁbers.
Besides Scx, Mohawk (Mkx) is another important regulator of
TNMD, since a markedly decreased expression of TNMD could
be observed in Mkx(−/−) mutant mice (Liu et al., 2010). Mkx,
identiﬁed by Anderson et al. (2006), is a homobox gene that is
most closely related to IRX gene. The absence of Mkx can lead
to heterotopic ossiﬁcation of the Achilles tendon within a month
after birth in mice, and the ossiﬁcation gets worse with age (Liu
et al., 2019). Moreover, Mkx(−/−) mutant mice showed abnormal
tendon sheath and the defect of tendon collagen ﬁbers, revealing
that Mkx is an important regulator of tendon development
(Liu et al., 2010).
Type I collagen (Col I) and type III collagen (Col III)
are other two matrix genes for tenogenic diﬀerentiation. Col
I is originally synthesized as procollagen, a precursor form,
consisting of two identical pro-α1(I) and one pro-α2(I) chains,
encoded by COL1A1 and COL1A2 gene, respectively (Lu et al.,
2019). Col III is made up of three identical pro-α1(III) encoded
by COL3A1 (Gelse et al., 2003). Tenocytes compound mainly
Col I and Col III (Hong et al., 1979) and the major problem
encountered during long-term tenocytes culture is the decrease
in the synthesis of Col I and Col III (Birk and Trelstad, 1986).
Güngörmü¸s and Kolankaya (2008) used immunoﬂuorescence
staining technique to reveal that Col I mainly existed around
the nucleus and Col III was more dispersed in the cytoplasm.
Col I and Col III play a strong part in development and
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
2
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 629515
Li et al.
Comparison of Tenocytes and TDSCs
healing of tendons, however, an excessive amount of collagen
will lead to tendon adhesions (Wong et al., 2009). Tendons are
mainly composed of Col I and the ﬁbers are arranged along
the tendon axis (Franchi et al., 2007). Col I and Col III are
co-distributed in the tendon bundle and the connective tissue
at 14 days of development in the immature tendon (Birk and
Mayne, 1997). During the ﬁbroblastic phase (days 3–14) of
tendon healing, the initial deposition of Col III occurs in a
disorganized manner and then reassembles into a longitudinal
structure (Wong et al., 2009). Col III is subsequently replaced
by Col I in the remodeling phase (beyond day 10) (Myer and
Fowler, 2016). Sakabe et al. (2018) found that ECM deposition
reduced and disordered Col III failed to convert to ordered Col I
at the tendon injury site of Scx−/−mice, resulting in weak tendon
healing strength and an increased degree of tendon adhesion.
Riederer-Henderson et al. (1983) identiﬁed the type of collagen
synthesized by chicken embryo tendon cells and ﬁbroblasts
of the synovium of sheathed tendons by isotope labeling
in vitro and immunohistochemistry. It was concluded that
tendon cells only synthesize Col I, while ﬁbroblasts synthesize
Col I and Col III.
Thrombospondin-4
(TSP-4
or
Thbs4)
and
cartilage
oligomeric
matrix
protein
(COMP)
are
members
of
thrombospondin gene family (Lawler et al., 1993). Hauser
et al. (1995) found that pentameric TSP-4 consisted in bovine
tendon ECM in 1995. It was shown by Södersten et al. (2006)
that both TSP-4 and COMP existed in equine tendon and were
unable to be parted under non-reducing conditions, indicating
hetero-oligomers formed via connection of disulﬁde bridges.
Frolova et al. (2014) found that larger tendon collagen ﬁbrils were
over-represented in Thbs4−/−than wild-type mice. Thbs4−/−
mice had smaller soleus muscles and reduced grip strength
of their hind and forelimbs compared with wild-type mice. It
suggests that the deﬁciency of TSP-4 changed the regulation
of the composition of the ECM in tendons and muscles. The
function of COMP is unclear, but it is considered to provide
integrity to the structure of ECM (Södersten et al., 2005). In
addition, COMP and TSP-4 can be expressed as an answer to
mechanical load (Södersten et al., 2007).
Decorin
(DCN)
is
a
member
of
small
leucine-rich
proteoglycans (SLRP) family, distributed in the connective
tissues. Samiric et al. (2004) found that DCN was the core
protein of about 80% proteoglycan in fresh tendons through
amino acid sequence analysis. Svensson et al. (1995) found
that DCN mainly interacted with Col I ﬁbrils through 4 to 5
leucine-rich repeats to inﬂuence the diameter of ﬁbrils and form
thinner ﬁbers. Elliott et al. (2003) studied the tail tendon of
DCN knockout mice and found that the viscoelastic properties
showed greater and faster stress relaxation in DCN−/−mice
compared to the control group. DCN also antagonizes the
synthesis of pathological collagen and plays the neutralization by
down-regulating TGF-β1 (Abbah et al., 2016).
Tenascin C (TnC) is an ECM glycoprotein existing in mature
and growing tendons (Kardon, 1998). TnC binds to a variety of
surface receptors, for instance, integrins and other components
of ECM, and thus participates in the regulation of cell-matrix
interactions (Jones and Jones, 2000). It suggests that TnC is
instrumental in the correct localization and alignment of collagen
ﬁbers in the tendon (Mackie and Ramsey, 1996).
The tenogenic diﬀerentiation markers mentioned above are
commonly used in previous studies for tenocytes. The markers
selected for the identiﬁcation of tenocytes in several diﬀerent
studies are listed in Table 1. However, the expression of these
genes is not limited to tendons, they also expressed in other
musculoskeletal tissues, including cartilage, fat, muscle and bone
(Jo et al., 2019). Therefore, the speciﬁc markers of tenocytes
remain unfound, which brings diﬃculties to ﬁnd a concise
method to identify tenocytes.
TDSCS
As stem cells, TDSCs are self-renewing and can diﬀerentiate
into tenocytes and other types of cells (osteocytes, chondrocytes,
and adipocytes) under diﬀerent conditions. In terms of
cell morphology, TDSCs isolated from diﬀerent tissue and
species sources are diﬀerent. Some are spindle-shaped with
an appearance of ﬁbroblasts, while others are like enlarged
triangles (Lui and Chan, 2011). The ECM of TDSCs is mainly
composed of ﬁbromodulin, biglycan, and other components,
and the microenvironment constituted by these is signiﬁcant for
the proliferation and diﬀerentiation of TDSC (Rui et al., 2011).
However, the niche (both regulators and anatomical locations),
characteristics and the role of TDSCs in vivo are still unclear (Lui,
2013). Although TDSCs have been isolated from tendons and
cultured in vitro, the origin is still a controversial topic, and no
speciﬁc markers are found.
Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) must express CD105,
CD73, and CD90, and lack the expression of CD45, CD34, CD14,
or CD11b, CD79alpha or CD19 and HLA-DR surface molecules
(Dominici et al., 2006). It is one of the minimal criteria proposed
by the Mesenchymal and Tissue Stem Cell Committee of the
International Society for Cellular Therapy. Therefore, TDSCs
meet the above labeling requirements (Lui, 2015). However,
TDSCs and other MSCs and certain diﬀerentiated cells cannot
be accurately distinguished by these markers (Alt et al., 2011).
Ruzzini et al. (2014) isolated tendon-derived CD44+ cells, which
were positive for the stem cell marker CD146 and STRO1, and
reported them to be TDSCs. The exact function of most CD
markers in stem cells is unclear, causing diﬃculties in identifying
speciﬁc markers of TDSCs. A better comprehension of the in vivo
function of MSC markers in TDSCs will help to select appropriate
markers to distinguish TDSCs from tenocytes.
In
addition
to
this,
TDSCs
are
reported
to
express
pluripotency
markers,
including
Nanog,
Oct-4,
Sox2,
nucleostemin, and SSEA-4 (Zhang and Wang, 2010; Tan
et al., 2013). Nanog was reported and oﬃcially named by
Chambers et al. (2003). Nanog belongs to the NK-2 gene of the
ANTP superfamily, which is a transcription factor expressed
by inner cell mass, primitive germ cells and embryonic stem
cells (ESCs). Studies have shown that Nanog not only help
maintain the undiﬀerentiated state of ESCs, but also promote
cell proliferation (Hyslop et al., 2005). Oct4 (Octamer-binding
transcription factor) is named for its ability to bind to DNA of
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
3
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 629515
Li et al.
Comparison of Tenocytes and TDSCs
TABLE 1 | Expression of positive and negative markers in tenocytes in different species.
References
Scx TNMD Mkx
Col I Col III Col IV TnC
DCN
a-
SMA
vimentin GDF-
8
FAP
FSP1 Sox9
Runx
2
Cell
source
Species
Wagenhäuser et al., 2012
+
−
+
+
+
+
Biceps
tendons
Human
Kendal et al.,
2020
Tenocyte A
+
+
+
+
Multiple
tendons
Human
Tenocyte B
+
+
+
+
Tenocyte C
+
+
+
Tenocyte D
+
+
+
+
Tenocyte E
+
+
+
+
Xu et al., 2018
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Achilles
tendons
Mouse
Chen et al., 2012
+
+
+
+
+
+
Digitorum
profundus
ﬂexor
tendons and
Achilles
tendons
Mouse
Fleischhacker et al., 2020
+
+
+
+
+
+
Achilles
tendons
Mouse
Vermeulen et al., 2019
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Achilles
tendons
Rat
Evrova et al., 2020
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Achilles
tendons
Rabbit
Riederer-Henderson et al., 1983
+
−
Flexor
tendons
Chicken
octamer modes. Currently, the prevailing view is that Oct4 plays a
nodal role in the transcription factors of somatic reprogramming,
and no other core or auxiliary transcription factors can replace
the function of Oct4 (Radzisheuskaya and Silva, 2014). Sex-
determining region Y-box 2 (SOX2) identiﬁes and combines the
promoter of various target genes to transactivate or inhibit their
expression through transactivation domain to regulate various
physiological processes (Nowling et al., 2000). SOX2 makes
a critical diﬀerence in maintaining the stem cell phenotype
of ESCs during embryogenesis. What should be of concern is
that SOX2, as one of the Yamanaka factors, together with the
ectopic expressions of Oct4, Klf4, and C-MYC, transforms mouse
embryonic ﬁbroblasts into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)
(Takahashi and Yamanaka, 2006). Nucleostemin was initially
identiﬁed as a gene enriched in human cancer cells and neural
stem cells (NSCs) (Tsai and McKay, 2002), and was later found to
be highly expressed in several kinds of other stem cells (Baddoo
et al., 2003). Nucleostemin, located in the cellular nucleolus, is
a guanosine triphosphate binding protein, which can sustain
the proliferation of stem cells and inhibit their diﬀerentiation
to mature cells, and is mainly involved in maintaining the
proliferation, diﬀerentiation, cell cycle process and renewal
of stem cells and tumor cells (Tsai, 2014). Stage-speciﬁc
embryonic antigen 4 (SSEA4), a core structure of globulin series
carbohydrates, has been reported to be a cell surface marker to
deﬁne a variety of human pluripotent stem cells, including ESCs
(Rao et al., 2007) and MSCs (Wakao et al., 2012). However, the
role of SSEA4 in the establishment and maintenance of ESCs
and iPSCs is unclear (Hamamura et al., 2020). At present, no
study has directly described the speciﬁc expression of these ESC
markers in TDSCs. There is also a lack of information on the
relational role of these ESC markers in the pluripotency and
self-renewal. Nucleostemin, OCT-4, Nanog, and Sox2, as nuclear
proteins, limit their application to be prospective isolation
markers in clinical trials or practices. Surface marker SSEA4,
may be more useful if proven to be eﬀective.
In diﬀerent studies, the marker expression of TDSCs are
discrepant, which are aﬀected by the cell source, cell isolation
and separation procedures (Lui, 2015). Positive or negative
expressions of TDSCs markers in diﬀerent species are listed
in Table 2.
Yin et al. (2016) found a subpopulation of nestin+ TS
by single-cell analysis in 2016. Nestin, a type of intermediate
ﬁlament protein speciﬁcally expressed in neuroepithelial stem
cells (Wiese et al., 2004),was found to be of signiﬁcance to self-
renewal stem cells (Park et al., 2010). The study demonstrated
that the expression of nestin was related to tendon diﬀerentiation
and nestin+ cells were involved in endogenous tendon injury
repair. Nestin+ cells showed stronger self-renewal, tenogenesis
and colony formation abilities than cells treated by nestin
knockdown. The authors further veriﬁed that knockdown of
nestin did harm to tendon healing and regeneration in a patellar
tendon defect model in vivo. The cells arranged randomly and the
collagen ﬁbril was misaligned. In summary, it is indicated that
nestin is a characteristic marker of TSCPs and new insights are
provided into the study of TSCPs.
Harvey et al. (2019) made great progress in the research
of cellular and molecular mechanisms of tendon regeneration
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
4
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 629515
Li et al.
Comparison of Tenocytes and TDSCs
TABLE 2 | Expression of positive and negative markers in TDSCs in different species.
References
Pluripotent markers
CD markers
Tenogenic markers
Cell
source
Species
nucleo
stemin
Nanog Oct-
4
Sox2 SSEA-
1
SSEA-
4
c-
Myc
Sca-
1
CD
18
CD
31
CD
34
CD
44
CD
45
CD
73
CD
90
CD
90.2
CD
105
CD
133
CD
146
CD
166
Stro-
1
Nestin Col
I
Col
II
Col
III
SCXTNMD TnC Comp Aggrecan αSMA
Tsai et al., 2013
−
−
+
−
+
+
+
−
+
Shoulder
rotator cuff
Human
Kohler et al.,
2013
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Achilles
tendons
Human
Yin et al., 2010
−
−
+
+
+
+
Achilles
tendons
Human
Zhang and
Wang, 2013a
+
+
+
+
+
+
Patellar
tendons
Human
Lee et al., 2012
−
+
−
+
+
+
−
−
Patellar
tendons
Human
Rui et al., 2010
−
−
+
+
P0
P3−
−
+
+
+
+
Flexor
tendons
Rat
Liu et al., 2013
+
+
+
Flexor
tendons
Rat
Chen et al.,
2014
+
+
Achilles
tendons
Rat
Tan et al., 2013
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Patellar
tendons
Rat
Holladay et al.,
2016
+
−
+
+
+
+
+
+
Patellar
tendons
Rat
Alberton et al.,
2015
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Tail
tendons
Mouse
Bi et al., 2007
+
−
+
−
+
+
+
+
Patellar
tendons
Mouse
Mienaltowski
et al., 2013
+
−
−
+
+
−
Achilles
tendons
Mouse
Zhang and
Wang, 2013b
+
+
+
Patellar
and
Achilles
tendons
Mouse
Zhang and
Wang, 2010
+
+
+
Patellar
and
Achilles
tendons
Rabbit
Tao et al., 2015
+
+
+
Patellar
tendons
Rabbit
Yang et al.,
2013
+
+
+
Patellar
tendons
Rabbit
Yang et al.,
2018
+
+
+
+
+
Achilles
tendons
Porcine
Lovati et al.,
2011
+
+
+
Superﬁcial
digital
ﬂexor
tendons
Horse
Yang et al.,
2016
+
+
−
+
+
Achilles
tendons
Fetal
bovine
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
5
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 629515
Li et al.
Comparison of Tenocytes and TDSCs
and suggested that the Tppp3+/pdgfra+ subpopulation possibly
indicated TDSC status. Tubulin polymerization-promoting
protein family member 3 (Tppp3), is reported to be a speciﬁc
marker of the diﬀerentiating synovial joints and tendon sheath
(Staverosky et al., 2009). Harvey et al. (2019) used single-
cell RNA sequencing to classify all the cells in the patella
tendon of adult mice and obtained eight clusters. One of
them, an unknown cluster was identiﬁed as TDSC, which was
enriched for Tppp3+. The authors used lineage tracing to
prove that Tppp3+ cells were activated after tendon injury
and were involved into tendon healing. Transcriptomic analysis
revealed the enrichment of PDGFR in the putative TDSCs.
PDGFRa, platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha, and
other PDGF signaling components are conﬁrmed to promote
the proliferation of TDSC and facilitates tendon ﬁbrosis
and regeneration.
These are two studies that had identiﬁed a potential marker
of TDSCs and explored their eﬀects in vivo. Although there
is still some left to further elucidate the complex role of the
microenvironment, the latest studies have made a signiﬁcant
leap in the research of TDSCs and tendon regeneration
(Titan and Longaker, 2019).
COMPARISON OF CHARACTERISTICS
OF TENOCYTES AND TDSCS
Subpopulations
Kendal et al. (2020) performed scRNA-seq and CITE-seq
integrated analysis of cells from tendon samples, and eight
distinct transcriptomic clusters were found, including ﬁve
tenocyte clusters (initially labeled “Tenocyte A–E”), monocytes,
lymphocytes and a group of combined endothelial cells. Part of
phenotypes of Tenocyte A–E is shown in Table 1. The authors
failed to detect a stem cell population in human cells. Although
the up-regulation of PDGFRA, TPPP3, and other genes which are
expressed in TDSCs were displayed in Tenocyte D and Tenocyte
E clusters, the article raised some questions about the presence or
absence of TDSCs.
It has been reported that mouse TDSCs contained two
subpopulations, CD105-positive cells and CD105-negative cells
(Asai et al., 2014). Compared with CD105-positive cells, CD105-
negative cells showed greater cartilage potential in vitro and
induced greater cartilaginous degeneration in mice.
Factors Inﬂuencing Characteristics
In vivo and in vitro
As mentioned above, many achievements have been made in
the expression of tenogenic diﬀerentiation markers of tenocytes
in vivo and in vivo and their roles in vivo. However, in vivo
studies of MSC markers and ESC markers in TDSCs are lacking.
Immunohistochemical staining showed the absence of ESC
markers (nucleostemin, Nanog, Oct-4, and SOX2) in all intact
rat patella tendon cells (Tan et al., 2013). The existing in vitro
markers are not eﬀective in vivo, suggesting the need for more
research on TDSCs.
Cell Passaging
Phenotypic drift of the cells leads to changes in common
cell markers over multiple passages. After two passages,
the
expression
levels
of
Col
I
and
Col
III
in
human
tenocytes
were
signiﬁcantly
decreased
(Mazzocca
et
al.,
2012). DCN, Scx, and TnC gradually declined over six
passages. In addition, with progressive passage, tenocytes
became
more
rounded.
Cells
of
the
sixth
passages
did
not have the ﬁbroblast characteristics any more showed
in
the
previous
two
passages.
The
cellular
processes
were longer and thicker of early passage compared with
the sixth passage.
Similarly, the expression of Scx and TNMD decreased during
passage in TDSCs (Tan et al., 2012). Meanwhile, the ability
of chondrogenic, adipogenic, and tendinogenic diﬀerentiation
of TDSCs decreased, and the ability to diﬀerentiate into
osteogenic lineage increased. Moreover, the surface expression
of CD73 and CD90 in TDSCs was down-regulated with
passaging. It showed no diﬀerence with previous reports that
MSCs began to lose their stem cell properties with passaging
in vitro (Izadpanah et al., 2008) and markers distinguishing
MSCs from ﬁbroblasts were down-regulated with passaging
(Halfon et al., 2011).
Culture Conditions
Phenotypes can be inﬂuenced by culture conditions. The
expression of markers can be induced or inhibited by growth
factors in fetal bovine serum, seeding densities, oxygen tension
and mechanical loading. For instance, human TDSCs cultured
in 5% oxygen had signiﬁcantly greater cell proliferation and
expressed higher levels of nucleostemin, Nanog, and SSEA-4
(Zhang and Wang, 2013a).
Applications
The ability of TDSCs to self-renew and their potential to
diﬀerentiate into tenocytes are expected to help reconstruct the
function and structure of damaged tendons, and the application
in the cure of tendon injuries has already been explored. TDSCs
were ﬁrst used to accelerate tendon repair in a rat patellar
tendon window defect model in 2011 (Ni et al., 2012). The
mechanical properties (elastic modulus and ultimate stress) of
tendon treated with stem cell therapy were signiﬁcantly higher
than those without TDSCs. More research on TDSCs in tendon–
tendon healing (Komatsu et al., 2016), tendon–bone healing
(Shen et al., 2012; Lui et al., 2014b), and tendinopathy (Chen
et al., 2014; Durgam et al., 2016) has followed. Biologically
speaking, using autologous TDSCs to heal tendon injuries may
be the most ideal choice. However, due to the limited number of
TDSCs in normal tendon, it is hard to obtain a great quantity
of TDSCs from self (Rui et al., 2010). It has been shown that
allogeneic TDSCs can also facilitate tendon injury repair without
inducing intense immune response and anti-inﬂammatory eﬀects
in mice (Lui et al., 2014a). However, the number of transplanted
TDSCs decreased gradually over time, indicating that the
role of allogeneic TDSCs was mainly through inducing cell
diﬀerentiation rather than directly diﬀerentiating by themselves.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
6
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 629515
Li et al.
Comparison of Tenocytes and TDSCs
In contrast, the use of tenocytes in cell-based therapy has
been much less reported. Wang A. et al. (2013); Wang et al.
(2015) reported to utilize autologous tenocyte injection (ATI)
as a treatment for severe, chronic resistant lateral epicondylitis
and autologous tenocyte implantation for tendinopathy and
partial-thickness rotator cuﬀtear in an elite athlete (Wang A.W.
et al., 2013). Bucher et al. (2017) used ATI for the treatment of
chronic recalcitrant gluteal tendinopathy. All of the treatment
have had some eﬀects.
The diﬀerence between the eﬀects of the two types of cells in
cell therapy is still unclear and needs further study.
Direct Comparison
There is little literature that directly compares the two types of
cells. The comprehensiveness of the comparisons in the literature
varies and discrepancy exists between diﬀerent species.
Zhang and Wang (2010) applied trypsin locally under
microscope and collected detached cells using micropipette
to separate TDSCs from tenocytes. They characterized the
properties of rabbit tenocytes and TDSCs. Tenocytes tend to
spread outward and are highly elongated, showing characteristic
shapes of ﬁbroblasts under conﬂuent conditions. The cell colonies
of TDSCs shape like pebbles, with smaller volume and larger
nucleoli compared with tenocytes. It was shown that TDSCs
proliferate faster than tenocytes. TDSCs expressed nucleostemin,
Oct-4, and SSEA-4 while these markers were expressed lowly
or barely in tenocytes. In addition, TDSCs had the ability of
tri-lineage diﬀerentiation in vivo and in vitro that tenocytes
essentially did not possess. It is a pity that the authors did not
compare from more markers.
Williamson et al. (2015) ﬁrst seeded the cells digested from
equine tendon at diﬀerent densities to isolate tenocytes (high
density) and TDSCs (low density). The results of the tri-
lineage diﬀerentiation assays suggested that this method might
not be suitable for equine TDSCs and the authors then used
diﬀerential adhesion of ﬁbronectin to isolate TDSCs. However,
the proliferation rates between the tenocyte and the putative
TDSCs in 5% oxygen had no signiﬁcant diﬀerences. In addition,
they compared the expression of tenocytes and TDSCs by
quantitative RT-PCR. Except for a higher expression of TSP-
4 in tenocytes, they did not ﬁnd other signiﬁcant diﬀerences.
Other markers included Nanog, Oct-4, CD90, CD73, CD34,
CD144, TnC, Scx, Mkx, EGR1, and TNMD. If species speciﬁcity
is excluded, the results suggested that this method may also not be
an ideal way to separate TDSCs from tenocytes. Lee et al. (2018)
made a comparison of characteristics of murine tenocytes and
TDSCs. They used cloning cylinders and applied trypsin topically
to isolate TDSCs. Tenocytes are large, tabular and ﬁbroblastic,
while TDSCs are smaller and rounder (Lee et al., 2018). Tenocytes
formed large and sparse colonies, while the colony formation of
TDSCs were denser and more compact. When compared with
tenocytes, early tenogenic markers (Mkx and Scx) and stem
cell markers (CD73 and Nanog) were expressed more highly
in TDSCs, whereas TSP-4, TNMD, and TNC presented a lower
expression in TDSCs than in tenocytes. Stem cell antigen-1 (Sca-
1) and CD90 were expressed similarly in two cell types. The
hematopoietic stem cell marker CD45 showed low expression
in TDSCs, but evidently higher expression was observed in
tenocytes. However, the authors merely made simple comparison
and did not expound and further study the signiﬁcance behind
the results. They also analyzed the capability of tenocytes
to diﬀerentiate into diﬀerent cell lineages, and found that
osteogenic diﬀerentiation and chondrogenic diﬀerentiation were
observed in tenocytes, but tenocytes demonstrated no adipogenic
diﬀerentiation. This conclusion contradicts the common belief
that tenocytes are terminally diﬀerentiated cells (Viganò et al.,
2017). We suspect that the characterization of the tenocytes was
done with a mixture of tenocytes and TDSCs rather than “pure”
tenocytes, which might have an eﬀect on the presented data.
To sum up, although there are some diﬀerent views, the
mainstream opinion is as follows:
Markers
commonly
used
for
tenocytes
are
tenogenic
diﬀerentiation markers, which are expressed in diﬀerent degrees
in both tenocytes and TDSCs. So the tenogenic markers are
not indicators that directly diﬀerentiate between tenocytes and
TDSCs. TDSCs have the potential of multi-diﬀerentiation and
self-renewal, which are not available in tenocytes. Therefore,
MSC and ESC markers and tri-lineage diﬀerentiation assays can
be used to distinguish between tenocytes and TDSCs. A rough
comparison of tenocytes and TDSCs is summarized in Table 3.
CONCLUSION AND PROSPECT
The research of tenocytes and TDSCs has been a hot topic
in recent years. The isolation and identiﬁcation of tenocytes
and TDSCs have been a relatively neglected problem. In most
literature, cells are extracted from tendons following a similar
enzymatic digestion protocol and are monolayer-cell cultured in
almost the same environment. The resulting cells theoretically
contain both tenocytes and TDSCs. Some authors identify these
tendon cells as tenocytes by tendon-speciﬁc markers, while
others identify them to be TDSCs by stem cell markers. The
distinction and identiﬁcation between both types of cells is
missing, which is appreciably rough and lacks of preciseness.
Furthermore, the lack of speciﬁcity of these markers leads to
no consensus on the identiﬁcation of the two kinds of cells.
Therefore, the markers selected in diﬀerent research articles
are not uniform and not ﬁxed. For example, Rui et al. (2010)
used ﬂow cytometric analysis to test that the tendon-derived
cells were positive for CD90 and CD44,and negative for the
endothelial cell marker CD31 and hematopoietic stem cell
TABLE 3 | Summary of general comparisons between tenocytes and TDSCs.
Tenocytes
TDSCs
Morphology
Large, tabular and
ﬁbroblastic
Smaller and rounder
Markers
Mainly tenogenic
markers
Mainly tenogenic
markers, MSC markers
and ESC markers
Multi-differentiation
−
+
Self-renewal
−
+
Applications
The difference is still unknown
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
7
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 629515
Li et al.
Comparison of Tenocytes and TDSCs
marker CD34. These cells were considered as TDSCs. And for
identiﬁcation of porcine TDSCs, Yang et al. (2018) chose some
other surface markers: CD105, CD90, Col I, Col III, and α-SMA.
New advances of speciﬁc markers have been made, but have not
been adopted widely in laboratory experiments. The discovery of
nestin+ and Tppp3+/pdgfra+ population revealed the cellular
and molecular role of TDSCs in tendon healing and regeneration,
providing a new enlightenment of biomarker research.
The frequently selected markers in tenocytes and TDSCs
can be seen in Tables 1, 2. Combined with the characteristics
of the markers and the frequency of selection, for now, we
recommend the use of Scx, TNMD, Col I for the identiﬁcation of
tenocytes. Scx and TNMD are early and late tenogenic markers
of tenocytes, respectively. Col I is the principal constituent of
tendons. And for the identiﬁcation of TDSCs, we recommend
to use CD90 [expressed in a subtype of ﬁbroblasts (Ho et al.,
2019)] and CD44 [speciﬁc surface markers of MSCs (Yang et al.,
2016)] combined with the above markers. CD90 is a GPI-
anchored cell surface protein and regulates ﬁbrosis (Saalbach
et al., 2000). CD44 is a complex transmembrane adhesion
glycoprotein that is basically related to the key component of
ECM and hyaluronic acid (Thorne et al., 2020). Since tenocytes
and TDSCs are both capable of tenogenic ability, it may not
be necessary for some research to separate the two types of
cells. In some necessary cases, high-throughput technologies
may be a better way to distinguish TDSCs from tenocytes,
although this is limited by conditions. Therefore, it is urgent to
further study the isolation method of tenocytes and TDSCs with
wide adaptability.
Many results and cues about functions and expression of
TDSCs are characterized and identiﬁed in vitro. However, the
role of MSC and ESC markers in TDSCs in vivo is unclear. To
better understand their in vivo function and expression, using
overexpression and knockdown methods or transplanting in
null animal models are crucial for better selection of markers
associated with multipotency and self-renewal of TDSCs. The
research on nestin and Tppp3/pdgfra provides a good model. At
present, although there are few reports about the subpopulations
of tenocytes and TDSCs, the expression of each marker may
be co-expressed by diﬀerent subpopulations of cells, which
leads to the limitations of the current identiﬁcation. Therefore,
co-expressed and hierarchical markers will also be a research
direction in the future.
There is still great need for speciﬁc markers of tendon cells
and reliable markers which can label TDSCs in vivo. With the
understanding of the expression, mechanism and inﬂuencing
factors of markers in vivo, researchers can better choose markers
with strong speciﬁcity. An accurate separation of tenocytes and
TDSCs from tendon cells is also necessary to study the role
of each cells in tendon healing, adhesions or degeneration.
Unknown ﬁelds still remain to be explored in the study of the
characteristics and markers expression of tenocytes and TDSCs,
which is of great signiﬁcance for the eventual application in the
prevention and treatment of tendon related diseases.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors determined the subject. YL and SL performed the
analysis. YL wrote the manuscript.
FUNDING
This literature was supported by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (81922045).
REFERENCES
Abbah, S. A., Thomas, D., Browne, S., O’Brien, T., Pandit, A., and Zeugolis,
D. I. (2016). Co-transfection of decorin and interleukin-10 modulates pro-
ﬁbrotic extracellular matrix gene expression in human tenocyte culture. Sci.
Rep. 6:20922.
Alberton, P., Dex, S., Popov, C., Shukunami, C., Schieker, M., and Docheva, D.
(2015). Loss of tenomodulin results in reduced self-renewal and augmented
senescence of tendon stem/progenitor cells. Stem. Cells Dev. 24, 597–609. doi:
10.1089/scd.2014.0314
Alt, E., Yan, Y., Gehmert, S., Song, Y. H., Altman, A., Gehmert, S., et al. (2011).
Fibroblasts share mesenchymal phenotypes with stem cells, but lack their
diﬀerentiation and colony-forming potential. Biol. Cell 103, 197–208.
doi:
10.1042/bc20100117
Anderson, D. M., Arredondo, J., Hahn, K., Valente, G., Martin, J. F., Wilson-Rawls,
J., et al. (2006). Mohawk is a novel homeobox gene expressed in the developing
mouse embryo. Dev. Dyn. 235, 792–801. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.20671
Asai, S., Otsuru, S., Candela, M. E., Cantley, L., Uchibe, K., Hofmann,
T. J., et al. (2014). Tendon progenitor cells in injured tendons have
strong chondrogenic potential: the CD105-negative subpopulation induces
chondrogenic degeneration. Stem Cells 32, 3266–3277.
doi: 10.1002/stem.
1847
Aslan, H., Kimelman-Bleich, N., Pelled, G., and Gazit, D. (2008). Molecular targets
for tendon neoformation. J. Clin. Invest. 118, 439–444. doi: 10.1172/jci33944
Baddoo, M., Hill, K., Wilkinson, R., Gaupp, D., Hughes, C., Kopen, G. C., et al.
(2003). Characterization of mesenchymal stem cells isolated from murine bone
marrow by negative selection. J. Cell Biochem. 89, 1235–1249. doi: 10.1002/jcb.
10594
Bi, Y., Ehirchiou, D., Kilts, T., Inkson, C., Embree, M., Sonoyama, W., et al. (2007).
Identiﬁcation of tendon stem/progenitor cells and the role of the extracellular
matrix in their niche. Nat. Med. 13, 1219–1227. doi: 10.1038/nm1630
Birk, D. E., and Mayne, R. (1997). Localization of collagen types I, III and V during
tendon development. Changes in collagen types I and III are correlated with
changes in ﬁbril diameter. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 72, 352–361.
Birk, D. E., and Trelstad, R. L. (1986). Extracellular compartments in tendon
morphogenesis: collagen ﬁbril, bundle, and macroaggregate formation. J. Cell
Biol. 103, 231–240. doi: 10.1083/jcb.103.1.231
Brandau, O., Meindl, A., Fässler, R., and Aszódi, A. (2001). A novel gene, tendin,
is strongly expressed in tendons and ligaments and shows high homology with
chondromodulin-I. Dev. Dyn. 221, 72–80. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.1126
Brown, D., Wagner, D., Li, X., Richardson, J. A., and Olson, E. N. (1999). Dual
role of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor scleraxis in mesoderm
formation and chondrogenesis during mouse embryogenesis. Development 126,
4317–4329.
Bucher, T. A., Ebert, J. R., Smith, A., Breidahl, W., Fallon, M., Wang, T.,
et al. (2017). Autologous tenocyte injection for the treatment of chronic
recalcitrant gluteal tendinopathy: a prospective pilot study. Orthop. J. Sports
Med. 5:2325967116688866.
Cao, Y., Liu, Y., Liu, W., Shan, Q., Buonocore, S. D., and Cui, L. (2002). Bridging
tendon defects using autologous tenocyte engineered tendon in a hen model.
Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 110, 1280–1289.
doi: 10.1097/00006534-200210000-
00011
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
8
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 629515
Li et al.
Comparison of Tenocytes and TDSCs
Chambers, I., Colby, D., Robertson, M., Nichols, J., Lee, S., Tweedie, S., et al. (2003).
Functional expression cloning of Nanog, a pluripotency sustaining factor in
embryonic stem cells. Cell 113, 643–655. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00392-1
Chen, B., Wang, B., Zhang, W. J., Zhou, G., Cao, Y., and Liu, W. (2012). In vivo
tendon engineering with skeletal muscle derived cells in a mouse model.
Biomaterials 33, 6086–6097. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.05.022
Chen, L., Liu, J. P., Tang, K. L., Wang, Q., Wang, G. D., Cai, X. H., et al. (2014).
Tendon derived stem cells promote platelet-rich plasma healing in collagenase-
induced rat achilles tendinopathy. Cell Physiol. Biochem. 34, 2153–2168. doi:
10.1159/000369659
Cserjesi, P., Brown, D., Ligon, K. L., Lyons, G. E., Copeland, N. G., Gilbert, D. J.,
et al. (1995). Scleraxis: a basic helix-loop-helix protein that preﬁgures skeletal
formation during mouse embryogenesis. Development 121, 1099–1110.
Docheva, D., Hunziker, E. B., Fässler, R., and Brandau, O. (2005). Tenomodulin is
necessary for tenocyte proliferation and tendon maturation. Mol. Cell Biol. 25,
699–705. doi: 10.1128/mcb.25.2.699-705.2005
Dominici, M., Le Blanc, K., Mueller, I., Slaper-Cortenbach, I., Marini, F., Krause,
D., et al. (2006). Minimal criteria for deﬁning multipotent mesenchymal
stromal cells. the international society for cellular therapy position statement.
Cytotherapy 8, 315–317. doi: 10.1080/14653240600855905
Durgam, S. S., Stewart, A. A., Sivaguru, M., Wagoner Johnson, A. J., and Stewart,
M. C. (2016). Tendon-derived progenitor cells improve healing of collagenase-
induced ﬂexor tendinitis. J. Orthop. Res. 34, 2162–2171.
doi: 10.1002/jor.
23251
Elliott, D. H. (1965). Structure and function of mammalian tendon. Biol. Rev.
Camb. Philos. Soc. 40, 392–421. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-185x.1965.tb00808.x
Elliott, D. M., Robinson, P. S., Gimbel, J. A., Sarver, J. J., Abboud, J. A., Iozzo,
R. V., et al. (2003). Eﬀect of altered matrix proteins on quasilinear viscoelastic
properties in transgenic mouse tail tendons. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 31, 599–605.
doi: 10.1114/1.1567282
Evans, R. B. (2012). Managing the injured tendon: current concepts. J. Hand. Ther.
25, 173–189. quiz 190, doi: 10.1016/j.jht.2011.10.004
Evrova, O., Kellenberger, D., Calcagni, M., Vogel, V., and Buschmann, J. (2020).
Supporting cell-based tendon therapy: eﬀect of PDGF-BB and ascorbic acid
on rabbit achilles tenocytes in vitro. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21:458.
doi: 10.3390/
ijms21020458
Fleischhacker, V., Klatte-Schulz, F., Minkwitz, S., Schmock, A., Rummler, M.,
Seliger, A., et al. (2020). In vivo and in vitro mechanical loading of mouse
achilles tendons and tenocytes-a pilot study. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21:1313.
doi:
10.3390/ijms21041313
Franchi, M., Trirè, A., Quaranta, M., Orsini, E., and Ottani, V. (2007). Collagen
structure of tendon relates to function. ScientiﬁcWorldJournal 7, 404–420. doi:
10.1100/tsw.2007.92
Frolova, E. G., Drazba, J., Krukovets, I., Kostenko, V., Blech, L., Harry, C.,
et al. (2014). Control of organization and function of muscle and tendon by
thrombospondin-4. Matrix Biol. 37, 35–48. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2014.02.003
Gelse, K., Pöschl, E., and Aigner, T. (2003). Collagens–structure, function, and
biosynthesis. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 55, 1531–1546. doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2003.
08.002
Güngörmü¸s, C., and Kolankaya, D. (2008). Characterization of type I, III and
V collagens in high-density cultured tenocytes by triple-immunoﬂuorescence
technique. Cytotechnology 58, 145–152. doi: 10.1007/s10616-009-9180-5
Halfon, S., Abramov, N., Grinblat, B., and Ginis, I. (2011). Markers distinguishing
mesenchymal stem cells from ﬁbroblasts are downregulated with passaging.
Stem. Cells Dev. 20, 53–66. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0040
Hamamura, K., Hotta, H., Murakumo, Y., Shibuya, H., Kondo, Y., and Furukawa,
K. (2020). SSEA-3 and 4 are not essential for the induction or properties of
mouse iPS cells. J. Oral. Sci. 62, 393–396. doi: 10.2334/josnusd.19-0513
Harvey, T., Flamenco, S., and Fan, C. M. (2019). A Tppp3(+)Pdgfra(+) tendon
stem cell population contributes to regeneration and reveals a shared role for
PDGF signalling in regeneration and ﬁbrosis. Nat. Cell Biol. 21, 1490–1503.
doi: 10.1038/s41556-019-0417-z
Hauser, N., Paulsson, M., Kale, A. A., and DiCesare, P. E. (1995). Tendon
extracellular matrix contains pentameric thrombospondin-4 (TSP-4). FEBS
Lett. 368, 307–310. doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(95)00675-y
Hess, G. P., Cappiello, W. L., Poole, R. M., and Hunter, S. C. (1989). Prevention
and treatment of overuse tendon injuries. Sports Med. 8, 371–384. doi: 10.2165/
00007256-198908060-00005
Hiraki, Y., Inoue, H., Iyama, K., Kamizono, A., Ochiai, M., Shukunami, C., et al.
(1997). Identiﬁcation of chondromodulin I as a novel endothelial cell growth
inhibitor. Puriﬁcation and its localization in the avascular zone of epiphyseal
cartilage. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 32419–32426. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.51.32419
Ho, J. D., Chung, H. J., Ms Barron, A., Ho, D. A., Sahni, D., Browning,
J. L., et al. (2019). Extensive CD34-to-CD90 ﬁbroblast transition deﬁnes
regions of cutaneous reparative, hypertrophic, and keloidal scarring. Am. J.
Dermatopathol. 41, 16–28. doi: 10.1097/dad.0000000000001254
Holladay, C., Abbah, S. A., O’Dowd, C., Pandit, A., and Zeugolis, D. I. (2016).
Preferential tendon stem cell response to growth factor supplementation.
J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 10, 783–798. doi: 10.1002/term.1852
Hong, B. S., Davison, P. F., and Cannon, D. J. (1979). Isolation and characterization
of a distinct type of collagen from bovine fetal membranes and other tissues.
Biochemistry 18, 4278–4282. doi: 10.1021/bi00587a003
Hyslop, L., Stojkovic, M., Armstrong, L., Walter, T., Stojkovic, P., Przyborski, S.,
et al. (2005). Downregulation of NANOG induces diﬀerentiation of human
embryonic stem cells to extraembryonic lineages. Stem. Cells 23, 1035–1043.
doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2005-0080
Izadpanah, R., Kaushal, D., Kriedt, C., Tsien, F., Patel, B., Dufour, J., et al. (2008).
Long-term in vitro expansion alters the biology of adult mesenchymal stem
cells. Cancer Res. 68, 4229–4238. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.can-07-5272
Jo, C. H., Lim, H. J., and Yoon, K. S. (2019). Characterization of tendon-speciﬁc
markers in various human tissues, tenocytes and mesenchymal stem cells. Tissue
Eng. Regen. Med. 16, 151–159. doi: 10.1007/s13770-019-00182-2
Jones, F. S., and Jones, P. L. (2000). The tenascin family of ECM glycoproteins:
structure, function, and regulation during embryonic development and tissue
remodeling. Dev. Dyn. 218, 235–259. doi: 10.1002/(sici)1097-0177(200006)218:
2<235::aid-dvdy2>3.0.co;2-g
Kannus, P. (2000). Structure of the tendon connective tissue. Scand. J. Med. Sci.
Sports 10, 312–320. doi: 10.1034/j.1600-0838.2000.010006312.x
Kannus, P., and Józsa, L. (1991). Histopathological changes preceding spontaneous
rupture of a tendon. A controlled study of 891 patients. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am.
73, 1507–1525. doi: 10.2106/00004623-199173100-00009
Kardon, G. (1998). Muscle and tendon morphogenesis in the avian hind limb.
Development 125, 4019–4032.
Kendal, A. R., Layton, T., Al-Mossawi, H., Appleton, L., Dakin, S., Brown, R., et al.
(2020). Multi-omic single cell analysis resolves novel stromal cell populations
in healthy and diseased human tendon. Sci. Rep. 10:13939.
Kohler, J., Popov, C., Klotz, B., Alberton, P., Prall, W. C., Haasters, F., et al. (2013).
Uncovering the cellular and molecular changes in tendon stem/progenitor cells
attributed to tendon aging and degeneration. Aging Cell 12, 988–999.
doi:
10.1111/acel.12124
Komatsu, I., Wang, J. H., Iwasaki, K., Shimizu, T., and Okano, T. (2016). The eﬀect
of tendon stem/progenitor cell (TSC) sheet on the early tendon healing in a
rat Achilles tendon injury model. Acta Biomater. 42, 136–146. doi: 10.1016/j.
actbio.2016.06.026
Lawler, J., Duquette, M., Whittaker, C. A., Adams, J. C., McHenry, K.,
and
DeSimone,
D.
W.
(1993).
Identiﬁcation
and
characterization
of
thrombospondin-4, a new member of the thrombospondin gene family. J. Cell
Biol. 120, 1059–1067. doi: 10.1083/jcb.120.4.1059
Lee, K., Clegg, P., Comerford, E., and Canty-Laird, E. (2018). A comparison of
the stem cell characteristics of murine tenocytes and tendon-derived stem cells.
BMC Musculosk. Disord. 19:116.
Lee, W. Y., Lui, P. P., and Rui, Y. F. (2012). Hypoxia-mediated eﬃcient expansion
of human tendon-derived stem cells in vitro. Tissue Eng. Part A 18, 484–498.
doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.2011.0130
Leong, D., and Sun, H. (2016). Mesenchymal stem cells in tendon repair and
regeneration: basic understanding and translational challenges. Ann. N. Y.
Acad. Sci. 1383, 88–96. doi: 10.1111/nyas.13262
Levay, A. K., Peacock, J. D., Lu, Y., Koch, M., Hinton, R. B. Jr., Kadler, K. E.,
et al. (2008). Scleraxis is required for cell lineage diﬀerentiation and extracellular
matrix remodeling during murine heart valve formation in vivo. Circ. Res. 103,
948–956. doi: 10.1161/circresaha.108.177238
Liu, H., Xu, J., and Jiang, R. (2019). Mkx-deﬁcient mice exhibit hedgehog signaling-
dependent ectopic ossiﬁcation in the achilles tendons. J. Bone Miner. Res. 34,
557–569. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.3630
Liu, J., Chen, L., Tao, X., and Tang, K. (2013). Phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt
signaling is essential for prostaglandin E2-induced osteogenic diﬀerentiation
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
9
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 629515
Li et al.
Comparison of Tenocytes and TDSCs
of rat tendon stem cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 435, 514–519. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.083
Liu, W., Watson, S. S., Lan, Y., Keene, D. R., Ovitt, C. E., Liu, H., et al. (2010).
The atypical homeodomain transcription factor Mohawk controls tendon
morphogenesis. Mol. Cell Biol. 30, 4797–4807. doi: 10.1128/mcb.00207-10
Longo, U. G., Lamberti, A., Maﬀulli, N., and Denaro, V. (2011). Tissue engineered
biological augmentation for tendon healing: a systematic review. Br. Med. Bull
98, 31–59. doi: 10.1093/bmb/ldq030
Lovati, A. B., Corradetti, B., Lange Consiglio, A., Recordati, C., Bonacina, E.,
Bizzaro, D., et al. (2011). Characterization and diﬀerentiation of equine tendon-
derived progenitor cells. J. Biol. Regul. Homeost. Agents 25, S75–S84.
Lu, Y., Zhang, S., Wang, Y., Ren, X., and Han, J. (2019). Molecular mechanisms and
clinical manifestations of rare genetic disorders associated with type I collagen.
Intractable Rare Dis. Res. 8, 98–107. doi: 10.5582/irdr.2019.01064
Luesma, M. J., Cantarero, I., Sánchez-Cano, A. I., Rodellar, C., and Junquera, C.
(2020). Ultrastructural evidence for telocytes in equine tendon. J. Anat. 238,
527–535. doi: 10.1111/joa.13335
Lui, P. P. (2013). Identity of tendon stem cells–how much do we know? J. Cell Mol.
Med. 17, 55–64. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12007
Lui, P. P. (2015). Markers for the identiﬁcation of tendon-derived stem cells in vitro
and tendon stem cells in situ – update and future development. Stem Cell Res.
Ther. 6:106.
Lui, P. P., and Chan, K. M. (2011). Tendon-derived stem cells (TDSCs): from
basic science to potential roles in tendon pathology and tissue engineering
applications. Stem Cell Rev. Rep. 7, 883–897. doi: 10.1007/s12015-011-9276-0
Lui, P. P., Kong, S. K., Lau, P. M., Wong, Y. M., Lee, Y. W., Tan, C., et al. (2014a).
Allogeneic tendon-derived stem cells promote tendon healing and suppress
immunoreactions in hosts: in vivo model. Tissue Eng. Part A 20, 2998–3009.
doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.2013.0713
Lui, P. P., Wong, O. T., and Lee, Y. W. (2014b). Application of tendon-
derived stem cell sheet for the promotion of graft healing in anterior cruciate
ligament reconstruction. Am. J .Sports Med. 42, 681–689.
doi: 10.1177/
0363546513517539
Ma, R. C., Jacobs, C. T., Sharma, P., Kocha, K. M., and Huang, P. (2018). Stereotypic
generation of axial tenocytes from bipartite sclerotome domains in zebraﬁsh.
PLoS Genet. 14:e1007775. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007775
Mackie, E. J., and Ramsey, S. (1996). Expression of tenascin in joint-associated
tissues during development and postnatal growth. J. Anat. 188(Pt 1), 157–165.
Mazzocca, A. D., Chowaniec, D., McCarthy, M. B., Beitzel, K., Cote, M. P.,
McKinnon, W., et al. (2012). In vitro changes in human tenocyte cultures
obtained from proximal biceps tendon: multiple passages result in changes in
routine cell markers. Knee Surg. Sports Traumatol. Arthrosc. 20, 1666–1672.
doi: 10.1007/s00167-011-1711-x
Mienaltowski, M. J., Adams, S. M., and Birk, D. E. (2013). Regional diﬀerences
in stem cell/progenitor cell populations from the mouse achilles tendon. Tissue
Eng. Part A 19, 199–210. doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.2012.0182
Muir, T., Sadler-Riggleman, I., and Skinner, M. K. (2005). Role of the basic helix-
loop-helix transcription factor, scleraxis, in the regulation of Sertoli cell function
and diﬀerentiation. Mol. Endocrinol. 19, 2164–2174. doi: 10.1210/me.2004-
0473
Murchison, N. D., Price, B. A., Conner, D. A., Keene, D. R., Olson, E. N., Tabin,
C. J., et al. (2007). Regulation of tendon diﬀerentiation by scleraxis distinguishes
force-transmitting tendons from muscle-anchoring tendons. Development 134,
2697–2708. doi: 10.1242/dev.001933
Myer, C., and Fowler, J. R. (2016). Flexor tendon repair: healing, biomechanics, and
suture conﬁgurations. Orthop. Clin. North Am. 47, 219–226.
Ni, M., Lui, P. P., Rui, Y. F., Lee, Y. W., Lee, Y. W., Tan, Q., et al. (2012).
Tendon-derived stem cells (TDSCs) promote tendon repair in a rat patellar
tendon window defect model. J. Orthop. Res. 30, 613–619. doi: 10.1002/jor.
21559
Nowling, T. K., Johnson, L. R., Wiebe, M. S., and Rizzino, A. (2000). Identiﬁcation
of the transactivation domain of the transcription factor Sox-2 and an
associated co-activator. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 3810–3818. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.6.
3810
Oshima, Y., Sato, K., Tashiro, F., Miyazaki, J., Nishida, K., Hiraki, Y., et al. (2004).
Anti-angiogenic action of the C-terminal domain of tenomodulin that shares
homology with chondromodulin-I. J. Cell Sci. 117, 2731–2744. doi: 10.1242/
jcs.01112
Park, D., Xiang, A. P., Mao, F. F., Zhang, L., Di, C. G., Liu, X. M., et al. (2010).
Nestin is required for the proper self-renewal of neural stem cells. Stem Cells 28,
2162–2171. doi: 10.1002/stem.541
Radzisheuskaya, A., and Silva, J. C. (2014). Do all roads lead to Oct4? the emerging
concepts of induced pluripotency. Trends Cell Biol. 24, 275–284. doi: 10.1016/
j.tcb.2013.11.010
Rao, R. R., Johnson, A. V., and Stice, S. L. (2007). Cell surface markers in human
embryonic stem cells. Methods Mol. Biol. 407, 51–61.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-
59745-536-7_5
Riederer-Henderson, M. A., Gauger, A., Olson, L., Robertson, C., and Greenlee,
T. K. Jr. (1983). Attachment and extracellular matrix diﬀerences between
tendon and synovial ﬁbroblastic cells. In Vitro 19, 127–133.
doi: 10.1007/
bf02621896
Rui, Y. F., Lui, P. P., Chan, L. S., Chan, K. M., Fu, S. C., and Li, G. (2011).
Does erroneous diﬀerentiation of tendon-derived stem cells contribute to the
pathogenesis of calcifying tendinopathy? Chin. Med. J. (Engl.) 124, 606–610.
Rui, Y. F., Lui, P. P., Li, G., Fu, S. C., Lee, Y. W., and Chan, K. M. (2010). Isolation
and characterization of multipotent rat tendon-derived stem cells. Tissue Eng.
Part A 16, 1549–1558. doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.2009.0529
Ruzzini, L., Abbruzzese, F., Rainer, A., Longo, U. G., Trombetta, M., Maﬀulli, N.,
et al. (2014). Characterization of age-related changes of tendon stem cells from
adult human tendons. Knee Surg. Sports Traumatol. Arthrosc. 22, 2856–2866.
doi: 10.1007/s00167-013-2457-4
Saalbach, A., Haustein, U. F., and Anderegg, U. (2000). A ligand of human thy-
1 is localized on polymorphonuclear leukocytes and monocytes and mediates
the binding to activated thy-1-positive microvascular endothelial cells and
ﬁbroblasts. J. Invest. Dermatol. 115, 882–888. doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2000.
00104.x
Sakabe, T., Sakai, K., Maeda, T., Sunaga, A., Furuta, N., Schweitzer, R., et al. (2018).
Transcription factor scleraxis vitally contributes to progenitor lineage direction
in wound healing of adult tendon in mice. J. Biol. Chem. 293, 5766–5780.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.ra118.001987
Samiric, T., Ilic, M. Z., and Handley, C. J. (2004). Characterisation of proteoglycans
and their catabolic products in tendon and explant cultures of tendon. Matrix
Biol. 23, 127–140. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2004.03.004
Scott, A., Sampaio, A., Abraham, T., Duronio, C., and Underhill, T. M.
(2011). Scleraxis expression is coordinately regulated in a murine model
of patellar tendon injury. J. Orthop. Res. 29, 289–296.
doi: 10.1002/jor.
21220
Shen, W., Chen, J., Yin, Z., Chen, X., Liu, H., Heng, B. C., et al. (2012). Allogenous
tendon stem/progenitor cells in silk scaﬀold for functional shoulder repair. Cell
Transplant 21, 943–958. doi: 10.3727/096368911x627453
Shukunami, C., Oshima, Y., and Hiraki, Y. (2001). Molecular cloning of
tenomodulin, a novel chondromodulin-I related gene. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 280, 1323–1327. doi: 10.1006/bbrc.2001.4271
Södersten, F., Ekman, S., Eloranta, M. L., Heinegård, D., Dudhia, J., and Hultenby,
K. (2005). Ultrastructural immunolocalization of cartilage oligomeric matrix
protein (COMP) in relation to collagen ﬁbrils in the equine tendon. Matrix Biol.
24, 376–385. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2005.06.003
Södersten, F., Ekman, S., Niehoﬀ, A., Zaucke, F., Heinegård, D., and Hultenby,
K. (2007). Ultrastructural immunolocalization of cartilage oligomeric matrix
protein, thrombospondin-4, and collagen ﬁbril size in rodent achilles tendon
in relation to exercise. Connect Tissue Res. 48, 254–262.
doi: 10.1080/
03008200701587505
Södersten,
F.,
Ekman,
S.,
Schmitz,
M.,
Paulsson,
M.,
and
Zaucke,
F.
(2006).
Thrombospondin-4
and
cartilage
oligomeric
matrix
protein
form heterooligomers in equine tendon. Connect Tissue Res. 47, 85–91.
doi: 10.1080/03008200600584124
Staverosky, J. A., Pryce, B. A., Watson, S. S., and Schweitzer, R. (2009). Tubulin
polymerization-promoting protein family member 3, Tppp3, is a speciﬁc
marker of the diﬀerentiating tendon sheath and synovial joints. Dev. Dyn. 238,
685–692. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21865
Svensson, L., Heinegård, D., and Oldberg, A. (1995). Decorin-binding sites for
collagen type I are mainly located in leucine-rich repeats 4-5. J. Biol. Chem. 270,
20712–20716. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.35.20712
Takahashi, K., and Yamanaka, S. (2006). Induction of pluripotent stem cells from
mouse embryonic and adult ﬁbroblast cultures by deﬁned factors. Cell 126,
663–676. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.07.024
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
10
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 629515
Li et al.
Comparison of Tenocytes and TDSCs
Takimoto, A., Oro, M., Hiraki, Y., and Shukunami, C. (2012). Direct conversion
of tenocytes into chondrocytes by Sox9. Exp. Cell Res. 318, 1492–1507. doi:
10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.04.002
Tan, Q., Lui, P. P., and Lee, Y. W. (2013). In vivo identity of tendon stem cells
and the roles of stem cells in tendon healing. Stem Cells Dev. 22, 3128–3140.
doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0073
Tan, Q., Lui, P. P., and Rui, Y. F. (2012). Eﬀect of in vitro passaging on the
stem cell-related properties of tendon-derived stem cells-implications in tissue
engineering. Stem Cells Dev. 21, 790–800. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0160
Tang, J. B., Wu, Y. F., Cao, Y., Chen, C. H., Zhou, Y. L., Avanessian, B., et al. (2016).
Basic FGF or VEGF gene therapy corrects insuﬃciency in the intrinsic healing
capacity of tendons. Sci. Rep. 6:20643.
Tao, X., Liu, J., Chen, L., Zhou, Y., and Tang, K. (2015). EGR1 induces tenogenic
diﬀerentiation of tendon stem cells and promotes rabbit rotator cuﬀrepair. Cell
Physiol. Biochem. 35, 699–709. doi: 10.1159/000369730
Thorne, R. F., Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., Jing, X., Zhang, X. D., de Bock, C. E., et al.
(2020). Evaluating nuclear translocation of surface receptors: recommendations
arising from analysis of CD44. Histochem. Cell Biol. 153, 77–87. doi: 10.1007/
s00418-019-01835-y
Titan, A. L., and Longaker, M. T. (2019). A ﬁne balance in tendon healing. Nat. Cell
Biol. 21, 1466–1467. doi: 10.1038/s41556-019-0432-0
Tsai, C. C., Huang, T. F., Ma, H. L., Chiang, E. R., and Hung, S. C. (2013).
Isolation of mesenchymal stem cells from shoulder rotator cuﬀ: a potential
source for muscle and tendon repair. Cell Transplant 22, 413–422. doi: 10.3727/
096368912x656090
Tsai, R. Y. (2014). Turning a new page on nucleostemin and self-renewal. J. Cell Sci.
127, 3885–3891. doi: 10.1242/jcs.154054
Tsai, R. Y., and McKay, R. D. (2002). A nucleolar mechanism controlling cell
proliferation in stem cells and cancer cells. Genes Dev. 16, 2991–3003. doi:
10.1101/gad.55671
Vermeulen, S., Vasilevich, A., Tsiapalis, D., Roumans, N., Vroemen, P., Beijer,
N. R. M., et al. (2019). Identiﬁcation of topographical architectures supporting
the phenotype of rat tenocytes. Acta Biomater. 83, 277–290. doi: 10.1016/j.
actbio.2018.10.041
Viganò, M., Perucca Orfei, C., Colombini, A., Stanco, D., Randelli, P., Sansone, V.,
et al. (2017). Diﬀerent culture conditions aﬀect the growth of human tendon
stem/progenitor cells (TSPCs) within a mixed tendon cells (TCs) population.
J. Exp. Orthop. 4:8. doi: 10.15761/jscrm.1000102
Wagenhäuser, M. U., Pietschmann, M. F., Sievers, B., Docheva, D., Schieker, M.,
Jansson, V., et al. (2012). Collagen type I and decorin expression in tenocytes
depend on the cell isolation method. BMC Musculoskelet. Disord. 13:140.
Wakao, S., Kitada, M., Kuroda, Y., and Dezawa, M. (2012). Isolation of adult
human pluripotent stem cells from mesenchymal cell populations and their
application to liver damages. Methods Mol. Biol. 826, 89–102. doi: 10.1007/978-
1-61779-468-1_8
Walia, B., and Huang, A. (2019). Tendon stem progenitor cells: understanding
the biology to inform therapeutic strategies for tendon repair. J. Orthop.
Res.
Oﬀ.
Publ.
Orthop.
Res.
Soc.
37,
1270–1280.
doi:
10.1002/jor.
24156
Wang, A. W., Bauer, S., Goonatillake, M., Breidahl, W., and Zheng, M. H.
(2013). Autologous tenocyte implantation, a novel treatment for partial-
thickness rotator cuﬀtear and tendinopathy in an elite athlete. BMJ Case Rep.
2013:bcr2012007899. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2012-007899
Wang, A., Breidahl, W., Mackie, K., Lin, Z., Qin, A., Chen, J., et al. (2013).
Autologous tenocyte injection for the treatment of severe, chronic resistant
lateral epicondylitis: a pilot study. Am. J. Sports Med. 41, 2925–2932.
doi:
10.1177/0363546513504285
Wang, A., Mackie, K., Breidahl, W., Wang, T., and Zheng, M. (2015). Evidence for
the durability of autologous tenocyte injection for treatment of chronic resistant
lateral epicondylitis: mean 4.5-Year clinical follow-up. Am. J. Sports Med. 43,
1775–1783. doi: 10.1177/0363546515579185
Wang, B., Liu, W., Zhang, Y., Jiang, Y., Zhang, W. J., Zhou, G., et al. (2008).
Engineering of extensor tendon complex by an ex vivo approach. Biomaterials
29, 2954–2961. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2008.03.038
Wiese, C., Rolletschek, A., Kania, G., Blyszczuk, P., Tarasov, K. V., Tarasova, Y.,
et al. (2004). Nestin expression–a property of multi-lineage progenitor cells?
Cell Mol. Life Sci. 61, 2510–2522. doi: 10.1007/s00018-004-4144-6
Williamson, K. A., Lee, K. J., Humphreys, W. J., Comerford, E. J., Clegg, P. D., and
Canty-Laird, E. G. (2015). Restricted diﬀerentiation potential of progenitor cell
populations obtained from the equine superﬁcial digital ﬂexor tendon (SDFT).
J. Orthop. Res. 33, 849–858. doi: 10.1002/jor.22891
Wong, J. K., Lui, Y. H., Kapacee, Z., Kadler, K. E., Ferguson, M. W., and
McGrouther, D. A. (2009). The cellular biology of ﬂexor tendon adhesion
formation: an old problem in a new paradigm. Am. J. Pathol. 175, 1938–1951.
doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.090380
Wong, J., and Peck, F. (2014). Improving results of ﬂexor tendon repair and
rehabilitation. Plastic Reconstruct. Surg. 134, 913e–925e.
Xu, K., Pan, X., Qiu, X., Wang, D., Dong, N., Yang, L., et al. (2018). Neural crest-
derived cells migrate from nerve to participate in Achilles tendon remodeling.
Wound Repair. Regen. 26, 54–63. doi: 10.1111/wrr.12614
Yang, J., Zhao, Q., Wang, K., Liu, H., Ma, C., Huang, H., et al. (2016).
Isolation and biological characterization of tendon-derived stem cells from fetal
bovine. In Vitro Cell Dev. Biol. Anim. 52, 846–856. doi: 10.1007/s11626-016-
0043-z
Yang, J., Zhao, Q., Wang, K., Ma, C., Liu, H., Liu, Y., et al. (2018). Isolation, culture
and biological characteristics of multipotent porcine tendon-derived stem cells.
Int. J. Mol. Med. 41, 3611–3619.
Yang, Y., Zhang, J., Qian, Y., Dong, S., Huang, H., Boada, F. E., et al. (2013).
Superparamagnetic iron oxide is suitable to label tendon stem cells and track
them in vivo with MR imaging. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 41, 2109–2119. doi: 10.1007/
s10439-013-0802-x
Yin, Z., Chen, X., Chen, J. L., Shen, W. L., Hieu Nguyen, T. M., Gao, L., et al.
(2010). The regulation of tendon stem cell diﬀerentiation by the alignment
of nanoﬁbers. Biomaterials 31, 2163–2175. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.
11.083
Yin, Z., Hu, J. J., Yang, L., Zheng, Z. F., An, C. R., Wu, B. B., et al. (2016).
Single-cell analysis reveals a nestin(+) tendon stem/progenitor cell population
with strong tenogenic potentiality. Sci. Adv. 2:e1600874. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.
1600874
Zhang, J., and Wang, J. H. (2010). Characterization of diﬀerential properties of
rabbit tendon stem cells and tenocytes. BMC Musculoskelet. Disord. 11:10.
Zhang, J., and Wang, J. H. (2013a). Human tendon stem cells better maintain
their stemness in hypoxic culture conditions. PLoS One 8:e61424. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0061424
Zhang, J., and Wang, J. H. (2013b). The eﬀects of mechanical loading on tendons–
an in vivo and in vitro model study. PLoS One 8:e71740. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0071740
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Li, Wu and Liu. This is an open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
11
April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 629515
