# Extracted PDF text — 2026-07-16 — part 1/9
# papers Abematsu2010_JCI_SCI+transplant .. Besharat2018_SciRep+Foxm1_NSC
# anchor per paper: ===== <note-stem> =====

===== Abematsu2010_JCI_SCI+transplant =====
Neurons derived from transplanted neural stem cells restore
disrupted neuronal circuitry in a mouse model of spinal cord
injury
Masahiko Abematsu, … , Setsuro Komiya, Kinichi Nakashima
J Clin Invest. 2010;120(9):3255-3266. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI42957.
The body’s capacity to restore damaged neural networks in the injured CNS is severely limited. Although various
treatment regimens can partially alleviate spinal cord injury (SCI), the mechanisms responsible for symptomatic
improvement remain elusive. Here, using a mouse model of SCI, we have shown that transplantation of neural stem cells
(NSCs) together with administration of valproic acid (VPA), a known antiepileptic and histone deacetylase inhibitor,
dramatically enhanced the restoration of hind limb function. VPA treatment promoted the differentiation of transplanted
NSCs into neurons rather than glial cells. Transsynaptic anterograde corticospinal tract tracing revealed that transplant-
derived neurons reconstructed broken neuronal circuits, and electron microscopic analysis revealed that the transplant-
derived neurons both received and sent synaptic connections to endogenous neurons. Ablation of the transplanted cells
abolished the recovery of hind limb motor function, confirming that NSC transplantation directly contributed to restored
motor function. These findings raise the possibility that epigenetic status in transplanted NSCs can be manipulated to
provide effective treatment for SCI.
Research Article
Find the latest version:
https://jci.me/42957/pdf

Research article
 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 120      Number 9      September 2010	
3255
Neurons derived from transplanted neural 
stem cells restore disrupted neuronal circuitry 
in a mouse model of spinal cord injury
Masahiko Abematsu,1,2 Keita Tsujimura,1 Mariko Yamano,3 Michiko Saito,4 Kenji Kohno,4  
Jun Kohyama,1 Masakazu Namihira,1 Setsuro Komiya,2 and Kinichi Nakashima1
1Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Ikoma, Japan.  
2Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan.  
3Department of Comprehensive Rehabilitation, Osaka Prefecture University, Habikino, Japan. 4Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Genetics,  
Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Ikoma, Japan.
The body’s capacity to restore damaged neural networks in the injured CNS is severely limited. Although vari-
ous treatment regimens can partially alleviate spinal cord injury (SCI), the mechanisms responsible for symp-
tomatic improvement remain elusive. Here, using a mouse model of SCI, we have shown that transplantation 
of neural stem cells (NSCs) together with administration of valproic acid (VPA), a known antiepileptic and 
histone deacetylase inhibitor, dramatically enhanced the restoration of hind limb function. VPA treatment 
promoted the differentiation of transplanted NSCs into neurons rather than glial cells. Transsynaptic antero-
grade corticospinal tract tracing revealed that transplant-derived neurons reconstructed broken neuronal cir-
cuits, and electron microscopic analysis revealed that the transplant-derived neurons both received and sent 
synaptic connections to endogenous neurons. Ablation of the transplanted cells abolished the recovery of hind 
limb motor function, confirming that NSC transplantation directly contributed to restored motor function. 
These findings raise the possibility that epigenetic status in transplanted NSCs can be manipulated to provide 
effective treatment for SCI.
Introduction
Numerous studies (1–18) have indicated that a variety of treat-
ments, such as administration of antibodies against myelin-associ-
ated neurite growth inhibitors (4, 5, 16) and neurotrophic factors 
(12, 13), can yield limited restorative benefits for spinal cord injury 
(SCI), but the mechanistic basis of symptomatic improvement is 
far from clear. Because of their ability to self renew, to differenti-
ate into multiple lineages, and to migrate toward damaged sites, 
neural stem cells (NSCs) are currently considered to be promising 
components of cell-replacement strategies aimed at treating CNS 
injuries (7–11, 14, 15).
Two desirable objectives of cell-based therapeutics are to induce 
trophic reactions, such as the production of extracellular matrix 
and diffusible factors, and to replace cells lost through injury or 
disease with transplant-derived cells, such as new oligodendrocytes 
and neurons, that will enhance the regenerative responses of the 
host CNS. Trophic factors secreted from transplanted cells have 
been shown to support neuronal survival and neurite outgrowth 
(12, 13), while other studies report that transplanted oligodendro-
cyte precursor cells enhance remyelination of remaining neuronal 
axons, leading to restoration of locomotion after SCI (9, 15). Stem 
cell–derived neuronal supplementation in the injured spinal cord 
also induces partial recovery, although a direct contribution of 
such neurons to the reconstruction of disrupted neuronal circuits 
has not been demonstrated (7, 10, 11).
In the severest CNS injuries, many neurons sustain direct 
damage and disrupted neuronal circuits have to be restored. 
Inflammatory cytokines are upregulated at lesion sites in the 
CNS (19–21), but their effect is to promote astrocytic differen-
tiation. Moreover, while exogenous NSCs that are transplanted 
into the injured CNS undergo proliferation, the vast majority 
of newly generated cells differentiate into astrocytes (7, 21, 22). 
This strong bias toward astrocytic differentiation at the expense 
of neuronal differentiation is one of the major current obstacles 
in regeneration therapy.
Valproic acid (VPA; 2-propylpentanoic acid) is an established 
drug in the long-term treatment of epilepsy (23). Recent experi-
ments have further revealed that VPA can directly inhibit histone 
deacetylase (HDAC) activity and cause hyperacetylation of his-
tones in 293T, Neuro2A, and teratocarcinoma F9 cells (24, 25), 
and we have also found that VPA induces neuronal differentia-
tion but suppresses astrocytic and oligodendrocytic differentia-
tion of NSCs (26). Taking advantage of these newly discovered 
effects of VPA, we report here that functional recovery in SCI 
model mice is dramatically improved by a combined treatment 
involving NSC transplantation and VPA administration. Fur-
thermore, we reveal the precise mechanisms used to reconstruct 
the damaged corticospinal tract (CST); these differ from neurite 
regrowth and remyelination of host neurons, hitherto consid-
ered as the major reasons for functional recovery of SCI follow-
ing NSC transplantation.
Results
Combined NSC transplantation and VPA administration improves func-
tional recovery of hind limbs without CST axon reextension. As VPA 
has been shown to have effects that are likely to be beneficial to 
treatment of the injured CNS, such as neuroprotection (27–31), 
induction of neuronal differentiation (26), and promotion of 
neurite outgrowth (32), we examined the response of SCI model 
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Citation for this article: J Clin Invest. 2010;120(9):3255–3266. doi:10.1172/JCI42957.
Related Commentary, page 3096  

research article
3256 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 120      Number 9      September 2010
mice to different combinations of VPA administration and NSC 
transplantation. We prepared NSCs from embryonic forebrains 
of 3 different Tg mouse lines ubiquitously expressing either GFP 
(GFP-Tg) (33), GFP and LUC (GFP.LUC-Tg), or GFP, LUC, and the 
diphtheria toxin (DT) receptor human heparin-binding EGF-like 
growth factor (TR6) (TR6.GFP.LUC-Tg) (see Methods). The expres-
sion of GFP, LUC, and TR6 in NSCs enabled us to distinguish 
transplanted cells from host cells, to trace the survival of trans-
planted cells based on LUC activity in a noninvasive fashion, and 
to specifically ablate transplanted cells (see below), respectively.  
To obtain a homogeneous population of NSCs, we used adher-
ent monolayer culture (34–36). The embryonic forebrains were 
Figure 1
A combination of NSC transplantation and VPA administration improves functional recovery of hind limbs without CST axon reextension. (A) 
Schematic of the NSC transplantation and VPA injection protocol. (B) Time course of functional recovery of hind limbs after SCI. GFP-NSCs, 
GFP.LUC-NSCs, and TR6.GFP.LUC-NSCs were transplanted into the SCI epicenter 7 days after injury as indicated. Combined treatment with 
NSC transplantation and VPA administration resulted in the greatest functional recovery. Data represent mean ± SEM. **P < 0.001 compared 
with SCI models with no treatment; *P < 0.01 compared with SCI models with no treatment (repeated measures ANOVA). NSC+VPA, total n = 21. 
(C) Representative pictures of BDA-labeled CST fibers at 5 mm rostral and 5 mm caudal to the lesion site. BDA was injected into the motor 
cortices 12 weeks after SCI. 2 weeks after the injection, mice were fixed and spinal cord sections were stained. Representative results for a 
GFP-NSC–transplanted spinal cord are shown. Blue, Hoechst nuclear staining. Scale bar: 20 μm. (D) Quantification of the labeled CST fibers 
in the spinal cords of intact mice, SCI mice receiving no treatment, and SCI mice undergoing combined NSC/VPA treatment. Eight 30-μm–thick 
serial parasagittal sections from individual spinal cords were evaluated. The x axis indicates specific locations along the rostrocaudal axis of the 
spinal cord, and the y axis indicates the ratio of the number of BDA-labeled fibers at the indicated site to that at 6 mm rostral to the lesion site 
(Th9). **P < 0.001 compared with SCI models without treatment; *P = 0.188 There is no significant difference in the number of BDA-labeled fibers 
between NSC+VPA-treated mice (blue line) and SCI model mice with no treatment (yellow line) (repeated measures ANOVA). All data shown 
are from at least 3 experiments in parallel conditions, with error bars representing SEM.

research article
 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 120      Number 9      September 2010	
3257
dissociated and cultured with EGF and basic FGF (bFGF) (36) 
(Supplemental Figure 1, A and B; supplemental material available 
online with this article; doi:10.1172/JCI42957DS1). These cells 
uniformly expressed the stem cell markers Sox2 and nestin but 
did not express differentiation markers (Supplemental Figure 1,  
C and D). Under the appropriate conditions for each lineage, these 
NSCs differentiated into neurons, astrocytes, or oligodendrocytes 
(Supplemental Figure 1, E and F). NSCs from different Tg mice 
behaved similarly in these culture conditions (data not shown). 
NSCs that had been cultured and passaged 5–10 times in the pres-
ence of both EGF and bFGF to maintain the undifferentiated state 
were used for transplantation studies.
Undifferentiated NSCs were transplanted into the SCI 
epicenter 7 days after injury. Nontransplanted control and 
transplanted mice were then intraperitoneally adminis-
tered VPA or saline daily for 7 days (Figure 1A), whereafter 
we monitored their hind limb motor function using the 
open field locomotor scale (BBB score) (7–9, 37) for 6 weeks. 
Remarkably, we found that the simultaneous treatment of 
SCI model mice with NSCs and VPA resulted in a dramatic 
recovery of hind limb function compared with either treat-
ment alone (Figure 1B and Supplemental Videos 1–4). There 
were no significant differences among the data obtained 
from each SCI model mouse group transplanted with the 
3 distinct NSCs. Functional recovery of each treated SCI 
model mouse reached a plateau at around 6 weeks, the level 
of which was sustained for more than 3 months. Since mice 
treated with VPA alone showed no further improvement 
compared with untreated mice, it is most likely that VPA 
affected the function of transplanted cells.
We next sought to determine the basis for this improve-
ment in locomotor function. Since transplanted NSCs 
have been reported to play a supportive role in the reexten-
sion of injured axons (14), we analyzed whether CST axons 
were regenerated by anterograde labeling using biotinyl-
ated dextran amine (BDA) (6, 16, 17). Because BDA was 
injected into the motor cortex, only the axons of first-order 
neurons in the CST could be visualized (Figure 1C). In our 
SCI model mice, the caudal part of the injured site was 
completely devoid of CST axons (Figure 1, C and D), and 
the same was true in mice that had undergone combined 
NSC transplantation and VPA administration (Figure 1, C 
and D). These data indicated that CST axons did not reex-
tend in mice treated with both NSCs and VPA and there-
fore that some other mechanism was responsible for the 
animals’ dramatic functional locomotor improvement.
Transplanted NSCs encompass the lesion site and extend their pro-
cesses. Given that host CST axon reextension was not involved 
in the observed hind limb recovery, we decided to focus on 
the transplanted cells. We analyzed the migration, morphol-
ogy, neuronal marker expression, and viability of these cells 
after coadministration with VPA. Transplant-derived cells 
migrated to both rostral and caudal areas and displayed pro-
cesses that extended into the gray matter and dorsal funicu-
lus within 5 weeks of transplantation (Figure 2). Between 
20% and 40% of the transplanted cells were found to be 
surviving in the injured spinal cord after 8 weeks, and 17% 
still remained viable more than 1 year after transplantation 
(data not shown). About 20% of the surviving cells had dif-
ferentiated into microtubule-associated protein 2–positive 
(MAP2-positive) neurons with elongated processes within 5 weeks 
after transplantation (Figure 2, B and C, and Figure 3, E and F). Sur-
vival of the transplanted NSCs was not significantly influenced by 
VPA administration (Supplemental Figure 8).
HDAC inhibition promotes neuronal differentiation of NSCs and is critical 
for transplantation-induced hind limb recovery. In contrast to previous 
studies, which have indicated that very few transplanted NSCs dif-
ferentiate into neurons in the injured CNS environment (8, 10, 11, 
20), many neurons were observed in the spinal cord after coadmin-
istration with VPA. We next examined in more detail the contribu-
tion of VPA to differentiation of cultured and transplanted NSCs. 
To analyze differentiation in vitro, NSCs were treated with either 
Figure 2
Transplanted NSCs migrate from the injection site and encompass the lesion site. 
Representative results of GFP-NSC–transplanted SCI model mice are shown. 
(A) A series of immunostaining images of injured spinal cord at 6 weeks after 
injury. SCI mice received combination treatment with NSC transplantation and 
VPA administration. Specimens were picked up every 150 μm and stained with 
anti-GFP (green) and MAP2 (not shown) antibodies and Hoechst (blue). The epi-
center of the SCI is indicated (*). Scale bar: 1 mm. (B and C) Higher-magnification 
images of the white boxes in A. GFP-positive transplanted NSCs differentiated 
into MAP2-positive neurons and extended their processes. Scale bar: 50 μm.

research article
3258 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 120      Number 9      September 2010

research article
 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 120      Number 9      September 2010	
3259
VPA or valpromide (VPM), an amide analog of VPA that is also an 
antiepileptic but is not an HDAC inhibitor (24), under differentia-
tion culture conditions. VPA enhanced histone acetylation (Supple-
mental Figure 2A) and promoted neuronal differentiation and neu-
rite outgrowth of the NSCs (Supplemental Figure 3, A–C); it also 
inhibited astrocytic and oligodendrocytic differentiation of NSCs 
(Supplemental Figure 3, D–G). A different HDAC inhibitor, tricho-
statin A (TSA), also enhanced histone acetylation (Supplemental 
Figure 2A) and neuronal differentiation of NSCs (not shown) (26). 
In contrast, VPM neither enhanced histone acetylation nor induced 
neuronal differentiation, suggesting that HDAC inhibition has an 
important role in regulating fate determination in NSCs.
We then assessed the histone acetylation status and differentia-
tion profiles of transplanted NSCs. VPA administration enhanced 
histone acetylation in transplanted cells in the spinal cord (Supple-
mental Figure 2, B and C). When we examined the differentiation sta-
tus of transplanted cells 1 week after transplantation, neuronal but 
not glial differentiation was greatly enhanced by VPA administration 
(Figure 3, A–D, and Supplemental Figure 4A). A similar differentia-
tion tendency of transplanted NSCs to that at 1 week was observed 
at 5 weeks after transplantation: there was a dramatic increase in the 
number of cells positive for MAP2 (a relatively late differentiation 
marker of neurons in comparison with DCX) in VPA-administered 
mice (Figure 3, E–G, and Supplemental Figure 4B). Furthermore, 
VPM administration to the SCI mice neither promoted neuronal 
differentiation nor enhanced hind limb motor function, suggesting 
that HDAC inhibition has an essential role in regulating fate deter-
mination of transplanted NSCs and improvement of motor function 
in vivo (Supplemental Figure 5, A–C). In light of the above findings 
that the percentage of neurons generated from transplanted NSCs 
increased dramatically with VPA administration, whereas those of 
astrocytes and oligodendrocytes declined, we anticipated that these 
neurons would be likely to play a major role in regenerating the dis-
rupted neuronal circuitry of the injured spinal cord.
Transplant-derived neurons reconstruct disrupted neuronal circuits 
in a relay manner. We next asked how the disrupted neuronal cir-
cuits were regenerated following the combined treatment with 
NSC transplantation and VPA administration. Wheat germ 
agglutinin (WGA), which can be transsynaptically transported, 
is one of the best known tracers of neural pathways (38). WGA 
protein can be transferred across synapses to second- and third-
order neurons, permitting functional neuronal circuits to be 
tracked in the CNS. We injected WGA-expressing adenoviruses 
into the motor cortex of mouse brain 12 weeks after SCI. In 
uninjured mice, WGA was detected as intracellular granule-like 
structures in neurons localized in the ventral horn throughout 
the spinal cord (Figure 4, A and B). In untreated SCI model 
mice, WGA granules were almost completely absent from the 
caudal region below the injured site (Figure 4, A and C). Sur-
prisingly, although we could not observe CST axonal reexten-
sion through the lesion site (Figure 1, C and D), WGA granules 
were clearly present in caudal large neurons located in the spi-
nal cords of mice treated with both NSC and VPA (Figure 4, 
A and D). Intriguingly, moreover, transplant-derived neurons 
in or close to the lesion site contained WGA granules (Figure 
4E), which were received from more rostral neurons. These data 
imply that WGA was conveyed through the lesion site to the 
caudal area via transplant-derived neurons. Considering this 
finding, together with the fact that WGA could be detected in 
caudal neurons without CST axonal reextension in mice that 
had undergone the combined treatment, it seemed conceivable 
that the transplant-derived neurons reconstructed the disrupt-
ed neuronal circuits, thereby acting as “relays” for transmitting 
signals between endogenous neurons whose interconnection 
had been abolished by the injury. In mice that received NSC 
transplantation alone after SCI, the percentage of WGA-posi-
tive cells among MAP2ab-positive cells in the caudal region was 
higher than that in untreated mice (Figure 4C) but lower than 
that in mice receiving combined NSC transplantation and VPA 
administration (Supplemental Figure 6), reflecting the degree 
of hind limb functional improvement (Figure 1C).
In support of the notion of a “relay” function for transplant-
derived neurons, immunoelectron microscopy revealed that GFP-
positive transplant-derived neurons received projections from 
endogenous neurons (Figure 5, A and B) and that the axon ter-
minals of transplant-derived neurons made synapses with endog-
enous neurons localized in the ventral horn (Figure 5, C–E).
Transplanted cells contribute directly to functional recovery of hind 
limb movement in SCI mice. To determine whether the transplant-
ed cells made a direct contribution to the functional recovery of 
hind limbs after SCI, we performed specific ablation of trans-
planted cells using the toxin receptor–mediated cell knockout 
(TRECK) method (Figure 6A and refs. 39, 40). For this purpose, 
we prepared NSCs from the embryonic forebrains of GFP.LUC Tg 
and TR6.GFP.LUC Tg mice (Figure 6A and Supplemental Figure 
7, A and B). Almost all of the transplanted TR6.GFP.LUC-NSCs 
were specifically ablated following DT administration (Figure 6, 
B and C). Furthermore, after ablation of the transplanted cells, 
the BBB scores of SCI model mice that had undergone combined 
TR6.GFP.LUC-NSC transplantation and VPA administration 
declined rapidly to levels similar to those observed in untreated 
and VPA only–treated mice. These results were superimposed on 
the graph in Figure 1B, with the observation period extended to 
12 weeks after SCI, as shown in Figure 6D (for clarity, the data 
for GFP-NSC.VPA and GFP.LUC-NS in Figure 1B were removed). 
These data indicate that the transplanted cells, in the presence 
of VPA, made a direct and major contribution to the functional 
recovery of hind limb movement in SCI model mice.
Figure 3
VPA promotes neuronal differentiation of transplanted NSCs. Represen-
tative results of GFP-NSC–transplanted SCI model mice are shown. (A) 
Confocal images of NSCs 1 week after transplantation into the injured 
spinal cords. Spinal cord sections from VPA-treated (+) and untreated 
(–) mice were stained with anti-GFP (green), anti-doublecortin (DCX) 
(immature neuronal marker, red) and anti-GFAP (magenta) antibodies, 
and Hoechst (blue). VPA administration resulted in an increase in the 
number of DCX-positive neuronal precursors among transplanted cells 
(lower panel). Scale bar: 20 μm. (B–D) The percentages of DCX-, GFAP-, 
and MBP-positive cells in GFP-positive transplanted cells were quanti-
fied. **P < 0.01; *P < 0.05 compared with controls (Student’s t test). (E) 
Confocal images of NSCs 5 weeks after transplantation into injured spi-
nal cords. Spinal cord sections from VPA-treated (+) and untreated (–) 
mice were stained with anti-GFP (green), anti-MAP2 (neuronal marker, 
red) and anti-GFAP (magenta) antibodies, and Hoechst (blue). VPA 
administration increased the numbers of MAP2-positive neurons (lower 
panel). Scale bar: 20 μm. (F and G) The percentages of cells positive for 
MAP2 or GFAP in GFP-positive transplanted cells in E were quantified. 
**P < 0.01; *P < 0.05 compared with control (Student’s t test). All data 
shown in B–D, F, and G are from at least 15 confocal images of 3 indi-
viduals in parallel experiments, with error bars representing the SD.

research article
3260 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 120      Number 9      September 2010
Both endogenous and transplant-derived local neurons play an important 
role in improving hind limb motor function. It has been shown recently 
that local neurons in the spinal cord play an important role in spon-
taneous functional recovery after SCI (41, 42). In our SCI model, we 
also observed slight but significant spontaneous recovery of hind 
limb function in untreated mice, and similar levels of recovery were 
sustained after ablation of transplanted cells (Figure 6D). We thus 
hypothesized that these recoveries were attributable to endogenous 
local neurons in the spinal cord. Furthermore, it seemed likely that 
the much higher recovery observed in mice with the combined treat-
ment but without cell ablation (Figure 6D) was effected by trans-
plant-derived local neurons in addition to the endogenous ones. To 
evaluate the involvement of these local neurons in our treatment 
regime, we divided each treated mouse group analyzed in Figure 6D 
into 2 subgroups (except for the “TR6.GFP.LUC-NCS–transplanted 
only” and “VPA-administered only” groups). The axon-sparing exci-
totoxin NMDA was injected at 12 weeks after SCI into the injury 
epicenter in the injured spinal cords of the mice in 1 subgroup for 
each treatment to ablate local neurons in the gray matter (43–45). 
In uninjured mice, NMDA injections had no significant effect on 
Figure 4
Transplant-derived neurons reconstruct disrupted neuronal circuits in a relay manner. (A) Representative pictures of WGA-labeled neuronal cell 
bodies located in the ventral horn at 14 weeks after SCI. Spinal cord sections were stained with anti-WGA (red) and -MAP2ab (magenta) antibod-
ies and Hoechst (blue). Scale bar: 20 μm. Intense WGA immunoreactivity was observed as intracellular granule-like structures. Left panels show 
the rostral area (Th4–Th7), and right panels show the caudal area (Th11 to lumbar vertebra [L] 1). In uninjured mice, WGA injected into the bilateral 
motor cortices was transsynaptically transported to neurons in areas rostral and caudal to the injured site (top panels). In the SCI model mice that 
did not receive treatment, very little WGA was observed in caudal areas (middle panels). However, in spinal cords of animals that underwent dual 
treatment with NSC and VPA, WGA was clearly observed in neurons in the caudal areas (bottom panels). Representative results of GFP-NSC–
transplanted SCI model mice are shown. (B–D) The percentages of WGA-positive cells in the neurons localized in the ventral horn were quantified. 
**P < 0.05 (Student’s t test). All data shown are from at least 30 images, containing more than 600 cells, from 3 individuals (5 images per area) 
in parallel experiments, with error bars representing SD. (E) Representative confocal images of WGA-labeled transplant-derived MAP2-positive 
neurons. Sections were stained with anti-WGA (red), anti-MAP2ab (magenta) and anti-GFP (green) antibodies, and Hoechst (blue). Granule-like 
WGA structures (yellow arrowheads) could be seen in the GFP and MAP2ab–double-positive transplant-derived neurons. Scale bar: 10 μm.

research article
 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 120      Number 9      September 2010	
3261
hind limb function (data not shown). However, as shown in Figure 
6E, NMDA injections completely reversed both spontaneous and 
treatment-provoked functional recovery of hind limb movement in 
SCI model mice, indicating that both endogenous and transplant-
derived local neurons indeed play an important role in the restora-
tion of hind limb motor function.
Discussion
Over the last 3 decades, numerous strategies to cure CNS injuries, 
including SCI, have been devised and tested (1–18). Regeneration of 
injured neuronal circuits in the adult CNS is a multistep process: 
axons must extend their processes to contact appropriate neuronal 
targets and must then be remyelinated, and functional synapses 
need to form on the surfaces of the targeted neurons. Stem cell–
derived cell supplementation to the injured spinal cord was previ-
ously shown to induce partial recovery (8, 9, 11, 15). However, the 
SCI models used in these studies involved moderate injury, so that 
hind limb motor function recovered spontaneously and sufficient-
ly, even in untreated subjects, for the animals to be able to support 
their own weight and walk (BBB scores were approximately 10 to 13) 
within 3 weeks. In these studies, axons demyelinated by the injury 
were reportedly remyelinated by transplant-derived oligodendro-
cytes, leading to significant but minor improvements in BBB score 
(to approximately 12 to 16) over those observed in untreated mice.
In clinical practice, as treatment of moderate SCI has improved 
greatly with advanced surgical reconstruction techniques and 
better general management, the development of regenerative 
therapies for severer, recalcitrant forms of SCI is more pressing 
(46). Accordingly, we applied in this study a severe SCI model 
in which CST axons were completely disrupted (Figure 1C) to 
assess the effectiveness of our strategy. Hind limb motor func-
tion in untreated mice recovered only marginally (to a BBB score 
of ~4), whereas recovery improved dramatically, to the level at 
which mice could support their weight, as a consequence of the 
combined treatment with NSCs and VPA (BBB score ~9 to 10). 
Such a degree of improvement in hind limb function in severely 
injured mice has, to the best of our knowledge, never before been 
attained. Although a neuroprotective effect has been reported for 
VPA (27–31), this does not seem to be pertinent to the functional 
recovery of SCI because mice treated with VPA alone showed no 
Figure 5
Transplant-derived neurons make synapses with endogenous neurons. (A) Immunoelectron microscopy image of a sagittal section of dual-
treated (GFP-NSC and VPA) injured spinal cord (rostral area). A GFP-positive dendrite (Den) made synapses with GFP-negative endogenous 
axon termini (At) (yellow arrowheads). Scale bar: 1 μm. (B) In other rostral regions, a dendrite of a GFP-positive transplant-derived neuron made 
a synapse (yellow arrowheads) with the axon terminus of a GFP-negative endogenous neuron. Scale bar: 1 μm. (C) Sagittal section of dual-
treated (NSC and VPA) injured spinal cord (caudal area) stained with anti-GFP antibody (dark brown). The epicenter of the SCI is indicated (*). 
Scale bar: 500 μm. (D) High-magnification image of a large neuron localized in the ventral horn in the white rectangle in C. GFP-positive 
transplanted neurons extended their processes toward an endogenous neuron (yellow arrowheads). Scale bar: 100 μm. (E) Immunoelectron 
microscopy image of the boxed area in D. GFP-positive axon termini made synapses with the dendrite of a GFP-negative endogenous large 
neuron (yellow arrowheads). Scale bar: 1 μm.

research article
3262 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 120      Number 9      September 2010

research article
 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 120      Number 9      September 2010	
3263
greater improvement compared with untreated mice (Figures 
1 and 6). We suggest that, in severe SCI, supplementation with 
neurons may be more beneficial than supplementation with oli-
godendrocytes for reconstructing destroyed neuronal circuits. 
Our observation that transplant-derived neuronal axons could 
be remyelinated by endogenous oligodendrocytes (Supplemental 
Figure 9) suggests that the injured CNS may have a much greater 
restorative capacity than previously thought.
Differentiation of NSCs transplanted into the injured spinal 
cord is generally restricted to the glial lineage: the host spinal 
cord milieu is not permissive for neuronal differentiation (7, 21, 
22, 47, 48). Neuronal differentiation of neuronal lineage–commit-
ted precursors grafted into the injured spinal cord is also severely 
inhibited, whereas the same cells can differentiate efficiently into 
neurons under in vitro culture conditions as well as in the intact 
spinal cord (47, 48). In an earlier attempt to stimulate neuronal 
differentiation, NSCs transduced with the proneural transcription 
factor neurogenin 2 (Neurog2) were engrafted into injured spinal 
cords, resulting in moderate functional recovery of hind limbs in 
comparison with untreated animals (11). The authors concluded, 
however, that oligodendrocytes derived unexpectedly from the 
transduced NSCs contributed to the improvement of motor func-
tion by remyelinating the injured axons. Although Neurog2-trans-
duced NSCs actually differentiated more efficiently into neurons 
than into oligodendrocytes after transplantation, the roles of these 
neurons were not thoroughly investigated.
In the present study, we adopted what we believe is a novel 
approach for the treatment of SCI: manipulation of transplanted 
NSC fate by an epigenetic reagent. A combined treatment involv-
ing NSC transplantation and administration of the HDAC inhibi-
tor VPA led to a marked functional recovery. We will refer below 
to this dual treatment as the HINT (HDAC inhibitor and NSC 
transplantation) method. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed 
that VPA administration promoted the neuronal differentiation of 
transplanted NSCs. We examined extensively the roles of the neu-
rons responsible for reconstruction of broken neuronal networks 
using 2 neuronal tracers, immunoelectron microscopy, and 2 cell-
ablation methods. These results revealed that transplant-derived 
neurons received projections from endogenous neurons and that 
their extended processes made synapses with endogenous neurons 
in the ventral horn. Furthermore, we showed clearly that trans-
plant-derived neurons reconstructed the disrupted CST, allowing 
the restoration of signal transmission in a relay manner (Figure 
7). Among these transplant-derived neurons, 16.9% ± 2.3% were 
vesicular glutamate transporter (VGLUT) 2-positive (glutamater-
gic) and 70.1% ± 1.8% were glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) 65 
positive (GABAergic) (Supplemental Figure 10). Although we have 
not examined the neuronal subtypes of the remaining 13%, these 
data suggest that both excitatory and inhibitory neuronal subtypes 
were generated from transplanted NSCs. In light of these findings, 
we hypothesize that the balance between the transplant-derived 
excitatory and inhibitory neuronal subtypes is important for hind 
limb functional recovery after SCI. However, we must await fur-
ther investigation to substantiate this hypothesis.
Although recovery was not as great as it was in mice that under-
went the HINT method, mice treated with NSCs alone showed 
greater improvement of hind limb function compared with the 
untreated controls, which exhibited slight but significant resto-
ration (Figures 1 and 6). This is probably due to trophic support 
provided by transplanted cells to endogenous cells, as suggested 
in previous reports (12–14), since transplanted NSCs barely dif-
ferentiate into neurons in the injured spinal cord. However, any 
beneficial trophic effect of transplanted NSCs on endogenous 
neurons is unlikely to be sufficient to explain the functional 
recovery of the injured spinal cord because we did not observe 
axon reextension beyond the lesion site in our severe SCI model 
even in mice treated by the HINT method. Thus, it is likely that 
local neurons in the spinal cord (perhaps a mixture of preserved 
endogenous neurons and transplant-derived neurons) transmit 
signals in a relay manner. This is also supported by the fact that 
both spontaneous and treatment-provoked hind limb functional 
restoration were completely reversed by NMDA injection to ablate 
local neurons in the spinal cord (Figure 6E).
As an established drug for long-term therapy for epilepsy, VPA 
may be more appropriate for use in clinical trials than other drugs 
or ectopically expressed Tgs. Nonetheless, while the combination 
of epigenetic manipulation and NSC transplantation for the 
treatment of SCI yielded a dramatic functional improvement in 
hind limb movement, recovery was incomplete. To achieve a more 
efficient treatment for SCI, administration of a more complex 
“cocktail” (combinatorial treatment in conjunction with other 
strategies, such as neurotrophin-mediated prevention of neuronal 
death, regeneration of axons by suppressing myelin inhibitors, 
and remyelination) may be necessary.
Methods
Tg mice. For visualization and specific ablation of transplanted cells, we 
used the TRECK method (40). To achieve more specific and conditional 
ablation of target cells, we introduced 2 point mutations (I117V/L148V) 
in human HB-EGF (39). The modified human HB-EGF (I117V/L148V) gene 
fragment fused with EGFP was subcloned into EcoRI sites in the mamma-
lian expression vector pCAGGS (49) (pCAG-TR6/GFP). The 3.8-kb SpeI-
HindIII fragment was isolated from pCAG-TR6/GFP and microinjected 
into fertilized mouse eggs (C57BL/6J Jcl background). These eggs were 
Figure 6
Ablation of transplanted cells abolishes hind limb motor function recov-
ery. (A) Schematic of the protocols for NSC transplantation and for 
detection and ablation of transplanted cells. NSCs derived from GFP.
LUC- or TR6.GFP.LUC-Tg mice were transplanted into SCI model mice 
1 week after injury. VPA was intraperitoneally administered every day 
for 1 week. Survival of transplanted cells and locomotor function of the 
mice were monitored weekly for 14 weeks. (B) Survival of transplanted 
cells was checked every week using a bioluminescence imaging sys-
tem. 6 weeks after injury (5 weeks after transplantation), each mouse 
received 2 DT administrations. By the following week, LUC activity 
had completely disappeared in mice transplanted with TR6.GFP.LUC-
NSCs (lower panel). (C) Sagittal sections from SCI model mice trans-
planted with GFP.LUC- and TR6.GFP.LUC-NSCs 2 weeks after DT 
injection. All transplanted cells were ablated with DT (lower panel). 
Scale bar: 1 mm. (D) Time course of the changes in BBB scores in SCI 
model mice. The hind limb function of mice that had undergone dual 
treatment with TR6.GFP.LUC-NSCs and VPA dropped drastically after 
DT administration (black line). *P < 0.0001 compared with GFP.LUC-
NSC–transplanted, VPA-administered, and DT-injected SCI model 
mice (blue line) (repeated measures ANOVA). Data are mean ± SEM. 
VPA, n = 8; no treatment, n = 8. (E) Twelve weeks after injury, groups 
of SCI model mice received NMDA injections, as indicated, into the 
injury epicenter, to ablate local neurons in the gray matter (blue, black, 
and yellow lines with triangles). *P < 0.0001 compared with non-
NMDA–injected mice in each group (blue, black, and yellow lines with 
circles) (repeated measures ANOVA). Data represent mean ± SEM.

research article
3264 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 120      Number 9      September 2010
subsequently implanted into pseudopregnant female mice (C57BL/6J Jcl) 
to obtain the Tg mouse line TR6.GFP-Tg. Female mice homozygous for 
the CAG-LUC Tg (LUC-Tg) were mated with TR6.GFP-Tg heterozygous 
or CAG-GFP (GFP-Tg) (33) heterozygous male mice. E14.5 forebrain-
derived NSCs from mice heterozygous for GFP (GFP-NSCs), TR6.GFP, 
and LUC (TR6.GFP.LUC-NSCs) or for GFP and LUC (GFP.LUC-NSCs) 
were expanded and used for transplantation. Tg mice expressing GFP 
under the control of the CAG promoter were a gift from M. Okabe (Osaka 
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan).
Cell culture. E14.5 mouse forebrains were dissected and triturated in 
calcium- and magnesium-free HBSS and cultured on poly-ornithine/
fibronectin–coated (O/F-coated) dishes for 4 days in N2-supplemented 
DMEM/F-12 containing 10 ng/ml bFGF (PeproTech). Cells were replat-
ed on O/F-coated dishes in NS-A medium (Euroclone) supplemented 
with modified N2 and 10 ng/ml each of EGF (PeproTech) and bFGF 
(NS expansion medium) (36). We routinely used HBSS to detach cells 
from the dish; we split cells 1:3 and replated them onto O/F-coated 
dishes every 2 days. Cells that had been passaged 5–10 times were used 
for transplantation. See Supplemental Methods for details of NSC dif-
ferentiation in vitro.
SCI model. All animal studies were conducted with the approval of the 
Nara Institute of Science and Technology animal care and use committee. 
We used 15-week-old male ICR mice weighing 37–45 g. Anesthetized (sodi-
um pentobarbital, 40 mg/kg body weight) mice received laminectomies 
and partial laminectomies at the ninth and tenth thoracic spinal vertebrae, 
respectively. The dorsal surface of the dura mater was exposed and SCI was 
applied using an SCI device (90 kdyn; Infinite Horizon impactor; Precision 
Systems & Instrumentation) as previously described (8). The muscle and 
skin were closed in layers. The mice underwent manual bladder evacua-
tion once a day. We checked the lesion site sizes in several SCI mice 1 week 
Figure 7
Diagrammatic summary of destruction and reconstruction of neural circuits in the injured spinal cord. (A) In the acute phase of SCI, CST fibers 
are disrupted and hind limb movement is completely lost. (B) In the chronic phase, WGA transport through the lesion site to the caudal area is 
negligible, probably because very few CST fibers are restored. (D) When NSCs were transplanted to the injured spinal cord, almost all of them 
differentiated into astrocytes, with the result that very little restoration of the injured CST occurred. (C) Following VPA administration, neuronal 
differentiation of transplanted NSCs was greatly enhanced and dramatic functional recovery could be observed. WGA is conveyed through 
the lesion site to the caudal area via transplant-derived neurons. (E) Ablation of transplant-derived cells with DT nullified hind limb functional 
recovery, suggesting that the transplanted cells contribute directly to the functional recovery in hind limbs. (F) Ablation of residual local neurons 
in the lesion site by NMDA led to a complete impairment of hind limb movement, suggesting that residual local endogenous neurons also play 
an important role in the improvement of hind limb motor function.

research article
 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 120      Number 9      September 2010	
3265
after injury and confirmed that they were comparable. One week after the 
injury, hind limb movement in the model mice was not observed (BBB 
score: 0). Mice with incomplete injury (BBB score above 0 at 1 week after 
injury) were excluded (2.4%).
Transplantation. Seven days after injury, mice were anesthetized and 
transplanted with NSCs using a glass micropipette attached to a stereo-
taxic injector (Narishige). The tip of the micropipette was inserted into the 
injury epicenter in the injured spinal cord, and 2 μl of NS medium lacking 
growth factor, with or without NSCs (0.5 × 106/μl), was injected at a rate 
of 1 μl/min. All mice subcutaneously received cyclosporine immunosup-
pressant (10 mg/kg) and gentamicin (8 mg/kg) daily. After transplanta-
tion, mice were given daily intraperitoneal injections of VPA (150 mg/kg) 
or saline (control) for the following 7 days.
Behavioral testing. We evaluated the motor function of the hind limbs for 
up to 14 weeks after injury. See Supplemental Methods for details.
Immunocytochemistry. Immunocytochemical experiments were performed 
as described previously (7). See Supplemental Methods for antibodies used 
and further details.
Immunohistochemistry. We performed immunohistochemical analysis on 
tissue sections using 3 or more independent samples from the mice. See 
Supplemental Methods for details.
Immunoelectron microscopy. See Supplemental Methods.
Anterograde labeling of the CST. Twelve weeks after injury, descending CST 
fibers were labeled with BDA (10% in saline, 2 μl per cortex, MW 10,000; 
Molecular Probes) (6, 16, 17) by injection into the left and right motor 
cortices (50) (for 3 uninjured mice, 3 mice that received SCI with no treat-
ment, and 3 mice that received SCI and underwent combined treatment 
with NSCs and VPA). See Supplemental Methods for details.
Visualization of multisynaptic neuronal pathways. To visualize selective and 
functional transsynaptic neuronal pathways, WGA-expressing recombinant 
adenoviruses (provided by Y. Yoshihara, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 
Wako, Saitama, Japan) were used (38). In this system, injections of WGA-
expressing adenovirus in well-mapped neural pathways result in labeling of 
first-, second-, and third-order neurons. WGA protein is efficiently trans-
ported in axons and dendrites in both anterograde and retrograde direc-
tions. See Supplemental Methods for details.
In vivo imaging of transplanted cells. In vivo imaging experiments were per-
formed as described previously (8). See Supplemental Methods for details.
Ablation of transplant-derived cells. Cell ablation experiments were performed 
as described previously (39, 40). See Supplemental Methods for details.
Ablation of local neurons. To ablate neurons localized in the gray matter, 
NMDA was injected into the spinal cord at thoracic vertebrae 9 (Th9). 
Twelve weeks after injury, SCI model mice (5 GFP.LUC-NSC–trans-
planted and VPA-treated mice, 3 TR6.GFP.LUC-NSC–transplanted and 
VPA-treated mice, and 3 untreated mice) received bilateral injections of 
NMDA into 2 sites of the spinal cord (0.5 ml of 10 mM in saline per site) 
under anesthesia.
Statistics. We performed statistical analysis with an unpaired 2-tailed Stu-
dent’s t test for single comparisons. For analysis of the open-field scores, 
we used repeated measures ANOVA (Prism, GraphPad). P < 0.05 was con-
sidered significant.
Acknowledgments
We thank Y. Yoshihara for providing the WGA-expressing 
adenovirus and M. Okabe for donating the Tg mice expressing 
GFP under the control of the CAG promoter. We also thank Y. 
Bessho, T. Matsui, S. Komai, M. Arai, H. Fujioka, T. Yamashita, 
M. Ueno, Y. Sasai, K. Muguruma, B. Juliandi, K. Yone, T. Setogu-
chi, and Y. Fujimoto for valuable discussions and technical advice; 
I. Smith for editing the manuscript; and N. Ueda and M. Tano 
for secretarial assistance. This work was supported by the Naito 
Foundation, the NAIST Cross-Fields Collaboration Promoting 
Project, and by a grant-in-aid for Exploratory Research, a grant-in-
aid for Young Scientists (B), and the NAIST Global COE Program 
(Frontier Biosciences: Strategies for Survival and Adaptation in a 
Changing Global Environment) from the Ministry of Education, 
Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan.
Received for publication March 11, 2010, and accepted in revised 
form July 7, 2010.
Address correspondence to: Kinichi Nakashima, Laboratory 
of Molecular Neuroscience, Graduate School of Biological 
Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, 8916-5 
Takayama, Ikoma 631-0192, Japan. Phone: 81.743.72.5471; Fax: 
81.743.72.5479; E-mail: kin@bs.naist.jp.
	 1.	Thuret S, Moon LD, Gage FH. Therapeutic inter-
ventions after spinal cord injury. Nat Rev Neurosci. 
2006;7(8):628–643.
	 2.	David S, Aguayo AJ. Axonal elongation into 
peripheral nervous system “bridges” after cen-
tral nervous system injury in adult rats. Science. 
1981;214(4523):931–933.
	 3.	Richardson PM, McGuinness UM, Aguayo AJ. 
Axons from CNS neurons regenerate into PNS 
grafts. Nature. 1980;284(5753):264–265.
	 4.	Schnell L, Schwab ME. Axonal regeneration in the 
rat spinal cord produced by an antibody against 
myelin-associated neurite growth inhibitors. 
Nature. 1990;343(6255):269–272.
	 5.	Bregman BS, Kunkel-Bagden E, Schnell L, Dai HN, 
Gao D, Schwab ME. Recovery from spinal cord 
injury mediated by antibodies to neurite growth 
inhibitors. Nature. 1995;378(6556):498–501.
	 6.	Bradbury EJ, et al. Chondroitinase ABC promotes 
functional recovery after spinal cord injury. Nature. 
2002;416(6881):636–640.
	 7.	Setoguchi T, et al. Treatment of spinal cord injury 
by transplantation of fetal neural precursor cells 
engineered to express BMP inhibitor. Exp Neurol. 
2004;189(1):33–44.
	 8.	Okada S, et al. In vivo imaging of engrafted neural 
stem cells: its application in evaluating the optimal 
timing of transplantation for spinal cord injury. 
Faseb J. 2005;19(13):1839–1841.
	 9.	Cummings BJ, et al. Human neural stem cells dif-
ferentiate and promote locomotor recovery in 
spinal cord-injured mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2005;102(39):14069–14074.
	10.	Ogawa Y, et al. Transplantation of in vitro-
expanded fetal neural progenitor cells results in 
neurogenesis and functional recovery after spinal 
cord contusion injury in adult rats. J Neurosci Res. 
2002;69(6):925–933.
	11.	Hofstetter CP, et al. Allodynia limits the useful-
ness of intraspinal neural stem cell grafts; directed 
differentiation improves outcome. Nat Neurosci. 
2005;8(3):346–353.
	12.	Shumsky JS, Tobias CA, Tumolo M, Long WD, 
Giszter SF, Murray M. Delayed transplantation of 
fibroblasts genetically modified to secrete BDNF 
and NT-3 into a spinal cord injury site is associ-
ated with limited recovery of function. Exp Neurol. 
2003;184(1):114–130.
	13.	Tobias CA, et al. Delayed grafting of BDNF and 
NT-3 producing fibroblasts into the injured spinal 
cord stimulates sprouting, partially rescues axoto-
mized red nucleus neurons from loss and atrophy, 
and provides limited regeneration. Exp Neurol. 
2003;184(1):97–113.
	14.	Yan J, Welsh AM, Bora SH, Snyder EY, Koliatsos VE. 
Differentiation and tropic/trophic effects of exog-
enous neural precursors in the adult spinal cord.  
J Comp Neurol. 2004;480(1):101–114.
	15.	Keirstead HS, et al. Human embryonic stem cell-
derived oligodendrocyte progenitor cell transplants 
remyelinate and restore locomotion after spinal 
cord injury. J Neurosci. 2005;25(19):4694–4705.
	16.	Hata K, et al. RGMa inhibition promotes axonal 
growth and recovery after spinal cord injury. J Cell 
Biol. 2006;173(1):47–58.
	 17.	Kaneko S, et al. A selective Sema3A inhibitor 
enhances regenerative responses and functional 
recovery of the injured spinal cord. Nat Med. 
2006;12(12):1380–1389.
	18.	Mi S, et al. LINGO-1 antagonist promotes spinal 
cord remyelination and axonal integrity in MOG-
induced experimental autoimmune encephalomy-
elitis. Nat Med. 2007;13(10):1228–1233.
	19.	Nakamura M, Houghtling RA, MacArthur L, 
Bayer BM, Bregman BS. Differences in cytokine 
gene expression profile between acute and sec-
ondary injury in adult rat spinal cord. Exp Neurol. 
2003;184(1):313–325.
	20.	Setoguchi T, et al. Traumatic injury-induced BMP7 
expression in the adult rat spinal cord. Brain Res. 
2001;921(1–2):219–225.

research article
3266 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 120      Number 9      September 2010
	21.	Martino G, Pluchino S. The therapeutic poten-
tial of neural stem cells. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006; 
7(5):395–406.
	22.	Abematsu M, Smith I, Nakashima K. Mechanisms 
of neural stem cell fate determination: extracellular 
cues and intracellular programs. Curr Stem Cell Res 
Ther. 2006;1(2):267–277.
	23.	Blaheta RA, Cinatl J Jr. Anti-tumor mechanisms of 
valproate: a novel role for an old drug. Med Res Rev. 
2002;22(5):492–511.
	 24.	Gottlicher M, et al. Valproic acid defines a novel 
class of HDAC inhibitors inducing differentiation of 
transformed cells. Embo J. 2001;20(24):6969–6978.
	25.	Phiel CJ, Zhang F, Huang EY, Guenther MG, 
Lazar MA, Klein PS. Histone deacetylase is a 
direct target of valproic acid, a potent anticonvul-
sant, mood stabilizer, and teratogen. J Biol Chem. 
2001;276(39):36734–36741.
	26.	Hsieh J, Nakashima K, Kuwabara T, Mejia E, 
Gage FH. Histone deacetylase inhibition-medi-
ated neuronal differentiation of multipotent adult 
neural progenitor cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2004;101(47):16659–16664.
	 27.	Hashimoto R, Hough C, Nakazawa T, Yamamoto 
T, Chuang DM. Lithium protection against gluta-
mate excitotoxicity in rat cerebral cortical neurons: 
involvement of NMDA receptor inhibition possi-
bly by decreasing NR2B tyrosine phosphorylation. 
J Neurochem. 2002;80(4):589–597.
	28.	Kanai H, Sawa A, Chen RW, Leeds P, Chuang DM. 
Valproic acid inhibits histone deacetylase activ-
ity and suppresses excitotoxicity-induced GAPDH 
nuclear accumulation and apoptotic death in neu-
rons. Pharmacogenomics J. 2004;4(5):336–344.
	29.	Ren M, Leng Y, Jeong M, Leeds PR, Chuang DM. 
Valproic acid reduces brain damage induced by 
transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats: poten-
tial roles of histone deacetylase inhibition and 
heat shock protein induction. J Neurochem. 
2004;89(6):1358–1367.
	30.	Kim AJ, Shi Y, Austin RC, Werstuck GH. Valproate 
protects cells from ER stress-induced lipid accu-
mulation and apoptosis by inhibiting glycogen 
synthase kinase-3. J Cell Sci. 2005;118(pt 1):89–99.
	 31.	Peng GS, et al. Valproate pretreatment protects dopa-
minergic neurons from LPS-induced neurotoxicity 
in rat primary midbrain cultures: role of microglia. 
Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2005;134(1):162–169.
	32.	Yuan PX, Huang LD, Jiang YM, Gutkind JS, 
Manji HK, Chen G. The mood stabilizer val-
proic acid activates mitogen-activated protein 
kinases and promotes neurite growth. J Biol Chem. 
2001;276(34):31674–31683.
	33.	Okabe M, Ikawa M, Kominami K, Nakanishi T, 
Nishimune Y. ‘Green mice’ as a source of ubiqui-
tous green cells. FEBS Lett. 1997;407(3):313–319.
	 34.	Johe KK, Hazel TG, Muller T, Dugich-Djordjevic 
MM, McKay RD. Single factors direct the differen-
tiation of stem cells from the fetal and adult central 
nervous system. Genes Dev. 1996;10(24):3129–3140.
	35.	Nakashima K, et al. Synergistic signaling in fetal 
brain by STAT3-Smad1 complex bridged by p300. 
Science. 1999;284(5413):479–482.
	36.	Conti L, et al. Niche-independent symmetrical self-
renewal of a mammalian tissue stem cell. PLoS Biol. 
2005;3(9):e283.
	 37.	Basso DM, Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC. A sensitive 
and reliable locomotor rating scale for open field 
testing in rats. J Neurotrauma. 1995;12(1):1–21.
	38.	Kinoshita N, Mizuno T, Yoshihara Y. Adenovirus-
mediated WGA gene delivery for transsynaptic 
labeling of mouse olfactory pathways. Chem Senses. 
2002;27(3):215–223.
	39.	Furukawa N, Saito M, Hakoshima T, Kohno K. A 
diphtheria toxin receptor deficient in epidermal 
growth factor-like biological activity. J Biochem. 
2006;140(6):831–841.
	40.	Saito M, et al. Diphtheria toxin receptor-mediated 
conditional and targeted cell ablation in transgenic 
mice. Nat Biotechnol. 2001;19(8):746–750.
	41.	Bareyre FM, Kerschensteiner M, Raineteau O, 
Mettenleiter TC, Weinmann O, Schwab ME. The 
injured spinal cord spontaneously forms a new 
intraspinal circuit in adult rats. Nat Neurosci. 
2004;7(3):269–277.
	42.	Courtine G, et al. Recovery of supraspinal con-
trol of stepping via indirect propriospinal relay 
connections after spinal cord injury. Nat Med. 
2008;14(1):69–74.
	43.	Faulkner JR, Herrmann JE, Woo MJ, Tansey KE, 
Doan NB, Sofroniew MV. Reactive astrocytes pro-
tect tissue and preserve function after spinal cord 
injury. J Neurosci. 2004;24(9):2143–2155.
	44.	Agrawal SK, Fehlings MG. Role of NMDA and 
non-NMDA ionotropic glutamate receptors in 
traumatic spinal cord axonal injury. J Neurosci. 
1997;17(3):1055–1063.
	45.	Yu SP, Yeh C, Strasser U, Tian M, Choi DW. NMDA 
receptor-mediated K+ efflux and neuronal apopto-
sis. Science. 1999;284(5412):336–339.
	46.	Ditunno JF Jr, Formal CS. Chronic spinal cord 
injury. N Engl J Med. 1994;330(8):550–556.
	 47.	Cao QL, Howard RM, Dennison JB, Whittemore SR. 
Differentiation of engrafted neuronal-restricted pre-
cursor cells is inhibited in the traumatically injured 
spinal cord. Exp Neurol. 2002;177(2):349–359.
	48.	Han SS, Kang DY, Mujtaba T, Rao MS, Fischer I. 
Grafted lineage-restricted precursors differentiate 
exclusively into neurons in the adult spinal cord. 
Exp Neurol. 2002;177(2):360–375.
	49.	Niwa H, Yamamura K, Miyazaki J. Efficient selec-
tion for high-expression transfectants with a novel 
eukaryotic vector. Gene. 1991;108(2):193–199.
	50.	Pronichev IV, Lenkov DN. Functional mapping 
of the motor cortex of the white mouse by a 
microstimulation method. Neurosci Behav Physiol. 
1998;28(1):80–85.

===== Affinati2021_eLife_VMHneurons+CrossSpecies =====
*For correspondence:
mgmyers@umich.edu (MGM);
ruppa@med.umich.edu (ACR)
Competing interest: See
page 14
Funding: See page 14
Received: 02 April 2021
Accepted: 14 May 2021
Published: 21 May 2021
Reviewing editor: Ana
Domingos, University of Oxford,
United Kingdom
Copyright Affinati et al. This
article is distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which
permits unrestricted use and
redistribution provided that the
original author and source are
credited.
Cross-species analysis defines the
conservation of anatomically segregated
VMH neuron populations
Alison H Affinati1, Paul V Sabatini1, Cadence True2, Abigail J Tomlinson1,
Melissa Kirigiti2, Sarah R Lindsley2, Chien Li3, David P Olson4, Paul Kievit2,
Martin G Myers1*, Alan C Rupp1*
1Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, United
States; 2Oregon National Primate Research Center, Beaverton, United States;
3Novo Nordisk Research Center, Seattle, United States; 4Department of Pediatrics,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, United States
Abstract The ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) controls diverse behaviors and
physiologic functions, suggesting the existence of multiple VMH neural subtypes with distinct
functions. Combing translating ribosome affinity purification with RNA-sequencing (TRAP-seq) data
with single-nucleus RNA-sequencing (snRNA-seq) data, we identified 24 mouse VMH neuron
clusters. Further analysis, including snRNA-seq data from macaque tissue, defined a more tractable
VMH parceling scheme consisting of six major genetically and anatomically differentiated VMH
neuron classes with good cross-species conservation. In addition to two major ventrolateral classes,
we identified three distinct classes of dorsomedial VMH neurons. Consistent with previously
suggested unique roles for leptin receptor (Lepr)-expressing VMH neurons, Lepr expression
marked a single dorsomedial class. We also identified a class of glutamatergic VMH neurons that
resides in the tuberal region, anterolateral to the neuroanatomical core of the VMH. This atlas of
conserved VMH neuron populations provides an unbiased starting point for the analysis of VMH
circuitry and function.
Introduction
The ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH, which primarily contains glutamatergic neurons) plays
important roles in a variety of metabolic responses and in the control of behaviors relevant to panic,
reproduction, and aggression. The VMH contains several anatomic subdivisions, including the dorso-
medial and central VMH (VMHDM and VMHC, respectively, which control autonomic outputs and
behavioral responses to emergencies; Lindberg et al., 2013; Vander Tuig et al., 1982), and the
ventrolateral VMH (VMHVL; known for roles in sexual and social behaviors; Hashikawa et al., 2017;
Krause and Ingraham, 2017). The predominantly GABAergic tuberal region of the hypothalamus
lies anterolateral to the core of the VMH.
Each VMH subdivision mediates a variety of outputs and thus presumably contains multiple
functionally distinct cell types. For example, activating adult Nr5a1-expressing VMH neurons (which
includes most cells in the VMHDM and VMHC) promotes panic-related behaviors, augments hepatic
glucose output to increase blood glucose, and elevates energy expenditure (Meek et al., 2016,
201; Flak et al., 2020; Kunwar et al., 2015). In contrast, activating the subset of VMHDM cells that
expresses leptin receptor (Lepr, which encodes the receptor for the adipose-derived, energy bal-
ance-controlling hormone, leptin; Chen et al., 1996; Tartaglia et al., 1995) promotes energy expen-
diture without altering these other parameters (Sabatini et al., 2021; Meek et al., 2013;
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
1 of 18
TOOLS AND RESOURCES

Meek et al., 2016). Hence, each VMH subregion may contain multiple discrete neuron populations
that mediate unique functions.
To date, most analyses of VMH function have utilized Nr5a1 or candidate markers that do not
necessarily align with functionally and/or transcriptionally unique VMH cell types (Bingham et al.,
2006). Thus, to understand VMH-controlled responses, we must use unbiased methods to define
discrete subpopulations of VMH neurons, along with markers that permit their selective manipula-
tion. Single-cell approaches (such as single-nucleus RNA-sequencing [snRNA-seq]) can identify neu-
ronal populations in an unbiased manner and have previously suggested parceling schemes for
neurons in many brain areas, including the VMH (Kim et al., 2019; Campbell et al., 2017;
Habib et al., 2017). Many such analyses define large numbers of highly interrelated cell populations
Figure 1. Identification of ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) neurons from mice. (A) Schematic of VMH
isolation and single-cell sequencing protocol. (B) UMAP of 21,585 neuronal nuclei colored and labeled by cluster
designation. (C) Expression profile of the top enriched genes for each cluster (colored on bottom), including
GABAergic (Gad1) and glutamatergic (Slc17a6) markers. (D) Expression of Nr5a1 and Fezf1 in individual cells in
UMAP space. (E) Nr5a1-Cre translating ribosome affinity purification with RNA-sequencing (TRAP-seq) overview.
Nr5a1-Cre mice were crossed with ROSA26eGFP-L10a mice, resulting in VMH-restricted eGFP-L10a expression.
Representative image shows GFP-IR (black) in a coronal section from these mice. (F) TRAP-seq revealed the
enrichment of thousands of genes (including Nr5a1 and Fezf1) in these cells relative to non-TRAP material. (G)
Expression profile of the top enriched genes from Nr5a1-Cre TRAP-seq across clusters; gray box indicates
presumptive VMH cells. (H) Magnitude of the first principal component after performing principal components
analysis for the genes enriched in Nr5a1-Cre TRAP-seq. (I) Venn diagram of genes enriched in Nr5a1-Cre TRAP-
seq (TRAP enriched), in single-nucleus RNA-sequencing (snRNA-seq) VMH pseudo-TRAP (pseudo-TRAP enriched),
or both (common). Number in parentheses refers to the number of genes in each category. (J) Histograms of
expression level for genes by enrichment gene set in each dataset (Nr5a1-Cre TRAP-seq or snRNA-seq). (K) Mean
scaled expression for each cluster for the top genes enriched in Nr5a1-Cre TRAP-seq.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 1:
Figure supplement 1. Mouse single-nucleus RNA-sequencing (snRNA-seq) identifies major CNS classes.
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
2 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

of unclear functional significance and conservation, however (Kim et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2017;
Lam et al., 2017). Determining functions for dozens of cell populations that lie in the same anatomic
region and which possess overlapping gene expression profiles (i.e., that do not contain unique
marker genes) would represent a daunting task.
Figure 2. Ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) neuronal populations can be grouped into six major classes.
(A) UMAP of 6049 VMH neurons colored and labeled by cluster designation. (B) Prevalence of clusters across
samples, mean ± SEM. (C) Expression profile of the top enriched genes for each cluster. (D) Hierarchical clustering
and mean expression of marker genes for each class of neurons. (E) ESm for the top three marker genes for each
population determined by CELLEX. (F) Median maximal pairwise expression correlation for each cut of the
hierarchical tree resulting in 2–24 clusters. (G) Percent of cells in each VMH cluster that correspond to each
neuronal cluster (from Figure 1). (H) ESm for the top five marker genes for each major class determined by
CELLEX.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 2:
Figure supplement 1. Comparison with ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) data from Kim et al.
Figure supplement 2. Comparison of data with ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) data from Campbell
et al.
Figure supplement 3. Identification of ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) neuronal ‘classes’.
Figure supplement 4. Dlk1 is expressed in neurons adjacent to the ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH).
Figure supplement 5. Ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) Nfib population localizes to dorsomedial
compartment.
Figure supplement 6. Foxp2 population localizes to anterolateral (‘tuberal’) compartment.
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
3 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

In the present study we use translating ribosome affinity purification with RNA-sequencing (TRAP-
seq) in mice together with snRNA-seq of mouse and macaque VMH neurons to define transcription-
ally unique, anatomically discrete, conserved, and genetically tractable classes of VMH neurons.
These include a distinct Lepr-expressing VMH neuron class, along with a set of glutamatergic VMH
neurons that resides in the tuberal region. These findings define a starting point for the comprehen-
sive analysis of VMH circuitry and function.
Results
Combining snRNA-seq with Nr5a1-directed TRAP-seq defines mouse
VMH neuron populations
To define neuronal populations within the mouse VMH in an unbiased manner, we microdissected
the VMH of mice and subjected 10 individual tissue samples to snRNA-seq using the 10 Genomics
platform (Figure 1A), collecting a total of 42,040 nuclei that passed quality control (Figure 1—figure
supplement 1A–C). The recovered nuclei included all major CNS cell types (Figure 1—figure sup-
plement 1, see Materials and methods for clustering and cell-type identification details), including
21,585 neurons that comprised 37 distinct neuronal populations (Figure 1B,C).
Many adult VMH neurons express Nr5a1 (which encodes the transcription factor, SF1;
Cheung et al., 2013) and/or Fezf1 (Kurrasch et al., 2007), whose detection was restricted to a con-
fined cluster of neurons in UMAP space (Figure 1D). Although essentially all VMH neurons express
Nr5a1 during development, only a subset of VMH cells express Nr5a1 and/or Fezf1 in adult animals
(Cheung et al., 2013; Kurrasch et al., 2007). Furthermore, the inherent noise in snRNA-seq data
risks false positives and negatives when using only one or two genes for cell-type identification. To
ensure that we identified all VMH cell groups for our analysis, we performed TRAP-seq using Nr5a1-
Cre;Rosa26eGFP-L10a mice, in which the early developmental expression of Nr5a1-Cre promotes the
permanent expression of tagged ribosomes across the VMH (Figure 1E). TRAP-seq identified 4492
transcripts significantly enriched in cells marked by the developmental expression of Nr5a1, includ-
ing Nr5a1 and Fezf1 (Figure 1F, Supplementary file 1). Applying this broader VMH-enriched tran-
scriptome
to
our
snRNA-seq
clusters
revealed
six
populations
of
neurons
(clusters
6–11;
corresponding to the populations with highest Nr5a1 and Fezf1 expression) that contain VMH neu-
rons (Figure 1G,H). Importantly, Nr5a1-negative cells (clusters 6 and 7) were identified as VMH by
their enrichment of Nr5a1-Cre TRAP-seq genes (Figure 1H), suggesting they were developmentally
labeled by Nr5a1-Cre; these cells presumably reside in the VMHVL (which expresses Nr5a1 during
development, but not in adulthood).
To compare TRAP-seq and snRNA-seq results, we performed ‘pseudo-TRAP’ on pseudobulk sam-
ples of our snRNA-seq data, aggregated by cell type (i.e., VMH clusters vs. non-VMH clusters; see
Supplementary file 2 for enrichment results). While many genes were enriched in both datasets
(1977), more were specific to one method (Figures 1I, 2354 genes specific to TRAP and 2828 spe-
cific to pseudo-TRAP). Notably, enrichment was largely a function of expression level: the genes that
were enriched in both datasets were highly expressed in both, while the genes that were specific to
TRAP or pseudo-TRAP were highly expressed in their enriched dataset, but expressed at lower levels
in the other (Figure 1J). This suggests that the two methods may illuminate partially distinct aspects
of the transcriptome—TRAP-seq for ribosome-associated genes and snRNA-seq for nuclear-enriched
and nascent transcripts—and that their combined use provides a more comprehensive view of cellu-
lar state. Finally, many of the genes enriched in both datasets were limited to one or a few popula-
tions, highlighting the heterogeneity of gene expression across VMH cell types, even for prominent
VMH marker genes (Figure 1K).
To understand the landscape of mouse VMH neuron populations in more detail, we subjected the
VMH
neurons
in
clusters
6–11
(Figure
1H)
to
further
clustering,
which
identified
24
transcriptionally defined neuronal populations (Figure 2A–C). The cell groups that we identified are
largely consistent with a recently published VMHVL-focused single-cell RNA-seq study (Figure 2—fig-
ure supplement 1; Kim et al., 2019). While our study identified 24 clusters whose major markers
were evenly distributed between the dorsomedial and ventrolateral compartments of the VMH, Kim
et al. identified 31 clusters with a bias toward populations with VMHVL markers. Integrating the data-
sets (Figure 2—figure supplement 1) revealed their broad correspondence, with highly correlated
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
4 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

Figure 3. VMHLepr neurons represent a distinct class of ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) neurons. (A)
Diagram of strategy to transcriptionally profile the VMHLepr neurons by crossing LeprCre and Slc17a6Flpo to a
mouse line in which the ROSA26 (R26) locus contains a CAG-driven, Flp- and Cre-dependent eGFP:L10a allele
(RCFLeGFP-L10a). (Below) A representative image of GFP-IR (black) expression in LeprCre;Slc17a6Flpo;RCFLeGFP-L10a
(LeprSlc17a6-L10a) mice. (B) Scaled counts per million (CPM) for each gene in LeprSlc17a6-L10a mice. (C) Expression
and enrichment of genes from LeprSlc17a6-L10a VMH pulldown. (D) Expression of Lepr in individual VMH neurons in
UMAP space. (E) Magnitude of the first principal component after performing principal components analysis for
the genes enriched in LeprSlc17a6-L10a VMH translating ribosome affinity purification with RNA-sequencing (TRAP-
seq), projected into UMAP space. (F) Mean class expression (left), Lepr cluster expression (center), and LeprSlc17a6-
L10a TRAP-seq enrichment (right) of the top genes unique to the VMHLepr population by both TRAP and pseudo-
TRAP. (G–I) Sagittal Allen Brain Atlas in situ images for (G) Gpr149, (H) Rai14, and (I) Tnfrsf8; all probes shown in
black.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 3:
Figure supplement 1. Comparison of different translating ribosome affinity purification with RNA-sequencing
(TRAP-seq) approaches for identifying genes enriched in Lepr ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) cells.
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
5 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

expression profiles (Figure 2—figure supplement 1B) and shared marker genes (Figure 2—figure
supplement 1D). The omission of Nfib-marked populations from the (Kim et al., 2019) analysis rep-
resented a notable difference between our analyses, however. In our reanalysis of their data, we
found that Nfib-marked cells were present in their samples but were filtered out before the final
VMH clustering (Figure 2—figure supplement 1). A previous scRNA-seq study of the neighboring
ARC also mapped a neuron population marked by Nfib expression to the VMH, however
(Campbell et al., 2017), and these cells correlated to our Nfib-marked VMH neuron populations
(Figure 2—figure supplement 2).
A simplified parceling scheme defines anatomically distinct VMH
neuron populations
Hierarchical clustering and marker gene analysis for our 24 mouse VMH neuron clusters using CEL-
LEX (Timshel et al., 2020) revealed that many cell groups were highly related to other VMH neuron
clusters (Figure 2D,E; Supplementary file 3). Furthermore, many of these populations share marker
gene expression to an extent that renders it impossible to specifically manipulate single populations
given current approaches that use a single gene for cell-type manipulation (e.g., Cre-based mouse
models) (Figure 2D,E). To identify classes of genetically distinguishable cells, we cut the hierarchical
tree at different levels and measured the maximum pairwise expression correlation to highlight the
level at which few pairs of clusters exhibited highly correlated transcriptomes. We found that six clas-
ses represented the largest number of classes that retained minimal correlated expression
(Figure 2F). To avoid confusion, we refer to these as VMH neuron classes, while referring to the cell
groups of which each class is composed as clusters or subpopulations. The mean silhouette width (a
measure of clustering robustness) for the various tree cuts also supported the use of six classes (Fig-
ure 2—figure supplement 3), and these six classes corresponded to the cluster designations from
the broader neuron dataset (Figure 2G). Hence, a parceling scheme for mouse VMH neurons that
Figure 4. Macaque ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) populations revealed by single-nucleus RNA-
sequencing (snRNA-seq). (A) Schematic of experimental process for macaque snRNA-seq. (B) UMAP of 3752 VMH
neuronal nuclei colored and labeled by cluster designation. (C) Expression profile of the top enriched genes for
each cluster. (D) Violin plot of normalized expression for marker genes for each VMH neuronal population. (E) ESm
for the top five marker genes for each cluster determined by CELLEX. (F) Pairwise scaled expression correlation
(Pearson’s r) for each macaque and mouse VMH neuronal cluster.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 4:
Figure supplement 1. Macaque single-nucleus RNA-sequencing (snRNA-seq) identifies major CNS classes.
Figure supplement 2. Identifying ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) neurons in macaque.
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
6 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

contains six classes, each composed of highly similar subpopulations, captures the transcriptional
patterns of the VMH. Importantly, this approach identified numerous specific marker genes (e.g.,
Dlk1, Esr1, Nfib, Foxp2, Fezf1, and Lepr) for each class of mouse VMH neurons (Figure 2D,H,
Supplementary file 4), which should facilitate their manipulation and study.
Consistent with the distinct nature of these six VMH neuron classes and the utility of this parceling
scheme, each class demonstrated a circumscribed anatomic distribution. As previously reported
(Lee et al., 2014; Persson-Augner et al., 2014), Dlk1- and Esr1-expressing neurons (VMHDlk1 and
VMHEsr1, respectively) map to the VMHVL. While Dlk1 is unique to a single class of VMH neurons, it is
also expressed in neighboring hypothalamic neurons (Figure 2—figure supplement 4), complicating
its utility for manipulating this population without using an intersectional approach. In contrast to
Figure 5. Ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) populations are conserved between mouse and macaque.
(A–B) Mouse and macaque single-nucleus RNA-sequencing (snRNA-seq) datasets were (A) merged using
canonical correlation analysis and (B) projected onto UMAP space, colored here by species. (C) UMAP of VMH
neuronal nuclei colored and labeled by cluster designation. (D) Mean scaled expression of marker genes across
integrated clusters by species. (E) Proportion of cells in each cluster from the sample for each species
(mean ± SEM). (F) Expression profile of the top enriched genes for each cluster. (G) Mapping of species-specific
clusters onto the integrated clusters. (H) Species-specific ESm for the top three marker genes for each integrated
cluster determined by CELLEX.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 5:
Figure supplement 1. Similarities of mouse and macaque clusters.
Figure supplement 2. Cluster marker expression in macaque ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH).
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
7 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

these
ventrolateral
populations,
Lepr-expressing
cells
lie
within
the
core
of
the
VMHDM
(Elmquist et al., 1998) and the expression of marker genes for the Nfib-marked clusters (VMHNfib)
resides in the most dorsomedial compartment of the VMHDM (Figure 2—figure supplement 5).
Fezf1-marked populations (VMHFezf1) include cells with similarity to both ventrolateral VMHDlk1 and
dorsomedial VMHLepr neurons, and many VMHFezf1 neurons lie in VMHC, in the transition between
the dorsomedial and ventrolateral zones of the VMH. Markers for the Foxp2-expressing populations
(VMHFoxp2) reside anterior and lateral to the core of the VMH, in the so-called tuberal region (Fig-
ure 2—figure supplement 6). Thus, the major VMH classes identified by our analysis each map to
specific and distinct anatomic locations, consistent with their unique genetic signatures.
Lepr-directed TRAP-seq analysis of VMHLepr cells
Given that Lepr-expressing VMH neurons mediate only a subset of VMHDM functions, we were
intrigued by the finding that unbiased snRNA-seq identified a distinct class of VMHDM cells marked
by Lepr (VMHLepr neurons), consistent with a specialized role for Lepr-expressing VMH cells
(Minokoshi et al., 1999; Toda et al., 2013; Noble et al., 2014; Gavini et al., 2016). The finding
that Lepr-expressing VMH neurons map onto a single VMH neuron class also suggests a uniformity
of function for these cells, which contrasts with the situation in other brain regions (such as the
neighboring ARC, where multiple cell types with opposing functions [e.g., Agrp and Pomc cells]
express Lepr; Campbell et al., 2017). We utilized TRAP-seq to assess the extent to which Lepr-
expressing VMH neurons correspond to the VMHLepr clusters and to compare the genetic program
of Lepr-expressing VMH neurons with gene expression in snRNA-seq-defined VMH neuron classes
and subpopulations.
TRAP-seq
analysis
of
microdissected
VMH
tissue
from
LeprCre;Rosa26eGFP-L10a
animals
(Leshan et al., 2006) resulted in the enrichment of transcripts from LeprCre neurons that lie in VMH-
adjacent brain areas, including Agrp-, Ghrh-, Pomc-, and Nts-expressing cells from the ARC and lat-
eral hypothalamic area (LHA) (Figure 3—figure supplement 1). To more closely restrict our TRAP-
seq analysis to Lepr-expressing neurons that reside in the VMH, we used a recently developed
mouse line that expresses eGFP-L10a only in cells that contain both Cre and Flp recombinases
(Sabatini et al., 2021). Because VMH neurons contain vGLUT2 (encoded by Slc17a6), while most
Lepr-expressing neurons in the neighboring ARC, dorsomedial hypothalamus (DMH), and LHA do
not (Vong et al., 2011), we crossed an Slc17a6Flpo mouse line to LeprCre and RCFLeGFP-L10 to pro-
duce Slc17a6Flpo; LeprCre; RCFLeGFP-L10 (LeprSlc17a6-L10a) mice. In these mice, mediobasal hypotha-
lamic eGFP-L10a was largely restricted to the VMH (Figure 3A; Sabatini et al., 2021).
We microdissected the VMH of LeprSlc17a6-L10a mice and performed TRAP-seq, identifying 3580
transcripts that were enriched in the TRAP material relative to the supernatant (Figure 3C,
Supplementary file 5). Importantly, Lepr itself was not enriched, suggesting that we successfully
purified ribosome-associated mRNA from Lepr-expressing VMH cells away from that derived from
other Lepr-expressing populations (Figure 3B). We found that most non-VMH genes enriched in our
conventional (LeprCre-only) TRAP-Seq (including Agrp, Nts, and Ghrh) were not enriched in this anal-
ysis (Figure 3—figure supplement 1). Pomc and Prlh remained somewhat enriched, however, sug-
gesting that Lepr-expressing DMH Prlh cells are glutamatergic (Dodd et al., 2014), and consistent
with the finding that some ARC Pomc cells express Slc17a6 (Jones et al., 2019).
As expected, we observed a high degree of concordance between snRNA-seq-defined gene
expression in neurons of the VMHLepr cluster with gene expression in Lepr-expressing VMH neurons
by TRAP-seq. We identified 3576 genes enriched in VMH-centered LeprSlc17a6 TRAP-seq material
(Figure 3C), 1174 of which were also enriched in pseudo-TRAP analysis of the neurons assigned to
the VMHLepr population (Supplementary file 6). Among the top enriched genes shared by these
two methods were Gpr149, Rai14, and Tnfrsf8 (Figure 3F), which exhibit a similar VMHDM-centered
expression pattern as Lepr (Figure 3G–I). As with the Nr5a1-Cre TRAP-seq, enrichment was largely a
function of expression level: the genes that were enriched in both datasets were highly expressed in
both, while the genes that were specific to TRAP or pseudo-TRAP were highly expressed in their
enriched dataset, but more lowly expressed in the other. Notably, gene ontology (GO) analysis of
the common genes revealed many terms related to synaptic function, while genes unique to TRAP-
seq were enriched for ribosomal and mitochondrial function (data not shown).
We mapped enriched genes from LeprSlc17a6 TRAP-seq to the gene expression profiles of our
snRNA-seq-defined VMH neuron populations (Figure 3F), revealing the bias of LeprSlc17a6 TRAP-seq
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
8 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

gene expression toward VMHLepr neurons and the exclusion of markers from other VMHLepr cells
from LeprSlc17a6 TRAP-seq-enriched genes. Thus, this analysis demonstrates that Lepr-expressing
VMH neurons map specifically to VMHLepr cell clusters, suggesting that they represent a transcrip-
tionally and functionally unique set of neurons.
Conservation of VMH neuronal populations across species
While many previous studies of VMH neuron function have suggested that this brain region contains
neurons that could represent therapeutic targets to aid people with obesity, diabetes, and other dis-
eases, most of these studies have been performed in mice (Hashikawa et al., 2017; Flak et al.,
2020; Meek et al., 2013; Kim et al., 2012). We know little about the cross-species conservation of
VMH cell populations, however. To assess the potential conservation of VMH neuron populations
across species, we microdissected macaque (Macaca mulatta) VMH and performed snRNA-seq using
the same techniques as for mouse VMH (Figure 4—figure supplement 1). A subset of macaque
neurons expressed NR5A1 and/or FEZF1 and exhibited similar gene expression profiles to our
mouse Nr5a1-Cre TRAP-seq enriched genes (Figure 4—figure supplement 2), suggesting that
these cells represent the macaque VMH and indicating that the mouse and macaque VMH share sim-
ilar global gene expression signatures.
Graph-based clustering of the macaque VMH neurons yielded seven populations with unique
marker genes (with the partial exception of two related ESR1-expressing cell types) (Figure 4B–E).
Most of these macaque populations, including populations marked by LEPR, FOXP2, NFIB, and
ESR1 (VMHLEPR, VMHFOXP2, VMHNFIB, and VMHESR1, respectively), have presumptive orthologs in the
mouse (Figure 4D, see Supplementary file 7 for a complete list of markers). While populations
marked by DLK1 and FEZF1 were absent from this analysis, the macaque VMH contained a popula-
tion marked by QRFPR expression (VMHQRFPR).
To determine whether the macaque populations were orthologous to those from the mouse, we
first compared expression of orthologous genes among mouse and macaque cell clusters. We found
that all macaque populations had clear correlates in the mouse, which mapped according to their
marker genes (as expected) (Figure 4F, Figure 5—figure supplement 1D). Notably, the macaque
VMHQRFPR population correlated with clusters from both VMHDlk1 and VMHFezf1 classes in the
mouse, suggesting that VMHQRFPR contains orthologs of the mouse VMHDlk1 and VMHFezf1 classes.
Projecting the mouse or macaque cluster labels onto the other species using Seurat anchors (see
Materials and methods for more details) yielded similar results (Figure 5—figure supplement 1). All
major classes from mouse and macaque projected with high confidence onto the equivalent major
classes of the other species, and the macaque VMHQRFPR population was represented by both
mouse VMHDlk1 and VMHFezf1 cells (Figure 5—figure supplement 1A).
To generate an atlas of conserved mouse and macaque VMH populations, we integrated the
mouse and macaque data and clustered the merged dataset using the Seurat canonical correlation
analysis (CCA) framework (Figure 5A–B, see Materials and methods for more details). This analysis
revealed populations of VMH neurons that each contained mouse and macaque cells in roughly
equal proportions (Figure 5E). As predicted, neurons from the macaque VMHLEPR, VMHFOXP2,
VMHNFIB, and VMHESR1 classes mapped directly with murine VMHLepr, VMHFoxp2, VMHNfib, and
VMHEsr1 classes, respectively (Figure 5G). We examined the potential co-expression of conserved
marker genes for VMHLEPR cells by in situ hybridization (ISH) for ACVR1C in the macaque hypothala-
mus (Figure 5—figure supplement 2), confirming ACVR1C is co-expressed with LEPR in the
macaque VMHDM. We also examined the potential co-expression of SLC17A8 (which marks VMHNFIB)
with LEPR. SLC17A8 identified a population of cells that lay at the medial extreme of the macaque
VMHDM, corresponding to the most dorsomedial aspect of the rodent VMHDM, as for murine
VMHNfib cells; these cells did not colocalize with LEPR-expressing cells (Figure 5—figure supple-
ment 2).
This analysis also identified macaque populations that mapped with the murine VMHDlk1 and
VMHFezf1 populations; these derived mainly from the macaque VMHQRFPR population (Figure 5G).
Notably, FEZF1 and DLK1 were poorly enriched in the macaque VMHQRFPR population (Figure 5D),
while mouse Qrfpr expression was biased toward the VMHEsr1 populations (Figure 5D). Despite dif-
ferences in some marker genes, however, the orthologous macaque and mouse VMH neuron popu-
lations share dozens of other genes across species (Figure 5H, Supplementary file 8, Figure 5—
figure supplement 1B), suggesting that the mouse and macaque cells in each group represent
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
9 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

similar cell types. Gene ontology (GO) analysis of common marker genes (Source data 2,
Source data 1) revealed that most of these mediate core neuronal functions, such as ion channel
activity (Figure 5—figure supplement 1C). Thus, while some marker genes vary across species, the
mouse VMH populations have close orthologs in the macaque VMH based upon their gene expres-
sion profiles.
Discussion
We combined TRAP- and snRNA-seq analysis of the VMH to identify 24 mouse neuronal populations
with complex interrelations. These 24 populations represented six distinct cell classes that demon-
strated unique anatomic distribution patterns. The main VMH classes were highly conserved
between the mouse and the macaque in terms of gene expression profiles and anatomic distribution
within the VMH. This atlas of conserved VMH neuron populations provides an unbiased and tractable
starting point for the analysis of VMH circuitry and function.
Having many populations of VMH neurons with highly related gene expression profiles compli-
cates the functional analysis of VMH cell types suggesting the importance of simplifying the map of
these heterogeneous populations to permit their manipulation and study. By using hierarchical clus-
tering, we were able to identify six maximally unrelated classes of VMH neurons with distinct gene
expression signatures. These six discrete transcriptionally defined VMH neuronal classes demon-
strated distinct anatomic distribution patterns (three located in the VMHDM, two in the VMHVL, and
one in the tuberal region), revealing a transcriptional basis for the previously suggested functional
architecture of the VMH.
Our VMH cell populations were similar to those previously described by Kim et al., although they
more finely split the VMHVL populations than did we (presumably because their dissection bias
toward the VMHVL yielded more VMHVL neurons) (Kim et al., 2019). We were able to more clearly
distinguish among VMHDM cell types in our VMHDM-focused analysis, however, including by dividing
the VMHDM neurons that they identified into two major classes (VMHLepr and VMHFezf1), as well as
identifying a third VMHDM population (VMHNfib) absent from their analysis. Interestingly, the VMHNfib
population was quite distinct from the more closely related VMHLepr and VMHFezf1 VMHDM cell
types, suggesting a potentially divergent function for this most dorsomedial of the VMHDM
populations.
Our mouse VMH cell types mapped clearly onto specific populations of macaque VMH neurons,
revealing the utility of the mouse as a surrogate for the primate in terms of VMH cell types and, pre-
sumably, function. While the macaque single VMHQRFRP population mapped to two mouse classes
(VMHFezf1 and VMHDlk1) by orthologous gene expression, these mouse classes are closely related to
each other (transcriptionally and anatomically) and the macaque cells from VMHQRFRP segregate to
distinct cell clusters defined by Dlk1 and Fezf1 in the mouse when we integrated and reclustered the
mouse and macaque cell data. Also, while DLK1 is not specific to the macaque VMHQRFPR cells, the
otherwise similar gene expression profiles of mouse and macaque cells that map to VMHDlk1 or
VMHFezf1 populations suggest the conserved nature of these cell types across species.
While not all Lepr-expressing cell types track in the brain across species (e.g., preproglucagon
[Gcg]-containing NTS neurons in the mouse express Lepr, rat NTS Gcg cells do not; Huo et al.,
2008), mouse VMHLepr neurons map directly with macaque VMHLEPR neurons by all of the measures
that we examined. The finding that Lepr/LEPR expression marks a unique and conserved cell type in
rodent and primate is consistent with the notion that this class of VMH neuron mediates a discrete
component of VMH function, as suggested by previous work in the mouse demonstrating roles for
Lepr-expressing VMH neurons in the control of energy balance, but not glucose production or
panic-like behaviors (Meek et al., 2013; Meek et al., 2016; Sabatini et al., 2021).
While the tuberal region contains more GABAergic than glutamatergic neurons, this region proj-
ects to similar target areas as does the core VMH and contains substantial numbers of neurons
marked by Nr5a1-Cre activity. Hence, although VMHFoxp2 cells lie in the tuberal region, their gluta-
matergic nature, their marking by Nr5a1-Cre activity, and the finding that they are transcriptional
most similar to other VMH populations mark VMHFoxp2 cells as VMH neurons. While few data exist
to suggest the physiologic roles played by these cells, it will be interesting to manipulate VMHFoxp2
neurons to determine their function.
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
10 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

The identification of distinct transcriptionally defined VMH cell populations provides the opportu-
nity to develop new tools that can be used to understand the nature and function of VMHDM cell
types and their roles in metabolic control. The finding that the major VMH cell classes found in the
mouse are present in the macaque supports the use of the mouse to study the metabolic functions
of the VMH as a means to identify potential therapeutic targets for human disease. It will be impor-
tant to use these findings to dissect functions for subtypes of VMH cells, which may represent tar-
gets for the therapy of diseases including obesity and diabetes.
Materials and methods
Animals
Mice were bred in the Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine at the University of Michigan. These
mice and the procedures performed were approved by the University of Michigan Committee on
the Use and Care of Animals and in accordance with Association for the Assessment and Approval
of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC) and National Institutes of Health (NIH) guidelines. Mice were
provided with ad libitum access to food (Purina Lab Diet 5001) and water in temperature-controlled
(25˚C) rooms on a 12 hr light-dark cycle with daily health status checks.
Nr5a1-Cre (Jax: 012462) (Dhillon et al., 2006) and Foxp2IRES-Cre (Jax: 030541) (Rousso et al.,
2016) mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratories. Rosa26
CAG-LSL-eGFP-L10a, LeprCre (Jax:
032457), Slc17a6Flpo, and RCFLeGFP-L10a mice have been described previously (Leshan et al., 2006;
Krashes et al., 2014; Sabatini et al., 2021).
Nonhuman primate tissue was obtained from the Tissue Distribution Program at ONPRC. Animal
care is in accordance with the recommendations described in the Guide for the Care and Use of Lab-
oratory Animals of the NIH and animal facilities at the Oregon National Primate Research Center
(ONPRC) are accredited by AAALAC.
Tissue prep, cDNA amplification, and library construction for 10
snRNA-seq
Mice were euthanized using isoflurane and decapitated, the brain was subsequently removed from
the skull and sectioned into 1-mm-thick coronal slices using a brain matrix. The VMH was dissected
out and flash frozen in liquid N2. Nuclei were isolated as previously described (Habib et al., 2017)
with modifications as follows. On the day of the experiment, frozen VMH (from 2 to 3 mice) was
homogenized in Lysis Buffer (EZ Prep Nuclei Kit, Sigma) with Protector RNAase Inhibitor (Sigma) and
filtered through a 30 mm MACS strainer (Myltenti). Strained samples were centrifuged at 500 rcf  5
min and pelleted nuclei were resuspended in wash buffer (10 mM Tris Buffer pH 8.0, 5 mM KCl, 12.5
mM MgCl2, 1% BSA with RNAse inhibitor). Nuclei were strained again and recentrifuged at 500 rcf
 5 min. Washed nuclei were resuspended in wash buffer with propidium iodide (Sigma) and stained
nuclei underwent FACS sorting on a MoFlo Astrios Cell Sorter. Sorted nuclei were centrifuged at
100 rcf  6 min and resuspended in wash buffer to obtain a concentration of 750–1200 nuclei/mL. RT
mix was added to target ~10,000 nuclei recovered and loaded onto the 10 Chromium Controller
chip. The Chromium Single Cell 3’ Library and Gel Bead Kit v3, Chromium Chip B Single Cell kit, and
Chromium i7 Multiplex Kit were used for subsequent RT, cDNA amplification, and library preparation
as instructed by the manufacturer. Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 4000 or NovaSeq
6000 (pair-ended with read lengths of 150 nt) to a depth of at least 50,000 reads/cell.
snRNA-seq data analysis
Count tables were generated from the FASTQ files using cellranger and analyzed in R 3.6.3 using
the Seurat three framework. Genes expressed in at least four cells in each sample and were not
gene models (starting with ‘Gm’) or located on the mitochondrial genome were retained. Cells with
at least 500 detected genes were retained. Doublets were detected using Scrublet (Wolock et al.,
2019). For each 10 run, the expected number of doublets was predicted using a linear model
given 10 data of the detected doublet rate and the number of cells. Then, each cell was given a
doublet score with Scrublet and the n cells (corresponding to the expected number of doublets)
with the top scores were removed.
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
11 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

The data was then normalized using scran (Lun et al., 2016) and centered and scaled for each
dataset independently and genes that were called variable by both Seurat FindVariableFeatures and
sctransform (Hafemeister and Satija, 2019) were input to principal component analysis (PCA). The
top principal components (PCs) were retained at the ‘elbow’ of the scree plot (normally 15–30,
depending on the dataset) and then used for dimension reduction using UMAP and clustering using
the Seurat FindNeighbors and FindClusters functions. Both were optimized for maximizing cluster
consistency by clustering over a variety of conditions: first, varying the number of neighbors from 10
to the square root of the number of cells while holding the resolution parameter in FindClusters at
one and finding the clustering that maximized the mean silhouette score; then, this number of neigh-
bors was held fixed while varying the resolution parameter in FindClusters from 0.2 upward in steps
of 0.2 until a maximal mean silhouette score was found. Clusters were then hierarchically ordered
based on their Euclidean distance in PC space and ordered based on their position in the tree.
Marker genes were found using the Seurat function FindAllMarkers for each sample with resulting
p-values combined using the logitp function from the metap package or using CELLEX 1.0.0. Cluster
names were chosen based on genes found in this unbiased marker gene search and known marker
genes.
From the all-cell data, cell types were predicted using gene set enrichment analysis from the
marker genes and a manually curated set of genes known to mark specific CNS cell types. From this,
clusters that were highly enriched for markers from two (or more) distinct cell types were labeled as
‘doublets’ and those with no enrichment were labeled as ‘junk’, the remaining clusters were labeled
based on their lone CNS cell type.
To predict VMH neurons from all neurons, we first found genes significantly enriched in the bead
fraction in Nr5a1-Cre TRAP-seq (see below for details) and expressed above one count per million.
The scaled count matrix containing these genes was then used as input to PCA. The magnitude of
the first PC (loading) was then used to generate a VMH similarity score and the clusters that had a
high Nr5a1-Cre TRAP loading were glutamatergic (express Slc17a6 and not Gad1 or Slc32a1 above
the mean value), and expressed either Nr5a1 or Fezf1 above the mean value were included as pre-
sumptive VMH.
TRAP-seq analysis
Mice (LeprCre;ROSA26EGFP-L10a or LeprCre;Slc17a6FlpO;ROSA26EGFP-L10a) were euthanized and decap-
itated, the brain was subsequently removed from the skull and sectioned into 1-mm-thick coronal sli-
ces using a brain matrix. The VMH or hypothalamus was dissected and homogenized in lysis buffer.
Between 15 and 20 mice were used for TRAP experiments. GFP-tagged ribosomes were immuno-
precipitated and RNA isolated as previously described (Allison et al., 2018). RNA was subject to
ribodepletion and the resultant mRNA was fragmented and copied into first strand cDNA. The prod-
ucts were purified and enriched by PCR to create the final cDNA library. Samples were sequenced
on a 50-cycle single end run on a HiSeq 2500 (Illumina) according to manufacturer’s protocols.
FASTQ files were filtered using fastq_quality_filter from fastx_toolkit to remove reads with a
phred score <20. Then reads were mapped using STAR with a custom genome containing the
Ensembl reference and sequences and annotation for Cre and EGFP:L10a (and Flpo in the RCFL::
eGFP-L10a dataset). Count tables were generated using the STAR –quantMode GeneCounts flag.
Count tables were analyzed in R 3.6.3 and were subject to quality control to ensure read ade-
quate library size (20–30 million reads), enrichment of positive control genes (e.g., EGFP:L10a and/
or Cre, Nr5a1), and appropriate sample similarity in both hierarchical clustering of Euclidean distance
and TSNE/UMAP space (e.g., bead samples are more similar to one another than to any sup sam-
ple). All samples passed quality control. Enriched genes were determined using DESeq2 including
an effect of sample pair in the model to account for pairing of the bead–sup samples (~pair + cells).
Integration with published data
Count tables from Kim et al., 2019 were downloaded from https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/
ypx3sw2f7c/3 and count tables from Campbell et al., 2017 were downloaded from https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE93374. Note: Only the 10 data from Kim et al. was
used. The data was then preprocessed and clustered in the same way as above, though some sam-
ples were removed from the Kim et al. dataset for low mean read depth that confounded clustering
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
12 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

(Samples 2018_0802, 2018_0803, 2018_0812_1, 2018_0812_2, and 2018_0812_3). For the Kim et al.
dataset, cells were clustered as above (FindNeighbors then FindClusters), and neuron clusters were
predicted using WGCNA to identify correlated gene expression modules. The modules contained
dozens of genes that mapped clearly onto a small set of clusters in UMAP space and—based on
known marker genes—corresponded to the most prevalent cell types in the brain (e.g., neurons,
astrocytes, microglia, oligodendrocytes, etc.). For the Campbell et al. data, neurons were labeled in
the metadata from the authors, so neuronal barcodes were simply selected based on their annota-
tion. For both neuronal datasets, VMH neurons were predicted using the same procedure as above:
clusters that were glutamatergic, Fezf1/Nr5a1-expressing, and similar to Nr5a1-Cre TRAP-seq. This
corroborated the clusters called VMH in both datasets by the original authors, with the exception of
the Nfib populations in the Kim et al. dataset that was not called VMH and therefore not assigned a
cluster name; we refer to these cells as (Missing) in our integrated dataset.
To find shared populations across datasets, we took two approaches. First, variable genes were
found for both datasets using the Seurat FindVariableFeatures function. Then, the pairwise Pearson’s
correlation was found for the mean scaled expression in each cluster in each dataset for the set of
genes called variable in both datasets. Additionally, we used the Seurat FindTransferAnchors and
IntegrateData functions to generate a merged dataset that was then subjected to PCA, UMAP
reduction, and clustering in the same way as above. These new clusters containing cells from both
datasets were then manually named using marker genes from the original datasets (e.g., Dlk1, Esr1,
Satb2, Lepr, Nfib, Foxp2, etc.).
Immunostaining
Animals were perfused with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) for 5 min followed by an additional
5 min of 10% formalin. Brains were then removed and post-fixed in 10% formalin for 24 hr at room
temperature, before being moved to 30% sucrose for 24 hr for a minimum of 24 hr at room temper-
ature. Brains were then sectioned as 30-mm-thick free-floating sections and stained. Sections were
treated with blocking solution (PBS with 0.1% triton, 3% normal donkey serum; Fisher Scientific) for
at least 1 hr. The sections were incubated overnight at room temperature in blocking solution con-
taining primary antibodies. The following day, sections were washed and incubated with fluorescent
secondary antibodies with species-specific Alexa Fluor-488 or -568 (Invitrogen, 1:250) to visualize
proteins. Primary antibodies used include: GFP (1:1000, #1020, Aves Laboratories) and NFIA (1:500,
#PA5-35936, Invitrogen). Images were collected on an Olympus BX51 microscope. Images were
background-subtracted and enhanced by shrinking the range of brightness and contrast in ImageJ.
Macaque snRNA-seq
Whole Rhesus macaque brains were obtained from the Tissue Distribution Program at ONPRC.
Brains were centered within a chilled brain matrix (ASI Instruments, catalog # MBM-2000C) and 2
mm slices were obtained from rostral to caudal. Slices containing the hypothalamus were placed in
saline and the PVH, ARC, VMH, and DMH were punched out and samples were placed in pre-chilled
tubes on dry ice. Samples were stored at  80˚C until shipment on dry ice. Nuclei were isolated from
frozen macaque tissue as described above for mice.
The FASTQ files were mapped to the macaque genome (Mmul_10) using cellranger and count
matrix files were analyzed in R using Seurat three as above, with the exception that gene models
and genes mapping to the macaque mitochondrial genome were not removed. Macaque neurons
were predicted using orthologs of mouse cell-type marker genes and macaque VMH neurons were
identified using macaque orthologs of Nr5a1-Cre TRAP-seq enriched genes. Orthologs were identi-
fied using Ensembl and only 1:1 orthologs were retained.
Species integration
The mouse and macaque datasets were integrated in a similar way to integrating the Kim et al. and
Campbell et al. mouse datasets. First, the macaque genes were renamed to their mouse orthologs
and only 1:1 orthologs and genes expressed in both species were retained. Importantly, because
our dataset was biased toward the dorsomedial VMH and the Kim et al. dataset was biased toward
the ventrolateral VMH, we also included four randomly chosen samples from the Kim et al. data to
get a more representative picture of shared VMH populations across species. The data was then
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
13 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

preprocessed, normalized, and scaled in the same way as previously. The mouse and macaque data
was then integrated using the Seurat FindTransferAnchors and IntegrateData functions and marker
genes were found that were common across species by running FindAllMarkers for each species sep-
arately and then using the metap logitp function to find genes that are significantly enriched.
Macaque ISH
Whole Rhesus macaque brains were obtained from the Tissue Distribution Program at ONPRC.
Hypothalamic blocks fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde were incubated in glycerol prior to freezing
with isopentane. Tissue was sectioned at 25 mm using a freezing stage sliding microtome and free-
floating sections were stored in glycerol cryoprotectant at  20˚C. Tissue was mounted on slides
prior to ISH, which was performed using ACD Bio RNAScope reagents (Multiplex Fluorescent Detec-
tion Kit v2, 323100) for Acvr1c (ACD 591481), Slc17a8 (ACD 543821-c2), and Lepr (ACD 406371-C3).
Negative and positive control probes were included in all runs. Slides were imaged on an Olympus
VS110 Slidescanner and processed using Visiopharm software.
Statistical analysis
All data is displayed as mean ± SEM. All plotting and statistical analysis was performed using R
3.6.3. Specific statistical tests are listed in the figure legends.
Resource availability
All mouse strains will be made available upon reasonable request.
Code availability
All analysis code will be available at https://github.com/alanrupp/affinati-elife-2021 (Affinati et al.,
2021, copy archived at swh:1:rev:d17662cffc0bcf7d20acd74c553f0e0e7f01654b).
Acknowledgements
We thank Randy Seeley, Lotte Bjerre Knudsen, Kevin Grove, Mads Tang-Christensen, Christine Bjørn
Jensen, and members of the Myers and Olson labs for helpful discussions. Research support was
provided by the Michigan Diabetes Research Center (NIH P30 DK020572, including the Molecular
Genetics, Microscopy, and Animal Studies Cores), the Marilyn H Vincent Foundation (to MGM),
Novo Nordisk A/S (to MGM), ADA 1–19-PDF-099 (to PVS), and NIH DK122660 (to AHA). NHP data
was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant P51 OD-11092 for operation of the Oregon
National Primate Research Center and DK123115 (PK).
Additional information
Competing interests
Chien Li: is an employee of Novo Nordisk A/S. The other authors declare that no competing inter-
ests exist.
Funding
Funder
Grant reference number
Author
National Institutes of Health
dk056731
Martin G Myers
Novo Nordisk
Martin G Myers
National Institutes of Health
P30 DK020572
Martin G Myers
National Institutes of Health
DK122660
Alison H Affinati
National Institutes of Health
DK123115
Paul Kievit
National Institutes of Health
P51 OD-11092
Paul Kievit
American Diabetes Association 1-19-PDF-09
Paul V Sabatini
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
14 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the
decision to submit the work for publication.
Author contributions
Alison H Affinati, Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing -
review and editing; Paul V Sabatini, Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing
- review and editing; Cadence True, Abigail J Tomlinson, Melissa Kirigiti, Sarah R Lindsley, Investiga-
tion, Writing - review and editing; Chien Li, Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing - review and
editing; David P Olson, Paul Kievit, Resources, Methodology, Writing - review and editing; Martin G
Myers, Conceptualization, Resources, Formal analysis, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing -
original draft, Project administration, Writing - review and editing; Alan C Rupp, Conceptualization,
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing
Author ORCIDs
Paul V Sabatini
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6613-566X
Martin G Myers
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9468-2046
Alan C Rupp
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5363-4494
Ethics
Animal experimentation: All mice used in this study were maintained in accordance with University
of Michigan Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC), Association for the Assessment
and Approval of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC) and National Institutes of Health (NIH) guide-
lines under protocol number PRO00007438 (PI Myers). Nonhuman primate tissue was obtained
post-mortem from the Tissue Distribution Program at ONPRC. Animal care is in accordance with the
recommendations described in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the
National Institutes of Health and animal facilities at the Oregon National Primate Research Center
(ONPRC) are accredited by the American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care
International. ONPRC does not provide protocol numbers for security reasons.
Decision letter and Author response
Decision letter https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065.sa1
Additional files
Supplementary files
. Source data 1. ESm values from CELLEX for each conserved ventromedial hypothalamic
nucleus (VMH) neuron cluster using macaque data.
. Source data 2. ESm values from CELLEX for each conserved ventromedial hypothalamic
nucleus (VMH) neuron cluster using mouse data.
. Supplementary file 1. Nr5a1eGFP-L10a ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) translating ribo-
some affinity purification with RNA-sequencing (TRAP-seq) enrichment results.
. Supplementary file 2. Ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) pseudo-translating ribosome
affinity purification with RNA-sequencing (TRAP) enrichment results.
. Supplementary file 3. ESm values from CELLEX for each mouse ventromedial hypothalamic
nucleus (VMH) neuron cluster.
. Supplementary file 4. ESm values from CELLEX for each mouse ventromedial hypothalamic
nucleus (VMH) neuron class.
. Supplementary file 5. LeprSlc17a6-L10a ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) translating ribo-
some affinity purification with RNA-sequencing (TRAP-seq) enrichment results.
. Supplementary file 6. Ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) Lepr pseudo-translating ribosome
affinity purification with RNA-sequencing (TRAP) enrichment results.
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
15 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

. Supplementary file 7. ESm values from CELLEX for each macaque ventromedial hypothalamic
nucleus (VMH) neuron cluster.
. Supplementary file 8. ESm values from CELLEX for each conserved ventromedial hypothalamic
nucleus (VMH) neuron cluster using combined data.
. Transparent reporting form
Data availability
Sequencing data have been deposited in GEO under accession code GSE172207.
The following dataset was generated:
Author(s)
Year Dataset title
Dataset URL
Database and Identifier
Myers MG
2021
Cross-Species Analysis Defines
the Conservation of
Anatomically-Segregated
VMH Neuron Populations
https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/geo/query/acc.
cgi?acc=GSE172207
NCBI Gene Expression
Omnibus, GSE172207
References
Affinati AH, Sabatini PV, True C, Tomlinson AJ, Kirigiti M, Lindsley SR, Li C, Olson DP, Kievit P, Myers MG, Rupp
AC. 2021. Affinati et al. eLife 2021. Software Heritage. swh:1:rev:d17662cffc0bcf7d20acd74c553f0e0e7f01654b.
https://archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:dir:0fb028314303fb86017d2a8b4a33e75937e2b5dd;origin=https://
github.com/alanrupp/affinati-elife-2021;visit=swh:1:snp:34e91d1808a671de921da9ce18a487798e977757;anchor=
swh:1:rev:d17662cffc0bcf7d20acd74c553f0e0e7f01654b
Allison MB, Pan W, MacKenzie A, Patterson C, Shah K, Barnes T, Cheng W, Rupp A, Olson DP, Myers MG. 2018.
Defining the transcriptional targets of leptin reveals a role for Atf3 in Leptin Action. Diabetes 67:1093–1104.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.2337/db17-1395, PMID: 29535089
Bingham NC, Verma-Kurvari S, Parada LF, Parker KL. 2006. Development of a steroidogenic factor 1/Cre
transgenic mouse line. Genesis 44:419–424. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/dvg.20231, PMID: 16937416
Campbell JN, Macosko EZ, Fenselau H, Pers TH, Lyubetskaya A, Tenen D, Goldman M, Verstegen AM, Resch
JM, McCarroll SA, Rosen ED, Lowell BB, Tsai LT. 2017. A molecular census of arcuate hypothalamus and
median eminence cell types. Nature Neuroscience 20:484–496. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4495, PMID: 2
8166221
Chen H, Charlat O, Tartaglia LA, Woolf EA, Weng X, Ellis SJ, Lakey ND, Culpepper J, Moore KJ, Breitbart RE,
Duyk GM, Tepper RI, Morgenstern JP. 1996. Evidence that the diabetes gene encodes the leptin receptor:
identification of a mutation in the leptin receptor gene in db/db mice. Cell 84:491–495. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81294-5, PMID: 8608603
Chen R, Wu X, Jiang L, Zhang Y. 2017. Single-Cell RNA-Seq reveals hypothalamic cell diversity. Cell Reports 18:
3227–3241. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.03.004, PMID: 28355573
Cheung CC, Kurrasch DM, Liang JK, Ingraham HA. 2013. Genetic labeling of steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1)
neurons in mice reveals ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus (VMH) circuitry beginning at neurogenesis
and development of a separate non-SF-1 neuronal cluster in the ventrolateral VMH. Journal of Comparative
Neurology 521:1268–1288. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.23226
Dhillon H, Zigman JM, Ye C, Lee CE, McGovern RA, Tang V, Kenny CD, Christiansen LM, White RD, Edelstein
EA, Coppari R, Balthasar N, Cowley MA, Chua S, Elmquist JK, Lowell BB2006. Leptin Directly Activates SF1
Neurons in the VMH, and This Action by Leptin Is Required for Normal Body-Weight Homeostasis. Neuron 49:
191–203. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2005.12.021
Dodd GT, Worth AA, Nunn N, Korpal AK, Bechtold DA, Allison MB, Myers MG, Statnick MA, Luckman SM. 2014.
The thermogenic effect of leptin is dependent on a distinct population of prolactin-releasing peptide neurons
in the dorsomedial hypothalamus. Cell Metabolism 20:639–649. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2014.07.
022, PMID: 25176149
Elmquist JK, Bjørbaek C, Ahima RS, Flier JS, Saper CB. 1998. Distributions of leptin receptor mRNA isoforms in
the rat brain. The Journal of Comparative Neurology 395:535–547. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1096-
9861(19980615)395:4<535::AID-CNE9>3.0.CO;2-2, PMID: 9619505
Flak JN, Goforth PB, Dell’Orco J, Sabatini PV, Li C, Bozadjieva N, Sorensen M, Valenta A, Rupp A, Affinati AH,
Cras-Me´ neur C, Ansari A, Sacksner J, Kodur N, Sandoval DA, Kennedy RT, Olson DP, Myers MG. 2020.
Ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus neuronal subset regulates blood glucose independently of insulin. Journal
of Clinical Investigation 130:2943–2952. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI134135
Gavini CK, Jones WC, Novak CM. 2016. Ventromedial hypothalamic melanocortin receptor activation: regulation
of activity energy expenditure and skeletal muscle thermogenesis. The Journal of Physiology 594:5285–5301.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1113/JP272352, PMID: 27126579
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
16 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

Habib N, Avraham-Davidi I, Basu A, Burks T, Shekhar K, Hofree M, Choudhury SR, Aguet F, Gelfand E, Ardlie K,
Weitz DA, Rozenblatt-Rosen O, Zhang F, Regev A. 2017. Massively parallel single-nucleus RNA-seq with
DroNc-seq. Nature Methods 14:955–958. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4407, PMID: 28846088
Hafemeister C, Satija R. 2019. Normalization and variance stabilization of single-cell RNA-seq data using
regularized negative binomial regression. Genome Biology 20:296. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-019-
1874-1, PMID: 31870423
Hashikawa K, Hashikawa Y, Tremblay R, Zhang J, Feng JE, Sabol A, Piper WT, Lee H, Rudy B, Lin D. 2017. Esr1+
cells in the ventromedial hypothalamus control female aggression. Nature Neuroscience 20:1580–1590.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4644, PMID: 28920934
Huo L, Gamber KM, Grill HJ, Bjørbaek C. 2008. Divergent leptin signaling in Proglucagon neurons of the nucleus
of the solitary tract in mice and rats. Endocrinology 149:492–497. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2007-0633,
PMID: 17974623
Jones GL, Wittmann G, Yokosawa EB, Yu H, Mercer AJ, Lechan RM, Low MJ. 2019. Selective restoration of Pomc
expression in glutamatergic POMC Neurons: Evidence for a Dynamic Hypothalamic Neurotransmitter Network.
Eneuro 6:ENEURO.0400-18.2019. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0400-18.2019, PMID: 30957016
Kim KW, Donato J, Berglund ED, Choi Y-H, Kohno D, Elias CF, DePinho RA, Elmquist JK. 2012. FOXO1 in the
ventromedial hypothalamus regulates energy balance. Journal of Clinical Investigation 122:2578–2589.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI62848
Kim DW, Yao Z, Graybuck LT, Kim TK, Nguyen TN, Smith KA, Fong O, Yi L, Koulena N, Pierson N, Shah S, Lo L,
Pool AH, Oka Y, Pachter L, Cai L, Tasic B, Zeng H, Anderson DJ. 2019. Multimodal analysis of cell types in a
hypothalamic node controlling social behavior. Cell 179:713–728. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.09.
020, PMID: 31626771
Krashes MJ, Shah BP, Madara JC, Olson DP, Strochlic DE, Garfield AS, Vong L, Pei H, Watabe-Uchida M, Uchida
N, Liberles SD, Lowell BB. 2014. An excitatory paraventricular nucleus to AgRP neuron circuit that drives
hunger. Nature 507:238–242 . DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12956
Krause WC, Ingraham HA. 2017. Origins and Functions of the Ventrolateral VMH: A Complex Neuronal Cluster
Orchestrating Sex Differences in Metabolism and Behavior.”. In: Mauvais-Jarvis F (Ed). Sex and Gender Factors
Affecting Metabolic Homeostasis, Diabetes and Obesity. Cham: Springer International Publishing. p. 199–213.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70178-3_10
Kunwar PS, Zelikowsky M, Remedios R, Cai H, Yilmaz M, Meister M, Anderson DJ. 2015. Ventromedial
hypothalamic neurons control a defensive emotion state. eLife 4:e06633. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.
06633
Kurrasch DM, Cheung CC, Lee FY, Tran PV, Hata K, Ingraham HA. 2007. The neonatal ventromedial
hypothalamus transcriptome reveals novel markers with spatially distinct patterning. Journal of Neuroscience
27:13624–13634. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2858-07.2007, PMID: 18077674
Lam BYH, Cimino I, Polex-Wolf J, Nicole Kohnke S, Rimmington D, Iyemere V, Heeley N, Cossetti C, Schulte R,
Saraiva LR, Logan DW, Blouet C, O’Rahilly S, Coll AP, Yeo GSH. 2017. Heterogeneity of hypothalamic pro-
opiomelanocortin-expressing neurons revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing. Molecular Metabolism 6:383–
392. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2017.02.007, PMID: 28462073
Lee H, Kim DW, Remedios R, Anthony TE, Chang A, Madisen L, Zeng H, Anderson DJ. 2014. Scalable control of
mounting and attack by Esr1+ neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus. Nature 509:627–632. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1038/nature13169, PMID: 24739975
Leshan RL, Bjo¨ rnholm M, Mu¨ nzberg H, Myers MG. 2006. Leptin receptor signaling and action in the central
nervous system. Obesity 14:208S–212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/oby.2006.310, PMID: 17021368
Lindberg D, Chen P, Li C. 2013. Conditional viral tracing reveals that steroidogenic factor 1-positive neurons of
the dorsomedial subdivision of the ventromedial hypothalamus project to autonomic centers of the
hypothalamus and hindbrain. Journal of Comparative Neurology 521:3167–3190. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/
cne.23338
Lun AT, McCarthy DJ, Marioni JC. 2016. A Step-by-Step workflow for Low-Level analysis of Single-Cell RNA-Seq
data with bioconductor. F1000Research 5:2122. DOI: https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.9501.2, PMID: 27
909575
Meek TH, Matsen ME, Dorfman MD, Guyenet SJ, Damian V, Nguyen HT, Taborsky GJ, Morton GJ. 2013. Leptin
action in the ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus is sufficient, but not necessary, to normalize diabetic
hyperglycemia. Endocrinology 154:3067–3076. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2013-1328, PMID: 23782941
Meek TH, Nelson JT, Matsen ME, Dorfman MD, Guyenet SJ, Damian V, Allison MB, Scarlett JM, Nguyen HT,
Thaler JP, Olson DP, Myers MG, Schwartz MW, Morton GJ. 2016. Functional identification of a neurocircuit
regulating blood glucose. PNAS 113:E2073–E2082. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1521160113,
PMID: 27001850
Minokoshi Y, Haque MS, Shimazu T. 1999. Microinjection of leptin into the ventromedial hypothalamus increases
glucose uptake in peripheral tissues in rats. Diabetes 48:287–291. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.48.2.
287, PMID: 10334303
Noble EE, Billington CJ, Kotz CM, Wang C. 2014. Oxytocin in the ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus reduces
feeding and acutely increases energy expenditure. American Journal of Physiology-Regulatory, Integrative and
Comparative Physiology 307:R737–R745. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.00118.2014, PMID: 24990860
Persson-Augner D, Lee YW, Tovar S, Dieguez C, Meister B. 2014. Delta-like 1 homologue (DLK1) protein in
neurons of the arcuate nucleus that control weight homeostasis and effect of fasting on hypothalamic DLK1
mRNA. Neuroendocrinology 100:209–220. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1159/000369069, PMID: 25342302
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
17 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

Rousso DL, Qiao M, Kagan RD, Yamagata M, Palmiter RD, Sanes JR. 2016. Two pairs of ON and OFF retinal
ganglion cells are defined by intersectional patterns of transcription factor expression. Cell Reports 15:1930–
1944. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.04.069, PMID: 27210758
Sabatini PV, Wang J, Rupp AC, Affinati AH, Flak JN, Li C, Olson DP, Myers MG. 2021. tTARGIT AAVs mediate
the sensitive and flexible manipulation of intersectional neuronal populations in mice. eLife 10:e66835.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.66835, PMID: 33704065
Tartaglia LA, Dembski M, Weng X, Deng N, Culpepper J, Devos R, Richards GJ, Campfield LA, Clark FT, Deeds
J, Muir C, Sanker S, Moriarty A, Moore KJ, Smutko JS, Mays GG, Wool EA, Monroe CA, Tepper RI. 1995.
Identification and expression cloning of a leptin receptor, OB-R. Cell 83:1263–1271. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/0092-8674(95)90151-5
Timshel PN, Thompson JJ, Pers TH. 2020. Genetic mapping of etiologic brain cell types for obesity. eLife 9:
e55851. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55851, PMID: 32955435
Toda C, Shiuchi T, Kageyama H, Okamoto S, Coutinho EA, Sato T, Okamatsu-Ogura Y, Yokota S, Takagi K, Tang
L, Saito K, Shioda S, Minokoshi Y. 2013. Extracellular signal-regulated kinase in the ventromedial hypothalamus
mediates leptin-induced glucose uptake in red-type skeletal muscle. Diabetes 62:2295–2307. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.2337/db12-1629, PMID: 23530005
Vander Tuig JG, Knehans AW, Romsos DR. 1982. Reduced sympathetic nervous system activity in rats with
ventromedial hypothalamic lesions. Life Sciences 30:913–920. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0024-3205(82)
90619-1, PMID: 7070201
Vong L, Ye C, Yang Z, Choi B, Chua S, Lowell BB. 2011. Leptin action on GABAergic neurons prevents obesity
and reduces inhibitory tone to POMC neurons. Neuron 71:142–154. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.
2011.05.028, PMID: 21745644
Wolock SL, Lopez R, Klein AM. 2019. Scrublet: computational identification of cell doublets in Single-Cell
transcriptomic data. Cell Systems 8:281–291. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2018.11.005, PMID: 30954476
Affinati et al. eLife 2021;10:e69065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.69065
18 of 18
Tools and resources
Neuroscience

===== Ahmed2019_Heliyon_SCI+RatModels+BehavioralTests =====
Review Article
Experimental spinal cord
injury and behavioral tests in
laboratory rats
Rakib Uddin Ahmed 1, Monzurul Alam∗,1, Yong-Ping Zheng
Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail address: md.malam@connect.polyu.hk (M. Alam).
1 Authors contributed equally.
Abstract
Traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI) results in some serious neurophysiological
consequences that alter healthy body functions and devastate the quality of living
of individuals. To ﬁnd a cure for SCI, researchers around the world are working
on diﬀerent neurorepair and neurorehabilitation modalities. To test a new
treatment for SCI as well as to understand the mechanism of recovery, animal
models are being widely used. Among them, SCI rat models are arguably the
most prominent. Furthermore, it is important to select a suitable behavioral test
to evaluate both the motor and sensory recovery following any therapeutic
intervention. In this paper, we review the rat models of spinal injury and
commonly used behavioral tests to serve as a useful guideline for neuroscientists
in the ﬁeld of SCI research.
Keywords: Neurology, Physiology, Rehabilitation, Surgery, Anatomy,
Neuroscience
1. Introduction
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is responsible for damaging the sensory, motor and auto-
nomic functions of an individual [1]. To address this problem, over the past few
Received:
13 July 2018
Revised:
1 November 2018
Accepted:
4 March 2019
Cite as: Rakib Uddin Ahmed,
Monzurul Alam,
Yong-Ping Zheng.
Experimental spinal cord
injury and behavioral tests in
laboratory rats.
Heliyon 5 (2019) e01324.
doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.
e01324
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

decades animals have been used for developing and testing therapies for SCI [2].
Both large and small animal models are commonly used to study the injury mecha-
nism and to assess the therapeutic outcomes after a controlled SCI in laboratory set-
tings [3]. Large animals, especially dogs and cats were used in the early
1950se1970s [4]. Afterward, rodent models became popular and were then stan-
dardized as a suitable animal model for SCI experiments. In rodent models, rats
and mice are mostly used to evaluate the functional and morphological changes after
SCI [5, 6, 7]. However, in the mouse model, following a SCI, evidence suggests that
a modest degree of regeneration occurs in the injured area and no typical cyst-like
structure is formed, while such type of axonal regeneration is not found in rat and
non-human primates [1]. In contrast, after an injury in rats, a large ﬂuid-ﬁlled cystic
cavity is formed which is similar to the human pathology after SCI and thus useful
for preclinical studies [8]. Rats are quickly adaptive to the experimental environ-
ments and to the given tasks for sensorimotor evaluations. Furthermore, high avail-
ability, low infection rate after surgery, and ease of maintenance make the rat a prime
candidate for translational research. Based on the above, laboratory rats are now
widely used as experimental SCI models.
In this translational research, several rat injury models were developed to examine
the neurophysiological responses after a SCI. Numerous approaches are being
applied to regenerate the damaged axon across the lesioned area, and conﬁrmed im-
munohistochemically and by protein analysis in rats [9, 10]. Furthermore, apart from
histological analysis, behavioral responses are also studied as a primary measure to
assess the recovery of spinal pathways. Other reviews [11, 12, 13, 14] focused on the
diﬀerent animal models of SCI particularly cervical injury and some behavior tests.
However, to our knowledge, no study has comprehensively described about all the
injury models and their impact on the behavioral changes. In this review, we focused
on diﬀerent SCI rat models and their recovery assessments using diﬀerent behavioral
tests. We also propose some novel behavioral tests to enrich this research. Our re-
view oﬀers a guideline for the researchers in this ﬁeld to successfully conduct SCI
research using rats.
2. Main text
2.1. Rat SCI models
Experimental injury models are designed to explore the physiological changes after
SCI to evaluate the treatments to repair the broken spinal cord. Laboratory rats are
commonly used to evaluate neural repair after an experimental SCI. Although some
SCI experiments have been conducted in non-human primates, more demanding
protocols, critical manpower, health safety and a large amount of investment in
the experimental setup and management make the primate model much more
2
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

diﬃcult and less used than rat injury models [15]. In rat SCI experiments, three
diﬀerent injury models are widely utilized: compression, contusion and transection
models. Among these, contusion and compression are the most common types of
injury found in humans. Hence, to evaluate the neuronal changes and behavioral out-
comes, these models are essential [7].
2.1.1. Compression model
In humans, ﬂexion and axial compression (burst fracture) are responsible for displac-
ing bone fragments into the vertebral canal and consequently SCI occurs. However,
the timing of compression can aﬀect the outcome of pathology [16]. To address this
problem, in rats the same model of injury is carried out to create persistent spinal
canal occlusion that is similar to human acute SCI. This injury is varied at diﬀerent
levels of the spinal cord. For example, at lumbar level, compression injury impairs
the ejaculation reﬂex in male rats [17]. There are several ways to create a compres-
sion model for rats such as calibrated forcep compression, clip compression and ba-
loon compression [16]. However, the clip compression model at the thoracic level is
much more correlated with the functional and histological outcome [18].
The acute clip compression model is the ﬁrst non-transection model that was devel-
oped in 1978 [19] and is widely used for experimental injury in rats. It is an inex-
pensive method where a special clip is used to compress the spinal cord [20].
Under inhalation anesthesia, a laminectomy is performed at a desired level of the
spine by retracting muscles and removing the spinous process and body of vertebrae.
A modiﬁed aneurysm clip (Fig. 1) is then inserted extradurally and maintained for 60
Fig. 1. The diagram represents diﬀerent injury models in rats’ spinal cord. In the compression model a
clip is used to initiate the injury. For the contusion model of injury an impactor is dropped from a pre-
deﬁned distance. In the transection model of injury, a surgical blade is used to carry out diﬀerent types of
transection injury. Modiﬁed from [113].
3
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

sec and then the clip is removed to produce an acute injury [21]. Muscles and con-
nective tissues are then sutured, and the skin is closed.
Due to the similarity to human traumatic SCI, the compression injury model is also
suitable for translational research. In a chronic condition of a compression SCI
model, glial scars are formed which are quite similar to those in SCI patients [22].
To examine the therapeutic eﬀect and neuroprotective study following a traumatic
SCI, the compression model of injury is a better choice for the experiment. Further-
more, this model is useful to study the minimal loss of neurons after a SCI. In addi-
tion, the compression injury model is also useful to study the secondary injury
mechanism events and cell transplantation therapies [23]. An important limitation
of the compression method, however, is that after the injury some neural tracts
may not be properly damaged which may lead to undesired outcomes in regeneration
studies. Moreover, after 4 and 6 weeks of post-injury, tissue sparing may increase,
suggesting that the late subacute and early intermediate stages of the secondary
injury may be associated with limited neuroanatomical recovery [24].
2.1.2. Contusion model
In humans, compression injury is caused by mainly falls from a height or by a phys-
ical impactor that crushes the spinal vertebral column which further leads the bony
parts to compress the spinal cord [1]. In rats, to get the same type of injury, the contu-
sion model is probably the most suitable method [25]. Among the several anatomical
locations, in thoracic position contusion injury is commonly used to evaluate the for-
ward and backward locomotion as well as recovery of the spinal tract [26]. Usually,
the injury is induced by an impactor which is used to drop a 10-gm rod onto the spi-
nal cord [27]. Several impactors are available worldwide to serve this purpose. In
Multicenter Animal Spinal Injury Study (MASCIS), the New York university
impactor, Inﬁnite Horizon (IH) impactor and Ohio State University Electromagnetic
Spinal Cord Injury Device (ESCID) are most commonly used. In MASCIS, a 10-gm
computer-controlled load is used to induce a SCI in rats [28]. After laminectomy, at a
desired spinal level, muscles and spinous process are removed according to the
diameter (usually 2.5 mm) of the impactor (Fig. 1). Height of the impactor, drop
weight and time are previously set up on a computer before initiation of the injury.
After the injury, subdural hemorrhage is commonly found which is later washed
with saline [27]. Finally, muscles and skin are sutured. Another reliable commer-
cially available impactor is Inﬁnite Horizon (IH) which is also used to produce
SCI rat models. System software is implemented to apply impactor force to the spi-
nal cord. This injury renders an ideal model of SCI by reducing the variability among
other existing devices [29].
Most SCIs reported in humans are similar to contusion and compression [8, 30].
Although the contusion SCI animal model is useful to study the secondary injury
4
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

mechanism and neuropathology of human injury [7], some limitations still persist
[31]. In neuroregeneration research, after a thoracic contusion injury, it is diﬃcult
to study the ﬁber’s regeneration through the contusion site [32]. Furthermore, the
contusion model cannot provide information regarding axonal tract regeneration
which is essential to evaluate limb function [33].
2.1.3. Transection model
The transection model of injury is the most widely utilized method that can give the
information of desired neural tracts at diﬀerent spinal level after injury. To investi-
gate the neuronal and functional improvements after diﬀerent transplantation thera-
pies, transection models of SCI are commonly used [34]. This injury model is quite
stable and assessment can be performed within four weeks of the injury [35]. The
spinal cord transection model is also useful to evaluate axonal regeneration and
behavioral responses after SCI [36]. Transection injury cannot produce any condi-
tion similar to contusion injury. However, this injury is useful to investigate the
damaged tract recovery after experimental therapies. Two main transection models
(complete and incomplete) are used in rats. In the incomplete transection model
(often called hemisection model), diﬀerent portions of spinal cord are cut such as
lateral hemisection, dorsal hemisection and dorsal funiculus crush to carry out
diﬀerent experiments. However, incomplete surgical transections are not considered
relevant to human SCI [13]. A complete injury requires a complete transection of the
spinal cord including both ascending and descending tracts. To carry out a complete
transection injury after laminectomy, microdissection scissors are inserted to cut the
spinal cord at a desired level and depth. After an injury gelfoam is inserted into the
transection site to minimize the bleeding and to conﬁrm the separation of the spinal
cord. After some complete transections ventral parts of the axons may be spared,
which is responsible for some residual motor function of the hindlimb [37]. For
an incomplete transection injury iridectomy scissors are used to cut both the dorsal
and ventral columns of the spinal cord from lateral to the midline by closing the tip of
the scissors [38]. Muscles and skin incision are then sutured, and the rat is examined
for therapeutic approaches and behavioral tests after recovery. Complete and incom-
plete transection injuries are not very similar to the clinical SCI of humans; they are
rather utilized for neuroscience and neurology research to study the neuronal circuits
and pathways [13].
Transection injury can give information on both ascending and descending tract
functions which is useful in neuroscience research [7]. Compared to other injury
models there is no need for a special device to transect the spinal cord. Before trans-
ecting the spinal cord, it is essential to understand the neurophysiology of the
diﬀerent anatomical structures of the nervous system. A complete transection injury
event involves the dissection of both ascending and descending tracts [22]. Special
5
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

care should be taken for the pain management and urinary bladder management after
a complete transection. To study speciﬁc spinal tract activity such as dorsal and
dorsolateral CST, an incomplete transection (or hemisection) injury can be applied.
After therapeutic interventions, this injury can also provide information regarding
axonal tract regeneration. The hemisection model of injury is suitable at the level
of cervical region CST which is responsible for forelimb reaching tasks. To regen-
erate axonal tracts for translational research after any therapeutic approach or cell
transplantation, the transection model of injury can be a choice for experiments
[39]. However, the transection injury model is unable to study the secondary injury
mechanism.
2.1.4. Selection of an optimum injury model
Pathological and behavioral functions that alter after a SCI depend on the site and
type of the injury. A correct injury model can give a proper understanding of the sys-
tem and the cellular-level changes after a SCI. Furthermore, an experimental SCI
model is necessary to evaluate the safety and reliability of a new therapeutic inter-
vention before translating it to humans [40]. Every injury model has advantages
and disadvantages over other models. Some selection criteria (listed in Table 1)
are necessary to select the most optimum one for a speciﬁc study. For example,
for translational research, contusion and compression injury models are useful as
these models mimic some relevant characteristics of the lesions of traumatic injuries
of the spinal cord. As they mimic real-life events, both models are also useful to
study the secondary injury mechanism. Even though there are clear advantages of
clinical translation of the injuries, both models fail to conﬁrm the anatomical lesion,
conﬁdently and precisely. In contrast, transection injury model conﬁdently cuts spe-
ciﬁc neural roots and circuits as per experimenter’s demand and thus very useful for
neuroscience research [13]. However, a post-experiment histology might be required
to conﬁrm the lesion. To study a speciﬁc drug for nerve regeneration in the lesioned
Table 1. Summary of the major injury models and their selection criteria.
Contusion
Compression
Transection
 The model is useful for
neuroprotective mechanism
study [114].
 Ideal injury model for
studying pathology and
secondary injury
mechanism [7].
 Diﬃcult method with high
variability [115].
 Recommended for
translational research.
 Simple and reliable method [116].
 Suitable method to study
secondary injury mechanism [16].
 Useful for cell transplantation
therapy
 Diﬃcult to control the variability
between subjects.
 Suitable model for translational
research [20].
 To study speciﬁc
pathway function and
regeneration [34].
 Easy to trace the axonal
tract [34].
 Precise control over the
injury.
 Least variability between
subjects.
 Suitable model for
neuroscience research.
6
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

spinal cord a speciﬁc nerve root lesion via incomplete transection model is suitable
[41, 42]. However, for cell transplantation treatment, a compression model is
recommended.
2.2. Behavioral examinations
Laboratory rats are widely used to evaluate diﬀerent types of behavioral tests that
involve neurological functions. After an experimental SCI in the desired location,
alteration in the spinal cord and neurological function can be conﬁrmed with behav-
ioral assessment. Hence, behavioral examination is one of the fundamental tests after
any therapeutic intervention of SCI. Diﬀerent behavioral tests are carried out to es-
timate the pre- and post-treatment functions of various neurological tracts of the
sensorimotor system [43]. According to the data collection procedure and functional
organization of the nervous system these tests are categorized as: 1) endpoint mea-
sures, in which a certain behavior receives a score according to some predeﬁned
scale, e.g. number of pellets eaten in a given time; 2) kinematic measurements,
which range from a qualitative description of movements to continuous quantitative
measurements, e.g. Basso-Beattie-Bresnahan (BBB) scale; 3) kinetic measurements,
which quantify the force produced by the limbs, e.g. forelimb grip strength tests; and
4) electrophysiological measurements, e.g. motor and somatosensory evoked poten-
tials [43, 44]. Based on the neurological tracts used [14], these behavioral examina-
tions can be divided into: 1) Motor test, e.g., limb grip strength test, forelimb
reaching task; 2) Locomotor test, e.g. BBB scale, swim test; 3) Sensory test, e.g.
Von Frey ﬁlament test, test for hot and cold sensation; and 4) Sensorimotor test,
e.g ladder walking test, grid walking test, rope climbing and walking test.
2.3. Motor test
Descending tracts of motor neurons which comprises both pyramidal and extrapyra-
midal tracts convey information to the lower motor centers in the spinal cord that are
responsible for transferring information to the muscle ﬁber to initiate movements of
the limbs [45]. The corticospinal tract (CST) is one of the foremost descending tracts
of the motor system that plays a vital role in skilled motor tasks by conveying voli-
tional information to the limbs. The degree of CST injury is strongly co-related to the
impairment of skilled motor function after a SCI [46]. After a cervical cord injury,
motor control of the forelimb is profoundly aﬀected due to the impairment of the
CST. Motor functions may be restored after skilled motor learning training that as-
sists in the reorganization of the nerve ﬁbers [47]. To assess the motor recovery of
descending tracts, several functional tests have been developed. These tests include
evaluation of the motor functions of diﬀerent limbs after complete and incomplete
SCI. Among these tests the Irvine, Beatties and Bresnahan (IBB) scale, skilled fore-
limb reaching task and limb grip strength test are the most common to evaluate the
7
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

motor functions after an experimental SCI in laboratory rats. In the following sec-
tions, we discuss them in detail.
2.3.1. Skilled forelimb reaching task
The forelimb reaching task is time-consuming and needs several weeks of training to
induce motor learning for forelimb food pellet retrieval. First, rats are habituated
with the apparatus and special food pellet (usually sugar pellet) for one to two weeks.
Food restriction is given from 3 days prior to starting the training. Training is pro-
vided for several weeks for the rats to master the reaching and grasping of the
food pellets. A pellet is placed on a pit platform in front of the box slit and it
must be ensured that the rat approaches the opening in a continuous manner as
shown in (Fig. 2). Ten pellets for warm up and 20 pellets per task are usually
used to evaluate the reaching behavior. Qualitative and quantitative assessments
of a rat’s skilled reaching task are performed after 4 weeks of training (5 sessions/
week) [48, 49]. For qualitative assessment, 10 components of movements (digits
to the midline, digits ﬂexed, elbow in, advance, digits extended, arpeggio, grasp, su-
pination I and II) are rated. Animals’ reaching is rated on a 3-point scale. For normal
reaching a score of “0” and for abnormal movement “1” is used. If there is no move-
ment then “2” is given [50, 51]. For quantitative assessment, the success rate of a
rat’s reaching is usually calculated. It includes the total number of pellets retrieved
and eaten. The following equation is used for reaching success rate estimation:
Fig. 2. Skilled forelimb reaching task for a laboratory rat. A) A special Plexiglas chamber (40 cm  25
cm  30 cm) with a 1e2 cm wide opening for grasping the food pellet from a pit is normally used which
is 3 cm above the base. B-E) Diﬀerent stages (advance-forelimb is advanced through a slot to the plat-
form, digit extension-forepaw is extended toward the pellet, grasp-paw grasps the pellet and supination-
paw is withdrawn from the slot and a pellet is successfully taken into the mouth) of reaching and grasping
of a sugar pellet by a trained Sprague Dawley rat.
8
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

Success rate ¼ Number of pellets = Number of trials  100
Furthermore, the amount of time required for grasping the pellets can also be
measured to evaluate forelimb funtional recovery [52]. Pre-injury assessment of suc-
cess rates for forelimb reaching was performed for ﬁve rats. The experimental pro-
tocol was approved by the Animals Subjects Ethics Sub-committee (ASESC) of The
Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Fig. 3 demonstrates the average number of food
pellets grasped and consumed in each trial (20 pellets per trial) by all the ﬁve rats.
After one week of apparatus habituation, the rats were trained to grasp 45 mg of dust-
less sugar pellets (Bio-serv, Flemington, NJ, USA). After 42 days of training,
reaching scores for each time point were compared to the untrained day 1 score. Sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerences of motor learning were found on day 22 and day 42 of the
training (P < 0.05 and P < 0.001 respectively; paired t-test).
A major limitation of the skilled forelimb reaching task is that partial lesion may not
impair the reaching success and qualitative scores including forepaw aiming, supi-
nation and food pellet release. However, it is also expected that complete restoration
of the damaged corticospinal pyramidal tract will not restore the original behavioral
condition [53].
2.3.2. Irvine, Beatties and Bresnahan (IBB) scale for forelimb
function
The IBB scale is a 10-point scale to identify recovery of both proximal and distal
forelimb functions after unilateral cervical SCI. Unlike the forelimb reaching task,
acclimatization of rats and food deprivation is not necessary for this test [54]. First,
a rat is placed in a cylindrical Plexiglas chamber for acclimation to the food. When
Fig. 3. Success rate (Mean  SEM) of the food-pellet reaching task of uninjured rats (n ¼ 5). Signiﬁcant
diﬀerences were found after 22 days (**P < 0.05) and 42 days (***P < 0.001) of reaching and grasping
training from day 1 (untrained).
9
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

the rat is well adapted to the apparatus and food, grasping and eating behavior are
recorded by a video camera. Various sizes (spherical and doughnut) of cereals are
generally used to assess forelimb function. From the recorded video, elbow position
(extended or ﬂexed), supporting of the paw (contact or noncontact), position of fore-
paw (clubbed, extended or ﬂexed), digit movements and grasping method are eval-
uated [55]. This test, however, is a qualitative assessment of the forelimb function.
Visual inspections by the experimenter may aﬀect the experimental assessment and
outcomes. Sometimes, the recorded video fails to provide any information for
scoring as the animal often shifts position during eating the cereals [54].
2.3.3. Limb grip strength test
A grip strength test is used to evaluate both forelimb and hindlimb functions [56].
Quantitative strength of the ﬂexor muscles can be measured by this test. Grip
strength measurement is important because it can predict any motor deﬁcit in the
limbs after a SCI. Anderson and colleagues showed that after a complete unilateral
hemisection, rats lose the gripping ability permanently [57]. Acclimatization of rats
to the testing apparatus is necessary before starting the test [58]. At the beginning of
measurement, the rat is held by the neck or back and allowed to grab the metal grid or
pull bar with either forepaw or hindpaw. The rat is then gently pulled away in hor-
izontal plane by the tail. The sensor reads the pull strength until the rat releases the
bar. Maximum grip strength is then measured from the recorded force. For each
limb, several testing sessions are usually conducted to evaluate the maximum grip
strength. This method is a simple procedure to evaluate the recovery over time
and the response is immediate. However, after daily repeated testing, rats may hes-
itate to grasp if they feel an unpleasant sensation when pulled by the tail [59]. Unlike
to other motor tests, in grip strength test, rats are forcibly motivated to perform the
task. Hence, the measured value may diﬀer from their natural grip strength value.
The test values are also experimenter-dependent, adding more variability into the
measurement. Furthermore, due to multiple measurements, the muscle may become
fatigue and results may diﬀer from each measured value.
2.4. Locomotor test
In mammals, the spinal cord contains an intrinsic locomotor mechanism that is
controlled by a rhythmic central pattern generator (CPG) [60]. The location of the
CPG in rats is found throughout the spinal cord, but most prominently at the lower
lumbar part that rhythmically activates ﬂexor and extensive motor pools of hin-
dlimbs during locomotion [61]. To transmit the neuronal impulse, the dorsal root
of the spinal cord carries sensory information and transmits it to the CPG for inte-
gration within the spinal cord for motor output (Windhorst 2007). During locomo-
tion, the motor output carries information for the gait control (Grillner and Jessell
10
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

2009). Hence, to evaluate the recovery after SCI, locomotion tests of rats are
commonly used [62]. Common locomotion tests include open-ﬁeld test, swim
test, BBB scale and BBB sub-scoring scale. In the following sections, we discuss
these tests in detail.
2.4.1. BBB scale and BBB sub-scoring scale
In 1954, Tarlov and Klinger designed a qualitative scale for locomotion [63]. Due to
less reliability and sensitivity, it was further modiﬁed to the Basso, Beattie and Bres-
nahan (BBB) scale [64] and is widely used to evaluate hindlimb locomotion func-
tion. It is a 21-point qualitative measurement developed for rats where ‘0’ refers
to no observable hindlimb movement and ‘21’ refers to consistent hindlimb move-
ment. This 21-point scale represents several stages during recovery such as move-
ment of joints, forelimb and hindlimb coordination, trunk stability, toe clearance
and tail position. From 0 to 7 is related to movement of the joints and 8 to 21 are
related to planter stepping and consistent coordination of gait [64, 65].
The BBB scale has some advantages over other locomotor tests. For example, there
is no training needed for this assessment. Furthermore, this test does not require any
special apparatus, and thus rats can incorporate a wide range of functions [66]. BBB
scale is an assessment for locomotion study which is widely used for the evaluation
of interlimb coordination via reticulospinal and vestibular pathways [67]. Following
a SCI, electrical and pharmacological stimulation can trigger the rhythmic circuit to
generate locomotion type movements [68]. For studies of reticulospinal regeneration
after a thoracic cord injury, the BBB scale is a good method to evaluate the assess-
ment. Furthermore, rhythmic activity can give information on excitatory interneu-
rons of the spinal cord. In the case of therapeutic treatment, the scale does not
follow the order of the BBB scale [69]. Furthermore, for non-contusive models of
SCI, many functional state conditions cannot represent the BBB scale [70].
To further solve the sensitivity of the BBB scale and to evaluate the higher motor
function, a 7-point sub-scoring system was developed by Lankhorst and colleagues.
In this sub-scoring scale, all the behaviors are cumulated independently and then
added together to yield a single score [71]. The major limitation of the BBB sub-
score is that it is only valid for mildly injured animals [72].
2.4.2. Open ﬁeld test
The open ﬁeld test is also the simplest method to evaluate locomotor behavior and
anxiety in rats after a SCI. In 1934, Calvin Hall developed a test where defecation
was used as a measure of anxiety [73]. It is also used to evaluate the eﬃcacy of
therapeutic drugs on anxiety-like behaviors in rodents [74]. To evaluate the explor-
atory behavior deﬁcit after a SCI, open ﬁeld test of rat is also used [75]. Under
11
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

closely controlled conditions a square open ﬁeld arena (60  60 cm), made of
black Plexiglas is required to assess behavior. The bottom of the area is subdivided
into 12  12 cm squares. A rat is placed at the center of the area and the number of
squares crossed is counted and recorded [76]. Additionally, the open ﬁeld test is
also used to measure the locomotor recovery of hindlimbs [77]. Another modiﬁca-
tion to this test named open ﬁeld motor test (OFT) was also developed for motor
evaluation [78, 79].
2.4.3. Swim test
The swim test is a standardized natural evaluation method of locomotor recovery af-
ter SCI [80, 81]. The method is also suitable for measuring the spasticity after a con-
tusive SCI [82]. Rebecca and colleagues developed the Louisville Swimming Scale
(LSS) which mainly evaluates forelimb and hindlimb movements and body position.
It cannot, however, uniformly evaluate mild to moderate SCI in rats [83]. To combat
this problem, in 2015, Xu and colleagues developed a swimming scale to assess the
locomotor recovery after a SCI in rats [72].
For the swim test, typically a Plexiglas swim tank (150 cm  15 cm  30 cm) is
used [72]. The tank is usually ﬁlled with tap water (28e32 C) to a depth of 20 cm.
To observe rats during swimming, a mirror is placed underneath the tank at a 45-
degree angle. A total of ﬁve trials per rat are used to evaluate the swimming
behavior. Forelimb and hindpaw movements, and the distance between hindpaw
and tail are used to analyze the swimming behavior. All the parameters are
measured on an 8-point scale as described previously [84]. An important limitation
of the test is that it cannot be performed in complete SCI animals. Moreover, the
rats need extensive training to obtain eﬀective results; otherwise it may induce
depression behavior [85].
2.5. Sensory test
Sensory feedback such as aﬀerent proprioception plays a signiﬁcant role in the con-
trol of motor functions. Hence, sensory tests are used to evaluate the hyperactivity of
rats in the presence of heat [86], cold [87] or pain [88]. After an experimental SCI
and therapeutic interventions, sensitivity tests are useful to evaluate the sensory path-
ways of the experimental rats [89]. By selecting a correct hindlimb sensory test for
these SCI rats, a sensory assessment can be carried out. In the following sections, we
further discuss some of these sensory tests in detail.
2.5.1. Tactile sensory test or neuropathic pain test
To test hindlimb sensation, the tactile sensory test is used by determining whether
the rat can stand or not after a SCI [90]. A group of special ﬁlaments (Von Frey
12
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

Filament) are used to evaluate the improvement of neuropathic pain after therapeutic
interventions in SCI rats [91]. Two validated testing methods - up/down plantar Von
Frey (VF) test, and dorsal Von Frey Hair (VFH) monoﬁlaments - are used for the
evaluation [90]. Before the evaluation, rats are habituated with the cage by providing
cereal grain so that they can seek food for a reward. The up/down plantar VF test is
calibrated by VF microﬁlaments ranging from 0.4e74 gm to elicit paw withdrawal
by the stimulus. For a successful test, at least 10 sequential trials are required for each
paw, and about 3e5 min of resting period must be maintained between two trials. In
the dorsal VF test, ﬁrst the rat is wrapped in a towel so that the hindquarters are
exposed. The stimulus is then given to the dorsal surface in between the ﬁrst and sec-
ond metatarsal by the VFH ﬁlaments. Withdrawal of the paw indicates that the spinal
reﬂex is active. Hair value for left and right paw are recorded and withdrawal re-
sponses are marked as positive and negative. Both of these forces produced by
the Von Frey Hairs are then averaged to yield a single score [92]. The VFH test
has high sensitivity to assess the tactile sensation of the hindpaws, and it can also
give information on neuropathic pain in chronic conditions. A disadvantage of
this test is, however, that it requires a very long time of repetitive measurements
which may lead to sensitization or learnt responses [93].
2.5.2. Test for hot sensation
This is a modiﬁcation of the tail ﬂick test where a heating beam is placed under the
tail for a predeﬁned time to assess the thermal sensation [94]. Later, a preheated (50
C) plate is used for this test to evaluate the sensory stimulation of hind paws after a
thoracic injury. A rat is placed on this hot plate for a maximum of 60 seconds. If the
rat shows any sign of licking its hind paws within this time, the rat is considered as
positive. If the rat does not show any sign of licking, it is considered as a negative
and must be removed from the hot plate after 60 seconds [95]. A major limitation of
the test is that the rat may vocalize or be injured due to the heat or burn its paw skin.
The problem can be overcome by wrapping the rat in a towel and placing only the
plantar on the metal surface [96].
2.5.3. Test for cold sensation
Unlike the hot sensation test, the cold sensation test is also useful for sensory noci-
ceptor testing. Ethyl chloride is mainly used for testing the cold sensation of rats.
First, the area of interest of the skin of a rat is shaved. Then ethyl chloride is sprayed
onto it, and the response is recorded and graded based on the following scale: 0 ¼ no
response, 1 ¼ localized response, 2 ¼ transient vocalization, and 3 ¼ sustained
vocalization [88]. Other chemicals such as acetone can also be used for cold sensa-
tion evaluation. Application of 100 ml of acetone onto the plantar hind paw was
applied to test the cold response in rats [87]. In addition, this sensory test can
13
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

evaluate only unilateral pain measurement. A complete injured animal model is not
suitable due to the variability during measurements.
2.6. Sensorimotor test
Unilateral or bilateral damage to the spinal cord is responsible for chronic deﬁcits of
somatosensory functions [97] and asymmetry of limb movements and inter-limb co-
ordination [98]. The somatosensory system also incorporates the aﬀerent, eﬀerent
and central integration pathways of the spinal cord to maintain homeostasis during
joint movements. To evaluate this sensory and motor integration after a SCI and
treatment, some sensorimotor tests are commonly used in rats. In the following sec-
tions, we discuss these tests in further detail.
2.6.1. Horizontal ladder walking test
To evaluate forelimb and hindlimb stepping and coordination, a horizontal ladder
walking test is frequently used [99]. Special ladder apparatus and video recording
are needed for quantitative and qualitative analysis of walking. Two horizontal Plex-
iglas walls (100 cm  20 cm each) with 50 small holes inserted with plane metal
rungs are generally used to make the horizontal ladder (Fig. 4). The rungs are placed
in a regular pattern at about 2 cm intervals. Rats are allowed to cross the horizontal
ladder from a new cage to the native cage. A reward is given after each successful
cross across the ladder.
After several days of training, diﬀerent templates of irregular rung patterns are used
to normalize the diﬃculty and enhance comparability during learning [70]. The re-
corded videos of the rat’s footsteps on the rungs are used for analyses. A 7-category
foot fault scoring scale (0-total miss, 1-deep slip, 2-slight slip, 3-replacement,
Fig. 4. Ladder rung test for rats. A) Two horizontal Plexiglas walls with 50 small inserted metal rungs;
B) The rat completely misses the metal rung when walking along the ladder; C) Rat lifts its limb and
replaces it on another metal rung.
14
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

4-correction, 5-partial placement and 6-correct placement) is used for the quantita-
tive measurement of foot paw placement on the rungs.
2.6.2. Grid walking test
Grid walking test is useful to evaluate and predict the eﬀerent and aﬀerent sensori-
motor integration [100]. There are several versions of this test such as horizontal grid
walking [44], ladder beam [101], inclined grid climbing [102] etc. These tests are
useful for measuring sensorimotor deﬁcit and recovery after any experimental injury
and treatment.
The grid walking test is an another method to assess the sensorimotor deﬁcits and
motor incoordination in rats after a SCI [100]. The test is useful for animals with
chronic neurological deﬁcits. Because foot faults are quantiﬁed during the test, it
is also termed as the foot fault test [103]. A rat is placed on a metal grid and allowed
to cross a 1e1.2 m long runway with irregular gaps. A fence is used to restrict the
roaming of the rat. The rat is required to put its limbs accurately on certain places.
When the paw of a rat falls down, it considered as a foot fault. Errors are counted
during the walking on the grid for 1 minute. A 3-point score is given to evaluate
the task. In complete transected or severely contused animal models, a major limi-
tation is that the diﬀerentiation of descending spinal inﬂuences may be diﬃcult;
however, this measure was found to be a sensitivity indicator for small residual
neurological deﬁcits [66, 78].
For inclined ladder climbing, a ladder made up of plastic frame (1280 mm  190
mm) with 19 round rungs (6 mm in diameter) is place in an inclined position
(55). Training of animal is essential for this test. After successful training, rat is
placed at the bottom of the ladder and climbing video is recorded. From the video,
hindpaw placings are evaluated and correct ladder steps are noted. The test can pro-
vide an evaluation of motor behavior after severe paralysis. However, the sensory
feedback cannot properly evaluated by this test. Furthermore, marginal improve-
ments of hindlimb stepping also cannot be evaluated properly; although, for horizon-
tal ladder walking, the hindlimb stepping can be evaluated properly.
2.6.3. Rope climbing and walking test
Pre-training of rats is needed for the rope climbing test. During this test, rats are
required to climb 160 cm and 1.25-in. wide vertical rope four times. Videos are
recorded using a camera to evaluate the climbing. From the video, the total number
of foot slips per rope climbing are evaluated for 42 days after the injury [104]. For
the horizontal rope walking test, rats are trained to cross an 83 cm horizontal rope
as described previously [105]. Rats are then tested for ﬁve consecutive trials.
Quantitative assessments of the rats are performed based on slips and falls from
15
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

the rope during each trial. The total number of errors per 10 steps is analyzed to
evaluate the locomotion on a 4-point rating (0- normal locomotion, 1- close to
normal locomotion, 2- moderate or unable to achieve continuous placement,
3- frequent falls and slips).
The sensorimotor test is useful to assess gait during walking. To ﬁnd out the coor-
dination of both sensory and motor functions, ladder walking tests are performed
before and after a SCI. With special apparatus, bipedal movement capacity can
also be carried out during locomotion [106]. Nonetheless both quantitative and qual-
itative assessments are essential to validate the study after an experimental SCI.
2.6.4. Selection of an appropriate behavioral test
An appropriate behavioral test should be chosen to understand the eﬀects of new
therapeutic interventions on experimental animals. Limitations of the behavior tests
should be considered before proceeding with the test. For speciﬁc tract recovery, a
behavior test should be chosen very wisely. For example, to evaluate the motor re-
covery, especially after CST injury, skilled reaching task in rats is useful. Similarly,
for drug and cell transplantation treatments for sensorimotor recovery, diﬀerent grid
walking tests can be considered. Behavioral assessment should also be chosen on the
basis of reliability, validation and sensitivity [64, 107, 108]. The overall criteria for
selecting a particular behavioral test are summarized in Table 2.
A healthy nervous system utilizes all the functions to accomplish one particular task,
it is expected that not all the functions are dominant to that task. For example, while
reaching task is dominant with motor function and walking task is dominant with
locomotor function; for natural reaching and walking, along with motor and locomo-
tor functions, both sensory and sensorimotor functions are also essential. However,
one or two appropriate tasks are suﬃcient to test the recovery of one particular
function.
Table 2. Summary of broad four types of behavioral tests and their selection
criteria.
Motor test
Locomotor test
Sensory test
Sensorimotor test
 To study volitional
movements
including arm and
digit movements [54].
 Qualitative and
quantiataive assessment
of forelimb function [48].
 To test diﬀerent neuronal
tract functions [50].
 To study the central
pattern generator (CPG)
mechanism [117].
 To study ﬂexor and
extensor neural network
organization [118].
 To examine sensory
integrity and
improvement after
any neurological
injury [90].
 To evaluate the
aﬀerent tract
function [89].
 To examine
somatosensory
and sensorimotor
integration [119].
 To assess gait
dynamics [106].
 To evaluate the
coordination
between left
and right limb
movements [99].
16
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

3. Conclusions
Laboratory rat with experimental SCI is a well-accepted animal model, frequently
used worldwide for SCI-related translational research. Several surgical methods
such as compression, contusion and transection models have been developed and
tested on laboratory rats. Selection of a correct injury model is also essential to un-
derstand similar clinical conditions in patients. Plasticity of neural tract after SCI is
very important and is a major topic in clinical research. However, there are still some
questions needed to be answered. How the behavior or activity modulates the neural
circuits and the synaptic strengths? What is the mechanism underlying this neuro-
plasticity? Each behavioral test, however, can answer only one or two speciﬁc ques-
tions. Hence, some new tests should be included into the experimental toolkits. For
example, for studying bipedal locomotion, rats can be trained on a body-weight sup-
port system for locomotor training [109]. Recent studies have demonstrated success-
ful translation of the research results to early-stage clinical interventions [110, 111].
For rat’s somatosensory test, tickling test, a new method of eliciting ultrasonic vocal-
ization by gently caressing to the trunk area, can be used to test the integrity of the
neuronal tract for conveying sensory information [112]. For successful clinical tests
of new interventions for SCI, an appropriate experimental plan is also needed. None-
theless, very high ethical standards should be maintained for animal welfare and for
the acceptance of the scientiﬁc outcomes.
Declarations
Author contribution statement
All authors listed have signiﬁcantly contributed to the development and the writing
of this article.
Funding statement
This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public,
commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.
Competing interest statement
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Additional information
No additional information is available for this paper.
References
[1] J. Kjell, L. Olson, Rat models of spinal cord injury: from pathology to
potential therapies, Dis. Model. Mech. 9 (10) (2016) 1125e1137. Epub
17
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

2016/10/14. PubMed PMID: 27736748; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMCPMC5087825.
[2] N. Zhang, M. Fang, H. Chen, F. Gou, M. Ding, Evaluation of spinal cord
injury animal models, Neural Regen. Res. 9 (22) (2014) 2008e2012.
PubMed PMID: 25598784.
[3] T. Cheriyan, D.J. Ryan, J.H. Weinreb, J. Cheriyan, J.C. Paul, V. Lafage, et
al., Spinal cord injury models: a review, Spinal Cord 52 (8) (2014)
588e595. Epub 2014/06/11 PubMed PMID: 24912546.
[4] B.K. Kwon, F. Streijger, C.E. Hill, A.J. Anderson, M. Bacon, M.S. Beattie,
et al., Large animal and primate models of spinal cord injury for the testing of
novel therapies, Exp. Neurol. 269 (2015) 154e168. Epub 2015/04/23.
PubMed PMID: 25902036.
[5] G.A. Metz, A. Curt, H. van de Meent, I. Klusman, M.E. Schwab, V. Dietz,
Validation of the weight-drop contusion model in rats: a comparative study
of human spinal cord injury, J. Neurotrauma 17 (1) (2000) 1e17. Epub 2000/
02/16. PubMed PMID: 10674754.
[6] R. van den Brand, J. Heutschi, Q. Barraud, J. DiGiovanna, K. Bartholdi,
M. Huerlimann, et al., Restoring voluntary control of locomotion after para-
lyzing spinal cord injury, Science 336 (6085) (2012) 1182e1185. Epub
2012/06/02. PubMed PMID: 22654062.
[7] M. Sharif-Alhoseini, M. Khormali, M. Rezaei, M. Safdarian, A. Hajighadery,
M.M. Khalatbari, et al., Animal models of spinal cord injury: a systematic
review, Spinal Cord 55 (8) (2017) 714e721. Epub 2017/01/25. PubMed
PMID: 28117332.
[8] D.-H. Lee, J.K. Lee, Animal models of axon regeneration after spinal cord
injury, Neurosci. Bull. 29 (4) (2013) 436e444. PubMed PMID: 23893429.
[9] L.T. Alto, L.A. Havton, J.M. Conner, E.R. Hollis 2nd, A. Blesch,
M.H. Tuszynski, Chemotropic guidance facilitates axonal regeneration and
synapse formation after spinal cord injury, Nat. Neurosci. 12 (9) (2009)
1106e1113. Epub 2009/08/04. PubMed PMID: 19648914; PubMed Central
PMCID: PMCPMC2753201.
[10] L. Olson, Combinatory treatments needed for spinal cord injury, Exp. Neu-
rol. 248 (2013) 309e315. Epub 2013/07/09. PubMed PMID: 23830948.
[11] R. Nardone, C. Florea, Y. Holler, F. Brigo, V. Versace, P. Lochner, et al., Ro-
dent, large animal and non-human primate models of spinal cord injury, Zoology
(Jena) 123 (2017) 101e114. Epub 2017/07/20. PubMed PMID: 28720322.
18
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

[12] S.A. Geissler, C.E. Schmidt, T. Schallert, Rodent models and behavioral out-
comes of cervical spinal cord injury, J. Spine Suppl 4 (2013) 001. PubMed
PMID: 25309824.
[13] O. Steward, R. Willenberg, Rodent spinal cord injury models for studies of
axon regeneration, Exp. Neurol. 287 (Pt 3) (2017) 374e383. Epub 2016/07/
05. PubMed PMID: 27374113.
[14] J. Sedy, L. Urdzikova, P. Jendelova, E. Sykova, Methods for behavioral
testing of spinal cord injured rats, Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 32 (3) (2008)
550e580. Epub 2007/11/27. PubMed PMID: 18036661.
[15] M. Sharif-Alhoseini, V. Rahimi-Movaghar, Animal Models in Traumatic
Spinal Cord Injury, 2014.
[16] D. Abdullahi, A.A. Annuar, M. Mohamad, I. Aziz, J. Sanusi, Experimental
spinal cord trauma: a review of mechanically induced spinal cord injury in
rat models, Rev. Neurosci. 28 (1) (2017) 15e20. Epub 2016/11/16. PubMed
PMID: 27845888.
[17] N. Kozyrev, M.D. Staudt, A. Brown, L.M. Coolen, Chronic contusion spi-
nal cord injury impairs ejaculatory reﬂexes in male rats: partial recovery by
systemic infusions of dopamine D3 receptor agonist 7OHDPAT, J. Neuro-
trauma 33 (10) (2016) 943e953. Epub 2015/10/07. PubMed PMID:
26437577.
[18] P.C. Poon, D. Gupta, M.S. Shoichet, C.H. Tator, Clip compression model is
useful for thoracic spinal cord injuries: histologic and functional correlates,
Spine 32 (25) (2007) 2853e2859. Epub 2008/02/05. PubMed PMID:
18246008.
[19] A.S. Rivlin, C.H. Tator, Eﬀect of duration of acute spinal cord compression
in a new acute cord injury model in the rat, Surg. Neurol. 10 (1) (1978)
38e43. Epub 1978/07/01. PubMed PMID: 684604.
[20] C.H. Tator, P. Poon, Acute clip impact-compression model, in: J. Chen,
Z.C. Xu, X.-M. Xu, J.H. Zhang (Eds.), Animal Models of Acute Neurolog-
ical Injuries, Humana Press, Totowa, NJ, 2009, pp. 449e460.
[21] G. Moonen, K. Satkunendrarajah, J.T. Wilcox, A. Badner, A. Mothe, W. Foltz,
et al., A new acute impact-compression lumbar spinal cord injury model in the
rodent, J. Neurotrauma 33 (3) (2016) 278e289. Epub 2015/09/29. PubMed
PMID: 26414192; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC4744888.
[22] J.M. Cregg, M.A. DePaul, A.R. Filous, B.T. Lang, A. Tran, J. Silver, Func-
tional regeneration beyond the glial scar, Exp. Neurol. 253 (2014) 197e207.
19
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

Epub 2014/01/16. PubMed PMID: 24424280; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMCPMC3951813.
[23] G.D. Sun, Y. Chen, Z.G. Zhou, S.X. Yang, C. Zhong, Z.Z. Li, A progressive
compression model of thoracic spinal cord injury in mice: function assess-
ment and pathological changes in spinal cord, Neural Regen. Res. 12 (8)
(2017) 1365e1374. Epub 2017/10/03. PubMed PMID: 28966654; PubMed
Central PMCID: PMCPMC5607834.
[24] N. Forgione, S.K. Karadimas, W.D. Foltz, K. Satkunendrarajah, A. Lip,
M.G. Fehlings, Bilateral contusion-compression model of incomplete trau-
matic
cervical
spinal
cord
injury,
J.
Neurotrauma
31
(21)
(2014)
1776e1788. Epub 2014/06/21. PubMed PMID: 24949719; PubMed Central
PMCID: PMCPMC4186801.
[25] W. Young, Spinal cord contusion models, Prog. Brain Res. 137 (2002)
231e255. Epub 2002/11/21. PubMed PMID: 12440371.
[26] S. van Gorp, M. Leerink, S. Nguyen, O. Platoshyn, M. Marsala,
E.A. Joosten, Translation of the rat thoracic contusion model; part 2 - forward
versus backward locomotion testing, Spinal Cord 52 (7) (2014) 529e535.
Epub 2014/05/14. PubMed PMID: 24819507.
[27] W. Young, MASCIS spinal cord contusion model, in: J. Chen, Z.C. Xu, X.-
M. Xu, J.H. Zhang (Eds.), Animal Models of Acute Neurological Injuries,
Humana Press, Totowa, NJ, 2009, pp. 411e421.
[28] J.A. Gruner, A monitored contusion model of spinal cord injury in the rat, J.
Neurotrauma 9 (2) (1992) 123e126, discussion 6-8. Epub 1992/01/01.
PubMed PMID: 1404425.
[29] S.W. Scheﬀ, A.G. Rabchevsky, I. Fugaccia, J.A. Main, J.E. Lumpp Jr.,
Experimental modeling of spinal cord injury: characterization of a force-
deﬁned injury device, J. Neurotrauma 20 (2) (2003) 179e193. Epub 2003/
04/05. PubMed PMID: 12675971.
[30] B.K. Kwon, J. Hillyer, W. Tetzlaﬀ, Translational research in spinal cord
injury: a survey of opinion from the SCI community, J. Neurotrauma 27
(1) (2010) 21e33. Epub 2009/09/16. PubMed PMID: 19751098.
[31] S.M. Onifer, A.G. Rabchevsky, S.W. Scheﬀ, Rat models of traumatic spinal
cord injury to assess motor recovery, ILAR J. 48 (4) (2007) 385e395. Epub
2007/08/23. PubMed PMID: 17712224.
[32] M.S. Beattie, J.C. Bresnahan, Cell death, repair, and recovery of function af-
ter spinal cord contusion injuries in rats, in: R.G. Kalb, S.M. Strittmatter
20
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01324
2405-8440/ 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Article Nowe01324

===== Alaynick2011_Cell+SpinalCordDev =====
Progenitor
Circuitry
Postmitotic
Column
Hindlimb Pool 
Progenitor Zone (Mitotic)
Postmitotic 
Cell Type Neurotransmitter
 Target
 Projection
  Role 
Low 
Low 
Low
Olig2 
pMN
MN
dl6
V3D
V0D
V0D
V2a
MN
dl3
dl4
V2a
V0C
V0C
V0V
V0V
V3V
VX
Nkx6.1 Nkx6.2 Ngn1
Ngn2
Lhx3 
Somatic 
MMC
HMC
LMCm
LMCI
PGC
Rectus f
Vastus
Visceral 
Isl2 
Nkx6.2 
Nkx6.1 
Isl1 
Lhx1 
C O N T R A L A T E R A L
C O N N E C T I O N S
I P S I L A T E R A L
C O N N E C T I O N S
Hb9 
Pea3 
Er81 
Er81 
Ia
propriospinals 
Hb9 
Ils1
Glutamate
CA>2
Cerebellum
Somatosensory relay
Glutamate
IA>2
Cerebellum
Somatosensory relay
Glutamate
CA<D
Thalamus
Somatosensory relay
Glutamate
IA<D
Motor neurons
Somatosensory relay
GABA
I<2
Cutaneous afferents
proprioceptive terminals
Somatosensory
associative
GABA
C<2
Dorsal horn interneurons
Somatosensory
associative
Glutamate
C AD
Dorsal horn interneurons
Somatosensory
associative
Glutamate
C<2
Dorsal horn interneurons
Somatosensory
associative
GABA/Glycine
C AD
Ventral interneurons
MNs
L/R coordination?
GABA Glycine
C
MN
L/R coordination
GABA Glycine
C D 1-3
MN, IaIN
Motor function
Acetylcholine
IC D 1-3
MN, Renshaw
Motor output
amplitude
Glutamate
?
MN, V0
Motor function
Glycine GABA
I D 1-3
MN, IaIN
Recurrent inhibition
of MNs
Glycine GABA
I D 1-3
MN, Renshaw
Reciprocal inhibition
Glycine GABA
?
?
Rate
Glutamate
I A>D>2
MN, V0
L/R coordination
GABA Glycine
I A>D>2
INs
F/E?
GABA Glycine?
?
?
?
Acetylcholine
Muscle
Muscle
Contraction of
musculature
Glutamate
? 
?
Motor function
Glutamate
C A>D>2
MN, V1, V2
Rhythmicity
Glutamate
C A>D>2
MN, V1, V2
Rhythmicity
Shh 
Foxa2 
Olig2 
Gdf7 
Dbx2 
Ngn2 
Dbx1 
Msx1 
Ngn1 
Math1 
Ngn1 
Ascl1 Gsh2 
Olig3 
Gsh1 
Ngn2 
Ptf1a 
Ngn3 
Lhx3 
Bm3a 
Evx1/2 
En1 
Hb9 
Sim1 
Lbx1 
PLCγ
 
Sox14 
Gata2 
Scl 
Gata3 
Pitx2 
Drg11 
Delta 
Notch 
FoxD3 
Bm3a 
Lhx5 
Lhx5 
Drg11 
Delta4 
Notch1 
Sox1
Tlx1/3 
Pax2 
Pax2 
Tlx3 
Lhx1/5 
Isl1 
Lmx1b 
Lhx1 
Lhx1 
Chx10 
BarH1 
Lhx9 
Lhx2 
Isl1/2 
pd1
dl1c
dl1i
dl2
dl3
dl4
dILA
dILB
dl5
dl6
V0D
V0V
V0C
V0G
V1
IaIN
V1
V2a
V2b
V2c
MN
VX
V3D
V3V
pd2
pd3
pd4
pdIL
pd5
pd6
p0
p1
p2
pMN
p3
Somite-
derived RA
Notochord-
derived Shh  
Ectoderm-derived TGF-β 
 
Ptf1a 
Sox21 
Foxn4 
Gata2 
Pax2 
Lhx3
 
Foxp2 
Lhx2 FoxD3 
Wt1 
Lhx3 
Lhx1 
Isl1 
Isl2 
Lmo4 
Isl1 
Foxp1 
HNF-6 
Hb9 
Hb9 
Hb9 
Bhlhb5 
Bhlhb5 
Bhlhb5 
Bhlhb5 
Gsx1/2 
Gsx1/2 
Bmpr1a 
Bmpr1b
Bmpr1a 
Bmpr1b
Lmx1a 
Lmx1a 
Nkx6.2
Nkx6.2
Nkx6.1
Nkx6.1
V1
Renshaw
V1
Renshaw
V1
Renshaw
V1
Renshaw
V1
Ia IN
V1
Ia IN
Nkx2.2
Nkx2.9  
Nkx2.2
Nkx2.9  
Bmp4
Bmp6
Bmp7
Gdf7
Wnt
Bmp4
Bmp6
Bmp7
Gdf7
Wnt
Roof plate  
Roof plate  
Floor plate  
Floor plate  
GABA, Glycine
Glutamate, ACh  
Class I: Shh repressed
Class II: Shh induced
Class A: TGFβ dependent
Class B: TGFβ independent  
P R O J E C T I O N  C O D E  
I: Ipsilateral
C: Contralateral
A: Ascending
D: Descending
1: Number of segments     
S Y M B O L S  
Adduc b
Adduc m
Adduc b
Gracilis p
Gracilis a
Obturator
Pectineous
Pax7 
Pax6 
Irx3 
Pax3 
SnapShot: Spinal Cord Development
William A. Alaynick1, Thomas M. Jessell2, and Samuel L. Pfaff1
1 HHMI, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; 2 HHMI, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA
See online version for legend and references.
178 Cell 146, July 8, 2011 ©2011 Elsevier Inc. DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2011.06.038

SnapShot: Spinal Cord Development
William A. Alaynick1, Thomas M. Jessell2, and Samuel L. Pfaff1
1 HHMI, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; 
2 HHMI, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA
178.e1  Cell 146, July 8, 2011 ©2011 Elsevier Inc.  DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2011.06.038
This SnapShot outlines the sequential genetic steps that generate neuronal diversity within an idealized spinal segment of the mouse. The progression from neural progenitor 
cells to postmitotic neurons spanning embryonic day 9.5 (e9.5) to e18.5 is shown from left to right, although some events are not strictly linear. Diverse combinations of Hox 
transcription factor expression along the rostrocaudal (i.e., head-to-tail) axis further subdivide motor neurons, but for clarity, these patterns are not reflected in this idealized 
segment. Recent studies have begun to define the functions of the cardinal cell types in the spinal cord, particularly those that relate to locomotor behaviors.
Precursor Generation
Cellular identities are defined by the influence of a two-dimensional coordinate system of morphogen gradients that act on the neuroepithelial cells occupying the ventricular 
zone of the ~e9.5 neural tube. A Sonic hedgehog (Shh) gradient produced by the notochord and the floor plate establishes the identity of five ventral progenitor cell domains (p0, 
p1, p2, pMN, and p3), marked by the expression transcription factors with a basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain and a homeodomain. Genes repressed by Shh are categorized 
as class I (e.g., Irx3), and genes induced by Shh are termed class II (e.g., Olig2). Typically, the transcription factors in adjacent progenitor domains repress expression of factors in 
neighboring domains, preventing cells from developing with hybrid identities. Transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) family proteins from the overlying ectoderm (e.g., Bmp4) and 
roof plate (e.g., Gdnf7) produces dorsalizing signals. The dorsal-most progenitor domains, pd1–pd3, depend on TGFβ, whereas pd4–pd6 and pdIL are independent of TGFβ. 
The somite produces retinoic acid (RA) that controls subtype and dorsoventral identity through Pax6. Within this idealized segment of spinal cord, these morphogen gradients 
establish 12 progenitor domains that grossly give rise to seven dorsal interneuron progenitor divisions, pd1–6 and pdIL; four ventral interneuron progenitor divisions, p0–3; and 
one motor neuron progenitor domain, pMN. Ventral progenitor domains (e.g., pMN) produce one cell type early (e.g., motor neurons) followed by another cell type later (e.g., 
oligodendrocytes).
Refinement and Subdivision of Classes
As cells mature within their respective progenitor zones and begin to exit the cell cycle, an abrupt transition occurs in the transcriptional profile of cells. The postmitotic cells from 
some progenitor domains (e.g., p2) become further diversified through intercellular signaling interactions (e.g., Notch-Delta), which leads to the generation of excitatory V2a and 
inhibitory V2b neurons from common ancestral progenitor cells. As neuron development progresses, the neurotransmitter properties of the cells emerge, and they express phe-
notypic markers, such as neurotransmitter biosynthetic enzymes (e.g., choline acetyltransferase [ChAT] or glutamic acid decarboxylase [GAD]) and vesicular transport proteins 
(e.g., vGluT2). Many progenitor domains tend to give rise to neurons with similar initial axonal growth trajectories; however, the pd1, p1, and p0 domains produce interneuron 
subtypes with diverse axonal projections, which are clear exceptions to this trend. The diversification of a single neuronal class is best exemplified by motor neurons.
Motor Neurons
Motor neurons are subdivided by their cell body positions within motor columns. Each motor column consists of multiple motor pools that innervate individual muscles. Generic 
postmitotic motor neurons become subdivided into the medial and hypaxial motor columns (MMC and HMC), which innervate the back (epaxial) and trunk (hypaxial) muscula-
ture, respectively. At limb levels, the medial and lateral portions of the lateral motor column (LMCm and LMCl) innervate the ventral and dorsal portions of the limb, respectively. 
Additional motor neurons form the autonomic nervous system as preganglionic (PGC) cholinergic neurons of sympathetic and parasympathetic targets. Pools of motor neurons 
innervating the same muscle can be defined by unique combinations of transcription factors (e.g., Nkx6 and Ets classes).
Locomotor Circuitry
The spinal interneurons and motor neurons comprise a central pattern-generating circuitry that is capable of producing rhythmic left-right and flexor-extensor alternation in 
isolated cords, called fictive locomotion. Molecular genetic studies have defined roles for several classes of interneurons found in the ventral cord. Mutant mice lacking contralat-
erally projecting inhibitory Dbx1+ V0 class interneurons display a disorganized left-right alternation. Use of diphtheria toxin to ablate ipsilaterally projecting excitatory Chx10+ V2a 
cells also disturbs right-left alternation and, notably, at higher speeds, animals transition to a left-right synchronous gallop that is not seen in wild-type mice. Loss or inactivation 
of ipsilateral inhibitory En1+ V1 neurons results in a marked slowing of locomotion, whereas inactivation of contralaterally projecting excitatory Sim1+ V3 interneuron class disrupts 
the regularity of the rhythm. Inactivation of the Pitx2+ V0C class disrupts locomotion during swimming due to altered integration of sensory feedback. The ipsilaterally projecting 
glutamatergic Hb9+ Vx class is rhythmically active during locomotion. The Ptf1a+ dI4 class forms inhibitory presynaptic contacts on glutamatergic proprioceptive sensory neurons 
in the ventral spinal cord. The dI6 and dI3 interneuron classes make direct connections onto motor neurons; however, their roles have not been determined.
Abbreviations
Ascl1, achaete-scute complex homolog 1 (Drosophila); BarH1, BarH-like homeobox; Bhlhb5, basic-helix-loop-helix family, member e22; Bmp2, bone morphogenetic protein 2; 
Bmp4, bone morphogenetic protein 4; Bmp5, bone morphogenetic protein 5; Bmp6, bone morphogenetic protein 6; Bmp7, bone morphogenetic protein 7; Bmpr1a, bone mor-
phogenetic protein receptor, type 1a; Bmpr1b, bone morphogenetic protein receptor, type 1b; Brn3a, POU domain, class 4, transcription factor 1; Chx10, visual system homeo-
box; Dbx1, developing brain homeobox; Dbx2, developing brain homeobox; Isl1, ISL1 transcription factor, LIM homeodomain; Isl2, ISL2 transcription factor, LIM homeodomain; 
Lbx1, ladybird homeobox homolog 1; Lhx1, LIM homeobox protein 1; Lhx2, LIM homeobox protein 2; Lhx4, LIM homeobox protein 4; Lhx5, LIM homeobox protein 5; Lhx9, LIM 
homeobox protein 9; Lmo4, LIM domain only 4; Lmx1b, LIM homeobox transcription factor 1 beta; Math1, atonal homolog 1 (Drosophila); Msx1, homeobox, msh-like 1; Ngn1, 
neurogenin 1; Ngn2, neurogenin 2; Ngn3, neurogenin 3; Notch, Notch gene homolog 1 (Drosophila); Nkx2.2, NK2 transcription factor related locus 2; Nkx2.9, NK2 transcription 
factor related, locus 9; Nkx6.1, NK6 homeobox 1; Nkx6.2, NK6 homeobox 2; Olig2, oligodendrocyte transcription factor 2; Olig3, oligodendrocyte transcription factor 3; Pax2, 
paired box gene 2; Pax3, paired box gene 3; Pax6, paired box gene 6; Pax7, paired box gene 7; PLCgamma, phospholipase C, gamma 1; Ptf1a, pancreas-specific transcription 
factor 1a; Pitx2, paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2; RA, retinoic acid; Scl, T cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 1; Shh, Sonic hedgehog; Sim1, single-minded homolog 
1; Sox1, SRY box-containing gene 1; Sox14, SRY box-containing gene 14; Sox21, SRY box-containing 21; Tlx1/3, T cell leukemia, homeobox 1/3; Wt1, Wilms tumor homolog 1.
References
Dasen, J.S., and Jessell, T.M. (2009). Hox networks and the origins of motor neuron diversity. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 88, 169–200.
Goulding, M. (2009). Circuits controlling vertebrate locomotion: moving in a new direction. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 507–518.
Goulding, M., and Pfaff, S.L. (2005). Development of circuits that generate simple rhythmic behaviors in vertebrates. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 15, 14–20.
Grillner, S., and Jessell, T.M. (2009). Measured motion: searching for simplicity in spinal locomotor networks. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 19, 572–586.
Helms, A.W., and Johnson, J.E. (2003). Specification of dorsal spinal cord interneurons. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 13, 42–49.
Jankowska, E. (2001). Spinal interneuronal systems: identification, multifunctional character and reconfigurations in mammals. J. Physiol. 533, 31–40.
Jessell, T.M. (2000). Neuronal specification in the spinal cord: inductive signals and transcriptional codes. Nat. Rev. Genet. 1, 20–29.
Kiehn, O. (2006). Locomotor circuits in the mammalian spinal cord. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 29, 279–306.
Ladle, D.R., Pecho-Vrieseling, E., and Arber, S. (2007). Assembly of motor circuits in the spinal cord: driven to function by genetic and experience-dependent mechanisms. Neuron 
56, 270–283.
Lee, S.K., and Pfaff, S.L. (2001). Transcriptional networks regulating neuronal identity in the developing spinal cord. Nat. Neurosci. 4 (Suppl), 1183–1191.

===== AlHajBaddar2018_DevDyn_AxoltlTailRegeneration+ROS =====
PATTERNS & PHENOTYPES
Amputation-Induced Reactive Oxygen Species Signaling
is Required for Axolotl Tail Regeneration
Nour W. Al Haj Baddar
,1,2* Adarsh Chithrala,3 and S. Randal Voss2,4
1Department of Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky
2Department of Neuroscience and Spinal Cord and Brain Injury Research Center (SCoBIRC), University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky
3Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Lexington, Kentucky
4Ambystoma Genetic Stock Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky
Background: Among vertebrates, salamanders are unparalleled in their ability to regenerate appendages throughput life.
However, little is known about early signals that initiate regeneration in salamanders. Results: Ambystoma mexicanum
embryos were administered tail amputations to investigate the timing of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and the
requirement of ROS for regeneration. ROS detected by dihydroethidium increased within minutes of axolotl tail amputation
and levels remained high for 24 hr. Pharmacological inhibition of ROS producing enzymes with diphenyleneiodonium chloride
(DPI) and VAS2870 reduced ROS levels. Furthermore, DPI treatment reduced cellular proliferation and inhibited tail outgrowth.
Conclusions: The results show that ROS levels increase in response to injury and are required for tail regeneration. These find-
ings suggest that ROS provide instructive, if not initiating cues, for salamander tail regeneration. Developmental Dynamics
248:189–196, 2019. © 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Key words: axolotl; Ambystoma mexicanum; ROS; superoxide anion; regeneration
Submitted 24 May 2018; First Decision 27 October 2018; Accepted 15 November 2018; Published online 21 December 2018
Introduction
Urodele amphibians (i.e., salamanders) are unparalleled among
vertebrates in their ability to regenerate appendages. Exactly
how salamanders regenerate their limbs and tail largely remains
a mystery. Many studies of salamander appendage regeneration
have focused attention on the dynamics of progenitor cells that
are recruited relatively late during the regeneration process
(Mchedlishvili et al., 2007; Kragl et al., 2009). Earlier events that
precede progenitor cell proliferation have received less attention.
Several injury-associated cues affect the initiation of tissue
regeneration in fish and frog tadpoles, including ion gradients,
reactive oxygen species (ROS), and hypoxia (Tseng and Levin,
2012; Jopling et al., 2012; Love et al., 2013; Gauron et al., 2013;
McLaughlin and Levin, 2018). Whether these or other cues initi-
ate appendage regeneration in highly regenerative urodeles is
unknown.
ROS are chemically reactive oxygen-containing molecules gen-
erated endogenously by several cellular components, including
mitochondria, lyzosomes, and the plasma membrane (Di Meo
et al., 2016). The reduction of molecular oxygen produces super-
oxide anion (O2
-), a precursor of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and
hydroxyl radicals (OH). ROS are well-known components of meta-
zoan innate immune responses and, at moderate concentrations,
serve others roles in tissue injury, wound healing, cellular signal-
ing, and gene expression (Weidinger and Kozlov, 2015). A grow-
ing number of studies highlight ROS in the regeneration of organs
that span vertebrate and invertebrate taxa, thus implicating ROS
as a phylogenetically conserved mechanism that initiates regener-
ation programs (Niethammer et al., 2009; Gauron et al., 2013;
Love et al., 2013; Piorette et al., 2015; Hameed et al., 2015; Zhang
et al., 2016). These and other studies (Yoo et al., 2012; Lisse et al.,
2016) show that ROS recruit regeneration-permissive lympho-
cytes, induce mitogen signaling pathways required for progenitor
cell proliferation, and modulate cell fate. Thus, ROS are not only
produced to mitigate pathogens at wound sites, additionally, they
provide injury cues to initiate regeneration programs. Still,
because relatively few models and research paradigms have been
investigated to date, there is need to further examine ROS signal-
ing during regeneration. Here, we report the requirement of ROS
for appendage regeneration in the primary salamander model,
Ambystoma mexicanum (axolotl).
Results and Discussion
Histology of Axolotl Embryo Tail Regeneration
Previously, we showed that developmental stage 42 (Bordzilovs-
kaya et al., 1989) axolotl embryos are capable of regenerating
2 mm of amputated, distal tail tip tissue in approximately 7 days
Grant
sponsor:
National
Institutes
of
Health;
Grant
number:
R24OD021479; Grant sponsor: the Ambystoma Genetic Stock Center
at the University of Kentucky; Grant number: NIH P40OD019794.
*Correspondence to: Nour W. Al Haj Baddar, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY 40506. E-mail: nwal222@uky.edu
Article is online at: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dvdy.
5/abstract
© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
189
DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS 248:189–196, 2019
DOI: 10.1002/dvdy.5
DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS

(Ponomareva et al., 2015). To further advance this model and
provide context for interpreting chemical perturbation of the
regeneration process, we used hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
staining to detail histological changes during tail regeneration
(Fig. 1). The tail amputation procedure removed the symmetrical,
rounded tail tip, leaving a blunt tail stump (Fig. 1A,A0). In
approximately 40 min postamputation (mpa), the open wound
was covered by a thin epithelium (Fig. 1B,B0). By 2 days postam-
putation (2 dpa), a few scattered erythrocytes and tissue debris
were observed between the notochord and the wound epidermis
(Fig. 1C,C0). Also at this time, mesenchymal tissue was observed
between the wound epidermis and ependymal tube of the spinal
cord, which had regenerated approximately 100 μm beyond the
amputation plane. By 5 dpa, the spinal cord had lengthened
Fig. 1. H&E stained longitudinal sections of
axolotl embryo tail regeneration. A,A0: At 0 dpa
the wound is open at the site of amputation.
B,B0:
A
thin
epithelial
layers
covers
the
amputation plane at 40 mpa. C,C0: At 2 dpa, the
wound is sealed and the terminal vesicle of the
spinal cord is formed dorsal to the notochord (C0:
star).
D,D0:
The
regenerating
spinal
cord
elongates within the regenerating mesenchyme
of the tail. E: A cartilaginous rod forms ventral to
the regenerating spinal cord (CR). F: At 12 dpa,
the CR is comprised of chondrocyte-like cells.
The black dotted line represents the plane of
amputation. Scale bar = 100 μm (10×) and 50 μm
(20×). SC,
spinal cord; NC, notochord;
CR,
cartilaginous rod.
190 AL HAJ BADDAR ET AL.
DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS

considerably into the mesenchyme of the regenerating tail
(Fig. 1D,D0). Ventral to the outgrowing spinal cord and distal to
the notochord was a nodule of cartilaginous tissue observed at
7 dpa (Fig. 1E) that by 12 dpa was an elongated rod comprised
of chondrocyte-like cells (Fig. 1F). Overall, histological changes
observed during axolotl embryo tail regeneration approximated
changes previously described for adult salamanders (Globus and
Liversage, 1975; Iten and Bryant, 1976).
Association of ROS With Axolotl Embryo Tail
Regeneration
ROS production during tail regeneration was measured by dihy-
droethidium (DHE), a dye that permeates plasma membranes to
report super oxide anion production (Owusu-Ansah et al., 2008).
Upon reaction with superoxide anions, DHE forms a red fluorescent
product (ethidium) that intercalates with DNA and subsequently
becomes retained by cells. After amputation of axolotl embryos,
DHE staining revealed a marked increase of ROS production in
midline, axial tissues (e.g., somites, spinal cord, notochord) of the
tail (Fig. 2A). Elevated ROS levels remained high after wound clo-
sure and were sustained through 24 hr postamputation (hpa), but
dropped to basal (unamputated) levels after that (Fig. 2B,C). This
suggests that ROS production is associated with early wound heal-
ing events that precede cell proliferation and tail outgrowth.
NOX Activity is Required for Amputation Induced ROS
Production
NAPDH oxidases (NOX) generate the majority of ROS (O2
- and
H2O2) (Bedard and Krause, 2007). These enzymes are phylogeneti-
cally conserved and expressed across many tissue types, and thus
we used pharmacological inhibitors of NOX activity (diphenyleneio-
donium chloride) [DPI] and VAS2870 to test the requirement of ROS
for tail regeneration. DHE staining of embryos treated with 5 μM
VAS2870 (Wingler et al., 2012) showed a significant reduction in
ROS production at 6 hpa, however, embryos did not survive past
24 hpa. (Fig. 3). Lower, nonlethal doses of VAS2870 did not signifi-
cantly lower ROS production or affect tail regeneration. Embryos
treated with 4 μM DPI (Bedard and Krause, 2007) did not show a
Fig. 2. Association of ROS production with axolotl embryo tail regeneration. A: in vivo imaging of ROS production revealed by DHE staining over the
course of 7 dpa. Top panels show fluorescent images while the bottom panels show the tail in grayscale at the representative time points. The DHE
signal was observed by 10 mpa in the medial part of the tail before returning to basal levels at 2–7 dpa (scale bar = 1 mm; n = 6–12 embryos per
time point). B: A representative image of a tail at 7 dpa stained with DE (left) and grayscale (right). C: Quantitative analysis of ROS produced through–
out the course of regeneration. Error bars represent standard deviations of the mean; n = 6–12 embryos per time point; *P < 0.01, **P < 0.05). NC,
notochord; SC, spinal cord.
AMPUTATION-INDUCED ROS SIGNALING IS REQUIRED FOR AXOLOTL TAIL REGENERATION 191
DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS

Fig. 3. DPI and VAS2870 reduced ROS production during tail regeneration. A: Effect of 5 μM VAS2870 (n = 15) on amputation induced ROS at 6 hpa
compared with controls (n = 15); scale bar = 1 mm. B: Quantitative analysis of data shown in A; error bars represent standard deviations of the mean
(*P < 0.05). C: Effect of 4 μM DPI (n = 15) on amputation induced ROS at 24 hpa compared with controls (n = 15), scale bar = 1 mm. D: Quantitative
analysis of data shown in C; error bars represent standard deviations of the mean (*P < 0.05).
Fig. 4. Treatment with 4 μm DPI (NOX inhibitor) significantly inhibits axolotl embryo tail regeneration. A: Representative images of the axolotl tail at 7 dpa
for control embryos (left) and DPI-treated embryos (right). The yellow arrowheads represent the plane of amputation, scale bar = 1 mm. B: Quantitation of
the length of tail regeneration between controls (n = 14) and DPI-treated embryos (n = 15) at 7 dpa. Error bars represent standard deviations of the mean
(*P < 0.01). C,D: H&E staining of control (C) and DPI-treated embryos (D) at 7 dpa. The dashed lines represent the plane of amputation. SC, spinal cord;
CR, cartilaginous rod; scale bar = 50 μm. In DPI-treated embryos, spinal cord regeneration was reduced and the cartilaginous rod did not form.
192 AL HAJ BADDAR ET AL.
DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS

decrease in ROS production at 6 hpa, but levels were significantly
lower at 24 hpa. Of interest, while a 0–24 hpa DPI treatment
decreased ROS levels, embryos successfully completed tail regenera-
tion. This suggested a requirement for NOX activity after 24 hpa. To
test this hypothesis, embryos were treated for progressively longer
periods of time, extending the treatment window by 24-hr intervals.
Embryos that were treated for 0–2 days successfully completed tail
regeneration while individuals that were treated for longer than
3 days died. Only individuals that were treated for 0–3 dpa showed
significant inhibition of tail and spinal cord regeneration at 7 dpa
(Fig. 4A,B). Because mesenchymal tissue did not form distal to the
amputation plane in DPI-treated embryos, spinal cord regeneration
was reduced and the underlying cartilaginous rod did not form
(Fig. 4C). These results implicate NOX activity in amputation-
induced ROS production and successful tail regeneration.
ROS as an Early Injury-Induced Signal and Its Role in
Cellular Proliferation
ROS signaling is associated with the activation of cellular signaling
pathways that regulate the proliferation of progenitor cells in pla-
naria and frog tadpoles (Gauron et al., 2013; Love et al., 2013; Pir-
otte et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2016). These findings prompted us to
investigate the link between ROS production and cell proliferation
during axolotl tail regeneration. The rate of distal tail outgrowth in
the axolotl embryo model increases linearly between 12 and
72 hpa, and then after this time the rate increases more steeply
(Ponomareva et al., 2015). Under the assumption that cell prolifera-
tion drives tail outgrowth, we quantified cell proliferation during
the linear phase of tail outgrowth at 2 dpa. Embryos were treated
with 4 μM DPI from 0–2 dpa and the number of mitotic, phospho-
histone H3 (PH3) positive cells in the tail stump were quantified rel-
ative to untreated, control embryos (Fig. 5). Overall, relatively few
mitotic cells were observed and their distribution was not localized
within any particular tissue compartment. However, the number of
PH3-postive cells was significantly higher in control embryos
(Fig. 5A,B). Furthermore, we found that DPI treatment significantly
reduced mitosis in the spinal cord and the epidermis but not in the
mesenchyme (Fig. 5C,D). These results suggest that NOX activity
affects cell mitosis in the spinal cord and the epidermis of the
axolotl tail.
To further test the idea that NOX activity is required for cell
proliferation, we tested DPI for an effect on cell cycle re-entry
(S-phase). Embryos were treated continuously with 4 μM DPI,
microinjected with 5-ethynyl-2´-deoxyuridine (EdU) at 2 dpa,
and then tissue was collected at 3 dpa for quantification of Edu
positive cells (Fig. 6A). EdU indices showed that cell proliferation
was significantly reduced in DPI-treated embryos (Fig. 6B,C) rel-
ative to controls, which showed strong incorporation of EdU in
regenerating spinal cord and tail fin (Fig. 6B, top panel).
Although the area of regenerating tissue in control embryos was
significantly greater than that of DPI-treated embryos at 3 dpa,
Fig. 5. ROS signaling is important for mitosis during axolotl embryo tail regeneration. A: Treatment of embryos with 4 μM DPI (n = 8)
significantly decreased the number of PH3 positive cells at 2 dpa compared with control embryos (n = 8), white dashed lines show the plane
of amputation. B: Quantification of PH3 positive cells. Error bars represent standard deviations of the mean (*P < 0.05). Scale bar = 500 μm.
C: Colored dashed lines representing (SC, spinal cord), (EP, epidermis), (Mes, mesenchyme) drawn on embryo tail section to outline the
individual tissue types for the analysis shown in D. D: Quantitative analysis showing the effect of DPI treatment on the number of PH3
positive cells in the epidermis, spinal cord, and mesenchyme. Error bars represent standard deviations of the mean (*P < 0.05).
AMPUTATION-INDUCED ROS SIGNALING IS REQUIRED FOR AXOLOTL TAIL REGENERATION 193
DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS

EdU incorporation were still significantly greater in control
embryos after normalizing for tissue area. While the regenerat-
ing tails of control embryos exhibited strong EdU incorporation
in the regenerating spinal cord and the mesenchyme, DPI-treated
embryos failed to regenerate spinal cord and had few EdU posi-
tive cells located within the tail fin (mesenchyme) (Fig. 6C).
These results are similar to the data shown in (Fig. 5) which sup-
ports the idea that NOX activity and ROS signaling are required
for cell cycle reentry and the proliferation response that drives
regenerate outgrowth, especially in the spinal cord.
In the context of tissue damage or injury, ROS can modulate
injury-induced gene expression responses and regulate proteins
involved in wound signaling and regeneration (Enyedi and
Niethammer, 2015; Neithammer, 2016; Lessi et al., 2016). Our
results show that ROS signaling and NOX activity are required
for axolotl spinal cord and tail regeneration. Although nothing
is known about the regulatory targets of ROS signaling during
axolotl tissue regeneration, studies of zebrafish and Xenopus
suggest ROS may target essential mitogens, such as sonic hedge-
hog (SHH) and bone morphogenetic protein, which are required
for proper cellular proliferation and blastema formation during
axolotl tail regeneration (Schnapp et al., 2005; Stoick-Cooper
et al., 2007). Recently, SHH was identified as a redox target
during zebrafish fin regeneration in a study that examined ROS
signaling during axon regeneration and cellular proliferation
(Meda et al., 2016, 2017). Also, fgf20, one of the direct targets of
Wnt/ β-catenin signaling, is down-regulated along with cell pro-
liferation, when NOX-derived ROS production is inhibited during
tadpole Xenopus tail regeneration (Love et al., 2013). Interest-
ingly, Wnt signaling is essential for successful axolotl embryo
tail regeneration and Fgf9 is one of the transcriptional targets
that is down-regulated upon Wnt inhibition (Ponomareva et al.,
2015). This implicates Wnt signaling as a potential candidate
redox target of NOX activity and ROS production. Future studies
will determine if these and other signaling pathways are regu-
lated by ROS in the axolotl tail regeneration model.
Conclusions
Urodele amphibians are exceptional in regards to regenerating
complex organs and tissues. Our results are consistent with find-
ings from studies of planaria (Pirotte et al., 2015), zebrafish fin
(Gauron et al., 2013), Xenopus tail (Love et al., 2013), and newt
adult brain (Hameed et al., 2015); clearly ROS are required for
successful tissue / appendage regeneration. We show that ROS
are produced shortly after amputation in axial tissues and their
Fig. 6. ROS signaling is required for DNA synthesis and cell cycle re–entry during axolotl tail regeneration. A: Sketch representing the experimental
design of the experiment. B: EdU quantification results for control (n = 12) and DPI-treated (n = 15) embryos. Error bars represent standard
deviations of the mean (*P < 0.05). C: Representative images of EdU labeled tails of DMSO embryos (top panel) and DPI-treated embryos (bottom
panel) at 3 dpa. SC, spinal cord; Scale bar = 500 μm.
194 AL HAJ BADDAR ET AL.
DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS

production is sustained during the first 24 hpa. We also found
that ROS signaling influences cellular proliferation during the
early phase of tail regeneration. Our study is the first to show
the requirement of NOX activity and ROS regulation for urodele
appendage regeneration, and given similar findings in other
metazoan taxa, suggest that ROS is a phylogenetically conserved
mechanism of tissue regeneration.
Experimental Procedures
Ethical Procedures
The use of prefeeding stage axolotls does not require a protocol
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at
University of Kentucky; however, embryos used in this study
were treated according to the same ethical standards that apply
to feeding axolotls.
Regeneration Assay
Mexican axolotl embryos (RRID: AGSC_100E) were obtained
from the Ambystoma Genetic Stock Center (RRID: SCR_006372)
at University of Kentucky. Stage 42 (Bordzilovskaya et al., 1989)
embryos were used for all experiments reported in this study.
The embryos were manually hatched, administered benzocaine
anesthesia (0.2 g in 10 ml ethanol / liter water) and photo-
graphed. Embryos with tail amputations were reared in artificial
pond water (43.25 g NaCl, 0.625 g KCl, 1.25 g MgSO4, 2.5 g
NaHCO3, and 1.25 g CaCl2 per 50 liters RO water). In administer-
ing amputations, the distal most 2 mm of tail tissue was
removed with a sterile razor blade. Whole embryo images were
captured using an Olympus SZX16 microscope with a 0.5×
objective lens and DP400 camera. Embryos were reared at
18–19C in 12-well microtiter plates, one embryo per well. The
effect of 4 μM DPI on tail regeneration was assessed by measur-
ing the distance between the distal tail tip and notochord, as the
latter does not regenerate leaving a clear mark of the amputation
plane. Experiments were performed three times; similar results
were obtained and are combined for the analyses. Postamputa-
tion measurements were compared between chemically treated
embryos (n = 15) and controls (n = 14) using Student’s t-test,
and P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Histology and Immunohistochemistry
Embryos were killed in benzocaine and fixed in 4% paraformal-
dehyde (PFA) overnight at 4C, washed three times with 1 phos-
phate buffered saline (PBS; pH = 7.4) and cryopreserved in 30%
sucrose overnight at 4C. Embryos were embedded in optimal
cutting temperature compound and sectioned longitudinally at
10–15 μm. Tissue sections were mounted on slides and stained
using hematoxylin and eosin (Fischer et al., 2008) or stored at
-80C for immunohistochemistry.
For immunohistochemistry, slides where rehydrated with 1×
PBS, incubated with blocking buffer (1× PBS with 5% bovine
serum albumin, 1% tween 20, and 0.3% Triton X-100; PBST) for
1 hr at room temperature. Slides were then incubated with mouse
anti-PH3 (Ser10) antibody (1:1,000, EMD Millipore # 05-1336-S)
overnight at 4C. Slides were washed in 1× PBS and incubated
with goat anti-mouse antibody (1:200, Thermo Fisher # A32723)
for 1 hr at room temperature. Slides were incubated with DAPI
(40,6-diamidine-2-phenylidole-dihydrochloride; Thermo Fisher #
62248) in 1× PBS (1:25,000) for 20 min, washed in 1× PBS, and
mounted with fluoroshield (Sigma-Aldrich # F6937).
In Vivo ROS Imaging
The detection of ROS during axolotl tail regeneration was per-
formed by incubating embryos in 5 μM DHE in darkness for 2 hr
before imaging. Embryos were then washed to remove excessive
stain, anesthetized in 0.02% benzocaine, and imaged using an
SZX16 Olympus microscope with 2× objective lens and DP400
camera. Fluorescence quantification at the tail tip was measured
as described by Jensen (2013) and Ozkucur et al. (2010) using
ImageJ (Schneider et al., 2012). Briefly, an exact region of inter-
est was drawn around the distal tail for each embryo image and
the gray pixel intensity was measured and background-sub-
tracted. The measurements were then averaged for embryos
(n = 6–12 embryos per time point) and results were analyzed by
one-way analysis of variance followed by Tukey’s post hoc anal-
ysis to compare all time points with preamputation levels. Fluo-
rescence quantification of embryos treated with 5 μM VAS2870
(n = 15) and controls (n = 15), and embryos treated with 4 μM
DPI (n = 15) and controls (n = 15) was performed as described
above. All experiments were performed three times yielding sim-
ilar results that were combined for statistical analysis.
The resulting data were analyzed using Student’s t-test, and
P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Cellular Proliferation Assay
Cellular mitosis was measured using PH3 staining, where DPI-
treated embryos and controls (n = 8 each) were fixed and pro-
cessed as described above. Embryo tails were sectioned at
15–20 μM thickness and stained for PH3 as described above. For
each embryo, three to eight sections were analyzed to identify
anatomically matching sections between control and treated
embryos. For each section, all cells staining positive for PH3
within the distal 0.5 mm2 of the amputation plane were counted
as well as cells staining positive for DAPI (Franklin et al., 2017).
A mitotic index was calculated by dividing the number of PH3
positive cells by the number of DAPI positive cells in a common
area for each tissue section. Student’s t-test was used to assess
statistical significance P < 0.05 was considered significant. To
further study the effect of DPI treatment on individual tissue
types in the tail, we divided the number of PH3 positive cells
within each of the following tissues (spinal cord, epidermis, and
mesenchyme) by the number of cells found in the distal
0.5 mm2. Student’s t-test was used to assess statistical signifi-
cance, P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
To assay for cell cycle reentry, we used EdU Click-iT ®kit to
detect DNA synthesis during S phase (Salic and Mitchison,
2008). Embryos at stage 42 were amputated and treated with
either 4 μM DPI (n = 15) or 0.04% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO;
n = 12). Embryos were microinjected with 0.5 μl of 8 mM EdU
using a picospritzer at 2 dpa. Embryos were killed at 3 dpa and
fixed in 4% PFA overnight. Embryos were washed three times in
1× PBS and dehydrated in a series of methanol concentrations
(25%, 50%, 75%, 100%). Embryos were then rehydrated by
running through the methanol concentrations backward and
incubated in 1× trypsin for 30 min at room temperature. The
embryos were then washed in distilled water three times and
placed in acetone for 10 min at -20C followed by washing in
AMPUTATION-INDUCED ROS SIGNALING IS REQUIRED FOR AXOLOTL TAIL REGENERATION 195
DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS

1% PBST three times. EdU cocktail reaction was prepared per
manufacturer kit with minor modification; 100 mM sodium
ascorbate replaced Click-iT® EdU buffer additive at the same
recommended volume per reaction. DAPI was used to counter-
stain nuclei. Embryos placed in EdU reaction solution were
placed in the dark and gently rocked for 30 min followed by
washing in 1× PBS before imaging.
Cell proliferation measurements were performed as described
in (Franklin et al., 2017) with some modifications. We were
interested in measuring cell proliferation within the regenerating
tissue, distal to the amputation plane; these areas where used for
quantification. All EdU labeled cells in regenerating tissue were
counted as well as cells staining positive for DAPI, after normal-
izing for regenerate tissue area. Student’s t-test was used to
assess statistical significance and P < 0.05 was considered statis-
tically significant.
References
Bedard K, Krause KH. 2007. The NOX family of ROS-generating
NADPH oxidases: physiology and pathophysiology. Physiol Rev
87:245–313.
Bordzilovskaya NP, Dettlaff TA, Duhon ST, Malacinski GM. 1989.
Developmental stage series of axolotl embryos. In: Armstrong JB,
Malacinski GM, editors. Developmental biology of the axolotl.
New York: Oxford University Press; p 201–219.
Di Meo S, Reed TT, Venditti P, Victor VM. 2016. Role of ROS and
RNS sources in physiological and pathological conditions. Oxid
Med Cell Longev 2016:1245049.
Enyedi B, Niethammer P. 2015. Mechanisms of epithelial wound
detection. Trends Cell Biol 25:398–407.
Fischer AH, Jacobson KA, Rose J, Zeller R. 2008. Hematoxylin and
eosin staining of tissue and cell sections. Cold Spring Harbor Pro-
toc 2008:pdb.prot4986.
Franklin BM, Voss SR, Osborn JL. 2017. Ion channel signaling influ-
ences cellular proliferation and phagocyte activity during axolotl
tail regeneration. Mech Dev 146:42–54.
Gauron
C,
Rampon C,
Bouzaffour
M,
Ipendey
E,
Teillon
J,
Volovitch M, Vriz S. 2013. Sustained production of ROS triggers
compensatory proliferation and is required for regeneration to pro-
ceed. Sci Rep 3:2084.
Globus M, Liversage R. 1975. Differentiation in vitro of innervated
tail regenerates in larval Ambystoma. J Embryol Exp Morphol 33:
803–812.
Hameed LS, Berg DA, Belnoue L, Jensen LD, Cao Y, Simon A.
2015. Environmental changes in oxygen tension reveal ROS-
dependent neurogenesis and regeneration in the adult newt brain.
Elife 4:e08422. doi:https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.08422.
Iten LE, Bryant SV. 1976. Stages of tail regeneration in the adult
newt, Notophthalmus viridescens. J Exp Zool 196:283–292.
Jensen EC. 2013.Quantitative Analysis of histological staining
and fluorescence
using Imagej.
Anat
Rec
(Hoboken) 296:
378–381.
Jopling C, Sune G, Faucherre A, Fabregat C, Izpisua Belmonte JC.
2012. Hypoxia induces myocardial regeneration in zebrafish.
Circulation 126:3017–3027.
Kragl M, Knapp D, Nacu E, Khattak S, Maden M, Epperlein HH,
Tanaka EM. 2009. Cells keep a memory of their tissue origin dur-
ing axolotl limb regeneration. Nature 460:60–65.
Lisse TS, King BL, Rieger S. 2016. Comparative transcriptomic pro-
filing of hydrogen peroxide signaling networks in zebrafish and
human keratinocytes: implications toward conservation, migration
and wound healing. Sci Rep 6:20328.
Love NR, Chen Y, Ishibashi S, Kritsiligkou P, Lea R, Koh Y,
Gallop JL, Dorey K, Amaya E. 2013. Amputation-induced reactive
oxygen species are required for successful Xenopus tadpole tail
regeneration. Nat Cell Biol 15:222–228.
McHedlishvili L, Epperlein HH, Telzzerow A, Tanaka EM. 2007. A
clonal analysis of neural progenitors during axolotl spinal cord
regeneration reveals evidence for both spatially restricted and
multipotent progenitors. Development 134:2083–2093.
McLaughlin KA, Levin M. 2018. Bioelectric signaling in regeneration:
mechanisms of ionic controls of growth and form. Dev Biol 433:
177–189.
Meda F, Gauron C, Rampon C, Teillon J, Volovitch M, Vriz S.
2016. Nerves control redox levels in mature tissues through
Schwann cells and hedgehog signaling. Antioxid Redox Signal
24:299–311.
Meda F, Joliot A, Vriz S. 2017. Nerves and hydrogen peroxide:
how old enemies become new friends. Neural Regen Res 12:
568–569.
Niethammer P, Grabher C, Look AT, Mitchison TJ. 2009. A tissue-
scale gradient of hydrogen peroxide mediates rapid wound detec-
tion in zebrafish. Nature 459:996–999.
Niethammer P. 2016. The early wound signals. Curr Opin Genet Dev
40:17–22.
Owusu-Ansah E, Yavari A, Banerjee U. 2008. A protocol for in vivo
detection of reactive oxygen species. Protoc Exch doi:https://doi.
org/10.1038/nprot.2008.23.
Ozkucur N, Epperlein HH, Funk RH. 2010. Ion imaging during axolotl
tail regeneration in vivo. Dev Dyn 239:2048–2057.
Pirotte N, Stevens AS, Fraguas S, Plusquin M, Van Roten A, Van
Belleghem F, Paesen R, Ameloot M, Cebria F, Artois T, Smeets K.
2015. Reactive oxygen species in planarian regeneration: an
upstream necessity for correct patterning and brain formation.
Oxid Med Cell Longev 2015:392476.
Ponomareva LV, Athippozhy A, Thorson JS, Voss SR. 2015. Using
Ambystoma mexicanum (Mexican axolotl) embryos, chemical
genetics, and microarray analysis to identify signaling pathways
associated with tissue regeneration. Comp Biochem Physiol C
Toxicol Pharmacol 178:128–135.
Salic A, Mitchison TJ. 2008. A chemical method for fast and sensi-
tive detection of DNA synthesis in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
105:2415–2420.
Schnapp E, Kragl M, Rubin L, Tanaka EM. 2005. Hedgehog signal-
ing controls dorsoventral patterning, blastema cell proliferation
and cartilage induction during axolotl tail regeneration. Develop-
ment 132:3243–3253.
Schneider CA, Rasband WS, Eliceiri KW. 2012. NIH Image to Ima-
geJ: 25 years of image analysis. Nat Methods 9:671–675.
Stoick-Cooper CL, Moon RT, Weidinger G. 2007. Advances in
signaling in vertebrate regeneration as a prelude to regenerative
medicine. Genes Dev 21:1292–1315.
Tseng AS, Levin M. 2012. Transducing bioelectric signals into epi-
genetic pathways during tadpole tail regeneration. Anat Rec
(Hoboken) 295:1541–1551.
Weidinger A, Kozlov AV. 2015. Biological activities of reactive oxy-
gen and nitrogen species: oxidative stress versus signal transduc-
tion. Biomolecules 5:472–484.
Wingler
K,
Altenhoefer
SA,
Kleikers
PW,
Radermacher
KA,
Kleinschnitz C, Schmidt HH. 2012. VAS2870 is a pan-NADPH
oxidase inhibitor. Cell Mol Life Sci 69:3159–3160.
Yoo SK, Freisinger CM, LeBert DC, Huttenlocher A. 2012. Early
redox, Src family kinase, and calcium signaling integrate wound
responses and tissue regeneration in zebrafish. J Cell Biol 199:
225–234.
Zhang Q, Wang Y, Man L, Zhu Z, Bai X, Wei S, Liu Y, Liu M,
Wang X, Gu X, Wang Y. 2016. Reactive oxygen species generated
from skeletal muscles are required for gecko tail regeneration. Sci
Rep 6:20752.
196 AL HAJ BADDAR ET AL.
DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS

===== Alkaslasi2021_NatComm_snTx+SCI+Mouse =====
ARTICLE
Single nucleus RNA-sequencing deﬁnes
unexpected diversity of cholinergic neuron types in
the adult mouse spinal cord
Mor R. Alkaslasi
1,2,3, Zoe E. Piccus1,2,3, Sangeetha Hareendran1, Hanna Silberberg1, Li Chen1, Yajun Zhang1,
Timothy J. Petros
1 & Claire E. Le Pichon
1✉
In vertebrates, motor control relies on cholinergic neurons in the spinal cord that have been
extensively studied over the past hundred years, yet the full heterogeneity of these neurons
and their different functional roles in the adult remain to be deﬁned. Here, we develop a
targeted single nuclear RNA sequencing approach and use it to identify an array of choli-
nergic interneurons, visceral and skeletal motor neurons. Our data expose markers for dis-
tinguishing these classes of cholinergic neurons and their rich diversity. Speciﬁcally, visceral
motor neurons, which provide autonomic control, can be divided into more than a dozen
transcriptomic classes with anatomically restricted localization along the spinal cord. The
complexity of the skeletal motor neurons is also reﬂected in our analysis with alpha, gamma,
and a third subtype, possibly corresponding to the elusive beta motor neurons, clearly dis-
tinguished. In combination, our data provide a comprehensive transcriptomic description of
this important population of neurons that control many aspects of physiology and movement
and encompass the cellular substrates for debilitating degenerative disorders.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2
OPEN
1 Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. 2 Department of
Neuroscience, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA. 3These authors contributed equally: Mor R. Alkaslasi, Zoe E. Piccus. ✉email: claire.lepichon@nih.gov
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:2471 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;

C
holinergic spinal cord neurons are essential for all aspects
of motor control including voluntary contractions of the
limbs and involuntary motions of internal organs. These
cholinergic neurons can be divided into three main types: skeletal
motor neurons, visceral motor neurons, and interneurons, with
distinct functions in motor control1. The two types of motor
neurons are particularly unusual as their cell bodies are located in
the central nervous system and project to the periphery to con-
nect the brain to the body. Skeletal motor neurons (MNs)
innervate skeletal muscle to coordinate muscle contraction, drive
locomotion, and mediate ﬁne motor control. Pre-ganglionic
autonomic neurons, or visceral MNs, project to autonomic
ganglion neurons that in turn innervate smooth muscle and
glands to control almost all physiological responses and organs of
the body. The cholinergic interneurons are critical for the local
spinal circuitry including regulating motor neuron excitability2,3.
Together, these three neuronal classes comprise a relatively small
population among all spinal cord cells that communicate to their
target cells with the excitatory neurotransmitter acetylcholine.
Previous work has shown that each of the three main classes can
be
divided
into
subtypes
with
speciﬁc
properties
and
specializations1. However, the true diversity of spinal cholinergic
neurons remains unknown.
One area of intense focus has been deﬁning subtypes of skeletal
MNs since the dysfunction of this class is a major component of
several diseases. Clinically, it has become clear that some subtypes
are more susceptible than others to degeneration. This is parti-
cularly striking in motor neuron diseases such as spinal muscular
atrophy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) where select
MNs degenerate while others are spared4–7. For example, among
affected neurons in ALS, skeletal MNs innervating fast-twitch
extrafusal ﬁbers degenerate earlier than those innervating slow-
twitch ﬁbers7,8. Most mutations linked to ALS are in widely
expressed genes, yet for unknown reasons MN subtypes are more
susceptible to death than other cell types, leading to the idea that
cell-intrinsic characteristics determine this vulnerability7,9. If so, a
transcriptomic deﬁnition of skeletal motor neuron subtypes could
unveil potential causes of cell-type susceptibility, deﬁne better
markers for studying degeneration and provide strategies to
selectively control gene expression in subsets of MNs.
With the recent advances in sequencing technologies, a few
studies have transcriptionally proﬁled individual spinal cord
neurons in development10,11 and in the adult12. But due to the
technical approaches adopted, the rarity of cholinergic neurons
among all spinal cord cells, as well as the large size of motor
neurons, only a few cholinergic neurons have been successfully
sequenced11,12. Here, we use a genetic strategy to permanently
mark cholinergic nuclei in the adult mouse spinal cord and
selectively enrich them for single-nucleus RNA sequencing
(snRNAseq). This approach allowed us to systematically classify
cholinergic neurons and generate an atlas of their transcriptional
identities. Our results exposed an array of cholinergic interneuron
subtypes and revealed signiﬁcant molecular diversity amongst
skeletal MNs, identifying targets for exploring their function.
Most surprisingly, we discovered an extensive diversity of visceral
motor neuron subtypes and deﬁned their anatomic organization
along the length of the spinal cord. Together, the data (available
at www.spinalcordatlas.org) provide a detailed view of spinal cord
cholinergic neuron types, identify molecular signatures for each,
and provide insights into their normal physiological functions.
Results
Transcriptional proﬁling of adult mouse spinal cholinergic
neurons. One goal of single-cell transcriptomics is to use the full
transcriptome to deﬁne neuronal classes and identify diagnostic
mRNA marker combinations, reﬂecting functional or anatomical
distinctions between types of neurons. Nuclear RNA sequencing
provides an important technical advance for single-cell proﬁling
from tissues such as the spinal cord that are difﬁcult to dissociate
into single cells12,13. We selected a single nucleus RNA sequen-
cing strategy for this reason, and to ensure the accurate and
unbiased proﬁling of all types of motor neurons, including those
of large diameter that is typically not viably captured using single-
cell isolation14. An added advantage of the single nuclei pre-
paration compared with single cells is that it is very rapid and
therefore avoids transcriptional stress responses that can occur
during tissue collection and dissociation, providing a more
accurate baseline representation of cell classes11,13,14. However,
even using snRNAseq12 very few cholinergic neurons were
identiﬁed, reﬂecting their sparse representation in the spinal cord.
To selectively enrich for nuclei from spinal cholinergic
neurons, we bred mice where cholinergic cells in the adult spinal
cord were labeled using Chat-IRES-Cre. Our genetic strategy
permanently marks their nuclei with a bright ﬂuorescent protein
attached to the nuclear envelope15 (Fig. 1). Whole tissue
immunolabeling and clearing revealed bright nuclei throughout
the spinal cord in the expected locations for cholinergic cells—
ventral horn, lateral column, and intermediate zone (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 3c; Supplementary Movie 1), thus verifying our strategy.
In order to be able to spatially map individual cells to different
spinal cord regions, we dissected the spinal cords into 3 regions:
cervical,
thoracic,
and
lumbo-sacral,
and
processed
them
separately (Fig. 1). We next proceeded to isolate nuclei from
frozen tissue, harvest GFP+ nuclei via ﬂuorescence-activated cell
sorting (FACS) (Supplementary Fig. 1), perform snRNA-Seq (see
“Methods” section), and characterize a total of 34,231 single
nuclei that met standard criteria (e.g., independent transcripts,
number of genes, level of mitochondrial transcripts). Preliminary
analysis revealed that the nuclei segregated into 38 distinct
clusters (Supplementary Fig. 2a). Common cell type markers
demonstrated that, while all of the nuclei were neuronal (Snap25-
expressing, Supplementary Fig. 2c), 22 of the clusters were not
cholinergic, reﬂecting excitatory or inhibitory neurons that had
expressed Chat-IRES-Cre, either developmentally or due to leaky
expression of Cre (Supplementary Fig. 2b–c, 3 a–b). After
removal of contaminating non-cholinergic neurons, analysis of
the 16,042 Chat-expressing nuclei identiﬁed 21 transcriptionally
distinct subtypes (Fig. 2a; Supplementary Table 1), exposing
considerably greater diversity for this class of neurons than the
two groups of cholinergic neurons that had been previously
described11. However, we did not observe any sex-speciﬁc
differences among cholinergic neurons (Supplementary Fig. 4).
Classiﬁcation of main cholinergic neuron types. How do the 21
distinct transcriptomic classes of cholinergic neurons relate to the
3 major categories of spinal neurons? At the most basic level, the
distribution of published markers for these cells in our data
should help deﬁne the roles of the diverse clusters. Moreover,
skeletal motor neurons, cholinergic interneurons, and visceral
motor neurons each reside in distinct locations within the spinal
cord (Fig. 1; boxed areas in Fig. 2e–f; Supplementary Fig. 3c)16–18.
Skeletal motor neurons are exclusively located in the ventral horn,
with axons that exit via the ventral roots to innervate and control
the skeletal muscles of the body. Cholinergic interneurons, as
modulators and regulators of neuronal activity, are small neurons
found primarily around the central canal and the intermediate
zone2,19. Visceral pre-ganglionic motor neurons are localized to
the lateral column of the spinal cord and project to the ganglion
neurons, which in turn innervate cardiac and smooth muscles for
organ control20,21. We reasoned that, if molecular markers for
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:2471 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

each subgroup could be identiﬁed, their expression pattern in the
spinal cord should be diagnostic.
We began by exploring the expression of several molecules
previously assigned to subtypes of cholinergic neurons and found
these markers mapped to speciﬁc clusters of neurons (Fig. 2b).
Spinal motor columns are speciﬁed during development and can
be distinguished by the expression of marker genes in the
embryo1. However, many of these embryonic markers were either
undetected, only lowly expressed, or non-speciﬁc to particular
cholinergic subtypes in our dataset, suggesting the expression
pattern of most of these genes is not maintained in the adult once
development is complete (Alcam, Foxp1, Isl1, Isl2, Lhx3, Mnx1;
Supplementary Fig. 14). Nonetheless, some markers identiﬁed in
development proved useful in our analysis. For example, Pax2, a
well-established marker for cholinergic interneurons22, was
highly expressed in 7 clusters that we renamed I1-I7. One small
cluster, I8, expressed Mpped2, a gene shared with all other
interneuron clusters (Fig. 2c; Supplementary Fig. 5c) but not the
Cervical
Thoracic
Lumbar/Sacral
Cholinergic Neurons
Excitatory Neurons
Inhibitory Neurons
Sucrose
cushion
centrifugation
Nuclear 
suspension
FACS sort
DRAQ5+
GFP-
Discard
DRAQ5+
GFP+
10X Genomics
Barcoding
cDNA library construction
Sequencing
Homogenize 
SC regions 
separately
GFP
DRAQ5
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Fig. 1 Strategy for single nucleus RNA sequencing of spinal cord cholinergic neurons. Spinal cords were extruded from Chat-IRES-Cre::CAG-Sun1-sfGFP
mice and separated into 3 regions (Cervical, Thoracic, and Lumbar/Sacral) that were processed separately (1). Image from a whole cleared spinal cord (SC)
immunolabeled for GFP (Supplementary Movie 1). Tissue was lysed (2) and nuclei were isolated by density gradient centrifugation (3). Nuclear
suspensions (4) were sorted using ﬂuorescent-activated cell sorting (FACS) (5) to select singlet GFP-positive DRAQ5-positive nuclei (6) that were
processed for single nucleus RNA sequencing using the 10X Genomics Chromium platform (7). Single nucleus cDNA libraries were sequenced together on
an Illumina HiSeq (7), then analyzed (8). Figure created with BioRender.com. Scale bars, (1) 200 µm, (5) 50 µm.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:2471 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3

motor neurons. Therefore, although they were not Pax2-positive,
we suspect I8 represents a rare type of cholinergic interneuron.
Meanwhile, Zeb2, a marker for visceral motor neurons23, was
most highly expressed in neighboring clusters we named V1–V10.
Notably, one cluster of presumptive visceral MNs based on its
location in the UMAP, V8, had undetectable Zeb2 expression, but
instead shared expression of the gene Fbn2 with the other visceral
clusters, identifying this gene as a more general candidate marker
for visceral MNs (Fig. 2c–d; Supplementary Fig. 5c). To test this
prediction, we examined the expression of this gene in spinal cord
sections using multiplexed ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization (ISH;
Fig. 2e; Supplementary Fig. 6c) relative to all cholinergic neurons
I2
I6
I5
I4
I8
I3
V10
I1
V3
S3
S1
V7
S2
V2
V6
V9
V1
V4
I7
V5
V8
Zeb2
Tns1
I1
I2
I3
I4
I5
I6
I7
I8 V1 V2 V3 V4 V5 V6 V7 V8
S1 S2 S3
V9 V10
Pax2
I1
I2
I3
I4
I5
I6
I7
I8 V1 V2 V3 V4 V5 V6 V7 V8
S1 S2 S3
V9 V10
I1
I2
I3
I4
I5
I6
I7
I8 V1 V2 V3 V4 V5 V6 V7 V8
S1 S2 S3
V9 V10
0
1
2
Slc6a1
0
1
2
3
Fbn2
0
1
2
Tns1
a
b
c
Skeletal MNs
Interneurons
Visceral MNs
Average
Expression
Percent
Expressed
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
25
50
75
Pard3b
Qrfpr
Cpne4
Nox4
Hpgds
Fam19a2
Col8a1
Cpa6
Gm29683
Mme
9530026P05Rik
Zbtb7c
Fign
Zeb2
Fbn2
Pde11a
Satb1
Kcnmb2
Arhgap6
Synpr
Gm20754
Il1rapl2
Pou6f2
Pax2
Nxph2
Slc6a1
Dscaml1
Grik3
Mpped2
Ebf3
Ebf2
Gm13912
Sox5
6030407O03Rik
Ret
Bcl6
Palld
Plekhg1
Htra1
Esrrb
Plch1
Anxa4
Pdgfd
Zbtb16
Gm43122
Tns1
d
e
f
Prph
Tns1
Chat
Tns1
1
2
2
1
3
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
Slc6a1
Fbn2
Chat
Fbn2
2
Fig. 2 Classiﬁcation of cholinergic neurons reveals the extensive diversity of motor neurons and interneurons. a UMAP of all 16,042 cholinergic nuclei
showing 21 distinct clusters. b Expression of marker genes for cholinergic interneurons (Pax2), visceral MNs (Zeb2), and skeletal MNs (Tns1) in the 21
cholinergic clusters. c Dot plot showing the top 15 marker genes for each main cholinergic subtype. d Feature plots depicting expression of the top novel
marker gene for each cholinergic subtype. e RNAScope for novel marker genes for a subset of interneurons (Slc6a1, red) and visceral MNs (Fbn2, cyan) co-
expressing with Chat (yellow). Interneurons in the intermediate zone (box 3) are double positive for Slc6a1 and Chat (arrowhead) or only express Chat
(arrow); visceral MNs in the lateral horn (box 2) are double positive for Fbn2 and Chat, and skeletal MNs in the ventral horn (box 1) are only Chat+. f ISH
for novel marker gene Tns1 (cyan) highlights skeletal MNs, showing restricted localization to the ventral horn and co-expression with Chat in cells with the
distinctive cell body shape of skeletal MNs. Co-labeling with Prph (red) and Chat (yellow) highlights skeletal MNs in the ventral horn (box 1) that are triple
positive, visceral MNs in the lateral horn (box 2) that are double positive for Chat and Prph, and interneurons in the intermediate zone (box 3) that are only
positive for Chat (arrow) or occasionally double-positive for Chat and Prph (arrowhead). e, f: thoracic spinal cord; all images are merged for the 3 colors
except for Fbn2 and Tns1, shown alone, as marked. Full single-color images and merges are shown in Supplementary Fig. 6. Low magniﬁcation image scale
bars, 200 µm. High magniﬁcation scale bars, 50 µm.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:2471 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

(Chat+) and most inhibitory neurons (Slc6a1+). Notably, Fbn2
expression localized to a small group of Chat+/Slc6a1−neurons
in the lateral column of the spinal cord where visceral MNs
reside, conﬁrming the value of Fbn2 in identifying the majority of
visceral motor neurons (Fig. 2d, e; Supplementary Fig. 12).
By default, the remaining three clusters lacking Pax2 or Zeb2
must include skeletal MNs, for which selective markers were not
known. These clusters account for a signiﬁcant fraction of
cholinergic neurons (Supplementary Fig. 5b). Notably, the gene
Tns1 was strongly expressed in all three clusters and was
essentially absent from other types of cholinergic neurons
(Fig. 2b–d). ISH demonstrated that Tns1 is robustly and
selectively expressed in a group of large neurons in the ventral
horn of the spinal cord, exactly where the cell bodies of skeletal
MNs are located (Fig. 2f; Supplementary Fig. 6b, d). The Tns1-
positive neurons invariably co-expressed two well-characterized
markers of cholinergic neurons, Chat and Prph24,25 (Fig. 2f;
Supplementary Fig. 6a, b), conﬁrming that Tns1-positive cells are
indeed skeletal MNs. Moreover, all Chat-positive neurons in this
area of the ventral horn co-expressed Tns1, thereby deﬁning Tns1
as a selective marker for skeletal MNs. In combination, these data
also
demonstrate
that
the
three
clusters
S1–S3
represent
transcriptomically distinct classes of this important type of motor
neuron.
Skeletal motor neurons. Skeletal muscle is composed of extra-
fusal ﬁbers, which generate force for locomotion, and intrafusal
ﬁbers, which contain muscle spindles that detect muscle stretch
and facilitate contraction. Three subtypes of skeletal MNs
innervate skeletal muscle including well-characterized alpha and
gamma subtypes with distinct electrophysiological properties, and
a third less well-deﬁned class, beta26. Alpha motor neurons have a
large cell body diameter and exclusively innervate extrafusal
muscle ﬁbers and drive muscle contraction. Gamma motor
neurons innervate intrafusal ﬁbers, regulating muscle spindle
sensitivity to stretch. Beta motor neurons are thought to innervate
intrafusal, as well as extrafusal muscle ﬁbers and to share prop-
erties with both alpha and gamma MNs27,28. Although the size,
presence, or absence of C-boutons and expression of markers (see
below) are often used as proxies to assign MN subtypes, elec-
trophysiology is required for deﬁnitive characterization. Ample
evidence shows that motor neuron disease more severely affects
some subtypes of skeletal MNs5,7. For example, in ALS, fast-ﬁring
alpha MNs that innervate fast fatigable muscle ﬁbers are widely
described to degenerate ﬁrst, both in patients and in animal
models8,29,30, while slow-ﬁring alpha MNs and gamma MNs are
more resistant7,31. Discovering speciﬁc markers for each skeletal
MN type and subtype would shed light on this differential vul-
nerability, for example by facilitating their detection and allowing
their manipulation in disease models.
We hypothesized that each of the three transcriptomic clusters
S1–S3 (Fig. 2a, b, d) corresponds with one of the three functional
types of skeletal motor neurons: alpha, beta, and gamma.
Previous studies have deﬁned Rbfox3 as a selective marker for
alpha MNs, and Esrrg and Gfra1 for gamma MNs32–34. There are
no known markers for beta MNs. Of the three clusters (S1, S2,
S3), only cluster S2 strongly expressed Rbfox3, tentatively
assigning to it the alpha MN identity (Fig. 3a). Clusters S1 and
S3 both expressed gamma markers Esrrg and Gfra1, with
S3 showing slightly higher Gfra1 expression (Fig. 3a), indicating
S3 might represent gamma MNs. S1 shared transcriptional
similarities with both S2 (Fig. 3b) and S3 (Fig. 3a; Supplementary
Fig. 7c–e). Several other genes reported as markers of skeletal
subtypes35–37 did not appear restricted to any one cluster by
snRNAseq (Supplementary Fig. 7c–e), perhaps reﬂecting the
sensitivity of the single nuclear sequencing approach.
The expression proﬁles of previously identiﬁed markers
support the assignment of S2 and S3 as alpha and gamma motor
neurons, respectively, but suggest that, of these markers, only
Rbfox3 is likely to be sub-type speciﬁc. The third type, S1,
expresses markers of both alpha and gamma, perhaps consistent
with it representing the less well-characterized beta MN.
However, given the lack of deﬁnitive markers for these neurons
and the need to demonstrate their properties physiologically and
anatomically38, these will be referred to as Type 3 MNs. Since
snRNAseq provides a rich resource for studying gene-expression
proﬁles of different cell types, we next used our data to identify a
series of strong candidate markers for the three classes of skeletal
motor neurons (Fig. 3b). For example, we predicted Sv2b, Stk32a,
and Glis3 would be exclusively expressed in alpha MNs, Nrp2 in
gammas, and Gpr149 in Type 3 (Fig. 3b, c; Supplementary Fig. 8e,
f). Moreover, Rreb1 would be primarily expressed in Type 3 MNs
with weaker
expression
in alphas,
and Plekhg1
primarily
expressed
in
gammas
with
lower
expression
in
Type
3
(Supplementary Fig. 8f).
Multiplexed ISH revealed candidate alpha markers Sv2b and
Stk32a are co-expressed with known marker Rbfox3 in choliner-
gic neurons in the ventral horn (Fig. 3d). Notably, these cells also
exhibit large diameters typical of alpha MNs, anatomically
diagnostic C-boutons apposed to their cell bodies (Fig. 3e), as
well as VGLUT1-positive synapses (Supplementary Fig. 9a).
These molecular and anatomic features strongly validate our
assignment of this class of cells as alpha MNs. By contrast, a
population of smaller diameter skeletal motor neurons expressed
the candidate Type 3 marker Gpr149 mRNA and lacked
prominent C-boutons (Fig. 3e; Supplementary Fig. 8g). Similarly,
we identiﬁed a different group of smaller diameter skeletal MNs
expressing the gamma marker Nrp2, with a subset of these co-
expressing Plekhg1, albeit at lower levels (Supplementary Fig. 8c,
d), and these neurons lacked C-boutons (Fig. 3e). Importantly,
our strategy for snRNAseq of cholinergic neurons uncovered
many genes for distinguishing between skeletal MNs subtypes.
The three types may exhibit different susceptibility in disease, but
their speciﬁc detection has been hampered by the small number
of existing markers. Our characterization of distinguishing
markers (Fig. 3d–e; Supplementary Fig. 8a–e) provides an
approach to identify all three skeletal MN types. Future
localization of other genes with speciﬁc expression patterns
(Fig. 3b; Supplementary Data 1) may suggest complementary
strategies and uncover even better diagnostic probes. Moreover,
Sv2b and Stk32a are highly speciﬁc for alpha MNs and thus
represent a signiﬁcant advance over Rbfox3 since their expression
pattern is much more restricted to motor neurons in the spinal
cord (Supplementary Fig. 14u, z, a’). Finally, we were able to
validate
the alpha maker
Sv2b, encoding
synaptic vesicle
glycoprotein 2B, at the protein level, by SV2B immunostaining
in the spinal cord and muscle, highlighting alpha motor neuron
cell bodies and axon terminals, respectively (Supplementary
Fig. 9b).
Subtypes of alpha motor neurons. Clustering of cholinergic
snRNAseq data provides strong evidence that the most promi-
nent transcriptomic differences between skeletal MNs account for
their division into 3 groups. In disease, gamma MNs are thought
to be more resilient than alpha MNs, and certain alpha motor
neurons die whereas others survive9,31,39–41. Because of this dif-
ferential vulnerability, we examined what types of distinctions
were reﬂected in the transcriptome by re-clustering the snRNA-
seq data from just the skeletal MNs (Supplementary Fig. 7a, b)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:2471 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5

and just the alpha MNs. We observed 8 subtypes of alpha MNs
(Fig. 4a) that we hypothesized might correspond to structural or
functional features, such as innervation patterns or electrical
properties. Because our experimental design included differential
barcoding of nuclei from the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar/sacral
cord to examine the distribution of cholinergic types along the
length of the spinal cord (Fig. 1; Supplementary Fig. 5d), we
explored the localization of alpha MNs among these regions
(Fig. 4b). We noted that 3 of the alpha MN subclusters were
primarily present in the cervical region (clusters 2, 6, and 7),
suggesting these might correspond to very speciﬁc alpha MN
types, such as the neurons innervating the diaphragm. We also
noted that two types (clusters 3, 4) were present only in cervical
and lumbar regions and were absent from the thoracic segment,
suggesting they might correspond to alpha MNs that innervate
speciﬁc parts of the limbs. Finally, there were multiple subtypes
(clusters 0, 1, 5) that were closely related to one another and were
present at all three levels.
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Average
Expression
Percent
Expressed
25
50
75
Dkk2
D5Ertd615e
Col27a1
Adamts16
Otof
Hs3st4
Samd5
Cdh11
Nrp2
Pard3b
Chst9
Glis3
Plxdc2
Aox1
Ccdc88c
Adra1a
Tpd52l1
Lypd6
Gm28928
Sv2b
Stk32a
Plcl1
Cntnap3
Adamts2
C1qtnf4
Rreb1
Trpc5
Gpr149
S1
S2
S3
a
b
c
S1
S2
S3
Rbfox3
Gfra1
Esrrg
Type 3 (S1)
Alpha (S2)
Gamma (S3)
Stk32a
Gpr149
Nrp2
Gpr149
Nrp2
Stk32a
Stk32a
Sv2b
Rbfox3
Chat
d
e
Chat-Cre::Ai14
Fig. 3 Novel markers for distinguishing alpha, gamma, and Type 3 motor neurons. a Expression of known alpha and gamma markers by skeletal clusters.
b Dot plot for the top marker genes for each skeletal cluster, showing more shared expression between clusters S1 and S2. c Expression of novel and
speciﬁc marker genes for each skeletal MN subtype. d ISH showing expression of novel alpha MN markers Stk32a (red) and Sv2b (yellow) co-expressed
with known alpha marker Rbfox3 (magenta) in large diameter Chat+ (cyan) ventral horn neurons. Arrowheads highlight examples of large diameter, triple-
positive alpha MNs; arrow highlights the example of a small diameter Chat+ MN that is negative for all 3 alpha markers (i.e., gamma or Type 3). e ISH
image overlayed on endogenous Chat-Cre::Ai14 labeling showing expression of S1 marker Gpr149 (yellow), S2 marker Stk32a (cyan), and S3 marker Nrp2
(red). High magniﬁcation images highlight a large MN expressing Stk32a and surrounded by C-boutons (examples indicated by arrows), characteristic of
alpha MNs, and a small MN expressing Nrp2 and lacking C-boutons, characteristic of gamma MNs. ISH from the ventral horn of lumbar spinal cord
sections. Low magniﬁcation scale bars, 100 µm. High magniﬁcation scale bars, d 50 µm, e 20 µm.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:2471 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

We determined a panel of diagnostic markers for 4 of the
8 subtypes of alpha MNs (bold font in Fig. 4c, d) to examine
their expression in alpha MNs innervating several different
muscles. We injected the muscles with a retrograde tracer, ﬁxed
and imaged the spinal cords to identify retrogradely labeled
cells, then performed in situ hybridization to detect the mRNA
markers in labeled Stk32a-positive alpha motor neurons (Fig. 4
e, f; Supplementary Fig. 10). We found that Cpne4 expression
(cluster
4)
correlated
well
with
digit
muscle-innervating
neurons (Fig. 4d, e), as previously reported42. Further, we
discovered that Erbb4-expressing alpha MNs project via the
phrenic nerve to the diaphragm (cluster 7; Fig. 4d, f). However,
among the remaining probes we tested, we did not detect any
correlation with the muscle types injected, including the lumbar
extensors of the spine43 (axial), soleus, and tibialis anterior
muscles.
Cervical
Lumbar/Sacral
Thoracic
0
1
3
7
5
2
4
6
Gm6213
Gm2164
Erbb4
Rasgrf2
Gulp1
C1qtnf4
Gpr149
Fam19a2
Mctp2
Fign
Atp2b4
Cpne4
Spint2
Prkca
Nrp2
Rspo2
Maf
Chodl
Kcnq5
Megf11
Gm26905
Stac
Pcdh11x
Cdh8
mt−Co3
Nwd2
Grik1
Kcnh7
Zfp804b
Cacna1e
Grm5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
−1
0
1
2
Average
Expression
Percent
Expressed
0
25
50
75
100
b
a
FastBlue
Stk32a
C1qtnf4
Cpne4
FastBlue
Stk32a
Grm5
Erbb4
Digit-innervating MNs
Phrenic MNs
Hind footpad injection
Trans-thoracic injection
Cluster 4
Cluster 7
c
e
f
d
Cpne4 (4)
Grm5 (2)
C1qtnf4/Gulp1 (5)
Erbb4 (7)
Axial
Digit
Phrenic
Soleus
TA
0
50
100
% of FastBlue+ alpha MNs
Fig. 4 Alpha motor neurons sub-cluster into eight transcriptional groups. a Alpha MNs can be re-clustered into 8 sub-clusters. b UMAPs displaying the
alpha MN clusters in each separately barcoded segment of the spinal cord. Clusters 2 and 7 are most prominent in cervical, 3 and 4 are sparse or missing
from thoracic. c Dot plot showing the top marker genes for each cluster. No markers were identiﬁed for clusters 0 or 1. Genes in bold are shown by ISH.
d Quantiﬁcation of cluster marker expression in alpha MNs retrogradely labeled from various muscles (Axial = lumbar extensors of the spine, TA = tibialis
anterior). For each muscle, N = 2 animals were injected with the retrograde tracer FastBlue. Percent of FastBlue+ alpha MNs, based on Stk32a expression,
expressing cluster markers from each injected muscle. Cpne4 (axial n = 66 neurons, digit n = 56, phrenic n = 175, soleus n = 91, TA n = 78) and Erbb4
(axial n = 138 neurons, digit n = 77, phrenic n = 177, soleus n = 63, TA n = 119) stand out as markers for digit-innervating and phrenic MNs, respectively.
Grm5 was relatively enriched in alpha MNs projecting to the soleus compared with the other muscles (axial n = 138 neurons, digit n = 77, phrenic n = 177,
soleus n = 63, TA n = 119), and C1qtnf4/Gulp1 was expressed in double the number of alpha MNs projecting to digit muscle (axial n = 94 neurons, digit
n = 67, phrenic n = 142, soleus n = 72, TA n = 100). e ISH examples of images quantiﬁed in d. Alpha MNs innervating the digits express the cluster 4
marker Cpne4 (yellow) but lack the cluster 5 marker C1qtnf4 (cyan). f Alpha MNs innervating the diaphragm (phrenic MNs) express the cluster 7 marker
Erbb4 (yellow) but lack the cluster 2 marker Grm5 (cyan). *p = 0.0053 by Shapiro-Wilk test comparing by muscle. #p = 0.0031 by Shapiro-Wilk test
comparing by the gene. Scale bars, e 50 µm, f 25 µm.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:2471 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7

We performed an analysis to examine the types of genes
enriched in the subtypes that could impact ﬁring properties and
found several candidates for each subtype (Supplementary
Data 2). Future electrophysiological studies, coupled with our
dataset, will provide a more thorough understanding of subtype-
speciﬁc ﬁring properties.
In combination, our analysis of gene expression in skeletal
MNs deﬁned markers for the three main classes, revealed that
each of these can be divided into subtypes, and identiﬁed
transcriptomic differences between alpha MNs that are likely to
correspond to innervation of distinct muscles with speciﬁc
functional properties. In particular, we identify a combination
of markers for the subtype of alpha MN that innervates
the diaphragm, the loss of which ultimately causes mortality
in ALS.
Cholinergic interneurons. Cholinergic interneurons are found in
the intermediate zone of the spinal cord where they modulate
circuit function to coordinate locomotor behavior3, but they have
not been extensively studied. The best characterized cholinergic
interneurons, also called partition cells, reside near the central
canal and express Pitx2. Elegant studies have demonstrated they
are the source of cholinergic C boutons that synapse either ipsi-
or contralaterally onto motor neuron cell bodies and modulate
their excitability2,3,44–46. In our dataset, we found 8 interneuron
clusters with different transcriptomic proﬁles and speciﬁc mar-
kers (Fig. 5a). We subclustered these neurons and distinguished
14 subclasses that did not exhibit differences along the ros-
trocaudal axis (Supplementary Fig. 11). Although a few potential
markers were identiﬁed, many were shared between the new
divisions, therefore we carried out our analysis on the simpler
clustering of cholinergic interneurons (Fig. 5a). Two of these
classes, I5 and I6, express Pitx2 (Fig. 5g), and are distinguished by
the expression of Tox in I5 but not I6 (Fig. 5h). As predicted by
the snRNAseq data, we identiﬁed examples of these two types of
partition cells by ISH (Fig. 5c).
Although much more is known about partition cells, the
majority of cholinergic interneurons did not express Pitx2
(Fig. 5g). Four clusters, I1, I2, I3, and I4, accounted for almost all
other cholinergic interneurons, indicating that these interneur-
ons are much more diverse than was previously known. These
cells were selectively labeled by Slc6a1, a GABA transporter
(Fig. 2c, d), and Mpped2 (Fig. 5b; Supplementary Fig. 5c). I8 is a
small group of cholinergic neurons sharing an expression of
Mpped2 with I1-I7 (Figs. 2c, 5b; Supplementary Fig. 5c). To
validate that this cluster represents a rare type of interneuron, we
deﬁned a speciﬁc combination of markers to localize I8 (Fig. 5d).
As predicted from the sequencing, we demonstrated the
existence of cholinergic neurons in the intermediate zone that
co-expressed. Diagnostic markers for I8, Piezo2 and Reln, in a
subset of Chat+ neurons (Fig. 5e, f). These cells localized to the
intermediate zone around the central canal (Fig. 5d), substan-
tiating their role as an unrecognized type of cholinergic
interneuron.
The expression of Piezo2 in cholinergic interneurons was
surprising as this mechano-sensitive ion channel is primarily
expressed in peripheral sensory neurons, where it is required for
sensitivity to touch stimuli to the skin47,48, aspects of interocep-
tion (e.g., breathing49), and proprioception48. We also detected its
expression in other interneuron clusters (I1, I7; Fig. 5e), a
particular subtype of alpha MN (subcluster 6), as well as several
visceral MN-clusters (V2, V3, V7, V8; Supplementary Fig. 14r). It
will be of great interest to examine Piezo2 function in these
different neuron types and to determine the types of internal
mechanical stimuli that it may allow these cells to detect.
Visceral motor neurons. The pre-ganglionic autonomic MNs, or
visceral MNs, is the third main class of cholinergic cells. These
neurons provide motor control in the autonomic nervous system
and are responsible for relaying CNS messages that control not
only involuntary movement of smooth muscles and glands but
also many immediate physiological responses including heart
rate, respiration, and digestion50. Unlike other spinal motor
neurons, visceral MNs do not directly innervate their ﬁnal
effector organ, acting instead via ganglia in the periphery. Re-
clustering visceral MNs in our dataset divided them into 16 sub-
clusters (Fig. 6a) that were distinguished by select markers
(Fig. 6b). Intriguingly, in addition to transcription factors, many
of the markers we identiﬁed that best describe each visceral MN
cluster include neuropeptides (Ccbe1, Sst, Penk) and genes
involved with their production (Pcsk2). Neuropeptides modulate
the function of many cells and processes, thus their differential
expression in subsets of visceral MNs likely reﬂects the diverse
functions and organs that these neurons control. Other distin-
guishing markers of visceral MN subtypes included secreted
molecules (Fam19a1 and Fam163a) and extracellular matrix
proteins (Postn, Fras1, Reln, Mamdc2) further highlighting how
their diverse gene-expression proﬁles are likely a reﬂection of
their distinct physiological roles.
Visceral MNs are restricted to the pre-ganglionic column in the
lateral horn and thought to be primarily found at thoracic and
sacral levels1. Moreover, immunolocalization of neuropeptides
suggested that different subtypes might exist and show restricted
localization along the length of the spinal cord51. Remarkably, our
sequencing revealed that visceral motor neurons are abundant
not only in the thoracic and lumbar/sacral spinal cord but also in
the most caudal cervical region (Fig. 6c; Supplementary Fig. 13;
Supplemental Movie 2). The cervical spinal cord is canonically
thought to be devoid of this type of neuron50, though a few
studies
have
identiﬁed
visceral
MNs
in
caudal
cervical
regions52,53. Using ISH we conﬁrmed that diagnostic markers
for visceral MNs, Fbn2, Chat, and Prph, are co-expressed in the
lateral column of cervical spinal cord sections (Fig. 6f; Supple-
mentary Fig. 12a, 13e–h). Therefore, this important class of
cholinergic neurons appears more widely distributed than
previously suspected.
Moreover, the distribution of visceral MN clusters was
strikingly diverse between the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar/
sacral spinal cord (Supplementary Fig. 5d; Fig. 6c). Select clusters
were entirely missing from certain spinal cord regions, or only
present in a single region, strongly suggesting functional
specialization of the neurons controlling speciﬁc organs. For
example, Dach2, Gpc3, and Sema5a are top markers enriched in C
and T levels but not lumbo-sacral, whereas Sst is enriched in the
L/S segment but absent from C and T levels (Fig. 6d). We
quantiﬁed these markers in Fbn2+ visceral motor neurons of the
lateral horn at all levels and demonstrate that the sequencing data
are predictive of the relative prevalence of each subtype per level
(Fig. 6e). As another example, cluster 8 marked by expression of
Bnc2 (Fig. 6b) was only detected in cervical-derived nuclear
sequence data. Importantly, ISH revealed that Bnc2 localized to a
small subset of the putative visceral MNs in the cervical lateral
column
(Supplementary
Fig.
12a),
further
supporting
our
conclusion that this region of the spinal cord has a clear and
specialized role in autonomic signaling.
At a more general level, our data strongly support a more
complex role for visceral MNs in autonomic signaling than
previously appreciated. Indeed, of 16 transcriptomically divergent
clusters (Fig. 6b), 12 were unique to or more abundant in a
given region. Thus, their anatomic and transcriptomic specializa-
tion coincide, strongly supporting a functional role for their
distinct gene expression proﬁles. Cluster 5 represented a large and
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:2471 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

particularly divergent group of visceral MNs that were present
only in the lumbar/sacral region (Fig. 6c) and co-expressed the
adrenergic receptor Adra1a with the neuropeptides proenkepha-
lin (Penk) and somatostatin (Sst; Fig. 6b; Supplementary Data 1).
Notably, ISH revealed that a large subset of visceral MNs in the
sacral spinal cord express the inhibitory neuropeptide Sst (Fig. 6g;
Supplementary Data 1), corresponding to pre-ganglionic neurons
that have been previously described as controlling bladder and
bowel function54–56. Sst+ Fbn2+ neurons of the lateral horn were
absent from cervical and thoracic levels (Supplementary Fig. 12b).
Discussion
Mammalian skeletal MNs are essential for coordinating muscle
activity and all types of consciously controlled movement. They
are also the cellular targets responsible for the progressive and
ultimately fatal symptoms of diseases like spinal muscular atro-
phy and ALS. Over the past 30 years, it has become increasingly
clear that diverse subtypes of skeletal MNs play distinct roles in
motor control and have different susceptibility in disease. In
particular, elegant developmental studies hint at considerable
diversity of adult motor neurons57 but little is known about the
Slc30a8
CT010465.1
Nr5a2
Cpne4
Adamtsl1
Fer1l6
Gm21847
Aldh1a1
Gm12649
Ror2
Gm13912
Pde11a
Zfp536
9530026P05Rik
Col18a1
Sox6
Lama2
Pde5a
Chst9
Cdh23
Prlr
Igsf3
Percent
Expressed
0
25
50
75
Average
Expression
0
1
2
I1
I2
I3
I4
I5
I6
I7
I8
Pitx2
Tox
b
c
a
d
g
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
Piezo2
Reln
I8
I8
I5
I4
I8
I7
I2
I3
I6
I1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
I5
I6
0
1
2
I5
I6
Pitx2
Chat
Tox
e
Piezo2
Reln
Chat
I8
Slc6a1
Chat
Mpped2
f
h
Fig. 5 Spinal cholinergic interneurons separate into 8 transcriptionally distinct subtypes. a Top markers of the 8 cholinergic interneuron clusters.
b ISH showing expression of two top markers for cholinergic interneurons (Fig. 2c), Slc6a1 (cyan) and Mpped2 (yellow) in Chat+ neurons (red) in the
intermediate zone. Boxes highlight a neuron expressing Chat and Mpped2, but lacking Slc6a1 (left), and a neuron expressing Chat, Mpped2, and Slc6a1
(right). c ISH showing expression of Pitx2 and Tox near the central canal (outlined) of the lumbar spinal cord. Co-expression of Pitx2 and Tox in Chat+ cells
exempliﬁes cluster I5 (left) whereas Pitx2 and Chat without Tox identify a cluster I6 cell (right). d High-magniﬁcation images showing co-expression of
Piezo2, Reln, and Chat in an I8 neuron found near the central canal (outlined) of the thoracic spinal cord. e, f Piezo2 and Reln co-expression are diagnostic of
a rare population of interneurons, cluster I8. g Pitx2, a known marker for partition cells, is expressed only in clusters I5 and I6. h Tox is expressed only in
interneuron cluster I5 and thus differentiates between the two Pitx2-expressing clusters. Low magniﬁcation scale bars, 50 µm. High magniﬁcation scale
bars, 10 µm.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:2471 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9

Fam163a
Fgf10
Mamdc2
Sema5a
Dach2
Sox5
Pde3a
Trpc3
Fstl4
Gm10248
Necab1
Ccbe1
Mob3b
Aldh1a1
Trhr
Gm12130
Gm32828
Etv1
Agbl1
Bnc2
Col24a1
Reln
Gm13912
Col12a1
Synpr
Col25a1
Piezo2
Oprm1
Gm15261
Slc26a7
Sst
Gm12128
Agmo
Nfib
Lama2
Gpc3
Rorb
4930445B16Rik
Gm43948
Fam19a1
Adamts18
Pcsk2
Tox
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
0
1
2
Average
Expression
Percent
Expressed
0
20
40
60
80
13
8
1
7
3
0
11
2
10
6
4
9
14
12
15
5
Cervical
Lumbar/Sacral
Thoracic
a
b
c
d
Cluster
C
T L/S
3
Sst
Sema5a
Dach2
Gpc3
Percent
Expressed
0
20
40
60
80
5
C
T L/S
14
C
T L/S
Sacral
Cervical
e
f
g
Chat
Fbn2
Gpc3
Prph
Fbn2
Sst
Dach2
Gpc3
Sema5a
Sst
0
20
40
60
80
100
% of Visceral MNs
Cervical
Thoracic
Lumbar
Sacral
Fig. 6 Visceral motor neurons exhibit extensive diversity in their gene expression proﬁles and anatomic localization. a Visceral motor neurons can be
re-clustered into 16 distinct sub-clusters. b Dot plot showing the top three marker genes for each cluster. Genes in bold font are shown by ISH below. c
UMAPs displaying the visceral motor neuron clusters derived from each separately barcoded segment of the spinal cord. Clusters 0, 1, 3, 4, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15
are sparse or missing from the lumbar/sacral segment; conversely, cluster 5 is unique to the lumbar/sacral segment, where cluster 2 is also most
abundant. Cluster 8 is most sparse in thoracic, while clusters 3 and 15 are most abundant in thoracic, and cluster 14 is most abundant in cervical. d Dot plot
showing expression of marker genes for uniquely cervical/thoracic (C/T) or lumbar/sacral (L/S) clusters in each segment of the spinal cord, with Gpc3,
Dach2, and Sema5a most highly expressed in rostral levels and Sst most highly expressed in caudal levels. e Quantiﬁcation of each level-speciﬁc cluster
marker in visceral MNs of each spinal cord level, shown as percent of Fbn2 + MNs expressing each gene (N = 2 animals), highlighting rostral expression of
Gpc3 (cervical n = 100 neurons, thoracic n = 64, lumbar n = 41, sacral n = 140), Dach2 (cervical n = 175 neurons, thoracic n = 139, lumbar n = 92, sacral
n = 91), and Sema5a (cervical n = 180 neurons, thoracic n = 142, lumbar n = 72, sacral n = 92) and caudal expression of Sst (cervical n = 144 neurons,
thoracic n = 77, lumbar n = 75, sacral n = 110), as predicted by the sequencing data. f ISH showing Gpc3 + (yellow) visceral MNs, likely representing
cluster 3 neurons, in the cervical spinal cord. g ISH showing Sst+ visceral MNs (yellow), likely representing cluster 5 neurons, in the sacral spinal cord.
Scale bars, 50 µm.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:2471 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

true range of these cell types or the molecules deﬁning them.
Thus, to gain genetic access to skeletal MNs in animal models, the
ﬁeld has relied extensively on a Chat-IRES-Cre mouse that
broadly targets cholinergic neurons. Here we used this line to
mark cholinergic neurons and adopted a snRNAseq approach to
characterize motor neuron diversity, identify sub-types and deﬁne
a wide range of genes that can be used to selectively distinguish
the many different classes of adult cholinergic neurons that we
discovered. Importantly, analyzing just a subset of the sequenced
nuclei does not dramatically change the clustering pattern nor the
major conclusions, therefore additional sequencing has a dimin-
ishing return. Nuclear sequencing is highly representative relative
to cell-based approaches but can overrepresent the expression of
nuclear-retained genes and miss good cytoplasmic markers14.
Although this is unlikely to affect clustering because this relies on
many transcripts, it may mean that better markers exist.
One discovery is the previously unappreciated number of
highly distinct visceral motor neuron types. That there should
exist different subtypes may not be surprising, given the diversity
of organs and glands they control, ranging from the heart and
lungs to the adrenal medulla, intestines, and bladder. However, it
was particularly compelling to ﬁnd that the different types are
discretely located along the length of the cord, corresponding to a
body map. An especially surprising ﬁnding was that visceral MNs
extends into the cervical spinal cord, where we have clearly
localized at least three subtypes (Gpc3+, Dach2+, Sema5a+, and
Bnc2+ cells in the lower cervical region). All previous descrip-
tions restrict these neurons to the thoracic and sacral regions1,50,
thus it will be of great interest to further characterize these cer-
vical visceral MNs in terms of their connectivity and function.
We also characterized a large population of cholinergic inter-
neurons and demonstrated unanticipated diversity. Previously,
only one major class of cholinergic interneurons, the Pitx2+
partition cells, has been studied at a functional level2,3,45. Our
analysis divides the partition cells into at least two transcriptomic
forms and identiﬁes several other types of cholinergic inter-
neurons with unknown function. Thus, the snRNAseq analysis of
cells targeted by Chat-IRES-Cre mediated recombination pro-
vides a rich resource and exposes features of several unusual types
of cholinergic neurons. Importantly, our data align well with a
concurrent study58 and in combination, these data should pro-
vide the ﬁeld with approaches for selectively targeting cholinergic
neuron types.
As we had hoped, our sequencing also identiﬁed skeletal MNs
as three related but transcriptomically distinct groups. This clear
division ﬁts well with previous reports of select differences
between alpha and gamma MNs and clearly demonstrates that a
third type, possibly beta MNs (referred to as Type 3), which have
been less well characterized, form an equally abundant class.
Notably, our analysis supports these Type 3 MNs as being related
to both alphas and gammas1 but as sharing the greatest similarity
with a subtype of alpha MNs. The transcriptomic description of
these different MN types dramatically changes the landscape of
markers that can be used to distinguish them and therefore
should greatly simplify their identiﬁcation. Indeed, intersectional
approaches using genes we validated here and Chat, would be
useful for separately targeting MN subtypes and facilitate in vivo
dissection of their biological roles. Our data show that the
embryonic marker code responsible for the development of dis-
tinct MN pools appears to be largely erased in the adult. Finally,
each class of skeletal MN can be subdivided into several tran-
scriptomically related but distinguishable types. For the alpha
motor neurons, these divisions appear at least in part related to
their peripheral targets, for example, Stk32a+ Erbb4+ alpha MNs
project to the diaphragm whereas Stk32a+ Cpne4+ alpha MNs
innervate digits. We anticipate that this rich transcriptomic
dataset should help deﬁne and characterize the different subtypes
of MNs and expose their differential signiﬁcance in health and
disease.
Methods
Animals. Animal care and experimental procedures were performed in accordance
with protocols 17-003 and 20-003 approved by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development Animal Care and Use Com-
mittee. CAG-Sun1/sfGFP mice (B6;129-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm5(CAG-Sun1/sfGFP)Nat/J; Stock
No: 02103915) were bred to the Chat-IRES-Cre::deltaNeo line (Chattm1(cre)Lowl/J);
Jax Stock No. 03166159), in which the neomycin cassette was removed to avoid
ectopic expression sometimes observed in the ChAT-IRES-Cre line. This cross
resulted in the expression of the SUN1 fusion protein (nuclear-membrane targeting
sequences of the SUN1 protein fused to 2 copies of superfolder GFP (sfGFP) followed
by 6 copies of Myc) in cells that express Chat.
Single nucleus isolation and sequencing. Spinal cords were rapidly extruded
from Chat-IRES-Cre::CAG-Sun1/sfGFP mice after anesthesia with 2.5% tri-
bromoethanol (0.5 ml/25 g body weight), decapitation, and a cut through the spinal
column at hip level. A PBS-ﬁlled syringe ﬁtted with a 20 G needle (7.25 mm) was
inserted into the caudal end of the spinal column to ﬂush out the spinal cord. Each
cord was separated into cervical, thoracic, and lumbar/sacral regions, and matching
regions from 2 mice were pooled for homogenization and nuclear isolation. FACS
sorted GFP+ nuclei from n = 12 mice (6 females and 6 males, 8 weeks old) were
pooled from each region to obtain the nuclei analyzed in this study. Samples were
frozen until processing, which was performed in 3 replicates—one of male tissue,
one female, and one of mixed-sex.
The nuclei isolation protocol was adapted from Sathyamurthy et al.12. Each
sample was thawed and homogenized in a Dounce Homogenizer (Kimble Chase
2 ml Tissue Grinder) containing 1 ml freshly prepared ice-cold lysis buffer (low
sucrose buffer [320 mM sucrose, 10 mM HEPES-pH 8.0, 5 mM CaCl2, 3 mM Mg-
acetate, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT] with 0.1% NP-40) applying 10 strokes with
the A pestle followed by 10 strokes with the B pestle. The homogenate was ﬁltered
through a 40 µm cell strainer (FisherScientiﬁc #08-771-1), transferred to a DNA
low bind 2 mL microfuge tube (Eppendorf, #022431048), and centrifuged at 300×g
for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed, the pellet was gently resuspended
in low sucrose buffer and centrifuged for another 5 min. The nuclei were
resuspended in 500 µl 1× PBS with 1% BSA and 0.2 U/µl SUPERaseIn RNase
Inhibitor (ThermoFisher, #AM2696) and loaded on top of 900 µl 1.8 M Sucrose
Cushion Solution (Sigma, NUC-201). The sucrose gradient was centrifuged at
13,000×g for 45 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was discarded, the nuclei were
resuspended in 500 µl Pre-FACS buffer (1× PBS with 1% BSA, 0.2 U/µl
SUPERaseIn RNase Inhibitor), and ﬁltered through a 35 µm cell strainer (Falcon
#352235). Before FACS sorting, 2.5 µl of 5 mM DRAQ5 (ThermoFisher #62251)
were added.
Samples were processed on a Sony SH800 Cell Sorter with a 100 mm sorting
chip and GFP+/DRAQ5+ nuclei were collected into 1.5 ml centrifuge tubes
containing 10 µl of the Pre-FACS buffer. We collected ~24,000, 15,000, and 34,000,
GFP+ nuclei from the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar/sacral spinal cord samples,
respectively (these nuclei were pooled from n = 4 mice in 3 replicates, n = 12 total).
Using a Chromium Single Cell 3′ Library and Gel Bead Kit v3 (10X Genomics),
GFP + nuclei were immediately loaded onto a Chromium Single Cell Processor
(10X Genomics) for barcoding of RNA from single nuclei. Sequencing libraries
were constructed according to the manufacturer’s instructions and resulting cDNA
samples were run on an Agilent Bioanalyzer using the High Sensitivity DNA Chip
as quality control and to determine cDNA concentrations. The samples were
combined and run on an Illumina HiSeq2500 with Read1 = 98-bp, Read2 = 26-bp,
and indexRead = 8. There were a total of 410 million reads passing the ﬁlter. Reads
were aligned and assigned to Ensembl GRm38 transcript deﬁnitions using the
CellRanger v3.1.0 pipeline (10X Genomics). The transcript reference was prepared
as a pre-mRNA reference as described in the Cell Ranger documentation.
Single nucleus analysis. Sequencing data were analyzed using the R package
Seurat version 3.1.460 following standard procedures61. Outliers were identiﬁed
based on the number of expressed genes and mitochondrial proportions and
removed from the data. Removal of outliers resulted in 34,231 total remaining cells
for analysis. Each separately barcoded region of the spinal cord was separately
processed by the standard methods. Brieﬂy, the data were normalized and scaled
with the SCTransform function, the linear dimensional reduction was performed
on scaled data, and signiﬁcant principal components (PCs) were identiﬁed using
the elbow method. Only signiﬁcant PCs, (10–30, determined via the elbow plot
method for each analysis) were used for downstream clustering. Clustering was
performed using the Seurat functions FindNeighbors and FindClusters
(resolution = 0.6). Clusters were then visualized with t-SNE or UMAP62. Reference
anchors were identiﬁed between each spinal cord region dataset before integration
with the IntegrateData function, and integrated data were then processed by the
same methods. For subclustering, clusters of interest for each subtype were taken as
a subset from the cholinergic neuron dataset and signiﬁcant PCs were used for
downstream clustering similarly to above. All data was visualized with the SCT
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:2471 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11

assay, and plots were generated using Seurat functions. Clustering of all cholinergic
neurons resulted in 23 clusters (Supplementary Fig. 5a); due to their proximity,
clusters 3, 4, and 22 were combined.
Cluster-speciﬁc marker genes were identiﬁed using the FindAllMarkers
function, utilizing a negative binomial distribution (DESeq263). Only positive
markers were identiﬁed, and the data were down-sampled to 100 cells per cluster to
facilitate comparison. Genes had to be detected in a minimum of 25% of cells and
display at least a 50% log fold change. Only markers with a p-value under 0.1 were
returned. In selecting top markers for each cluster, we prioritized expression in a
low number of cells outside each cluster and a higher log fold change in a large
number of cells within each cluster. We ﬁltered the markers to identify genes with
expression in fewer than 30% of cells outside of each cluster and an average log fold
change greater than 60% between each cluster and all other clusters and selected
the genes that were least expressed outside of each cluster for visualization. In this
way, we were able to select markers that are highly expressed within each cluster,
while still being restricted to genes unique to each individual cluster.
Identiﬁcation of activity-related genes among alpha MNs. Gene ontology (GO)
terms related to ﬁring properties were selected (channel activity, GO:0005216;
GABA receptor activity, GO:0016917; g-protein-coupled receptor activity,
GO:0004930), and alpha MN marker genes within each ontology were identiﬁed
(Supplementary Table 2).
Fixed tissue harvest and immunostaining. Mice were anesthetized with 2.5%
avertin and transcardially perfused with saline, then 4% paraformaldehyde, fol-
lowed by overnight post-ﬁxation and cryoprotection in 30% sucrose prior to sec-
tioning. Sixteen micrometer thick coronal slices were collected onto positively
charged slides using a Leica CM3050 S Research Cryostat. For immunostaining,
tissue was permeabilized in 0.1% Triton-X100 in 1× PBS (PBSTx), then blocked in
5% normal donkey serum in 0.1% PBSTx. The primary antibody was diluted in
0.5% normal donkey serum in 0.1% PBSTx and tissue was incubated overnight at
4 °C. Tissue was washed in 0.1% PBSTx and incubated in secondary antibody
(ThermoFisher) diluted in 0.1% PBSTx for 1 h, washed in 1× PBS, and coverslipped
with Prolong Diamond (ThermoFisher #P36961). Primary antibodies: anti-SV2B
(Synaptic Systems# 119 102, 1:500), anti-VGLUT1 (Synaptic Systems #135 011,
1:500). Alpha-bungarotoxin (ThermoFisher #B13422, 1:200) was diluted with a
secondary antibody.
Retrograde tracing. Motor neurons innervating speciﬁc muscles were retrogradely
labeled using the tracer FastBlue (Polysciences Inc. #17740) at 5% w/v. Mice were
anesthetized using isoﬂuorane and a small incision was performed on the skin to
expose the muscle of interest. Tracer was loaded into a Hamilton syringe
(Hamilton #1701N) and mounted onto a syringe pump (KD Scientiﬁc #78-0220).
Tracer was delivered at a rate of 1 µl/min, 1 µl per site, 2–4 sites per muscle,
depending on muscle size. Tibialis anterior (TA) was injected at 3 sites per side,
soleus at 2 sites per side, lumbar extensors of the spine43 (axial) at 4 sites per side,
hindlimb footpads (digit) at 3 sites per side. Phrenic MNs were labeled by trans-
thoracic injection, as previously described64. The tissue was ﬁxed and harvested
3 days post-injection.
Multiplexed in situ hybridization. Spinal cord tissue was rapidly extruded as
above or dissected out, immediately embedded in O.C.T. compound (Tissue-Tek),
and fresh frozen on dry ice, taking care to work rapidly in order to minimize RNA
degradation. The tissue was cut into cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and sacral regions
that were co-embedded together for parallel processing and stored at −80 °C.
Blocks were sectioned into 16 µm-thick coronal slices onto positively charged slides
using a Leica CM3050 S Research Cryostat. Slides were dried in the cryostat, then
stored at −80 °C for up to 2 weeks. Multiplexed in situ hybridization was per-
formed according to the manufacturer’s instructions for fresh frozen sections
(ACD: 320851). Brieﬂy, sections were ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde, treated with
Protease IV for 30 min, and hybridized for 2 h at 40 °C (HybEZ II System) with
gene-speciﬁc probes to mouse Bnc2, C1qtnf4, Chat, Cpne4, Dach2, Erbb4, Fbn2,
Glis3, Gpc3, Gpr149, Grm5, Gulp1, Mpped2, Nrp2, Piezo2, Plekhg1, Prph, Rbfox3,
Reln, Rreb1, Sema5a, Slc6a1, Sst, Stk32a, Sv2b, Tns1, Tox, and Zeb2 identiﬁed from
single nucleus analysis. Each probe was tested in at least n = 2 mice.
Sections for in situ hybridizations of ﬁxed tissue were harvested and sectioned
as previously described. Slides were dried at 60 °C for 10 min, then stored at −80 °C
for up to 2 weeks. For in situ images overlayed with Fast Blue or Chat-Cre::
Ai14 signal, multiplexed in situ hybridization was performed according to the
manufacturer’s instructions for ﬁxed frozen sections (ACD: 323100, 323120)
through dehydration, then imaged in a 2× SSC buffer with pyranose oxidase
(Sigma: P4234) and RNAse inhibitor (NEB: M0314L), after which the ACD
protocol resumed. Probe targets were visualized using Opal dyes 520, 570, 620, or
690 (Akoya). Catalog numbers for all in situ hybridization reagents are listed in
Supplementary Table 2.
Slides were imaged either using a Zeiss Axiocam 506 color camera and Zeiss
Apotome.2 for optical sectioning, or a Zeiss confocal LSM800. Imaging settings
were stitched using Zeiss ZEN software (blue edition). We used FIJI65 to generate
maximum intensity projections and adjust brightness and contrast.
Overlaying tracer or endogenous signal with multiplexed ISH signal. Images
from before (FastBlue or Ai14 signal) and after (ISH signal) probe hybridization
were overlaid and manually aligned with the Arivis Vision 4D software channel
shift tool, using unique cell shapes, tissue tears, and section edges as landmarks.
Channels were saved separately and merged using FIJI software.
Quantiﬁcation of cells labeled by ISH markers (FastBlue retrograde label
experiments, and analysis of Fbn2+ lateral horn cells). Using FIJI software,
FastBlue labeled cells were outlined manually. Cells were counted as positive for
in situ hybridization probes if there were 3 or more distinct puncta within the
region deﬁned by FastBlue. Only FastBlue labeled cells also positive for Stk32a were
used in the analysis. A Shapiro-Wilk test was performed on the ratio of probe-
positive cells within Stk32a+ Fast Blue+ cells for each cluster marker by muscle.
Probes were tested in at least 2 animals per muscle.
Chat or Prph signal in the lateral horn was used to determine visceral MN
regions of interest. The Chat+ or Prph+ cells were outlined, and those that were
also Fbn2+ were analyzed for expression of marker genes expected to display
differential localization along the rostro-caudal axis of the spinal cord. Positivity
was determined by the identiﬁcation of 3 or more distinct puncta within the
outlined region of each cell. The percent of visceral subcluster marker (Dach2,
Gpc3, Sema5a, or Sst) positivity in these cells was determined for each spinal cord
level (C, T, L, and S).
Whole tissue immunolabeling and clearing by iDisco+. Whole adult spinal
cords were dissected out from Chat-IRES-Cre::CAG-Sun1/sfGFP double hetero-
zygous mice and ﬁxed in a straightened position using 4% paraformaldehyde in
PBS. To immunolabel and visualize GFP-positive nuclei within whole cleared tis-
sue, spinal cords were processed for iDisco+ as previously described66. Spinal
cords were immunolabeled with Chicken anti-GFP (ThermoFisher #A10262) at
1:200 during a 3-day incubation at 37 °C, washed, then labeled with AlexaFluor
647-conjugated goat anti-chicken secondary antibody (ThermoFisher #A21449) at
1:200 for 2 days at 37 °C. Spinal cords were embedded in 1% agarose prior to the
clearing steps to facilitate their handling and imaging once cleared. Imaging was
performed by light-sheet microscopy using the Ultramicroscope II (Miltenyi Bio-
tec) and the LaVision Biotec ×4 objective. Images were acquired using Imspector
software (single sheet, 13 dynamic focus planes, and Contrast Adaptive/Contrast
algorithm). Video and 2D image renderings were generated using Arivis Vision 4D
software.
Statistics and reproducibility. All quantiﬁcation of microscopy images was per-
formed blinded. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 9. All
validation of sequencing results by in situ hybridization was replicated across at
least 5 sections from multiple animals. All attempts at replication were successful.
All micrographs are representative images.
Reporting summary. Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during this study have been deposited in
the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession number “GSE167597”. An
interactive web portal for exploring the dataset is available at www.spinalcordatlas.org
and also at https://seqseek.ninds.nih.gov/. All other relevant data supporting the key
ﬁndings of this study are available within the article and its Supplementary Information
ﬁles or from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. A reporting summary
for this article is available as a Supplementary Information ﬁle. Source data are provided
with this paper.
Code availability
Code used in analyzing nuclear sequencing data is available at https://github.com/
malkasla/Alkaslasi-et-al._2021 [https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4580493].
Received: 29 June 2020; Accepted: 25 March 2021;
References
1.
Stifani, N. Motor neurons and the generation of spinal motor neuron
diversity. Front. Cell Neurosci. 8, 293 (2014).
2.
Miles, G. B., Hartley, R., Todd, A. J. & Brownstone, R. M. Spinal cholinergic
interneurons regulate the excitability of motoneurons during locomotion.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 2448–2453 (2007).
3.
Zagoraiou, L. et al. A cluster of cholinergic premotor interneurons modulates
mouse locomotor activity. Neuron 64, 645–662 (2009).
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:2471 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

4.
Hadzipasic, M. et al. Selective degeneration of a physiological subtype of spinal
motor neuron in mice with SOD1-linked ALS. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111,
16883–16888 (2014).
5.
Powis, R. A. & Gillingwater, T. H. Selective loss of alpha motor neurons with
sparing of gamma motor neurons and spinal cord cholinergic neurons in a
mouse model of spinal muscular atrophy. J. Anat. 228, 443–451 (2015).
6.
Murray, L. M., Beauvais, A., Gibeault, S., Courtney, N. L. & Kothary, R.
Transcriptional proﬁling of differentially vulnerable motor neurons at pre-
symptomatic stage in the Smn (2b/-) mouse model of spinal muscular
atrophy. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 3, 55 (2015).
7.
Ragagnin, A. M. G., Shadfar, S., Vidal, M., Jamali, M. S. & Atkin, J. D. Motor
neuron susceptibility in ALS/FTD. Front. Neurosci. 13, 532 (2019).
8.
Kanning, K. C., Kaplan, A. & Henderson, C. E. Motor neuron diversity in
development and disease. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 33, 409–440 (2010).
9.
Kaplan, A. et al. Neuronal matrix metalloproteinase-9 is a determinant of
selective neurodegeneration. Neuron 81, 333–348 (2014).
10. Delile, J. et al. Single cell transcriptomics reveals spatial and temporal
dynamics of gene expression in the developing mouse spinal cord.
Development 146, dev173807 (2019).
11. Rosenberg, A. B. et al. Single-cell proﬁling of the developing mouse brain and
spinal cord with split-pool barcoding. Science 360, eaam8999 (2018).
12. Sathyamurthy, A. et al. Massively parallel single nucleus transcriptional
proﬁling deﬁnes spinal cord neurons and their activity during behavior. Cell
Rep. 22, 2216–2225 (2018).
13. Habib, N. et al. Massively parallel single-nucleus RNA-seq with DroNc-seq.
Nat. Methods https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4407 (2017).
14. Nguyen, M. Q., Le Pichon, C. E. & Ryba, N. Stereotyped transcriptomic
transformation of somatosensory neurons in response to injury. Elife 8,
e49679 (2019).
15. Mo, A. et al. Epigenomic signatures of neuronal diversity in the mammalian
brain. Neuron 86, 1369–1384 (2015).
16. Borges, L. F. & Iversen, S. D. Topography of choline acetyltransferase
Immunoreactive Neurons and ﬁbers in the rat spinal cord. Brain Res. 362,
140–148 (1986).
17. Barber, R. P. et al. The morphology and distribution of neurons containing
choline acetyltransferase in the adult rat spinal cord: An immunocytochemical
study. J. Comp. Neurol. 229, 329–346 (1984).
18. Phelps, P. E. et al. Postnatal development of neurons containing choline
acetyltransferase in rat spinal cord: An immunocytochemical study. J. Comp.
Neurol. 229, 347–361 (1984).
19. Huang, A., Noga, B. R., Carr, P. A., Fedirchuk, B. & Jordan, L. M. Spinal
cholinergic neurons activated during locomotion: localization and
electrophysiological characterization. J. Neurophysiol. 83, 3537–3547 (2000).
20. Markham, J. A. & Vaughn, J. E. Migration patterns of sympathetic
preganglionic neurons in embryonic rat spinal cord. J. Neurobiol. 22, 811–822
(1991).
21. Thaler, J. P. et al. A postmitotic role for Isl-class LIM homeodomain proteins
in the assignment of visceral spinal motor neuron identity. Neuron 41,
337–350 (2004).
22. Burrill, J. D., Moran, L., Goulding, M. D. & Saueressig, H. PAX2 is expressed
in multiple spinal cord interneurons, including a population of EN1+
interneurons that require PAX6 for their development. Dev. Camb. Engl. 124,
4493–4503 (1997).
23. Roy, A. et al. Onecut transcription factors act upstream of Isl1 to regulate
spinal motoneuron diversiﬁcation. Dev. Camb. Engl. 139, 3109–3119 (2012).
24. Escurat, M., Gumpel, M., Lachapelle, F., Gros, F. & Portier, M. M.
[Comparative expression of 2 intermediate ﬁlament proteins, peripherin and
the 68 kDa neuroﬁlament protein, during embryonal development of the rat].
Comptes Rendus De. L’académie Des. Sci. Série Iii Sci. De. La Vie 306, 447–456
(1988).
25. Troy, C. M., Brown, K., Greene, L. A. & Shelanski, M. L. Ontogeny of the
neuronal intermediate ﬁlament protein, peripherin, in the mouse embryo.
Neuroscience 36, 217–237 (1990).
26. Manuel, M. & Zytnicki, D. Alpha, beta, and gamma motoneurons: functional
diversity in the motor system’s ﬁnal pathway. J. Integr. Neurosci. 10, 243–276
(2011).
27. Bessou, P., Emonet-Dénand, F. & Laporte, Y. Motor ﬁbres innervating
extrafusal and intrafusal muscle ﬁbres in the cat. J. Physiol. 180, 649–672
(1965).
28. Boyd, I. A., Gladden, M. H., McWilliam, P. N. & Ward, J. Control of dynamic
and static nuclear bag ﬁbres and nuclear chain ﬁbres by gamma and beta
axons in isolated cat muscle spindels. J. Physiol. 265, 133–162 (1977).
29. Frey, D. et al. Early and selective loss of neuromuscular synapse subtypes with
low sprouting competence in motoneuron diseases. J. Neurosci. 20, 2534–2542
(2000).
30. Dengler, R. et al. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: macro-EMG and twitch
forces of single motor units: motor units in ALS. Muscle Nerve 13, 545–550
(1990).
31. Lalancette-Hebert, M., Sharma, A., Lyashchenko, A. K. & Shneider, N. A.
Gamma motor neurons survive and exacerbate alpha motor neuron
degeneration in ALS. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, E8316–E8325 (2016).
32. Sarnat, H. B., Nochlin, D. & Born, D. E. Neuronal nuclear antigen (NeuN): a
marker of neuronal maturation in the early human fetal nervous system. Brain
Dev. 20, 88–94 (1998).
33. Friese, A. et al. Gamma and alpha motor neurons distinguished by expression
of transcription factor Err3. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 13588–13593
(2009).
34. Enjin, A. et al. Sensorimotor function is modulated by the serotonin receptor
1d, a novel marker for gamma motor neurons. Mol. Cell Neurosci. 49, 322–332
(2012).
35. Shneider, N. A., Brown, M. N., Smith, C. A., Pickel, J. & Alvarez, F. J. Gamma
motor neurons express distinct genetic markers at birth and require muscle
spindle-derived GDNF for postnatal survival. Neural Dev. 4, 42 (2009).
36. Edwards, I. J. et al. Na+/K+ ATPase 1 and 3 isoforms are differentially
expressed in - and -motoneurons. J. Neurosci. 33, 9913–9919 (2013).
37. Ashraﬁ, S. et al. Wnt7A identiﬁes embryonic γ-motor neurons and reveals
early postnatal dependence of γ-motor neurons on a muscle spindle-derived
signal. J. Neurosci. 32, 8725–8731 (2012).
38. Scott, J. J. A., Kümmel, H. & Illert, M. Skeletofusimotor (β) innervation of
proximal and distal forelimb muscles of the cat. Neurosci. Lett. 190, 1–4
(1995).
39. Nijssen, J., Comley, L. H. & Hedlund, E. Motor neuron vulnerability and
resistance in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Acta Neuropathol. 133, 863–885
(2017).
40. Pun, S., Santos, A. F., Saxena, S., Xu, L. & Caroni, P. Selective vulnerability and
pruning of phasic motoneuron axons in motoneuron disease alleviated by
CNTF. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 408–419 (2006).
41. Saxena, S. & Caroni, P. Selective neuronal vulnerability in neurodegenerative
diseases: from stressor thresholds to degeneration. Neuron 71, 35–48 (2011).
42. Mendelsohn, A. I., Dasen, J. S. & Jessell, T. M. Divergent hox coding and
evasion of retinoid signaling speciﬁes motor neurons innervating digit
muscles. Neuron 93, 792–805.e4 (2017).
43. Goetz, C., Pivetta, C. & Arber, S. Distinct limb and trunk premotor circuits
establish laterality in the spinal cord. Neuron 85, 131–144 (2015).
44. Rozani, I. et al. Pitx2 cholinergic interneurons are the source of C bouton
synapses on brainstem motor neurons. Sci. Rep. 9, 4936 (2019).
45. Stepien, A. E., Tripodi, M. & Arber, S. Monosynaptic rabies virus reveals
premotor network organization and synaptic speciﬁcity of cholinergic
partition cells. Neuron 68, 456–472 (2010).
46. Nascimento, F. et al. Synaptic mechanisms underlying modulation of
locomotor-related motoneuron output by premotor cholinergic interneurons.
Elife 9, e54170 (2020).
47. Coste, B. et al. Piezo1 and Piezo2 are essential components of distinct
mechanically activated cation channels. Science 330, 55–60 (2010).
48. Chesler, A. T. et al. The Role of PIEZO2 in human mechanosensation. N. Engl.
J. Med. 375, 1355–1364 (2016).
49. Nonomura, K. et al. Piezo2 senses airway stretch and mediates lung inﬂation-
induced apnoea. Nature 541, 176–181 (2016).
50. Kandel, E. R., Schwartz, J. H., Jessell, T. M., Siegelbaum, S. A. & Hudspeth, A.
J. Principles of Neural Science., McGraw-Hill Education (5th edn).
51. Krukoff, T. L. Peptidergic inputs to sympathetic preganglionic neurons. Can. J.
Physiol. Pharm. 65, 1619–1623 (1987).
52. Anderson, C. R. & Edwards, S. L. Intraperitoneal injections of ﬂuorogold
reliably labels all sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the rat. J. Neurosci.
Meth. 53, 137–141 (1994).
53. Leong, S.-K. & Ling, E.-A. Labelling neurons with ﬂuorescent dyes
administered via intravenous, subcutaneous or intraperitoneal route. J.
Neurosci. Meth. 32, 15–23 (1990).
54. Dalsgaard, C.-J., Hökfelt, T., Johansson, O. & Elde, R. Somatostatin
immunoreactive cell bodies in the dorsal horn and the parasympathetic
intermediolateral nucleus of the rat spinal cord. Neurosci. Lett. 27, 335–339
(1981).
55. Krukoff, T. L., Ciriello, J. & Calaresu, F. R. Somatostatin‐Like
immunoreactivity in neurons, nerve terminals, and ﬁbers of the cat spinal
cord. J. Comp. Neurol. 243, 13–22 (1986).
56. Keast, J. R. Neuropeptide-containing axon terminals in the male rat major
pelvic ganglion are primarily of sacral origin. J. Auton. Nerv. Syst. 47, 151–158
(1994).
57. Dasen, J. S. & Jessell, T. M. Hox networks and the origins of motor neuron
diversity. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 88, 169–200 (2009).
58. Blum, J. et al. Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of the adult mouse spinal
cord reveals molecular diversity of autonomic and skeletal motor neurons.
Nat. Neurosci. 24, 572–583 (2021)..
59. Rossi, J. et al. Melanocortin-4 receptors expressed by cholinergic neurons
regulate energy balance and glucose homeostasis. Cell Metab. 13, 195–204
(2011).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:2471 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
13

60. Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive integration of single-cell data. Cell 177,
1888–1902.e21 (2019).
61. Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E. & Satija, R. Integrating single-
cell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and species.
Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 411–420 (2018).
62. Becht, E. et al. Dimensionality reduction for visualizing single-cell data using
UMAP. Nat. Biotechnol. 37, 38–44 (2018).
63. Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold change and
dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550 (2014).
64. Vandeweerd, J.-M., Hontoir, F., Knoop, A. D., Swert, K. D. & Nicaise, C.
Retrograde neuroanatomical tracing of phrenic motor neurons in mice. J. Vis.
Exp. https://doi.org/10.3791/56758 (2018).
65. Schindelin, J. et al. Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis.
Nat. Methods 9, 676–682 (2012).
66. Renier, N. et al. Mapping of brain activity by automated volume analysis of
immediate early genes. Cell 165, 1789–1802 (2016).
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank intramural NIH colleagues Drs. Steven Coon, James Iben, and
Tianwei Li of the Molecular Genomics Core (NICHD) for RNA sequencing and align-
ment to the pre-mRNA genome, Drs. Apratim Mitra and Ryan Dale of the Bioinfor-
matics and Scientiﬁc Programming Core (NICHD) for technical advice, the NICHD
Microscopy and Imaging Core (MIC), and Drs. Nicholas Ryba (NIDCR) and Alexander
Chesler (NCCIH) for helpful discussion and comments on the manuscript. CLP is
intramurally funded by the National Institutes of Health, ZIA-HD008966 (NICHD).
Author contributions
M.R.A., Z.E.P., and C.L.P. designed the experiments and wrote the paper. M.R.A. and
Z.E.P. performed computational analysis and data validation by in situ hybridization.
M.R.A. performed retrograde labeling. M.R.A., Z.E.P., and S.H. performed immunos-
taining, imaging, and quantiﬁcation of in situ hybridization experiments. T.J.P. provided
advice on experimental design and expertise for sample preparation. H.S. generated the
mouse crosses. L.C. and H.S. helped perform experiments. Y.Z., H.S., and T.J.P. gener-
ated the single nucleus cDNA libraries for sequencing. All authors reviewed and edited
the manuscript.
Funding
Open Access funding provided by the National Institutes of Health (NIH).
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to C.E.L.P.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewer(s) for
their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the US; foreign
copyright protection may apply 2021
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2
14
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2021) 12:2471 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22691-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

===== All2021_SpinalCord+ContusionTransection =====
ARTICLE
Comparative analysis of functional assessment for contusion
and transection models of spinal cord injury
Angelo H. ALL1✉and Hasan Al-Nashash2✉
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to International Spinal Cord Society 2021
STUDY DESIGN: Descriptive secondary analysis of two spinal cord injury (SCI) animal models.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP) and motor behavioral (BBB) assessments of the two most used
rodent SCI models (contusion and transection), to elucidate their functional similarity and differences over the acute phase of 3 weeks.
SETTING: Neuro-electrophysiology SSEP and motor behavioral BBB assessments are used to provide a comparative analysis of the
functional changes among various severities of contusion and transection SCI.
METHODS: Adult male and female rats randomly grouped (n = 5) as following: mild (6.25 mm), moderate (12.5 mm), severe (25 mm), and
very severe (50 mm) contusion as well as right T10 hemi-transection (RxI), left T8 and right T10 double hemi-transection (DxI), and T8
complete transection (CxI) injuries, plus the control group (laminectomy with no injury). Animal weight, body temperature, anesthesia,
surgical procedures, electrophysiological SSEP monitoring, locomotion BBB scoring, and statistical analysis were identical among all animal
groups.
RESULTS: Statistical analysis of the SSEP and BBB data from both contusion and transection injury models indicate signiﬁcant differences
(P < 0.05). The results also show remarkable similarity for the severe and very severe contusion injuries to the complete transection, the
moderate contusion injury to the double hemi-transection, and the mild contusion injury to the T10 hemi-transection injury.
CONCLUSION: Although contusion and transection spinal cord injuries have two completely different pathophysiologies, their injury
progress during acute phase follow a similar trend.
Spinal Cord (2021) 59:1206–1209; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41393-021-00698-2
INTRODUCTION
It is critical to have standardized research models of spinal cord
injuries (SCI) in order to characterize the onset as well as the
progress of the various forms of injuries. Scientists must be able to
reproduce SCI models [1, 2] to unify their studies and compare
their results. In this multidisciplinary research, monitoring func-
tional deﬁcits [3, 4], examining neuroprotective effectiveness of
hypothermia [5–8], evaluating long-term efﬁciency of stem cell
replacement therapy [9–12], application of imaging techniques to
detect anatomical changes [12], assessments of cortical plasticity,
and reorganization of neuropathways within the spinal cord
[4, 13–15] are few important ﬁelds of study to mention.
Although the spinal cord is well-protected by the strong bony
structure of the vertebral arch, it is still vulnerable to various forms of
insult, especially the impact injuries [1, 16]. Such injury could happen
when high energy is delivered to a small parenchyma in a very short
period. So-called contusive injury will not only contuse one or more
segments of spinal cord that are directly underneath the site of
impact, but also could cause either dislocation or fracture of the
vertebrae causing laceration and partial or full transection of the
spinal cord. Thus, contusion and transection injuries often happen
simultaneously at and around the epicenter of the injury.
Researchers have successfully created reproducible and reliable
contusion and transection models of SCI. Nevertheless, a true
translational model, which could include key characteristics of
both contusion and transection injuries, still is absent. Technical
challenges such as difﬁculty in independently evaluating two
variables in one research subject have long prevented the
development of SCI models that carry both elements of injuries
concurrently.
Here, for the ﬁrst time, we intend to present the results of two
most prevalent rodent SCI models, contusion and transection, and
provide a comparative analysis of their functional assessments. This
article describes an analytical evaluation for the onset and progress
of the two SCI models through neuro-electrophysiology by
Somatosensory-evoked potential (SSEP) assessment and locomotion
by Basso, Beattie, and Bresnahan (BBB score) examination. SSEP is
the sensory response recorded from cortices after stimulating
peripheral nerves, which has been adopted to measure the severity
and evolution of spinal cord injuries objectively [17–22]. The BBB
scoring is the traditional behavioral assessment of injury, which is
based on 4 min observations of rats in a 90 cm diameter open ﬁeld
by two examiners [17, 23]. Brieﬂy, during the contusion, most of the
impact energy will be absorbed by the Gray Matter directly
underneath of injury epicenter. Then, it will spread to the
surrounding White Matter and extends to the proximal, distal,
dorsal, and ventral adjacent areas over time, causing utmost
irregular disruption of the spinal cord parenchyma [21, 24–26].
Received: 19 April 2021 Revised: 11 August 2021 Accepted: 12 August 2021
Published online: 7 September 2021
1Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong. 2Department of Electrical Engineering, College of Engineering, American
University of Sharjah, University City, Sharjah, UAE. ✉email: angelo@hkbu.edu.hk; hnashash@aus.edu
www.nature.com/sc

Clearly, the expansion of the damage depends on the severity of the
impact. The NYU-Impactor is one of the most used devices to create
contusive injuries in mice and rats [1, 25]. On the other hand, the
transection model of SCI is produced by a clean transverse incision
of the spinal cord, which generates a well-deﬁned interruption of
neuropathways with relatively consistent neuro-inﬂammation at the
site of injury. A small scalpel (No. 11) is usually used to incise rodents’
spinal cord under microscope creating either complete or partial
hemi-transection injury [2, 4, 27–29]. Due to the two very distinctive
injury inductions (impact vs. incision), the histological data are not
reported, though they were extensively presented in our previous
publications [1, 2].
To be applicable for comparison purposes and future studies,
the monitoring of the contusion and transection SCI should strictly
be time dependent. This means the data collection and analysis
for both SSEP signal and BBB scores should be from identical time-
points post-injury. Other critical conditions, such as animal weight,
body temperature, anesthetic drug, anesthesia induction meth-
ods, laminectomy to expose the spinal cord, other surgical
procedures (except for the injury induction itself), post-surgery
recovery care, recording instruments and statistical analysis must
also be identical in both models [1, 2, 30, 31].
It is also important to mention that since these two injuries have
different pathoanatomy and pathophysiology as well as natural
history, we do not intend to correlate the contusion and
transection SCI models. Our goal is to present the comparison
(both
similarity
and
contrast)
among
various
severities
of
contusion and transection SCIs and provide a comparative analysis
of the functional changes that start to happen immediately after
onset of injury and the events that continue to progress during
the acute and sub-acute phase of SCI.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental procedures
As we reported in detail previously [1, 2], equal number of adult (225–250
g) male and female rats were grouped randomly. Anesthesia induction and
maintenance as well as body temperature of all subjects in all groups were
kept identical and constant. Four screw electrodes corresponding to
forelimbs and hindlimbs somatosensory areas of the left and right cortices
and one near Lambda (as reference electrode) were carefully implanted on
the skull of rats without rupturing the dura or penetrating the brain tissue
[1, 2]. These ﬁve electrodes were connected to a data acquisition system
for real-time monitoring and ofﬂine analysis. Four pairs of needle
electrodes were placed near the left and right Median (forelimbs) and
Tibial (hindlimbs) nerves (without touching the nerve bundles) to induce
electrical stimulation. Each stimulation triggered recording from contral-
ateral skull electrodes as well as three other electrode with one second
pause between stimulations. Laminectomy in rats is a safe, secure, easy,
and relatively fast (15 min) procedure to expose the dorsal part of the
spinal cord, where either contusion under NYU-Impactor or clean
transection under microscope was intended. Animal care post-SCI included
s.c. saline injection (~10 cc/day), analgesic (4 days), antibiotic (3 days),
temporary bladder expression twice a day for 3–5 days, adequate room
temperature (18–23 °C) and humidity (40–60%), 12 h day/night cycle, free
access to food and water at the bottom of the cage—all the conditions
and procedures were identical for contusive and transection injuries.
Behavioral assessment
Few days before the injury, locomotion of all animals was assessed using
the BBB rating scale [23]. The BBB scoring is a subjective 21-point scale
used to assess the hindlimb joints movements of the animal in a 90 cm
open-ﬁeld by two observers independently. BBB score 0 is assigned no
hindlimb motion, while simultaneous movement of the joints in hip, knee,
and ankle in hindlimbs are given score up to 7. Scores 8 to 13 are given
from motion with occasional plantar stepping without weight support to
consistent front-hind limbs co-ordination. Advanced recovery with scores
14–20 is given to better recovery from plantar steps with parallel paw
position, to hindlimb stepping with toe clearance, and ﬁne paw
coordination with tail balancing off the ground. The score 21 is reserved
for animals with absolutely no motor behavior deﬁcit.
Signal analysis
The SSEP signal has mainly four identiﬁable peaks. After stimulation, which
appears within the ﬁrst few milliseconds (ms), the ﬁrst positive peak (P1)
can be identiﬁed within the 5 ms, which is followed by ﬁrst negative peak
(N1) at 5–10 ms and the second positive peak (P2) appears at 10–20 ms,
followed by second negative peak (N2) at 25–50 ms in rats. Note that the
P1 peak could be absent often. Conventionally, identiﬁcation of the N1
peak is used to analyze the latency and the amplitude of N1-P2 peaks is
used for amplitude analyses and measurements [32–42]. In both contusion
and transection experiments, the SSEPs contralateral to the side of limb
stimulation were used for analysis. The signal-to-noise ratio was enhanced
by using ensemble averaging of 100–700 sweeps. Peak detection was then
applied to locate the N1 and P2 peaks of the averaged SSEP. The SSEP
averaged signals were then normalized relative to the respective baseline
signal. Relative here means that the amplitude of the SSEP was measured
relative to the amplitude of the corresponding baseline SSEP signal. This
was done by dividing the N1-P2 peak-to-peak amplitude of SSEPs by the
N1-P2 peak-to-peak of the corresponding baseline. All signal processing
was performed using MATLAB R2019a by The MathWorks, Inc.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis of the SSEP data was performed by a repeated measure
analysis of variance over 5 time points: Baseline, Day 4, Week 1, Week 2,
and Week 3. For the contusion experiments, the control group of rats with
laminectomy but without any weight drop (injury) and the injury groups
weight drop impact heights of 6.25 mm (mild), 12.5 mm (moderate), 25
mm (severe), and 50 mm (very severe) were analyzed. For the transection
experiments, Right T10 hemi-transection injury (RxI); Left T8 and Right T10
double hemi-transection injury (DxI), and T8 complete transection injury
(CxI) were analyzed. Pairwise multivariate “t” tests according to Fisher Least
Signiﬁcant Difference method and compensation for multiple comparisons
on different days were performed. The null hypothesis was that the relative
amplitudes are the same on different days before and after injury. Similar
statistical analysis was also conducted for the motor behavioral scores.
RESULTS
The relative amplitude of the SSEP signals normalized with respect
to the baseline for the four contusion and three transection injury
groups as well as the control group (which is identical for both injury
models) is shown in Fig. 1. It is observed that the laminectomy only
(control group) has no SSEP amplitude attenuation as expected.
However, the relative SSEP amplitudes of the four contusion and
three transection injury groups reduced corresponding to the
increase in injury severity. In addition, the motor behavior BBB
scores for both contusion and transection injury groups as well as
the control group (which is identical for both injury models) is
shown in Fig. 2. The BBB scores of the four contusion and three
transection injury groups are reduced corresponding to the increase
in injury severity and the BBB score of rats in laminectomy only
(control group) showed no deﬁcit as expected.
Fig.
1
Time
course
of
mean
relative
amplitude
of
the
somatosensory-evoked potentials (SSEPs) obtained following mid-
thoracic spinal cord contusion and transection injuries.
A.H. ALL and H. Al-Nashash
1207
Spinal Cord (2021) 59:1206 – 1209
1234567890();,:

Statistical analysis of the SSEP data from both contusion and
transection injuries indicated that a differential pattern for their
progress of injuries began to appear after week 1 across all injury
groups. Furthermore, signiﬁcant differences between the pair-wise
groups of the two higher (25 and 50 mm) and two lower (6.25 and
12.5 mm) injury severities (P < 0.05). Statistical analysis of the
transection data also rejected the null hypothesis that all relative
SSEP means are the same with (P < 0.05).
DISCUSSION
The contusion model of spinal cord injury is the most relevant
form of SCI in human and approximately one third of contusive
SCIs have also equivalent transection injuries due to the blunt
force that causes vertebral fractures and dislocations. Logically, in
any research model, only one type of injury could be induced and
investigated, while most of the times in real life, the two injuries
happen concurrently.
In this article, we intend to provide a comparative analysis of the
functional assessment and deﬁne the contribution and role of the two
major components (contusion and transection) in the overall progress
of injury during the three weeks acute phase of SCI. Evidently, the
anatomopathology and pathophysiology of the contusion and
transection injuries are completely different and hence, realistically
no correlation between the two injuries can be drawn. Contusion
injury (transfer of high energy in a very short time) typically presents
with irregular progress, extending proximally, distally, ventrally,
dorsally, and laterally, within the spinal cord parenchyma over time.
The injury always starts from the epicenter of contusion in Gray
Matter, where the energy is primarily absorbed by higher density
parenchyma. Then, it extends into the surrounding White Matter
involving mostly larger diameter axons. This is because axons present
both circumferential stress or tension and contractility. Hence, thicker
and more rigid axons break easier than small-diameter axons. The
transection injury, on the other hand, is a clean and precise incision
with overall limited extension throughout the spinal cord parench-
yma. The parenchymal transection injury mostly presents as acute
axonal damage that consequently evolves into Wallerian degenera-
tion. Obviously, the contrast between the extensive and irregular
expansion of injury in contusion and the Wallerian degeneration in
the transection injury is signiﬁcant. Similarly, we do not attempt to
correlate the BBB scores from the two injury models either, but only
presenting their impact based on the severity of each injury group.
To avoid the indistinct and non-stable sub-acute phase of SCI,
we focused on the comparative analysis of the relative amplitudes
of SSEPs during the third-week post-SCI, as it reﬂects more steady
state of pathophysiological conditions. In the case of mild
(6.25 mm) contusion injury, the relative SSEP amplitude drops to
66%, which is nearly similar to the 55% relative amplitude changes
of the right T10 hemi-transection injury. These percentage changes
are comparable because of the similarity in propagation of action
potential via ascending spared ﬁbers (anatomically continued)
through the injury site. However, in the case of moderate
(12.5 mm) contusion and double (right T8 and left T10) hemi-
transection injuries, the drop in SSEP amplitude signals is 53% and
48%, respectively. This relatively similar difference could be
attributed to the signals that would still propagate through the
parenchyma owing to the continuity of the axons in the moderate
injury and otherwise healthy neuropathways of the opposite site of
the double hemi-transection injuries. However, in the matter of
severe (25 mm) and very severe (50 mm) contusion injury as well as
complete T8 transection injury, there are substantial drop of SSEP
amplitude to 11%, 2%, and 19%, respectively. These changes are
due to considerable axonal interruption in the case of severe injury
and practically no surviving axonal tracks with the injury expansion
to a much larger surrounding parenchyma affecting higher
number of neuropathways in the event of very severe injury.
Wherein, still there is some form of continuity between the two
transected edges of the spinal cord after complete transection
injury at T8 (no insulating material was used), allowing spread of
non-discriminatory electrical signal, which results in a major
reduction of SSEP amplitude. Similar trend of analysis also conﬁrms
resemblance in results for the motor behavior (BBB scores) values.
In conclusion, the similarity of the SSEP amplitude changes and
BBB scores for the severe and very severe contusion injuries to the
complete transection, the moderate contusion injury to double
hemi-transection,
and
the
mild
contusion
injury
to
hemi-
transection is noteworthy.
DATA ARCHIVING AND DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the corresponding
authors, H Al-Nashash and AH All, upon request.
REFERENCES
1. Agrawal G, Kerr C, Thakor NV, All AH. Characterization of graded multicenter animal
spinal cord injury study contusion spinal cord injury using somatosensory-evoked
potentials. Spine. 2010;35:1122–7. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181be5fa7.
2. All AH, Al Nashash H, Mir H, Luo S, Liu X. Characterization of transection spinal cord
injuries by monitoring somatosensory evoked potentials and motor behavior. Brain
Res Bull. 2020;156:150–163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2019.12.012.
3. Sydekum E, Ghosh A, Gullo M, Baltes C, Schwab M, Rudin M. Rapid functional
reorganization of the forelimb cortical representation after thoracic spinal cord
injury
in
adult
rats.
Neuroimage.
2014;87:72–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2013.10.045.
4. Vipin A, Thow XY, Mir H, Kortelainen J, Manivannan J, Al-Nashash H, et al. Natural
progression of spinal cord transection injury and reorganization of neural path-
ways. J Neurotrauma. 2016;33:2191–201. https://doi.org/10.1089/neu.2015.4383.
5. Maybhate A, Hu C, Bazley FA, Yu Q, Thakor NV, Kerr CL, et al. Potential long term
beneﬁts of acute hypothermia after spinal cord injury: assessments with soma-
tosensory evoked potentials. Crit Care Med. 2012;40:573. https://doi.org/10.1097/
CCM.0b013e318232d97e.
6. Teh DBL, Chua SM, Prasad A, Kakkos I, Jiang W, Yue M, et al. Neuroprotective
assessment of prolonged local hypothermia post contusive spinal cord injury in
rodent model. Spine J. 2018;18:507–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2017.10.066.
7. Bazley F, Pashai N, Kerr C, All A. The effects of local and general hypothermia on
temperature proﬁles of the central nervous system following spinal cord injury in
rats. Ther Hypothermia Temp Manag. 2014;4:115–24. https://doi.org/10.1089/
ther.2014.0002.
8. Vipin A, Kortelainen J, Al-Nashash H, Chua S, Thow X, Manivannan J, et al. Prolonged
local hypothermia has no long-term adverse effect on the spinal cord. Ther
Hypothermia Temp Manag. 2015;5:152–62. https://doi.org/10.1089/ther.2015.0005.
9. Kerr C, Letzen B, Hill C, Agrawal G, Thakor N, Sterneckert J, et al. Efﬁcient dif-
ferentiation of human embryonic stem cells into oligodendrocyte progenitors for
application in a rat contusion model of spinal cord injury. Int J Neurosci.
2010;120:305–13. https://doi.org/10.3109/00207450903585290.
10. All AH, Bazley FA, Gupta S, Pashai N, Hu C, Pourmorteza A, et al. Human
embryonic stem cell-derived oligodendrocyte progenitors aid in functional
recovery of sensory pathways following contusive spinal cord injury. PloS One.
2012;7:e47645. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0047645.
Fig. 2
Time course of BBB Scores obtained following thoracic spinal
cord contusion and transection injuries.
A.H. ALL and H. Al-Nashash
1208
Spinal Cord (2021) 59:1206 – 1209

11. All A, Gharibani P, Gupta S, Bazley F, Pashai N, Chou B, et al. Early intervention for
spinal cord injury with human induced pluripotent stem cells oligodendrocyte
progenitors. Plos One. 2015 Jan 30;10:e0116933. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0116933.
12. Bazley FA, Pourmorteza A, Gupta S, Pashai N, Kerr C, All AH. DTI for assessing
axonal integrity after contusive spinal cord injury and transplantation of oligo-
dendrocyte progenitor cells. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2012;2012:82-5.
https://doi.org/10.1109/EMBC.2012.6345876.
13. Bazley FA, All AH, Thakor NV, Maybhate A. Plasticity associated changes in cortical
somatosensory evoked potentials following spinal cord injury in rats. Annu Int Conf
IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2011;2011:2005–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2011.
6090564.
14. Blesch A, Tuszynski M. Spinal cord injury: plasticity, regeneration and the chal-
lenge of translational drug development. Trends Neurosci. 2009;32:41–7. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2008.09.008.
15. Ghosh A, Haiss F, Sydekum E, Schneider R, Gullo M, Wyss M, et al. Rewiring of
hindlimb
corticospinal
neurons
after
spinal
cord
injury.
Nat
Neurosci.
2010;13:97–U266. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2448.
16. McDonald J, Sadowsky C. Spinal-cord injury. Lancet. 2002;359:417–25. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0140-6736(02)07603-1.
17. Agrawal G, Thakor N, All A. Evoked potential versus behavior to detect minor
insult to the spinal cord in a rat model. J Clin Neurosci. 2009;16:1052–5. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2008.08.009.
18. Fatoo N, Mirza N, Ahmad R, Al-Nashash H, Naeini H, Thakor N. Detection and
assessment of spinal cord injury using spectral coherence. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng
Med Biol Soc. 2007;2007:1426-9. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2007.4352567.
19. Dawson G. Cerebral responses to electrical stimulation of peripheral nerve in
man. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1947;10:134.
20. Mir H, Al-Nashash H, Kerr D, All A, Thakor N. Using variations of somatosensory
evoked potentials to quantify spinal cord injury level. Engineering. 2013;5:99–102.
https://doi.org/10.4236/eng.2013.510B020.
21. Agrawal G, Sherman D, Maybhate A, Gorelik M, Kerr D, Thakor N, et al. Slope
analysis of somatosensory evoked potentials in spinal cord injury for detecting
contusion injury and focal demyelination. J Clin Neurosci. 2010;17:1159–64.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2010.02.005.
22. Agrawal G, Sherman D, Walczak P, Bulte J, Thakor NV, Kerr D, et al. Shape analysis
of somatosensory evoked potentials to detect a focal spinal cord lesion. Conf.
Proc. IEEE Northeast Bioeng., Boston, MA, 3–5 April 2009, pp. 1–2. https://doi.org/
10.1109/NEBC.2009.4967710.
23. Basso D, Beattie M, Bresnahan J. A sensitive and reliable locomotor rating scale
for open ﬁeld testing in rats. J Neurotrauma. 1995;12:1–21. https://doi.org/
10.1089/neu.1995.12.1.
24. Bazley F, Hu C, Maybhate A, Pourmorteza A, Pashai N, Thakor N, et al. Electro-
physiological evaluation of sensory and motor pathways after incomplete uni-
lateral spinal cord contusion laboratory investigation. J Neurosurg-Spine.
2012;16:414–23. https://doi.org/10.3171/2012.1.SPINE11684.
25. Young W. Spinal cord contusion models. Prog Brain Res. 2002;137:231-55. https://
doi.org/10.1016/s0079-6123(02)37019-5.
26. Bazley F, Maybhate A, Tan C, Thakor N, Kerr C, All A. Enhancement of bilateral
cortical somatosensory evoked potentials to intact forelimb stimulation following
thoracic contusion spinal cord injury in rats. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng.
2014;22:953–64. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSRE.2014.2319313.
27. Bellardita C, Marcantoni M, Löw P, Kiehn O. Sacral spinal cord transection and
isolated sacral cord preparation to study chronic spinal cord injury in adult mice.
Bio Protoc. 2018;8:e2784. https://doi.org/10.21769/BioProtoc.2784.
28. Al-Nashash H, Luo S, Liu X, All AH. Trading baseline with forelimbs somatosensory
evoked potential for longitudinal analysis in thoracic transection spinal cord injury. J
Neurosci Methods. 2020;343:108858. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2020.108858.
29. Mir H, Al-Nashash H, Yuan TX, Kortelainen J, Min CS, Manivannan J, et al.
Assessment of bilateral SSEP signals enhancement following transectional spinal
cord injury using linear modeling. World Congress on Medical Physics and Bio-
medical Engineering, June 7–12, 2015, Toronto, Canada pp 1219–1219. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-19387-8_296.
30. Kortelainen J, Al-Nashash H, Vipin A, Thow X, All A. The effect of anaesthesia on
somatosensory evoked potential measurement in a rat model. Lab Anim.
2016;50:63–6. https://doi.org/10.1177/0023677215589514.
31. Kortelainen J, Vipin A, Yuan TX, Mir H, Thakor N, Al-Nashash H, et al. Effect of
isoﬂurane on somatosensory evoked potentials in a rat model. Annu Int Conf IEEE
Eng Med Biol Soc. 2014;2014:4286–9. https://doi.org/10.1109/EMBC.2014.6944572.
32. Al-Nashash H, Fatoo NA, Mirza NN, Ahmed RI, Agrawal G, All AH. Spinal cord
injury detection and monitoring using spectral coherence. IEEE Trans Biomed
Eng. 2009 Aug;56(8):1971–9. https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2009.2018296.
33. All AH, Agrawal G, Walczak P, Maybhate A, Bulte JWM, Kerr DA. Evoked potential and
behavioral outcomes for experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in Lewis rats.
Neurol Sci. 2010 Oct;31:595–601. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-010-0329-y.
34. Agrawal G, Sherman D, Thakor N, All AH. A novel shape analysis technique for
somatosensory evoked potentials. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc.
2008;2008:4688–91. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2008.4650259.
35. Mir H, Al-Nashash H, Kerr D, Thakor N, All A. Histogram based quantiﬁcation of
spinal cord injury level using somatosensory evoked potentials. Annu Int Conf IEEE
Eng Med Biol Soc. 2010;2010:4942–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2010.5627238.
36. Väyrynen E, Noponen K, Vipin A, Thow XY, Al-Nashash H, Kortelainen J, et al.
Automatic parametrization of somatosensory evoked potentials with chirp
modelling. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2016;24:981–92. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TNSRE.2016.2525829.
37. Mir H, Al-Nashash H, Kerr D, All AH, Thakor N. Spinal cord injury evaluation using
morphological difference of somatosensory evoked potentials. 5th International
Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedical Engineering. 1–4. https://doi.org/
10.1109/icbbe.2011.5780408.
38. Sherman DL, Wuyyuru V, Brooke MJ, Zhang HX, Sepkuty JP, Thakor NV, et al.
Spinal cord integrity monitoring by adaptive coherence measurement. J Neurosci
Methods. 2010 Oct 30;193:90–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2010.07.035.
39. Mir H, Al-Nashash H, Kortelainen J, All A. Novel modelling of somatosensory
evoked potentials for the assessment of spinal cord injury. in IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering, vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 511–520, March 2018, https://doi.org/
10.1109/TBME.2017.2700498.
40. Mir HS, Al-Nashash H, All AH, Thakor NV Quantiﬁcation of spinal cord injury level
using somatosensory evoked potentials. 2010 4th International Conference on
Bioinformatics and Biomedical Engineering, 2010, pp. 1–4, https://doi.org/
10.1109/ICBBE.2010.5515579.
41. Mir H, Al-Nashash H, Kortelainen J, All A. Assessment of spinal cord injury via
sparse modeling of somatosensory evoked potential signals. 2017 Asia Modelling
Symposium (AMS), 2017, pp. 13–17, https://doi.org/10.1109/AMS.2017.11.
42. All AH, Luo S, Liu X, Al-Nashash H. Effect of thoracic spinal cord injury on forelimb
somatosensory evoked potential. Brain Res Bull. 2021;173:22–27. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2021.05.005
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank colleagues and students in our both contusion and
transection SCI teams for their collaboration and contribution with the experimental
procedures, electrophysiology recordings, motor behavioral scoring, and care for
animals as well as for their administrative support.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Angelo All (AA) and Hasan Al Nashash (HA) contributed to the conception and
experimental design. AA supervised the experimental procedures and provided
critical revision. HA completed data analysis. AA and HA drafted the paper.
FUNDING
This project received funding from the following sources at the Hong Kong Baptist
University: Start-Up Tier 1 Fund # 21.4531.162640 (PI: AH All), Century Club Fund #
11.42.4531.135462.00.00 (PI: AH All), Faculty Seed Fund # 31.4531.179234 (PI: AH All),
Initiation Grant Faculty Niche Research Areas Fund RC-FNRA-IG/20-21/SCI/02 (PI: AH
All), HKBU Matching Equipment Fund RC-EMF/20-21/07 (PI: AH All), and 2021 Hong
Kong Government UGC—General Research Fund (GRF) (PI: AH All).
STATEMENT OF ETHICS
We certify that all applicable institutional and governmental regulations concerning
the ethical use of animals were followed during the course of this research.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.H.A. or H.A-N.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
A.H. ALL and H. Al-Nashash
1209
Spinal Cord (2021) 59:1206 – 1209

===== AmadorArjona2015_PNAS_SOX2+Neurogenesis =====
SOX2 primes the epigenetic landscape in neural
precursors enabling proper gene activation during
hippocampal neurogenesis
Alejandro Amador-Arjonaa, Flavio Cimadamorea, Chun-Teng Huanga, Rebecca Wrightb, Susan Lewisa, Fred H. Gageb,
and Alexey V. Terskikha,1
aCenter for Neuroscience, Aging, and Stem Cell Research, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037; and bLaboratory of Genetics, The
Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037
Edited by Rudolf Jaenisch, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, and approved March 6, 2015 (received for review November
13, 2014)
Newborn granule neurons generated from neural progenitor cells
(NPCs) in the adult hippocampus play a key role in spatial learning
and pattern separation. However, the molecular mechanisms that
control activation of their neurogenic program remain poorly un-
derstood. Here, we report a novel function for the pluripotency factor
sex-determining region Y (SRY)-related HMG box 2 (SOX2) in regulat-
ing the epigenetic landscape of poised genes activated at the onset
of neuronal differentiation. We found that SOX2 binds to bivalently
marked promoters of poised proneural genes [neurogenin 2 (Ngn2)
and neurogenic differentiation 1 (NeuroD1)] and a subset of neuro-
genic genes [e.g., SRY-box 21 (Sox21), brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (Bdnf), and growth arrest and DNA-damage–inducible, beta
(Gadd45b)] where it functions to maintain the bivalent chromatin
state by preventing excessive polycomb repressive complex 2 activity.
Conditional ablation of SOX2 in adult hippocampal NPCs impaired the
activation of proneural and neurogenic genes, resulting in increased
neuroblast death and functionally aberrant newborn neurons. We
propose that SOX2 sets a permissive epigenetic state in NPCs, thus
enabling proper activation of the neuronal differentiation program
under neurogenic cue.
SOX2 | neurogenesis | epigenetics
C
ell fate and differentiation decisions of adult neural pro-
genitor cells (NPCs) are controlled by intrinsic and extrinsic
signals from the neurogenic niche (1–3). Recent genomewide
analyses of epigenetic regulators in the brain have provided
considerable insight into the mechanisms that regulate neural
development, neurological disease, and aging (4, 5). The chro-
matin states of NPCs change dynamically during cell-fate de-
termination and cell differentiation, and chromatin marks such as
histone H3 trimethylated Lys 27 (H3K27me3), histone H3 tri-
methylated Lys 4 (H3K4me3), and histone H3 acetylated Lys 9
(H3K9ac) are essential for regulating the expression of key genes
involved in these processes (6). Sex-determining region Y (SRY)-
related HMG box 2 (SOX2) is a member of the SOXB1 family of
transcription factors, which play important roles in maintaining
neural stem/progenitor cell properties, including their capacity to
proliferate and self-renew (7, 8). In humans, SOX2 mutations are
associated with anophthalmia, defective hippocampal development,
and seizures (9–11). Most patients with this syndrome experience
intellectual disabilities (11), suggesting that loss of SOX2 function
affects areas of the brain involved in cognition (e.g., hippocampus).
SOX2 deficiency also causes neurodegeneration and impaired
neurogenesis in the adult mouse brain (12, 13). However, the mo-
lecular mechanisms underlying the function of SOX2 in adult
neurogenesis and its role in the human SOX2 anophthalmia syn-
drome are largely unknown.
The subgranular zone (SGZ) of the dentate gyrus (DG) in the
hippocampus is a germinal zone of active neurogenesis during
adulthood (14). Indeed, approximately one-third of DG neurons
lost during this period are replaced by adult-born neurons (15),
suggesting an essential role for newborn neurons in cognitive
plasticity (16, 17). Adult-born neurons originate from a pop-
ulation of NPCs with glial cell characteristics, having cell bodies
in the SGZ and radial processes extending into the granular cell
layer (GCL) (18). SOX2 is expressed in both types of neural stem/
progenitors; quiescent radial NPCs (type 1) and amplifying pro-
genitors (type 2a) (12, 19–22). The requirement for SOX2 in the
establishment and maintenance of pluripotency in NPCs is well
documented (12, 13); however, its role in neuronal differentiation
is not well understood.
SOX2 overexpression represses neuronal differentiation (23–25),
whereas SOX2 down-regulation induces exit from the cell cycle and
expression of early differentiation markers (25). A recent genome-
wide analysis of SOX2-binding sites in NPCs revealed that SOX2
occupies the regulatory regions of hundreds of genes involved in
neuronal differentiation (26), including proneural genes such as
MASH1 and NGN1 (27). Previous studies have shown that activa-
tion of proneural genes requires the replacement of SOX2 by
neurogenic signals at the regulatory regions of the promoters [e.g.,
SOX2 replaced by β-catenin to activate neurogenic differentiation 1
(NeuroD1) expression] (28). There now is evidence that epigenetic
regulators are necessary for adult neural progenitors to generate
neurons that will integrate into the hippocampal circuitry (29–
31). Before cell differentiation, methylation of H3K27 and H3K4
by the polycomb (PcG) and trithorax (TrxG) complexes maintain
genes transcriptionally silent but poised for activation once dif-
ferentiation cues are received (32, 33). Taken together, these
findings suggest that SOX2 is a transcriptional repressor of
neuronal target genes. However, loss-of-function studies have
shown that SOX2 is required for neurogenesis in the central (13,
Significance
Sex-determining region Y-related HMG box 2 (SOX2) is a well-
established marker of neural stem and progenitor cells, and its
function was shown to be required for the self-renewal of these
cells. However, the function of SOX2 in neuronal differentiation
is poorly understood. Here we described a novel role of SOX2 in
neuronal differentiation in which SOX2 binds to bivalently marked
promoters of poised proneural genes in neural progenitor cells
and limits the activity of polycomb repressive complex 2 and ex-
cessive levels of histone H3 Lys 27 trimethylation. We propose
a novel function of SOX2 in maintaining a permissive epigenetic
state thus enabling proper activation of the neuronal differentia-
tion program under neurogenic cue.
Author contributions: A.A.-A., F.H.G., and A.V.T. designed research; A.A.-A., F.C., C.-T.H.,
R.W., and S.L. performed research; A.A.-A., F.C., R.W., F.H.G., and A.V.T. analyzed data;
and A.A.-A. and A.V.T. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: terskikh@burnham.org.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1421480112/-/DCSupplemental.
E1936–E1945
|
PNAS
|
Published online March 30, 2015
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1421480112
Downloaded by guest on August 14, 2021 

34–36) and peripheral (27) nervous systems. Therefore, de-
termining the mechanism by which SOX2 regulates expression
of neurogenic genes that are essential for neuronal differenti-
ation is vital to our understanding of the overall regulatory
network that directs NPCs to generate neurons.
Here, we investigated SOX2 regulation of adult neuronal
differentiation using an in vitro model of SOX2 deficiency in adult
hippocampal NPCs (hipNPCs) and a genetic mouse model in which
SOX2 is deleted in adult NPCs, bypassing the deleterious effects of
SOX2 ablation during embryogenesis. We show that SOX2 de-
ficiency in cultured adult hipNPCs reduces activation of “poised”
bivalently marked (H3K4me3 and H3K27me3) transcription fac-
tors, including the neurogenic genes neurogenin 2 (Ngn2) and
NeuroD1. SOX2 binds to their regulatory regions and prevents
accumulation of the H3K27me3 closed chromatin mark, likely
limiting the activity of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2)
histone methyltransferase. We argue that SOX2 promotes a poised
chromatin state at the regulatory regions of neurogenic genes,
thereby enabling appropriate activation of the differentiation pro-
gram upon exposure to a neurogenic stimulus.
Results
SOX2 Deficiency Leads to Epigenetic Repression at the Promoters
of Bivalently Marked Proneural Genes. In NPCs, the chromatin
regions of proneural and neurogenic genes contain high levels of
both H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 (37, 38); such bivalent marks
maintain the genes transcriptionally silent but poised for acti-
vation once differentiation cues are received (32). To understand
the regulatory function of SOX2 in activation of the neurogenic
program, we examined previously published ChIP-sequencing
(ChIP-seq) data including the occurrence of H3K27me3 and
H3K4me3 marks at SOX2-binding sites in mouse ES cell-derived
NPCs (6, 26). Genomewide analysis revealed that of the 16,683
SOX2-binding sites, 2,514 were enriched for H3K27me3 (15.1%)
(Fig. 1A). Moreover, 680 (27%) of these H3K27me3-enriched
regions also contained high levels of H3K4me3 (Fig. 1 A and B).
Our analysis also revealed that these SOX2-binding regions con-
stitute 25% of all promoter regions with enriched H3K27me3 and
H3K4me3 marks in NPCs (SI Appendix, Fig. S1A), suggesting that
SOX2 controls a subset of genes with bivalent marks. Many of the
bivalently marked SOX2-binding sites were located near the genes
encoding for key transcriptional regulators of stem/progenitor cell
fate and differentiation (Fig. 1C). Other genes identified are in-
volved in neurogenesis (Sox factors, components of the PDGF and
EGF signaling pathways, and proneural genes) or encode secreted
molecules [such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (Bdnf) or
Vgf] and transcription factors implicated in cell-fate specification
(including members of the bHLH and homeobox gene families).
We also examined genes with bivalent promoters to which SOX2
does not bind (75% of promoters with bivalent marks) and which,
presumably, SOX2 does not regulate directly. These genes are
mostly implicated in the later stages of neurogenesis, such as
neuronal maturation (e.g., synapse and channel activity), and in
neuronal function (SI Appendix, Fig. S1B). Based on this analysis,
we propose that SOX2 is involved in the regulation of a subset of
neurogenic genes that are essential for the early steps of neuronal
commitment and differentiation (here called “early neurogenic
genes”). Intriguingly, further examination of the H3K27me3 and
H3K4me3 profile surrounding the SOX2-binding sites (± 5 kb) at
bivalent chromatin regions revealed a depression (valley) in
H3K27me3 density flanking SOX2-binding sites (Fig. 1D), in-
dicating that SOX2 may limit H2K27me3 deposition at these sites.
Commitment of progenitor cells to a neuronal fate is a crucial
step in adult neurogenesis and is accompanied by the expression of
Fig. 1.
SOX2-deficient NPCs show epigenetic repression at promoters of neurogenic genes. (A, Left) Heatmap showing H3K27me3 densities at all 16,683
unique SOX2-binding sites ± 5.0 kb clustered by H3K27m3 occupancy. (Right) Heatmap showing H3K4me3 densities at all 2,514 unique SOX2-binding sites
with high density of H3K27me3. Signal is represented by the log2 ratio. Green color indicates a low level; red represents a high level of a mark. Data are from
ChIP-seq experiments in mouse NPCs (see Experimental Procedures for details). (B) Percentage of SOX2-binding sites with bivalent chromatin marks
(H3K27me3/H3K4me3) within the group with a high density of H3K27me3. (C) Gene Ontology analysis of genes with bivalent chromatin marks and SOX2
binding at their regulatory regions in mouse NPCs. (D) Density profile of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 at SOX2-binding sites ± 5.0 kb at bivalent domains.
(E) ChIP-seq plot of H3K4me3, H3K27me3, and SOX2 at Ngn2 (Upper) and NeuroD1 (Lower) loci in mouse NPCs. (F) SOX2 binding at Ngn2 and NeuroD1 loci in
mouse adult hipNPCs. (G) H3K4me3 (Left) and H3K27me3 (Right) levels at regulatory regions of Ngn2 (Lower) and NeuroD1 (Upper) promoters in mouse adult
hipNPCs induced with a scrambled shRNA (shCTRL) or an shRNA against Sox2 (shSox2). Highlighted is SOX2 binding at these promoters. (H, Upper) Schematic
of a 7-d cell culture protocol used to differentiate SOX2-deficient hipNPCs under neurogenic signals (Wnt3a, 50 ng/mL). (Lower) qRT-PCR analysis of Ngn2 and
NeuroD1 gene-expression changes in SOX2cKO and wild-type NPCs under self-renewal or exposure to neurogenic signals (Wnt3a). For all quantifications, data
are plotted as the mean ± SEM (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001).
Amador-Arjona et al.
PNAS
|
Published online March 30, 2015
|
E1937
NEUROSCIENCE
PNAS PLUS
Downloaded by guest on August 14, 2021 

transcription factors such as Ngn2 (39) and NeuroD1 (40). Both
Ngn2 and NeuroD1 contain bivalent chromatin marks around the
SOX2 regulatory regions (Fig. 1E), and we confirmed, using ChIP-
qualitative PCR (qPCR) assays, that SOX2 binds to Ngn2 and
NeuroD1 regulatory regions in the wild-type hipNPCs generated in
this study (Fig. 1F). To study the consequences of SOX2 deficiency
on the epigenetic landscape of Ngn2 and NeuroD1 genes, we
transduced wild-type hipNPCs with a doxycycline (dox)-inducible
vector encoding shRNA against Sox2 (shSox2) or control shRNA
(shCTRL) (SI Appendix, Fig. S2) and found significantly higher
levels of the repressive H3K27me3 mark in genomic regions
proximal to the SOX2-binding sites at Ngn2 and NeuroD1 pro-
moters in hipNPCs transduced with shSOX2, whereas levels of
H3K4me3 were unaffected (Fig. 1G). We next asked whether the
increase in H3K27me3 at these bivalent promoters could affect
their expression upon exposure to neurogenic cues (Wnt3a).
Consistent with the epigenetic data, Wnt3a induced much higher
expression of Ngn2 and Neurod1 in hipNPCs transduced with
shCTRL than with shSox2 (Fig. 1H). These data suggest that the
loss of SOX2 shifts the poised state of Ngn2 and NeuroD1 chro-
matin toward a more repressed configuration.
Loss of SOX2 Causes Impaired Transcriptional Activation of Proneural
Genes in Response to Neurogenic Cues. The finding that biva-
lent proneural genes in SOX2-deficient hipNPCs show reduced
activation raised the possibility that increased H3K27me3 de-
position renders these genes less active. To test this idea fur-
ther, we conditionally ablated Sox2 in vivo in adult hipNPCs
postnatally using the previously described Sox2flox mice (13)
crossed with mGFAP-Cre::Nestin-CFPnuc mice (SI Appendix,
Fig. S3) (17, 21, 41). The resulting mouse strain is designated
Sox2flox::mGFAP-Cre::nestin-CFPnuc (SOX2cKO). Notably, al-
though wild-type hipNPCs responded to Wnt/β-catenin signaling
by up-regulating Ngn2 and NeuroD1 transcription, SOX2cKO cells
were unaffected by Wnt treatment (SI Appendix, Fig. S4A). Because
there was little difference in the expression of other Wnt/β-catenin
target genes (e.g., Lef1, cJun, cMyc, Btrc, and Axin2) in hipNPCs
from SOX2cKO and from wild-type mice (SI Appendix, Fig. S4B),
these results suggest that Wnt/β-catenin signaling in stem/pro-
genitor cells is generally unaffected by the loss of SOX2, except for
the failure to activate the expression of proneural genes.
Treatment with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor
valproic acid (VPA) previously has been shown to increase acet-
ylation of the NeuroD1 promoter and activate its expression in
NPCs, resulting in neuronal differentiation (42). Therefore, we
asked whether VPA could rescue the expression of Ngn2 and
NeuroD1 in SOX2-deficient cells. We found that treatment with
HDAC inhibitor VPA had no effect on Ngn2 and NeuroD1 ex-
pression in SOX2cKO hipNPCs (SI Appendix, Fig. S4C). These
observations suggest a profound chromatin change at the Neu-
roD1 regulatory regions in SOX2-deficient NPCs that renders
NeuroD1 expression insensitive to global epigenetic modifiers.
SOX2 Limits the Activity of the Polycomb Complex PRC2 at the
Regulatory Regions of Poised Neurogenic Genes. To determine
whether SOX2 is necessary to ensure a balance of bivalent chro-
matin marks at the regulatory regions of poised neurogenic genes,
we examined several genes known to be associated with the dif-
ferentiation of hippocampal adult-born neurons, including the
transcription factor Sox21 (43), the neurotrophic factor Bdnf (44),
and the activity-inducible DNA demethylation factor growth arrest
and DNA-damage–inducible, beta (Gadd45b). Consistent with the
genome-wide ChIP-seq data from mouse ES cell-derived NPCs
(Fig. 2A) (26), hipNPCs also showed SOX2 binding at Sox21,
Bdnf, and Gadd45b genes (Fig. 2B). Analysis of the SOX2-bound
regulatory regions revealed an increased level of H3K27me3 at
these sites in SOX2-deficient as compared with control hipNPCs
(Fig. 2C). Moreover, binding of EZH2, the catalytic subunit of the
PRC2 histone methyltransferase complex, was increased at SOX2-
regulatory regions of Ngn2, NeuroD1, Sox21, Bdnf, and Gadd45b
in SOX2-deficient hipNPCs (Fig. 2D). Notably, shSox2- and
shCTRL-expressing hipNPCs contained comparable total levels of
H3K27me3 and EZH2 (Fig. 2E), indicating that H3K27me3 was
increased selectively only at the SOX2-binding sites. Similar to our
observations with Ngn2 and NeuroD1, we found that expression
of Sox21, Bdnf, and Gadd45b was reduced in SOX2-deficient
hipNPCs exposed to the Wnt3a differentiation cue (Fig. 2F).
We next investigated the levels of H3K27me3 in SOX2-
deficient hipNPCs under differentiation conditions. Analysis of epi-
genetic marks after neurogenic activation revealed a pronounced
increase in H3K27me3 levels at proneural (Ngn2 and NeuroD1)
and neurogenic (Sox21, Bdnf, and Gadd45b) genes in cells lacking
Fig. 2.
Loss of SOX2 Increases polycomb complex PRC2 activity at bivalent genes required for neuronal differentiation. (A) ChIP-seq plot of H3K4me3,
H3K27me3, and SOX2 at Sox21, Bdnf, and Gadd45b loci in mouse NPCs. (B) SOX2 binding at Sox21, Bdnf, and Gadd45b loci in mouse adult hipNPCs.
(C) H3K27me3 level at regulatory regions of Sox21 (Left), Bdnf (Center), and Gadd45b (Right) loci in mouse adult hipNPCs induced with shCTRL or shSox2.
Highlighted is SOX2 binding at these promoters. (D) EZH2 binding in SOX2-binding sites of Ngn2, NeuroD1, Sox21, Bdnf, and Gadd45b loci in mouse hipNPCs.
(E) Western blot showing H3K27me3 and EZH2 levels in SOX2-deficient and wild-type hipNPCs. (F, Left) Schematic of a 7-d cell-culture protocol used to
differentiate SOX2-deficient hipNPCs under neurogenic signals (Wnt3a). (Right) Quantification of Sox21, Bdnf, and Gadd45b mRNA levels in adult hipNPCs
under self-renewal or neurogenic signals (Wnt3a). For all quantifications, data are plotted as the mean ± SEM (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001).
E1938
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1421480112
Amador-Arjona et al.
Downloaded by guest on August 14, 2021 

SOX2 (SI Appendix, Fig. S5 A and B). H3K9ac is found at actively
transcribed promoters and is increased during neuronal differenti-
ation (45). Consistent with the repressive epigenetic signature in
SOX2-deficient hipNPCs, we found that H3K9ac levels were higher
within the regulatory regions of poised proneural/neurogenic genes
in shCTRL- than in shSOX2-expressing hipNPCs following expo-
sure to Wnt3a (SI Appendix, Fig. S5C). Because H3K9 acetylation is
catalyzed primarily by the histone acetyltransferase GCN5 (46), we
monitored the dynamics of GCN5 binding at proneural/neurogenic
genes during neuronal differentiation of control and SOX2-knock-
down hipNPCs. Indeed, Wnt3a treatment increased the binding of
GCN5 to the regulatory regions of these genes in both cell types but
did so to a much lower extent in SOX2-deficient hipNPCs than in
control cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S5D).
Taken together, these data suggest that SOX2 functions to
maintain a bivalent chromatin state at the poised genes, likely by
limiting EZH2 binding and PRC2 activity (H3K27me3 levels). The
absence of SOX2 thus would result in the increased H3K27me3,
leading to a more compact chromatin structure and impaired gene
expression during differentiation.
Loss of SOX2 in hipNPCs Reduces the Expression of NGN2 and
NEUROD1 in Vivo. To evaluate whether SOX2 deficiency influen-
ces the expression of these pivotal neurogenic genes in vivo, we
examined their expression in DG sections from SOX2cKO and
wild-type mice. NGN2 is transiently expressed by late-amplifying
progenitors, and NGN2 deficiency impairs neurogenesis by reducing
the proliferation of these cells (Fig. 3A) (39). Immunohistochemical
staining of NGN2 revealed that expression in hippocampal pro-
genitor cells was significantly lower in SOX2cKO mice than in wild-
type mice (Fig. 3B). NEUROD1 was not detected in the majority of
neural stem/progenitor cells but was present in only a small fraction
of cells transitioning from the progenitor to neuroblast stage (Fig.
3A) (28, 40). Similar to our findings with NGN2, NEUROD1 ex-
pression was reduced in SGZ neuroblasts of SOX2cKO mice
compared with wild-type mice (Fig. 3C). To determine whether
NEUROD1 expression is reduced at a particular stage of differ-
entiation, we examined expression in neuroblasts (DCX+) identi-
fied morphologically as early- (nondendritic processes), mid- (short
dendritic processes), or late- (large dendritic processes) stage neu-
roblasts. Intriguingly, NEUROD1 expression was similar in early,
mid, and late neuroblasts of SOX2cKO mice, whereas expression in
wild-type mice peaked at the early neuroblast stage and did so at
significantly higher levels (Fig. 3D). We also analyzed the expression
of PROX1, a transcription factor up-regulated in neuroblasts and
required for granule cell maturation (Fig. 3A) (47), but we found no
differences in expression between SOX2cKO and wild-type neuro-
blasts (SI Appendix, Fig. S6A). Interestingly, the PROX1 regulatory
region bound by SOX2 is not bivalently marked, suggesting that the
epigenetic mechanism described here specifically affects poised
genes. To substantiate our in vivo results, we examined the expres-
sion of Prox1 in adult hipNPCs grown from 2-mo-old SOX2cKO
mice. In agreement with the in vivo data, the expression of Prox1
mRNA (SI Appendix, Fig. S6B) was similar in SOX2cKO and wild-
type hipNPCs. Together, these data indicate that SOX2 deletion in
adult stem/progenitor cells decreases the expression of proneural
genes, compromising the differentiation of newborn neurons.
Loss of SOX2 Reduces Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis. The condi-
tional loss of SOX2 in adult hipNPCs of SOX2cKO mice provides
us with an opportunity to follow the stem/progenitor cell pop-
ulation with the Nestin-CFPnuc transgene (41). The total number
of neural stem/progenitor (CFPnuc+) cells in the DG of SOX2cKO
mice was 71.2%, 78.4%, and 64.8% of wild-type levels at 1, 2, and 6
mo of age, respectively (SI Appendix, Fig. S7A). The number of
radial NPCs and amplifying progenitors in the SGZ was examined
by comparing the expression of GFAP, an intermediate filament
protein organized in granule layer-traversing processes of radial
NPCs, with the expression of CFPnuc, which is localized in the
nuclei of all Nestin-expressing cells (both radial NPCs and ampli-
fying progenitors) (Fig. 4A). Two-month-old SOX2cKO mice
contained fewer radial NPCs (CFPnuc+ cells with radial GFAP+
processes) and amplifying progenitors (CFPnuc+ GFAP−cells)
than did wild-type mice, suggesting that SOX2 deficiency may af-
fect the self-renewal and/or survival of both cell populations.
To determine whether SOX2 affects the proliferation of adult
stem/progenitor cells, we analyzed the expression of the nuclear
proliferative cell marker proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA) and the incorporation of the thymidine analog BrdU
into DNA. We found that the number of PCNA+ stem/pro-
genitor cells in the SGZ was lower in SOX2cKO than in wild-
type mice at each age examined (76.0%, 61.4%, and 45.6% of
wild-type levels at 1, 2, and 6 mo, respectively) (SI Appendix, Fig.
S7B). Analysis of BrdU incorporation 2 h after injection (Fig.
Fig. 3.
Loss of SOX2 in adult hipNPCs reduces the expression of NGN2 and
NEUROD1 in early neuroblasts. (A) Graphical representation of the expression
of NGN2, NEUROD1, and PROX1 in adult hippocampal neuronal maturation.
(B, Left) Sections from 2-mo-old mice were immunostained for NGN2. (Scale bar:
20 μm.) (Right) Quantification results are expressed as the average intensity of
NGN2 staining in stem/progenitor (CFPnuc+) cells relative to mature granule neu-
rons. (C, Left) Sections from 2-mo-old mice were immunostained for NEUROD1.
(Scale bar: 50 μm.) (Right) Quantification results are expressed as the average in-
tensity of NEUROD1 staining in neuroblasts (DCX+) cells relative to mature granule
neurons. (D, Left) Confocal imaging showing colocalization of NEUROD1 in neu-
roblasts (DCX+) of wild-type and SOX2cKO mice. (Scale bar: 20 μm.) (Right)
Quantification results are expressed as the average intensity of NEUROD1 staining
in NPCs, early, mid, and late neuroblasts (NB) and neurons (NeuN). For all quanti-
fications, data are plotted as the mean ± SEM (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001).
Amador-Arjona et al.
PNAS
|
Published online March 30, 2015
|
E1939
NEUROSCIENCE
PNAS PLUS
Downloaded by guest on August 14, 2021 

4B) revealed that SOX2cKO and wild-type mice contained ap-
proximately the same percentage of proliferating radial NPCs in
the DG, but the percentage of proliferating amplifying progen-
itors was reduced significantly in SOX2cKO mice (Fig. 4C). To
analyze the effect of SOX2 loss on cell-cycle progression, mice
were injected sequentially with 5-chloro-2-deoxyuridine (CldU)
and 5-iodo-2-deoxyuridine (IdU), which allows monitoring of
cells reentering the cell cycle (CldU+ IdU+) (SI Appendix, Fig.
S8A) (48, 49). Very few (∼4%) radial NPCs were detected in
mice of either genotype (SI Appendix, Fig. S8B). In contrast, the
number of amplifying progenitors that reenter the cell cycle was
reduced significantly in SOX2cKO mice (19%) compared with
wild-type mice (31%) (SI Appendix, Fig. S8B). We then analyzed
the number of DCX+ neuroblasts and found reduced numbers in
SOX2cKO mice (73.2%, 78.8%, and 49.7% of wild-type levels at
1, 2, and 6 mo, respectively) (Fig. 4D and SI Appendix, Fig. S7C).
These results indicate that loss of SOX2 causes an age-associated
progressive reduction in the total number of neural stem/pro-
genitor cells and immature neuroblasts in the DG.
To analyze neurogenesis in the DG of SOX2cKO mice, 2-mo-
old mice were injected with BrdU for 5 d, and cells were analyzed
4 wk later (Fig. 4E). Mature newborn neurons can be identified
microscopically by colocalization of BrdU with the mature neuron
marker NeuN (Fig. 4 F and G). Quantitative analysis of double-
stained cells revealed a 45.5% decrease in the density of newborn
neurons in the DG of SOX2cKO mice compared with wild-type
mice (Fig. 4H). To confirm these results, we grew adult hipNPCs
from 2-mo-old mice (SI Appendix, Fig. S9A), cultured them in the
presence of Wnt3a to promote neural differentiation, and then
examined the expression of the neuroblast marker TUJ1. In
Fig. 4.
Reduced number of adult hipNPCs and adult newborn neurons in SOX2cKO mice. (A, Left) Sections of the SGZ of the DG from 2-mo-old mice (SOX2cKO and
littermate controls) were stained for GFAP and CFPnuc. (Scale bar: 20 μm.) (Right) Quantification of the number of radial NPCs and amplifying progenitors in the SGZ
of SOX2cKO and wild-type mice. (B) Protocol for BrdU (100 mg/kg body weight) injection used in 2-mo-old SOX2cKO and wild-type mice. Cells were examined 2 h
after injection. (C, Left) Sections from BrdU-injected mice (as in B) were immunostained for BrdU, GFAP, and CFPnuc. (Scale bar: 50 μm.) (Right) The percentage of
BrdU+ cells that are radial NPCs or amplifying progenitors was quantified among CFPnuc+ cells. (D, Left) Hippocampal DG sections from 2-mo-old mice (SOX2cKO
and the littermate control) were stained for the neuroblast marker DCX. (Scale bar: 50 μm.) (Right) The number of neuroblasts (DCX+ cells) in the DG was analyzed in
SOX2cKO and wild-type mice. (E) Protocol for BrdU injection (5 d of twice-daily injections given 12 h apart, at 50 mg/kg body weight) used in 2-mo-old SOX2cKO and
wild-type mice. BrdU-labeled cells were examined 4 wk after the last injection. (F) Sections from BrdU-injected mice (as in E) were immunostained for BrdU and
NeuN. (Scale bar: 50 μm.) (G) Confocal imaging showing colocalization of a BrdU+ NeuN+ neuron in the GCL. (Scale bar: 20 μm.) (H) Quantification of BrdU+ NeuN+
cells showing reduced neurogenesis in the GCL of the DG in SOX2cKO mice. For all quantifications, data are plotted as the mean ± SEM (*P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001).
E1940
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1421480112
Amador-Arjona et al.
Downloaded by guest on August 14, 2021 

agreement with our in vivo data, the frequency of TUJ1+ cells
was reduced dramatically in cultures of SOX2cKO NPCs (∼2.5%
TUJ1+) compared with wild-type NPCs (∼12.5% TUJ1+) (SI
Appendix, Fig. S9B). Together, these results indicate that neu-
rogenesis is decreased substantially in SOX2cKO mice.
SOX2 Deficiency Reduces Adult Neurogenesis by Increasing Apoptosis
of Neuroblasts. The finding that the DG of SOX2cKO mice shows
a mild reduction in the number and proliferation of neuroblasts
but a dramatic decrease in the number of new integrating neu-
rons raised the possibility that a large proportion of neuroblasts
undergo apoptosis during differentiation. In fact, loss of Neu-
roD1 in the hippocampal neurogenic lineage results in impaired
maturation and survival of new neurons (40). Therefore we an-
alyzed the density of apoptotic cells within the hippocampal
neurogenic niche of 2-mo-old mice by detecting activated cas-
pase 3 (AC3) or fragmented DNA (TUNEL). We found that the
density of AC3+ and TUNEL+ cells in the SGZ was ∼1.5- to two-
fold higher in SOX2cKO than in wild-type mice (Fig. 5 A and B).
To identify the cell subpopulation(s) undergoing apoptosis, we
immunostained for AC3, CFPnuc, and DCX (Fig. 5C). Apoptotic
neuroblasts (AC3+ DCX+) were more abundant in SOX2cKO
mice than in wild-type mice, but the number of apoptotic adult
neural stem/progenitor cells (AC3+ CFPnuc+) was approximately
the same in both strains. These results are in agreement with
a previous study (50) showing that the majority of apoptotic cells
in the adult SGZ are neuroblasts (PSA-NCAM+ cells). Because
SOX2 is not expressed in neuroblasts, our results suggest that the
loss of SOX2 affects the activation of the genetic program con-
trolling neuronal differentiation, and as a consequence, new
neurons in SOX2cKO mice undergo apoptosis before maturation.
NeuroD1 Expression Recovers Adult Neurogenesis in SOX2cKO Mice.
Next, we asked whether exogenous expression of proneural
genes could recover the neuroblast defect resulting from SOX2
deficiency. Because NeuroD1 is essential for the survival of
adult-born neuroblasts (40) and has a strong prodifferentiation
activity, we transduced hipNPC cultures from SOX2cKO or wild-
type mice (SI Appendix, Fig. S10A) with lentiviral vectors en-
coding NeuroD1 or GFP (control) and examined neuronal dif-
ferentiation in vitro. We found that transduction of SOX2cKO
hipNPCs with the NeuroD1 lentivirus at the initiation of dif-
ferentiation increased the number of cells expressing the neu-
ronal marker MAP2ab relative to the number observed in wild-
type hipNPC cultures (SI Appendix, Fig. S10B), demonstrating
that NEUROD1 expression recovered neurogenesis in SOX2-
deficient cultures.
To examine this recovery of neuroblasts in vivo, we delivered
NEUROD1 or GFP specifically to hippocampal neural stem/
progenitor cells by using retroviral vectors, which infect only
proliferating cells and are passed on to their progeny. For these
experiments, SOX2cKO mice were injected into the right and left
DG with either ND1-IRES-GFP or GFP-IRES-GFP retroviruses.
Both sides received the same control retrovirus encoding mCherry
(Fig. 6 A and B). In this paradigm, mCherry serves as an internal
control, which ensures the equal infection of the progenitor cells
in the left and the right DG. Therefore, the ability of NEUROD1
expression to recover neurogenesis is reflected in the total number
of mCherry+ cells in each side and the number of cells expressing
both GFP+ and mCherry+ (yellow) compared with the number of
cells expressing only mCherry (red) on each side. These quanti-
fications are largely independent of slight variations in viral titer
and injection site (51). We found that DG of SOX2cKO mice
injected with NEUROD1-encoding retrovirus (the ND1 side)
contained a higher number of total mCherry+ (red + yellow) cells
than did the DG injected with GFP-encoding retrovirus (the GFP
side) at both 7 and 21 d postinjection (dpi) (Fig. 6C). The mor-
phology of mCherry+ cells at both sites was consistent with that of
neuroblasts at 7 dpi and DG granule neurons at 21 dpi. Because
equal numbers of progenitors on both sides were infected with
mCherry (an equal volume of the same virus was injected) the
increase in total mCherry+ cells at the NeuroD1 side indicates
a specific effect of NEUROD1 expression. The numbers of
mCherry-only (red) cells were similar in both sides (Fig. 6D) at
both 7 and 21 dpi, suggesting similar numbers of uninfected (and,
therefore, originally infected) cells in both NEUROD1- and GFP-
injected sides. However, much larger numbers of yellow cells were
seen on the NEUROD1-injected side than on the GFP-injected
side, further demonstrating a specific effect of NEUROD1 ex-
pression (Fig. 6D) on cell survival at both 7 and 21 dpi. Together,
these results indicate that expression of NeuroD1 in differentiat-
ing stem/progenitor cells recovers the newly generated neuroblasts
in SOX2-deficient hipNPCs both in vitro and in vivo.
SOX2-Deficient Adult NPC Progeny Show Aberrant Dendritic Mat-
uration and Electrophysiology. The failure of SOX2-deficient
hipNPCs to activate proneural and neurogenic gene expression
efficiently suggests that neuronal maturation and function may
be impaired in SOX2cKO mice. To examine adult-born neuro-
blasts, we stereotactically injected a GFP-encoding retrovirus
into the DG of 2-mo-old SOX2cKO and wild-type mice,
allowing us to visualize and quantify the dendritic outgrowth of
individual newborn neurons (Fig. 7A) (52). Analysis of sections
of DG at 28 dpi revealed a significant reduction in both total
dendritic length and branch number of newborn neurons in
SOX2cKO compared with wild-type mice (Fig. 7B). We also
analyzed spine density and morphology in mice injected with
a retrovirus encoding mCherry (Fig. 7C). Interestingly, SOX2
deficiency significantly decreased the spine density but in-
creased the mushroom dendritic spine density of adult-born
neurons (Fig. 7D). To determine whether SOX2 ablation af-
fected neuronal physiology and connectivity, whole-cell re-
cordings were performed in GFP-labeled newborn neurons in
acute slices. Cells from SOX2cKO mice showed slightly lower
resting membrane potentials than cells from wild-type mice (SI
Appendix, Fig. S11A); however, the cells showed similar levels of
excitability (action-potential spikes generated in response to pos-
itive current injections in current-clamp conditions) (SI Appendix,
Fig. S11B). The average amplitude of spontaneous excitatory
postsynaptic currents (sEPSCs) was increased in SOX2cKO cells
(Fig. 7E); given that sEPSC amplitude correlates with spine-head
size (53), this finding is consistent with the observed increase in
mushroom spines in newborn neurons from SOX2cKO mice. In
contrast, SOX2 ablation had no effect on the frequency of sEPSC
events (Fig. 7E). Although the reduction in dendritic spines would
Fig. 5.
Increase in programmed cell death in SOX2cKO mice. (A, Left) Sec-
tions from 2-mo-old mice were immunostained for the apoptotic cell marker
AC3. (Scale bar: 50 μm.) The number of apoptotic cells was increased in the
SGZ of SOX2cKO mice. (Right) Results are expressed as the number of AC3+
cells within the total volume of the DG. (B) Quantification of TUNEL+ cells in
the DG of 2-mo-old mice revealed an increase in the number of apoptotic
cells in SOX2cKO mice. (C, Left) Confocal imaging showing an apoptotic
neuroblast (colocalization of AC3 and DCX staining). (Scale bar: 25 μm.)
(Right) The number of apoptotic neuroblasts is higher in SOX2cKO mice than
in wild-type mice. Results are expressed as the number of AC3+ cells within
the total volume of the DG. For all quantifications, data are plotted as the
mean ± SEM (*P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001).
Amador-Arjona et al.
PNAS
|
Published online March 30, 2015
|
E1941
NEUROSCIENCE
PNAS PLUS
Downloaded by guest on August 14, 2021 

be expected to reduce the frequency of sEPSCs in SOX2-deficient
cells, the observed increase in the density of mushroom spines
may compensate.
Thus, SOX2 deletion leads to aberrant neuronal maturation
and integration during adult hippocampal neurogenesis, as illus-
trated by the defects in dendritic outgrowth, dendritic spine for-
mation, and neuronal activity. Our findings suggest that, in addition
to its function in maintaining the survival and proliferative capacity
of neural progenitors, SOX2 also plays a role in the maturation of
newborn granule neurons long after its expression has ceased. This
“delayed” function of SOX2 is consistent with our finding that it
regulates the epigenetic landscape of many neurogenic genes, en-
abling their robust activation at the onset of neurogenic program
(SI Appendix, Fig. S12).
Discussion
Although SOX2 is arguably a cornerstone of neural stem cell
biology (54, 55) and plays an essential role in neurogenesis in the
developing and adult brain (13), the mechanisms by which SOX2
regulates neuronal differentiation have remained unclear. In our
previous study focusing on the LIN28 gene, which is fully active
in NPCs, we found that SOX2 promotes an open chromatin state
at the promoter (H3K9ac mark) through recruitment of the
TRRAP/GCN5 complex (56). Here, we uncovered a distinct
epigenetic mechanism of SOX2 function on poised proneural
and early neurogenic genes in NPCs. We discovered that SOX2
binds within bivalently marked regulatory regions of such poised
genes where it limits the activity of the PRC2 complex. Our data
suggest that SOX2 promotes the functional bivalent chromatin
state and thus enables proper activation of differentiation pro-
gram upon exposure to neurogenic cues. Finally, we demonstrate
that the reduction in proneural gene expression in differentiating
SOX2-deficient hipNPCs increases cell death during neuronal
differentiation and impairs dendritic development and electro-
physiological properties of the surviving new neurons.
SOX2 Limits PRC2 Complex Activity at Bivalent Genes. Previous
ChIP-seq studies have found that SOX2 is bound to hundreds
of known or presumably poised loci that are transcriptionally
inactive but will be expressed during differentiation (26, 38);
however, its biological role at these genes was unknown. It is
widely accepted that bivalent domains are central to maintaining
genes in a poised state, ensuring proper and robust responses to
differentiation cues (57). During development, TrxG and PcG
complexes at bivalent domains play a key role in fine-tuning the
expression of genes encoding crucial factors and in defending
against unscheduled gene activation (57). Differentiation of neural
progenitors is accompanied by an epigenetic switch characterized
Fig. 6.
NeuroD1 transduction recovers neurogenesis in SOX2cKO mice. (A, Left) Retroviral injections were performed in hippocampal DG of 2-mo-old
SOX2cKO mice. One side was injected with a mixture of GFP-IRES-GFP–encoding retrovirus and mCherry-encoding control retrovirus. The other side was
injected with a mixture of ND1-IRES-GFP–expressing retrovirus and mCherry-encoding control retrovirus. The same amount of control virus was injected into
both sides. (Right) The resulting infected newborn neurons at 7 and 21 dpi. (B) Confocal imaging showing transduced neuroblasts (DCX+) with GFP and
mCherry retroviruses (Left) or with only mCherry retrovirus (Right) at 7 and 21 dpi. (Scale bars: 25 μm for merged images and 10 μm for single channels.)
(C) Quantification of total mCherry+ (GFP+ mCherry+) and only mCherry+ cells per DG at 7 (Upper) and 21 (Lower) dpi. (D) Quantification of GFP+ mCherry+ and
only mCherry+ cells in the GFP and ND1 sides at 7 (Upper) and 21 (Lower) dpi. For all quantifications, data are plotted as the mean ± SEM (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01).
E1942
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1421480112
Amador-Arjona et al.
Downloaded by guest on August 14, 2021 

by a decrease of H3K27me3 and a gain of H3K4me3 at the pro-
moters of proneural genes (6). Exogenous SOX2 expression pre-
viously was shown to be sufficient to reprogram fibroblasts into
multipotent neural stem cells (NSCs) (55) or, in combination with
Mash1, to reprogram human brain pericytes into neuronal cells
(58). These findings suggested that SOX2 plays a key role in the
epigenetic control of the neurogenic program, cooperating with
the differentiation capacities of neurogenic factors. Consistent
with this SOX2 cooperative function in neuronal differentiation,
we found that loss of SOX2 increased the repressive H3K27me3
mark at proneural (Ngn2 and NeuroD1) and neurogenic (Sox21,
Bdnf, and Gadd45b) genes normally bound by SOX2. Further-
more, H3K27me3 was increased only at SOX2-binding sites,
whereas EZH2 binding was increased in broader regulatory regions
of these genes. This result is consistent with the recent observa-
tion that EZH2 binding does not equate with PRC2 complex
activity (i.e., H3K27me3 levels) (59). At the same time, global
H3K27me3 and EZH2 levels were not altered in SOX2-deficient
cells, suggesting that SOX2 acts locally (directly or through cofac-
tors) to modulate PRC2 complex binding in the vicinity of SOX2-
binding sites. Moreover, our whole-genome analysis suggests that
SOX2 regulates the bivalent marks on a subset of early neurogenic
genes involved in the onset of neuronal differentiation (25% of
bivalently marked promoters), whereas the remaining 75% (genes
involved in neuronal maturation and function) are mainly devoid of
SOX2, implicating other factors in their regulation.
Based on our results, we propose that in neural precursors
SOX2 functions at bivalent domains as a lineage-specific tran-
scriptional regulator to maintain the bivalent chromatin/poised
state by limiting the activity of the PRC2 complex. SOX2 could
compete directly with PRC2 for chromatin binding at bivalent
domains and/or act indirectly, e.g., through its control of Utf1
expression (60). To our knowledge, this is the first example of
a lineage-specific transcription factor that maintains the bivalent
state at the promoters of poised genes, thus coordinating the
onset of a developmental (neurogenic) program and conse-
quently ensuring a robust and appropriate terminal (neuronal)
differentiation process. It is worth pointing out potential limi-
tations of our whole-genome analysis, which has been performed
using the ChIP-seq datasets from mouse ES cell-derived NPCs.
In the future, it will be important to generate the whole-genome
maps of SOX2 binding and the epigenetic landscape of hipNPCs
and to investigate the exact mechanisms of SOX2 interference
with PRC2, which could involve steric hindrance of the same
locus, recruitment of other transcription factors, DNA methyl-
ation, or changes in chromatin structure in hipNPCs.
SOX2 Regulates the Transcriptional Response to Neurogenic Cues.
Neural progenitors in the adult hippocampus decrease SOX2
levels before exiting the cell cycle and initiating the expression of
markers associated with neural differentiation. For example,
NeuroD1 transcriptional activation by Wnt/β-catenin requires
the removal of SOX2 binding at the NeuroD1 promoter (28).
Previously, however, it was unclear whether SOX2 binding at the
promoters of essential neurogenic genes is simply repressive
or might contribute to their activation. We found that SOX2-
deficient hipNPCs showed a significantly impaired neurogenic
response to Wnt3a, a physiological ligand expressed in the adult
hippocampus (61), suggesting that SOX2 presence at the poised
promoters indeed is required for full transcriptional activation.
We correlated the reduced neurogenic response in SOX2-
deficient NPCs with the increased abundance of repressive
H3K27me3 marks at the poised proneural/neurogenic genes.
These early changes in NPCs also affected epigenetic regulation
at later stages of the neurogenic program, including the GCN5-
dependent deposition of H3K9ac activating marks. Notably,
attempts to maintain high levels of acetylation in SOX2-knock-
down NPCs by treatment with VPA did not rescue the expression
of proneural genes, suggesting that the early SOX2-dependent
imbalance in H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 marks has a profound
impact throughout the entire differentiation process. Further
work is needed to understand fully this previously unknown
function of SOX2 and to identify downstream factors involved in
the epigenetic regulation of poised proneural/neurogenic genes.
Our analysis of SOX2cKO mice revealed that the expression
of both poised proneural genes, Ngn2 (amplifying progenitors)
and NeuroD1 (neuroblasts), was reduced significantly in the
adult hippocampus. In particular, the dynamics of NeuroD1
expression were perturbed in SOX2cKO mice, and the typical
peak in expression in early neuroblasts was absent (40). In con-
trast, there was no effect on PROX1, which is required for
granule cell maturation and is bound by SOX2. However, the
Prox1 promoter is not bivalently marked, reinforcing the notion
that SOX2-dependent epigenetic regulation specifically affects
poised genes during neuronal differentiation.
Loss of SOX2 Impairs Neuronal Survival and Differentiation. Deletion
of SOX2 in adult neural progenitors was shown previously to reduce
drastically the number and proliferation of radial neural progenitors
and, consequently, the number of neuroblasts in the adult hippo-
campus (13). However, we observed only a slight reduction in radial
glia cells in SOX2cKO mice between 1 and 6 mo of age. One
possible explanation for this discrepancy is the use of tamoxifen to
induce Sox2 deletion in the former study (13); tamoxifen might have
had a deleterious effect on the SOX2-deficient hipNPCs.
We found that SOX2 regulates the abundance of transiently
amplifying progenitors by opposing premature exit from the cell
cycle. The cell-cycle deficits observed in these proliferating cells
likely result from the reduced expression of Lin28. Our previous
work showed that SOX2 directly controls Lin28 expression in sev-
eral types of NPCs, and Lin28 rescues the proliferation defect in
SOX2-deficient NPCs through effects on cell-cycle regulators such
as CyclinD1, TLX, and CDC25A (56). On the other hand, the
absence of a cell-cycle deficit in SOX2-deficient radial glia stem
cells is consistent with the limited self-renewal of this stem cell
population (48).
The role of SOX2 in regulating neuronal differentiation and
functional integration in the adult hippocampus had not been in-
vestigated previously. The defects in hippocampal neurogenesis
Fig. 7.
SOX2 deficiency leads to abnormal newborn granule neuron mat-
uration. (A) Sample projected confocal images of newborn neurons in the
DG at 28 dpi of a retrovirus encoding GFP. (Scale bar: 50 μm.) (B) Quantifi-
cation of total dendritic length and branching points of GFP+ newborn
neurons at 28 dpi. (C) Sample-projected confocal images of dendritic spines of
newborn neurons at 28 dpi of a retrovirus expressing mCherry. (Scale bar: 2 μm.)
(D) Quantification of the number of spines and the number of mushroom
spines of mCherry+ newborn neurons at 28 dpi. (E, Left) Plot of spontaneous
excitatory postsynaptic currents (sEPSC) in GFP+ newborn neurons at 42 dpi.
(Scale bars: 20 pA and 5 s.) (Right) Quantification results. For all quantifica-
tions, data are plotted as the mean ± SEM (*P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001).
Amador-Arjona et al.
PNAS
|
Published online March 30, 2015
|
E1943
NEUROSCIENCE
PNAS PLUS
Downloaded by guest on August 14, 2021 

observed in SOX2cKO mice are of particular importance, because
patients with SOX2 anophthalmia syndrome are known to have
learning and memory deficits, and most have anomalies of the
hippocampus (62, 63). We found that apoptosis of immature
neuroblasts was increased in SOX2cKO mice, leading to dra-
matically reduced integration of newborn neurons in the hippo-
campal DG. Given that the proneural genes Ngn2 (39) and
NeuroD1 (40) are required for the survival of hippocampal new-
born neurons, we predicted that exogenous overexpression of one
or both of these genes would recover cell survival in SOX2cKO
mice. Indeed, the recovery of neuroblasts in vivo was shown by
retroviral delivery of NeuroD1 in the adult hippocampus of these
mice, demonstrating that appropriate NeuroD1 expression is suffi-
cient for neuroblast survival in the absence of SOX2.
We reasoned that deficient activation of proneural and neu-
rogenic genes would lead to impaired neuronal development and
function. Indeed, we found that newborn neurons in the DG of
SOX2cKO mice had prominent morphological alterations and
functional abnormalities compared with the newborn neurons in
the DG of wild-type mice. Consistent with its role in setting up the
epigenetic landscape, we argue that SOX2 affects neuroblast
survival and neuronal maturation long after its expression has
ceased. These results indicate that SOX2 plays a much broader
role than previously anticipated. Further experiments will be
required to understand the impact of newborn neurons in
SOX2-deficient animals on hippocampal functions such as
contextual learning and pattern separation. We expect that these
hippocampal functions will be affected in SOX2cKO mice.
However, because the number of newborn neurons decreased,
and the function of the remaining neurons was altered, a be-
havioral paradigm capable of separating these phenomena will
be required.
Finally, the neuronal differentiation defect we observed in
SOX2cKO mice provides insight into the human SOX2 anoph-
thalmia syndrome. The phenotype of SOX2cKO mice observed
here suggests one possible epigenetic mechanism for this clinical
syndrome. The defects observed in neuronal differentiation,
dendritic development, and functional integration of newborn
neurons in the hippocampus of adult SOX2cKO mice may
contribute to the learning and intellectual disabilities experi-
enced by patients with SOX2 anophthalmia syndrome (63).
Given the reversibility of epigenetic changes, our results suggest
that pharmacological therapies directed at restoring the levels of
neurogenic genes down-regulated in SOX2-deficient hipNPCs
might be beneficial for anophthalmia syndrome patients, par-
ticularly in ameliorating hippocampal-related learning disability.
Experimental Procedures
Mouse Models. The generation of conditional Sox2 mutant mice has been
described (13). Briefly, Sox2flox mice were established by inserting loxP
sites into a 6.5-kbp region containing the Sox2 locus. Mice were crossed
with transgenic mice expressing Cre recombinase under the control of the
mouse glial fibrillary acidic protein promoter (mGFAP-Cre) (21), resulting
in Sox2flox::mGFAP-Cre mice. These mice were crossed with Nestin-CFPnuc
transgenic mice (41), resulting in Sox2flox::mGFAP-Cre::nestin-CFPnuc mice
(SOX2cKO mice). All mice were backcrossed onto a C57BL/6 background.
Mutant mice were compared directly with nontransgenic littermates. Ex-
periments were conducted according to guidelines and protocols ap-
proved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Sanford-
Burnham Medical Research Institute.
BrdU, CldU, and IdU Experiments. For proliferation studies, 8-wk-old mice were
injected once with BrdU (i.p. 100 mg/kg body weight) (51-7581KZ; BD
Pharmingen) and were perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde 2 h later. To
study adult neurogenesis, 8-wk-old mice were injected twice daily, 12 h apart,
for five consecutive days with BrdU (i.p. 50 mg/kg body weight) and were
perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde 4 wk after the last injection. To de-
termine the mitotic potential of stem and progenitor cells, 8-wk-old mice
were injected i.p. with equimolar concentrations of CldU (85 mg/kg in saline;
Sigma) and IdU [115 mg/kg in saline containing 2% (vol/vol) of 0.2N
NaOH; Sigma].
Cell Culture and in Vitro Quantification. Neurosphere cultures from the hip-
pocampal DG of 6- to 8-wk-old mice were established as described, with some
modifications (64). Briefly, the DG was dissected, disaggregated in papain,
and maintained in culture in base medium (1:1 ratio of DMEM/F12 Gluta-
max-neurobasal medium [Gibco], 2% B27 supplement without vitamin A
[Gibco], 10% BIT 9500 [StemCell Technologies], and 1 mM glutamine [Gibco])
supplemented with 20 ng/mL EGF (Chemicon), 20 ng/mL bFGF, 1 μM pur-
morphamine (Calbiochem), 5 μg/mL insulin (Sigma), and 5 mM nicotinamide
(Sigma). After the second passage, neurospheres were propagated as
monolayer cultures on Matrigel-coated plates. hipNPCs were subcultured
enzymatically with Accutase (Chemicon) at a 1:3 ratio approximately once
a week. For neuronal differentiation experiments, hipNPCs were transferred
to base medium supplemented with 5 μg/mL insulin (Sigma), 5 mM nico-
tinamide (Sigma), and 50 ng/mL Wnt3a ligand (R&D Systems) for the in-
dicated times. To inhibit histone deacetylase activity, 1 mM VPA was added
to hipNPC cultures at the time of withdrawal from EGF and bFGF.
qPCR. Total RNA was extracted using an RNeasy kit (Qiagen), and 1 μg was
reverse transcribed using the QuantiTect kit (Qiagen) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Real-time PCR analysis was performed with
3.125 ng of cDNA per sample using a LightCycler 480 II (Roche) and SYBR
Green master mix (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturers’ recom-
mendations. Primer sequences are listed in SI Appendix, Table S1. Gene ex-
pression was normalized against the ubiquitously expressed HPRT gene.
Data were analyzed using the Δ(ΔCT) method.
ChIP. ChIP was performed using the EZ-ChIP kit (Millipore) according to the
manufacturer’s recommendations with the following modifications: 1 × 106
cell equivalents were used for each immunoprecipitation, cells were soni-
cated to obtain chromatin fragments of 200–500 bp, and 5–10 μg of anti-
body was used in each ChIP. To evaluate factor-specific enrichment at
different promoter sites, qPCR was performed using the purified chromatin
as a template. Amplification was performed with site-specific primers
designed to flank the genomic region of interest (SI Appendix, Table S1).
qPCR data were normalized to the values obtained with normal rabbit IgG.
To compare factor-specific enrichment at particular sites across different cell
lines (i.e., shCTRL vs. shSox2), qPCR data were normalized to 1% of the
purified input DNA, which was used as a measure of the total amount of
chromatin present in the sample.
Stereotactic Injections and Analysis of Coinjection Assays. All experiments
were performed with 5- to 6-wk-old wild-type or SOX2cKO mice (n = 4 per
group). Mice were anesthetized with a mixture of ketamine (100 mg/kg
body weight) and xylazine (10 mg/kg body weight). Mice were stereotacti-
cally injected with 1.5 μL of a 1:1 mixture of CAG-NeuroD1-IRES-GFP/CAG-
mCherry and CAG-GFP-IRES-GFP/CAG-mCherry into the left and right DG,
respectively. Coordinates from the bregma were (in mm): −2.1 anterior/
posterior, ±1.6 medial/lateral, and −1.95 dorsal/ventral from the dura. Viral
titers were adjusted to ensure equal amounts were injected. At the ap-
propriate times after injection, animals were transcardially perfused as
previously described.
To phenotype the transduced cells, equidistant sections throughout the
entire DG were selected and stained. Sections were immunostained for DCX,
counterstained with Hoechst dye, and analyzed by confocal fluorescence
microscopy (n = 20–40 cells per animal and marker). To analyze the ratio of
colabeled cells after injection of viral mixtures, the fraction of double-
transduced cells (GFP+ mCherry+) to all transduced cells (all mCherry+) was
determined. Statistical analysis was performed with data from at least 10
sections from each hemisphere per mouse.
Morphological Analysis. Dendritic lengths, branch points, spines, and mush-
room spines were analyzed in DG neurons of mice that had been transduced
4 wk earlier with a GFP-encoding retrovirus. 3D reconstruction of GFP-transduced
neurons was made from Z-series stacks of confocal images. The projection
images were traced with ImageJ (Nationals Institutes of Health) (imagej.nih.
gov/ij/) using the NeuronJ plug-in (www.imagescience.org/meijering/software/
neuronj/). Spine density was calculated by dividing the spine number by the
length of the dendritic segment. A spine was classified as mushroom if its
diameter was more than twice the length of the spine neck.
Statistical Analysis. Data were analyzed by unpaired two-tailed t test or
ANOVA followed by post hoc tests for multiple comparisons when appro-
priate. A P value of ≤0.05 was considered significant.
E1944
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1421480112
Amador-Arjona et al.
Downloaded by guest on August 14, 2021 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank S. K. Nikolis of the University of Milano-
Bicocca, M. V. Sofroniew of the University of California, Los Angeles, and
G. Enikolopov of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory for Sox2flox, mGFAP-Cre,
and Nestin-CFPnuc mice, respectively. This work was supported by tran-
sient research from the Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute and
Grant RO1 NS066278 (to A.V.T.).
1. Deisseroth K, et al. (2004) Excitation-neurogenesis coupling in adult neural stem/
progenitor cells. Neuron 42(4):535–552.
2. Ge S, et al. (2006) GABA regulates synaptic integration of newly generated neurons in
the adult brain. Nature 439(7076):589–593.
3. Lai K, Kaspar BK, Gage FH, Schaffer DV (2003) Sonic hedgehog regulates adult neural
progenitor proliferation in vitro and in vivo. Nat Neurosci 6(1):21–27.
4. Jakovcevski M, Akbarian S (2012) Epigenetic mechanisms in neurological disease. Nat
Med 18(8):1194–1204.
5. Numata S, et al. (2012) DNA methylation signatures in development and aging of the
human prefrontal cortex. Am J Hum Genet 90(2):260–272.
6. Hahn MA, et al. (2013) Dynamics of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine and chromatin marks in
Mammalian neurogenesis. Cell Reports 3(2):291–300.
7. Archer TC, Jin J, Casey ES (2011) Interaction of Sox1, Sox2, Sox3 and Oct4 during
primary neurogenesis. Dev Biol 350(2):429–440.
8. Miyagi S, Kato H, Okuda A (2009) Role of SoxB1 transcription factors in development.
Cell Mol Life Sci 66(23):3675–3684.
9. Fantes J, et al. (2003) Mutations in SOX2 cause anophthalmia. Nat Genet 33(4):
461–463.
10. Kelberman D, et al. (2006) Mutations within Sox2/SOX2 are associated with abnor-
malities in the hypothalamo-pituitary-gonadal axis in mice and humans. J Clin Invest
116(9):2442–2455.
11. Sisodiya SM, et al. (2006) Role of SOX2 mutations in human hippocampal malfor-
mations and epilepsy. Epilepsia 47(3):534–542.
12. Ferri AL, et al. (2004) Sox2 deficiency causes neurodegeneration and impaired neu-
rogenesis in the adult mouse brain. Development 131(15):3805–3819.
13. Favaro R, et al. (2009) Hippocampal development and neural stem cell maintenance
require Sox2-dependent regulation of Shh. Nat Neurosci 12(10):1248–1256.
14. Gage FH (2000) Mammalian neural stem cells. Science 287(5457):1433–1438.
15. Spalding KL, et al. (2013) Dynamics of hippocampal neurogenesis in adult humans.
Cell 153(6):1219–1227.
16. Clelland CD, et al. (2009) A functional role for adult hippocampal neurogenesis in
spatial pattern separation. Science 325(5937):210–213.
17. Amador-Arjona A, et al. (2011) Primary cilia regulate proliferation of amplifying
progenitors in adult hippocampus: Implications for learning and memory. J Neurosci
31(27):9933–9944.
18. van Praag H, et al. (2002) Functional neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus. Nature
415(6875):1030–1034.
19. Ellis P, et al. (2004) SOX2, a persistent marker for multipotential neural stem cells
derived from embryonic stem cells, the embryo or the adult. Dev Neurosci 26(2-4):
148–165.
20. Suh H, et al. (2007) In vivo fate analysis reveals the multipotent and self-renewal
capacities of Sox2+ neural stem cells in the adult hippocampus. Cell Stem Cell 1(5):
515–528.
21. Garcia AD, Doan NB, Imura T, Bush TG, Sofroniew MV (2004) GFAP-expressing pro-
genitors are the principal source of constitutive neurogenesis in adult mouse fore-
brain. Nat Neurosci 7(11):1233–1241.
22. Seri B, García-Verdugo JM, Collado-Morente L, McEwen BS, Alvarez-Buylla A (2004)
Cell types, lineage, and architecture of the germinal zone in the adult dentate gyrus.
J Comp Neurol 478(4):359–378.
23. Bani-Yaghoub M, et al. (2006) Role of Sox2 in the development of the mouse neo-
cortex. Dev Biol 295(1):52–66.
24. Bylund M, Andersson E, Novitch BG, Muhr J (2003) Vertebrate neurogenesis is
counteracted by Sox1-3 activity. Nat Neurosci 6(11):1162–1168.
25. Graham V, Khudyakov J, Ellis P, Pevny L (2003) SOX2 functions to maintain neural
progenitor identity. Neuron 39(5):749–765.
26. Lodato MA, et al. (2013) SOX2 co-occupies distal enhancer elements with distinct POU
factors in ESCs and NPCs to specify cell state. PLoS Genet 9(2):e1003288.
27. Cimadamore F, et al. (2011) Human ESC-derived neural crest model reveals a key role
for SOX2 in sensory neurogenesis. Cell Stem Cell 8(5):538–551.
28. Kuwabara T, et al. (2009) Wnt-mediated activation of NeuroD1 and retro-elements
during adult neurogenesis. Nat Neurosci 12(9):1097–1105.
29. Hsieh J, Gage FH (2004) Epigenetic control of neural stem cell fate. Curr Opin Genet
Dev 14(5):461–469.
30. Ma DK, et al. (2009) Neuronal activity-induced Gadd45b promotes epigenetic DNA
demethylation and adult neurogenesis. Science 323(5917):1074–1077.
31. Gao Z, et al. (2011) The master negative regulator REST/NRSF controls adult neuro-
genesis by restraining the neurogenic program in quiescent stem cells. J Neurosci
31(26):9772–9786.
32. Bernstein BE, et al. (2006) A bivalent chromatin structure marks key developmental
genes in embryonic stem cells. Cell 125(2):315–326.
33. Boyer LA, et al. (2006) Polycomb complexes repress developmental regulators in
murine embryonic stem cells. Nature 441(7091):349–353.
34. Cavallaro M, et al. (2008) Impaired generation of mature neurons by neural stem cells
from hypomorphic Sox2 mutants. Development 135(3):541–557.
35. Puligilla C, Dabdoub A, Brenowitz SD, Kelley MW (2010) Sox2 induces neuronal for-
mation in the developing mammalian cochlea. J Neurosci 30(2):714–722.
36. Taranova OV, et al. (2006) SOX2 is a dose-dependent regulator of retinal neural
progenitor competence. Genes Dev 20(9):1187–1202.
37. Lim DA, et al. (2009) Chromatin remodelling factor Mll1 is essential for neurogenesis
from postnatal neural stem cells. Nature 458(7237):529–533.
38. Bergsland M, et al. (2011) Sequentially acting Sox transcription factors in neural lin-
eage development. Genes Dev 25(23):2453–2464.
39. Roybon L, et al. (2009) Neurogenin2 directs granule neuroblast production and am-
plification while NeuroD1 specifies neuronal fate during hippocampal neurogenesis.
PLoS ONE 4(3):e4779.
40. Gao Z, et al. (2009) Neurod1 is essential for the survival and maturation of adult-born
neurons. Nat Neurosci 12(9):1090–1092.
41. Mignone JL, Kukekov V, Chiang AS, Steindler D, Enikolopov G (2004) Neural stem and
progenitor cells in nestin-GFP transgenic mice. J Comp Neurol 469(3):311–324.
42. Hsieh J, Nakashima K, Kuwabara T, Mejia E, Gage FH (2004) Histone deacetylase in-
hibition-mediated neuronal differentiation of multipotent adult neural progenitor
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101(47):16659–16664.
43. Matsuda S, et al. (2012) Sox21 promotes hippocampal adult neurogenesis via the
transcriptional repression of the Hes5 gene. J Neurosci 32(36):12543–12557.
44. Chan JP, Cordeira J, Calderon GA, Iyer LK, Rios M (2008) Depletion of central BDNF in
mice impedes terminal differentiation of new granule neurons in the adult hippo-
campus. Mol Cell Neurosci 39(3):372–383.
45. Hezroni H, et al. (2011) H3K9 histone acetylation predicts pluripotency and re-
programming capacity of ES cells. Nucleus 2(4):300–309.
46. Suka N, Suka Y, Carmen AA, Wu J, Grunstein M (2001) Highly specific antibodies
determine histone acetylation site usage in yeast heterochromatin and euchromatin.
Mol Cell 8(2):473–479.
47. Lavado A, Lagutin OV, Chow LM, Baker SJ, Oliver G (2010) Prox1 is required for
granule cell maturation and intermediate progenitor maintenance during brain
neurogenesis. PLoS Biol 8(8):e000460.
48. Encinas JM, et al. (2011) Division-coupled astrocytic differentiation and age-related
depletion of neural stem cells in the adult hippocampus. Cell Stem Cell 8(5):566–579.
49. Vega CJ, Peterson DA (2005) Stem cell proliferative history in tissue revealed by
temporal halogenated thymidine analog discrimination. Nat Methods 2(3):167–169.
50. Sierra A, et al. (2010) Microglia shape adult hippocampal neurogenesis through ap-
optosis-coupled phagocytosis. Cell Stem Cell 7(4):483–495.
51. Tashiro A, Sandler VM, Toni N, Zhao C, Gage FH (2006) NMDA-receptor-mediated,
cell-specific integration of new neurons in adult dentate gyrus. Nature 442(7105):
929–933.
52. Zhao C, Teng EM, Summers RG, Jr, Ming GL, Gage FH (2006) Distinct morphological
stages of dentate granule neuron maturation in the adult mouse hippocampus.
J Neurosci 26(1):3–11.
53. Nusser Z, et al. (1998) Cell type and pathway dependence of synaptic AMPA receptor
number and variability in the hippocampus. Neuron 21(3):545–559.
54. Pevny LH, Nicolis SK (2010) Sox2 roles in neural stem cells. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 42(3):
421–424.
55. Ring KL, et al. (2012) Direct reprogramming of mouse and human fibroblasts into
multipotent neural stem cells with a single factor. Cell Stem Cell 11(1):100–109.
56. Cimadamore F, Amador-Arjona A, Chen C, Huang CT, Terskikh AV (2013) SOX2-LIN28/
let-7 pathway regulates proliferation and neurogenesis in neural precursors. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 110(32):E3017–E3026.
57. Voigt P, Tee WW, Reinberg D (2013) A double take on bivalent promoters. Genes Dev
27(12):1318–1338.
58. Heinrich C, et al. (2014) Sox2-mediated conversion of NG2 glia into induced neurons
in the injured adult cerebral cortex. Stem Cell Rev 3(6):1000–1014.
59. Davidovich C, Zheng L, Goodrich KJ, Cech TR (2013) Promiscuous RNA binding by
Polycomb repressive complex 2. Nat Struct Mol Biol 20(11):1250–1257.
60. Jia J, et al. (2012) Regulation of pluripotency and self- renewal of ESCs through
epigenetic-threshold modulation and mRNA pruning. Cell 151(3):576–589.
61. Lie DC, et al. (2005) Wnt signalling regulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Nature
437(7063):1370–1375.
62. Ragge NK, et al. (2005) SOX2 anophthalmia syndrome. Am J Med Genet A 135(1):1–7,
discussion 8.
63. Ragge NK, Quaghebeur G, Stewart H (2013) SOX2 anophthalmia syndrome in
adulthood - a neurodegenerative picture? Clin Genet 83(5):482–484.
64. Ferrari D, Binda E, De Filippis L, Vescovi AL (2010) Isolation of neural stem cells from
neural tissues using the neurosphere technique. Curr Protoc Stem Cell Biol Chapter
2:Unit2D.6.
Amador-Arjona et al.
PNAS
|
Published online March 30, 2015
|
E1945
NEUROSCIENCE
PNAS PLUS
Downloaded by guest on August 14, 2021

===== Anderson2016_Nature_SCI+Mouse+Astrocytes =====
1 4  a p r i l  2 0 1 6  |  V O L  5 3 2  |  N A T U R E  |  1 9 5
Article
doi:10.1038/nature17623
Astrocyte scar formation aids central 
nervous system axon regeneration
Mark A. Anderson1*†, Joshua E. Burda1*, Yilong Ren1†, Yan Ao1, Timothy M. O’Shea1, Riki Kawaguchi2, Giovanni Coppola2, 
Baljit S. Khakh3, Timothy J. Deming4 & Michael V. Sofroniew1
Transected axons fail to regrow spontaneously across severe tissue 
lesions in the mature mammalian central nervous system (CNS). 
Potential mechanisms include: (i) reduced intrinsic growth capacity 
of mature CNS neurons1–3; (ii) absence of external growth stimulating 
and supporting factors1,4,5; and (iii) presence of external inhibitory 
factors associated with myelin6,7, fibrotic tissue8 or astrocytic scars9. 
Alleviating cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying axon 
regeneration failure is fundamental to improving CNS repair after 
traumatic injury, stroke or degenerative disease.
Astrocytic scars have been regarded as barriers to CNS axon regrowth 
since the mid-twentieth century on the basis of their appearance 
and early reports that attenuating astrocytic scar formation enabled 
spontaneous axon regrowth10,11. Although axon-growth-promoting 
effects of early scar attenuators proved illusory, reports correlat-
ing failed axon regrowth with presence of mature astrocytes12 or 
astrocytic scars9, plus evidence that astrocytes produce chondroitin 
sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) that inhibit axon growth in vitro9, led 
to the widespread view that astrocytic scars are critical inhibitors of 
CNS axons and that nullifying this inhibition will lead to spontaneous 
axon regeneration.
Here we tested the hypothesis that astrocytic scar formation 
plays a causal role in the failure of transected mature CNS axons 
to regenerate across severe tissue lesions. We used multiple trans-
genic loss-of-function strategies to ablate scar-forming astrocytes, 
genetically attenuate scar-forming astrocytes or to ablate chronic 
astrocytic scars after severe SCI in adult mice. We quantified the 
effects of these manipulations on (i) spontaneous regeneration of 
three major types of CNS axons; (ii) total CSPG levels; (iii) genome-
wide expression by astrocytes and non-astrocytes in SCI lesions of 
molecules associated with axon growth; and (iv) axon regeneration 
stimulated by conditioning lesions plus delivery via synthetic hydro-
gel depots of known axon-required growth factors missing from 
SCI lesions.
No axon regrowth after preventing scars
We first determined effects of preventing astrocytic scar formation on 
the potential for spontaneous unstimulated axon regeneration through 
severe CNS lesions. After focal traumatic tissue damage, CNS lesions 
comprise central areas of non-neural lesion core tissue surrounded 
by narrow astrocytic scar borders13,14. Astrocytic scar formation is 
complete by two weeks after adult murine SCI and is critically 
dependent on astrocyte proliferation and STAT3 signalling15–18. 
We prevented astrocyte scar formation with two loss-of-function 
transgenic mouse models that either selectively kill proliferating 
scar-forming astrocytes15,16 or delete STAT3 signalling selectively from 
astrocytes17,18, referred to respectively as TK+GCV or STAT3-CKO 
mice (Supplementary Information).
After severe crush SCI, wild-type mice formed dense astrocytic scars 
by two weeks that persisted for eight weeks, whereas TK+GCV and 
STAT3-CKO mice failed to form scars and instead exhibited larger 
areas of non-neural tissue around lesion centres that were essentially 
devoid of astrocytes from two to eight weeks after SCI (Fig. 1a–d, 
Extended Data Fig. 1 and Supplementary Information).
Effects of preventing astrocyte scar formation on axon regeneration 
were quantified in three axonal systems: (i) descending corticospinal 
tract (CST); (ii) ascending sensory tract (AST); and (iii) descending 
serotonergic (5HT) tract, visualized either by axonal tract tracing or 
immunohistochemistry (Fig. 1c, e–i and Supplementary Information). 
As expected after severe SCI in adult wild-type mice, transected CST 
and AST axons both exhibited moderate dieback away from lesion 
centres (Fig. 1c, e, g, h). Preventing astrocytic scar formation in 
either TK+GCV or STAT3-CKO mice failed to result in spontane-
ous regrowth of transected CST or AST axons through SCI lesions, 
and instead significantly increased axonal dieback (Fig. 1c, e, g, h). 
As expected19,20, transected 5HT axons exhibited little dieback from 
lesion centres (Fig. 1f, i). Preventing scar formation in TK+GCV 
or STAT3-CKO mice did not exacerbate dieback of 5HT axons. 
Transected axons fail to regrow in the mature central nervous system. Astrocytic scars are widely regarded as causal in 
this failure. Here, using three genetically targeted loss-of-function manipulations in adult mice, we show that preventing 
astrocyte scar formation, attenuating scar-forming astrocytes, or ablating chronic astrocytic scars all failed to result in 
spontaneous regrowth of transected corticospinal, sensory or serotonergic axons through severe spinal cord injury (SCI) 
lesions. By contrast, sustained local delivery via hydrogel depots of required axon-specific growth factors not present 
in SCI lesions, plus growth-activating priming injuries, stimulated robust, laminin-dependent sensory axon regrowth 
past scar-forming astrocytes and inhibitory molecules in SCI lesions. Preventing astrocytic scar formation significantly 
reduced this stimulated axon regrowth. RNA sequencing revealed that astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells in SCI lesions 
express multiple axon-growth-supporting molecules. Our findings show that contrary to the prevailing dogma, astrocyte 
scar formation aids rather than prevents central nervous system axon regeneration.
1Department of Neurobiology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095-1763, USA. 2Departments of Psychiatry and Neurology, David Geffen 
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095-1761, USA. 3Department of Physiology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California 
90095-1751, USA. 4Departments of Bioengineering, Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095-1600, USA. †Present addresses: School of 
Life Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL), SV BMI UPCourtine, Station 19, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland (M.A.A); Department of Spine Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China (Y.R.).
*These authors contributed equally to this work. 
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article
RESEARCH
1 9 6  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  5 3 2  |  1 4  a p r i l  2 0 1 6
Nevertheless, although many 5HT axons remained in lesion centres 
devoid of astrocytes, they also failed to regrow (Fig. 1f, i).
Thus, in spite of the essential absence of scar-forming astrocytes 
from SCI lesions for eight weeks after SCI in TK + GCV mice or 
STAT3-CKO mice, there was no spontaneous regeneration of tran-
sected CST, AST or 5HT axons through the lesions. This regrowth 
failure was particularly apparent for AST and 5HT axons, the axonal 
tips of which were often present along or within large areas devoid 
of astrocytes but did not regrow spontaneously through such areas 
(Fig. 1e, f).
No axon regrowth after removing chronic scars
Acute astrocytic scar formation restricts inflammation and preserves 
neural tissue14–18. It has been proposed that after inflammation has 
resolved, chronic astrocytic scars are expendable and detrimen-
tal because they continually prevent axon regeneration. To test this 
hypothesis, we ablated chronic astrocytic scars five weeks after SCI 
with genetically targeted diphtheria toxin receptor and ultra-low 
doses of diphtheria toxin21 (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Information). 
Distribution and specificity of targeting to mature astrocytic scars was 
verified with the genetic reporter tdTomato (Fig. 2b, Extended Data 
Fig. 1c and Supplementary Information). GFAP immunohistochemistry 
verified efficient removal of chronic astrocytic scars (Fig. 2c). Axon 
quantitation ten weeks after SCI showed that transected CST, AST or 
5HT axons all failed to regrow spontaneously through areas depleted 
of chronic astrocytic scars (Fig. 2d–i). Again, this failure was particu-
larly notable for AST and 5HT axons in or along areas devoid of scar- 
forming astrocytes that did not regrow through these areas (Fig. 2e, f). 
We also ablated chronic astrocytic scars and adjacent astrocytes over 
larger areas to reach ‘died-back’ CST and AST axons, but this approach 
caused pronounced tissue degeneration and large lesions (Extended 
Data Fig. 1e) that contained essentially no detectable CST, AST or 5HT 
axons. These findings show that ablating chronic astrocytic scars fails 
to result in spontaneous regrowth of CST, AST or 5HT axons through 
SCI lesions, and that chronic astrocytic scars remain critical for 
sustaining tissue integrity.
Multicellular CSPG production
We next looked for molecular mechanisms that might explain why 
ablating or attenuating astrocytic scars failed to enable spontaneous 
axon regrowth through severe lesions. CSPGs produced by astrocytic 
scars are regarded as the principal inhibitors of axon regeneration9. 
Total CSPG levels determined by dot blot with CS56 antibody9,22 were, 
as expected9, significantly higher in our wild-type SCI lesions, but 
were not significantly reduced by transgenic ablation or disruption of 
astrocytic scar formation (Fig. 3a). Because diverse cells in SCI lesions 
including pericytes, fibroblast lineage cells and inflammatory cells13 
can produce CSPGs23, we examined cellular production of CSPG and 
GFAP and quantified immunohistochemically stained tissue areas. 
In SCI lesions of TK+GCV and STAT3-CKO mice, GFAP area was 
significantly reduced in both grey and white matter compared with 
wild type, whereas CSPG area was not significantly reduced in lesion 
core tissue or in regions of ablated astrocytic scars, which were filled 
with CSPG-positive, GFAP-negative cells (Figs 3b,c, Extended Data 
Fig. 2 and Supplementary Information). These findings show that non- 
astrocyte cells in SCI lesions produce substantive amounts of CSPGs 
Figure 2 | No spontaneous regrowth of CST, AST or 5HT axons after 
ablating chronic astrocyte scars. a, Experiment summary schematic.  
b, Selective targeting of tdTomato reporter to GFAP-positive scar-forming 
astrocytes in 500 μm zone occupied by the astrocytic scar (see Extended 
Data Fig. 1c). c, Diphtheria toxin-mediated ablation of chronic astrocytic 
scar after severe SCI in mice with transgenically targeted diphtheria toxin 
receptor. Dotted lines indicate lesion centre (Cn) and 500 μm on either side 
normally occupied by scar-forming astrocytes in wild-type (WT) mice. 
Boxes show locations of d–f in adjacent sections. d, CST axons are found 
only among GFAP-positive astrocytes proximal to ablated scar. e, AST 
axons are present at the margins of a large area depleted of scar but have 
not regrown (arrows). f, 5HT axons are present within an area depleted  
of scar but have not regrown (arrows). g–i, Numbers (means ± s.e.m.) of 
CST (g), AST (h), or 5HT (i) axons at various distances from SCI lesion 
centres as a percentage of the total number of axons present at 3 mm 
proximal. CST, n = 6 mice; AST and 5HT, n = 5 mice; *P < 0.05 versus  
wild type (ANOVA with Newman–Keuls).
LC
LC
d CST axons 
AST axons 
e 
f 5HT axons 
C
50 μm
L
C
LC
LC
LC
f
d
e
Cn
500 μm
LC
CST 
5HT 
Caudal
Rostral
3 mm
Cn
LC
AS
AST 
3 mm
a 
b 
 
AAV-GFAP-Cre
to mature scar
500 μm
LC
AS
Cn
BDA + GFAP + DAPI CTB + GFAP + DAPI 5HT + GFAP + DAPI 
tdT + GFAP 
GFAP + DAPI 
% of axons
0
0
0
0
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
–3,000 –2,000 –1,000
0
*
*
*
WT
DT
h 
AST axons 
Distance from lesion centre (μm)
i 
5HT axons 
LC
!!!"
0
0
0
0
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
–3,000 –2,000 –1,000
0
*
*
!!!"
0
0
0
0
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
–3,000 –2,000 –1,000
0
*
*
*
g 
CST axons 
Mature scar  
ablation 
c 
Figure 1 | Preventing astrocytic scar formation does not lead to 
spontaneous regrowth of CST, AST or 5HT axons after SCI.  
a, Experiment summary schematic. Horizontal view of lesion core (LC)  
and astrocytic scar (AS) after SCI. Intercepts of CST, AST or 5HT axons 
with lines drawn at various distances from lesion centre (Cn) were  
counted and expressed as a percentage of all axons 3 mm proximal.  
b, c, e, f, Dotted lines demarcate lesion centre and 500 μm on either side.  
b, d, Area occupied by GFAP-positive scar-forming astrocytes within 
500 μm either side of the lesion centre at 2 or 8 weeks after SCI. n = 6.  
c, e, Arrows depict most-caudal CST axons (biotinylated dextran amine 
tracing) or most-rostral AST axons (choleratoxin B tracing). f, Arrows 
in top images depict most caudally penetrating 5HT axons, boxed areas 
are shown below. In wild-type mice, 5HT axons are surrounded by the 
astrocytic scar (arrowheads). In TK+GCV and STAT3-CKO mice, many 
5HT axons are not in contact with the astrocytic scar (arrows), but have 
not regrown. g–i, Numbers (means ± s.e.m.) of CST (g), AST (h) and  
5HT (i) axons at various distances from the SCI lesion centre as a 
percentage of the total number of axons present 3 mm proximal. CST,  
n = 6 mice; AST and 5HT, n = 5 mice; *P < 0.05 versus wild type  
(ANOVA with Newman–Keuls).
e 
b 
Cn
500 μm
LC
LC
AS
AS
WT 
TK+GCV 
STAT3-CKO 
Astrocytic scar at 2 weeks 
GFAP 
c 
WT 
TK+GCV 
STAT3-CKO 
Cn
500 μm
AS
AS
LC
LC
BDA + GFAP 
CST tracing at 8 weeks 
CST 
5HT 
Caudal
Rostral
3 mm
Cn
LC
AS
AST 
3 mm
WT 
TK+GCV 
STAT3-CKO 
AS
Cn
500 μm
AST tracing at 8 weeks 
CST axons 8 weeks 
% of axons
0
0
0
0
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
–3,000 –2,000 –1,000
0
+1,000
*
*
*
**
Distance from lesion centre (μm)
AST axons 8 weeks 
% of axons
0
0
0
0
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
–3,000 –2,000 –1,000
0
+1,000
Distance from lesion centre (μm)
5HT staining at 8 weeks 
LC
LC
500 μm
AST
AST
AST
Cn
a 
g 
h 
5HT axons 8 weeks 
% of axons
0
0
0
0
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
–3,000 –2,000 –1,000
0
+1,000
Distance from lesion centre (μm)
i 
f 
500 μm
WT 
TK+GCV 
STAT3-CKO 
Cn
WT
TK+GCV
STAT3-CKO
Astrocyte scar area 
20
40
60
80
0
100
2 week 8 week
GFAP (% of area)
* *
* *
d 
25 μm
5HT + GFAP + DAPI 
AS
CTB + GFAP + DAPI 
*
*
* *
*
*
*
*
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article RESEARCH
1 4  a p r i l  2 0 1 6  |  V O L  5 3 2  |  N A T U R E  |  1 9 7
and that preventing astrocytic scar formation fails to reduce total CSPG 
production in SCI lesions.
Genomic dissection of SCI lesions
Numerous molecules attract, repel, support or inhibit axon growth dur-
ing development, and many of these are present in CNS lesions7,24,25. To 
look broadly at molecules produced by astrocytes or non-astrocyte cells 
in SCI lesions that might affect axon regrowth, we conducted genome-
wide RNA sequencing of astrocyte-specific ribosome-associated RNA 
(ramRNA) precipitated via a haemagglutinin tag26 transgenically 
targeted to either wild-type or STAT3-CKO astrocytes, and non- 
precipitated (flow-through) RNA deriving from non-astrocyte 
cells in the same tissue samples (Fig. 4, Extended Data Fig. 3 and 
Supplementary Information).
At two weeks after SCI, astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells in SCI 
lesions exhibited significantly altered expression of many genes in 
both wild-type and STAT3-CKO mice, and wild-type astrocytes 
exhibited expected known changes27 (Extended Data Fig. 4a–d and 
Supplementary Information). Notably, 63% of genes significantly 
regulated by wild-type astrocytes were not significantly altered by 
STAT3-CKO astrocytes after SCI, and STAT3-CKO SCI astrocyte 
transcriptomes clustered more similarly towards uninjured astrocytes 
than towards wild-type SCI astrocytes (Fig. 4c, d).
We analysed 59 molecules reported to negatively or positively modu-
late axon growth in SCI lesions (Extended Data Table 1). In SCI lesions 
from wild-type mice, both astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells expressed 
a majority not only of 28 known axon inhibitors, including specific 
CSPGs, ephrins, netrins, neuropillins, plexins, slits and others, but also 
a majority of 31 known axon permissive molecules, including specific 
CSPGs, laminins, syndecans, glypicans, decorin and others (Fig. 4e). 
Notably, both astrocytes and non-astrocytes downregulated more axon 
inhibitory molecules than were upregulated, and upregulated more than 
three times the number of axon-permissive molecules than were down-
regulated. Preventing astrocytic scar formation in STAT3-CKO mice did 
not significantly decrease the expression by astrocytes or non-astrocytes 
of a single reported inhibitor, whereas eleven were upregulated, and 
significantly increased the expression of two permissive molecules, and 
decreased three, compared to wild-type SCI (Fig. 4e).
In agreement with our immunoblot and immunohistochemical 
CSPG findings (above), various individual CSPG ramRNAs were 
expressed by both astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells in SCI lesions 
(Fig. 4e). Interestingly, aggrecan, the prototypical CSPG used in axon 
growth inhibition studies in vitro9,28, was not detectably expressed 
by scar-forming astrocytes at either the ramRNA or immunohisto-
chemistry of protein levels (Fig. 4e and Extended Data Fig. 5a). Other 
axon-inhibitory CSPGs, brevican, neurocan, versican and phospha-
can, were all expressed by both scar-forming astrocytes and non-­
astrocyte cells in SCI lesions as revealed by RNA analysis (Fig. 4e) 
and confirmed by immunohistochemistry of protein for brevican and 
neurocan (Extended Data Figs 5b and 6a).
CSPGs are diverse with respect to inhibiting or supporting axon 
growth at both protein and sugar-epitope levels29,30. Of the five 
growth-inhibitory CPSGs, wild-type scar-forming astrocytes increased 
above normal only versican ramRNA, and significantly decreased 
neurocan and phosphacan (Fig. 4e). In contrast, ramRNAs of two 
axon-growth-­supportive CSPGs, Cspg4 (NG2) and Cspg5 (neuro-
glycan C) (Extended Data Table 1), were significantly upregulated 
by scar-forming astrocytes (Fig. 4e) and both NG2 and CSPG5 clearly 
decorated scar-forming astrocytes, as revealed by immunohisto­
chemistry (Extended Data Fig. 6b, c).
Our genomic findings show that: (i) STAT3-CKO prevents or atten-
uates a majority of genome-wide changes in astrocytes associated with 
astrogliosis and scar formation in wild-type mice; (ii) astrocytes and 
non-astrocyte cells in SCI lesions express a large, diverse mix of axon 
inhibitory and permissive molecules; (iii) non-astrocyte cells in SCI 
lesions substantively express CSPGs; (iv) preventing astrocyte scar 
formation with STAT3-CKO does not reduce expression of CSPGs or 
other inhibitory molecules in SCI lesions; (v) scar-forming astrocytes 
upregulate and substantively express axon-growth-supporting CSPGs, 
indicating that CS56 immune detection of total CSPG levels22 need not 
indicate a purely axon-inhibitory environment; and (vi) scar-forming 
astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells in SCI lesions upregulate multiple 
axon-growth-permissive matrix molecules, including laminins.
Axon regrowth in spite of scar formation
We next stimulated axon growth after SCI in the presence or absence 
of astrocytic scar formation. Developing axons do not grow by default 
but require stimulatory cues31. This requirement may apply also to 
regrowth of transected mature axons. Some transected mature AST 
axons can be stimulated to regrow in severe SCI lesions by activat-
ing neuron intrinsic growth programs with peripheral conditioning 
lesions32–34, and this regrowth can be significantly augmented by cell 
grafts that provide supportive matrix plus the neurotrophic factors NT3 
and BDNF that attract AST axon growth during development35. We 
noted the essential absence of Nt3 and Bdnf expression in our wild-type 
SCI lesions, combined with expression of permissive matrix molecules 
including laminins known to support developing AST axons36 (Fig. 4e 
and Extended Data Table 1). We therefore tested effects of conditioning 
lesions plus local delivery of NT3 and BDNF on AST axon regenera-
tion stimulated in the presence or absence of astrocyte scar formation 
(Fig. 5 and Extended Data Figs 7–9). Because cell grafts modify astro-
cytic scars35 and provide permissive substrates for regrowing axons, 
we delivered NT3 and BDNF via synthetic hydrogel depots that do not 
modify astrocytic scar formation and provide prolonged neurotrophin 
delivery37–39 (Fig. 5d; Supplementary Information).
No AST fibres regrew past astrocytic scars into lesion cores after 
SCI alone or with hydrogel without growth factors (Fig. 5a, j and 
Figure 3 | CSPG production by non-astrocyte cells in SCI lesions 
after ablation or attenuation of astrocytic scars. a, Dot blots (left) and 
quantification (right, mean and s.e.m.) of total CSPGs detected by CS56 
antibody relative to total protein levels (Ponceau). n = 4 mice; *P < 0.05 
versus uninjured (ANOVA with Newman–Keuls). b, CS56 and GFAP 
immunohistochemistry (see Extended Data Fig. 2). AS, astrocytic scar;  
LC, lesion core; g, grey matter; w, white matter. c, Details of boxed areas  
in b showing CSPG production by GFAP-negative cells.
Total CSPGs in SCI lesions 
a 
b 
TK+GCV
WT
c 
WT uninjured
STAT3-CKO 
LC
TK+GCV 
200 μm
g
g
w
w
STAT3-CKO 
LC
AS
WT SCI
WT SCI (LC)
TK+GCV 
10 μm
CS56 
Total protein (Ponceau)
SCI
Uninjured
WT
TK
STAT3-
CKO 
STAT3-
CKO 
1
2
3
4
0
SCI
CSPG density
Uninjured
*
NS
NS
TK+GCV
STAT3-CKO
WT
TK
CSPG + GFAP + DAPI 
CSPG + GFAP 
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article
RESEARCH
1 9 8  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  5 3 2  |  1 4  a p r i l  2 0 1 6
Extended Data Fig. 7c). Small numbers of AST axons regrew into 
lesion cores in mice with SCI plus conditioning lesions alone, or 
SCI plus NT3 and BDNF without conditioning lesions (Fig. 5j, k 
and Extended Data Fig. 7c). By contrast, mice receiving both condi-
tioning lesions plus NT3 and BDNF exhibited robust axon regrowth 
through and beyond astrocytic scars, and the number of axon inter-
cepts counted at lesion centres averaged over 45% of that in intact sen-
sory tracts 3 mm proximal to lesions (Fig. 5b, j, k and Extended Data 
Fig. 7c). Remarkably, these stimulated AST axons regrew profusely 
through, and past, dense astrocyte scars, and in spite of substantial 
CSPG (Fig. 5b, e–g, Extended Data Figs 7b, c and 8). AST axons stim-
ulated to regrow in SCI lesions were thin and uniformly tracked along 
laminin surfaces, turning and even reversing direction along these 
surfaces as expected of regenerating axons40, whereas AST axons in 
intact gracile–cuneate tracts were coarsely beaded and were not in 
direct contact with laminin (Fig. 5h and Extended Data Fig. 9a–f). 
Hydrogel delivery of anti-CD29 laminin-integrin function-blocking 
antibodies36 together with NT3 and BDNF significantly reduced AST 
axon regrowth in lesion cores by 73%, demonstrating that laminin 
interactions were critical for stimulated AST axon regrowth (Fig. 5i, j, 
Extended Data Fig. 9g–i and Supplementary Information). Lastly, pre-
venting astrocyte scar formation did not augment AST axon regrowth 
stimulated by conditioning lesions plus NT3 and BDNF, but instead 
completely prevented, or significantly attenuated, axon regrowth in 
TK + GCV mice and STAT3-CKO mice, respectively (Fig. 5c, j, k), 
demonstrating that astrocytic scar formation aids, rather than inhibits 
appropriately stimulated AST axon regeneration after SCI.
Discussion
Our findings show that contrary to prevailing dogma, astrocytic scar 
formation is not a principal cause for the failure of injured mature CNS 
axons to regrow across severe CNS lesions and that scar-forming astro-
cytes permit and support robust amounts of appropriately stimulated 
CNS axon regeneration. Although our observations with stimulated 
AST axon regeneration needs extension to other axonal systems, our 
findings are consistent with evidence that: (i) astrocytes can support 
growth of different CNS axons in vivo during development41,42 or 
after mature CNS injury19,43; (ii) genetic activation of axonal growth 
programs by mature neurons leads to axon regeneration across CNS 
lesions only when scar-forming astrocyte bridges are present2,44; and 
(iii) grafts of progenitor-derived astrocytes support axon regeneration 
through non-neural SCI lesion cores45,46.
The predominant mechanistic proposal for astrocytic scar inhi-
bition of axon regeneration is CSPG production9. However, specific 
CSPGs can support or repel axon growth (see Extended Data Table 1). 
We show that scar-forming astrocytes upregulate growth supportive 
CSPG4 and CSPG5, and that both astrocytes and non-astrocytes in SCI 
lesions express multiple axon-growth-supportive molecules, includ-
ing laminins. Axon growth and guidance depend both on intrinsic 
growth potential2,3,31,32,47 and on a balance of extrinsic regulatory cues 
that modulate one another’s effects on growth cones25. Our findings 
show that sustained delivery of required axon-specific growth factors 
not adequately expressed in SCI lesions, combined with activation of 
neuron-intrinsic growth programs, can stimulate robust regrowth of 
transected axons along specifically required supportive matrix cues in 
Astrocyte DEG
SCI vs. uninj.
d  
4,000 
2901  3335  
1572  
721  
WT 
STAT3 
–4,000 
0 
Axon growth modulator expression 
e  
Non-astrocyte cells
Astrocytes
a 
Inhibitory 
Gene 
log2 fold change
NS
NS
NS
2.15
NS
NS
NS
NS
1.45
NS
NS
–1.21
2.39
NS
NS
NS
1.22
NS
NS
0.94
NS
NS
NS
1.88
NS
NS
NS
–1.63
1.45
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
0.94
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
1.23
NS
NS
1.39
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
1.64
NS
1.48
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
8.31
WT SCI 
mean expression 
ST3 SCI
vs.
WT SCI
WT SCI
vs.
uninj
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
1.46
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
1
10
0.1
–7.70
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
–7.49
NS
NS
NS
1.35
–1.28
1.50
–6.99
–2.23
NS
NS
2.13
–1.26
–0.94
–2.21
–2.75
–1.40
–1.78
WT  
STAT3  
4,000
00 
0 
WT
STAT3  
A
–13.0 
14.0 
HA-tagged ribosomes in
scar-forming astrocytes 
b
Mean FPKM (log10) 
Mean FPKM (log10) 
NS
3.05
NS
Permissive 
log2 fold change
Permissive 
Gene 
3.10
NS
NS
NS
–1.06
NS
NS
NS
2.49
NS
NS
4.23
NS
–0.89
–1.22
NS
NS
1.35
NS
NS
2.40
NS
NS
NS
NS
–3.56
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
4.94
5.23
NS
3.27
3.83
0.92
1.89
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
3.16
2.48
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
1.53
NS
NS
4.72
2.00
NS
NS
6.30
5.43
NS
NS
1.71
1.80
NS
NS
NS
NS
2.96
–1.49
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
–1.49
–1.17
NS
NS
2.07
2.40
NS
NS
WT SCI 
mean expression 
ST3 SCI
vs.
WT SCI
WT SCI
vs.
uninj.
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
–1.32
–1.05
0.95
NS
NS
2.07
–1.63
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
1
10
0.1
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
3.83
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
2.25
1.76
3.10
NS
–0.89
NS
1.35
NS
2.40
NS
4.94
NS
3.27
NS
0.92
NS
3.16
NS
4.72
NS
6.30
NS
–1.49
NS
2.07
NS
–1.32
NS
1.71
NS
Cluster dendrogram  
of all RNA reads  
from all mice 
c 
15 μm
HA + GFAP + DAPI
RNAseq of astrocytes and
non-astrocyte cells 
 in SCI lesions 
Acan
Bcan
Ncan
Vcan
Ptprz1
Xylt1
Tnr
Epha4
Ephb2
Efnb3
Ntn1
Sema3a
Plxna1
Plxnb1
Nrp1
Unc5b
Dcc
Neo1
Rgma
Rgmb
Slit1
Slit2
Slitrk1
Robo1
Robo2
Robo3
Draxin
Sema3f
Cspg4
Cspg5
Tnc
Sdc1
Sdc2
Sdc3
Sdc4
Bdnf
Ntf3
Gdnf
Lif
Cntf
Igf1
Fgf2
Tgfa
Lama1
Lama2
Lama4
Lama5
Lamb1
Lamc1
Col4a1
Fn1
Hspg2
Gpc1
Gpc3
Gpc5
Dcn
Lgals1
Ncam1
Matn2
Lateral
crush
at T10
LC
Tissue
block
W4
Astrocytes 
STAT3-CKO 
I
C
S
I
C
S
T
W
W1W2
W3
S1
S2 S3
Uninjured 
U1
U2 U3 U4
Height 
0.00
0.04
0.08
0.12
AS
Figure 4 | Genomic dissection of astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells 
in SCI lesions. a, Schematic of tissue harvested for RNA sequencing 
(RNAseq). AS, astrocytic scar; LC, lesion core. b, Transgenically-targeted 
haemagglutinin (HA)-tagged ribosome clusters (arrows) among GFAP 
filaments in scar-forming astrocytes (see Extended Data Fig. 3a).  
c, Unsupervised hierarchical clustering dendrogram based on Pearson 
correlations shows that transcriptome profiles of STAT3-CKO SCI 
astrocytes cluster nearer to (and are more similar to) those of uninjured 
as compared to wild-type (WT) SCI astrocytes. d, Numbers and heat 
map of significantly differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in wild-type 
astrocytes after SCI and the comparative differential expression profile of 
that specific cohort of genes in STAT3-CKO SCI astrocytes. Differential 
expression relative to uninjured, false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.1.  
e, Histogram of astrocyte and non-astrocyte expression of axon-growth-
inhibitory or -permissive molecules after SCI shown as mean FPKM 
(fragments per kilobase of transcript sequence per million mapped 
fragments). Asterisks indicate significant differences between astrocytes 
and non-astrocytes, FDR < 0.1. Numbers show significant log2 fold 
differences. Red, upregulated; green, downregulated; NS, non-significant; 
ST3 SCI, STAT3-CKO SCI.
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article RESEARCH
1 4  a p r i l  2 0 1 6  |  V O L  5 3 2  |  N A T U R E  |  1 9 9
spite of the presence of inhibitory cues, and that this stimulated axon 
regrowth can occur either in direct contact with scar-forming astro-
cyte processes or independently of astrocyte processes. These obser-
vations provide direct evidence that the requirements for achieving 
axon regeneration across severe CNS lesions, where transected axons 
lack intrinsic and extrinsic conditions for long-distance regrowth, are 
fundamentally different from requirements to achieve local neurite 
outgrowth in intact but reactive perilesional grey matter, where con-
ditions compatible with axon terminal growth and remodelling are 
present and where blocking inhibitory regulators such as CSPGs and 
others produced by astrocytes and other cells may be sufficient to 
promote axon sprouting that might also improve function9,15,24,28,40,48. 
Our findings have important implications for CNS repair strategies by 
demonstrating that rather than being hostile to axon growth, newly 
generated immature scar-forming astrocytes derived after SCI from 
endogenous progenitors18,41,44, and potentially from grafted progeni-
tors45,46, aid axon regeneration and may represent exploitable bridges 
for regrowing axons across severe CNS lesions.
Online Content Methods, along with any additional Extended Data display items and 
Source Data, are available in the online version of the paper; references unique to 
these sections appear only in the online paper.
received 23 October 2015; accepted 26 February 2016. 
Published online 30 March; corrected online 13 April 2016  
(see full-text HTML version for details).
1.	
Ramón y Cajal, S. Degeneration and Regeneration of the Nervous System 
(Oxford Univ. Press, 1928).
2.	
Sun, F. et al. Sustained axon regeneration induced by co-deletion of PTEN and 
SOCS3. Nature 480, 372–375 (2011).
3.	
Liu, K., Tedeschi, A., Park, K. K. & He, Z. Neuronal intrinsic mechanisms of axon 
regeneration. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 34, 131–152 (2011).
4.	
Richardson, P. M., McGuinness, U. M. & Aguayo, A. J. Axons from CNS neurons 
regenerate into PNS grafts. Nature 284, 264–265 (1980).
5.	
David, S. & Aguayo, A. J. Axonal elongation into peripheral nervous system 
“bridges” after central nervous system injury in adult rats. Science 214, 
931–933 (1981).
6.	
Schwab, M. E. Functions of Nogo proteins and their receptors in the nervous 
system. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 11, 799–811 (2010).
7.	
Harel, N. Y. & Strittmatter, S. M. Can regenerating axons recapitulate 
developmental guidance during recovery from spinal cord injury ? Nature 
Rev. Neurosci. 7, 603–616 (2006).
8.	
Klapka, N. & Muller, H. W. Collagen matrix in spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 
23, 422–435 (2006).
9.	
Silver, J. & Miller, J. H. Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 
5, 146–156 (2004).
10.	
Windle, W. F., Clemente, C. D. & Chambers, W. W. Inhibition of formation of a 
glial barrier as a means of permitting a peripheral nerve to grow into the brain. 
J. Comp. Neurol. 96, 359–369 (1952).
Figure 5 | Robust regrowth of AST axons can be stimulated after 
wild-type SCI and is significantly attenuated by preventing astrocytic 
scar formation. a–c, Top, AST axons (choleratoxin B tracing) plus 
GFAP immunohistochemistry. Bottom, AST axons alone. AS, astrocytic 
scar; D, hydrogel depot; LC, lesion core. a, Wild-type mouse, SCI and 
hydrogel only (no growth factors). Arrowhead denotes most rostrally 
penetrating axons that do not pass beyond AS. b, Wild-type mouse, SCI 
plus conditioning lesion (CL) and hydrogel depot (D) with NT3 + BDNF. 
Arrows denote robust regrowth of AST axons past the scar into the lesion 
core and along, but not into, the depot that releases NT3 + BDNF but that 
provides no adhesive matrix. c, STAT3-CKO mouse, SCI plus conditioning 
lesions and NT3 + BDNF depot. Arrows denote regrowth of AST axons 
into the lesion core. d, Experiment summary schematic. CTB, choleratoxin 
B; DRG, dorsal root ganglion. e–g, Wild-type mice, AST plus GFAP and 
CSPG (CS56) immunohistochemistry. Box in e is shown in f. e, f, Arrows 
denote robust regrowth of stimulated AST axons past the astrocytic scar 
into the lesion core through CSPG. g, Regrowing AST axons track along 
CSPG-positive GFAP-negative structures (arrows) or along CSPG-positive 
GFAP-positive astrocyte processes (arrowheads) (see Extended Data  
Figs 7 and 8 for single channel images of e–g). h, i, AST axons plus laminin 
immunohistochemistry. h, i, Arrows indicate regrowing stimulated AST 
axons tracking along laminin. i, Arrowheads indicate stimulated AST 
axons exposed to anti-CD29 antibody and failing to maintain contact 
with laminin. j, k, Numbers of AST axons at SCI lesion centre (Cn) (j) or 
on either side (k) expressed as a percentage of all axons 3 mm proximal. 
n = 5; *P < 0.05 versus all other groups, #P < 0.05 versus all groups except 
STAT3-CKO (ANOVA with Newman–Keuls).
SCI + hydrogel 
SCI + CL + NT3 + BDNF 
D
LC
LC
D
LC
c
 
a
 
LC
 
125 μm
LC
 
 
AS
D
250 μm 
LC
b
 
AS
CTB + GFAP + DAPI 
h
SCI + CL + NT3 + BDNF 
LC 
i
f 
g 
SCI + CL + NT3 + BDNF + anti-CD29 
LC 
15 μm
CTB + Laminin 
% of axons
j
20
100
AST axons  
around centre of lesion  
SCI + CL + NT3 + BDNF
SCI + CL + NT3 + BDNF + anti-CD29
SCI + CL
SCI only
SCI + NT3 + BDNF
SCI + CL + hydrogel
SCI + CL + NT3 + BDNF + STAT3-CKO
SCI + CL + NT3 + BDNF + TK-GCV
–500 –250
Cn +250 +500 μm
% of axons
20
40
60
80 *
*
k
100
* *
*
0
*
*
AST axons at centre of lesion 
*
40
60
80
0
0
0
Lesion
core
Astrocyte 
scar
Crush 
SCI 
Hydrogel + NT3 + BDNF
CL 
DRG
CTB
Caudal
Rostral
Hydrogel 
depot
d 
Growth factor delivery 
15 μm 
!
20 μm 
e 
SCI + CL + NT3 + BDNF 
 
LC
50 μm 
AS
SCI + CL + NT3 + BDNF
+ STAT3-CKO 
CTB + GFAP + CSPG
CTB + GFAP + CSPG
CTB + GFAP + CSPG
 
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article
RESEARCH
2 0 0  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  5 3 2  |  1 4  a p r i l  2 0 1 6
11.	
Windle, W. F. Regeneration of axons in the vertebrate central nervous system. 
Physiol. Rev. 36, 427–440 (1956).
12.	
Liuzzi, F. J. & Lasek, R. J. Astrocytes block axonal regeneration in mammals by 
activating the physiological stop pathway. Science 237, 642–645 (1987).
13.	
Burda, J. E. & Sofroniew, M. V. Reactive gliosis and the multicellular response 
to CNS damage and disease. Neuron 81, 229–248 (2014).
14.	
Sofroniew, M. V. Astrocyte barriers to neurotoxic inflammation. Nature Rev. 
Neurosci. 16, 249–263 (2015).
15.	
Bush, T. G. et al. Leukocyte infiltration, neuronal degeneration and neurite 
outgrowth after ablation of scar-forming, reactive astrocytes in adult 
transgenic mice. Neuron 23, 297–308 (1999).
16.	
Faulkner, J. R. et al. Reactive astrocytes protect tissue and preserve function 
after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 24, 2143–2155 (2004).
17.	
Herrmann, J. E. et al. STAT3 is a critical regulator of astrogliosis and scar 
formation after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 28, 7231–7243 (2008).
18.	
Wanner, I. B. et al. Glial scar borders are formed by newly proliferated, 
elongated astrocytes that interact to corral inflammatory and fibrotic cells via 
STAT3-dependent mechanisms after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 33, 
12870–12886 (2013).
19.	
Lee, J. K. et al. Combined genetic attenuation of myelin and semaphorin-
mediated growth inhibition is insufficient to promote serotonergic axon 
regeneration. J. Neurosci. 30, 10899–10904 (2010).
20.	
Hawthorne, A. L. et al. The unusual response of serotonergic neurons after 
CNS injury: lack of axonal dieback and enhanced sprouting within the 
inhibitory environment of the glial scar. J. Neurosci. 31, 5605–5616 (2011).
21.	
Buch, T. et al. A Cre-inducible diphtheria toxin receptor mediates cell lineage 
ablation after toxin administration. Nature Methods 2, 419–426 (2005).
22.	
Avnur, Z. & Geiger, B. Immunocytochemical localization of native chondroitin-
sulfate in tissues and cultured cells using specific monoclonal antibody. Cell 
38, 811–822 (1984).
23.	
Mikami, T. & Kitagawa, H. Biosynthesis and function of chondroitin sulfate. 
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1830, 4719–4733 (2013).
24.	
Mironova, Y. A. & Giger, R. J. Where no synapses go: gatekeepers of circuit 
remodeling and synaptic strength. Trends Neurosci. 36, 363–373 (2013).
25.	
Lin, A. C. & Holt, C. E. Local translation and directional steering in axons. EMBO 
J. 26, 3729–3736 (2007).
26.	
Sanz, E. et al. Cell-type-specific isolation of ribosome-associated mRNA from 
complex tissues. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 13939–13944 (2009).
27.	
Zamanian, J. L. et al. Genomic analysis of reactive astrogliosis. J. Neurosci. 32, 
6391–6410 (2012).
28.	
Lang, B. T. et al. Modulation of the proteoglycan receptor PTPsigma promotes 
recovery after spinal cord injury. Nature 518, 404–408 (2015).
29.	
Yamaguchi, Y. Lecticans: organizers of the brain extracellular matrix. Cell. Mol. 
Life Sci. 57, 276–289 (2000).
30.	
Miller, G. M. & Hsieh-Wilson, L. C. Sugar-dependentmodulation of neuronal 
development, regeneration, and plasticity by chondroitin sulfate 
proteoglycans. Exp. Neurol. 274, 115–125 (2015).
31.	
Goldberg, J. L. et al. Retinal ganglion cells do not extend axons by default: 
promotion by neurotrophic signaling and electrical activity. Neuron 33, 
689–702 (2002).
32.	
Richardson, P. M. & Issa, V. M. Peripheral injury enhances central regeneration 
of primary sensory neurones. Nature 309, 791–793 (1984).
33.	
Neumann, S. & Woolf, C. J. Regeneration of dorsal column fibers into and 
beyond the lesion site following adult spinal cord injury. Neuron 23, 83–91 
(1999).
34.	
Omura, T. et al. Robust Axonal regeneration occurs in the injured CAST/Ei 
mouse CNS. Neuron 86, 1215–1227 (2015).
35.	
Alto, L. T. et al. Chemotropic guidance facilitates axonal regeneration and 
synapse formation after spinal cord injury. Nature Neurosci. 12, 1106–1113 
(2009).
36.	
Plantman, S. et al. Integrin-laminin interactions controlling neurite outgrowth 
from adult DRG neurons in vitro. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 39, 50–62 (2008).
37.	
Nowak, A. P. et al. Rapidly recovering hydrogel scaffolds from self-assembling 
diblock copolypeptide amphiphiles. Nature 417, 424–428 (2002).
38.	
Yang, C. Y. et al. Biocompatibility of amphiphilic diblock copolypeptide 
hydrogels in the central nervous system. Biomaterials 30, 2881–2898 (2009).
39.	
Song, B. et al. Sustained local delivery of bioactive nerve growth factor in the 
central nervous system via tunable diblock copolypeptide hydrogel depots. 
Biomaterials 33, 9105–9116 (2012).
40.	
Tuszynski, M. H. & Steward, O. Concepts and methods for the study of axonal 
regeneration in the CNS. Neuron 74, 777–791 (2012).
41.	
Brosius Lutz, A. & Barres, B. A. Contrasting the glial response to axon injury in 
the central and peripheral nervous systems. Dev. Cell 28, 7–17 (2014).
42.	
Mason, C. A., Edmondson, J. C. & Hatten, M. E. The extending astroglial 
process: development of glial cell shape, the growing tip, and interactions with 
neurons. J. Neurosci. 8, 3124–3134 (1988).
43.	
Kawaja, M. D. & Gage, F. H. Reactive astrocytes are substrates for the growth of 
adult CNS axons in the presence of elevated levels of nerve growth factor. 
Neuron 7, 1019–1030 (1991).
44.	
Zukor, K. et al. Short hairpin RNA against PTEN enhances regenerative growth 
of corticospinal tract axons after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 33,  
15350–15361 (2013).
45.	
Shih, C. H., Lacagnina, M., Leuer-Bisciotti, K. & Proschel, C. Astroglial-derived 
periostin promotes axonal regeneration after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 
34, 2438–2443 (2014).
46.	
Zhang, S. et al. Thermoresponsive copolypeptide hydrogel vehicles for CNS 
cell delivery. ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 1, 705–717 (2015).
47.	
Ruschel, J. et al. Systemic administration of epothilone B promotes axon 
regeneration after spinal cord injury. Science 348, 347–352 (2015).
48.	
Cafferty, W. B., McGee, A. W. & Strittmatter, S. M. Axonal growth therapeutics: 
regeneration or sprouting or plasticity ? Trends Neurosci. 31, 215–220 (2008).
Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper.
Acknowledgements We thank D. W. Bergles for the NG2 antibody, and the 
Microscopy Core Resource of the UCLA Broad Stem Cell Research Center-CIRM 
Laboratory. This work was supported by the US National Institutes of Health 
(NS057624 and NS084030 to M.V.S.; P30 NS062691 to G.C. and NS060677, 
MH099559A, MH104069 to B.S.K.), and the Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson 
Medical Foundation (M.V.S. and T.J.D.), and Wings for Life (M.V.S.).
Author Contributions M.A.A., J.E.B., B.S.K., T.J.D. and M.V.S. designed 
experiments; M.A.A., J.E.B., Y.R. and Y.A. conducted experiments; M.A.A., J.E.B., 
Y.A., T.M.O., R.K., G.C. and M.V.S. analysed data. M.A.A., J.E.B., T.M.O., B.S.K, T.J.D. 
and M.V.S. prepared the manuscript.
Author Information Raw and normalized genomic data have been deposited 
in the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus and are accessible through accession 
number GSE76097 and via a searchable, open-access website  
https://astrocyte.rnaseq.sofroniewlab.neurobio.ucla.edu. Reprints and 
permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. The authors 
declare no competing financial interests. Readers are welcome to comment 
on the online version of the paper. Correspondence and requests for materials 
should be addressed to M.V.S. (sofroniew@mednet.ucla.edu).
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article RESEARCH
Methods
Mice. All non-transgenic, transgenic and control mice used in this study were 
derived from in house breeding colonies backcrossed > 12 generations onto 
C57/BL6 backgrounds. All mice used were young adult females between two and 
four months old at the time of spinal cord injury. All transgenic mice used have 
been previously well characterized or are the progeny of crossing well-characterized 
lines: (1) mGFAP-TK transgenic mice line 7.115,16,49; (2) mGFAP-Cre-STAT3-loxP 
mice generated by crossing STAT3-loxP mice with loxP sites flanking exon 22 
of the STAT3 gene50 with mGFAP-Cre mice line 73.1217,18; (3) loxP-STOP- 
loxP-DTR (diphtheria toxin receptor) mice21; (4) mGFAP-Cre-RiboTag mice 
generated by crossing mice with loxP-STOP-loxP-Rpl22-HA (RiboTag)26 with 
mGFAP-Cre mice line 73.1217,18; (5) loxP-STOP-loxP-tdTomato reporter mice51. 
All mice were housed in a 12-h light/dark cycle in a specific-pathogen-free facility 
with controlled temperature and humidity and were allowed free access to food 
and water. All experiments were conducted according to protocols approved by 
the Animal Research Committee of the Office for Protection of Research Subjects 
at University of California, Los Angeles.
Surgical procedures. All surgeries were performed under general anaesthesia 
with isoflurane in oxygen-enriched air using an operating microscope (Zeiss, 
Oberkochen, Germany), and rodent stereotaxic apparatus (David Kopf, Tujunga, 
CA). Laminectomy of a single vertebra was performed and severe crush spinal 
cord injuries (SCI) were made at the level of T10 using No. 5 Dumont forceps 
(Fine Science Tools, Foster City, CA) without spacers and with a tip width of 
0.5 mm to completely compress the entire spinal cord laterally from both sides for 
5 s16–18. For pre-conditioning lesions, sciatic nerves were transected and ligated 
one week before SCI. Hydrogels were injected stereotaxically into the centre of 
SCI lesions 0.6 mm below the surface at 0.2 μl per minute using glass micropi-
pettes (ground to 50–100 μm tips) connected via high-pressure tubing (Kopf) to 
10-μl syringes under control of microinfusion pumps, two days after SCI52. Tract 
tracing was performed by injection of biotinylated dextran amine 10,000 (BDA, 
Invitrogen) 10% wt/vol in sterile saline injected 4 × 0.4 μl into the left motor cer-
ebral cortex 14 days before perfusion to visualize corticospinal tract (CST) axons, 
or choleratoxin B (CTB) (List Biological Laboratory, Campbell, CA) 1 μl of 1% 
wt/vol in sterile water injected into both sciatic nerves three days before perfu-
sion to visualize ascending sensory tract (AST) axons33. AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre 
(see below) was injected either 3 or 6 × 0.4 μl (1.29 × 1013 gc ml−1 in sterile 
saline) into and on either side of mature SCI lesions two weeks after SCI, or into 
uninjured spinal cord after T10 laminectomy. All animals received analgesic 
before wound closure and every 12 h for at least 48 h post-injury. Animals were 
randomly assigned numbers and evaluated thereafter blind to genotype and 
experimental condition.
AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre. Adeno-associated virus 2/5 (AAV) vector with a min-
imal GFAP promoter (AAV2/5 GfaABC1D) was used to target Cre-recombinase 
expression selectively to astrocytes53–55.
Hydrogel with growth factors and antibodies. Diblock co-polypeptide hydro-
gel (DCH) K180L20 was fabricated, tagged with blue fluorescent dye (AMCA-X) 
and loaded with growth factor and antibody cargoes as described38,39,52. Cargo 
molecules comprised: human recombinant NT3 and BDNF were gifts (Amgen, 
Thousand Oaks, CA, (NT3 Lot#2200F4; BDNF Lot#2142F5A) or were pur-
chased from PeproTech (Rocky Hill, NJ; NT3 405-03, Lot#060762; BDNF 405-02 
Lot#071161). Function blocking anti-CD29 mouse monoclonal antibody was pur-
chased from BD Bioscience (San Diego, CA) as a custom order at 10.25 mg ml−1 
(product #BP555003; lot#S03146). Freeze dried K180L20 powder was reconstituted 
on to 3.0% or 3.5% wt/vol basis in sterile PBS without cargo or with combinations 
of NT3 (1.0 μg μl−1), BDNF (0.85 μg μl−1) and anti-CD29 (5 μg μl−1). DCH mixtures 
were prepared to have G′ (storage modulus at 1 Hz) between 75 and 100 Pascal 
(Pa), somewhat below that of mouse brain at 200 Pa (refs 38,39).
Ganciclovir (GCV), BrdU or DT injections. GCV (Cytovene-IV Hoffman 
LaRoche, Nutley, NJ), 25 mg kg−1 per day dissolved in sterile physiological saline 
was administered as single daily subcutaneous injections starting immediately 
after surgery and continued for the first 7 days after SCI. Bromodeoxyuridine 
(BrdU, Sigma), 100 mg kg−1 per day dissolved in saline plus 0.007 M NaOH, was 
administered as single daily intraperitoneal injections on days 2 through 7 after 
SCI. Diphtheria toxin A (DT, Sigma #DO564) 100 ng in 100 μl sterile saline was 
administered twice daily as intraperitoneal injections for ten days starting three 
weeks after injection of AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre to loxP-DTR mice (which was 
5 weeks after SCI) (see timeline in Extended Data Fig. 1d).
Hindlimb locomotor evaluation, animal inclusion criteria, randomization 
and blinding. Two days after SCI, all mice were evaluated in open field and 
mice exhibiting any hindlimb movements were not studied further. Mice that 
passed this pre-determined inclusion criterion were randomized into experimen-
tal groups for further treatments and were thereafter evaluated blind to their 
experimental condition. At 3, 7, 14 days and then weekly after SCI, hindlimb 
movements were scored using a simple six-point scale in which 0 is no movement 
and 5 is normal walking17.
Histology and immunohistochemistry. After terminal anaesthesia by barbiturate 
overdose mice were perfused transcardially with 10% formalin (Sigma). Spinal 
cords were removed, post-fixed overnight, and cryoprotected in buffered 30% 
sucrose for 48 h. Frozen sections (30 μm horizontal) were prepared using a cry-
ostat microtome (Leica) and processed for immunofluorescence as described16–18. 
Primary antibodies were: rabbit anti-GFAP (1:1,000; Dako, Carpinteria, CA); 
rat anti-GFAP (1:1,000, Zymed Laboratories); goat anti-CTB (1:1,000, List 
Biology Lab); rabbit anti-5HT (1:2,000, Immunostar); goat anti-5HT (1:1,000, 
Immunostar); mouse anti-CSPG22 (1:100, Sigma); rabbit-anti haemaggluti-
nin (HA) (1:500 Sigma); mouse-anti HA (1:3,000 Covance); sheep anti-BrdU 
(1:6,000, Maine Biotechnology Services, Portland, ME); rabbit anti-laminin 
(1:80, Sigma, Saint Louis, MO); guinea pig anti-NG2 (CSPG4) (E. G. Hughes 
and D. W. Bergles56, Baltimore, MA); goat anti-aggrecan (1:200, NOVUS); rabbit 
anti-brevican (1:300, NOVUS); mouse anti-neurocan (1:300, Milipore); mouse 
anti-phosphacan (1:500, Sigma); goat anti-versican (1:200, NOVUS); rabbit 
anti-neurglycan C (CSPG5) (1:200, NOVUS). Fluorescence secondary antibodies 
were conjugated to: Alexa 488 (green) or Alexa 350 (blue) (Molecular Probes), 
or to Cy3 (550, red) or Cy5 (649, far red) all from (Jackson Immunoresearch 
Laboratories). Mouse primary antibodies were visualized using the Mouse-
on-Mouse detection kit (M.O.M., Vector). BDA tract-tracing was visual-
ized with streptavidin-HRP plus TSB Fluorescein green or Tyr-Cy3 (Jackson 
Immunoresearch Laboratories). Nuclear stain: 4′,6′-diamidino-2-phenylindole 
dihydrochloride (DAPI; 2 ng ml−1; Molecular Probes). Sections were coverslipped 
using ProLong Gold anti-fade reagent (InVitrogen, Grand Island, NY). Sections 
were examined and photographed using deconvolution fluorescence microscopy 
and scanning confocal laser microscopy (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany).
Axon quantification. Axons labelled by tract tracing or immunohistochemistry 
were quantified using image analysis software (NeuroLucida, MicroBrightField, 
Williston, VT) operating a computer-driven microscope regulated in the x, y and 
z axes (Zeiss) by observers blind to experimental conditions. Using NeuroLucida, 
lines were drawn across horizontal spinal cord sections at SCI lesion centres and 
at regular distances on either side (Fig. 1a) and the number of axons intercepting 
lines was counted at 63× magnification under oil immersion by observers blind 
to experimental conditions. Similar lines were drawn and axons counted in intact 
axon tracts 3 mm proximal to SCI lesions and the numbers of axon intercepts in 
or near lesions were expressed as percentages of axons in the intact tracts in order 
to control for potential variations in tract-tracing efficacy or intensity of immuno-
histochemistry among animals. Two sections at the level of the CST or AST, and 
three sections through the middle of the cord for 5HT, were counted per mouse 
and expressed as total intercepts per location per mouse. To determine efficacy 
of axon transection after SCI, we examined labelling 3 mm distal to SCI lesion 
centres, with the intention of eliminating mice that had labelled axons at this 
location on grounds that these mice may have had incomplete lesions. However, 
all mice that had met the strict behavioural inclusion criterion of no hindlimb 
movements two days after severe crush SCI, exhibited no detectable axons 3 mm 
distal to SCI lesions regardless of treatment group.
Quantification of immunohistochemically stained areas. Sections stained for 
GFAP, CSPG or laminin were photographed using constant exposure settings. 
Single-channel immunofluorescence images were converted to black and white 
and thresholded (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 2b) and the amount of stained 
area measured in different tissue compartments using NIH ImageJ software. Areas 
are shown in graphs as mean values plus or minus standard error of the means 
(s.e.m.).
Statistics, power calculations and group sizes. Statistical evaluations of repeated 
measures were conducted by ANOVA with post hoc, independent pairwise anal-
ysis as per Newman-Keuls (Prism, GraphPad, San Diego, CA). Power calculations 
were performed using G*Power Software v3.1.9.2 (ref. 57). For quantification of 
histologically derived neuroanatomical outcomes such as numbers of axons or 
percentage of area stained for GFAP or CSPG, group sizes were used that were 
calculated to provide at least 80% power when using the following parameters: 
probability of type I error (α) = 0.05, a conservative effect size of 0.25, 2–8 treat-
ment groups with multiple measurements obtained per replicate. Using Fig. 5j as 
an example, evaluation of n = 5 biological replicates (with multiple measurements 
per replicate) in each of 8 treatment groups provided greater than 88% power.
Dot blot. For dot blot immunoassay of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans 
(CSPG), spinal cord tissue blocks were lysed and homogenized in standard 
RIPA (radio-immunoprecipitation assay) buffer. LDS (lithium dodecyl sulfate) 
buffer (Life Technologies) was added to the post-mitochondrial supernatant and 
2 μl containing 2 μg μl−1 protein was spotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane 
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article
RESEARCH
(Life Technologies), set to dry and incubated overnight with mouse anti- 
chondroitin sulfate antibody (CS56, 1:1000, Sigma Aldrich), an IgM-monoclonal 
antibody that detects glyco-moieties of all CSPGs22. CS56 immunoreactivity was 
detected on X-ray film with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated secondary antibody 
and chemiluminescent substrate (Life Technologies). Densitometry measure-
ments of CS56 immunoreactivity were obtained using ImageJ software (NIH) and 
normalized to total protein (Poncau S) density58. Densities are shown in graphs as 
mean values plus or minus standard error of the means (s.e.m.).
Isolation, sequencing and analysis of RNA from astrocytes and non-astrocyte 
cells. Two weeks after SCI, spinal cords of wild-type control (GFAP-RiboTag) and 
STAT3-CKO (GFAP-STAT3CKO-RiboTag) mice were rapidly dissected out of the 
spinal canal. The central 3 mm of the lower thoracic lesion including the lesion 
core and 1 mm rostral and caudal were then rapidly removed and snap frozen in 
liquid nitrogen. Haemagglutinin (HA) immunoprecipitation (HA-IP) of astro-
cyte ribosomes and ribosome-associated mRNA (ramRNA) was carried out as 
described26. The non-precipitated flow-through (FT) from each IP sample was 
collected for analysis of non-astrocyte total RNA. HA and FT samples underwent 
on-column DNA digestion using the RNase-Free Dnase Set (Qiagen) and RNA 
purified with the RNeasy Micro kit (Qiagen). Integrity of the eluted RNA was 
analysed by a 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent) using the RNA Pico chip, mean sam-
ple RIN = 8.0 ± 0.95. RNA concentration determined by RiboGreen RNA Assay 
kit (Life Technologies). cDNA was generated from 5 ng of IP or FT RNA using 
the Nugen Ovation 2 RNA-Seq Sytstem V2 kit (Nugen). 1 μg of cDNA was frag-
mented using the Covaris M220. Paired-end libraries for multiplex sequencing 
were generated from 300 ng of fragmented cDNA using the Apollo 324 automated 
library preparation system (Wafergen Biosystems) and purified with Agencourt 
AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter). All samples were analysed by an Illumina 
NextSeq 500 Sequencer (Illumina) using 75-bp paired-end sequencing. Reads were 
quality controlled using in-house scripts including picard-tools, mapped to the 
reference mm10 genome using STAR59, and counted using HT-seq60 with mm10 
refSeq as reference, and genes were called differentially expressed using edgeR61. 
Individual gene expression levels in the Fig. 4e histogram are shown as mean FPKM 
(fragments per kilobase of transcript sequence per million mapped fragments). 
Additional details of differential expression analysis are described in the legends of 
Fig. 4 and Extended Data Figs 3 and 4. Raw and normalized data have been depos-
ited in the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus and are accessible through accession 
number GSE76097. To ensure the widespread distribution of these datasets, we 
have created a user-friendly website that enables searching for individual genes of 
interest https://astrocyte.rnaseq.sofroniewlab.neurobio.ucla.edu.
49.	
Bush, T. G. et al. Fulminant jejuno-ileitis following ablation of enteric glia in 
adult transgenic mice. Cell 93, 189–201 (1998).
50.	
Takeda, K. et al. Stat3 activation is responsible for IL-6-dependent T cell 
proliferation through preventing apoptosis: generation and characterization 
of T cell-specific Stat3-deficient mice. J. Immunol. 161, 4652–4660 (1998).
51.	
Madisen, L. et al. A robust and high-throughput Cre reporting and 
characterization system for the whole mouse brain. Nature Neurosci. 13, 
133–140 (2010).
52.	
Zhang, S. et al. Tunable diblock copolypeptide hydrogel depots for local 
delivery of hydrophobic molecules in healthy and injured central nervous 
system. Biomaterials 35, 1989–2000 (2014).
53.	
Shigetomi, E. et al. Imaging calcium microdomains within entire astrocyte 
territories and endfeet with GCaMPs expressed using adeno-associated 
viruses. J. Gen. Physiol. 141, 633–647 (2013).
54.	
Jiang, R., Haustein, M. D., Sofroniew, M. V. & Khakh, B. S. Imaging intracellular 
Ca2 + signals in striatal astrocytes from adult mice using genetically-encoded 
calcium indicators. J. Vis. Exp. 93, e51972 (2014).
55.	
Tong, X. et al. Astrocyte Kir4.1 ion channel deficits contribute to neuronal 
dysfunction in Huntington’s disease model mice. Nature Neurosci. 17, 
694–703 (2014).
56.	
Kang, S. H. et al. Degeneration and impaired regeneration of gray matter 
oligodendrocytes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature Neurosci. 16, 
571–579 (2013).
57.	
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A. G. & Buchner, A. G. *Power 3: a flexible statistical 
power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. 
Behav. Res. Methods 39, 175–191 (2007).
58.	
Romero-Calvo, I. et al. Reversible Ponceau staining as a loading control 
alternative to actin in western blots. Anal. Biochem. 401, 318–320 (2010).
59.	
Dobin, A. et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics  
29, 15–21 (2013).
60.	
Anders, S., Pyl, P. T. & Huber, W. HTSeq–a Python framework to work with 
high-throughput sequencing data. Bioinformatics 31, 166–169 (2015).
61.	
Robinson, M. D., McCarthy, D. J. & Smyth, G. K. edgeR: a Bioconductor 
package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. 
Bioinformatics 26, 139–140 (2010).
62.	
Friedlander, D. R. et al. The neuronal chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 
neurocan binds to the neural cell adhesion molecules Ng-CAM/L1/NILE and 
N-CAM, and inhibits neuronal adhesion and neurite outgrowth. J. Cell Biol. 
125, 669–680 (1994).
63.	
Sango, K. et al. Phosphacan and neurocan are repulsive substrata for 
adhesion and neurite extension of adult rat dorsal root ganglion neurons in 
vitro. Exp. Neurol. 182, 1–11 (2003).
64.	
Hurtado, A., Podinin, H., Oudega, M. & Grimpe, B. Deoxyribozyme-mediated 
knockdown of xylosyltransferase-1 mRNA promotes axon growth in the adult 
rat spinal cord. Brain 131, 2596–2605 (2008).
65.	
Becker, C. G., Schweitzer, J., Feldner, J., Becker, T. & Schachner, M. Tenascin-R 
as a repellent guidance molecule for developing optic axons in zebrafish.  
J. Neurosci. 23, 6232–6237 (2003).
66.	
Dickson, B. J. Molecular mechanisms of axon guidance. Science 298, 
1959–1964 (2002).
67.	
Masuda, T. et al. Netrin-1 acts as a repulsive guidance cue for sensory 
axonal projections toward the spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 28, 10380–10385 
(2008).
68.	
Winberg, M. L. et al. Plexin A is a neuronal semaphorin receptor that controls 
axon guidance. Cell 95, 903–916 (1998).
69.	
Hu, H., Marton, T. F. & Goodman, C. S. Plexin B mediates axon guidance in 
Drosophila by simultaneously inhibiting active Rac and enhancing RhoA 
signaling. Neuron 32, 39–51 (2001).
70.	
He, Z. & Tessier-Lavigne, M. Neuropilin is a receptor for the axonal 
chemorepellent Semaphorin III. Cell 90, 739–751 (1997).
71.	
Lu, X. et al. The netrin receptor UNC5B mediates guidance events controlling 
morphogenesis of the vascular system. Nature 432, 179–186 (2004).
72.	
Keino-Masu, K. et al. Deleted in Colorectal Cancer (DCC) encodes a netrin 
receptor. Cell 87, 175–185 (1996).
73.	
Ahmed, G. et al. Draxin inhibits axonal outgrowth through the netrin receptor 
DCC. J. Neurosci. 31, 14018–14023 (2011).
74.	
Rajagopalan, S. et al. Neogenin mediates the action of repulsive guidance 
molecule. Nature Cell Biol. 6, 756–762 (2004).
75.	
Monnier, P. P. et al. RGM is a repulsive guidance molecule for retinal axons. 
Nature 419, 392–395 (2002).
76.	
Kajiwara, Y., Buxbaum, J. D. & Grice, D. E. SLITRK1 binds 14-3-3 and regulates 
neurite outgrowth in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Biol. Psychiatry 
66, 918–925 (2009).
77.	
Islam, S. M. et al. Draxin, a repulsive guidance protein for spinal cord and 
forebrain commissures. Science 323, 388–393 (2009).
78.	
Yang, Z. et al. NG2 glial cells provide a favorable substrate for growing axons.  
J. Neurosci. 26, 3829–3839 (2006).
79.	
Hossain-Ibrahim, M. K., Rezajooi, K., Stallcup, W. B., Lieberman, A. R. & 
Anderson, P. N. Analysis of axonal regeneration in the central and peripheral 
nervous systems of the NG2-deficient mouse. BMC Neurosci. 8, 80  
(2007).
80.	
Lu, P., Jones, L. L. & Tuszynski, M. H. Axon regeneration through scars and into 
sites of chronic spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol. 203, 8–21 (2007).
81.	
Busch, S. A. et al. Adult NG2 + cells are permissive to neurite outgrowth and 
stabilize sensory axons during macrophage-induced axonal dieback after 
spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 30, 255–265 (2010).
82.	
Nakanishi, K. et al. Identification of neurite outgrowth-promoting domains 
of neuroglycan C, a brain-specific chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan, and 
involvement of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and protein kinase C 
signaling pathways in neuritogenesis. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 24970–24978 
(2006).
83.	
Götz, B. et al. Tenascin-C contains distinct adhesive, anti-adhesive, and 
neurite outgrowth promoting sites for neurons. J. Cell Biol. 132, 681–699 
(1996).
84.	
Andrews, M. R. et al. Alpha9 integrin promotes neurite outgrowth on 
tenascin-C and enhances sensory axon regeneration. J. Neurosci.  
29, 5546–5557 (2009).
85.	
Edwards, T. J. & Hammarlund, M. Syndecan promotes axon regeneration by 
stabilizing growth cone migration. Cell Rep. 8, 272–283 (2014).
86.	
Farhy Tselnicker, I., Boisvert, M. M. & Allen, N. J. The role of neuronal versus 
astrocyte-derived heparan sulfate proteoglycans in brain development and 
injury. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 42, 1263–1269 (2014).
87.	
Lu, P., Jones, L. L. & Tuszynski, M. H. BDNF-expressing marrow stromal cells 
support extensive axonal growth at sites of spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol.  
191, 344–360 (2005).
88.	
Grill, R., Murai, K., Blesch, A. & Tuszynski, M. H. Cellular delivery of 
neurotrophin-3 promotes coricospinal axonal growth and partial  
functional recovery after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 17, 5560–5572 
(1997).
89.	
Blesch, A. & Tuszynski, M. H. Cellular GDNF delivery promotes growth of 
motor and dorsal column sensory axons after partial and complete spinal 
cord transections and induces remyelination. J. Comp. Neurol. 467,  
403–417 (2003).
90.	
Blesch, A. et al. Leukemia inhibitory factor augments neurotrophin expression 
and corticospinal axon growth after adult CNS injury. J. Neurosci. 19, 
3556–3566 (1999).
91.	
Cafferty, W. B. et al. Leukemia inhibitory factor determines the growth 
status of injured adult sensory neurons. J. Neurosci. 21, 7161–7170 
(2001).
92.	
Müller, A., Hauk, T. G. & Fischer, D. Astrocyte-derived CNTF switches mature 
RGCs to a regenerative state following inflammatory stimulation. Brain 130, 
3308–3320 (2007).
93.	
Ozdinler, P. H. & Macklis, J. D. IGF-I specifically enhances axon outgrowth  
of corticospinal motor neurons. Nature Neurosci. 9, 1371–1381  
(2006).
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article RESEARCH
94.	
Szebenyi, G. et al. Fibroblast growth factor-2 promotes axon branching of 
cortical neurons by influencing morphology and behavior of the primary 
growth cone. J. Neurosci. 21, 3932–3941 (2001).
95.	
White, R. E., Yin, F. Q. & Jakeman, L. B. TGF-α increases astrocyte invasion and 
promotes axonal growth into the lesion following spinal cord injury in mice. 
Exp. Neurol. 214, 10–24 (2008).
96.	
Tom, V. J., Doller, C. M., Malouf, A. T. & Silver, J. Astrocyte-associated fibronectin 
is critical for axonal regeneration in adult white matter. J. Neurosci. 24, 
9282–9290 (2004).
97.	
Qin, J., Liang, J. & Ding, M. Perlecan antagonizes collagen IV and ADAMTS9/
GON-1 in restricting the growth of presynaptic boutons. J. Neurosci. 34, 
10311–10324 (2014).
98.	
Hill, J. J., Jin, K., Mao, X. O., Xie, L. & Greenberg, D. A. Intracerebral 
chondroitinase ABC and heparan sulfate proteoglycan glypican improve 
outcome from chronic stroke in rats. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 
9155–9160 (2012).
99.	
Minor, K. et al. Decorin promotes robust axon growth on inhibitory CSPGs and 
myelin via a direct effect on neurons. Neurobiol. Dis. 32, 88–95 (2008).
100.	 Horie, H. et al. Galectin-1 regulates initial axonal growth in peripheral nerves 
after axotomy. J. Neurosci. 19, 9964–9974 (1999).
101.	 Walsh, F. S. & Doherty, P. Neural cell adhesion molecules of the 
immunoglobulin superfamily: role in axon growth and guidance. Annu. Rev. 
Cell Dev. Biol. 13, 425–456 (1997). 
102.	 Malin, D. et al. The extracellular-matrix protein matrilin 2 participates in 
peripheral nerve regeneration. J. Cell Sci. 122, 995–1004 (2009).
103.	 Zhang, Y. et al. An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing database of 
glia, neurons, and vascular cells of the cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci.  
34, 11929–11947 (2014).
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article
RESEARCH
Extended Data Figure 1 | SCI model schematic, locomotor behavioural 
effects, and AAV vector targeting specificity and effects. a, Schematic 
of severe lateral crush SCI at thoracic level T10 that generates a large 
lesion core (LC) of non-neural tissue surrounded by an astrocytic scar 
(AS) and completely transects descending and ascending axons. b, Open 
field hindlimb locomotor score at various times after SCI assessed using a 
5-point scale where 5 is normal and 0 is no movement of any kind17.  
No significant differences were observed among any of the experimental  
groups at any time point. n = 6 mice at all time points P > 0.5 (ANOVA with 
Newman–Keuls post hoc analysis). WT, wild type. c, Horizontal sections 
through a severe SCI lesion of a representative tdTomato (tdT) reporter 
mouse51 injected with an AAV vector with a minimal Gfap promoter 
regulating Cre (AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre) into the lesion at two weeks after 
SCI and perfused at three weeks. tdTomato labelling demonstrates that 
this AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre efficiently and specifically targets GFAP-
positive astrocytes. In this mouse, the amount AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre 
injected was intentionally titrated on the basis of previous trial and error 
to target primarily the astrocytic scar border in an approximately 500 μm 
zone immediately abutting the SCI lesion core. High-magnification 
analysis of individual fluorescence channels stained for tdTomato plus 
various cell markers shows the specificity of Cre activity targeting to cells 
expressing the astrocyte marker, GFAP, but not to cells expressing either 
the neuronal marker, NeuN, or the mature oligodendrocyte marker, GSTπ. 
AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre was prepared using a previously described and 
well-characterized cloning strategy53–55. d, Open field hindlimb locomotor 
scores at various times after SCI. There was no difference in scores of 
control mice and loxP-STOP-loxP-DTR (diphtheria toxin receptor) mice 
that received AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre before injections of diphtheria 
toxin (DT). Five weeks after DT injections, loxP-DTR mice that received 
AAV2/5- GfaABC1D-Cre exhibited a slightly, but significantly, lower 
locomotor score. Hindlimb locomotion was assessed using a 5-point 
scale where 5 is normal and 0 is no movement of any kind17. n = 6 mice 
per group; *P < 0.05 versus wild-type (ANOVA with Newman–Keuls). 
e, GFAP immunohistochemistry of a sagittal section after ablation of a 
chronic astrocytic scar plus adjacent astrocytes. DT was administered to a 
transgenic mouse expressing DTR targeted selectively to astrocytes around 
a severe SCI. In this case, the amount of AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre injected 
was titrated to target not only primarily the astrocytic scar border but also 
adjacent astrocytes spread over approximately 2 mm on either side of the 
centre (Cn) of the SCI lesion core (LC). Note the profound degeneration of 
neural tissue resulting from the selective ablation of the chronic astrocytic 
scar plus adjacent astrocytes after SCI.
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article RESEARCH
Extended Data Figure 2 | Single-channel CSPG and GFAP 
immunofluorescence and stained area quantification. a, Individual 
fluorescence channels of CS56 and GFAP immunohistochemistry from 
horizontal sections of uninjured mice and at two weeks after severe SCI 
shown in Fig. 3b. Sections are taken from wild-type (WT) mice and mice 
with transgenic ablation (TK+GCV) or attenuation (STAT3-CKO) of 
astrocytic scar formation. b, Example of black and white thresholding of 
single channels of immunofluorescence staining for image analysis  
to quantify (using NIH Image J software) the amount of CSPG- or  
GFAP-stained area in different tissue compartments in SCI lesions.  
Boxes denote areas quantified to obtain values for lesion core (LC) and  
grey (g) or white (w) matter in astrocytic scar (AS) or equivalent regions 
in uninjured tissue. Graphs show percentage of areas (means ± s.e.m.) 
stained for CSPG or GFAP determined using ImageJ. n = 4 (wild type 
mice); n = 6 (TK+GCV and STAT3-CKO mice); #P < 0.05 versus 
uninjured white matter; *P < 0.05 versus uninjured grey matter in same 
experimental group (ANOVA with Newman–Keuls); ^P < 0.05 versus 
equivalent anatomical region in wild-type (ANOVA with Newman–Keuls).
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article
RESEARCH
Extended Data Figure 3 | See next page for caption. 
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article RESEARCH
Extended Data Figure 3 | Specificity of haemagglutinin targeting to 
astrocytes and enrichment of haemagglutinin immunoprecipitation for 
astrocyte-specific RNA transcripts. a, Individual fluorescence channels 
of immunohistochemistry for transgenically targeted haemagglutinin 
(HA) plus various cell markers showing the specificity of HA targeting to 
cells expressing the astrocyte marker, GFAP, and not to cells expressing 
either the neuronal marker, NeuN, or the mature oligodendrocyte marker, 
GSTπ, in uninjured grey and white matter and in astrocytic scars at 2 
weeks after SCI. b, CNS-cell-type-specific gene transcript enrichment of 
ribosome-associated mRNA (ramRNA) isolated from wild-type (WT) 
uninjured spinal cord by HA immunoprecipitation (HA-IP). Differential 
expression analysis by RNA-seq indicates significant enrichment (red) 
for astrocyte-specific gene transcripts, and de-enrichment (green) for 
gene transcripts enriched in other CNS cell types, FDR < 0.1. A log2 scale 
is used so that positive and negative differences are directly comparable. 
The mean numerical enrichment of three quintessential astrocyte genes, 
Gfap, Aldh1l1 and Aqp4, is 25-fold greater in HA samples than in flow-
through samples. c, Gene transcript enrichment of HA-IP ramRNA 
relative to P7 mouse primary cortical astrocytes103. Of the 200 most highly 
expressed genes previously described103 for post-natal mouse cortical 
astrocytes, 71.5% (red line) are at least fourfold enriched (blue line) in 
HA-IP ramRNA isolated from uninjured spinal cord relative to flow 
through RNA from non-astrocyte cells. d, Pearson correlation plots of 
total normalized RNA-seq reads from individual biological replicates for 
each treatment condition. Correlation colouring indicates little (white) to 
high (red) similarity. n = 4 mice each for uninjured controls and wild-type 
SCI (SCI-WT); n = 3 mice for STAT3-CKO SCI (SCI-STAT3). FDR < 0.1 
for differential expression and enrichment analysis. Raw and normalized 
data have been deposited in the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus and 
are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE76097 and via 
a searchable, open-access website https://astrocyte.rnaseq.sofroniewlab.
neurobio.ucla.edu.
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article
RESEARCH
Extended Data Figure 4 | Comparison of genomic data from astrocytes 
and non-astrocyte cells from WT and STAT3-CKO mice after SCI. 
a, Heat maps depicting all significantly differentially expressed genes 
(DEG), as determined by RNA-seq, for wild-type (WT) and STAT3-CKO 
astrocytes and non-astrocytes from independent biological replicates two 
weeks after SCI relative to uninjured wild-type control. Red upregulated, 
green downregulated. b, Total numbers and Venn diagrams of significant 
DEGs in wild-type and STAT3-CKO astrocytes and non-astrocytes two 
weeks after SCI relative to uninjured control. Red and green numerical 
values indicate significantly upregulated and downregulated genes, 
respectively. c, Comparison of altered gene expression in our SCI-reactive 
astrocytes and previously reported forebrain stroke-reactive astrocytes27. 
Of the 200 most highly elevated genes in forebrain astrocytes one week 
following stroke27, 58.5% (red line) are also significantly elevated in 
astrocytes after SCI, relative to uninjured. d, Comparison of expression by 
wild-type SCI and STAT3-CKO SCI reactive astrocytes of a selected cross-
section of genes that are highly regulated after SCI by wild-type reactive 
astrocytes. Many of the regulated genes exhibit changes that are expected 
and implicated in wild-type reactive astrogliosis mechanisms and roles, 
and some of the changes appear to be newly identified in this context. Note 
that many of the genes are not regulated or exhibit attenuated changes 
in STAT3-CKO SCI astrocytes. n = 4 mice each for uninjured and wild-
type SCI; n = 3 mice for STAT3-CKO SCI (SCI-STAT3). FDR < 0.1 for 
differential expression and enrichment analysis.
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article RESEARCH
Extended Data Figure 5 | Immunohistochemistry of specific CSPGs. 
a, Absence of aggrecan (ACAN) production by scar-forming astrocytes. 
Images show individual fluorescence channels of ACAN and GFAP 
immunohistochemistry from horizontal sections two weeks after severe 
SCI in a representative wild-type (WT) mouse. Boxes denote areas 
of astrocytic scar (AS) or uninjured tissue (Uninj) shown at higher 
magnification. Note that ACAN is: (i) heavily present in the perineuronal 
nets that surround neurons in uninjured tissue; (ii) almost absent from 
astrocytic scar and lesion core (LC); and (iii) not detectably produced 
by newly generated scar-forming astrocytes (arrows). b, Brevican 
(BCAN) production by scar-forming astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells. 
Images show individual fluorescence channels of BCAN and GFAP 
immunohistochemistry from horizontal sections two weeks after severe 
SCI, in wild-type mice and mice with transgenic ablation (TK+GCV) or 
attenuation (STAT3-CKO) of astrocytic scar formation. Note that BCAN 
is produced both by GFAP-positive scar-forming astrocytes (arrowheads) 
and by non-astrocyte cells (arrows).
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article
RESEARCH
Extended Data Figure 6 | Immunohistochemistry of specific CSPGs. 
a, Neurocan (NCAN) production by scar-forming astrocytes and 
non-astrocyte cells. Images show individual fluorescence channels of 
NCAN and GFAP immunohistochemistry from horizontal sections two 
weeks after severe SCI, in a representative wild-type (WT) mouse. Box 
denotes area of lesion core (LC) and astrocytic scar (AS) shown at higher 
magnification. Note that NCAN is produced both by GFAP-positive 
scar-forming astrocytes and by non-astrocyte cells (arrows) in the lesion 
core. b, NG2 (CSPG4) production by newly proliferated scar-forming 
astrocytes. Images show individual channels and various combinations 
of immunofluorescence staining for NG2, GFAP, tdTomato (tdT), BrdU 
(proliferation marker) and DAPI showing astrocytes in a mature SCI 
scar. The images are representative of findings from tdTomato-reporter 
mice51 injected with AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre vector53 into multiple sites 
of the uninjured spinal cord to label mature astrocytes. Three weeks after 
AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre injection, the mice received a severe SCI and 
were administered BrdU from days 2–7 after SCI. The mice were perfused 
after two weeks after SCI. Images comparing individual fluorescence 
channels show that astrocytes labelled 1 and 3: (i) incorporated BrdU  
and thus are newly proliferated after SCI; (ii) express the tdTomato 
reporter; (iii) express GFAP, the prototypical marker of reactive and  
scar-forming astrocytes; and (iv) express NG2 both intracellularly  
and along their cell surfaces. In contrast, astrocyte number 2 is also  
BrdU-labelled and expresses both tdTomato and GFAP, but does not 
appear to express detectable levels of NG2. c, CSPG5 (Neuroglycan C) 
production by scar-forming astrocytes. Images show individual channels 
and various combinations of immunofluorescence staining for CSPG5 
or GFAP. Note that CSPG5 is present within and along the processes of 
GFAP-positive scar-forming astrocytes (arrows).
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article RESEARCH
Extended Data Figure 7 | Specificity and effects of treatments to 
stimulate AST axon regrowth after SCI. a, BDNF and NT3 treatment 
does not alter the appearance or density of astrocyte scars in wild-type 
(WT) or STAT3-CKO mice. Images show horizontal sections of mice at 
two weeks after SCI or after SCI followed by delayed injection of hydrogel 
only (as a control) or hydrogel releasing NT3 and BDNF. Top images show 
GFAP immunofluorescence; boxed area denotes size of areas taken from 
multiple locations in the astrocytic scar (AS) for GFAP area quantification 
shown in graph. n = 5 mice per group; NS, P > 0.05 (ANOVA with 
Newman–Keuls). Bottom images show brightfield immunohistochemistry 
simultaneously of GFAP+TK to stain both astrocyte cell processes (GFAP) 
and cell bodies (TK) in mGFAP-TK transgenic mice for quantification 
of astrocyte cell numbers shown in graph. For these experiments the 
transgene-derived TK is used as a reporter protein that efficiently labels 
astrocyte cell bodies and thereby improves cell quantification18 and 
the mice were not given GCV. n = 4 mice per group; *P < 0.05 versus 
uninjured (ANOVA with Newman–Keuls); NS, P > 0.05 (ANOVA with 
Newman–Keuls). b, AST axon regrowth through scar-forming astrocytes 
and CSPGs in SCI lesions. Images show individual channels and various 
combinations of immunofluorescence staining for CTB, GFAP and CS56 
to detect total CSPGs from a wild-type mouse after SCI followed by 
delayed injection of a hydrogel depot releasing NT3 and BDNF, shown as 
multichannel image in Fig. 5e. Arrows denote robust regrowth of many 
AST axons along, through and past scar-forming astrocytes into and 
through the lesion core. Note that the stimulated axons are regrowing 
through CSPG containing areas in the astrocyte scar and lesion core. 
Boxed area is shown at higher magnification in Extended Data Fig. 8.  
c, Graph shows numbers of AST axons at various distances past the 
proximal border of the astrocytic scar under different conditions. n = 5 per 
group; *P < 0.001 significant difference SCI+CL+BDNF+NT3 versus all 
other groups (ANOVA with post-hoc Newman–Keuls).
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article
RESEARCH
Extended Data Figure 8 | AST axon regrowth through scar-forming 
astrocytes and CSPGs in SCI lesions. a, b, Images show individual 
channels and various combinations of immunofluorescence staining for 
CTB, GFAP and CS56 to detect total CSPGs from a wild-type (WT) mouse 
after SCI followed by delayed injection of a hydrogel depot releasing NT3 
and BDNF, shown as multichannel images in Fig. 5f, g. Arrows in a denote 
robust regrowth of many AST axons along, through and past scar-forming 
astrocytes into and through the lesion core; note that the stimulated axons 
are regrowing through CSPG containing areas in the astrocytic scar and 
lesion core. b, High-magnification orthogonal images of axons in three 
visual planes. Arrows in b denote AST regrowing axons tracking along 
CSPG-positive and GFAP-negative structures. Arrowheads in b denote 
AST axons tracking along GFAP-positive and CSPG-positive astrocyte 
processes, passing from one astrocyte process to another.
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article RESEARCH
Extended Data Figure 9 | AST axon regrowth in SCI lesions is 
dependent on laminin. a–g, Tract tracing of AST axons using CTB 
and laminin immunohistochemistry. a–c, Same fields imaged for CTB 
alone (a1–c1), or CTB plus laminin (a2–c2). a, d, Intact gracile–cuneate 
tract (GCT). b, SCI only. c, f, SCI plus conditioning lesion (CL) plus 
hydrogel with growth factors. e, SCI plus conditioning lesion. g, SCI plus 
conditioning lesion plus hydrogel with growth factors and anti-CD29. 
d–g, High-magnification orthogonal images of axons in three visual 
planes. Arrows indicate regrowing axons in direct contact with laminin. 
Arrowheads indicate axons not in direct contact with laminin in the 
intact GCT (d) or with anti-CD29 treatment (g). Note the difference in 
appearance of axons in the intact gracile–cuneate tract (GCT), which are 
independent of laminin, compared with regrowing axons in lesion core 
(LC), which track along laminin. h, Axon length per tissue volume (means 
± s.e.m.) in intact GCT or in SCI lesions under different conditions. Intact 
GCT values were not included in ANOVA comparison of other 3 groups. 
i, Percentages (means ± s.e.m.) of AST axon length in direct contact with 
laminin under different conditions. n = 5 mice per group; *P < 0.001 
(ANOVA with post-hoc Newman–Keuls); NS, not significant (ANOVA 
with post-hoc Newman–Keuls).
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Article
RESEARCH
Extended Data Table 1 |  Axon growth inhibitory molecules and axon growth permissive molecules
This table lists the gene abbreviations and full names and of the 59 axon-growth-modulating molecules whose gene expression levels are presented in Fig. 4. The table also summarizes literature 
providing evidence for the axon-growth-inhibitory or -permissive effects of each molecule. Refs 62–102 are cited in this table.
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

===== Anderson2022_NatNeuro_SCI+CircuitReorganization+Review =====
Nature Neuroscience
nature neuroscience
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01196-1
Review Article
Natural and targeted circuit reorganization 
after spinal cord injury
Mark A. Anderson 
  1,2,3,4,5, Jordan W. Squair 
  1,2,3,5, Matthieu Gautier 
  1,2,3, 
Thomas H. Hutson1,2,3,4, Claudia Kathe 
  1,2,3, Quentin Barraud 
  1,2,3, 
Jocelyne Bloch1,2,3 & Grégoire Courtine 
  1,2,3 
A spinal cord injury disrupts communication between the brain and 
the circuits in the spinal cord that regulate neurological functions. The 
consequences are permanent paralysis, loss of sensation and debilitating 
dysautonomia. However, the majority of circuits located above and below 
the injury remain anatomically intact, and these circuits can reorganize 
naturally to improve function. In addition, various neuromodulation 
therapies have tapped into these processes to further augment recovery. 
Emerging research is illuminating the requirements to reconstitute 
damaged circuits. Here, we summarize these natural and targeted 
reorganizations of circuits after a spinal cord injury. We also advocate for 
new concepts of reorganizing circuits informed by multi-omic single-cell 
atlases of recovery from injury. These atlases will uncover the molecular 
logic that governs the selection of 'recovery-organizing' neuronal 
subpopulations, and are poised to herald a new era in spinal cord medicine.
The circuits that regulate motor and autonomic functions reside in 
the spinal cord. While these circuits are often regarded as rudimentary 
components of the CNS under the authoritative control of the brain and 
brainstem, we are beginning to uncover remarkable sophistication and 
diversity in the molecular architecture of the neuronal subpopulations 
that forge these circuits1,2. Equally refined is the organization of the 
brain and brainstem regions that interact with neurons in the spinal 
cord. Interrogation of neuronal subpopulations based on their identity 
and/or projection targets have revealed that these regions can no longer 
be schematized with interacting boxes delivering executive commands 
to the spinal cord through specialized descending pathways3. Instead, 
each region is composed of specific neuronal subpopulations with 
distinct receptomes and projectomes that contribute uniquely to the 
production of behavior4. Deciphering how the neuronal subpopula-
tions from the brain, brainstem and spinal cord interact to regulate 
motor and autonomic functions is a daunting task. Even more intimidat-
ing is the attempt to understand how these neuronal subpopulations 
respond to, and reorganize after, a spinal cord injury (SCI).
Until recently, probing the functional role of neuronal subpopula-
tions has been a laborious endeavor. Our knowledge on the reorgani-
zation of circuits after SCI primarily derived from the interrogation of 
broadly defined pathways and circuits that are known to regulate motor 
and autonomic functions.
Here, we summarize our knowledge on how the circuits located 
in the brain, brainstem and spinal cord respond to SCI, and how their 
reorganization can contribute not only to natural recovery but also to 
degradation of neurological functions. We focus on motor functions, 
but also consider autonomic functions when relevant. We discuss how 
neuromodulation technologies can engage and reorganize the intact 
neuronal subpopulations above and below an SCI to improve these 
functions. We then lay out our understanding of the requirements to 
reconstitute damaged circuits. Finally, we advocate for a shift away 
from vaguely defined pathways, circuits or regions. We must increase 
the resolution of our nervous system interrogation by uncovering 
'recovery-organizing' neurons—the specific neuronal subpopulations 
that reorganize anatomically to restore function after SCI—and how 
Received: 7 September 2021
Accepted: 5 October 2022
Published online: xx xx xxxx
 Check for updates
1NeuroX Institute, School of Life Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland. 2Department of Clinical Neuroscience, 
Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV) and University of Lausanne (UNIL), Lausanne, Switzerland. 3Defitech Center for Interventional Neurotherapies 
(NeuroRestore), EPFL/CHUV/UNIL, Lausanne, Switzerland. 4Wyss Center for Bio and Neuroengineering, Geneva, Switzerland. 5These authors contributed 
equally: Mark A. Anderson, Jordan W. Squair. 
 e-mail: gregoire.courtine@epfl.ch

Nature Neuroscience
Review Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01196-1
The formation of relays through reticulospinal and rubrospinal neu-
rons underscores the important role of brainstem-derived projec-
tions26 and suggests the existence of recovery-organizing neurons 
located in distributed regions of the brainstem.
Reorganization of brainstem circuits
Studies have documented the growth of reticulospinal5, rubrospi-
nal27 and serotonergic28 projections within territories located below 
incomplete SCIs (Fig. 1). This growth often recapitulates the natural 
innervation pattern of these projections5,29, suggesting an attempt to 
reestablish the pre-injury connectivity of these pathways. Electrophysi-
ological, lesion-specific and projection-specific silencing experiments 
have linked this reorganization with recovery5,28.
However, the involvement of subcortical structures cannot be 
restricted to pathways that project directly to the spinal cord. One 
example is the necessary contribution of the nucleus accumbens to 
the execution of dexterous hand movements, especially early after 
SCI30. Another unexpected contribution of evolutionary ancient sub-
cortical regions comes from the mesencephalic locomotor region 
(MLR)31. While this region is not necessary to produce walking in the 
absence of injury32, neurons distributed within the MLR are capable of 
recruiting reticulospinal neurons with surviving projections to produce 
locomotion after SCI33.
Limiting the survey of recovery-organizing brainstem neurons to 
regions with residual projections below the SCI also fails to acknowledge 
the diversity of circuits within and across brainstem regions. For exam-
ple, the MLR contains distinct subpopulations of glutamatergic neurons 
that project to specific targets to regulate distinct behaviors34. It is also 
well established that reticulospinal neurons cluster in spatially defined 
regions based on their contribution to the control of specific limbs35 or 
behaviors36. Moreover, projection-stratified neuronal subpopulations 
of the brainstem encode discrete phases of actions, and they may even 
serve as building blocks for regulating complex movements37.
This stratification of brainstem neuronal subpopulations into 
interactive, hierarchically organized layers suggests that multiple 
regions may interact to pass executive commands downstream. Natu-
ral recovery from SCI may involve multifaceted changes in the flow 
of communication among these subcortical neuronal populations. 
Concomitant adaptations in the receptome and projectome of these 
recovery-organizing neuronal subpopulations are likely to take place 
to support recovery.
These observations reveal that functional recovery after SCI may 
rely on unexpected circuit reorganization, including evolutionarily 
conserved mechanisms that are not essential to produce behaviors in 
the absence of injury, but that become essential to support recovery 
after SCI. The critical role of mesolimbic and mesencephalic regions 
provides perfect illustrations of this mechanism, but similar examples 
have also been described in the spinal cord.
Reorganization of spinal circuits above the injury
The motor cortex is essential for regaining motor functions after SCI, 
especially in primates. Yet, cortical commands do not have to be trans-
ferred directly to the spinal cord below the injury. A remarkable example 
comes from the ability of propriospinal neurons located in C3–C4 seg-
ments to relay cortical signals past an SCI to restore hand dexterity in 
NHP models38. Importantly, these evolutionarily conserved neurons 
are not critical in the absence of injury, but they become essential for 
recovery of hand functions when direct corticospinal tract projections 
are interrupted (Fig. 1).
The same mechanism supports recovery of walking after dorsal or 
lateral hemisection SCI13, and even temporally and spatially separated 
hemisection SCI. In this scenario, all the direct pathways from the 
brain are interrupted as a result of the two hemisections on opposite 
sides. Yet, the neurons located between the hemisections can form 
relays that transfer sufficient information past the injury to restore 
they can be targeted to further improve spinal cord repair and func-
tional recovery.
Adaptive and maladaptive circuit reorganization
An SCI induces the death of neurons and glia in and around spinal cord 
lesions and the interruption of axons passing in the vicinity. However, 
circuits located far from the injury, both above and below the SCI, also 
undergo profound changes that can contribute to natural recovery5,6 or 
instead be detrimental7,8. Local growth of residual descending fibers, 
sprouting of synaptic terminals, adaptations in synaptic transmission 
and multifaceted changes in molecular properties of neurons have been 
documented in numerous regions of the brain, brainstem and spinal 
cord. These adaptive and maladaptive modifications primarily depend 
on the severity of SCI, as summarized below (Fig. 1).
Reorganization of brain circuits
Neuronal populations embedded in the cerebral cortex are essential for 
hand dexterity, are the most experimentally accessible neurons, and 
subserve the motor skills of primate species. Experiments in nonhu-
man primate (NHP) models have shown that dexterous movements 
are not possible when corticospinal tract projections are interrupted9. 
Accordingly, the integrity of the corticospinal tract is a key predictor 
of natural functional recovery after SCI in humans10.
One of the most striking mechanisms of recovery involves 
time-dependent, bilateral reorganization of cortical dynamics. This 
mechanism has been described after lateralized SCI in NHP models11. 
These studies found a bilateral increase in activity of the motor and 
sensory cortices early after SCI. Once recovery had taken place, how-
ever, the increased activity was restricted to the contralesional motor 
and sensory cortices and to both ventral premotor cortices. Silencing 
experiments confirmed that ipsilesional cortical regions are necessary 
for movement execution, but only during the early phase after the SCI11. 
Functional remapping of cortical regions during recovery from SCI in 
rodents also illustrated the importance of time-dependent changes 
in cortical dynamics12,13. When cortically derived projections in the 
spinal cord below injury were silenced, the recovery of movement 
vanished immediately, showing the relevance of this reorganization 
to the restoration of function after SCI5,14.
Anatomical reorganization of cortically derived projections15 and 
ascending pathways16 parallels these adaptations of cortical dynamics. 
When the SCI spares a subset of fibers from the corticospinal tract, 
these fibers undergo directed growth to invade the gray matter ter-
ritories that have been deprived of supraspinal projections17,18. After a 
lateral SCI, corticospinal tract fibers can branch from the contralesional 
dorsolateral column, cross the spinal cord midline, and develop dense 
synaptic projections into the ventral gray matter where they contact 
neuronal subpopulations producing hand function19. Interventions 
that enhance this growth further augment hand function recovery20. 
Although the mechanisms that trigger this process remain unclear, 
regression of corticospinal tract neurons to a transcriptional state 
similar to that of developing neurons appears responsible for enabling 
this growth21. The reorganization of cortically derived projections has 
been exposed in rodent and NHP models, but evidence suggests that 
this mechanism also supports recovery in humans22.
When the SCI interrupts all corticospinal tract projections, the 
commands from the motor cortex can also be rerouted through alterna-
tive pathways with surviving projections below the injury (Fig. 1). For 
example, the growth of cortically derived projections onto neurons 
located in the reticular formation restores walking after contusion SCI5. 
Owing to the ubiquitous location of reticulospinal fibers within the rim 
of spinal cord white matter, a subset of these fibers survives contu-
sion SCI, regardless of the inherently variable topology of damage5. 
Similarly, sprouting of cortically derived projections within the red 
nucleus enables the motor cortex to convey information to the spinal 
cord through the rubrospinal tract to regain upper limb function23–25. 

Nature Neuroscience
Review Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01196-1
leg movements18,39,40. Again, these neurons are not necessary for walk-
ing before the SCI40, but they become essential after the SCI. Many 
descending projections from propriospinal relay neurons survive SCIs. 
However, injury-mediated downregulation of the potassium–chloride 
cotransporter KCC2 in inhibitory neurons located in the vicinity of the 
injury leads to excessive inhibition of relay circuits, rendering them 
nonfunctional39. Experimental prevention of KCC2 downregulation 
maintains the balance between inhibition and excitation, which is 
sufficient to restore walking39. The molecular identities of these relay 
neurons and the computational principles that enable the transfer of 
meaningful commands past the SCI remain unknown.
Directed reorganization of spinal circuits below the injury
The interruption of supraspinal projections triggers a reorganization 
of spinal circuits located below the injury. When residual supraspinal 
projections are abundant, these surveying fibers extend collaterals 
onto reorganizing circuits below the injury, which supports functional 
recovery5,19,26. Neurorehabilitation can also direct a reorganization of 
circuits below the injury that improves recovery, even following com-
plete SCI41,42. When deprived of sufficient guidance, however, spinal 
circuits undergo maladaptive reorganization that provokes clinical 
syndromes. Below, we summarize our knowledge on directed (adap-
tive) and undirected (maladaptive) reorganization of spinal circuits 
below the injury (Fig. 1).
Spinal circuits can produce complex motor behaviors without any 
contribution from the brain and brainstem43,44. Central to this compe-
tence is their ability to transform task-specific sensory information into 
patterns of muscle activity that meet the intrinsic biomechanical con-
straints and extrinsic environmental demands45. When supraspinal pro-
jections are compromised, sensory information must thus become the 
main source of control for movement45. Indeed, limb immobilization 
alters functional recovery after SCI46. Instead, neurorehabilitation can 
direct activity-dependent functional47 and anatomical48 reorganization 
of sensory projections that supports recovery. A logical consequence 
is the necessity of feedback circuits to execute and regain motor func-
tions after SCI49, especially those originating from muscle propriocep-
tive organs49. Indeed, the genetic ablation of muscle spindle feedback 
circuits abolishes the recovery that naturally occurs after incomplete 
SCI. Concomitantly, brainstem and spinal cord relay neurons fail to 
respond to injury with the growth of new projections that mediates 
this natural recovery6. These observations help to explain why the out-
come of neurorehabilitation depends so singularly on the coincidence 
between the flow of sensory information and the volitional drive from 
residual supraspinal projections. However, the nature and topology of 
the interactions that promote this growth remain unknown. Proprio-
ceptive neurons are thus recovery-organizing cells that steer beneficial 
reorganization of circuits throughout the nervous system. Moreover, 
targeting alterations in histone acetylation of proprioceptive neurons 
after SCI endows their axons with increased regenerative capacities, 
which can contribute to augmenting recovery50.
It is difficult to identify neurons below an SCI that are not pro-
foundly perturbed when a severe spinal cord damage occurs. Yet, func-
tional recovery is likely to rely more prominently on the reorganization 
of specific neuronal subpopulations45,51. For example, the recruitment 
of developmentally defined V2a neurons during the recovery of walk-
ing1,52 and breathing53 suggests that these cells modify how they interact 
with the circuits that produce these functions. Neurons located in 
spinal cord deep layers (dl3) have also been implicated54.
These observations stress the importance of shifting the focus 
on clearly defined neuronal subpopulations. Single-cell technologies 
have exposed a remarkable diversity of neuronal subpopulations in 
the spinal cord. Original nomenclatures were derived from the known 
cardinal lineages in the developing and postnatal spinal cord1,55. More 
recently, a top-down approach identified orderly genetic tiers that 
divide neuronal subpopulations according to their motor–sensory, 
Above injury
Between injuries
Below injury
Undirected reorganization
Directed reorganization
Corticospinal
Reticulospinal
Rubrospinal
Serotonergic spinal projections
Descending tracts
New cortical
 dynamics
Brainstem
New projections
Growth of maladaptive
projections
Fig. 1 | Adaptive and maladaptive reorganization of brain, brainstem and 
spinal circuits following spinal cord injury. An SCI triggers functional and 
anatomical changes throughout the nervous system. Extensive functional 
and anatomical reorganization of projections from neurons located in the 
brain, brainstem and spinal cord above the injury occur naturally after SCI. 
The topological distribution of these reorganizations is illustrated, including 
alterations in cortical dynamics and growth of new axonal projections from 
neurons in the brain, brainstem and spinal cord. The profound changes that these 
circuits undergo can contribute to natural recovery or instead be detrimental 
to neurological functions and result in neuropathic pain, autonomic dysreflexia 
or spasticity. To a large extent, the severity of the SCI determines whether this 
reorganization is directed or undirected.

Nature Neuroscience
Review Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01196-1
local–long range and excitatory–inhibitory features2. We anticipate 
that this developmentally driven taxonomy will lead to a harmonized 
catalog of neuronal subpopulations in the developing and adult spinal 
cord56 that will guide the rapid identification of recovery-organizing 
neurons in the spinal cord after SCI.
Undirected reorganization of spinal circuits below the injury
The massive depletion of supraspinal projections induces a collection 
of maladaptive compensatory responses that are responsible for vari-
ous clinical syndromes (Fig. 1).
Following deafferentation of a region in the CNS, new synapses 
derived from unaffected afferent pathways form spontaneously57. 
After SCI, this compensatory homeostatic response58 contributes 
to the aberrant sprouting of afferents originating from dorsal root 
ganglia neurons7,59, the chaotic growth of new propriospinal connec-
tions60 and the ubiquitous genesis of excitatory synapses below the 
injury7,61. Moreover, the disruption of blood flow below the injury leads 
to a chronic state of hypoxia owing to paradoxical excess activity of 
monoamine receptors on pericytes, which impairs neuronal function62. 
Parallel changes in the molecular properties of neurons take place. 
These include an increase in constitutive activity of monoaminergic 
receptors63, serotonin hypersensitivity64, upregulation of intracellular 
chloride concentration65, increased excitability of various classes of 
neurons66 and hyperactivity of L-type calcium channels67.
Unlike the directed reorganization that occurs when sufficient 
supraspinal projections persist, this undirected formation of circuits 
after severe SCI leads to clinical syndromes, including abnormal pro-
prioceptive reflex responses7,68, increased muscle tone69, spontaneous 
spasms7, bladder overactivity70, neuropathic pain71 and autonomic 
dysreflexia72.
Various types of interneurons and circuits have been implicated 
in these clinical syndromes73. Yet, we surmise that this chaos involves 
the recruitment of specific neuronal subpopulations whose individual 
responses are directed toward predictable targets.
Perspectives on natural circuit reorganization
This unstructured registry of pathways, regions and circuits that may 
contribute to the recovery or deterioration of neurological functions 
underscores the incompleteness of our knowledge. Moreover, obser-
vations that recovery may rely on unexpected mechanisms or regions 
not critical to neurological functions in the absence of injury leaves the 
possibility that critically important recovery-organizing neuronal sub-
populations may have been overlooked by previous studies that were 
merely informed by principles identified in uninjured animal models.
The identification of recovery-organizing neuronal subpopulations 
is contingent on catalogs of genetically accessible neurons. These cata-
logs are now available for most brain regions74, but the brainstem and 
spinal cord have remained comparatively less explored. Consequently, 
previous studies were forced to rely on developmentally defined neu-
ronal subtypes or broadly defined neuronal subtypes, which may or 
may not reflect the diversity of neuronal subpopulations in the adult 
nervous system1,2,75. However, current high-throughput technologies are 
now enabling us to generate spatially resolved catalogs of neuronal sub-
populations52,76, auguring the imminent availability of comprehensive 
atlases over the entire nervous system. Moreover, the statistical meth-
ods to navigate these uncharted territories are expanding quickly1,52,77.
Understanding the recovery-organizing neuronal subpopulations 
in the brain, brainstem and spinal cord that contribute to natural recov-
ery of function after SCI is essential, because this knowledge can be 
harnessed to develop neuromodulation and biological repair therapies 
that target these neurons to augment recovery, as we discuss below.
Neuromodulation of anatomically intact circuits
Spinal cord damage disrupts the flow of communication between the 
circuits that regulate motor and autonomic functions, but spares the 
vast majority of neurons that compose them. Consequently, various 
neuromodulation strategies based on electricity have tapped into 
anatomically intact neurons of the brain, brainstem and spinal cord 
to improve neurological functions after SCI (Fig. 2).
Neuromodulation of cortical circuits
Targeting cortical circuits provides broad access to a multitude of 
circuits located downstream. A perfect example of this hierarchical 
organization is illustrated in the immediate recovery of walking when 
the motor cortex is stimulated after a lateral hemisection78. Despite the 
interruption of corticospinal tract projections on one side, adjusting 
the amplitude of intracortical closed-loop stimulation patterns was 
sufficient to control the amplitude of stepping movements from the 
paralyzed leg on the denervated side78. The same observations were 
obtained during graded optogenetic activation of cortical projection 
neurons after contusion SCI5. Because this injury abolished all corti-
cospinal projections, the optogenetically evoked signals were relayed 
through glutamatergic reticulospinal neurons that retained projections 
below the SCI. These results indicate that activation of cortical circuits 
propagates commands that cascade downstream through brainstem 
neurons with spared yet functionally silent projections below the SCI.
Activity-dependent stimulation protocols can also strengthen 
the residual connections between the brain and spinal cord (Fig. 2). 
The molecular mechanisms remain unclear, but it is now established 
that the repeated activation of the motor cortex with noninvasive or 
invasive electrical stimulation methods promotes activity-dependent 
Deep brain stimulation
MLR
Transcranial 
magnetic stimulation
Vagus nerve 
stimulation
Spinal circuits
Deep brain stimulation
Large-diameter aﬀerents
Spinal cord stimulation
Transcranial magnetic stimulation
Corticospinal tract
Reticulospinal tract
SCVsx2::Hoxa10 neurons
Spinal cord
electrical stimulation
Fig. 2 | Neuromodulation of anatomically intact circuits. Neuromodulation 
strategies, which are primarily based on electrical stimulation methods, 
tap into anatomically intact circuits of the brain, brainstem and spinal cord 
to improve neurological functions immediately and/or promote long-term 
recovery of neurological functions after SCI. When the SCI is incomplete, 
electrical stimulation is delivered in the brain or brainstem to reactivate circuits 
in the spinal cord or to reinforce the strength of connections between the 
brain and spinal cord. When an SCI is severe, the circuits in the spinal cord lack 
the source of modulation and excitation that they require to be functional. 
Electrical spinal cord stimulation, in particular EES, can reactivate these circuits 
through the modulation of large-diameter afferents. When combined with 
neurorehabilitation, the stimulation directs the growth of residual projections 
from the brain and brainstem (arrows) to SCVsx2::Hoxa10 neurons that are activated by 
the stimulation52. This reorganization promotes recovery of volitional movement 
even when the stimulation is turned off.

Nature Neuroscience
Review Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01196-1
growth of corticospinal tract projections79. Pairing motor cortex stimu-
lation with precisely timed recruitment of peripheral nerves or even 
intraspinal stimulation further enhances transmission along residual 
neural pathways80. The resulting spike-timing-dependent reorganiza-
tion of circuits has mediated lasting improvement of motor functions 
and reduced spasticity in animal models81 and people with SCI82.
Neuromodulation of cortical circuits can also be indirect. For 
example, vagus nerve stimulation activates diverse nuclei throughout 
the brainstem, provoking a release of acetylcholine and norepinephrine 
throughout the brain that predisposes vicariously distributed circuits 
to increase their responses to neurorehabilitation83 (Fig. 2). As with 
most neuromodulation therapies, the timing of the stimulation must 
coincide with relevant motor events to maximize recovery84. When 
delivered after cervical SCI, closed-loop vagus nerve stimulation pro-
moted the growth of neuronal projections involved in the control of 
hand musculature84. Improvement of manual dexterity paralleled this 
anatomical reorganization, but whether and how specific neuronal 
populations contributed to this recovery remains unknown.
Neuromodulation of brainstem circuits
The majority of SCIs spare bridges of white matter within which mixed 
populations of brainstem-derived projections reside. When few pro-
jections are spared, they fail to mediate volitional muscular contrac-
tions. This understanding led to neuromodulation therapies that aim 
to recruit these spared projections to elicit movement. For example, 
the delivery of deep brain stimulation within the MLR activates reticu-
lospinal neurons, which improved walking after SCI33 (Fig. 2). These 
results are comparable to those observed during motor cortex stimula-
tion, suggesting that the brain fails to engage the entire population of 
reticulospinal neurons with spared projections below an SCI.
The relevance of this ancestral locomotor system remains unclear 
in humans. Moreover, this region is difficult to target surgically because 
the MLR is primarily defined functionally within the scattered topology 
of the pedunculopontine nucleus. Accordingly, deep brain stimulation 
of this region to improve gait after Parkinson’s disease led to variable 
outcomes85. Recent studies have segregated the MLR into anatomi-
cally distinct nuclei with defined populations of projection-stratified 
neurons that regulate specific behaviors36. These studies open the pos-
sibility that more refined targets could be identified, or even upstream 
regions with more circumscribed anatomical topology.
Neuromodulation of spinal circuits
Ultimately, spinal circuits generate the muscular contractions that 
regulate motor actions. Therefore, it is logical that tapping into these 
circuits results in the generation of organized muscular activity. Experi-
ments from the past century documented the initiation of walking 
when the isolated spinal cords of cats and dogs were stimulated electri-
cally86. The same observations were made in humans during the 1980s87. 
EES stimulation
EES stimulation
Blood pressure
muscle activity
Flexor
Extensor
Blood vessel
Lumbosacral
Low thoracic
Large-diameter 
aﬀerent fibers
Hemodynamics
Mobility
Alternative recruitment of muscles
Increase in blood pressure
Fig. 3 | Mechanisms through which epidural electrical stimulation restores 
hemodynamics and mobility. Evidence suggests that EES elicits electrical 
currents that do not modulate neurons directly, but instead flow around the 
spinal cord within the cerebrospinal fluid where they depolarize large-diameter 
afferent fibers. Owing to their low impedance and heavy myelin contents, 
these fibers are prone to depolarization, especially where they enter the spinal 
cord through the dorsal root entry zones. There is evidence that alternative 
stimulation methods act through the same mechanisms. The recruitment of 
large-diameter afferent fibers activates visceral and somatic motor neurons both 
directly and indirectly, and helps to transform spinal circuits from a dormant to 
a highly excitable state. Because flexor and extensor motor pools are located in 
different spinal segments, targeting the dorsal roots that project to the segments 
wherein these motor pools reside enables the modulation of specific muscles 
with a timing that reproduces the natural activation of these muscles.

Nature Neuroscience
Review Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01196-1
It is now well established that delivering electrical stimulation to the 
lumbar spinal cord using epidural88,89, intraspinal90 or transcutaneous91 
methods can elicit rhythmic leg movements, weight-bearing standing, 
and even independent stepping in animal models18 and humans with 
SCI88,89,92 (Fig. 2). Pharmacological neuromodulation based on mono-
aminergic agents can also reactivate the spinal cord below an SCI93, 
and acts synergistically with electrical neuromodulation therapies to 
promote movement45. When a sufficient number of supraspinal pro-
jections is spared, these therapies even enable these otherwise silent 
residual projections to engage spinal circuits5. This mechanism, which 
was unmasked in preclinical models5, has restored volitional control 
over the activity of paralyzed muscles in humans88,89.
These observations motivated studies that dissected the mecha-
nisms of epidural electrical stimulation (EES). It was found that EES elic-
its electrical currents that do not modulate neurons directly, but instead 
flow within the cerebrospinal fluid where they depolarize large-diameter 
afferent fibers94. Owing to their relatively low impedance, these fibers 
are prone to depolarization, especially where they enter the spinal cord 
through the dorsal root entry zones94,95 (Fig. 3). Alternative stimulation 
methods are likely to act through the same mechanisms96. The recruit-
ment of large-diameter afferent fibers activates motor neurons both 
directly and indirectly, and contributes to the transformation of spinal 
circuits from a dormant to an excitable state95,97.
These experiments revealed that the biophysical properties of the 
spinal cord operate as functional filters that direct unspecific electri-
cal currents toward specific neuronal subpopulations. EES leverages 
large-diameter afferent fibers as a gateway to modulate motor neurons. 
Since large-diameter afferent fibers primarily modulate motor neurons 
located in the spinal segment innervated by the root wherein these 
afferents reside89,98, targeting individual dorsal roots enables the modu-
lation of distinct motor pool ensembles89,98,99. This biological principle 
led to stimulation strategies98–101 that target the individual dorsal root 
entry zones with a temporal structure aiming to reproduce the natural 
spatiotemporal activation pattern of motor neurons102 (Fig. 3). This 
principle enables the configuration of activity-dependent biomimetic 
stimulation programs to support standing, walking, biking, swimming 
and even trunk movements in people with paralysis103.
While the lumbar spinal cord has been the primary focus of studies 
on EES, experiments in NHP models104 and two humans with tetraple-
gia105 suggested that targeting the cervical dorsal root entry zones also 
improves hand dexterity. However, complex hand gestures may rely 
on more complex stimulation programs that are controlled directly 
by the brain. Brain-controlled regulation of EES can be achieved using 
brain–computer interface technologies99.
Neurorehabilitation supported by EES improves functional recov-
ery89. Individuals with chronic SCI have regained volitional control over 
previously paralyzed muscles, and some could even walk naturally 
without any stimulation. This recovery involved an unexpected reduc-
tion in the neural activity in the lumbar spinal cord during walking, 
suggesting that specific neuronal subpopulations are selected dur-
ing neurorehabilitation. Indeed, interrogation of a single-cell atlas of 
recovery in mice revealed that excitatory interneurons expressing Vsx2 
are selected during neurorehabilitation supported by EES52. These cells 
are nested within the intermediate lamina of the spinal cord, where 
they receive projections from large-diameter afferents and brainstem 
neurons with surviving projections5,18. Neurorehabilitation reinforces 
these projection patterns, enabling these recovery-organizing neurons 
to transform information from brainstem locomotor regions and 
large-diameter afferents into commands that are broadcasted to the 
ventrally located neurons to produce movement (Fig. 3).
The understanding that EES utilizes large-diameter afferents as 
gateways to circuits in the spinal cord opened up the possibility of 
developing neuromodulation therapies that improve other neurologi-
cal functions, especially autonomic functions, which are ranked among 
the top priorities for people with SCI (Box 1).
Perspectives on neuromodulation therapies
Neuromodulation of anatomically intact circuits in the brain, brainstem 
and spinal cord have shown realistic promise to improve neurological 
functions after SCI. However, current approaches exclusively based 
on electricity are poorly specific. Even when the biophysical and/or 
functional properties of neural tissues steer electrical currents toward 
specific neuronal subpopulations, the resolution of these physiological 
filters remains limited regarding the highly specialized flow of com-
munication that circulates in the intact nervous system. Identifica-
tion of the neuronal subpopulations that are engaged and remodeled 
in response to electrical stimulation might open avenues for more 
targeted interventions that may be combined with pharmacological 
agents. However, neuromodulation therapies mediate improvements 
that remain incomplete, and thus not fully satisfying. Consequently, 
the reconstitution of circuits with biological repair strategies remains 
essential to maximize recovery.
Biological strategies to reconstitute circuits
The reconstitution of circuits following spinal cord damage comes 
in several interpretations, each targeting specific mechanisms and 
comprising unique challenges (Box 2). The more accomplishable inter-
pretation consists of densifying the projectome of neurons that retain 
axons below the injury. When the SCI is complete, however, reconsti-
tution of circuits implies the regeneration of severed axons through 
hostile tissues to repair damaged circuits or form new relay circuits 
that bypass the lesion and restore communication across the injury. 
Alternatively, these hostile tissues can be repopulated with grafts that 
reconstitute functional spinal cord environments. Below, we summa-
rize the biological strategies that target each of these interpretations, 
Box 1
Neurotechnologies to improve 
autonomic functions
Preliminary studies in feline models and humans have shown that 
EES applied over the sacral spinal cord could modulate spinal 
circuits involved in the regulation of bladder and bowel functions134.
Even more conclusive were studies targeting hemodynamic 
instability135,136. People with cervical and upper thoracic SCI 
experience frequent drops in blood pressure that not only affect 
their quality of life but also lead to life-threatening conditions. 
These hemodynamic events, which are referred to as orthostatic 
hypotension, are due to the interruption of descending signals 
from brainstem vasomotor regulatory circuits136. Consequently, 
the sympathetic circuits in the spinal cord no longer respond to 
orthostatic challenges.
Circuits embedded in the low thoracic spinal cord are enriched 
in sympathetic preganglionic neurons136. Engaging these neurons 
recruits ganglionic neurons, which release norepinephrine to 
activate alpha1 receptors on splanchnic blood vessels and thus 
provoke arterial vasoconstriction136. Large-diameter afferent fibers 
recruited with EES can activate sympathetic preganglionic neurons 
through an intermediary glutamatergic interneuron136 (Fig. 3). This 
mechanism enables the precise regulation of sympathetic circuits. 
Closed-loop control of EES targeting these circuits maintained 
blood pressure stability during transient, varying, and sustained 
orthostatic challenges in rat and NHP models, as well as in 
humans136,137. Large clinical trials are underway to turn this strategy 
into a treatment for people who suffer from severe orthostatic 
hypotension.

Nature Neuroscience
Review Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01196-1
with a focus on the reconstitution of circuits after SCI to adhere to the 
theme of this review (Fig. 4).
Densification of projections from spared circuits
Natural recovery from SCI largely correlates with the relative number of 
spared neuronal pathways106. This trivial etiology makes it abundantly 
clear that augmenting recovery after SCI will require the densification 
of projections from spared circuits. Neutralizing inhibitory molecules 
or targeting intrinsic neuronal growth competence promotes this 
remodeling (Box 3).
When axons are severed within the adult CNS, they fail to regen-
erate. Extrinsic inhibitors found in degenerating myelin and astro-
cyte borders were once thought to be responsible for this failure6. 
This understanding launched a race to identify inhibitory molecules 
and develop strategies to neutralize them. Initial experiments sug-
gested that these therapies act by promoting the regeneration of 
severed axons across the site of injury107. However, modern methods 
revealed that these interventions do not promote the regenera-
tion of corticospinal tract axons through scars, but rather mediate 
short-distance growth of axon collaterals over short distances in 
healthy tissue6,108. Early efforts were conducted with the hope that 
a singular solution would be sufficient to neutralize inhibition and 
thus overcome regenerative failure. These hopes have declined with 
the realization that reducing inhibition does not promote sufficient 
regrowth of severed axons6,108.
In parallel, others have focused on identifying regeneration- 
associated genes to reactivate intrinsic growth programs of neurons109 
and stabilize growth cones110 (Box 3). Regrowth of severed axons from 
corticospinal, retinal and propriospinal neurons has been achieved with 
the manipulation of the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)111, 
suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3)112, STAT3 (ref. 112), SOX11 
(ref. 113), osteopontin (OPN)114,115, insulin growth factor 1 (IGF-1)114,115, 
ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF)115 and Krüppel-like family of tran-
scription factors (KLFs)116 and neuronal RHOA117, among others118. 
Transcription and growth factors can be manipulated concurrently 
to augment this regrowth. Activation of mMTOR and STAT3 pathways 
with co-deletion of PTEN and SOCS3, or overexpression of the growth 
factors IGF-1 and OPN, induced synergistic regrowth of axons across 
astrocyte bridges and into topologically relevant targets below the 
injury, which was sufficient to restore some function114. Transient 
exposure to reduced oxygen levels, called intermittent hypoxia, is an 
alternative strategy to modulate raphe serotonergic neurons, trigger 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor synthesis, and promote the growth 
of serotonergic projections below the injury119. Likewise, neuronal 
activity promotes the release of various neurotrophic factors that aug-
ment the growth of spared neuronal projections. Neurorehabilitation 
leverages this mechanism to improve functional recovery42.
While impressive, these circuit reconstitutions present limitations. 
First, the regrowth of severed axons was obtained only for axons origi-
nating from specific populations of neurons. The remarkable diversity 
of projection neurons in the brain, brainstem and spinal cord suggests 
that unique combinations of transcription and growth factors may 
be necessary to induce axon regrowth from each subpopulation115,120. 
Second, the accessibility of active gene regulatory regions may limit the 
efficacy of transcription factor manipulation. Understanding spatial 
and temporal changes in transcriptional and chromatin environments 
in neuronal subpopulations could lead to the development of targeted, 
temporally controlled strategies to improve chromatin accessibility 
and transcriptional initiation in recovery-organizing neurons. Third, 
increasing the intrinsic growth competence of neurons promotes 
axon repair through healthy spinal cord tissue, but stimulated axons 
abruptly stop when encountered with fibrotic scar tissue115,121. There-
fore, the reconstitution of damaged circuits or formation of new cir-
cuits that reestablish communication across complete SCI remains a 
formidable challenge.
Box 2
Specific challenges in each 
compartment of the injured 
region
Damage to the spinal cord is typically inflicted by mechanical 
insults such as laceration or contusion. This primary injury tears 
axons apart and causes severe bleeding, which triggers a secondary 
injury response involving a cascade of cellular and molecular 
events such as immune cell infiltration, cell death, demyelination 
and scar formation. These secondary events lead to the formation of 
three cellularly distinct compartments, starting from a core fibrotic 
scar or cavity that is surrounded by an astrocyte border, and spared 
but reactive and reorganizing neural tissue109.
Fibrotic scar (core)
Severe inflammation provokes the formation of the fibrotic scar, 
which is composed of fibroblasts, pericytes, endothelial and 
inflammatory cells. While the origin of the cell types responsible 
for fibrotic scarring has been intensely debated138–140, we know 
that the origin is neither neuronal nor glial; therefore, the fibrotic 
component of the scar must be distinguished from the glial scar. 
Because the fibrotic scar has been ascribed an inhibitory role, 
many interventions sought to ablate the cellular constituents of the 
fibrotic scar with the goal of decreasing the extracellular matrix110,141. 
Partial ablations have been reported to result in decreased 
extracellular matrix deposition and improved behavioral outcomes, 
while complete ablation of the same cells resulted in larger tissue 
damage and worsened behavioral outcomes141. In striking contrast, 
recent studies revealed that the fibrotic scar can act as a permissive 
scaffold that supports stimulated axons to regrow through this 
scar115,121. Differences between these studies are likely to result from 
the specific types of extracellular matrix that are upregulated and 
deposited by each intervention. Deconstructing the biology of 
fibrotic scarring will provide actionable pathways to manipulate the 
extracellular matrix in order to foster the repair of damaged circuits.
Astrocyte border (surrounding the core)
Fibrotic scars are surrounded by a thin and densely packed border 
of astrocytes, termed the astrocyte border, which is regulated 
through signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)142 
and leucine zipper-bearing kinase (LZK) signaling143. Astrocyte 
borders are almost exclusively composed of newly proliferated 
and reactive astroglia144,145. This border was long regarded as 
a physical and chemical barrier to axon growth. However, the 
supposedly negative properties of border-forming astrocytes have 
now been dismantled. We know that they are not the principal 
cause of regenerative failure121, but instead restrict the spread of 
inflammation into viable neural tissue121,144,146. Moreover, they are not 
the primary producers of purportedly inhibitory chondroitin sulfate 
proteoglycans (CSPGs)121, but can instead support the growth of 
stimulated axons115,121. These observations imply that border-forming 
astrocytes support neural repair and that hindering astrocyte border 
formation is likely to be detrimental to recovery.
Spared but reactive neural tissue (neighboring the core)
Adjacent to the astrocyte borders lies spared but reactive neural 
tissue, which contains hypertrophic reactive astroglia combined 
with neurons forming circuits and undergoing synaptic turnover.

Nature Neuroscience
Review Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01196-1
Reconstitution of damaged circuits
A complete SCI not only interrupts communication across the injury, 
but also provokes the formation of fibrotic scar tissues with different 
lesion compartments that each present challenges to reconstitute 
spinal circuits (Box 2). Cajal posited that regrowing axons through 
such hostile tissues would require recapitulation of the conditions that 
stimulate and guide the growth of axons during development122. Certain 
components of this hypothesis were documented123–125, culminating in 
a developmentally inspired, multipronged strategy that reactivated 
the intrinsic growth capacity of neurons, induced the formation of 
substrates to support axon growth within the core lesion compart-
ment, and guided axons downstream using spatially and temporally 
controlled release of growth factors115. Stimulated, supported and 
chemoattracted axons regrew through astrocyte borders, across the 
fibrotic scar, and into healthy tissues where they formed contacts with 
neurons below the SCI (Fig. 4). This strategy targeted propriospinal 
neurons with the assumption that these cells would become relay cir-
cuits capable of mediating recovery. Despite the pronounced regrowth 
of electrophysiologically conductive axons, no recovery of function 
was observed115. Various mechanisms may explain this lack of recovery, 
including the absence of activity to shape these new circuits, innerva-
tion of improper targets, poor remyelination and even axon retraction. 
Equally mysterious is whether other neuronal subpopulations located 
in the brain and brainstem could be similarly guided through complete 
SCI and to relevant targets below the injury.
Engraftment of new circuits
A cure for SCI will require reconstituting the natural topology of the 
CNS. However, demonstrating that intraspinal neurons may relay suf-
ficient information downstream to produce behaviors led to a more 
optimistic definition of the requirements for meaningful recovery 
after SCI.
Efforts to repopulate the hostile lesion environment with relay 
circuits followed. Various types of cells, including neural progeni-
tor cells (NPCs), have been grafted into the injured spinal cord with 
widely differing success125 (Fig. 4). Only when NPCs were harvested 
from homologous spinal cord tissue, supported with growth factors 
and embedded in stabilizing matrices or scaffolds, did they survive 
the engraftment. NPCs matured into glial cells and neurons that filled 
the fibrotic tissue lesion and propelled thousands of axons along the 
entire rostrocaudal extent of the rodent and primate spinal cords126,127. 
Differentiated neurons attracted projections from various host neu-
rons located in the brain and brainstem, thus establishing relay circuits 
Digestion of inhibitors
Increase neuronal growth capacity
Increase neuronal growth capacity
Induce supportive substrate 
Chemoattractive gradient
Neural stem cell relay circuits
Fig. 4 | Biological strategies to reconstitute damaged circuits. Schematic 
summarizing the primary biological strategies to reconstitute circuits after SCI. 
The reconstitution of circuits following spinal cord damage depends on the 
severity of injury. For incomplete injuries, regeneration of severed axons is not 
required, as a sufficient number of axon projections remain intact. Densifying 
the projectome of neurons that retain axons below the injury can be achieved by 
either activating intrinsic neuronal growth competence or digesting inhibitors 
associated with degenerating myelin or chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (top). 
When the SCI is complete, reconstitution of circuits necessitates regrowing 
severed axons across injury sites to restore connectivity. This regrowth 
can be achieved for propriospinal neurons by deploying a multipronged, 
developmentally inspired repair strategy that sequentially upregulates intrinsic 
neuronal growth competence, induces supportive substrates and provides 
chemoattraction (middle). Alternatively, these hostile tissues can be repopulated 
with the engraftment of supportive neural stem cells that receive input from 
key supraspinal centers and relay information across injury sites to restore 
connectivity (bottom).
Box 3
Overcoming inhibition 
versus reactivation of growth 
programs
Neutralizing inhibitory molecules and targeting intrinsic neuronal 
growth competence have been the main strategies to promote the 
anatomical remodeling of residual neuronal projections after SCI.
Neutralizing inhibitory molecules
The most established strategy involves the delivery of the enzyme 
chondroitinase (ChABC), which digests the glycosaminoglycan side 
chain of CSPGs. CSPGs are the key constituents of perineuronal 
nets that regulate the opening and closing of the neurogenesis 
critical period. Devoid of perineuronal nets, neurons become 
available to receive synapses from newly formed axons of residual 
projections. Multiple independent laboratories have demonstrated 
that ChABC mediates functional improvements in both rodent 
and NHP models20,147. Activity-dependent neurorehabilitation 
further enhances this recovery41. Equally popular are strategies 
targeting the nogo receptor reticulon 4 (RTN4), which neutralizes 
myelin-associated inhibition107. Positive outcomes in rodent and NHP 
models have led to a multinational clinical trial that is evaluating 
the efficacy of antibodies against this receptor to augment manual 
dexterity after incomplete SCI (NCT03935321).
Targeting intrinsic neuronal growth competence
One of the transformative moments for neural repair came from 
systematic screenings in optic nerve injury models. It was found 
that the genetic deletion of PTEN induces unprecedented regrowth 
of injured axons from retinal ganglion cells111. Suppressing this 
transcription factor in cortical neurons induced long-distance 
regrowth of corticospinal tract axons through spared astrocyte 
bridges following SCI148. These findings revealed that reactivating 
intrinsic neuronal growth mechanisms enables true regeneration of 
severed axons that become insensitive to extrinsic inhibitors. Many 
discoveries followed, as summarized in the main text.

Nature Neuroscience
Review Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01196-1
that could restore electrophysiological connectivity across complete 
SCI126. However, these new circuits mediated limited recovery126–128. 
Various mechanisms may be invoked to account for this discrepancy, 
including the importance of activity-dependent factors, guidance of 
axons to relevant targets, and even the necessity to differentiate NPCs 
into specific neuronal subpopulations. For example, transplantation 
of NPCs enriched with V2a interneurons into the injury site improves 
recovery of diaphragm activity129.
Perspectives on biological strategies to reconstitute circuits
All of these interpretations on the requirements for reconstituting 
circuits after SCI led to considerable advances42. We now understand 
how to densify the projections from spared neurons, regrow severed 
axons over long distances, and repopulate the injured spinal cord with 
viable circuits. However, the resulting recovery has so far been insuf-
ficient to translate into impactful clinical applications. We surmise 
that directing interventions to specific neuronal subpopulations118 and 
guiding their regrowing axons to relevant targets may be necessary to 
achieve recovery. Single-cell methods are opening a path to support 
this shift of resolution. Even following pronounced spinal circuit repair, 
however, complementary interventions must counteract the maladap-
tive changes that take place in circuits located below a severe SCI, as 
observed following multiple sclerosis130.
Molecular choreography of recovery from SCI
The cure for SCI is unforeseeable, but we can already forecast that cur-
rent strategies will not complete this long-haul quest. Throughout this 
review, we have argued that we must operate a radical transition in the 
resolution of our CNS interrogation. Instead of focusing on vaguely 
defined circuits and pathways, we must establish multi-omic cartogra-
phies at single-cell resolution over the entire CNS to map the landscape 
of neurons that can orchestrate the natural recovery of function after 
SCI—thus capturing the changing properties of recovery-organizing 
neuronal subpopulations. These large-scale, multi-omic cartogra-
phies will also identify whether and how other cell types and epigenetic 
mechanisms contribute to improving or impairing recovery.
Imaging whole nervous systems131, single-cell technologies132 and 
cell-specific interrogations133 have established the analytical tools to 
catalog the molecular choreography of recovery from spinal cord dam-
age with exquisite detail. We now possess technologies to dissect the 
molecular signatures and growth requirements one neuron at a time, 
across all the neurons of the CNS and over timescales ranging from min-
utes to months. The resulting space–time catalogs of recovery from SCI 
are poised to uncover the transcriptional programs that will support 
the regrowth of any neuronal subpopulation from the brain, brainstem 
and spinal cord. We must then harness this knowledge to inform these 
evidence-based repair programs that engage and reconstitute the 
projections from each recovery-organizing neuronal subpopulation 
to their respective targets.
This new era will unlock the blueprints to reconstitute the natural 
topology of all the relevant recovery-organizing neuronal populations, 
with the hope that the development of a cure for SCI will then follow.
References
1.	
Skinnider, M. A. et al. Cell type prioritization in single-cell data. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 39, 30–34 (2020).
2.	
Osseward, P. J. et al. Conserved genetic signatures parcellate 
cardinal spinal neuron classes into local and projection subsets. 
Science 372, 385–393 (2021).
3.	
Arber, S. & Costa, R. M. Connecting neuronal circuits for 
movement. Science 360, 1403–1404 (2018).
4.	
Pivetta, C., Esposito, M. S., Sigrist, M. & Arber, S. Motor-circuit 
communication matrix from spinal cord to brainstem neurons 
revealed by developmental origin. Cell 156, 537–548 (2014).
5.	
Asboth, L. et al. Cortico-reticulo-spinal circuit reorganization 
enables functional recovery after severe spinal cord contusion. 
Nat. Neurosci. 21, 576–588 (2018).
6.	
Sofroniew, M. V. Dissecting spinal cord regeneration. Nature 557, 
343–350 (2018).
7.	
Kathe, C., Hutson, T. H., McMahon, S. B. & Moon, L. D. F. 
Intramuscular neurotrophin-3 normalizes low threshold spinal 
reflexes, reduces spasms and improves mobility after bilateral 
corticospinal tract injury in rats. Elife 5, e18146 (2016).
8.	
Taweel, W. A. & Seyam, R. Neurogenic bladder in spinal cord 
injury patients. Res. Rep. Urol. 7, 85–99 (2015).
9.	
Courtine, G. et al. Performance of locomotion and foot grasping 
following a unilateral thoracic corticospinal tract lesion in 
monkeys (Macaca mulatta). Brain 128, 2338–2358 (2005).
10.	 Freund, P. et al. MRI investigation of the sensorimotor cortex and 
the corticospinal tract after acute spinal cord injury: a prospective 
longitudinal study. Lancet Neurol. 12, 873–881 (2013).
11.	
Nishimura, Y. et al. Time-dependent central compensatory 
mechanisms of finger dexterity after spinal cord injury. Science 
318, 1150–1155 (2007).
12.	 Hollis, E. R. 2nd et al. Ryk controls remapping of motor cortex 
during functional recovery after spinal cord injury. Nat. Neurosci. 
19, 697–705 (2016).
13.	 Bareyre, F. M. et al. The injured spinal cord spontaneously  
forms a new intraspinal circuit in adult rats. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 
269–277 (2004).
14.	 Hilton, B. J. et al. Reestablishment of cortical motor output maps 
and spontaneous functional recovery via spared dorsolaterally 
projecting corticospinal neurons after dorsal column spinal cord 
injury in adult mice. J. Neurosci. 36, 4080–4092 (2016).
15.	 Ghosh, A. et al. Rewiring of hindlimb corticospinal neurons after 
spinal cord injury. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 97–104 (2010).
16.	 Kaas, J. H. et al. Cortical and subcortical plasticity in the brains  
of humans, primates, and rats after damage to sensory afferents 
in the dorsal columns of the spinal cord. Exp. Neurol. 209, 
407–416 (2008).
17.	 Rosenzweig, E. S. et al. Extensive spontaneous plasticity of 
corticospinal projections after primate spinal cord injury. Nat. 
Neurosci. 13, 1505–1510 (2010).
18.	 Brand, Rvanden et al. Restoring voluntary control of locomotion 
after paralyzing spinal cord injury. Science 336, 1182–1185 (2012).
19.	 Rosenzweig, E. S. et al. Extensive spontaneous plasticity of 
corticospinal projections after primate spinal cord injury. Nat. 
Neurosci. 13, 1505–1510 (2010).
20.	 Rosenzweig, E. S. et al. Chondroitinase improves anatomical 
and functional outcomes after primate spinal cord injury. Nat. 
Neurosci. 22, 1269–1275 (2019).
21.	 Poplawski, G. H. D. et al. Injured adult neurons regress to an 
embryonic transcriptional growth state. Nature 581, 77–82 (2020).
22.	 Friedli, L. et al. Pronounced species divergence in corticospinal 
tract reorganization and functional recovery after lateralized 
spinal cord injury favors primates. Sci. Transl. Med. 7,  
302ra134 (2015).
23.	 Siegel, C. S., Fink, K. L., Strittmatter, S. M. & Cafferty, W. B. J. 
Plasticity of intact rubral projections mediates spontaneous 
recovery of function after corticospinal tract injury. J. Neurosci. 
35, 1443–1457 (2015).
24.	 Mosberger, A. C. et al. Axotomized corticospinal neurons increase 
supra-lesional innervation and remain crucial for skilled reaching 
after bilateral pyramidotomy. Cereb. Cortex 28, 625–643 (2017).
25.	 Zaaimi, B., Edgley, S. A., Soteropoulos, D. S. & Baker, S. N. 
Changes in descending motor pathway connectivity after 
corticospinal tract lesion in macaque monkey. Brain 135,  
2277–2289 (2012).

Nature Neuroscience
Review Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01196-1
26.	 Filli, L. et al. Bridging the gap: a reticulo-propriospinal detour 
bypassing an incomplete spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 34, 
13399–13410 (2014).
27.	 Kwon, B. K. et al. Survival and regeneration of rubrospinal neurons 
1 year after spinal cord injury. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 
3246–3251 (2002).
28.	 Alilain, W. J., Horn, K. P., Hu, H., Dick, T. E. & Silver, J. Functional 
regeneration of respiratory pathways after spinal cord injury. 
Nature 475, 196–200 (2011).
29.	 Müllner, A. et al. Lamina‐specific restoration of serotonergic 
projections after Nogo‐A antibody treatment of spinal cord injury 
in rats. Eur. J. Neurosci. 27, 326–333 (2008).
30.	 Sawada, M. et al. Function of the nucleus accumbens in motor 
control during recovery after spinal cord injury. Science 350, 
98–101 (2015).
31.	 Shik, M. L., Severin, F. V. & Orlovskiĭ, G. N. Control of walking and 
running by means of electric stimulation of the midbrain. Biofizika 
11, 659–666 (1966).
32.	 Ryczko, D. & Dubuc, R. The multifunctional mesencephalic 
locomotor region. Curr. Pharm. Des. 19, 4448–4470 (2013).
33.	 Bonizzato, M. et al. Multi-pronged neuromodulation  
intervention engages the residual motor circuitry to facilitate 
walking in a rat model of spinal cord injury. Nat. Commun. 12,  
1925 (2021).
34.	 Caggiano, V. et al. Midbrain circuits that set locomotor speed and 
gait selection. Nature 553, 455–460 (2018).
35.	 Esposito, M. S., Capelli, P. & Arber, S. Brainstem nucleus  
MdV mediates skilled forelimb motor tasks. Nature 508,  
351–356 (2014).
36.	 Ferreira-Pinto, M. J. et al. Functional diversity for body  
actions in the mesencephalic locomotor region. Cell 184, 
4564–4578 (2021).
37.	 Ruder, L. et al. A functional map for diverse forelimb actions 
within brainstem circuitry. Nature 590, 445–450 (2021).
38.	 Kinoshita, M. et al. Genetic dissection of the circuit for hand 
dexterity in primates. Nature 487, 235–238 (2012).
39.	 Chen, B. et al. Reactivation of dormant relay pathways in injured 
spinal cord by KCC2 manipulations. Cell 174, 521–535 (2018).
40.	 Courtine, G. et al. Recovery of supraspinal control of stepping via 
indirect propriospinal relay connections after spinal cord injury. 
Nat. Med. 14, 69–74 (2008).
41.	 García-Alías, G., Barkhuysen, S., Buckle, M. & Fawcett, J. W. 
Chondroitinase ABC treatment opens a window of opportunity for 
task-specific rehabilitation. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1145–1151 (2009).
42.	 Courtine, G. & Sofroniew, M. V. Spinal cord repair: advances in 
biology and technology. Nat. Med. 25, 898–908 (2019).
43.	 Lanuza, G. M., Gosgnach, S., Pierani, A., Jessell, T. M. & Goulding, 
M. Genetic identification of spinal interneurons that coordinate 
left–right locomotor activity necessary for walking movements. 
Neuron 42, 375–386 (2004).
44.	 Gosgnach, S. et al. V1 spinal neurons regulate the speed of 
vertebrate locomotor outputs. Nature 440, 215–219 (2006).
45.	 Courtine, G. et al. Transformation of nonfunctional spinal circuits 
into functional states after the loss of brain input. Nat. Neurosci. 
12, 1333–1342 (2009).
46.	 Caudle, K. L. et al. Hindlimb immobilization in a wheelchair alters 
functional recovery following contusive spinal cord injury in the 
adult rat. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 25, 729–739 (2011).
47.	 Côté, M.-P., Azzam, G. A., Lemay, M. A., Zhukareva, V. & Houlé, J. D. 
Activity-dependent increase in neurotrophic factors is associated 
with an enhanced modulation of spinal reflexes after spinal cord 
injury. J. Neurotrauma 28, 299–309 (2011).
48.	 Ichiyama, R. M. et al. Step training reinforces specific spinal 
locomotor circuitry in adult spinal rats. J. Neurosci. 28,  
7370–7375 (2008).
49.	 Takeoka, A., Vollenweider, I., Courtine, G. & Arber, S. Muscle 
spindle feedback directs locomotor recovery and circuit 
reorganization after spinal cord injury. Cell 159, 1626–1639 (2014).
50.	 Hutson, T. H. et al. Cbp-dependent histone acetylation  
mediates axon regeneration induced by environmental 
enrichment in rodent spinal cord injury models. Sci. Transl. Med. 
11, eaaw2064 (2019).
51.	 Satkunendrarajah, K., Karadimas, S. K., Laliberte, A. M., Montandon, 
G. & Fehlings, M. G. Cervical excitatory neurons sustain breathing 
after spinal cord injury. Nature 562, 419–422 (2018).
52.	 Kathe, C. et al. The neurons that restore walking after paralysis. 
Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05385-7 (2022).
53.	 Zholudeva, L. V., Karliner, J. S., Dougherty, K. J. & Lane, M. A. 
Anatomical recruitment of spinal V2a interneurons into  
phrenic motor circuitry after high cervical spinal cord injury.  
J. Neurotrauma 34, 3058–3065 (2017).
54.	 Bui, T. V., Stifani, N., Akay, T. & Brownstone, R. M. Spinal 
microcircuits comprising dI3 interneurons are necessary for 
motor functional recovery following spinal cord transection. Elife 
5, e21715 (2016).
55.	 Sathyamurthy, A. et al. Massively parallel single nucleus 
transcriptional profiling defines spinal cord neurons and their 
activity during behavior. Cell Rep. 22, 2216–2225 (2018).
56.	 Russ, D. E. et al. A harmonized atlas of mouse spinal cord cell 
types and their spatial organization. Nat. Commun. 12, 5722 (2021).
57.	 Overman, J. J. & Carmichael, S. T. Plasticity in the injured brain. 
Neuroscientist 20, 15–28 (2014).
58.	 Pozo, K. & Goda, Y. Unraveling mechanisms of homeostatic 
synaptic plasticity. Neuron 66, 337–351 (2010).
59.	 Squair, J. W., West, C. R. & Krassioukov, A. V. Neuroprotection, 
plasticity manipulation, and regenerative strategies to  
improve cardiovascular function following spinal cord injury.  
J. Neurotrauma 32, 609–621 (2015).
60.	 Krassioukov, A. V., Johns, D. G. & Schramm, L. P. Sensitivity of 
sympathetically correlated spinal interneurons, renal sympathetic 
nerve activity, and arterial pressure to somatic and visceral stimuli 
after chronic spinal injury. J. Neurotrauma 19, 1521–1529 (2002).
61.	 Brennan, F. H. et al. Acute post-injury blockade of α2̣δ-1 calcium 
channel subunits prevents pathological autonomic plasticity after 
spinal cord injury. Cell Rep. 34, 108667 (2021).
62.	 Li, Y. et al. Pericytes impair capillary blood flow and motor 
function after chronic spinal cord injury. Nat. Med. 23,  
733–741 (2017).
63.	 D’Amico, J. M. et al. Constitutively active 5-HT2/α1 receptors 
facilitate muscle spasms after human spinal cord injury. J. 
Neurophysiol. 109, 1473–1484 (2013).
64.	 Husch, A. et al. Spinal cord injury induces serotonin 
supersensitivity without increasing intrinsic excitability of mouse 
V2a Interneurons. J. Neurosci. 32, 13145–13154 (2012).
65.	 Boulenguez, P. et al. Down-regulation of the potassium-chloride 
cotransporter KCC2 contributes to spasticity after spinal cord 
injury. Nat. Med. 16, 302–307 (2010).
66.	 Bellardita, C. et al. Spatiotemporal correlation of spinal network 
dynamics underlying spasms in chronic spinalized mice. Elife 6, 
e23011 (2017).
67.	 Marcantoni, M. et al. Early delivery and prolonged treatment with 
nimodipine prevents the development of spasticity after spinal 
cord injury in mice. Sci. Transl. Med. 12, eaay0167 (2020).
68.	 Beauparlant, J. et al. Undirected compensatory plasticity 
contributes to neuronal dysfunction after severe spinal cord 
injury. Brain 136, 3347–3361 (2013).
69.	 Elbasiouny, S. M., Moroz, D., Bakr, M. M. & Mushahwar, V. K. 
Management of spasticity after spinal cord injury: current 
techniques and future directions. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 24, 
23–33 (2010).

Nature Neuroscience
Review Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01196-1
70.	 Groat, W. C de & Yoshimura, N. Mechanisms underlying the 
recovery of lower urinary tract function following spinal cord 
injury. Prog. Brain Res. 152, 59–84 (2006).
71.	 Kramer, J. L. K. et al. Neuropathic pain following traumatic spinal 
cord injury: models, measurement and mechanisms. J. Neurosci. 
Res. 95, 1295–1306 (2017).
72.	 Hou, S. & Rabchevsky, A. G. Autonomic consequences of spinal 
cord injury. Compr. Physiol. 4, 1419–1453 (2017).
73.	 Zholudeva, L. V. et al. Spinal Interneurons as gatekeepers  
to neuroplasticity after injury or disease. J. Neurosci. 41,  
845–854 (2021).
74.	 Manno, G. L. et al. Molecular architecture of the developing 
mouse brain. Nature 596, 92–96 (2021).
75.	 Squair, J. W. et al. Confronting false discoveries in single-cell 
differential expression. Nat. Commun. 12, 5692 (2021).
76.	 Cao, J. et al. The single-cell transcriptional landscape of 
mammalian organogenesis. Nature 566, 496–502 (2019).
77.	 Zappia, L. & Theis, F. J. Over 1,000 tools reveal trends in the 
single-cell RNA-seq analysis landscape. Genome Biol. 22,  
301 (2021).
78.	 Bonizzato, M. & Martinez, M. An intracortical neuroprosthesis 
immediately alleviates walking deficits and improves recovery  
of leg control after spinal cord injury. Sci. Transl. Med. 13, 
eabb4422 (2021).
79.	 Carmel, J. B., Kimura, H. & Martin, J. H. Electrical stimulation of 
motor cortex in the uninjured hemisphere after chronic unilateral 
injury promotes recovery of skilled locomotion through ipsilateral 
control. J. Neurosci. 34, 462–466 (2014).
80.	 Nishimura, Y., Perlmutter, S. I., Eaton, R. W. & Fetz, E. E. 
Spike-timing-dependent plasticity in primate corticospinal 
connections induced during free behavior. Neuron 80,  
1301–1309 (2013).
81.	 McPherson, J. G., Miller, R. R. & Perlmutter, S. I. Targeted, 
activity-dependent spinal stimulation produces long-lasting 
motor recovery in chronic cervical spinal cord injury. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 112, 12193–12198 (2015).
82.	 Christiansen, L. & Perez, M. A. Targeted-plasticity in 
the corticospinal tract after human spinal cord injury. 
Neurotherapeutics 15, 618–627 (2018).
83.	 Darrow, M. J. et al. Vagus nerve stimulation paired with 
rehabilitative training enhances motor recovery after bilateral 
spinal cord injury to cervical forelimb motor pools. Neurorehabil. 
Neural Repair 34, 200–209 (2020).
84.	 Ganzer, P. D. et al. Closed-loop neuromodulation restores network 
connectivity and motor control after spinal cord injury. Elife 7, 
e32058 (2018).
85.	 Thevathasan, W. et al. Pedunculopontine nucleus deep brain 
stimulation in Parkinson’s disease: a clinical review. Mov. Disord. 
33, 10–20 (2018).
86.	 Sherrington, C. S. The Integrative Action of The Nervous System 
https://doi.org/10.1037/13798-000 (Yale Univ. Press, 1906).
87.	 Dimitrijevic, M. R., Gerasimenko, Y. & Pinter, M. M. Evidence for 
a spinal central pattern generator in humans. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 
860, 360–376 (1998).
88.	 Angeli, C. A. et al. Recovery of over-ground walking after  
chronic motor complete spinal cord injury. N. Engl. J. Med. 379, 
1244–1250 (2018).
89.	 Wagner, F. B. et al. Targeted neurotechnology restores walking in 
humans with spinal cord injury. Nature 563, 65–71 (2018).
90.	 Holinski, B. J., Mazurek, K. A., Everaert, D. G., Stein, R. B. & 
Mushahwar, V. K. Restoring stepping after spinal cord injury using 
intraspinal microstimulation and novel control strategies. Annu. 
Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2011, 5798–5801 (2011).
91.	 Gerasimenko, Y. et al. Transcutaneous electrical spinal-cord 
stimulation in humans. Ann. Phys. Rehabil. Med. 58, 225–231 (2015).
92.	 Harkema, S. et al. Effect of epidural stimulation of the lumbosacral 
spinal cord on voluntary movement, standing, and assisted 
stepping after motor complete paraplegia: a case study. Lancet 
377, 1938–1947 (2011).
93.	 Barbeau, H. & Rossignol, S. Recovery of locomotion  
after chronic spinalization in the adult cat. Brain Res. 412,  
84–95 (1987).
94.	 Capogrosso, M. et al. A computational model for epidural 
electrical stimulation of spinal sensorimotor circuits. J. Neurosci. 
33, 19326–19340 (2013).
95.	 Formento, E. et al. Electrical spinal cord stimulation must 
preserve proprioception to enable locomotion in humans with 
spinal cord injury. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1728–1741 (2018).
96.	 Meyer, C. et al. Immediate effects of transcutaneous  
spinal cord stimulation on motor function in chronic, 
sensorimotor incomplete spinal cord injury. J. Clin. Med. 9,  
3541 (2020).
97.	 Moraud, E. M. et al. Mechanisms underlying the neuromodulation 
of spinal circuits for correcting gait and balance deficits after 
spinal cord injury. Neuron 89, 814–828 (2016).
98.	 Wenger, N. et al. Spatiotemporal neuromodulation therapies 
engaging muscle synergies improve motor control after spinal 
cord injury. Nat. Med. 22, 138–145 (2016).
99.	 Capogrosso, M. et al. A brain–spine interface alleviating  
gait deficits after spinal cord injury in primates. Nature 539, 
284–288 (2016).
100.	Minev, I. R. et al. Electronic dura mater for long-term multimodal 
neural interfaces. Science 347, 159–163 (2015).
101.	 Capogrosso, M. et al. Configuration of electrical spinal cord 
stimulation through real-time processing of gait kinematics. Nat. 
Protoc. 13, 2031–2061 (2018).
102.	Cappellini, G., Ivanenko, Y. P., Dominici, N., Poppele, R. E. & 
Lacquaniti, F. Migration of motor pool activity in the spinal cord 
reflects body mechanics in human locomotion. J. Neurophysiol. 
104, 3064–3073 (2010).
103.	Rowald, A. et al. Activity-dependent spinal cord neuromodulation 
rapidly restores trunk and leg motor functions after complete 
paralysis. Nat. Med. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-021-01663-5 
(2022).
104.	Barra, B. et al. Epidural electrical stimulation of the cervical dorsal 
roots restores voluntary upper limb control in paralyzed monkeys. 
Nat. Neurosci. 25, 924–934 (2022).
105.	Lu, D. C. et al. Engaging cervical spinal cord networks to 
reenable volitional control of hand function in tetraplegic 
patients. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 30, 951–962 (2016).
106.	Fouad, K., Popovich, P. G., Kopp, M. A. & Schwab, J. M. The 
neuroanatomical–functional paradox in spinal cord injury. Nat. 
Rev. Neurol. 17, 53–62 (2021).
107.	 Schnell, L. & Schwab, M. E. Axonal regeneration in the rat spinal 
cord produced by an antibody against myelin-associated neurite 
growth inhibitors. Nature 343, 269–272 (1990).
108.	Lee, J. K. et al. Assessing spinal axon regeneration and  
sprouting in Nogo-, MAG- and OMgp-deficient mice. Neuron 66, 
663–670 (2010).
109.	Squair, J. W., Gautier, M., Sofroniew, M. V., Courtine, G. & 
Anderson, M. A. Engineering spinal cord repair. Curr. Opin. 
Biotech. 72, 48–53 (2021).
110.	 Hellal, F. et al. Microtubule stabilization reduces scarring and 
causes axon regeneration after spinal cord injury. Science 331, 
928–931 (2011).
111.	 Park, K. K. et al. Promoting axon regeneration in the adult  
CNS by modulation of the PTEN/mTOR pathway. Science 322, 
963–966 (2008).
112.	 Sun, F. et al. Sustained axon regeneration induced by co-deletion 
of PTEN and SOCS3. Nature 480, 372–375 (2011).

Nature Neuroscience
Review Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01196-1
113.	 Wang, Z., Reynolds, A., Kirry, A., Nienhaus, C. & Blackmore, 
M. G. Overexpression of Sox11 promotes corticospinal tract 
regeneration after spinal injury while interfering with functional 
recovery. J. Neurosci. 35, 3139–3145 (2015).
114.	 Liu, Y. et al. A sensitized IGF1 treatment restores corticospinal 
axon-dependent functions. Neuron 95, 817–833 (2017).
115.	 Anderson, M. A. et al. Required growth facilitators propel axon 
regeneration across complete spinal cord injury. Nature 561, 
396–400 (2018).
116.	 Wang, Z. et al. KLF6 and STAT3 co-occupy regulatory DNA and 
functionally synergize to promote axon growth in CNS neurons. 
Sci. Rep. 8, 12565 (2018).
117.	 Stern, S. et al. RhoA drives actin compaction to restrict axon 
regeneration and astrocyte reactivity after CNS injury. Neuron 
109, 3436–3455 (2021).
118.	 Anderson, M. A. Targeting central nervous system regeneration 
with cell type specificity. Neurosurg. Clin. N. Am. 32,  
397–405 (2021).
119.	 Lovett-Barr, M. R. et al. Repetitive intermittent hypoxia induces 
respiratory and somatic motor recovery after chronic cervical 
spinal injury. J. Neurosci. 32, 3591–3600 (2012).
120.	Duan, X. et al. Subtype-specific regeneration of retinal ganglion 
cells following axotomy: effects of osteopontin and mTOR 
signaling. Neuron 85, 1244–1256 (2015).
121.	 Anderson, M. A. et al. Astrocyte scar formation aids  
central nervous system axon regeneration. Nature 532,  
195–200 (2016).
122.	Ramón y Cajal, S., DeFelipe, J. & Jones, E. G. Cajal’s Degeneration 
and Regeneration of the Nervous System (Oxford Univ. Press, 
Oxford, 1991).
123.	Alto, L. T. et al. Chemotropic guidance facilitates axonal 
regeneration and synapse formation after spinal cord injury. Nat. 
Neurosci. 12, 1106–1113 (2009).
124.	Lu, P. et al. Motor axonal regeneration after partial and complete 
spinal cord transection. J. Neurosci. 32, 8208–8218 (2012).
125.	Assinck, P., Duncan, G. J., Hilton, B. J., Plemel, J. R. & Tetzlaff, W. 
Cell transplantation therapy for spinal cord injury. Nat. Neurosci. 
20, 637–647 (2017).
126.	Lu, P. et al. Long-distance growth and connectivity of neural stem 
cells after severe spinal cord injury. Cell 150, 1264–1273 (2012).
127.	 Rosenzweig, E. S. et al. Restorative effects of human neural  
stem cell grafts on the primate spinal cord. Nat. Med. 24, 
484–490 (2018).
128.	Abematsu, M. et al. Neurons derived from transplanted neural 
stem cells restore disrupted neuronal circuitry in a mouse model 
of spinal cord injury. J. Clin. Invest. 120, 3255–3266 (2010).
129.	Zholudeva, L. V. et al. Transplantation of neural progenitors and 
V2a interneurons after spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 35, 
2883–2903 (2018).
130.	Rocca, M. A. et al. Clinical and imaging assessment of  
cognitive dysfunction in multiple sclerosis. Lancet Neurol. 14, 
302–317 (2015).
131.	 Chung, K. & Deisseroth, K. CLARITY for mapping the nervous 
system. Nat. Methods 10, 508–513 (2013).
132.	Srivatsan, S. R. et al. Embryo-scale, single-cell spatial 
transcriptomics. Science 373, 111–117 (2021).
133.	Fenno, L. E. et al. Targeting cells with single vectors  
using multiple-feature Boolean logic. Nat. Methods 11,  
763–772 (2014).
134.	Bruns, T. M., Weber, D. J. & Gaunt, R. A. Microstimulation of 
afferents in the sacral dorsal root ganglia can evoke reflex bladder 
activity. Neurourol. Urodyn. 34, 65–71 (2015).
135.	West, C. R. et al. Association of epidural stimulation with 
cardiovascular function in an individual with spinal cord injury. 
JAMA Neurol. 75, 630–632 (2018).
136.	Squair, J. W. et al. Neuroprosthetic baroreflex controls 
haemodynamics after spinal cord injury. Nature 590,  
308–314 (2021).
137.	 Squair, J. W. et al. Implanted system for orthostatic hypotension in 
multiple-system atrophy. N. Engl. J. Med. 386, 1339–1344 (2022).
138.	Göritz, C. et al. A pericyte origin of spinal cord scar tissue. Science 
333, 238–242 (2011).
139.	Soderblom, C. et al. Perivascular fibroblasts form the  
fibrotic scar after contusive spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 33, 
13882–13887 (2013).
140.	Dorrier, C. E. et al. CNS fibroblasts form a fibrotic scar in response 
to immune cell infiltration. Nat. Neurosci. 24, 234–244 (2021).
141.	 Dias, D. O. et al. Reducing pericyte-derived scarring promotes 
recovery after spinal cord injury. Cell 173, 153–165 (2018).
142.	Herrmann, J. E. et al. STAT3 is a critical regulator of astrogliosis 
and scar formation after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 28, 
7231–7243 (2008).
143.	Chen, M. et al. Leucine zipper-bearing kinase is a critical regulator 
of astrocyte reactivity in the adult mammalian CNS. Cell Rep. 22, 
3587–3597 (2018).
144.	Wanner, I. B. et al. Glial scar borders are formed by newly 
proliferated, elongated astrocytes that interact to corral 
inflammatory and fibrotic cells via STAT3-dependent mechanisms 
after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 33, 12870–12886 (2013).
145.	Anderson, M. A., Ao, Y. & Sofroniew, M. V. Heterogeneity of 
reactive astrocytes. Neurosci. Lett. 565, 23–29 (2014).
146.	Faulkner, J. R. et al. Reactive astrocytes protect tissue and 
preserve function after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 24, 
2143–2155 (2004).
147.	 Bartus, K. et al. Large-scale chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 
digestion with chondroitinase gene therapy leads to reduced 
pathology and modulates macrophage phenotype following 
spinal cord contusion injury. J. Neurosci. 34, 4822–4836 (2014).
148.	Liu, K. et al. PTEN deletion enhances the regenerative  
ability of adult corticospinal neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 13,  
1075–1081 (2010).
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge support from Defitech Foundation, the Swiss 
National Science Foundation (Ambizione Fellowship PZ00P3_185728 
to M.A.A.) and subsidy to G.C. (310030_192558), Swiss National 
Science Foundation (32003BE_205563), European Research Council 
(ERC-2015-CoG HOW2WALKAGAIN 682999; Marie Sklodowska-Curie 
individual fellowship 842578 to J.W.S.), H2020-MSCA-COFUND-2016 
EPFL Fellows program (665667 to C.K.), the Morton Cure Paralysis 
Foundation (to M.A.A.), the ALARME Foundation (to M.A.A. and G.C.) 
and the Human Frontiers in Science Program long-term fellowship 
(LT001278/2017-L to C.K.).
Competing interests
G.C., J.B. and J.W.S. hold various patents in relation with some of the 
present work. G.C. and J.B. are consultants of ONWARD medical. G.C. 
and J.B. are minority shareholders of ONWARD, a company with partial 
relationships with some of the presented work. The remaining authors 
declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondence should be addressed to Grégoire Courtine.
Peer review information Nature Neuroscience thanks Vicki Tysseling 
and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the 
peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at  
www.nature.com/reprints.

Nature Neuroscience
Review Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01196-1
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds 
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with 
the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the 
accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the 
terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
© Springer Nature America, Inc. 2022

===== Andersson2021_Science_LiverProliferationZone =====
SCIENCE  sciencemag.org
pressive series of experiments on the F + 
HD reaction that test the theory of chemi-
cal reactions to new limits have reached 
their limit. For three-atom reactions, the 
end seems nearer than ever before. How-
ever, although the authors have controlled 
and measured the energy of the reactants 
and products with quantum-state preci-
sion, there is one final quantum number 
that is left to be controlled and measured: 
the magnetic quantum number mji of each 
angular momentum ji (where the subscript 
i can be F, HD, HF, or D), which is the pro-
jection of each ji on a laboratory axis and 
determines the relative spatial orientation 
of the angular momenta of the reactants 
and products. 
For example, selection of mjF can con-
trol whether the F-atom p orbital is pref-
erentially parallel or perpendicular to the 
F velocity vector, and selection of mjHD 
(for jHD > 0) can control whether the HD 
bond is preferentially parallel or perpen-
dicular to the HD velocity vector. Such 
control provides intuitive models of the 
reactive encounter, whereas the reduction 
in the averaging over all possible orienta-
tions will further amplify resonance effects 
and will test theory even more stringently. 
Methods for the control and measurement 
of the angular momentum orientation of 
HD, halogen atoms, HF, and D atoms have 
been demonstrated (4–7), opening the way 
for such m-state–resolved experiments.
Progression to experiments with larger 
systems is also an obvious next step. 
Recently, theory explained the cold HCl ro-
tational distributions from the nine-atom 
Cl + C2H6 
 HCl + C2H5 reaction (8), re-
solving a nearly 25-year discrepancy with 
the experimental measurements. The close 
interplay between theory and experiment 
continues in the long quest to understand 
chemical reactivity and reactions of in-
creasing complexity. j 
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1.  T. Wang et al., Chem. Soc. Rev. 47, 6744 (2018).  
 2.  W. Chen et al., Science 371, 936 (2021).
 3.  Z. Sun, D. H. Zhang, M. H. Alexander, J. Chem. Phys. 132, 
034308 (2010).  
 4.  N. C. M. Bartlett et al., J. Chem. Phys. 129, 084312 
(2008).  
 5.  A. P. Clark, M. Brouard, F. Quadrini, C. Vallance, Phys. 
Chem. Chem. Phys. 8, 5591 (2006).  
 6.  A. Kvaran, O. F. Sigurbjornsson, H. S. Wang, J. Mol. Struct. 
790, 27 (2006). 
 7.  B. M. Broderick et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 85, 053103 
(2014).  
 8.  D. Papp, V. Tajti, T. Győri, G. Czakó, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 11, 
4762 (2020).  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge X. Yang for providing the 
data for the figure and G. Katsoprinakis for assistance 
in its preparation.
10.1126/science.abg3184
By Emma R. Andersson
I
n humans, the liver is the most regener-
ative solid organ, able to regrow to nor-
mal size after removal of up to 90% of 
the liver volume (1, 2). The liver is also 
distinct because it scales with body size, 
a characteristic that has been attributed 
to a “hepatostat” that adjusts liver size to 
the needs of the body (3). Identifying the 
cells contributing to liver homeostasis and 
repair could lead to therapies that can acti-
vate specific cellular compartments respon-
sible for regeneration. On pages 906 and 
905 of this issue, Wei et al. (4) and He et al. 
(5), respectively, find that, in mice, a subset 
of cells in a particular region of the liver, 
called midlobular zone 2, 
are the major contributors 
to hepatocyte prolifera-
tion during homeostasis 
and identify other hepa-
tocyte subsets that con-
tribute to regeneration 
after damage. This raises 
questions regarding the 
mechanisms that induce 
hepatocyte 
proliferation 
and the zonal division of 
labor with respect to the 
hepatostat.
At first glance, the liver 
appears to be composed 
of a “simple” repeating 
architectural element, the 
liver lobule. Conceptually, 
the liver lobule is a hexagonal unit with 
a central vein in the middle and a portal 
vein, hepatic artery, and bile duct (lined 
by biliary cells) at each of its six corners, 
separated by hepatocyte sinusoids and 
other cell types (see the figure). However, 
a strategic division of labor in the liver is 
achieved through specialization of cellular 
roles as a function of the architectural gra-
dient (6–8) from the portal or central vein, 
spanning three zones from periportal to 
midlobular to pericentral. Most emphasis 
thus far has been placed on the specializa-
tion of the periportal zone (zone 1), which 
is enriched for gluconeogenesis and cho-
lesterol and urea biosynthesis functions, 
and the pericentral zone (zone 3), which 
is enriched for glycolysis and glutamine 
and bile acid biosynthesis functions. Less 
is known of the role of zone 2, which has 
largely been considered a transition zone, 
in addition to its function in the regulation 
of iron concentration in the blood (6).
Both hepatocytes (9, 10) and biliary cells 
(11–13) can contribute to regeneration of 
hepatocytes, depending on the context. 
Although a tendency toward repopulation 
from zone 2 had been noted, homeostatic 
proliferation has been suggested to be 
broadly and relatively equally distributed 
among different liver zones. The studies of 
Wei et al. and He et al. describe new tools 
to trace and identify proliferating cells in 
liver. By indelibly labeling 
cells of interest at a given 
time point and examining 
their status at a later time 
point, it is possible to 
trace the lineages of cells 
derived from the origi-
nal cells of interest to 
unravel principles of de-
velopment, homeostasis, 
or pathology (14). The 
workhorse of genetic lin-
eage tracing uses induc-
tion of permanent expres-
sion of a fluorophore, 
through excision of an 
upstream stop cassette 
by site-specific recombi-
nases (SSRs), usually the 
Cre-LoxP system. By directing SSR expres-
sion to specific cell types using cell type– 
or cell function–specific promotors, dis-
tinct cell types, or cells undergoing defined 
processes, can be followed over time. 
Maintaining liver size in normal condi-
tions, during homeostasis, requires repopu-
lation of cells lost because of normal turn-
over. By contrast, in response to damage, 
cells must regenerate damaged tissue. To 
determine the competence of hepatocytes 
in different zones to repopulate or regen-
erate the liver, Wei et al. generated 11 new 
conditional Cre mouse strains that allow in-
ducible fluorescent labeling of hepatocytes 
in different zones and performed lineage 
tracing with these and three other extant 
Cre strains under homeostatic or damaging 
conditions. To exclusively trace proliferat-
REGENERATION
In the zone for liver proliferation
Distinct liver compartments contribute to hepatocyte 
homeostasis versus regeneration
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.  Email: emma.andersson@ki.se
“By distributing 
proliferative potential 
widely across zones...
the liver achieves 
a capacity to rapidly 
respond to damage 
with proliferation of 
the healthiest 
hepatocytes without 
the use of stem cells.”
26 FEBRUARY 2021 • VOL 371 ISSUE 6532    887
Published by AAAS
on March 10, 2021
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 

INSIGHTS  |  PERSPECTIVES
sciencemag.org  SCIENCE
GRAPHIC: N.DESAI/SCIENCE
ing cells in a cell type–specific 
and inducible manner, He et al. 
developed a strategy to induc-
ibly and permanently fluores-
cently label specific proliferating 
cells using combinatorial SSRs, 
dubbed ProTracer. Collectively, 
using these new tools and ap-
proaches 
demonstrated 
that 
zone 2 midlobular hepatocytes 
are the main source of repopu-
lating hepatocytes during ho-
meostasis but that regeneration 
of hepatocytes is dependent on 
where the liver injury occurs. 
Random lineage tracing after 
liver injury has demonstrated 
that periportal and midlobu-
lar 
hepatocytes 
reconstitute 
liver after a pericentral injury, 
whereas pericentral and mid-
lobular hepatocytes reconsti-
tute liver after periportal injury 
(9). Although hepatocytes from 
all zones have the capacity to 
proliferate, Wei et al. show that 
during homeostasis, zone 1 he-
patocytes diminish in number, 
whereas zone 3 hepatocytes 
remain steady in number. By 
contrast, zone 2 hepatocytes in-
crease more than threefold over 
a year, suggesting that zone 2 
hepatocytes are the main source 
of 
proliferating 
hepatocytes 
during homeostatic conditions, confirm-
ing previous work using random rainbow 
lineage tracing (9). Similar to previous 
findings, the response to periportal injury 
resulted in expansion of zone 3– and zone 
2–traced hepatocytes, whereas pericentral 
injury resulted in expansion of zone 1– and 
zone 2–traced hepatocytes. It is thus now 
clear that the capacity of hepatocytes to 
proliferate is broadly spread among lobule 
zones but that predominantly zone 2 he-
patocytes maintain homeostasis, whereas 
predominantly zone 1 and zone 3 hepa-
tocytes respond to injury and repopulate 
the liver after injury to zones 3 and 1, re-
spectively. Liver function and repair are 
thus maintained by hepatocytes in general 
and not by a rare stem cell population. 
Thanks to these newly developed mouse 
Cre strains, it will be possible to unravel 
exactly which hepatocytes and signaling 
mechanisms contribute to liver homeosta-
sis, growth, repair, or cancer. It will also 
be interesting to investigate the sexual di-
morphism of increased liver regeneration 
in females. 
ProTracer is an interesting approach to 
tracing cells that have proliferated. This 
method allows inducible lineage tracing of 
cells that proliferate from a specific time 
point. During homeostasis, continuous pro-
liferation tracing using ProTracer showed 
that zone 2 hepatocytes proliferate twice 
as much as zone 1 hepatocytes and eight 
times more than zone 3 hepatocytes, fur-
ther strengthening the concept that zone 
2 hepatocytes are the main contributors to 
liver homeostasis. By contrast, regeneration 
after partial hepatectomy in which whole 
liver lobes are removed, and which induces 
enlargement of the remaining liver lobes, 
was first dominated by proliferation of zone 
1 hepatocytes (at 40 hours), and by 7 days, 
zones 1 and 2 were 80% populated by he-
patocytes that had undergone proliferation, 
whereas only half of zone 3 hepatocytes had 
undergone proliferation. 
The ProTracer mouse model opens up 
the possibility of tracing cell proliferation 
from adult stages over longer time scales 
(several months) in a continuous manner, 
enabling the identification of slowly cy-
cling cells and rare stem cells in various or-
gans. This may unveil previously unknown 
stem cell populations. In the liver, regen-
eration after injury is usually maintained 
by cells with phenotypic fidelity: Typically, 
hepatocytes regenerate hepatocytes, and 
biliary cells regenerate biliary 
cells. By distributing prolif-
erative potential widely across 
zones, and soliciting recovery 
from the least-damaged regions, 
the liver achieves a capacity to 
rapidly respond to damage with 
proliferation of the healthiest 
hepatocytes without the use 
of stem cells. Whether specific 
hepatocyte zones are more or 
less important for regeneration 
and whether certain hepatotox-
ins are more damaging because 
they target important subsets of 
hepatocytes are questions that 
can be addressed with these 
new tools.
The studies of Wei et al. and 
He et al. raise several questions. 
Zone 1 hepatocytes proliferate 
far more than zone 3 hepato-
cytes, yet zone 1 hepatocyte 
numbers decline with time, 
whereas zone 3 numbers remain 
steady. Do hepatocytes have dif-
ferent life spans depending on 
their location? It is also unclear 
which molecular mechanisms 
induce zone-specific hepatocyte 
proliferation in response to dis-
tinct modes of injury; perhaps 
these can be leveraged thera-
peutically to induce or acceler-
ate regeneration of hepatocytes. 
Although hepatocytes can transdifferenti-
ate to regenerate the biliary tree (15), it is 
not yet known whether transdifferentia-
tion is a function of only a subset of he-
patocytes and whether this also could be 
leveraged therapeutically to induce regen-
eration in biliary diseases. These questions 
and others can now begin to be addressed, 
building a foundation to approach liver 
disease therapeutically. j 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
 1.  A. P. Monaco, J. Hallgrimsson, W. V. McDermott Jr., Ann. 
Surg. 159, 513 (1964).  
 2.  B. Cady, M. Bonneval, H. R. Fender Jr., Am. J. Surg. 137, 
514 (1979).  
 3.  G. K. Michalopoulos, B. Bhushan, Nat. Rev. 
Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 18, 40 (2021).  
 4.  Y. Wei et al., Science 371, eabb1625 (2021).
 5.  L. He et al., Science 371, eabc4346 (2021). 
 6.  K. B. Halpern et al., Nature 542, 352 (2017).  
 7.  K. B. Halpern et al., Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 962 (2018).  
 8.  A. Braeuning et al., FEBS J. 273, 5051 (2006).  
 9.  F. Chen et al., Cell Stem Cell 26, 27 (2020).  
 10.  Y. Malato et al., J. Clin. Invest. 121, 4850 (2011).  
 11.  A. Raven et al., Nature 547, 350 (2017).  
 12. X. Deng et al., Cell Stem Cell 23, 114 (2018).  
 13.  J. O. Russell et al., Hepatology 69, 742 (2019).  
 14.  C. S. Baron, A. van Oudenaarden, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
20, 753 (2019).  
 15.  J. R. Schaub et al., Nature 557, 247 (2018).  
10.1126/science.abg4864
Homeostatic 
proliferation
Central
vein
Portal
vein
Hepatic
artery
Bile 
duct
Portal triad
Damage-dependent 
regenerative 
proliferation
Periportal
Zone 1
Midlobular
Zone 2
Pericentral
Zone 3
One liver lobule
Mouse liver with 
four main lobes
Liver lobules
Hepatocyte
888    26 FEBRUARY 2021 • VOL 371 ISSUE 6532
Hepatocyte repopulation and regeneration
Liver architecture is defined by repeating units, called liver lobules, which 
have a hexagonal structure with a central vein and a portal triad (portal 
vein, hepatic artery, and bile duct) at each corner, separated by hepatocytes. 
Hepatocytes exhibit specialized functions from the portal vein to the central 
vein, creating three zones. Zone 2 hepatocytes are the main contributors to 
homeostatic proliferation, whereas hepatocytes in zones 1 and 3 are 
capable of regenerating liver after damage to zones 3 and 1, respectively. 
Published by AAAS
on March 10, 2021
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 

In the zone for liver proliferation
Emma R. Andersson
DOI: 10.1126/science.abg4864
 (6532), 887-888.
371
Science 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/371/6532/887
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/12/535/eaav8075.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/12/539/eaaw8523.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/12/551/eaba5146.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/12/572/eaba4448.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/371/6532/eabb1625.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/371/6532/eabc4346.full
REFERENCES
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/371/6532/887#BIBL
This article cites 15 articles, 2 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title 
(print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science 
Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works
Copyright © 2021 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of
on March 10, 2021
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from

===== Arneson2018_NatComm_TBI+scRNAseq =====
ARTICLE
Single cell molecular alterations reveal target cells
and pathways of concussive brain injury
Douglas Arneson1,2, Guanglin Zhang1, Zhe Ying1, Yumei Zhuang1, Hyae Ran Byun1, In Sook Ahn1,
Fernando Gomez-Pinilla1,3,4 & Xia Yang
1,2,5,6
The complex neuropathology of traumatic brain injury (TBI) is difﬁcult to dissect, given the
convoluted cytoarchitecture of affected brain regions such as the hippocampus. Hippocampal
dysfunction during TBI results in cognitive decline that may escalate to other neurological
disorders, the molecular basis of which is hidden in the genomic programs of individual cells.
Using the unbiased single cell sequencing method Drop-seq, we report that concussive TBI
affects previously undeﬁned cell populations, in addition to classical hippocampal cell types.
TBI also impacts cell type-speciﬁc genes and pathways and alters gene co-expression across
cell types, suggesting hidden pathogenic mechanisms and therapeutic target pathways.
Modulating the thyroid hormone pathway as informed by the T4 transporter transthyretin Ttr
mitigates TBI-associated genomic and behavioral abnormalities. Thus, single cell genomics
provides unique information about how TBI impacts diverse hippocampal cell types, adding
new insights into the pathogenic pathways amenable to therapeutics in TBI and related
disorders.
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
OPEN
1 Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 2 Bioinformatics Interdepartmental
Program, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 3 Department of Neurosurgery, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 4 Brain Injury Research Center, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 5 Institute for Quantitative and
Computational Biosciences, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 6 Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to F.G-P. (email: fgomezpi@ucla.edu)
or to X.Y. (email: xyang123@ucla.edu)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;

T
raumatic brain injury (TBI) is common in domestic,
sports, and military environments and often leads to long-
term neurological and psychiatric disorders1. The hippo-
campus is a member of the limbic system and plays a major role
in learning and memory storage. As a major aspect of the TBI
pathology2, hippocampal dysfunction leads to memory loss and
cognitive impairment. The hippocampal formation encompasses
four Cornu Ammonis (CA) subﬁelds largely composed of pyr-
amidal cells, and their connections with dentate gyrus (DG) cells.
The CA—DG circuitry has served as a model to study synaptic
plasticity underlying learning and memory. Glial cells are vital to
the hippocampal cytoarchitecture, however, their interactions
with neuronal cells are poorly deﬁned. The heterogeneous
properties of the hippocampal cytoarchitecture have limited the
understanding of the mechanisms involved in the TBI pathology.
Mild TBI (mTBI) is particularly difﬁcult to diagnose given its
broad pathology, such that there are no accepted biomarkers for
mTBI3. This limitation becomes an even more pressing issue
given the accumulating clinical evidence that mTBI poses a sig-
niﬁcant risk for neurological and psychiatric disorders associated
with the hippocampus such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD), chronic
traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), epilepsy, and dementia4. Accordingly, there is an urgent
need to identify functional landmarks with predictive power
within the hippocampus to address current demands in clinical
neuroscience.
Given that gene regulatory programs determine cellular func-
tions, scrutiny of large-scale genomic changes can reveal clues to
the molecular determinants of mTBI pathogenesis including
cellular dysfunction, injury recovery, treatment response, and
disease predisposition. However, existing genomic proﬁling stu-
dies of mTBI are based on heterogeneous mixtures of cell con-
glomerates5–9
which
mask
crucial
signals
from
the
most
vulnerable cell types. Here, we report the results of a high
throughput parallel single cell sequencing study, using Drop-seq,
to capture mTBI-induced alterations in gene regulation in thou-
sands of individual hippocampal cells in an unbiased manner. We
focus on concussive injury, the most common form of mTBI,
using a mild ﬂuid percussion injury (FPI) mouse model which
induces identiﬁable hippocampal-dependent behavioral deﬁcits
despite minimal cell death10. We examine the hippocampus at 24
h post-mTBI, as this is a pivotal timeframe for pathogenesis and
is generally used for diagnostic and prognostic biomarker
discovery11.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst single cell sequencing study
to investigate the mTBI pathogenesis in thousands of individual
brain cells in parallel, offering a cell atlas of the hippocampus
under both physiological and pathological conditions. In doing
so, we provide novel evidence about the cellular and molecular
remodeling in the hippocampus at the acute phase of TBI and
help answer critical longstanding questions. Which cell types are
vulnerable to mTBI at the acute phase? Within each cell type,
which genes have altered transcriptional activities that are
induced by mTBI? Which molecular pathways are perturbed by
mTBI in each cell type and how do they relate to mTBI pathology
and pathogenesis of secondary brain disorders such as AD and
PTSD? How do the coexpression patterns of genes across cells
and circuits vary in response to mTBI? Through answering these
questions, the identiﬁed sensitive cell types and associated gene
markers can serve as signatures of mTBI pathology that inform
on the stage, functional alterations, and potential clinical out-
comes. Since the cell is the elementary unit of biological structure
and function, we reveal fundamental information that can lead to
a better understanding of the mechanistic driving forces for mTBI
pathogenesis and identify potential pathways for therapeutic
targeting in an unbiased manner. As a proof of concept, we use
the data-driven single cell information to prioritize Ttr, encoding
transthyretin, and show for the ﬁrst time that modulating Ttr
improves behavioral phenotypes and reverses the molecular
changes observed in mTBI.
Results
Unbiased identiﬁcation of cell identities in hippocampus.
Using Drop-seq12, we sequenced 2818 and 3414 hippocampal
cells from mTBI and Sham animals, respectively. A single-cell
digital gene expression matrix was generated using Drop-seq
Tools12 and subsequently projected onto two dimensions using t-
distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE)13 to deﬁne
cell clusters (Methods). We detected 15 clusters each containing
cells sharing similar gene expression patterns (Fig. 1a). The cell
clusters were not due to technical or batch effects (Supplementary
Fig. 1).
To resolve the cell-type identities, we obtained cluster-speciﬁc
gene signatures (Supplementary Data 1) and compared them to
known signatures of hippocampal cell types derived from
Fluidigm-based single cell studies14,15 (Methods). We recovered
all known major cell types including neurons, oligodendrocytes,
oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (oligoPCs), microglia, mural
cells, endothelial cells, astrocytes, and ependymal cells (Fig. 1b).
Previously known cell markers, such as Aqp4 for astrocytes, Mog
for oligodendrocytes, and C1qc for microglia, all showed distinct
cluster-speciﬁc expression patterns, conﬁrming the reliability of
our data-driven approach in distinguishing cell types (Fig. 1c–e;
additional examples in Supplementary Fig. 2). Beyond retrieving
known cell markers, we also identiﬁed novel marker genes for
each hippocampal cell type, such as Calml4 for ependymal, Vcan
for oligodendrocytes, and Ly6a for endothelial cells (Fig. 1f;
Supplementary Data 1). We conﬁrmed the cellular identity and
hippocampal localization of many novel marker genes using the
in situ hybridization (ISH) data from the Allen Brain Atlas (Fig. 2;
Supplementary Figs. 3–9).
We identiﬁed two potential novel cell clusters whose gene
expression signatures did not signiﬁcantly overlap with any of the
known
hippocampal
cell
types,
and
were
hence
named
Unknown1 (113 cells; 1.8% of all cells tested) and Unknown2
(74 cells; 0.9%; Fig. 1a). Unknown1 has markers indicative of cell
growth and migration such as Ndnf, Nhlh2, Reln, and Igfbpl1, as
well as endothelial markers (Fig. 1b), suggesting the cells are
migrating endothelial cells. Endothelial cells as main components
of the blood brain barrier which is disrupted after mTBI16, with
proliferation and migration of endothelial cells being an intrinsic
aspect of new vessel formation17. Unknown2 expresses unique
markers indicative of cell differentiation such as Pcolce, Col1a2,
Asgr1, Serping1, and Igf2, along with markers of endothelial,
mural, and ependymal cells (Fig. 1b), suggesting that these may
be progenitor cells differentiating into multiple lineages. To
further resolve the identities of these unknown clusters, we
examined the expression patterns of their signature genes in the
Allen Brain Atlas ISH data. The marker genes of the Unknown2
cluster colocalized to a population of cells in the choroid plexus
distinct from the ependymal cells (Fig. 2; Supplementary Fig. 9).
The localization of these cells to an area implicated to house stem
cells and progenitor cells18 in conjunction with the functions of
the marker genes, supports that this cluster may represent
progenitor cells. These cell clusters may illustrate cell types that
have been previously left undetected by classical morphological
categorization, although detailed functional characterization is
required to conﬁrm their identities and functions.
To further characterize neuronal diversity within the hippo-
campus, we took the cell cluster that expresses canonical neuronal
markers (Fig. 1a) and further reﬁned nine subclusters using the
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

BackSPIN biclustering method which offers better resolution14
(Fig. 3a). Annotation with known neuronal markers helped
resolve GABAergic interneurons, DG granule cells, and 4 subtypes
of CA pyramidal neurons (Fig. 3b). However, two clusters
(Neuronal Subtype1, Neuronal Subtype 2) express general
neuronal markers, but do not express markers of any currently
established neuronal subtype in the hippocampus. The functions
of their markers (Fig. 3b) suggest that these clusters may contain
neurons with the potential to differentiate or self-renew. The
unique ability of Drop-seq to catalog cells based on unbiased
genomic parameters was also instrumental in unveiling novel
neuronal markers14,15 including Ptn in CA1 neurons, Ly6e in
1
0
2
9
4
4
2
0
0
1
35
3
2
6
5
3
4
1
115
10
9
10
1
1
5
6
4
6
5
2
0
6
7
12
1
1
1
3
4
3
0
1
0
0
0
2
1
2
3
1
0
0
1
0
50
29
1
2
1
2
0
0
0
51
41
7
4
4
5
2
4
5
1
0
19
21
3
3
4
1
3
1
2
1
141
10
6
3
3
1
1
2
1
0
0
3
2
1
0
1
3
4
0
1
3
3
10
Pcolce,Col1a2,Asgr1,Serping1,Igf2
Ndnf,Nhlh2,Reln,Igfbpl1,Fam159b
Atp1b1,Olfm1,Rtn1,Snap25,Calm2
Ermn,Plp1,Mal,Opalin,Trf
Vcan,Pdgfra,Cacng4,Olig1,Marcks
Acta2,Tpm1,Tpm2,Crip1,Tagln
Ctss,C1qb,Hexb,C1qc,C1qa
Calml4,Ak7,Ccdc153,1110017D15Rik,Dynlrb2
Bsg,Ly6c1,Igfbp7,Flt1,Ly6a
Aldoc,Slc1a3,Clu,Slc1a2,Cpe
Astrocytes (394)
Corrected P value
(0.1,1]
(0.001,0.1]
(1e−06,0.001]
(1e−09,1e−06]
(1e−18,1e−12]
(1e−33,1e−25]
(0,1e−52]
Endothelial (531)
Ependymal (828)
Microglia (440)
Mural (172)
OligoPCs (249)
Oligodendrocytes (439)
Neurons (969)
Unknown1 (170)
Unknown2 (178)
Astrocytes (240)
Endothelial (353)
Ependymal (484)
Microglia (436)
Mural (155)
OligoPCs DivSeq (31)
Oligodendrocytes (453)
CA1 (409)
Interneuron (365)
S1 (294)
Astrocytes
Endothelial
Ependymal
Microglia
Mural
OligoPCs
Oligodendrocytes
Unknown 1
Unknown 2
Slc1a3
Calml4
Ctss
Tpm1
Vcan
Ermn
Ndnf
Pcolce
Ly6c1
Astrocytes
Endothelial
Ependymal
Microglia
Mural
DG Granule cells
CA1 neurons
CA Subtype1 neurons
CA Subtype2 neurons
GABAergic interneurons
Oligodendrocytes
OligoPCs
Unknown1
Unknown2
Sham
TBI
Max
Min
a
b
Astrocytes: Aqp4
c
Oligodendrocytes: Mog
d
Microglia: C1qc
e
f
1
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3

CA3 neurons, and Sema5a in DG granule cells (Fig. 3b; full list in
Supplementary Data 1). We conﬁrmed the subtype-speciﬁc
expression patterns in hippocampal subregions and cell types
(Fig. 3c–e) and further veriﬁed the expression speciﬁcity of
several novel markers using the Allen Brain Atlas ISH data (Fig. 2,
Supplementary Figs. 3–9). The CA Subtype2 cells were found to
be located in the Subicular Complex (Fig. 2), which mediates the
main output of signals from the hippocampus. Like the CA
subregions, the Subicular Complex is also comprised of pyramidal
neurons, which explains the expression of CA neuronal signature
genes in addition to the genes speciﬁc to this cell cluster. The
subiculum is involved in pathology of CTE and the associated
dementia following TBI4.
These results indicate that our transcriptome-driven, unbiased
Drop-seq approach has the unique ability to uncover potential
new cell types, states, and markers based on genomic features that
may infer function. Based on the central dogma, gene regulation
is upstream of the production of proteins, which are fundamental
for cell function. In contrast, morphology-based approaches may
not offer the resolution to distinguish subtypes of cell populations
that share similar morphology but carry certain unique functions.
For instance, cells of the two CA subtype clusters uniquely
express speciﬁc marker genes which may infer unique functions.
However, detailed functional characterization of these potential
new cell subtypes is required in future studies to test functional
differences and their role in the hippocampal circuitry under
homeostatic and/or pathological conditions.
Identiﬁcation of vulnerable hippocampal cell types to mTBI.
To retrieve hippocampal cell types vulnerable to mTBI, we ﬁrst
compared the cell population proportions between mTBI and
Sham animals. Ependymal cells were found to be more abundant
in mTBI compared to Sham animals (89% from mTBI samples vs
11% from Sham samples, Fig. 1a). This large shift in relative
abundance of ependymal cells at 24 h post-surgery is consistent
with the reported role of ependymal cells in acute post-injury
processes such as circuit repair, scar formation, and potential
source of progenitor cells19,20. We also see signiﬁcant increases in
the cell proportions of microglia, endothelial cells, and Unknown
2, as well as signiﬁcant decreases in neurons, oligodendrocytes
and oligoPCs post-TBI (Supplementary Table 1). However, many
experimental factors in the Drop-seq procedure may inﬂuence the
capture rate of different cell types between samples, and changes
in the relative proportion of a cell type do not directly implicate
cell proliferation or death but could be the result of shifts in other
cell types. Therefore, caution is needed in the interpretation of
these results.
We also examined the shifts in global transcriptome patterns
within each cell type by testing if the Euclidean distance of gene
expression proﬁles of cells between the two groups is larger than
expected by chance (details in Methods). This analysis revealed
that DG, ependymal cells, astrocytes, microglia, oligodendrocytes,
oligoPCs, endothelial cells, Neuronal Subtype 1, CA1, CA
Subtype1, and GABAergic neurons demonstrate signiﬁcant global
transcriptomic shifts between mTBI and Sham (Supplementary
Fig. 10). In particular, mTBI had such a profound effect on the
transcriptome of DG granule cells, that they became clearly
separated into two distinct clusters (Figs. 1a, 3a). Post-traumatic
epilepsy is a major concern in TBI and is attributable to DG
dysfunction21.
The above analyses implicated the majority of hippocampal cell
types to be vulnerable to mTBI and open the possibility for
investigating the speciﬁc roles of each cell type in mTBI pathology
and for designing targeted treatments. For example, the genomic
markers of the DG granule cells highly sensitive to mTBI can be
used to design treatments that target speciﬁc DG subpopulations
responsible for post-traumatic epilepsy to avoid the side effects of
classical epilepsy treatments targeting broad populations of cells.
mTBI alters cell-cell gene co-expression in the hippocampus.
Emerging evidence in the neuroimaging ﬁeld suggests that
changes in the interaction patterns among cells in circuits can
contribute to reduced cognitive capacity in TBI22. We used the
co-regulation patterns between genes of different cell types to
infer interactions among cells, as gene co-expression can infer
functional connectivity23,24. Speciﬁcally, we focused on marker
genes encoding secreted peptides from each cell type (source
cells), which have the potential to interact with receptors and
regulate downstream effector genes in other cell types (target
cells) (Methods; Fig. 4a). This approach was found to recapitulate
known cell–cell communications within the trisynaptic circuit of
the hippocampus (Fig. 4b–d). The gene co-expression patterns
reﬂected the known mutual interactions between DG and CA3 as
well as the CA3 to CA1 interaction. We applied our method to
the mTBI data and found extensive reorganization in the pattern
of
gene
coexpression,
potentially
representing
interactions,
among cells in response to mTBI. For example, the interaction
from astrocytes and ependymal cells to neurons and from
microglia to oligodendrocytes was enhanced in mTBI (Fig. 4e, f).
We also found decreased interaction between microglia and
neurons, and decreased interaction from oligodendrocytes to
neurons in mTBI. These shifts in the pattern of gene co-
regulation among hippocampal cell types may implicate reorga-
nization of the working ﬂow in response to mTBI challenge. The
reorganization was also reﬂected in changes in the association
pattern among single genes. For instance, the correlation of Bdnf
from neurons with cell metabolism genes in microglia was lost in
mTBI. Notably, the known AD risk gene Apoe in astrocytes and
ependymal cells (source cells) showed strong correlations with
mitochondrial metabolism genes in neurons (target cells) after
mTBI. These results suggest the potential of mTBI to alter the
interactive patterns at the level of circuits and genes in the hip-
pocampus, with cell metabolism involved in the interactions
(detailed peptide-gene correlations in Supplementary Data 2). We
acknowledge that this in silico analysis points towards potential
circuit perturbations but would require downstream validation.
Fig. 1 Determination of major hippocampal cell types and cell type-speciﬁc gene markers. a t-SNE plot showing cell clusters. Each colored dot is a cell, with
blue cells originating from Sham animals and red cells originating from mTBI animals. b Overlap between Drop-seq deﬁned marker genes of major cell
clusters (rows) with known cell type markers (columns) derived from a previous Fluidigm-based single cell study14. Signature marker numbers are
indicated in the parenthesis. Fisher’s exact test is used to test enrichment with Bonferroni adjusted p values reported. Statistical signiﬁcance of overlap is
indicated by color (the darker the more signiﬁcant) and the numbers of overlapping genes between our Drop-seq deﬁned markers, and previously known
markers are shown in the cells. Top cell marker genes determined by our Drop-seq data are listed on the right of the plot. c–e Cluster-speciﬁc expression of
known cell markers: Astrocytes—Aqp4, Oligodendrocytes—Mog, and Microglia—C1qc. This analysis conﬁrms that each cluster captures a particular cell
type. f Normalized expression values of top cell type-speciﬁc marker genes are plotted as violin plots with cell types as rows and genes as columns. Cells
were from 3 sham and 3 mTBI animals
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Cbln2
Slc17a6
Nts
Pex5l
Fibcd1
Arhgap12
CA1 neurons
Npy2r
Ly6e
Cpne4
CA3 neurons
Stxbp6
Igfbp5
Fam163b
DG Granule cells
Rarres2
Odf3b
Dnali1
Ependymal
Slc13a4
Pcolce
Mgp
Unknown2
Dkk3 - Pan CA
Itpka - CA1 + DG
Prkcb - CA1 + CA3
Multiple cell types
CA subtype2 neurons
Fig. 2 Cross-validation of novel marker genes for speciﬁc neuronal subpopulations. To validate the speciﬁcity of novel marker genes for neuronal
populations and to help resolve the identity of previously unknown cell clusters, we examined the expression patterns of our cell markers in the ISH images
from the Allen Brain Atlas58. Here, we showcase three select novel genes from four cell types: CA1 neurons, CA3 neurons, DG granule cells, and
ependymal cells. Additionally, we showcase marker genes expressed across multiple cell types, genes which resolve the Unknown2 cluster to cells inside
the choroid plexus, and genes which help resolve CA Subtype2 Neurons to the Subicular Complex
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5

2
1
0
0
0
0
6
5
6
2
2
3
1
2
0
0
8
7
4
2
3
0
0
0
5
5
4
5
1
0
0
0
9
12
15
9
1
1
2
2
1
1
0
0
31
3
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
5
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
5
2
1
0
0
0
41
14
4
3
1
1
1
1
6
11
35
Ndnf,Diablo,Cacna2d2,Marcks,1500016L03Rik
Tshz2,Arpp21,Ddit4l,Nrep,Meis2
Gad2,Gad1,Slc32a1,Nap1l5,Slc6a1
C1ql2,Tpt1,Plekha2,Prkce,Nrn1
Cplx2,Ncdn,Olfm1,Synpr,Sem5a
Serpini1,Ly6g6e,Cbln2,Fezf2,Nxph3
Dcn,Nnat,Timp2,Cpne7,Ndufc2
Ly6e,Atp1b1,Slc24a2,Prkca,Cpe
Atp2b1,Hpca,Spink8,Arpc2,Ptn
Corrected P value
(0.1,1]
(0.001,0.1]
(1e–06,0.001]
(1e–09,1e–06]
(1e–12,1e–09]
(1e–18,1e–12]
(1e–25,1e–18]
(1e–33,1e–25]
(1e–42,1e–33]
(1e–52,1e–42]
CA1 neurons (139)
CA3 neurons (64)
CA subtype 1 neurons (67)
CA subtype 2 neurons (77)
Sham DG granule cells (199)
TBI DG granule cells (218)
GABAergic interneurons (223)
Neuronal subtype 1 (78)
Neuronal subtype 2 (48)
CA1 ABA (49)
CA2 ABA (53)
CA3 ABA (52)
CA1 divSeq (101)
CA2 divSeq (153)
CA3 divSeq (139)
DG ABA (50)
DG divSeq (164)
GABAergic divSeq (122)
TBI DG granule cells
Sham DG granule cells
Neuronal subtype 2
CA1 Neurons
CA3 neurons
GABAergic interneurons
Neuronal subtype 1
CA subtype 1 neurons
CA subtype 2 neurons
a
b
Neuronal subtype 2
Neuronal subtype 1
GABAergic interneurons
DG granule cells
CA subtype 2 neurons
CA subtype 1 neurons
CA3 neurons
CA1 neurons
Pou3f1
Thsd4
Dcn
Ly6g6e
C1ql2
Gad2
Ddit4l
Ndnf
Max
Min
f
CA1 neurons: Wfs1
DG granule cells: Dsp
GABAergic interneurons: Gad2
c
d
e
Fig. 3 Determination of neuronal cell subtypes and cell type-speciﬁc gene markers. a t-SNE plot of neuronal subtypes determined by backspin biclustering.
Each color indicates a different cell type cluster identiﬁed, and cells with a black dot at their center are from TBI samples. b Overlap of Drop-seq deﬁned
marker genes of the neuronal subtypes (rows) with those of the previously deﬁned hippocampal neuronal cell types (columns). Known markers were
derived from Alan Brain Atlas (ABA)58 and Habib et al. using Div-Seq15. Signature marker numbers are indicated in the parenthesis. Fisher’s exact test is
used to test enrichment with Bonferroni adjusted p values reported. Statistical signiﬁcance of overlap is indicated by color (the darker the more signiﬁcant),
and the numbers of overlapping genes between our Drop-seq deﬁned markers and previously known markers are shown in the cells. Top cell marker genes
determined by our Drop-seq data are listed on the right of the plot. c–e Cluster-speciﬁc expression of known cell markers: CA1 neurons—Wfs1, DG granule
cells—Dsp, and GABAergic interneurons—Gad2. f Normalized expression values of top neuronal subtype-speciﬁc marker genes are plotted as violin plots
with cell types as rows and genes as columns
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Identiﬁcation of genes and pathways vulnerable to mTBI. To
determine speciﬁc genes and pathways that may confer mTBI
pathogenesis in each hippocampal cell type and to further reﬁne
the vulnerable cell types, we identiﬁed differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) between Sham and mTBI within each cell cluster
(Table 1; all DEGs in Supplementary Data 3) at false discovery
rate (FDR) <0.05. Astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and neurons had
the largest numbers of DEGs between mTBI and Sham samples
(Table 1). Annotation of the DEGs with curated biological
pathways from KEGG25, Reactome26, BIOCARTA, and Gene
Ontology27 databases identiﬁed key pathways that could explain
fundamental aspects of the mTBI pathology and the main cell
types involved (Table 1; full pathway list in Supplementary
Data 4). For example, our results showed diverse pathways to be
involved in mTBI, encompassing energy and metabolism (astro-
cytes, neurons), inﬂammation and immune response (microglia,
oligodendrocyte PCs), myelination (oligodendrocytes), amyloids
(endothelial and ependymal cells), neurogenesis and synaptic
signaling (neurons), cell migration (GABAergic interneurons),
glutamate transport (CA1 pyramidal cells), regulation of cell
death (astrocytes and microglia, multiple neuronal populations),
and dendrite morphogenesis (Unknown 1 cluster). Our data
e
f
Apoe_A
Bcan
Cck_A
Cd63_A
Clu_A
Cpe
Cst3
Cxcl14
Dkk3_A
Enho
Epdr1_A
Fam213a
Fjx1
Gpc5
Htra1
Il18
Lcat
Luzp2
Mfge8
Nell2_A
Nrcam_A
Pla2g7
Ptn
Ptprz1
S100a13
Scg3
Scrg1
Sdc4
Sdf2_A
Serpine2
Sparcl1
Timp4
Adamts20
Apoe_E
B4galt1
C1qtnf4
C3
Cd9_E
Clec3b
Clu_E
Col8a1
Col8a2
Cp
Cpq
Creld2
Cxadr
Cyb5d2
Cyr61
Efemp2
Enpp5_E
Folr1
Gars_E
Gas6_E
Gm1673_E
Gpr98
Lamb2
Lbp
Lgals3
Lrp8
Matn2
Mr1
Nenf_E
Pddc1
Prdx4
Prelp
Psap_E
Rspry1
Sdf2_E
Sema3b
Sfrp1
Sostdc1
Spata6
Tcn2
Txn1
Vwa5b1
Wfikkn2
Adamts1
B2m
C1qa
C1qb
C1qbp
C1qc
Cap1
Ccl12
Ccl2
Ccl3
Ccl4
Cfh
Creg1
Ctsb
Fcgr2b
Gas6_M
Hmgb2
Ifnar2
Ighm
Il1a
Itm2b_M
Ly86
Lyz2
Manf
Npc2
Olfml3
Ppt1
Pros1
Psap_M
Sdcbp
Sparc
Srgn
Tnf
Trem2
Ybx1
Bdnf
C1ql2
C1ql3
Cck_N
Chga
Chgb
Chl1
Creg2
Crtac1
Cx3cl1
Dkk3_N
Emc10
Enpp5_N
Epdr1_N
Fam131a
Fam3c
Gars_N
Gm1673_N
Gnas
Itfg1
Lgi1
Ndfip1
Nell2_N
Nenf_N
Nrcam_N
Pcsk1n
Resp18
Scg2
Scg5
Serpini1
Snca
Sorl1
Spock3_N
Tcp1
Vstm2a
Abhd17b
Cd63_O
Cd9_O
Edil3
Hapln2
Hmgb1
Il1rap
Il33
Itm2b_O
Jam3
Pdgfa
Ptgds
Spock3_O
Trf
Cpe
Enho
Gpc5
Gpi1
Htra1
Lcat
Luzp2
Ptn
S100a13
Scg3
Sdc4
Timp4
Aebp1
Apoe
C3
Clu
Col8a1
Col8a2
Cpq
Cyr61
Enpp2
F5
Fam213a
Folr1
Igf2
Igfbp2
Lamb1
Lamb2
Lbp
Lrp8
Mr1
Npy
Pla2g7
Plat
Pltp
Prdx4
Psap
Rarres2
Rnase4
Sema3b
Sostdc1
Tcn2
Timp3
Ttr
Vwa5b1
Wfikkn2
C1qbp
Cap1
Ccl12
Ccl2
Ccl3
Ccl4
Cd14
Cfh
Creg1
Cst3
Ctsb
Grn
Hmgb2
Ifnar2
Il1a
Lgals9
Lyz2
Manf
Olfml3
Ppt1
Pros1
Sepp1
Sparc
Timp2
Tnf
Ybx1
Aimp1
Bdnf
C1ql2
C1ql3
Car11
Cck
Chga
Chgb
Chl1
Creg2
Crtac1
Cx3cl1
Dkk3
Emc10
Fam131a
Fam3c
Gars
Gnas
Hsp90ab1
Itfg1
Lgi1
Ndfip1
Nell2
Nenf
Olfm1
Pcsk1n
Ppia
Resp18
Scg2
Scg5
Serpini1
Sorl1
Tcp1
Vstm2a
Abhd17b
Apod
Cnp
Endod1
Gsn
Hapln2
Hmgb1
Il1rap
Jam3
Lgi3
Pdgfa
Ptgds
Hypothesis
Cell type A
Secreted proteins/
peptides
Cell type B
Correlation
Peptides
G1
G2
G3
S1
S2
S3
3
2
3
5
1
4
4
6
4
Samples
Ga
Gb
Gc
Gd
S1
S2
S3
4
3
2
4
2
3
2
4
5
5
3
5
Genes
Samples
Overview
Astrocytes
Neurons
Microglia
TSNE_1
TSNE_2
C1
C4
C2 C3
G1
G2
G3
G4
G5
0
8
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
4
12
4
2
8
4
0
4
2
Sparse single
cell matrix
Sample gene
averages
G1
G2
G3
G4
G5
S1
S2
S3
4
4
2
2
2
1
8
1
4
4
2
3
2
1
2
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
C9
C10
C11
C12
Project single cells
from samples onto
two dimensions and
identify cell types
Generate
gene × cell
Matrix from
cell clusters
Collapse cells
from same
Animal into
average gene
expression
Collapse cell type single-cell gene expression
Correlation
Peptides
G1
G2
G3
S1
S2
S3
3
2
3
5
4
6
4
Samples
Ga
Gb
Gc
Gd
S1
S2
S3
4
3
2
4
2
3
2
4
5
5
3
5
Genes
Samples
Target criteria:
1). > 20% expression
Source criteria:
1). Cell marker gene
2). Secreted peptide
Correlate source and target cell types
Permute target cell type
Ga
Gb
Gc
Gd
S1
S2
S3
4
3
2
4
2
3
2
4
5
3
5
Genes
Samples
Permute each
gene from
target independently
1000 permutations
Astrocytes
Neurons
Neurons
Generate gene correlations for source-target interactions
Ga
Gb
Gc
Gd
Ga
Gb
Gc
Gd
G1
G2
G3
0.5
0.01 0.9 0.003
0.05 0.01 0.02
0.3
0.001
0.008
Genes
Peptides
Astrocyte-neuron
correlation
p-values of
correlation matrix
Score =   -log(pval)
G1: 7.3
G2: 2.9
G3: 9.3
Cell-cell interaction score
Distribution from permutation scores
G1
G2
G3
0.04
0.1
0.3
0.09
0.9
0.8
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.2
0.9
0.5
Genes
Peptides
Score
Counts
G1: pval = 0.002
G2: pval = 0.3
G2: 3.5
G3: 1.6
Use permutation
scores for null
distribution
Find scores
on distribution
To determine
significance
G3: pval = 0.001
Get interaction score and evaluate significance
a
b
d
DG
EC
CA1
CA3
Dentate gyrus
granule cells
CA3 pyramidal
neurons
CA1 pyramidal
neurons
Dentate gyrus
Granule cells
Source
CA3 pyramidal
neurons
CA1 pyramidal
neurons
Target
0.221
0.006
0.203
0.013
0.085
0.303
0.002
0.033
p values
[0.001,0.01)
[0.01,0.05)
[0.05,0.1)
[0.1,0.2)
[0.2,0.5)
DG
CA1
CA3
Mouse1
Mouse2
Mouse3
Brain1
Brain3
Brain2
O
li
go
de
nd
roc
yte
s
Neurons
Neurons
Neurons
Microgila
Ependymal
Astrocytes
Oligodendrocytes
Microgila
Ependymal
Oligodendrocytes
Microgila
Ependymal
Astrocytes
Microglia
Neurons
Oligodendrocytes
0.001
0.1
5
c
0.128
1
4
As
tro
cyt
es 
Ep
en
dm
al
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7

uniquely points to the speciﬁc cell types engaging these pathways
and offers novel insights into the functions of individual cell
types, including previously understudied cell populations, in
mTBI pathogenesis.
TBI is followed by a stage of metabolic dysfunction28 which
reduces
the
capacity
of
the
brain
for
activity-dependent
plasticity29. Our results provide a better understanding of the
molecular and cellular underpinnings of the metabolic crisis
typical of mTBI by identifying down-regulation of mitochondrial
metabolic genes in astrocytes and CA1 pyramidal cells. Astrocytes
supply energy substrates to neurons and are essential for neuronal
function. Interestingly, our results indicate that CA1 pyramidal
cells also experience metabolic alterations at this early stage of
mTBI pathogenesis (24 h). In addition, DEGs in CA1 pyramidal
cells informed on increased expression of glutamate transporters,
which could explain the altered capacity to sustain long-term
potentiation post-TBI30.
The risks posed by mTBI on the development of other
neurological disorders are a pressing issue in clinical neu-
roscience. The genes, pathways, and the associated cell types that
we identiﬁed provide insights into the molecular and cellular
bases for these disease connections. DG granule cells, which
function to interact with CA pyramidal cells (Fig. 4b), showed
alterations in genes involved in cell-cell signaling (Npy, Penk,
Ptprn, and Ihnba) as well as neuroplasticity genes such as Bdnf
and Ntf3. These pathways may underlie the sensitivity of DG
granule cells to contribute to post-traumatic epilepsy after mTBI.
Pathways informed by DEGs from the endothelial and ependymal
cells implicate the importance of these cell types in amyloid
buildup, as indicated by the upregulation of the known pro-
amyloid deposition gene B2m and down-regulation of inhibitors
of beta-amyloid aggregation (Apoe, Itm2a, Itm2b, and Itm2c) in
these cell types. As dysregulated metabolism and amyloid
deposition are key features in AD, CTE, and PD31, our study
provides detailed information on the speciﬁc cell types such as
astrocytes, CA1 pyramidal cells, endothelial and ependymal cells
that could be the starting loci for the wave of post-mTBI amyloid
buildup in chronic mTBI.
mTBI alters gene expression in a cell-type speciﬁc manner. We
found that many of the DEGs were signiﬁcantly altered by mTBI
in a speciﬁc cell type (Fig. 5a, b) and showed clear cell type-
speciﬁc shifts in expression patterns (Fig. 5c–e). Importantly,
>50% of the DEGs identiﬁed at the single cell level were masked
in bulk tissue analysis (Fig. 5f; tissue-level DEGs in Supplemen-
tary Data 3) and these unique cell-level DEGs were primarily
from cell types of low abundance such as neuronal subpopula-
tions. On the other hand, the common DEGs between single-cell
and tissue-level analyses were mainly from abundant cell types
such as astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. As less abundant cells
such as neurons carry essential functions in the brain, the cell
type-speciﬁc DEGs can be strong drivers of disease but will be
missed in bulk tissue analysis. Therefore, genomic information in
individual cell types has the advantage to extract hidden
mechanisms involved in TBI pathology that otherwise would be
masked in bulk tissue studies.
Cell type-speciﬁc DEGs may serve as selective biomarkers or
therapeutic targets that can trace or normalize speciﬁc abnorm-
alities of mTBI pathology (Fig. 6a). For instance, Id2, a gene
previously described to be upregulated by seizures in DG32, is
speciﬁcally upregulated by mTBI in DG granule cells and could
serve as a potential target to temper post-traumatic epilepsy. We
also found that P2ry12, a marker for brain resident microglia33, is
speciﬁcally downregulated in microglia post-mTBI, suggesting the
potential utility of P2ry12 as a marker for early inﬂammatory
response to TBI. Interestingly, Trf, encoding transferrin for iron
transport was upregulated in oligodendrocytes, suggesting a
possible involvement of Trf on the described association between
iron deposition and cognitive deﬁcits in mTBI34,35. Several of the
cell-type speciﬁc DEGs are related to amyloid deposition and AD,
including Apoe—an ependymal-speciﬁc DEG and known for its
effects on AD and TBI36, and Itm2a—an endothelial speciﬁc DEG
and an inhibitor of amyloid-beta production and deposition37.
These results indicate that the putative action of TBI in amyloid
regulation involves various cell types.
We also found several cell-type speciﬁc mTBI responsive genes
that have not been implicated in mTBI previously. For instance, a
CA1 pyramidal cell-speciﬁc DEG Klhl2, which encodes an actin
binding protein, was recently implicated in human neuroticism38,39
and showed increased neuronal expression post-mTBI (Fig. 6a).
Klhl2 in CA1 pyramidal cells may serve as a novel link between
mTBI and the increased tendency for neuroticism observed in blast
TBI40. Arhgap32 is primarily upregulated in CA subtype 2 cells in
mTBI. It encodes a neuron-associated GTPase-activating protein
that may regulate dendritic spine morphology and strength41.
Arhgap32 may be critical for supporting transmission of informa-
tion across hippocampal cells. The endothelial-speciﬁc gene Fxyd5
encodes a glycoprotein that enhances chemokine production and
inhibits cell adhesion by downregulating E-cadherin42. It was
upregulated in mTBI in endothelial cells, suggesting that it may play
a role in neuroinﬂammation and blood-brain-barrier dysfunction
associated with TBI.
Fig. 4 TBI alters cell-cell gene co-expression in the hippocampus. a Cell-cell gene co-expression analysis method. Secreted proteins or peptides from a
source cell can communicate with genes in a target cell, which can be captured by strong correlations between the secreted proteins in the source cells and
genes in the target cells. For each cell cluster, the expression of each gene was summarized to individual animal level, and a correlation matrix between
genes of different cell types was constructed. The -log10 p-values of the correlations for each secreted peptide are summed to obtain an interaction score
of that peptide with a particular target cell type. The cell type gene expression matrix is then permuted to generate the null distribution of interaction scores
to calculate the signiﬁcance of observed interaction scores. b Schematic of known cell type interactions within the trisynaptic circuit. The entorhinal cortex
(EC) is not captured in our single cell analysis so we cannot validate its edges (dashed). c Heatmap displaying the permutation-based p-values of
glutamate-driven cell–cell gene coexpression; columns are source cells and rows are target cells. Darker purple indicates signiﬁcant (lower p value)
interactions. d Redrawn cell-cell interaction schematic based on our cell–cell gene coexpression method. All between-cell type interactions among CA1,
CA3, and DG cells are recapitulated, but within cell type self-interactions differ from the known schematic in b. e, f Circos plots of signiﬁcant cell-cell gene
coexpression among hippocampal cell types in Sham (e) and TBI groups (f). The bottom half of each circos plot shows source cell types with secreted
peptides listed and the top half are the target cell types (genes not shown because many genes show strong coexpression; listed in Supplementary Data 2).
Colored lines in the center indicate signiﬁcant connections of the peptides with different cell types. Comparison between e and f shows reorganization
in the gene coexpression patterns among hippocampal cell types after TBI and the genes potentially driving the interactions. As cell transcriptome can
instruct cell-cell communication to process high order information, these results suggest potential changes in neural circuit organization after an episode
of TBI
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Validation of cell-type speciﬁc mTBI DEGs. We used the
RNAscope multiplex RNA ISH to validate select cell-type speciﬁc
mTBI DEGs (selected from Fig. 6a) by co-hybridizing hippo-
campal tissue slices with a cell identity marker and a DEG for
each select cell type. Using n = 8 animals per group, over 900 z-
stack images with two ISH channels (one for cell markers and the
other for DEGs) and a DAPI (for nuclei) channel were generated
for multiple DEGs and cell types. RNAscope is a high-resolution
quantitative ISH which detects single mRNA molecules. Co-
localization between a cell marker gene and a DEG is determined
by the presence of ﬂuorescent spots representing single mRNA
molecules of both genes within the same cell. Automated cell
segmentations were performed using the CellProﬁler software43
and quantiﬁcation of mRNA molecules per cell was carried out
using FISH-quant44. To quantify cell type-speciﬁc differential
expression of a DEG, we ﬁrst determined the cell type of interest
from a z-stack image by thresholding the counts of the cell type
marker, followed by comparing the counts of the DEG mRNA
molecules only within that cell type between Sham and TBI
samples (Methods). As shown in Fig. 7 (high magniﬁcation
images of select regions) and Supplementary Fig. 11 (low mag-
niﬁcation images of larger areas), the select DEGs are localized in
the same cell segments expressing the corresponding cell identity
markers. Quantitative assessments validated signiﬁcant differ-
ential expression of cell type-speciﬁc DEGs in Microglia (P2ry12),
DG granule cells (Id2), and CA Subtype 2 neurons (Arhgap32) in
both CA1 and CA3 regions (p < 0.05 by bimodal likelihood ratio
test; n = 8/group). Klhl2 in CA1 pyramidal neurons did not reach
statistical signiﬁcance (p = 0.07) but showed an increasing trend
which is consistent with the Drop-seq data.
Prioritization of mTBI targets based on single cell data. The
aforementioned cell-type speciﬁc genes perturbed by mTBI pro-
vide unique information about the microcircuits underlying the
mTBI pathophysiology. These can be leveraged for the design of
therapeutic interventions to target speciﬁc cell types driving
pathological manifestations if their causal roles in pathogenesis
are conﬁrmed. Conversely, identifying DEGs that are affected
across multiple cell types by mTBI has the potential to pinpoint
the most vulnerable genes that are responsible for the broad
symptomology of mTBI. Such genes cannot be retrieved without
examining multiple cell types individually to conﬁrm the wide-
spread effect across cell types. Given the broad aspects of the TBI
pathogenesis, targeting such pan-hippocampal DEGs may offer
broader and stronger therapeutic effects by normalizing the
functions of multiple cell types.
Based on the consistency of differential expression across cell
types, we prioritized a number of multi-cell type DEGs affected
by mTBI (Fig. 6b). Several such DEGs are related to beta-amyloid
and AD, including Ttr—encoding transthyretin which is an
amyloid beta scavenger45, mt-Rnr2—encoding the mitochondria
factor humanin46 which is protective against AD, Itm2b—an
inhibitor of beta-amyloid deposition47, and Apba2 (Mint2)—a
stabilizer of amyloid precursor protein APP48. These pan-
hippocampal DEGs, along with some of the cell-type speciﬁc
DEGs previously discussed, strongly implicate pathways related
to post-mTBI AD pathogenesis and can be targeted for post-
mTBI AD prevention. Slc17a7 is a pan-neuronal DEG. It encodes
a
sodium-dependent
phosphate
transporter
in
neuron-rich
regions of the brain and functions in glutamate transport49.
Interestingly, genetic polymorphisms in this gene have been
associated with recovery time and severity of outcomes after
sport-related concussion in humans50.
Notably, the gene Ttr represents the most robust DEG across
hippocampal cell types in that it was a top DEG with increased
expression post-mTBI in 7 of the 10 major cell types and 6 of the
8 neuronal clusters, with the highest expression and strongest
induction seen in ependymal cells (Fig. 6b). Therefore, the full
information across hippocampal cell types established Ttr as the
most consistent DEG post-mTBI, providing a strong rationale to
Table 1 Top enriched pathways among DEGs of major cell types (FDR<5%) and representative DEGs in the select pathways
Cell type
No. DEGs
Top DEG pathways
Top 5 representative DEGs
Astrocytes
247
Metabolic depression
Down: Mdh1,Atp5b,Cox4i1,Atp5a1,Ndufs7
Calcium/calmodulin pathways
Up: S100a11,Syt1; Down: Calm1,Calm2,Camk4
Microglia
57
Inﬂammation/immune response
Up: Cebpb,Il1b,Cxcl1; Down: Selplg,Cx3cr1
Oligodendrocytes
115
Myelination
Up: Klk6; Down: Mbp,Mal,Sirt2,Tspan2
Oligodendrocyte differentiation
Up: Sox10; Down: Gstp1,Cnp,Tspan2,Olig1
(Oligodendrocyte PCs)
7 (103)
Myelination
Down: Mbp,Plp1,Sirt2,Mag
Immune response
Up: Prkx; Down: Egr1,Fyn
Endothelial
35
Amyloids
Up: Ttr,B2m; Down: Itm2a,Itm2b
(Ependymal)
87 (783)
Cilia related pathways
Down: Tmem107,Ift43,Dynll1,Spag17,Spef2
Platelet degranulation
Up: Igf2; Down: Rarres2,Scg3,Clu,Pros1
Amyloids
Up: Cst3; Down: Itm2c,Apoe,Bace2,Apbb1
(Unknown1)
1 (52)
Dendrite morphogenesis
Down: Epha4,Stk11,Baiap2,Bhlhb9
Neurons—general
139
Neurogenesis
Up: Npy,Inhba,Adgrl3; Down: Ndn,Cck
Energy-related
Up: Atp1a1,Atp1a2,Atp2b2; Down:Atp1b1
Synaptic signaling
Up: Scn1b,Cplx2,Slc17a7,Grik4,Grin2b
(CA1 neurons)
16 (330)
Glutamate transport
Up: Slc17a7,Grin2b,Gria1,Gria2
Metabolic depression
Down: Ndufa4,Atp5d,Atp5g1,Ndufv3,Cox8a
(CA3 neurons)
14 (209)
Biosynthesis
Up: Ncan; Down: Mrpl57,Eef1a2,Farsb,Rpl15
(CA subtype1 neurons)
6 (204)
Neurotransmitter pathways
Up: Camk2a,Ppp1r1b,Grin2b,Cav2,Prkcg
(Neuronal subtype2)
11 (139)
Proteosome
Up: Rpn1,Psmc6,Psma1
DG granule cells
44
Neuroplasticity/neurotropic
Up: Set,Bdnf; Down: Chl1,Ntf3,Pcp4
Cell-cell signaling
Up: Ptprn,Penk,Npy,Inhba,Pcdh8
(GABAergic interneurons)
6 (240)
Cell migration
Up: Wasl,Arpc3,Pik3ca
DEGs listed as up had increased expression in TBI and DEGs listed as down had decreased expression in TBI compared to sham. Cell types shown in parenthesis are rare cell types with fewer cells
analyzed, and hence did not have sufﬁcient numbers of DEGs at FDR < 5% between Sham and TBI samples to reveal signiﬁcant pathways. Instead, DEGs reaching a threshold of p < 0.01 (number of DEGs
shown in parenthesis) were used to derive suggestive pathways for these rare cell types. P values were determined using a bimodal likelihood ratio test
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9

prioritize Ttr for testing. Ttr encodes transthyretin, a transporter
that carries the thyroid hormone thyroxine, preferentially T4,
across the blood brain barrier51. We hypothesize that the pan-
hippocampal upregulation of Ttr might implicate an impaired
thyroid hormone pathway in TBI and a compensatory need for
thyroxine T4, the major brain-speciﬁc substrate of transthyretin.
Given the strong implication of altered cell metabolism in various
cell types discussed above, the critical role of thyroid hormone in
regulating metabolism could serve as a platform to mitigate the
metabolic crisis after mTBI across a broad range of hippocampal
cell types.
As a proof of concept, we examined the possibility that
modulating the thyroid hormone pathway and Ttr may serve as
an effective strategy to counteract mTBI pathology. We ﬁrst
quantitatively conﬁrmed, using RNAscope multiplex ISH assays,
that Ttr was indeed signiﬁcantly upregulated in multiple cell types
and brain regions as predicted by Drop-seq (Fig. 8 for high
magniﬁcation images, Supplementary Fig. 12 for low magniﬁca-
tion images). Acute intraperitoneal injection of T4 within the ﬁrst
6 h post-mTBI protected learning and memory, as determined by
the Barnes Maze test one-week post-mTBI. For the learning
component, animals were trained with two trials per day for four
consecutive days, and memory retention was assessed two days
after the last learning trial. Differences in learning and memory
between groups were determined using a two-tailed Student’s t-
test. The learning effects were evidenced by a sustained reduction
in the latency to ﬁnd the escape hole across all time points in the
T4 group compared to TBI mice without T4 (Fig. 9a, b). The
Ependymal
Sham
TBI
Up
Down
Neurons
Down
Sham
TBI
c
Sham
TBI
Up
Up
Down
Astrocytes
d
e
a
b
250
241
207
189
175
146
126111
14
10
7
7
7
6
6
4
4
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
0
100
200
Intersection size
Neuronal subtype 1
Neuronal subtype 2
CA Subtype1 neurons
CA subtype2 neurons
CA3 neurons
GABAergic interneurons
DG granule cells
CA1 neurons
f
Whole tissue
Single cell
345
280
p = 2.2 < 10–16
Fold enrichment = 45.05
179
82 74 71
38
24
211
25 14 6
2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 4 3 2 2
0
50
100
150
200
Intersection size
Astrocytes
Neurons
Oligodendrocytes
Ependymal
Microglia
Endothelial
Oligodendrocyte PCs
Unknown1
Mural
Unknown2
Max
Min
12 11 11
9
9
8
5
5
5
5
4
3 3
1 1 1 1 1 2 2 1
272
Fig. 5 Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) induced by TBI in hippocampal cell types. a, b DEGs unique to a cell type are indicated in red and those shared
between ≥2 cell types are indicated by black dots. The histogram above each plot indicates the DEG counts for each category. a The majority of the DEGs
are cell-type speciﬁc. b The majority of the DEGs in neuron subtypes are subtype-speciﬁc. c–e Heatmaps of DEGs in select cell types demonstrate clear
differential expression patterns between Sham and TBI cells. f Many cell-type speciﬁc DEGs cannot be captured in the bulk tissue analysis, supporting the
uniqueness of using single cell genomic analysis. DEG overlap p-value was calculated using Fisher’s exact test
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

effects of T4 on memory were demonstrated by the recovery of
the latency time to a level comparable to the Sham group (Fig. 9c,
d). The improved Barnes Maze performance was not due to
changes in velocity (Supplementary Fig. 13). It is noteworthy that
T4 was injected immediately after the lesion, which could protect
a variety of cellular functions against the disruptive effects of TBI.
This is the ﬁrst time that T4 treatment was found to mitigate
cognitive deﬁcits in a mouse model of concussive injury.
A recent study using cortical impact injury suggested a
potentially protective action of T4 by testing candidate genes
related to hypoxia and neurogenesis52. Our analysis of known T4
transporters indicates that T4 treatment primarily downregulates
Ttr and has weaker effects on genes encoding other transporters
(Fig. 9e). Genes encoding thyroid hormone receptors that are
downstream of T4 also had less consistent changes across cell
types compared to Ttr (Supplementary Table 2). These results
agree with our hypothesis that the upregulation of Ttr seen in TBI
is an indicator of thyroid hormone deﬁciency in the brain and T4
treatment reverses this change. Although our gene expression
data suggests that Ttr is more strongly modulated by T4
compared to the other known T4 transporters and receptors,
substrate binding experiments are needed to test whether Ttr is
the main T4 transporter. Through whole transcriptome proﬁling,
we also identiﬁed a cascade of genes and pathways potentially
involved in T4 effects. T4 treatment affected a total of 951 DEGs
involved in diverse pathways that could support cell functions
ranging from metabolic processes, cell differentiation, to cell–cell
signaling (Supplementary Data 5). Among the T4 DEGs, 121
were also altered by mTBI (Fig. 9f) and T4 reversed the TBI-
induced changes of 93 genes (Fig. 9g), including Ttr, Wdr72
(implicated in cognitive processing speed53), and Tpx2 (protective
of neurocyte apoptosis in an AD model54) (Fig. 9h). The 93 mTBI
genes normalized by T4 (Fig. 9g) were enriched for hormone
response and metabolic pathways (Fig. 9i). However, there are
pathways that are affected by TBI but are not reversed by T4
treatment as well as genes affected by T4 treatment but are not
perturbed by TBI (Supplementary Table 2; Fig. 9i), suggesting
that T4 normalizes select aspects of TBI pathology.
Ttr
Ependymal
mt-Rnr2
Itm2b
Ptgds
Atp1a1
Microglia
Oligodendrocytes
CA1 neurons
CA3 neurons
DG granule cells
**
*
*
*
p = 0.035
*
*
*
p = 0.035
*
*
*
*
*
p = 0.028
**
*
*
*
*
p = 0.037
Itm2a
Fxyd5
Ak7
Apoe
P2ry12
Trf
Klhl2
Arhgap32
Id2
Endothelial
Ependymal
Microglia
Oligodendrocytes
CA1 neurons
CA Subtype 2 neurons
DG Granule cells
***
**
***
***
***
**
**
a
b
**
Sham
TBI
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
Apba2
Slc17a7
Fig. 6 Top cell-type speciﬁc DEGs and pan-hippocampal DEGs. The normalized expression of cell-type speciﬁc (a) and pan-hippocampal (b) DEGs
between Sham and TBI samples is displayed as violin plots. Single cells from Sham samples are indicated by the blue plots and single cells from TBI
samples are indicated by the red plots. Likelihood-ratio test was used to determine statistical signiﬁcance between Sham and TBI groups and FDR was
calculated to correct for multiple testing. *FDR < 0.02, **FDR < 1 × 10−4, ***FDR < 1 × 10−6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11

Discussion
High-throughput parallel single cell sequencing analysis enabled
us to characterize novel cell types, subtypes, and gene markers
within the complex cytoarchitecture of the hippocampus under
both physiological and pathological conditions, thus providing a
rich
resource
for
the
neuroscience
community
to
study
hippocampus-related processes and diseases. In particular, our
study unveiled key aspects of the hippocampal molecular and
cellular adaptations during the acute phase of mTBI. Viewed
holistically, our analyses of cell proportion changes, global tran-
scriptome pattern shifts, differentially expressed genes, and per-
turbed pathways indicate that the majority of hippocampal cell
types, including previously undeﬁned cell populations, demon-
strate various degrees of sensitivity to mTBI. As the transcriptome
can instruct the functions of cells organized in circuits important
for processing of high order information, our results on the
numerous alterations in cell-type speciﬁc genes and pathways and
the reorganization of cell–cell gene co-expression patterns pro-
vide detailed molecular information crucial for our understanding
of the mTBI pathology.
Our single cell information was also indispensable for the
prioritization of numerous potential therapeutic pathways affec-
ted by mTBI in diverse cell types, including the thyroid hormone
pathway as indicated by Ttr. The encouraging results from the use
of T4 to normalize the disrupted pathways to improve cognitive
behavior such as learning and memory support the potential of
using single cell approaches to identify target pathways of ther-
apeutic applications. It is important to note that such signals
across multiple cell types can only be derived from studying all
cell types individually as done in the current study.
DG granule
cells - Id2
CA1 pyramidal
neurons - Klhl2
Microglia
P2ry12
p =1.3e–13
LogFC = 0.94
0
1
2
3
p = 0.0719
logFC = 0.17
0
1
2
3
p = 0.0408
logFC = –0.36
1
2
3
DAPI
Id2
Prox1
DAPI
Klhl2
Wfs1
DAPI
P2ry12
Tmem119
DAPI
Id2
Prox1
DAPI
Klhl2
Wfs1
DAPI
P2ry12
Tmem119
DAPI
Id2
DAPI
Klhl2
DAPI
P2ry12
DAPI
Id2
DAPI
Klhl2
DAPI
P2ry12
RNAscope sham
RNAscope TBI
Quantification
FISHquant sham
FISHquant TBI
CAST2 neurons
(CA1)-Arhgap32
0
1
2
3
p = 0.0043
logFC = 0.65
0
1
2
3
4
p = 4.3e–13
logFC = 0.92
DAPI
Arhgap32
Ly6g6e
DAPI
Arhgap32
Ly6g6e
DAPI
Arhgap32
Ly6g6e
DAPI
Arhgap32
Ly6g6e
DAPI
Arhgap32
DAPI
Arhgap32
DAPI
Arhgap32
DAPI
Arhgap32
CAST2 neurons
(CA3)-Arhgap32
Fig. 7 Validation of select cell type speciﬁc DEGs using RNAscope in situ hybridization. Representative ﬂuorescent microphotographs for Sham and TBI
showing each DEG of interest (selected from Fig. 6a) along with cell marker genes with DAPI in the background. The RNAscope images for Sham (ﬁrst
column) and TBI (third column) display cell colocalization of each DEG (green) and the corresponding cell marker gene (red). The corresponding FISH-
quant images for Sham (second column) and TBI (fourth column) show the automated cell segmentation (blue) overlayed on the 2D maximal projection of
the DAPI z-stack images (gray) with the DEG of interest (green in the RNAscope images) indicated in bright dots. The quantiﬁcation of the cell type
speciﬁc DEGs is shown in the violin plots (5th column) with Sham in blue and TBI in red. Only cells which meet a certain count threshold for the cell type
marker gene are considered the appropriate cell type and used in the DEG quantiﬁcation (details in Methods). The ln(counts per cell) of the DEGs are
shown on the y-axis with the p-value from a bimodal likelihood ratio test and log fold change (logFC) between TBI and Sham samples indicated. These
ﬁgures have been zoomed in 5x from the original form to show high magniﬁcation detail of a few cells to more easily demonstrate colocalization of DEGs
and cell markers. Lower magniﬁcation photos which indicate the region which was magniﬁed are provided in Supplementary Fig. 11. Scale bars are 4
µm. Sample size was n = 8 mice/group
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

The transcriptome perturbations by mTBI in individual cell
types help pinpoint the cell origins of processes that likely guide
mTBI pathogenesis, such as metabolic dysfunction in astrocytes
and neurons and amyloid regulation involving ependymal and
endothelial cells. These cell-level transcriptome patterns depict
gene programs that may regulate and predict susceptibility to
post-mTBI neurological disorders such as AD, PD, PTSD, neu-
roticism, and epilepsy. The information also has the potential to
guide treatments to improve mTBI outcome by targeting either
speciﬁc cell types or broad cell interactions. For instance, the fact
that genes involved in cell metabolism and amyloid processes
were recurring ﬁndings across cell types and analytical approa-
ches (cell-type speciﬁc DEGs, pan-hippocampal DEGs, pathways,
and cell–cell gene co-expression) suggests that these are core
processes in mTBI pathogenesis. Our single cell study opens new
avenues to deconvolute the pathogenic processes involved in
Ependymal
RNAscope sham
RNAscope TBI
Quantification
p = 5.82e–12
LogFC = 0.35
0
2
4
FISHquant sham
FISHquant TBI
DAPI
Ttr
Foxj1
DAPI
Ttr
Foxj1
DAPI
Ttr
DAPI
Ttr
CA ST2 (CA1)
CA ST2 (CA2)
CA ST2 (CA3)
p = 1.28e–06
LogFC = 0.44
0
2
4
3
1
p = 0.0083
LogFC = 0.26
2
3
4
p = 0.037
LogFC = 0.12
0
2
4
1
3
DAPI
Ttr
Ly6g6e
DAPI
Ttr
Ly6g6e
DAPI
Ttr
Ly6g6e
DAPI
Ttr
Ly6g6e
DAPI
Ttr
Ly6g6e
DAPI
Ttr
Ly6g6e
DAPI
Ttr
DAPI
Ttr
DAPI
Ttr
DAPI
Ttr
DAPI
Ttr
DAPI
Ttr
Microglia
CA1 Pyramidal
p = 1.43e–06
LogFC = 0.79
0
1
3
2
p = 0.040
LogFC = 0.35
0
1
3
4
2
DAPI
Ttr
Tmem119
DAPI
Ttr
Wfs1
DAPI
Ttr
Tmem119
DAPI
Ttr
Wfs1
DAPI
Ttr
DAPI
Ttr
DAPI
Ttr
DAPI
Ttr
Fig. 8 Validation of increased Ttr expression post-TBI using RNAscope in situ hybridization. Representative ﬂuorescent microphotographs for Sham and TBI
showing Ttr along with cell type markers with DAPI in the background. The RNAscope images for Sham (ﬁrst column) and TBI (third column) display cell
colocalization of Ttr (green) and the corresponding cell marker gene (red). The corresponding FISH-quant images for Sham (second column) and TBI
(fourth column) show the automated cell segmentation (blue) overlayed on the 2D maximal projection of the DAPI z-stack images (gray) with Ttr (green in
the RNAscope images) indicated in bright dots. The quantiﬁcation of Ttr expression is shown in the violin plots (5th column) with Sham in blue and TBI in
red. Only cells which meet a certain count threshold for the cell type marker gene are considered the appropriate cell type and used for Ttr quantiﬁcation
(details in Methods). The ln(counts per cell) of Ttr is shown on the y-axis with the p-value from a bimodal likelihood ratio test and log fold change (logFC)
between TBI and Sham samples indicated. These ﬁgures have been zoomed in 5x from the original form to show high magniﬁcation detail of a few cells to
more easily demonstrate colocalization between Ttr and cell type markers. Lower magniﬁcation photos which indicate the region which was magniﬁed are
provided in Supplementary Fig. 12. Scale bars are 4 µm. Sample size was n = 8 mice/group
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
13

mTBI in individual brain cell populations and prioritize both cell-
type speciﬁc (such as Arhgap32 in neurons and Apoe in epen-
dymal cells) and potential broad-spectrum pan-hippocampal
targets (such as transthyretin and humanin).
Concussive brain injury is the most common form of brain
injury in sports, domestic, and military settings and has been
associated with numerous long-lasting and debilitating neurolo-
gical consequences. The identiﬁed genes, processes, and cell types
vulnerable to acute concussive injury will form the foundation for
mechanistic studies and for the development of novel therapeutic
strategies for mTBI and related neurological disorders. The cell
type-speciﬁc signals may also facilitate future development of
molecular diagnostic markers considering difﬁculties to diagnose
concussive injury using conventional neuroimaging examina-
tions3. Future in-depth studies to test the functionality as well as
the potential diagnostic and therapeutic values of the predicted
novel cell types, cell type speciﬁc mTBI targets, and cell-cell
coordination are warranted.
Methods
Animals and mild ﬂuid percussion injury (FPI). Male C57BL/6 J (B6) mice of
10 weeks of age (Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA) weighing between 20
and 25 g were group housed in cages (n = 3–4/group) and maintained in
environmentally controlled rooms (22–24 °C) with a 12 h light/dark cycle. Mice
were randomized to receive either FPI or Sham surgeries, with no investigator
blinding. FPI was performed with the aid of a microscope55 (Wild, Heerburg,
Switzerland), where a 1.5-mm diameter craniotomy was made 2.5 mm posterior to
the bregma and 2.0 mm lateral (left) of the midline with a high-speed drill (Dremel,
Racine, WI, USA). A plastic injury cap was placed over the craniotomy with
silicone adhesive and dental cement. When the dental cement hardened, the cap
was ﬁlled with 0.9% saline solution. Anesthesia was discontinued, and the injury
cap was attached to the ﬂuid percussion device. At the ﬁrst sign of hind-limb
withdrawal to a paw pinch, a mild ﬂuid percussion pulse (1.5–1.7 atm, wake up
time greater than 5 min) was administered. Sham animals underwent an identical
preparation with the exception of the lesion. Immediately following response to a
paw pinch, anesthesia was restored and the skull was sutured. Neomycin was
applied on the suture and the mice were placed in a heated recovery chamber for
approximately an hour before being returned to their cages. After 24 h, mice were
sacriﬁced and fresh hippocampal tissue was dissected for use in Drop-seq (n = 3/
group with one animal per group per day; sample size was determined based on
previous single cell studies that demonstrated sufﬁcient statistical power). All
experiments were performed in accordance with the United States National
Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were
approved by the University of California at Los Angeles Chancellor’s Animal
Research Committee.
Tissue dissociation for Drop-seq. The protocol by Brewer et al56. was used to
suspend cells at a ﬁnal concentration of 100 cells/μl in 0.01% BSA-PBS by digesting
freshly dissected hippocampus tissue with papain (Worthington, Lakewood, NJ,
USA). Brieﬂy, hippocampi were rapidly dissected from the ipsilateral side of the
Log2 fold change
–8
–4
0
4
Ttr
Ucp2
Cdk8
Tpx2
Wdr72
TBIvsSham
T4vsTBI
***
***
***
**
**
**
*
*
*
*
Ttr
Ptgds
Slc16a2
Slc7a8
Slc7a5
Slco1a4
Slco1c1
Slco2b1
Slco3a1
TBIvsSham
T4vsTBI
Log2 fold change
–0.4
0.0
0.4 ***
***
*
*
*
*
**
0.06
**
**
*
*
*
*
TBI/T4
TBI/veh
Sham/veh
Condition
Sham TBI TBI/T4
0
20
40
60
Latency (s)
Number of errors
Day1
Day2
Day3
Day4
Day1
Day2
Day3
Day4
Latency (s)
TBIvsSham
T4vsTBI
p = 2.2<10–16
Fold enrichment = 4.61
506
121
830
Sham TBI TBI/T4
Number of errors
Neuroactive ligand
receptor interaction
Cell cell signaling
Hormone metabolic process
Lipid metabolic process
Alcohol metabolic process
Protein metabolic process
Cell differentiation
Neurogenesis
Synaptic signaling
Actin filament
Immune system
Vesicle mediated transport
Blood vessel
remodeling
Inflammatory
response
–Log10 adj p value
Enriched pathways
Reversed genes
T4/TBI vs TBI (T4 unique)
TBI vs sham (TBI unique)
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
20
40
80
60
0
5
10
15
25
20
Sham2
Sham4
Sham3
TBI1
TBI4
TBI3
TBI2
T4-1
Sham1
T4-4
T4-3
T4-2
Max
Min
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
Fig. 9 Validation of T4 treatment effects. a, b T4 treatment effects on learning through measurement of latency (a) and number of errors (b). c, d T4
treatment improves memory through measurement of latency (c) and number of errors (d) in Barnes Maze test. Bargraphs display mean values with error
bars representing the standard error of the mean. Two-sided t-test was used to determine signiﬁcance. e Ttr is the primary thyroid hormone transporter
responsive to TBI and T4 treatment compared to other known transporters. f–h Gene expression proﬁles of T4 treatment experiments. f TBI and T4
treatment show signiﬁcant overlap in DEGs. Signﬁcance in overlap was determined using Fisher’s exact test. g Heatmap showing T4 reversed the
expression patterns of 93 TBI-affected genes. h Examples of TBI genes reversed by T4. Signiﬁcance of DEGs between the two conditions in e and h is
determined by the negative binomial model, and the log2 fold change between two conditions based on the average gene expression values of the two
groups was plotted on the y-axis. i Enriched pathways among the 93 TBI DEGs reversed by T4, pathways unique to T4 treatment (T4/TBIvsTBI) and those
unique to TBI (TBIvsSham). Enrichment of pathways were determined using Fisher’s exact test with Bonferroni corrected p values used for statistical
signiﬁcance. Adjusted *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. Error bars are s.e.m. Sample size: a–d Sham/Veh: n = 6, TBI/Veh: n = 8, TBI/T4: n = 7; e, h n =
4/group
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
14
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

brain on ice. The hippocampi were transferred into 4 ml HABG (Fisher Scientiﬁc,
Hampton, NH, USA) and incubated in water bath at 30 °C for 8 min. The
supernatant was discarded and the remaining tissue was incubated with papain (12
mg in 6 ml HA-Ca) at 30 °C for 30 min. After incubation, the papain solution was
removed from the tissue and washed with HABG three times. Using a siliconized 9-
in Pasteur pipette with a ﬁre-polished tip, the solution was triturated approximately
ten times in 45 s. Next, the cell suspension was carefully applied to the top of the
prepared OptiPrep density gradient (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and
ﬂoated on top of the gradient. The gradient was then centrifuged at 800 g for 15
min at 22 °C. We aspirated the top 6 ml containing cellular debris. To dilute the
gradient material, we mixed the desired cell fractions with 5 ml HABG. The cell
suspension containing the desired cell fractions was centrifuged for 3 min at 22 °C
at 200 g, and the supernatant containing the debris was discarded. Finally, the cell
pellet was loosened by ﬂicking the tube and the cells were re-suspended in 1 ml
0.01% BSA (in PBS). This ﬁnal cell suspension solution was passed through a 40-
micron strainer (Fisher Scientiﬁc, Hampton, NH, USA) to discard debris, followed
by cell counting.
Drop-seq single cell barcoding and library preparation. Barcoded single cells, or
STAMPs (single-cell transcriptomes attached to microparticles), and cDNA
libraries were generated following the drop seq protocol from Macosko et al12. and
version 3.1 of the online Drop-seq protocol [http://mccarrolllab.com/download/
905/]. Brieﬂy, single cell suspensions at 100 cells/μl, EvaGreen droplet generation
oil (BIO-RAD, Hercules, CA, USA), and ChemGenes barcoded microparticles
(ChemGenes, Wilmington, MA, USA) were co-ﬂowed through a FlowJEM
aquapel-treated Drop-seq microﬂuidic device (FlowJEM, Toronto, Canada) at
recommended ﬂow speeds (oil: 15,000 μl/hr, cells: 4000 μl/hr, and beads 4000 μl/hr)
to generate STAMPs. The following modiﬁcations were made to the online pub-
lished protocol to obtain enough cDNA as quantiﬁed by a high sensitivity BioA-
nalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) to continue the protocol: (1) The number
of beads in a single PCR tube was 4000. (2) The number of PCR cycles was 4 + 11
cycles. (3) Multiple PCR tubes were pooled. The libraries were then checked on a
BioAnalyzer high sensitivity chip (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) for library
quality, average size, and concentration estimation. The samples were then tag-
mented using the Nextera DNA Library Preparation kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA,
USA) and multiplex indices were added. After another round of PCR, the samples
were checked on a BioAnalyzer high sensitivity chip for library quality check before
sequencing. A cell doublet rate of 5.6% was obtained by running the microﬂuidic
device without the lysis buffer and counting the percentage of cell doublets through
three separate runs.
Illumina high-throughput sequencing of Drop-seq libraries. The Drop-seq
library molar concentration was quantiﬁed by Qubit Fluorometric Quantitation
(ThermoFisher, Canoga Park, CA, USA) and library fragment length was estimated
using a Bioanalyzer. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina HiSeq 2500
(Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) instrument using the Drop-seq custom read 1B
primer (GCCTGTCCGCGGAAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGTAC) (IDT,
Coralville, IA, USA). Paired end reads were generated using custom read lengths of
24 for read 1 and 76 for read 2 and an 8 bp index read for multiplexing. Read 1
consists of the 12 bp cell barcode, followed by the 8 bp UMI, and the last 4 bp on
the read are not used. Read 2 contains the single cell transcripts.
Drop-seq data pre-processing and quality control. The fastq ﬁles of the Drop-
seq sequencing data were processed to digital expression gene matrices using Drop-
seq tools version 1.12 [http://mccarrolllab.com/download/922/]. The protocol
outlined in the Drop-seq alignment cookbook v1.2 [http://mccarrolllab.com/wp-
content/uploads/2016/03/Drop-seqAlignmentCookbookv1.2Jan2016.pdf] was fol-
lowed, using default parameters. Fastq ﬁles were converted to BAM format and cell
and molecular barcodes were tagged. Reads corresponding to low quality barcodes
were removed. Next, any occurrence of the SMART adapter sequence or polyA tails
found in the reads was trimmed. These cleaned reads were converted back to fastq
format to be aligned to the mouse reference genome mm10 using STAR-2.5.0c.
After the reads were aligned, the reads which overlapped with exons were tagged
using a RefFlat annotation ﬁle of mm10. A percentage of the Chemgenes barcoded
beads which contain the UMIs and cell barcodes were anticipated to have synthesis
errors. We used the Drop-seq Tools function DetectBeadSynthesisErrors to
quantify the Chemgenes beads batch quality and estimated a bead synthesis error
rate of 5–10%, within the acceptable range. Finally, a digital gene expression matrix
for each sample was generated where each row is the read count of a gene and each
column is a unique single cell. The transcript counts of each cell were normalized
by the total number of UMIs for that cell. These values are then multiplied by
10,000 and log transformed. Digital gene expression matrices from the six samples
(3 Sham and 3 TBI samples) were combined to create three different pooled digital
gene expression matrices for: (1) all Sham samples, (2) all TBI samples and (3)
combined Sham and TBI samples. Single cells were identiﬁed from background
noise by using a threshold of at least 500 genes and 900 transcripts.
Identiﬁcation of cell clusters. The Seurat R package version 1.4.0.1 [https://
github.com/satijalab/seurat] was used to project all sequenced cells onto two
dimensions using t-SNE and density-based spatial clustering (DBSCAN) was used
to assign clusters. To further reﬁne the neuronal cell clusters, the BackSPIN soft-
ware14 was used to perform biclustering of the single cells identiﬁed to be neuronal
cells to further resolve this cell type. Biclustering has been previously demonstrated
to differentiate between cell types which cannot be captured by traditional t-SNE-
based approaches14. BackSPIN was run with default parameters, selecting for the
top 2000 most highly variable genes and proceeding with 5 levels of biclustering.
Identiﬁcation of marker genes of individual cell clusters. We deﬁned cell cluster
speciﬁc marker genes from our Drop-seq dataset using a bimodal likelihood ratio
test57. To determine the marker genes, the single cells were split into two groups for
each test: the cell type of interest and all remaining single cells. To be considered in
the analysis, the gene had to be expressed in at least 30% of the single cells from
one of the groups and there had to be at least a 0.25 log fold change in gene
expression between the groups. Multiple testing was corrected using the
Benjamini–Hochberg method and genes with an FDR < 0.05 are deﬁned as marker
genes. We explored the gene-gene correlation within-group and between-group for
each cell type and conﬁrmed the consistency of cell type identiﬁcation between
samples (Supplementary Fig. 1).
Resolving cell identities of the cell clusters. We use two methods to resolve the
identities of the cell clusters. First, known cell-type speciﬁc markers from previous
studies were curated and checked for expression patterns in the cell clusters. A
cluster showing high expression levels of a known marker gene speciﬁc for a
particular cell type was considered to carry the identity of that cell type. Second, we
evaluated the overlap between known marker genes of various cell types with the
marker genes identiﬁed in our cell clusters. Overlap was assessed using a Fisher’s
exact test and signiﬁcance was set to Bonferroni-corrected p < 0.05. A cluster was
considered to carry the identity of a cell type if the cluster marker genes showed
signiﬁcant overlap with known markers of that cell type. The two methods showed
consistency in cell identity determination.
Known markers for major hippocampal cell types and neuronal subtypes were
retrieved from Zeisel et al.14, Habib et al.15, and the Allen Brain Atlas58. These
markers were sufﬁcient to deﬁne all major cell types as well as GABAergic neurons,
dentate gyrus (DG), CA1 and CA3 pyramidal neurons.
Quantitative assessment of global transcriptome shifts. For each cell type, we
generate two representative cells, one for the Sham group and the other for mTBI
condition by calculating the average gene expression of each gene for each group
within that cell type. We then calculate the Euclidian distance in gene expression
between these representative cells as a metric to quantify the effect of TBI on each
cell type. To determine if the observed Euclidian distance between Sham and mTBI
cells within each cell type is signiﬁcantly larger than that of random cells, we
estimated a null distribution by calculating the Euclidian distance between ran-
domly sampled cells of the given cell type. This permutation approach is repeated
for a total of 1000 times to generate the null distribution, which is compared to the
Euclidian distance generated from the true TBI and Sham groups to determine an
empirical p value. To correct for multiple testing across all the cell types tested, we
applied a Bonferroni correction to retrieve adjusted p values.
Cell–cell gene co-expression analysis. We assessed cell–cell gene co-expression
based on gene-level correlation patterns between any two given cell types (Fig. 6a).
To infer directionality of the interactions between two cell types, we deﬁned a cell
type whose marker genes encode secreted peptides based on Uniprot information
as the source cell type, and then correlated the peptide-encoding marker genes
from the source cell type with genes in the target cell type. To deal with the sparse
nature of single cell data, we averaged the gene expression of Sham and TBI
samples respectively for each cell type. An interaction score is calculated from the
sum of the correlation p-values for each peptide, assuming that a peptide from a
source cell type with strong correlations with many genes in the target cell type
would have a high score and indicate strong interactions. To determine the sig-
niﬁcance of interaction, we use a permutation approach in which a null distribu-
tion is drawn from the interactions scores generated by the correlations between
source peptides and target genes where the expression values for each target gene
has been shufﬂed independently. The genes correlated with each peptide were
tested for pathway enrichment in KEGG, Reactome, BIOCARTA, GO Molecular
Functions, and GO Biological Processes to infer the key pathways involved in the
interactions.
To assess the validity of our method, we benchmarked how well our gene
coexpression analysis could recapitulate the known cell–cell interactions in the
hippocampal trisynaptic circuit. As the neuronal cell types involved in this neural
circuit and present in our data are glutamatergic neurons (DG granule cells, CA1
pyramidal neurons, and CA3 pyramidal neurons) we used genes involved in
glutamate secretion to deﬁne source cell types and used the same scoring and
permutation approach above to determine signiﬁcance of gene coexpression
between cell types. Due to the very small numbers of CA1 and CA3 cells in our
dataset hence limited power, we utilized data from a previous DroNc-seq study59
involving much larger populations of CA1 pyramidal cells, CA3 pyramidal cells,
and DG granule cells from 6 control animals.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
15

Identiﬁcation of DEGs between Sham and TBI. Within each identiﬁed cell type,
Sham and TBI samples are compared for differential gene expression using a
bimodal likelihood ratio test57. To be considered in the analysis, the gene had to be
expressed in at least 30% of the single cells from one of the two groups for that cell
type and there had to be at least a 0.25 log fold change in gene expression between
the groups. We correct for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg method
and genes with an FDR < 0.05 were used in downstream pathway enrichment
analyses (unless explicitly noted that a p-value of 0.01 was used instead to retrieve
suggestive pathways). Enrichment of pathways from KEGG, Reactome, BIO-
CARTA, GO Molecular Functions, and GO Biological Processes was assessed with
Fisher’s exact test, followed by multiple testing correction with the
Benjamini–Hochberg method.
Comparison of single cell vs. bulk tissue DEGs. To deﬁne the advantages gained
by employing single cell sequencing, we simulated bulk tissue gene expression by
averaging the gene expression across all TBI single cells and all Sham single cells for
each animal. These in silico bulk tissue Sham and TBI samples were then compared
for differential gene expression using a bimodal likelihood ratio test57. FDR < 5%
was used as the cutoff to determine tissue-level DEGs, which were then compared
against those from the single-cell analysis.
RNAscope in situ hybridization. We used RNAscope Multiplex in situ hybridi-
zation (Advanced Cell Diagnostics) to assess the expression of the genes of interest
(Wang, J Molec Diag, 2012), according to manufacturer user manual for fresh
frozen tissue. For each gene, n = 8/group was used. Two fresh frozen brain slices
from each hippocampus (15 µm) were mounted on glass slides in 4% neutral
buffered paraformaldehyde (Fisher Scientiﬁc) for 15 min at 4 °C. We rinsed the
slides twice in PBS, dehydrated them in 50, 70, 100, and 100% ethanol, and stored
slices in fresh 100% ethanol for overnight at −20 °C. Slides were dried at room
temperature for 5 min. We drew a hydrophobic barrier on slides around the brain
slices to avoid the spreading of solutions, and then treated the slides with protease
IV at room temperature for 30 min followed by a PBS wash. We applied probes to
co-localize the target gene and a cell marker gene in the same tissue to the slides
and incubated them at 40 °C for 2 h in the HybEZ oven. Each RNAscope target
probe contains a mixture of multiple ZZ oligonucleotide probes that are bound to
the target RNA: Ttr probe (GenBank accession number NM_013697.5; target
region 141–1149, Arhgap32 probe (GenBank accession number NM_001195632.1;
target nt region, 1880–2864), Id2 probe (GenBank accession number
NM_010496.3; target nt region, 57–794), Foxj1 probe (GenBank accession number
NM_008240.3; target nt region, 1121–1836); Ly6g6e probe (GenBank accession
number NM_027366.1; target nt region, 2–902), Prox1 probe (GenBank accession
number NM_008937.2; target nt region, 590–1769), Tmem119 probe (GenBank
accession number NM_146162.2; target nt region, 2–1106), Wfs1 probe (GenBank
accession number NM_011716.2; target nt region, 757–1629), Klhl2 probe (Gen-
Bank accession number NM_178633.3; target nt region, 534–1477), P2ry12
(GenBank accession number NM_027571.3; target nt region, 739–1854). The
negative control sections received RNase treatment before performing the RNA-
scope assay, and the positive control contained a housekeeping RNA (RTU mixture
of three probes targeting POLR2A in channel C1, PPIB in channel C2, and UBC in
channel C3). We incubated the slides with ampliﬁer probes (AMP1, 40 °C for 30
min; AMP2, 40 °C for 15 min; AMP3, 40 °C for 30 min). We then incubated the
slides with ﬂuorescently labeled probes by selecting a speciﬁc combination of colors
associated with each channel: green (Alexa 488 nm), orange (Alexa 550 nm), and
far red (Alexa 647 nm). We used AMP4 FL Alt A to detect genes of interest. We
washed the slides with 1 × washing buffer twice in between incubations. After air
drying the slides we coverslipped them with a ProLong Gold Antifade mounting
medium containing DAPI (Invitrogen). Fluorescent images were captured at 400×
magniﬁcation (Zeiss Imager.Z1; Gottingen, DE) using the Axiovision software
(Carl Zeiss Vision, version 4.6). According to manufacturer, each dot represents a
single molecule of mRNA.
RNAscope quantiﬁcation. RNAscope ISH was quantiﬁed using the automated
FISH-quant software44. Brieﬂy, each stained tissue section was imaged in a z-stack
of 5 images with 555 nm of distance between each image. Each set of 5 z-stack
images for DAPI, Alexa 488 nm, Alexa 550 nm, and/or Alexa 647 nm depending on
the sets of genes being multiplexed were collapsed into a single.tif ﬁle for each
channel which were used in the FISH-quant software with the following settings:
pixel size—555 nm (x, y, and z), refractive index—1.0002, numeric aperture—0.75,
554, and 576 excitation and emission wavelength (Alexa 550 nm), 501 and 523
excitation and emission wavelength (Alexa 488 nm). Prior to cell segmentation, a
2D maximal projection was made from each image z-stack using a TENG focus
operator for DAPI and a HELM focus operator for Alexa 550 nm and Alexa 488
nm images with global focus measurement. These 2D projections were used in the
CellProﬁler43 software to deﬁne nuclei and cell segmentations. Using these outlines
in FISH-quant, preliminary parameters for each gene were determined from a set
of 3 representative images. These parameters were applied in batch-mode to
quantify all images, and optimal threshold parameters for determining true mRNA
spots from background were deﬁned based on distributions for: sigma-xy, sigma-z,
and the amplitude of the RNA spots. To ensure quantiﬁcation of a DEG in cell
types of interest, we consider only cells which meet a certain RNA spot threshold of
the cell type speciﬁc marker gene to be the appropriate cell type. This threshold is
determined by looking for the knee of gene counts per cell. The following
thresholds were used: CA1 Pyramidal cells—6, Microglia—11, Ependymal—15, CA
Subtype 2–8, Dentate Gyrus granule cells—20. Within the group of cells which pass
this threshold, we quantify the counts per cell of the DEG of interest and compare
the count distributions between TBI and Sham groups using a bimodal likelihood
ratio test57.
T4 treatment. L-Thyroxine sodium salt pentahydrate (T4, Sigma Chemical Co., St.
Louis, MO, USA) dissolved in saline vehicle (154 nM NaCl) was injected i.p. twice
at 1 and 6 h after FPI in the treatment group (n = 6 mice) at 1.2 µg/100 g body
weight. Control FPI mice (n = 6) received vehicle (saline).
Behavioral tests for T4 treatment experiments. Mice from the Sham, TBI, and
T4 treatment groups were tested on the Barnes maze 7 days after injury to assess
learning acquisition and memory retention60. For learning, animals were trained
with two trials per day for 4 consecutive days, and memory retention was assessed
two days after the last learning trial. The maze was manufactured from acrylic
plastic to form a disk 1.5 cm thick and 120 cm in diameter, with 40 evenly spaced 5
cm holes at its edges. The disk was brightly illuminated (900 lumens) by four
overhead halogen lamps to provide an aversive stimulus to search for a dark escape
chamber hidden underneath a hole positioned around the perimeter of a disk. All
trials were recorded simultaneously by a video camera installed directly overhead at
the center of the maze. A trial was started by placing the animal in the center of the
maze covered under a cylindrical start chamber; after a 10 s delay, the start
chamber was raised. A training session ended after the animal had entered the
escape chamber or when a pre-determined time (5 min) had elapsed, whichever
came ﬁrst. All surfaces were routinely cleaned before and after each trial to elim-
inate possible olfactory cues from preceding animals. After the memory test the
animals were sacriﬁced immediately by decapitation and the fresh hippocampal
tissues were dissected out, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored in −80 °C for bulk
tissue RNA-sequencing.
RNA-seq analysis of T4 treatment experiments. After completion of the
behavior test (11 days post-injury/treatment), hippocampal tissues were dissected
from the Sham, untreated TBI, and T4-treated TBI animals (n = 6/group for
behavior, and n = 4/group selected for sequencing). QuantSeq 3′ libraries were
prepared from cDNA samples using the QuantSeq 3′ mRNA-Seq Library Prep Kit
(Lexogen, Greenland, NH, USA). Libraries were run on a HiSeq4000. Reads were
aligned with STAR and read counts per gene were generated using the BlueBee
platform. Differentially expressed genes between the different groups (Sham, TBI
untreated, and TBI T4 treatment) were determined using negative binomial
models61. DEGs with p < 0.05 were included in gene signatures which were checked
for pathway enrichment. DEGs between TBI and Sham were compared for overlap
with DEGs between T4 treated mice and untreated TBI mice.
Code availability. Our analytical workﬂow was stored and freely accessible as a
SnakeMake ﬁle [https://github.com/darneson/DropSeq].
Data availability
The sequence data that support the ﬁndings of this study have been deposited in the
Gene Expression Omnibus repository, with the series record GSE101901.
Received: 19 October 2017 Accepted: 27 August 2018
References
1.
Rohling, M. L. et al. A meta-analysis of neuropsychological outcome after mild
traumatic brain injury: re-analyses and reconsiderations of Binder et al.
(1997), Frencham et al. (2005), and Pertab et al. (2009). Clin. Neuropsychol.
25, 608–623 (2011).
2.
Girgis, F., Pace, J., Sweet, J. & Miller, J. P. Hippocampal neurophysiologic
changes after mild traumatic brain injury and potential neuromodulation
treatment approaches. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 10, 8 (2016).
3.
Blennow, K. et al. Traumatic brain injuries. Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers 2, 16084
(2016).
4.
Shively, S., Scher, A. I., Perl, D. P. & Diaz-Arrastia, R. Dementia resulting from
traumatic brain injury: what is the pathology? Arch. Neurol. 69, 1245–1251
(2012).
5.
Lipponen, A., Paananen, J., Puhakka, N. & Pitkänen, A. Analysis of post-
traumatic brain injury gene expression signature reveals tubulins, Nfe2l2,
Nfkb, Cd44, and S100a4 as treatment targets. Sci. Rep. 6, 31570 (2016).
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
16
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

6.
Meng, Q. et al. Traumatic brain injury induces genome-wide transcriptomic,
methylomic, and network perturbations in brain and blood predicting
neurological disorders. EBioMedicine 16, 184–194 (2017).
7.
Redell, J. B. et al. Analysis of functional pathways altered after mild traumatic
brain injury. J. Neurotrauma 30, 752–764 (2013).
8.
Samal, B. B. et al. Acute response of the hippocampal transcriptome following
mild traumatic brain injury after controlled cortical impact in the rat. J. Mol.
Neurosci. 57, 282–303 (2015).
9.
von Gertten, C., Flores Morales, A., Holmin, S., Mathiesen, T. & Nordqvist, A.
C. Genomic responses in rat cerebral cortex after traumatic brain injury. BMC
Neurosci. 6, 69 (2005).
10. Lyeth, B. G. Historical review of the ﬂuid-percussion TBI model. Front.
Neurol. 7, 217 (2016).
11. Mondello, S. et al. Blood-based diagnostics of traumatic brain injuries. Expert
Rev. Mol. Diagn. 11, 65–78 (2011).
12. Macosko, E. Z. et al. Highly parallel genome-wide expression proﬁling of
individual cells using nanoliter droplets. Cell 161, 1202–1214 (2015).
13. van der Maaten, L. J. P. & Hinton, G. E. Visualizing high-dimensional data
using t-SNE. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 9, 2579–2605 (2008).
14. Zeisel, A. et al. Brain structure. Cell types in the mouse cortex and
hippocampus revealed by single-cell RNA-seq. Science 347, 1138–1142 (2015).
15. Habib, N. et al. Div-Seq: Single-nucleus RNA-Seq reveals dynamics of rare
adult newborn neurons. Science 353, 925–928 (2016).
16. Shlosberg, D., Beniﬂa, M., Kaufer, D. & Friedman, A. Blood-brain barrier
breakdown as a therapeutic target in traumatic brain injury. Nat. Rev. Neurol.
6, 393–403 (2010).
17. Salehi, A., Zhang, J. H. & Obenaus, A. Response of the cerebral vasculature
following traumatic brain injury. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 37, 2320–2339
(2017).
18. Lim, D. A. & Alvarez-Buylla, A. The adult ventricular-subventricular zone (V-
SVZ) and olfactory bulb (OB) neurogenesis. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol.
8, a018820 (2016).
19. Carlen, M. et al. Forebrain ependymal cells are Notch-dependent and generate
neuroblasts and astrocytes after stroke. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 259–267 (2009).
20. Szabolcsi, V. & Celio, M. R. De novo expression of parvalbumin in ependymal
cells in response to brain injury promotes ependymal remodeling and wound
repair. Glia 63, 567–594 (2015).
21. Butler, C. R., Boychuk, J. A. & Smith, B. N. Effects of rapamycin treatment on
neurogenesis and synaptic reorganization in the dentate gyrus after controlled
cortical impact injury in mice. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 9, 163 (2015).
22. Hayes, J. P., Bigler, E. D. & Verfaellie, M. Traumatic brain injury as a disorder
of brain connectivity. J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc. 22, 120–137 (2016).
23. Bassett, D. S. & Sporns, O. Network neuroscience. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 353–364
(2017).
24. Fulcher, B. D. & Fornito, A. A transcriptional signature of hub connectivity in
the mouse connectome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 1435–1440 (2016).
25. Kanehisa, M. & Goto, S. KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes.
Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 27–30 (2000).
26. Croft, D. et al. The Reactome pathway knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Res. 42,
D472–D477 (2014).
27. Consortium, G. O. Gene Ontology Consortium: going forward. Nucleic Acids
Res. 43, D1049–D1056 (2015).
28. Vespa, P. et al. Metabolic crisis without brain ischemia is common after
traumatic brain injury: a combined microdialysis and positron emission
tomography study. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 25, 763–774 (2005).
29. Van Horn, J. D., Bhattrai, A. & Irimia, A. Multimodal imaging of
neurometabolic pathology due to traumatic brain injury. Trends Neurosci. 40,
39–59 (2017).
30. Sanders, M. J., Sick, T. J., Perez-Pinzon, M. A., Dietrich, W. D. & Green, E. J.
Chronic failure in the maintenance of long-term potentiation following ﬂuid
percussion injury in the rat. Brain Res. 861, 69–76 (2000).
31. Cai, H. et al. Metabolic dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease and related
neurodegenerative disorders. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 9, 5–17 (2012).
32. Elliott, R. C., Khademi, S., Pleasure, S. J., Parent, J. M. & Lowenstein, D. H.
Differential regulation of basic helix-loop-helix mRNAs in the dentate gyrus
following status epilepticus. Neuroscience 106, 79–88 (2001).
33. Butovsky, O. et al. Identiﬁcation of a unique TGF-β-dependent molecular and
functional signature in microglia. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 131–143 (2014).
34. Lu, L., Cao, H., Wei, X., Li, Y. & Li, W. Iron deposition is positively related to
cognitive impairment in patients with chronic mild traumatic brain injury:
assessment with susceptibility weighted imaging. Biomed. Res. Int. 2015,
470676 (2015).
35. Raz, E. et al. Brain iron quantiﬁcation in mild traumatic brain injury: a
magnetic ﬁeld correlation study. AJNR Am. J. Neuroradiol. 32, 1851–1856
(2011).
36. Nathoo, N., Chetty, R., van Dellen, J. R. & Barnett, G. H. Genetic vulnerability
following traumatic brain injury: the role of apolipoprotein E. Mol. Pathol. 56,
132–136 (2003).
37. Matsuda, S. et al. The familial dementia BRI2 gene binds the Alzheimer gene
amyloid-beta precursor protein and inhibits amyloid-beta production. J. Biol.
Chem. 280, 28912–28916 (2005).
38. Smith, D. J. et al. Genome-wide analysis of over 106 000 individuals identiﬁes
9 neuroticism-associated loci. Mol. Psychiatry 21, 749–757 (2016).
39. Soltysik-Espanola, M. et al. Characterization of Mayven, a novel actin-binding
protein predominantly expressed in brain. Mol. Biol. Cell 10, 2361–2375
(1999).
40. Mendez, M. F., Owens, E. M., Jimenez, E. E., Peppers, D. & Licht, E. A.
Changes in personality after mild traumatic brain injury from primary blast
vs. blunt forces. Brain. Inj. 27, 10–18 (2013).
41. Okabe, T. et al. RICS, a novel GTPase-activating protein for Cdc42 and Rac1,
is involved in the beta-catenin-N-cadherin and N-methyl-D-aspartate
receptor signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 9920–9927 (2003).
42. Ino, Y., Gotoh, M., Sakamoto, M., Tsukagoshi, K. & Hirohashi, S. Dysadherin,
a cancer-associated cell membrane glycoprotein, down-regulates E-cadherin
and promotes metastasis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 365–370 (2002).
43. Carpenter, A. E. et al. CellProﬁler: image analysis software for identifying and
quantifying cell phenotypes. Genome Biol. 7, R100 (2006).
44. Mueller, F. et al. FISH-quant: automatic counting of transcripts in 3D FISH
images. Nat. Methods 10, 277–278 (2013).
45. Oliveira, S. M., Ribeiro, C. A., Cardoso, I. & Saraiva, M. J. Gender-dependent
transthyretin modulation of brain amyloid-beta levels: evidence from a mouse
model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 27, 429–439 (2011).
46. Bodzioch, M. et al. Evidence for potential functionality of nuclearly-encoded
humanin isoforms. Genomics 94, 247–256 (2009).
47. Kim, J. et al. BRI2 (ITM2b) inhibits Abeta deposition in vivo. J. Neurosci. 28,
6030–6036 (2008).
48. McLoughlin, D. M. et al. Mint2/X11-like colocalizes with the Alzheimer’s
disease amyloid precursor protein and is associated with neuritic plaques in
Alzheimer’s disease. Eur. J. Neurosci. 11, 1988–1994 (1999).
49. Takamori, S., Rhee, J. S., Rosenmund, C. & Jahn, R. Identiﬁcation of a
vesicular glutamate transporter that deﬁnes a glutamatergic phenotype in
neurons. Nature 407, 189–194 (2000).
50. Madura, S. A. et al. Genetic variation in SLC17A7 promoter associated with
response to sport-related concussions. Brain. Inj. 30, 908–913 (2016).
51. Richardson, S. J., Wijayagunaratne, R. C., D’Souza, D. G., Darras, V. M. & Van
Herck, S. L. Transport of thyroid hormones via the choroid plexus into the
brain: the roles of transthyretin and thyroid hormone transmembrane
transporters. Front. Neurosci. 9, 66 (2015).
52. Li, J. et al. Thyroid hormone treatment activates protective pathways in both
in vivo and in vitro models of neuronal injury. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 452,
120–130 (2017).
53. Giddaluru, S. et al. Genetics of structural connectivity and information
processing in the brain. Brain Struct. Funct. 221, 4643–4661 (2016).
54. Liang, K., Zhang, J., Yin, C., Zhou, X. & Zhou, S. Protective effects and
mechanism of TPX2 on neurocyte apoptosis of rats in Alzheimer’s disease
model. Exp. Ther. Med. 13, 576–580 (2017).
55. Wu, A., Molteni, R., Ying, Z. & Gomez-Pinilla, F. A saturated-fat diet
aggravates the outcome of traumatic brain injury on hippocampal plasticity
and cognitive function by reducing brain-derived neurotrophic factor.
Neuroscience 119, 365–375 (2003).
56. Brewer, G. J. & Torricelli, J. R. Isolation and culture of adult neurons and
neurospheres. Nat. Protoc. 2, 1490–1498 (2007).
57. McDavid, A. et al. Modeling bi-modality improves characterization of cell
cycle on gene expression in single cells. PLoS Comput. Biol. 10, e1003696
(2014).
58. Lein, E. S. et al. Genome-wide atlas of gene expression in the adult mouse
brain. Nature 445, 168–176 (2007).
59. Habib, N. et al. Massively parallel single-nucleus RNA-seq with DroNc-seq.
Nat. Methods 14, 955–958 (2017).
60. Barnes, C. A. Memory deﬁcits associated with senescence: a
neurophysiological and behavioral study in the rat. J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol.
93, 74–104 (1979).
61. Di, Y., Schafer, D., Cambie, J. & Chang, J. The NBP negative binomial models
for assessing differential gene expression from RNA-seq. Stat. Appl. Genet.
Mol. Biol. 10, 1–28 (2011).
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Weizhe Hong for advice on neuronal subpopulation analysis and helpful
discussions. X.Y. and F.G-P. are funded by R01 DK104363 and R21 NS103088. F.GP. is
funded by R01 NS50465 and UCLA BIRC. D.A. is funded by Hyde Fellowship and NIH-
NCI National Cancer Institute T32CA201160.
Author contributions
D.A. participated in the experimental design, collected and analyzed sequencing datasets,
and wrote the paper. Y.Z., H.R.B., I.S.A., Z.Y., G.Z conducted animal, Drop-seq, and
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
17

immunohistochemistry experiments, and edited the manuscript. X.Y. and F.G-P. con-
ceived the study, designed and coordinated the study, and wrote the manuscript.
Additional information
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
018-06222-0.
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2018
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0
18
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3894 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06222-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

===== Assinck2017_NatNeuro_SCI+Review =====
nature neuroscience  VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017	
637
r e v i e w
An estimated three million people live with traumatic spinal cord 
injury (SCI) worldwide, with ~180,000 new cases reported each year1. 
Spontaneous recovery is limited, and there is still no treatment for the 
injured spinal cord itself. Cell transplantation has emerged as a potential 
strategy to promote repair following SCI. Several early phase clinical 
trials have been completed showing that cell transplantation is generally 
feasible2,3 but the efficacy and long-term safety remain unproven.
Although cell transplantation remains intensely studied, surpris­
ingly little is known about the mechanisms through which trans­
planted cells promote repair and mediate functional improvements. 
Here we define a mechanism broadly as an interaction, either direct 
or indirect, between transplanted cells and host cells that affects 
histological or functional outcomes following SCI. These interac­
tions can be defined at the systems, cellular and/or molecular level. 
Unlike drugs or implanted biomaterials, transplanted cells are capa­
ble of responding to cues provided by the injured microenvironment 
and altering their environmental interactions. This makes defining 
specific therapeutic interactions between transplanted cells and host 
tissue a challenge. However, mechanistic information is also often 
lacking because of limitations in experimental design and a lack of 
critical interpretation.
In this review, we discuss the five most commonly proposed mech­
anisms through which cell transplantation is thought to promote 
functional benefits following SCI: neuroprotection, immunomodu­
lation, axon sprouting and/or regeneration, neuronal relay formation, 
and myelin regeneration. We address their definitions, discuss how 
researchers might provide more definitive evidence that they mediate 
functional improvements and highlight the obstacles to making cell 
transplantation a viable treatment option.
Historical perspective
The history of cell transplantation for CNS repair has multiple origins. 
Jorge Francisco Tello, in the laboratory of Santiago Ramon y Cajal, 
transplanted pre-degenerated peripheral nerve segments onto the 
proximal stumps of severed optic nerves and observed retinal axons 
growing into these nerves4. This was almost forgotten until experi­
ments by Richardson, David and Aguayo demonstrated that adult 
spinal axons can grow long distances into peripheral nerve grafts5. In 
1975, Richard Bunge envisioned treating SCI with Schwann cells, and 
the pioneering work by Bunge, Bunge and Wood on in vitro cultures of 
Schwann cells for spinal cord repair has led to recent clinical trials6.
Transplanting neural and non-neural tissues from both embry­
onic and adult sources into the mammalian CNS has an equally 
rich history7. The notion that fetal tissue can promote CNS repair 
was established by Anders Björklund and colleagues, who replaced 
lost cell types in models of Parkinson’s and Huntington’s disease8. 
Transplantation of fetal spinal cord tissue into injured spinal cord 
resulted in successful graft survival, differentiation of transplanted 
cells, connectivity and host–graft integration9. Intraspinal grafting of 
human fetal spinal cord tissue is both feasible and safe in humans10. 
Current approaches owe a great deal to these researchers, who estab­
lished the capacity of transplanted cells to differentiate, promote axon 
growth and myelinate within the injured spinal cord.
Candidate cell types
Numerous cell types have been assessed for their capacity to treat 
SCI with transplantation. The most widely studied are Schwann cells, 
neural stem and progenitor cells (NSPCs), oligodendrocyte precursor 
cells (OPCs), olfactory ensheathing cells (OECs) and mesenchymal 
stem cells (MSCs)11. Schwann cells are the myelinating glia of the 
1International Collaboration on Repair Discoveries, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. 2Graduate Program in Neuroscience, University 
of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. 3Department of Zoology, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. 4Department of Clinical Neurosciences 
and the Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada. 
5Department of Surgery, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. 
6These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence should be 
addressed to W.T. (tetzlaff@icord.org).
Received 23 June 2016; accepted 22 February 2017; published online 25 April 
2017; doi:10.1038/nn.4541
Cell transplantation therapy for spinal 
cord injury
Peggy Assinck1,2,6, Greg J Duncan1,3,6, Brett J Hilton1,3,6, Jason R Plemel4,6 & Wolfram Tetzlaff1,3,5
Spinal cord injury can lead to severe motor, sensory and autonomic dysfunction. Currently, there is no effective treatment 
for the injured spinal cord. The transplantation of Schwann cells, neural stem cells or progenitor cells, olfactory ensheathing 
cells, oligodendrocyte precursor cells and mesenchymal stem cells has been investigated as potential therapies for spinal cord 
injury. However, little is known about the mechanisms through which these individual cell types promote repair and functional 
improvements. The five most commonly proposed mechanisms include neuroprotection, immunomodulation, axon regeneration, 
neuronal relay formation and myelin regeneration. A better understanding of the mechanisms whereby these cells promote 
functional improvements, as well as an appreciation of the obstacles in implementing these therapies and effectively modeling 
spinal cord injury, will be important to make cell transplantation a viable clinical option and may lead to the development of 
more targeted therapies.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

638	
VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017  nature neuroscience
R e v i e w
peripheral nervous system; they guide regenerating axons following 
peripheral nerve injury. NSPCs are multipotent progenitors, typically 
grown as neurospheres that can differentiate into neurons, astrocytes, 
oligodendrocytes and oligodendrocyte precursor cells in vitro. OECs 
are glia that support olfactory receptor axon growth into the olfac­
tory bulb. MSCs are multipotent progenitors found in many tissues, 
including bone marrow. Cells for transplantation can be generated 
from adult and embryonic sources, induced pluripotent stem cells12 
and, potentially, via direct conversion technology13.
Transplanted cells often vary with respect to the species, age and 
source from which they are derived, as well as culture conditions and 
co-treatments (Table 1). Comparisons between studies, even those that 
focus on a particular cell type, are challenging, as the cell name (for 
example, NSPC or MSC) can be an umbrella term for an assortment 
of cells that differ due to these variables. The timing after injury and 
location of cell transplantation can also influence transplanted cell fate. 
NSPCs transplanted into host parenchyma predominantly differentiate 
into oligodendrocytes, while lesion-site transplantation leads to more 
astrocyte differentiation14. Following transplantation, cells are hypoth­
esized to mediate functional improvements following SCI through a 
variety of mechanisms, including neuroprotection, immunomodula­
tion, axon sprouting and/or regeneration, and myelin regeneration.
Mechanisms of action of transplanted cells
Neuroprotection. Primary trauma to the spinal cord triggers a 
complex cascade of secondary damage15–17 (Fig. 1). One proposed 
mechanism underlying functional improvements following cell 
transplantation is neuroprotection: the mitigation of this secondary 
Table 1  Cell sources and proposed mechanisms of cited transplantation work
Schwann cells: peripheral myelinating glia required for the regeneration of axons following nerve injury.
Source \ Species \ Age \ Cotransplant agent
Proposed mechanism
  Sciatic nerve \ rat \ adult \ none101,104,132,embedded in Matrigel61,65,67,73, intraspinal cAMP25, 
embedded in Matrigel with OEC cotransplant and systematic chondroitinase ABC65
Neuroprotection61,101, axon regeneration and 
sprouting25,65,67,73,101,104,132, myelination25,65,67,101
  Back skin \ rat102 or mouse26 \ neonatal \ none26,102
Neuroprotection26,102, axon regenerationand sprouting26,102, 
myelination26,102
Olfactory ensheathing cells (OEC)s: glia that support the axonal growth of olfactory receptor neurons into the olfactory bulb.
Source\ Species \ Age \ Cotransplant agent
Proposed mechanism
  Olfactory bulb \ rat27,42,62,65,101,132 or mouse43 \ adult \ none27,42,43,62,101,132 embedded in 
Matrigel with Schwann cell cotransplant and systematic chondroitinase ABC65
Neuroprotection27,42,62,101, axon regeneration and 
sprouting27,43,62,65,101,132
  Lamina propria \ mice \ neonatal \ none43,44
axon regeneration and sprouting43,44
MSCs and multipotent adult progenitor cells (MAPC)s: multipotent progenitors found in tissues such as adult bone marrow isolated by virtue of their adherence during 
tissue culturing and/or distinct cell surface markers.
Source \ Species \ Age \ Cotransplant agent
Proposed mechanism
  Tibia or femur bone marrow \ rat \ adult \ none30,33,56, cells overexpressing BDNF35, cAMP 
injected into DRG to precondition neurons with intraspinal NT-364, or intraspinal BDNF along 
with BDNF overexpression in transplanted cells71
Neuroprotection33,35,56, immunomodulation30,56, axon 
regeneration and sprouting64,71
  Iliac crest (pelvic) bone marrow55 or MAPCs57 \ human \ adult \ none55,57
Neuroprotection55,57,, immunomodulation55,57
NSPCs: multipotent progenitors isolated from the CNS and often grown as neurospheres with the capacity to differentiate into neurons and glia.
Source \ Species \ Age \ Cotransplant agent
Proposed mechanism
  Spinal cord \ rat \ adult30,110,115 or embryonic39–41,63,86,87,89,113 \ none30, cells infected with 
neurogenin-2 overexpressing retrovirus115, transplanted as a graft39–41,86,87, cells infected with 
D15A retrovirus which secretes a bioactive growth factor with BDNF and NT3 activities113 or 
overexpressing CNTF110, dissociated cells suspended in fibrin gel with growth factor cocktail63,89
Neuroprotection113, immunomodulation30, axon 
regeneration and sprouting63,87,89,115, relay formation63 
myelinogenesis110,113
  Brain \ mouse \ embryonic112,117 or adult54,111,116,139 \ none54, cells from a shiverer mouse116,117, 
exogenous FGF and/or PDGF112, exogenous PDGF, FGF, EGF for 1 week111 and 1 week of 
chondroitinase ABC139
Neuroprotection54,116,117, myelinogenesis111,112,139, axon 
regeneration and sprouting116,117
  Brain \ human \ fetal14,90 \ none14,90, retroviral overexpression of Olig2114
Neuroprotection114, myelinogenesis114
  Spinal cord \ human \ fetal \ transplanted in fibrin matrix with trophic factor cocktail63
Axon regenerating and sprouting63, relay formation63
Embryonic stem cell–derived or inducible pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neural precursor cells: cells derived from immortalized cell lines or from adult tissues 
and induced into pluripotent stem cells. Cells are then differentiated into desirable cell type prior to transplantation.
Source \ Species \ Age \ Cotransplant agent
Proposed mechanism
  Stem cells \ human \ embryonic \ predifferentiated into OPCs32,108, sorted for NSPCs and 
transplanted in fibrin matrix with growth factor cocktail63
Neuroprotection32, immunomodulation32 axon regeneration 
and sprouting63, relay formation63, myelinogenesis108
  Fibroblasts \ human \ adult \ iPSCs differentiated into NSPCs121,128, with fibrin matrix and 
growth factor cocktail12,68
Neuroprotection128, axon regeneration and 
sprouting12,68,121,128, relay formation12,68
  Peripheral blood monocytes, fetal lung fibroblasts or BMSCs predifferentiated into OPCs \ 
mouse \ adult or fetal \ none109
Neuroprotection109, myelinogenesis109
An overview of the cell types discussed in this review with a description of tissue sources and mechanisms the original authors of the studies cited proposed as mediating either 
anatomical or functional improvements. Only primary articles with cell transplantations following SCI are included here. Cells were grouped first by their generic cell type and then 
by the anatomical source of the cells. The proposed mechanisms are limited to the major mechanisms discussed in the review: neuroprotection, immunomodulation, axonal sprout­
ing and regeneration, relay formation, and myelination. Cotransplant agents include biomaterials transplanted with the cells, exogenous factors and genetic modifications to the 
cells; immunosuppressants, growth factors used during cell culturing or antigens used in cell sorting were not included. Commas between cotransplant agents indicate different 
experiments. Species refers to the host species the cells were harvested from.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

nature neuroscience  VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017	
639
r e v i e w
damage to protect the tissue. Many cell types are thought to promote 
neuroprotection, including Schwann cells, NSPCs, MSCs, OECs and 
OPCs11,18 (Table 1). Neuroprotection is believed to be the underlying 
mechanism when there is more ‘spared’ (normal-appearing) tissue 
adjacent to the injury site in a cell-transplanted group compared to in 
the control group. An increase in spared tissue is generally correlated 
with improvements in sensorimotor function in preclinical models 
of injury19–21 and in humans with SCI22 (Box 1). Quantification of 
lesion volume is also sometimes performed to assess neuroprotection 
but is confounded by decreasing lesion volume over time due to the 
ongoing shrinkage of the spinal cord, without necessarily increasing 
spared tissue23.
Do transplanted cells promote neuroprotection? Transplantation 
is likely to promote neuroprotection through different mechanisms 
than those classically attributed to protection, such as therapies that 
prevent excitotoxicity. Yet there are several caveats to studies that 
propose neuroprotection as a mechanism of action. First, classical 
neuroprotective agents that are known to reduce secondary damage 
are only effective within the first hours (rarely a day) after injury24, 
yet cell transplantation is often performed 1–2 weeks after the 
injury to improve graft survival11. Even at these later time points of 
transplantation—when known mediators of secondary damage 
have already been released—transplantation has been associated 
with increased tissue sparing, as evidenced by increased thickness 
of spared white matter surrounding the contusion epicenter25–27. In 
the weeks after injury, there is ongoing cellular injury and apoptosis 
of oligodendrocytes28; transplanted cells may rescue oligodendrocytes 
or prevent ongoing degeneration by unknown mechanisms. Second, 
many cell transplantation candidates might contribute to the appear­
ance of increased spared white matter by producing myelin in the 
adjacent parenchyma on spared axons. Schwann cell myelination is 
particularly relevant in this regard, as it requires more space than 
oligodendrocyte myelin and might enlarge the cross-sectional area of 
white matter tracts29. Third, cell transplantation could enhance axon 
regeneration and sprouting, followed by myelination in the paren­
chyma surrounding the injury site. If there are more myelinated axons 
or regenerated fibers, this could in itself increase the cross-sectional 
area adjacent to the injury site. Thus, an increase in spared tissue 
adjacent to the injury site might reflect bona fide protection, a regen­
erative response that increases the amount of white matter adjacent 
to the injury site or a combination of both.
Molecules secreted by transplanted cells. One widely proposed 
mechanism underlying neuroprotection mediated by transplanted 
cells is the secretion of bioactive molecules such as trophic factors 
and cytokines. Many cell types, including MSCs, NSPCs and Schwann 
cells, have the capacity to secrete trophic factors and cytokines in vitro 
or to increase the presence of these factors after transplantation30–34. 
These factors may potentially enhance host cell survival, regulate glio­
sis, modulate inflammation and/or improve the regeneration of blood 
vessels. However, the increase in these factors and their neuroprotec­
tive properties is, for the most part, correlative. There are few studies 
which systemically employ cell-type specific deletion to investigate 
which cell-derived factor(s) is (are) necessary for neuroprotection. 
These studies require the transplantation of cells that are modified 
and diminished in their capacity to express/secrete specific factors35. 
For example, the neuroprotective effects of transplanted MSCs from 
bone marrow (BMSCs) after SCI are reduced when secretion of brain-
derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is impaired35. However, BDNF 
knockdown also reduces BMSC survival, leaving it unclear whether 
the reduction of spared tissue is a result of diminished BDNF secre­
tion directly or whether it is secondary to some other BMSC-mediated 
neuroprotective effect that hinges on cell survival. Moving forward, 
it will be important to understand the secretome of transplanted 
cells and to use factor specific loss-of-function experiments while 
Uninjured
Subacute (1–2 weeks after injury)
Chronic (6–8 weeks after injury)
Astrocyte
OPC or NG2+ cell
Myelinating 
oligodendrocyte
Oligodendrocyte myelin
Neuron
Axon with end bulb
Microglia
Fibroblast or
stromal cell
Reactive astrocyte
Schwann cell myelin
Activated microglia
or macrophages
Growing axon
b
c
a
Myelin debris
Figure 1  The pathophysiology of spinal cord injury in the absence of cell 
transplantation. The uninjured rat spinal cord and the contused rat spinal 
cord at specific stages post-SCI. After SCI, cells are typically transplanted 
at the subacute (defined here as 1–2 weeks after injury) or chronic (defined 
here as beginning 6–8 weeks after injury) stages. (a) Uninjured spinal 
cord contains axons wrapped in myelin. OPCs, microglia and astrocytes 
are found throughout white and gray matter. Neuronal somata can be seen 
in gray matter. (b) Spinal cord contusion in rat induces a secondary injury 
cascade. At the subacute stage, there is considerable loss of neurons, axons, 
oligodendrocytes and myelin. Axons die back from the lesion site and myelin 
debris accumulates. Activated microglia, hematogenous macrophages and 
other inflammatory cells are recruited to the lesion site. Astrocytes become 
reactive by extending processes and proliferating and along with fibrotic 
cells forming a scar. OPCs and other cells also staining for the neural/glial 
antigen-2 (NG2+ cells) also proliferate and are recruited to the scar. (c) At 
the chronic stage (6–8 weeks after injury) astrocytes and other cells further 
thicken the scar, and in rats, a fluid-filled cavity is frequently formed at the 
lesion center. Activated microglia and macrophages persist within the lesion, 
though at reduced numbers compared to the subacute period. Some OPCs 
differentiate into new oligodendrocytes that produce myelin, and Schwann 
cells are often found myelinating axons near or in the lesion epicenter.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

640	
VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017  nature neuroscience
R e v i e w
promoting survival of the cells by other means to determine whether 
these factors are beneficial after transplantation.
Preventing blood vessel loss or improving angiogenesis. There is 
widespread blood vessel loss after SCI, which induces local hypoxia 
within and adjacent to the injury site36,37. The proliferation of 
endothelial cells, or angiogenesis, occurs as early as 3 d and stops 
by 10 d after SCI, but only after 14 d does vessel perfusion recover 
to baseline levels38. Restoration of oxygen and nutrients within 
spared tissue is rarely discussed but might be a general mechanism 
by which transplanted cells influence outcome. Transplant-derived 
secreted molecules might promote blood vessel protection and 
regeneration. Fetal tissue grafts re-establish oxygen levels within the 
graft and adjacent to the injury site39, which is correlated with elevated 
blood vessel density in and around the transplant site40. Fetal tissue 
grafts also elevate glucose utilization, suggesting an overall increase in 
metabolism compared to SCI injured controls41. Transplanted OECs 
increase vasculature within the graft and align vasculature along 
the length of the spinal cord42–44, but whether they, or any other 
transplanted cell type, accelerate tissue reoxygenation and nutrient 
access after injury is unknown. The use of in vivo live imaging tech­
niques with vital dyes or genetically encoded fluorescence resonance 
energy transfer (FRET) sensors to measure dynamic changes in tissue 
oxygen45, glucose46 and/or other tissue metabolites37, coupled with 
injury and transplantation, will improve our understanding of the 
dynamic metabolic changes after SCI and how transplantation might 
regulate these processes. In these investigations of tissue oxidation 
and metabolites, large animal models such as pigs may be of use, 
since they permit the placement of dialysis probes or pressure sensors 
into the spinal cord37.
Immunomodulation. Many repair mechanisms rely on beneficial 
aspects of inflammation47–49, yet certain aspects of inflammation 
cause damage to spared tissue. The complex nature of inflammation 
is best exemplified by the phenotypic separation of macrophages 
and potentially microglia into neurotoxic, proinflammatory M1 and 
immunoregulatory M2 subsets, the latter of which secretes factors that 
promote axon growth50,51 and enhance remyelination52. While the M1 
or M2 designation reflects an oversimplification and there are other 
macrophage activation states53, they are yet to be described in vivo 
after SCI50. Cell transplantation can provide benefits through immu­
nomodulation, by attenuating detrimental inflammation or stimulat­
ing beneficial inflammation. Whether transplanted cells directly alter 
inflammation is confounded by putative neuroprotective mechanisms; 
transplanted cells might alter inflammation indirectly by dampen­
ing tissue damage. Still, few studies dissect the direct interactions 
between transplanted cells and immune cells; instead, they measure 
global changes in cytokine release or the abundance of immune cells 
after SCI11. These findings are, thus, correlative. For example, NSPC 
transplantation improves ankle movement and hindlimb placement 
in association with a slight increase in the abundance of T cells, a 
decrease in B cells and reduced M1-like macrophages following SCI54. 
NSPCs express and secrete many factors that could regulate inflam­
mation, yet demonstrating a causal role would require transplanting 
cells with specific genetic modifications of candidate genes of interest. 
MSCs can also modify the immune response after injury by elevating 
levels of anti-inflammatory and reducing levels of proinflammatory 
cytokines when transplanted 3 or 7 d after SCI55,56. Intraspinal trans­
plantation of MSCs 1 week after SCI is associated with a polarization of 
macrophages toward an M2 phenotype and away from an M1 pheno­
type, which is correlated with increased spared white matter55. Despite 
a lack of cell entry into the spinal cord, intravenous delivery of MSCs 
1 d after contusive SCI is associated with increased forelimb–hindlimb 
coordination and improved micturition, which correlates with 
increased spared tissue and an elevation in M2 markers57. There is 
also decreased proinflammatory cytokine production in the spleen 
and blood, indicating a systemic change in the inflammatory state. 
Importantly, there is no need for neural integration of MSCs: condi­
tioned medium from MSCs can improve motor function after SCI, 
suggesting that cell transplantation may not be required to achieve 
functional benefits31.
Axon regeneration and/or sprouting. The primary cause of sustained 
dysfunction following SCI is the disruption of functional connections 
in the CNS. As such, a major goal is to promote axon regeneration and 
plasticity. Major impediments to axon growth following SCI include 
the formation of a scar around the injury site58, CNS myelin59 and 
the diminished growth capacity of adult mammalian central neurons, 
particularly after axotomy60. In humans, in addition to the forma­
tion of a scar around the injury site, SCI sites can contain cavities 
filled with extracellular fluid that lack a substrate for axon growth, 
but most such sites also harbor tissue septae that can serve as a bridge 
and might be important as a site of attachment for transplanted cell 
integration and axon growth16.
Bridge formation. The most well-established mechanism through 
which cell transplantation can promote axon growth is through the 
formation of bridges across the lesion site (Fig. 2a). We define a bridge 
as a multicellular structure comprised of transplanted cells that crosses 
the lesion site (rostrally to caudally) and provides a substrate onto 
which axons can grow. Transplanted-cell-secreted molecules, such as 
laminin, also provide a substrate for axon growth. Evidence that cel­
lular bridging leads to axon regeneration is typically an association of 
host axons with transplanted cells within the bridge following a com­
plete transection SCI that cuts all descending and ascending axons at 
the level of injury. Schwann cells61, OECs62, NSPCs63 and MSCs64 can 
form bridges following SCI leading to axon regeneration, which can 
generally be accentuated by combining cells with biomaterials63,65,66 
or trophic factors6,63. However, stimulating large numbers of axons to 
exit these bridges at the distal interface remains a challenge67.
Box 1  What is functional recovery in spinal cord injury? 
‘Recovery’ is defined in the Oxford English Dictionary as “a return to a normal state of health, mind, or strength.” In most animal models of SCI there 
are significant spontaneous improvements. For example, after the commonly used moderate thoracic contusion, there is initially flaccid paralysis of the 
hindlimbs, but within weeks animals regain weight-supported stepping. However, recovery to a normal state, comparable to an uninjured animal, is not 
seen. As a field, SCI researchers use the term ‘functional recovery’ to refer to a statistically significant functional improvement in a treatment group 
versus control, although true recovery as such is rarely observed. Hence, we should avoid using this general term and refer to specific improvements. 
Importantly, since no effective treatment for SCI has been translated, it is unclear what degree of functional improvement in preclinical animal models 
is clinically relevant. Although we focus on motor improvements, treatment can also promote sensory or autonomic functional improvement, which can 
be more highly prioritized by those with injury133.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

nature neuroscience  VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017	
641
r e v i e w
Heterogeneity of axon growth. There is significant heterogeneity in 
the capacity of different axon populations to grow onto bridges. While 
there are many documented cases of brainstem, propriospinal and 
sensory ascending axons on bridges of various sources, there are lim­
ited examples of robust corticospinal regeneration onto a transplanted 
cell bridge68. To date, the most robust corticospinal axon regeneration 
observed is onto NSPCs suspended in fibrin with growth factors63,68. 
Understanding this heterogeneity is essential given the importance 
of corticospinal function in humans69. It appears that this capacity 
relates to two factors primarily. First, the ability of axons to grow onto 
bridges correlates with their intrinsic growth capacity (with sensory 
neurons having arguably the highest and corticospinal neurons the 
lowest)70 and can be accentuated by the application of treatments that 
heighten growth potential25,63,64,71. Second, the homotypic nature of 
the graft—that is, its similarity to the axons’ original substrate—may 
be an important factor. Robust corticospinal regeneration onto NSPCs 
only occurs when the cells are derived from or driven toward a caudal 
neural fate, similar to what is observed in the spinal cord, where cor­
ticospinal axons normally project. When derived from telencephalon, 
NSPCs are incapable of supporting corticospinal regeneration68. 
Deciphering molecular differences underlying this may detail the 
factor(s) necessary to induce corticospinal regeneration, opening up 
the possibility of enhancing corticospinal regeneration onto cell types 
of other origin or without the need for transplantation.
Modification of the glial scar. An additional mechanism through 
which cell transplantation is thought to promote axon growth is by 
modifying the astrocyte response to injury. Glial fibrillary acidic 
protein (GFAP)-positive reactive astrocytes in proximity to SCI 
lesion sites can be an unfavorable substrate for axon growth and can 
secrete growth-inhibitory molecules58. The age-dependent decline in 
axon regeneration in the adult mammalian CNS is accompanied by 
increased GFAP immunoreactivity in the vicinity of lesions72. There 
is evidence that cell transplantation can modify astrogliosis in a way 
that promotes axon regeneration. Following Schwann cell transplanta­
tion along with Matrigel, regenerating axons can be found in direct 
association with GFAP-positive astrocyte processes that elongate in 
association with transplanted Schwann cell processes73. Regenerating 
axons grow within a basal lamina tunnel alongside transplanted 
cells and GFAP-positive astrocyte processes, and the extent of axon 
regeneration correlates with the number of astrocyte processes found 
within the bridge73. Therefore, it is likely that these astrocytes are in 
part mediating the regeneration observed.
In some cases of transplantation following SCI, a modification 
of astrogliosis following cell transplantation is observed based on 
a change in GFAP immunoreactivity26,68, yet it is unclear if this 
promotes axon growth. Reactive astrocytes help restrict secondary 
damage by forming a compact scar protecting outside tissue from a 
non-neural lesion core comprised of inflammatory cells and fibrob­
lasts58,74,75. Preventing astrocyte scar formation does not promote 
axon regeneration following SCI74. Instead, it results in fewer axons 
present in the vicinity of the lesion site76. A diverse mix of factors 
modifies reactive gliosis following CNS injury74. While some of these 
molecules may be expressed by transplanted cells77, no transplanted 
cell has been specifically demonstrated to secrete factors that regulate 
astrogliosis in loss-of-function experiments. Given that a common 
transplantation site is the non-neural lesion core, there are likely many 
interactions between transplanted cells and lesion cells that will be 
important to identify to establish the mechanisms through which cell 
transplantation promotes axon growth and to consider transplanta­
tion a rational option to safely modify astrogliosis.
Caveats to axon growth assessments. Although enhancing axon 
growth is considered one primary objective of cell transplantation 
strategies following SCI, there are significant challenges to interpret­
ing these data. Some compensatory axonal plasticity occurs after SCI 
in the absence of treatment78. If cell transplantation protects against 
axonal degeneration, it might be associated with a higher axon density 
without actually promoting de novo axon growth. In the context of 
bridge formation in incomplete models of SCI such as contusions, a 
direct physical interaction between host axons and transplanted cells 
might arise without representing axon growth. The term ‘axon regen­
eration’ has historically been ambiguous, but a growing consensus has 
defined the term to mean ‘regrowth of a transected axon’70. In contu­
sion SCI models, wherein transplantation studies often occur, there 
is typically considerable tissue sparing, leaving ambiguity as to what 
extent axons have been severed. The development of injury models 
that completely cut a projecting system of axons70,79 and clearing 
technologies that permit 3-dimensional reconstruction of tissue80 will 
aid interpretation in this regard.
Axon growth: not always functionally beneficial. It is important 
to realize that axon growth is not always associated with improved 
function. Overexpression of Sox11 in corticospinal neurons promotes 
Host neuron
Axon
Axon with 
endbulb
Regenerating axon
Transplant-derived 
neuron
Regenerated and synapsed
transplant-derived axon
Transplant-derived 
bridging cell
Regenerated and 
synapsed axon
a
b
Bridge formation
Relay formation
Figure 2  Repair of neuronal connectivity following SCI after cell 
transplantation. Cell transplantation may promote the repair of neuronal 
connectivity through the formation of a bridge or relay. (a) Transplanted cells, 
such as Schwann cells, can support axon growth by providing a bridge 
across the injury site. Axons, which frequently have a tortuous appearance 
in the bridge, are often unable to re-enter host tissue. (b) Transplanted cells 
may improve the connectivity through the formation of a relay. Such relays 
occur when host axons synapse onto transplant-derived neurons, which 
harbor a capacity to extend axons long distances from the injury and 
synapse with host neurons.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

642	
VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017  nature neuroscience
R e v i e w
axon regeneration but impairs forelimb function on pellet reaching 
and horizontal ladder tasks81. OEC transplantation into complete 
transection SCI sites promotes axon regeneration and reconnec­
tion of descending pathways across the lesion site as evidenced 
electrophysiologically62. The combination of this transplantation with 
step training to facilitate the reorganization of regenerating axons into 
functional circuits and with quipazine, a 5-HT2A (serotonin) agonist 
that activates lumbosacral locomotor networks, results in increased 
frequency of plantar stepping in some rats. However, in other rats, 
retransection of the spinal cord to interrupt regenerating axons is 
associated with rats making significantly more plantar steps, provid­
ing evidence that regeneration actually suppressed this function62. 
This highlights the complexity of directing functional improvement, 
which may require activity-based approaches to consolidate axons 
into mature networks82. Indeed, little is known about how regenerat­
ing axons can be directed toward forming functional synapses with 
target neurons, given that robust axon regeneration remains a formi­
dable challenge. It will be important to assess causal roles for specific 
populations of axons in recovery. Traditionally, it has not been pos­
sible to distinguish such causality and merely correlative evidence has 
been presented. However, with the development of reversible neuro­
nal silencing technologies, it is now possible for researchers to assess 
the extent to which specific neuronal populations are incorporated 
into functional circuits underlying functional changes83,84.
Neuronal relays. An alternative approach to reconnecting segments 
following SCI is through the formation of neuronal relays. When 
transplanted cells are capable of neuronal differentiation, survival, 
axon outgrowth and synapse formation with host neurons, a relay 
circuit can form between descending axons and newly differentiated 
transplanted neurons (Fig. 2b). Early studies demonstrated that axons 
could project into and arise from embryonic day 14 rat spinal cord 
tissue grafts following their transplantation into spinal cord cavi­
ties85–87. Human neuroblasts implanted into lesioned adult striatum 
can extend axons along myelinated fiber tracts for distances up to 
20 mm88. NSPCs can differentiate into neurons with a capacity for 
relay formation63. In the latter study63 cells were embedded within 
a fibrin matrix to aid in their retention within a complete transec­
tion site and included a cocktail of (initially) 10 trophic factors (four 
were used in later studies) plus a protease inhibitor to support cell 
survival and vascular ingrowth. When grafting was implemented 
2 weeks after complete transection, host axons synapsed onto newly 
differentiated neurons, which extended large numbers of axons 
long distances rostral or caudal to injury. This approach resulted 
in significant hindlimb functional improvement: grafted rats had 
movement about each joint of the hindlimb, in contrast to minimal-
to-no movement in controls, and this was abolished following 
retransection at the rostral graft–host interface.
Translational concerns. One concern with transplantation of NSPCs 
is the migration of cells to other areas of the CNS, where they can form 
ectopic colonies that might trigger abnormal activity and/or compress 
tissue89. Following thoracic SCI, human NSPCs transplanted into the 
spared parenchyma proliferate and migrate several millimeters toward 
and away from the injury epicenter90. To limit migration, cells can be 
embedded in a fibrin matrix that stabilizes them within the lesion. 
One possibility is that ectopic colony formation relies on inconsistent 
gelation of this matrix, although this remains to be tested. It will be 
important to establish the efficacy of this fibrin-matrix approach in 
more clinically relevant models of injury, given that complete transec­
tions rarely occur in humans. An additional translational concern is 
the administration of trophic factors that, while necessary for graft 
survival, can instigate sensory dysfunction91. Still, while these possi­
ble complications need to be addressed, the principle of using NSPCs 
as relays may provide a new means to promote repair and opens up 
an exciting avenue to study mechanisms underlying axon growth in 
the injured CNS environment.
Myelin regeneration. Loss of myelin is observed early after SCI in 
both rodents92,93 and humans16,22. Concurrent with myelin loss, 
oligodendrocyte apoptosis occurs for weeks after contusive SCI in 
rodents, nonhuman primates and humans28,94. Demyelination impairs 
conduction and severs an important metabolic shuttle between oli­
godendrocytes and axons95,96. Replacing lost oligodendrocytes and 
myelin improves conduction97,98 and may protect axons from degen­
eration. Myelin regeneration, the process by which transplanted cells 
produce myelin around axons that have lost their myelin sheaths, 
has been targeted as a mechanism to enhance recovery following 
SCI (Fig. 3).
Myelin regeneration following cell transplantation. Transplantation 
of Schwann cells, OPCs or NSPCs capable of producing oligodendro­
cytes can be used to enhance myelin regeneration after SCI11,99,100. 
Transplanting Schwann cells in the acute or subacute setting after rodent 
thoracic SCI increases the number of axons with peripheral myelin and 
is often correlated with modest improvements in forelimb–hindlimb 
coordination during open field testing26,101. Transplanted Schwann 
cells can myelinate axons25,26,65,67,102 and enhance endogenous 
Schwann cell myelination102,103. However, attributing any improve­
ment in function to myelination by Schwann cells is confounded 
by their propensity to enhance axon growth25,26,65,67,73,101,102,104 
(Table 1). There is also uncertainty about whether peripheral myelin 
found within the spinal cord following transplantation forms around 
demyelinated spared axons or if this represents myelination of newly 
grown axons. Therefore, it is not known to what extent spared axons 
are remyelinated by transplanted Schwann cells, nor is the contribu­
tion of this myelin to functional improvements proven. Ascending 
or descending axons should be traced in combination with Schwann 
cell transplantation to examine their contribution to remyelination of 
spared axons. Transplantation of Schwann cells incapable of producing 
OPC/NG2+
Myelinating host 
oligodendrocyte
Oligodendrocyte myelin
Schwann cell myelin
Myelinating transplant-
derived oligodendrocyte
Transplant-derived
OPC/NG2+
Transplant-derived
oligodendrocyte myelin
Myelinating cell transplantation
Figure 3  Regeneration of oligodendrocyte-derived myelin with cell 
transplantation. Transplanting precursors of myelinating glia can result in the 
formation of new myelin sheaths. Transplanted OPCs or NSPCs compete with 
endogenous OPCs to remyelinate axons.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

nature neuroscience  VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017	
643
r e v i e w
myelin, such as cells derived from trembler (Pmp22Tr) mutant mice105, 
may be useful in establishing a causal relationship between myelin 
regeneration and functional improvements.
Extensive endogenous remyelination occurs following contusive 
injuries in rodents106,107, and thus remyelination as a therapeutic 
approach after SCI is contentious (Box 2). Transplanted OPCs or 
NSPCs are likely to compete with endogenous remyelinating cells for 
denuded axons. Several studies have found an increase in the number 
of myelinated axons at endpoint, which is suggestive of enhanced 
remyelination and is correlated with improved forelimb–hindlimb 
coordination108–110 or enhanced frequency of plantar stepping111. 
However, the differentiation of transplanted cells into oligodendro­
cytes does not always result in improved motor recovery, particularly 
if the level of remyelination is not sufficient to promote an overall 
increase in the number of myelinated fibers112. Transplanted cells 
engineered to overexpress trophic factors110,113 or transcription 
factors114,115 enhance oligodendrogenesis110,113–115 and functional 
improvements113–115 compared to naive cells. Improving the differ­
entiation of transplanted cells to oligodendrocytes with exogenous 
factors or genetic modification may be necessary to increase remy­
elination over the level attained by host precursors. Given the efficacy 
of endogenous remyelination, it is possible that enhancing this proc­
ess may promote functional improvements without the need for cell 
transplantation (Box 3).
Is remyelination by transplanted cells causally related to func­
tional improvements? Recent studies have tested whether myelina­
tion by transplanted cells is required for functional improvement. 
NSPCs derived from shiverer (Mbpshi) mice were transplanted after 
SCI116,117. Shiverer mice are capable of producing oligodendrocytes 
but are incapable of compact myelin formation118. In contrast to wild-
type cells, transplanted shiverer-derived NSPCs fail to promote func­
tional improvements after SCI116,117, implying that transplanted cells 
must generate compact myelin to promote functional improvements. 
However, shiverer oligodendrocytes are capable of ensheathing 
axons116–118, and it is possible that these cells displaced endog­
enous cells which would otherwise have remyelinated demyelinated 
axons. The total number of remyelinated axons was not quantified 
after shiverer NSPC transplantation, and it remains unclear whether 
endogenous remyelination was affected in these studies. Thus, cau­
tion is warranted when interpreting these results and concluding that 
improved myelin regeneration is required for transplanted cells to 
promote recovery. Conditionally depleting specific cell types, such 
as myelinating oligodendrocytes, within the transplanted cell popu­
lation119 or removing a critical factor essential for myelinogenesis 
and axon ensheathment from transplanted cells will complement the 
shiverer studies above and help elucidate the role of remyelination 
specifically in recovery associated with cell transplantation.
Future perspectives
In addition to enhancing our mechanistic understanding of repair by 
transplanted cells, there should be additional efforts to:
  1. Improve risk assessments. Each transplantation candidate car­
ries specific risks during translation that are often poorly under­
stood115. Options for risk assessment include transplantation into 
large animals that live longer than rodents and allowing long-term 
assessments of the tumorigenic potential of human cells that may 
not thrive in a rodent microenvironment120. Tumor formation is 
a major risk, particularly in cases where cells are derived from a 
pluripotent stage121. Another risk of transplantation is increasing 
the likelihood of infections. With injuries at T3 or above, there is a 
large systemic decrease of immune function, termed CNS injury-
induced immune deficiency syndrome (CIDS)122,123. The use of 
immunosuppressants might further weaken immune function 
and should be tested thoroughly to ensure that an increased risk 
of infection is not observed124. There might be an upside of CIDS, 
as such patients may be less likely to reject allogeneic transplants.
Box 2  Is remyelination an optimal target for cell transplantation after SCI? 
The capacity of transplanted cells to myelinate is the rationale for several human trials. However, considerable debate remains regarding the capacity 
of endogenous OPCs to effectively myelinate denuded axons following SCI and whether demyelinated axons persist long after injury92,93,100,107,134. 
In animal models, there are reports of demyelinated axons persisting for months after injury93,135,136. However, these studies examined cross sections 
where it is difficult to differentiate between severed axons that persist near the lesion without myelin and axons that were spared but have become 
demyelinated. Tracing spared axons through the lesion found no evidence that a population of intact, chronically demyelinated axons remains following 
SCI, suggesting that endogenous myelin regeneration is highly efficient in rodents92,107. The persistence of chronically demyelinated axons after 
human SCI has only been examined in a handful of studies, in which it is generally noted that few demyelinated axons persist16,22,137 except in cases 
of persistent cord compression, which may result in ongoing demyelination137,138. This raises questions regarding whether myelin regeneration is 
even a plausible therapeutic strategy at later timepoints after injury. No study which observes improved motor function132,139 following transplantation 
of chronically myelinating cells has demonstrated an enhanced total number of remyelinated fibers in the spinal cord. Functional benefits in these 
studies could be the result of enhanced axon growth and/or sparing, which are also observed132,139. Thus, transplantation of cells to myelinate seems 
premature as it is unclear whether myelin regeneration is a proven target100.
Box 3  Can we stimulate the endogenous cellular response after SCI in lieu of transplantation? 
Stimulating the endogenous cellular response to injury could be a strategy to improve outcomes without the use of exogenous cells. Neural/glial antigen 
2 (NG2)–expressing OPCs are the major proliferating cell type after SCI and are the primary producer of new oligodendrocytes106,140–143. Growth factor 
and ferritin treatments increase OPC proliferation and stimulate oligodendrogenesis144,145. The scar is also produced by highly proliferative astro­
cytes143, type A pericytes146, ependymal cells143,147,148 and perivascular collagen1α1 cells149. Some inflammatory cells facilitate endogenous repair 
processes, including axon regeneration, sprouting and myelin regeneration49,51,52. There is also evidence that cell transplantation can affect endog­
enous responses. Schwann cell transplantation into the injured spinal cord can increase the number of endogenous Schwann cells26,104, although 
the value of this is yet to be determined. Understanding how exogenous cells modify the host endogenous cell response might enable us to target the 
endogenous cell response to injury in a way that avoids the need for cell transplantation, with its associated risks of invasiveness, immunosuppression 
and the possibility of tumor formation.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

644	
VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017  nature neuroscience
R e v i e w
  2. Align preclinical models more closely with the clinical situation. 
The majority of preclinical data is based on mild to moderately 
severe thoracic contusion injury models, and these are not severe 
enough to justify clinical translation with cell transplantation125. 
Functionally incomplete thoracic injuries occur infrequently in 
humans (approximately 5% of cases in Canada)126. Over 60% of 
human SCIs occur in cervical spinal segments, and many lead to 
complete or severe incomplete loss of sensorimotor function126. 
Patients with cervical injuries are expected to benefit the most from 
cell therapies, as regaining two segments of function could mean 
regaining independence and greatly improved quality of life127. In 
addition, many studies have been undertaken in immunodeficient 
animals that have vastly different immune responses to SCI128. 
Such alterations of the immune system can overcome rejection of 
transplanted cells and may better reveal the tumorigenic poten­
tial of a human cell in a rodent. However, these immunodeficient 
models may not accurately model the human situation.
  3. Assess efficacy in the chronic stage of injury. Most preclinical trans­
plantation studies have been performed ~1–2 weeks after injury129. 
While this has guided several clinical trials, a later transplantation 
time point will help reduce the number of subjects required for a 
clinical trial since their outcome trajectory is more predictable130. 
However, the SCI microenvironment changes drastically from the 
acute to the chronic setting, and this can affect cell survival and 
differentiation131. Unfortunately, few preclinical studies have been 
performed with treatment initiation at ≥2 months after injury, and 
those that have been conducted at the time this paper was writ­
ten demonstrate marginal or no functional benefits14,108,111,132. 
Despite this, trials in humans with chronic injuries have been 
approved and initiated (https://clinicaltrials.gov/).
Conclusion
Despite efforts to match preclinical models to human SCI, no amount 
of preclinical animal investigation can guarantee the safety and suc­
cess of a cell treatment in human trials. The validity of preclinical SCI 
animal models remains unproven until a treatment is successfully 
translated, and only a human trial (albeit experimental in nature) 
will provide necessary data on the efficacy and safety of cells. Still, 
researchers should do what is possible to improve therapeutic effect 
sizes, and thus the likelihood of success, and to minimize the risks 
before taking a cell-transplantation approach to trial.
With several clinical trials ongoing, cell transplantation for spinal 
cord repair remains an important avenue for further research. To date, 
causal relationships between functional improvements and particular 
mechanisms have rarely been established. Usually, only correlative 
evidence is provided, and the effect sizes are modest. Unfortunately, 
this is enough to fuel stem-cell tourism with unproven cell treatments 
in clinics worldwide. Still, while few studies have demonstrated which 
interactions between transplanted cells and host tissue mediate func­
tional benefits, thanks to technological advances, there has never been 
a better time to investigate this. By more accurately modeling human 
SCI and through rigorous interpretation, the field can further advance 
cell transplantation strategies for spinal cord repair.
Acknowledgments
P.A. received a Canadian Institute for Health Research (CIHR) Frederick Banting 
and Charles Best Canadian Graduate Scholarship–Doctoral Award and the CIHR 
Transplantation Training Program Award. G.J.D. was supported by a Multiple 
Sclerosis Society of Canada Doctoral Scholarship and the CIHR Transplantation 
Training Program Award. B.J.H. holds a CIHR Frederick Banting and Charles Best 
Canadian Graduate Scholarship–Doctoral Award, a Zoology Graduate Fellowship 
and a CIHR Transplantation Training Program Award. J.R.P. is supported by the 
Donna Joan Oxford Postdoctoral Fellowship Award from the Multiple Sclerosis 
Society of Canada and by postdoctoral fellowship awards from CIHR, Alberta 
Innovates Health Solutions and T. Chen Fong. W.T. receives support from the John 
and Penny Ryan British Columbia Leadership Chair in Spinal Cord Research and 
from CIHR FRN 130475.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://www.nature.com/
reprints/index.html.
1.	
Lee, B.B., Cripps, R.A., Fitzharris, M. & Wing, P.C. The global map for traumatic 
spinal cord injury epidemiology: update 2011, global incidence rate. Spinal Cord 
52, 110–116 (2014).
2.	
Mackay-Sim, A. & St John, J.A. Olfactory ensheathing cells from the nose: 
clinical application in human spinal cord injuries. Exp. Neurol. 229, 174–180 
(2011).
3.	
Saberi, H. et al. Safety of intramedullary Schwann cell transplantation for 
postrehabilitation spinal cord injuries: 2-year follow-up of 33 cases. J. Neurosurg. 
Spine 15, 515–525 (2011).
4.	
Ramón y Cajal, S., DeFelipe, J. & Jones, E.G. Cajal’s Degeneration and 
Regeneration of the Nervous System (Oxford Univ. Press, 1991).
5.	
David, S. & Aguayo, A.J. Axonal elongation into peripheral nervous system 
“bridges” after central nervous system injury in adult rats. Science 214, 931–933 
(1981).
6.	
Bunge, M.B. Efficacy of Schwann Cell (SC) transplantation for spinal cord repair 
is improved with combinatorial strategies. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 594, 3533–3538 
(2016).
7.	
Das, G.D. Neural transplantation: an historical perspective. Neurosci. Biobehav. 
Rev. 14, 389–401 (1990).
8.	
Björklund, A. & Lindvall, O. Cell replacement therapies for central nervous system 
disorders. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 537–544 (2000).
9.	
Bregman, B.S. et al. Recovery of function after spinal cord injury: mechanisms 
underlying transplant-mediated recovery of function differ after spinal cord injury 
in newborn and adult rats. Exp. Neurol. 123, 3–16 (1993).
10.	 Wirth, E.D. III et al. Feasibility and safety of neural tissue transplantation in 
patients with syringomyelia. J. Neurotrauma 18, 911–929 (2001).
11.	 Tetzlaff, W. et al. A systematic review of cellular transplantation therapies for 
spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 28, 1611–1682 (2011).
12.	 Lu, P. et al. Long-distance axonal growth from human induced pluripotent stem 
cells after spinal cord injury. Neuron 83, 789–796 (2014).
13.	 Yang, N. et al. Generation of oligodendroglial cells by direct lineage conversion. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 434–439 (2013).
14.	
Piltti, K.M., Salazar, D.L., Uchida, N., Cummings, B.J. & Anderson, A.J. Safety of 
epicenter versus intact parenchyma as a transplantation site for human neural stem 
cells for spinal cord injury therapy. Stem Cells Transl. Med. 2, 204–216 (2013).
15.	 Kwon, B.K., Tetzlaff, W., Grauer, J.N., Beiner, J. & Vaccaro, A.R. Pathophysiology 
and pharmacologic treatment of acute spinal cord injury. Spine J. 4, 451–464 
(2004).
16.	 Norenberg, M.D., Smith, J. & Marcillo, A. The pathology of human spinal cord 
injury: defining the problems. J. Neurotrauma 21, 429–440 (2004).
17.	 Oyinbo, C.A. Secondary injury mechanisms in traumatic spinal cord injury: a 
nugget of this multiply cascade. Acta Neurobiol. Exp. (Warsz.) 71, 281–299 
(2011).
18.	 Raisman, G. Olfactory ensheathing cells - another miracle cure for spinal cord 
injury? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2, 369–375 (2001).
19.	 Plemel, J.R. et al. A graded forceps crush spinal cord injury model in mice. 
J. Neurotrauma 25, 350–370 (2008).
20.	 Basso, D.M., Beattie, M.S. & Bresnahan, J.C. Graded histological and locomotor 
outcomes after spinal cord contusion using the NYU weight-drop device versus 
transection. Exp. Neurol. 139, 244–256 (1996).
21.	 Schucht, P., Raineteau, O., Schwab, M.E. & Fouad, K. Anatomical correlates 
of locomotor recovery following dorsal and ventral lesions of the rat spinal cord. 
Exp. Neurol. 176, 143–153 (2002).
22.	 Kakulas, B.A. Neuropathology: the foundation for new treatments in spinal cord 
injury. Spinal Cord 42, 549–563 (2004).
23.	 Rabchevsky, A.G., Fugaccia, I., Sullivan, P.G., Blades, D.A. & Scheff, S.W. Efficacy 
of methylprednisolone therapy for the injured rat spinal cord. J. Neurosci. Res. 
68, 7–18 (2002).
24.	
Kwon, B.K. et al. A systematic review of non-invasive pharmacologic neuroprotective 
treatments for acute spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 28, 1545–1588 (2011).
25.	 Pearse, D.D. et al. cAMP and Schwann cells promote axonal growth and functional 
recovery after spinal cord injury. Nat. Med. 10, 610–616 (2004).
26.	 Biernaskie, J. et al. Skin-derived precursors generate myelinating Schwann cells 
that promote remyelination and functional recovery after contusion spinal cord 
injury. J. Neurosci. 27, 9545–9559 (2007).
27.	 Barbour, H.R., Plant, C.D., Harvey, A.R. & Plant, G.W. Tissue sparing, behavioral 
recovery, supraspinal axonal sparing/regeneration following sub-acute glial 
transplantation in a model of spinal cord contusion. BMC Neurosci. 14, 106 
(2013).
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

nature neuroscience  VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017	
645
r e v i e w
28.	 Crowe, M.J., Bresnahan, J.C., Shuman, S.L., Masters, J.N. & Beattie, M.S. 
Apoptosis and delayed degeneration after spinal cord injury in rats and monkeys. 
Nat. Med. 3, 73–76 (1997).
29.	 Lankford, K.L., Imaizumi, T., Honmou, O. & Kocsis, J.D. A quantitative 
morphometric analysis of rat spinal cord remyelination following transplantation 
of allogenic Schwann cells. J. Comp. Neurol. 443, 259–274 (2002).
30.	 Hawryluk, G.W. et al. An in vivo characterization of trophic factor production 
following neural precursor cell or bone marrow stromal cell transplantation for 
spinal cord injury. Stem Cells Dev. 21, 2222–2238 (2012).
31.	 Cantinieaux, D. et al. Conditioned medium from bone marrow-derived mesenchymal 
stem cells improves recovery after spinal cord injury in rats: an original strategy 
to avoid cell transplantation. PLoS One 8, e69515 (2013).
32.	 Sharp, J., Frame, J., Siegenthaler, M., Nistor, G. & Keirstead, H.S. 
Human embryonic stem cell-derived oligodendrocyte progenitor cell transplants 
improve recovery after cervical spinal cord injury. Stem Cells 28, 152–163 
(2010).
33.	 Gu, W.D. et al. Transplantation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells reduces 
lesion volume and induces axonal regrowth of injured spinal cord. Neuropathology 
30, 205–217 (2010).
34.	 Zhang, S.X., Huang, F., Gates, M. & Holmberg, E.G. Role of endogenous Schwann 
cells in tissue repair after spinal cord injury. Neural Regen. Res. 8, 177–185 
(2013).
35.	
Ritfeld, G.J. et al. The role of brain-derived neurotrophic factor in bone 
marrow stromal cell-mediated spinal cord repair. Cell Transplant. 24, 2209–2220 
(2015).
36.	 Tator, C.H. & Fehlings, M.G. Review of the secondary injury theory of acute spinal 
cord trauma with emphasis on vascular mechanisms. J. Neurosurg. 75, 15–26 
(1991).
37.	 Okon, E.B. et al. Intraparenchymal microdialysis after acute spinal cord injury 
reveals differential metabolic responses to contusive versus compressive 
mechanisms of injury. J. Neurotrauma 30, 1564–1576 (2013).
38.	 Figley, S.A., Khosravi, R., Legasto, J.M., Tseng, Y.F. & Fehlings, M.G. 
Characterization of vascular disruption and blood-spinal cord barrier permeability 
following traumatic spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 31, 541–552 (2014).
39.	 Stokes, B.T. & Reier, P.J. Oxygen transport in intraspinal fetal grafts: graft-host 
relations. Exp. Neurol. 111, 312–323 (1991).
40.	 Horner, P.J., Reier, P.J. & Stokes, B.T. Quantitative analysis of vascularization 
and cytochrome oxidase following fetal transplantation in the contused rat spinal 
cord. J. Comp. Neurol. 364, 690–703 (1996).
41.	 Horner, P.J. & Stokes, B.T. Fetal transplantation following spinal contusion injury 
results in chronic alterations in CNS glucose metabolism. Exp. Neurol. 133, 
231–243 (1995).
42.	 López-Vales, R., Garcia-Alias, G., Fores, J., Navarro, X. & Verdu, E. Increased 
expression of cyclo-oxygenase 2 and vascular endothelial growth factor in lesioned 
spinal cord by transplanted olfactory ensheathing cells. J. Neurotrauma 21, 
1031–1043 (2004).
43.	 Richter, M.W., Fletcher, P.A., Liu, J., Tetzlaff, W. & Roskams, A.J. Lamina propria 
and olfactory bulb ensheathing cells exhibit differential integration and migration 
and promote differential axon sprouting in the lesioned spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 
25, 10700–10711 (2005).
44.	 Ramer, L.M. et al. Peripheral olfactory ensheathing cells reduce scar and cavity 
formation and promote regeneration after spinal cord injury. J. Comp. Neurol. 
473, 1–15 (2004).
45.	 Quaranta, M., Borisov, S.M. & Klimant, I. Indicators for optical oxygen sensors. 
Bioanal. Rev. 4, 115–157 (2012).
46.	 Bittner, C.X. et al. High resolution measurement of the glycolytic rate. Front. 
Neuroenergetics https://doi.org/10.3389/fnene.2010.00026 (2010).
47.	 Plemel, J.R., Yong, V.W. & Stirling, D.P. Immune modulatory therapies for spinal 
cord injury - past, present and future. Exp. Neurol. 258, 91–104 (2014).
48.	 Gadani, S.P., Walsh, J.T., Lukens, J.R. & Kipnis, J. Dealing with danger 
in the CNS: the response of the immune system to injury. Neuron 87, 47–62 
(2015).
49.	 Jones, T.B., McDaniel, E.E. & Popovich, P.G. Inflammatory-mediated injury and 
repair in the traumatically injured spinal cord. Curr. Pharm. Des. 11, 1223–1236 
(2005).
50.	 Gensel, J.C. & Zhang, B. Macrophage activation and its role in repair and pathology 
after spinal cord injury. Brain Res. 1619, 1–11 (2015).
51.	 Kigerl, K.A. et al. Identification of two distinct macrophage subsets with divergent 
effects causing either neurotoxicity or regeneration in the injured mouse spinal 
cord. J. Neurosci. 29, 13435–13444 (2009).
52.	
Miron, V.E. et al. M2 microglia and macrophages drive oligodendrocyte differentiation 
during CNS remyelination. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1211–1218 (2013).
53.	 Xue, J. et al. Transcriptome-based network analysis reveals a spectrum model of 
human macrophage activation. Immunity 40, 274–288 (2014).
54.	 Cusimano, M. et al. Transplanted neural stem/precursor cells instruct phagocytes 
and reduce secondary tissue damage in the injured spinal cord. Brain 135, 
447–460 (2012).
55.	 Nakajima, H. et al. Transplantation of mesenchymal stem cells promotes an 
alternative pathway of macrophage activation and functional recovery after spinal 
cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 29, 1614–1625 (2012).
56.	 Abrams, M.B. et al. Multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells attenuate chronic 
inflammation and injury-induced sensitivity to mechanical stimuli in experimental 
spinal cord injury. Restor. Neurol. Neurosci. 27, 307–321 (2009).
57.	 DePaul, M.A. et al. Intravenous multipotent adult progenitor cell treatment 
decreases inflammation leading to functional recovery following spinal cord injury. 
Sci. Rep. 5, 16795 (2015).
58.	 Filous, A.R. & Silver, J. Targeting astrocytes in CNS injury and disease: 
A translational research approach. Prog. Neurobiol. 144, 173–187 (2016).
59.	 Schwab, M.E. & Strittmatter, S.M. Nogo limits neural plasticity and recovery from 
injury. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 27, 53–60 (2014).
60.	 He, Z. & Jin, Y. Intrinsic control of axon regeneration. Neuron 90, 437–451 
(2016).
61.	 Xu, X.M., Guenard, V., Kleitman, N. & Bunge, M.B. Axonal regeneration into 
Schwann cell-seeded guidance channels grafted into transected adult-rat spinal-
cord. J. Comp. Neurol. 351, 145–160 (1995).
62.	 Takeoka, A. et al. Axon regeneration can facilitate or suppress hindlimb 
function after olfactory ensheathing glia transplantation. J. Neurosci. 31, 
4298–4310 (2011). 
	
OEC transplantation promotes axon regeneration that can suppress hindlimb motor 
function. This study articulates the need to understand how regenerated axons can be 
directed towards forming circuitry that underlies functional improvements.
63.	 Lu, P. et al. Long-distance growth and connectivity of neural stem cells after 
severe spinal cord injury. Cell 150, 1264–1273 (2012). 
	
This study demonstrates relay formation between descending motor pathways and 
transplant-derived neurons that project axons long distances in the injured adult 
mammalian spinal cord.
64.	 Lu, P., Yang, H., Jones, L.L., Filbin, M.T. & Tuszynski, M.H. Combinatorial therapy 
with neurotrophins and cAMP promotes axonal regeneration beyond sites of spinal 
cord injury. J. Neurosci. 24, 6402–6409 (2004).
65.	 Fouad, K. et al. Combining Schwann cell bridges and olfactory-ensheathing glia 
grafts with chondroitinase promotes locomotor recovery after complete transection 
of the spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 25, 1169–1178 (2005). 
	
Combinatorial therapy of Schwann Cells, OECs and chABC promotes hindlimb motor 
function following complete transection of the spinal cord that likely relies on 
serotonergic axon regeneration caudal to the injury site.
66.	 Krishna, V. et al. Biomaterial-based interventions for neuronal regeneration and 
functional recovery in rodent model of spinal cord injury: a systematic review. 
J. Spinal Cord Med. 36, 174–190 (2013).
67.	 Xu, X.M., Chen, A., Guenard, V., Kleitman, N. & Bunge, M.B. Bridging Schwann 
cell transplants promote axonal regeneration from both the rostral and caudal 
stumps of transected adult rat spinal cord. J. Neurocytol. 26, 1–16 (1997).
68.	 Kadoya, K. et al. Spinal cord reconstitution with homologous neural grafts enables 
robust corticospinal regeneration. Nat. Med. 22, 479–487 (2016)
	
This paper describes robust corticospinal regeneration and synapse formation caudal 
to injury following neural graft transplantation. Regenerating corticospinal axons long 
distances represents a key goal for the field, given the pathway’s importance in 
voluntary movement.
69.	 Lemon, R.N. Descending pathways in motor control. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 31, 
195–218 (2008).
70.	 Tuszynski, M.H. & Steward, O. Concepts and methods for the study of axonal 
regeneration in the CNS. Neuron 74, 777–791 (2012).
71.	 Lu, P. et al. Motor axonal regeneration after partial and complete spinal cord 
transection. J. Neurosci. 32, 8208–8218 (2012).
72.	 Geoffroy, C.G., Hilton, B.J., Tetzlaff, W. & Zheng, B. Evidence for an age-dependent 
decline in axon regeneration in the adult mammalian central nervous system. 
Cell Rep. 15, 238–246 (2016). 
	
This paper demonstrates an age-related decline in CNS axon regeneration. Whether 
axon growth following cell transplantation after SCI is influenced by aging is unknown 
and is an important avenue for further research.
73.	 Williams, R.R., Henao, M., Pearse, D.D. & Bunge, M.B. Permissive Schwann cell 
graft/spinal cord interfaces for axon regeneration. Cell Transplant. 24, 115–131 
(2015).
74.	 Burda, J.E. & Sofroniew, M.V. Reactive gliosis and the multicellular response to 
CNS damage and disease. Neuron 81, 229–248 (2014).
75.	 Cregg, J.M. et al. Functional regeneration beyond the glial scar. Exp. Neurol. 253, 
197–207 (2014).
76.	 Anderson, M.A. et al. Astrocyte scar formation aids central nervous system axon 
regeneration. Nature 532, 195–200 (2016).
77.	 Crigler, L., Robey, R.C., Asawachaicharn, A., Gaupp, D. & Phinney, D.G. Human 
mesenchymal stem cell subpopulations express a variety of neuro-regulatory 
molecules and promote neuronal cell survival and neuritogenesis. Exp. Neurol. 
198, 54–64 (2006).
78.	 Weidner, N., Ner, A., Salimi, N. & Tuszynski, M.H. Spontaneous corticospinal 
axonal plasticity and functional recovery after adult central nervous system injury. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 3513–3518 (2001).
79.	 Hilton, B.J. et al. Dorsolateral funiculus lesioning of the mouse cervical spinal 
cord at C4 but not at C6 results in sustained forelimb motor deficits. 
J. Neurotrauma 30, 1070–1083 (2013).
80.	 Ertürk, A. & Bradke, F. High-resolution imaging of entire organs by 3-dimensional 
imaging of solvent cleared organs (3DISCO). Exp. Neurol. 242, 57–64 
(2013).
81.	 Wang, Z.M., Reynolds, A., Kirry, A., Nienhaus, C. & Blackmore, M.G. Overexpression 
of Sox11 promotes corticospinal tract regeneration after spinal injury while 
interfering with functional recovery. J. Neurosci. 35, 3139–3145 (2015).
82.	 Fouad, K. & Tetzlaff, W. Rehabilitative training and plasticity following spinal cord 
injury. Exp. Neurol. 235, 91–99 (2012).
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

646	
VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017  nature neuroscience
R e v i e w
83.	
Hilton, B.J. et al. Re-establishment of cortical motor output maps and spontaneous 
functional recovery via spared dorsolaterally projecting corticospinal neurons after dorsal 
column spinal cord injury in adult mice. J. Neurosci. 36, 4080–4092 (2016). 
	
This paper provides the first demonstration that a spared dorsolateral corticospinal 
pathway underlies recovery following spinal cord injury. Similar approaches can be 
used to assess circuit functionality in the context of cell transplantation.
84.	 Roth, B.L. DREADDs for neuroscientists. Neuron 89, 683–694 (2016).
85.	 Reier, P.J. Neural tissue grafts and repair of the injured spinal cord. Neuropathol. 
Appl. Neurobiol. 11, 81–104 (1985).
86.	 Bregman, B.S. & Reier, P.J. Neural tissue transplants rescue axotomized 
rubrospinal cells from retrograde death. J. Comp. Neurol. 244, 86–95 (1986).
87.	 Jakeman, L.B. & Reier, P.J. Axonal projections between fetal spinal-cord 
transplants and the adult-rat spinal-cord - a neuroanatomical tracing study of 
local interactions. J. Comp. Neurol. 307, 311–334 (1991).
88.	 Wictorin, K., Brundin, P., Gustavii, B., Lindvall, O. & Bjorklund, A. Reformation 
of long axon pathways in adult rat central nervous system by human forebrain 
neuroblasts. Nature 347, 556–558 (1990).
89.	 Steward, O., Sharp, K.G., Yee, K.M., Hatch, M.N. & Bonner, J.F. Characterization 
of ectopic colonies that form in widespread areas of the nervous system with 
neural stem cell transplants into the site of a severe spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 
34, 14013–14021 (2014).
90.	 Sontag, C.J., Uchida, N., Cummings, B.J. & Anderson, A.J. Injury to the 
spinal cord niche alters the engraftment dynamics of human neural stem cells. 
Stem Cell Rep. 2, 620–632 (2014).
91.	 Gold, M.S. & Gebhart, G.F. Nociceptor sensitization in pain pathogenesis. 
Nat. Med. 16, 1248–1257 (2010).
92.	 Lasiene, J., Shupe, L., Perlmutter, S. & Horner, P. No evidence for chronic 
demyelination in spared axons after spinal cord injury in a mouse. J. Neurosci. 
28, 3887–3896 (2008). 
	
Tracing rubrospinal axons reveals little evidence of chronic demyelination after 
contusive SCI, but shorter internodes are observed in many axons, suggestive of 
extensive remyelination.
93.	 Totoiu, M.O. & Keirstead, H.S. Spinal cord injury is accompanied by chronic 
progressive demyelination. J. Comp. Neurol. 486, 373–383 (2005).
94.	 Emery, E. et al. Apoptosis after traumatic human spinal cord injury. J. Neurosurg. 
89, 911–920 (1998).
95.	 Lee, Y. et al. Oligodendroglia metabolically support axons and contribute to 
neurodegeneration. Nature 487, 443–448 (2012).
96.	 Funfschilling, U. et al. Glycolytic oligodendrocytes maintain myelin and long-term 
axonal integrity. Nature 485, 517–521 (2012).
97.	 Blight, A.R. & Young, W. Central axons in injured cat spinal-cord recover 
electrophysiological function following remyelination by Schwann-cells. J. Neurol. 
Sci. 91, 15–34 (1989).
98.	 Smith, K.J., Blakemore, W.F. & Mcdonald, W.I. Central remyelination restores 
secure conduction. Nature 280, 395–396 (1979).
99.	 Myers, S.A., Bankston, A.N., Burke, D.A., Ohri, S.S. & Whittemore, S.R. Does 
the preclinical evidence for functional remyelination following myelinating cell 
engraftment into the injured spinal cord support progression to clinical trials? 
Exp. Neurol. 183B, 560–572 (2016).
100.	 Plemel, J.R. et al. Remyelination after spinal cord injury: is it a target for repair? 
Prog. Neurobiol. 117, 54–72 (2014).
101.	 Takami, T. et al. Schwann cell but not olfactory ensheathing glia transplants 
improve hindlimb locomotor performance in the moderately contused adult rat 
thoracic spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 22, 6670–6681 (2002).
102.	 Sparling, J.S. et al. Schwann cells generated from neonatal skin-derived precursors 
or neonatal peripheral nerve improve functional recovery after acute transplantation 
into the partially injured cervical spinal cord of the rat. J. Neurosci. 35, 
6714–6730 (2015).
103.	 Wiliams, R.R. & Bunge, M.B. Schwann cell transplantation: a repair strategy for 
spinal cord injury? Prog. Brain Res. 201, 295–312 (2012).
104.	 Hill, C.E., Moon, L.D., Wood, P.M. & Bunge, M.B. Labeled Schwann cell 
transplantation: cell loss, host Schwann cell replacement, and strategies to 
enhance survival. Glia 53, 338–343 (2006).
105.	 Henry, E.W. & Sidman, R.L. Long lives for homozygous trembler mutant mice despite 
virtual absence of peripheral nerve myelin. Science 241, 344–346 (1988).
106.	 Hesp, Z.C., Goldstein, E.A., Miranda, C.J., Kaspar, B.K. & McTigue, D.M. Chronic 
oligodendrogenesis and remyelination after spinal cord injury in mice and rats. 
J. Neurosci. 35, 1274–1290 (2015). 
	
Genetic fate mapping determines that the majority of oligodendrocytes are produced 
weeks after contusive spinal cord injury. This work highlights that remyelination can 
continue for months after injury.
107.	 Powers, B.E. et al. Axonal thinning and extensive remyelination without chronic 
demyelination in spinal injured rats. J. Neurosci. 32, 5120–5125 (2012). 
This is the first study to genetically label new myelin using an inducible membrane-
tethered GFP in OPCs after SCI, revealing that the g-ratio is not altered in new myelin 
following SCI compared to developmental myelin 6 months after injury.
108.	 Keirstead, H.S. et al. Human embryonic stem cell-derived oligodendrocyte 
progenitor cell transplants remyelinate and restore locomotion after spinal cord 
injury. J. Neurosci. 25, 4694–4705 (2005). 
	
Transplanting OPCs increases the number of thinly myelinated axons, suggestive of 
oligodendrocyte remyelination, and promotes hindlimb motor function. This work was 
the basis for a clinical trial conducted and terminated early by Geron Corporation and 
now restarted under Asterias Biotherapeutics.
109.	 All, A.H. et al. Early intervention for spinal cord injury with human induced 
pluripotent stem cells oligodendrocyte progenitors. PLoS One 10, e0116933 
(2015).
110.	 Cao, Q. et al. Transplantation of ciliary neurotrophic factor-expressing adult 
oligodendrocyte precursor cells promotes remyelination and functional recovery 
after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 30, 2989–3001 (2010).
111.	 Karimi-Abdolrezaee, S., Eftekharpour, E., Wang, J., Morshead, C.M. & Fehlings, 
M.G. Delayed transplantation of adult neural precursor cells promotes remyelination 
and functional neurological recovery after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 26, 
3377–3389 (2006).
112.	 Plemel, J.R. et al. Platelet-derived growth factor-responsive neural precursors give 
rise to myelinating oligodendrocytes after transplantation into the spinal cords of 
contused rats and dysmyelinated mice. Glia 59, 1891–1910 (2011). 
	
This paper describes transplantation of PDGF-responsive precursors capable of 
differentiation into oligodendrocytes and myelinating after SCI, and demonstrates that 
transplanting cells capable of differentiating into myelinating oligodendrocytes is not 
sufficient to enhance recovery without an increase in total myelination.
113.	 Cao, Q. et al. Functional recovery in traumatic spinal cord injury after 
transplantation of multineurotrophin-expressing glial-restricted precursor cells. 
J. Neurosci. 25, 6947–6957 (2005).
114.	 Hwang, D.H. et al. Transplantation of human neural stem cells transduced with 
Olig2 transcription factor improves locomotor recovery and enhances myelination 
in the white matter of rat spinal cord following contusive injury. BMC Neurosci. 
10, 117 (2009).
115.	 Hofstetter, C.P. et al. Allodynia limits the usefulness of intraspinal neural stem 
cell grafts; directed differentiation improves outcome. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 346–353 
(2005). 
	
This paper presents a cautionary study that demonstrated that NSPC transplantation 
can result in aberrant axon growth and allodynia. Suppressing astrocyte differentiation 
of NSPCs prevents allodynia, highlighting the importance of regulating transplanted 
cell fates.
116.	 Hawryluk, G.W.J. et al. An examination of the mechanisms by which neural 
precursors augment recovery following spinal cord injury: a key role for 
remyelination. Cell Transplant. 23, 365–380 (2014).
117.	 Yasuda, A. et al. Significance of remyelination by neural stem/progenitor cells 
transplanted into the injured spinal cord. Stem Cells 29, 1983–1994 (2011). 
	
Transplantation of NSPCs from shiverer mice is associated with substantially less 
functional improvement compared to wild-type transplanted cells, suggesting compact 
myelin formation is important for recovery.
118.	 Privat, A., Jacque, C., Bourre, J.M., Dupouey, P. & Baumann, N. Absence of the 
major dense line in myelin of the mutant mouse Shiverer. Neurosci. Lett. 12, 
107–112 (1979).
119.	 Tang, Y., Stryker, M.P., Alvarez-Buylla, A. & Espinosa, J.S. Cortical plasticity 
induced by transplantation of embryonic somatostatin or parvalbumin interneurons. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 18339–18344 (2014).
120.	 Salegio, E.A. et al. A unilateral cervical spinal cord contusion injury model in 
non-human primates (Macaca mulatta). J. Neurotrauma 33, 439–459 (2016).
121.	 Nori, S. et al. Long-term safety issues of iPSC-based cell therapy in a spinal cord 
injury model: oncogenic transformation with epithelial-mesenchymal transition. 
Stem Cell Rep. 4, 360–373 (2015).
122.	 Zhang, Y. et al. Autonomic dysreflexia causes chronic immune suppression after 
spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 33, 12970–12981 (2013).
123.	 Meisel, C., Schwab, J.M., Prass, K., Meisel, A. & Dirnagl, U. Central nervous 
system injury-induced immune deficiency syndrome. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 
775–786 (2005).
124.	 Brommer, B. et al. Spinal cord injury-induced immune deficiency syndrome 
enhances infection susceptibility dependent on lesion level. Brain 139, 692–707 
(2016).
125.	 Kwon, B.K. et al. Demonstrating efficacy in preclinical studies of cellular therapies 
for spinal cord injury - how much is enough? Exp. Neurol. 248, 30–44 (2013).
126.	 Dvorak, M.F. et al. Minimizing errors in acute traumatic spinal cord injury trials 
by acknowledging the heterogeneity of spinal cord anatomy and injury severity: 
an observational Canadian cohort analysis. J. Neurotrauma 31, 1540–1547 
(2014).
127.	 Steeves, J.D. et al. Outcome measures for acute/subacute cervical sensorimotor 
complete (AIS-A) spinal cord injury during a phase 2 clinical trial. Top. Spinal 
Cord Inj. Rehabil. 18, 1–14 (2012).
128.	 Kobayashi, Y. et al. Pre-evaluated safe human iPSC-derived neural stem cells 
promote functional recovery after spinal cord injury in common marmoset without 
tumorigenicity. 
PLoS 
One 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0052787 
(2012).
129.	 Okada, S. et al. Conditional ablation of Stat3 or Socs3 discloses a dual role 
for reactive astrocytes after spinal cord injury. Nat. Med. 12, 829–834 (2006).
130.	 Steeves, J.D. et al. Extent of spontaneous motor recovery after traumatic cervical 
sensorimotor complete spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord 49, 257–265 (2011).
131.	 Nishimura, S. et al. Time-dependent changes in the microenvironment of injured 
spinal cord affects the therapeutic potential of neural stem cell transplantation 
for spinal cord injury. Mol. Brain 6, 3 (2013).
132.	 Barakat, D.J. et al. Survival, integration, and axon growth support of glia 
transplanted into the chronically contused spinal cord. Cell Transplant. 14, 
225–240 (2005).
133.	 Anderson, K.D. Targeting recovery: priorities of the spinal cord-injured population. 
J. Neurotrauma 21, 1371–1383 (2004).
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

nature neuroscience  VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017	
647
r e v i e w
134.	 Powers, B.E. et al. Remyelination reporter reveals prolonged refinement of spontane­
ously regenerated myelin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 4075–4080 (2013).
135.	 James, N.D. et al. Conduction failure following spinal cord injury: functional and 
anatomical changes from acute to chronic stages. J. Neurosci. 31, 18543–18555 
(2011).
136.	 Blight, A.R. Delayed demyelination and macrophage invasion: a candidate for 
secondary cell damage in spinal cord injury. Cent. Nerv. Syst. Trauma 2, 299–315 
(1985).
137.	 Guest, J.D., Hiester, E.D. & Bunge, R.P. Demyelination and Schwann cell 
responses adjacent to injury epicenter cavities following chronic human spinal 
cord injury. Exp. Neurol. 192, 384–393 (2005).
138.	 Bunge, R.P., Puckett, W.R., Becerra, J.L., Marcillo, A. & Quencer, R.M. 
Observations on the pathology of human spinal cord injury. A review and 
classification of 22 new cases with details from a case of chronic cord compression 
with extensive focal demyelination. Adv. Neurol. 59, 75–89 (1993).
139.	 Karimi-Abdolrezaee, S., Eftekharpour, E., Wang, J., Schut, D. & Fehlings, M.G. 
Synergistic effects of transplanted adult neural stem/progenitor cells, 
chondroitinase, and growth factors promote functional repair and plasticity of the 
chronically injured spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 30, 1657–1676 (2010).
140.	 McTigue, D.M., Wei, P. & Stokes, B.T. Proliferation of NG2-positive cells and 
altered oligodendrocyte numbers in the contused rat spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 21, 
3392–3400 (2001).
141.	 Tripathi, R. & McTigue, D.M. Prominent oligodendrocyte genesis along the border 
of spinal contusion lesions. Glia 55, 698–711 (2007).
142.	 Lytle, J.M. & Wrathall, J.R. Glial cell loss, proliferation and replacement 
in the contused murine spinal cord. Eur. J. Neurosci. 25, 1711–1724 
(2007).
143.	 Barnabé-Heider, F. et al. Origin of new glial cells in intact and injured adult spinal 
cord. Cell Stem Cell 7, 470–482 (2010).
144.	 Whittaker, M.T. et al. GGF2 (Nrg1-beta3) treatment enhances NG2+ cell response 
and improves functional recovery after spinal cord injury. Glia 60, 281–294 
(2012).
145.	 Schonberg, D.L. et al. Ferritin stimulates oligodendrocyte genesis in the adult 
spinal cord and can be transferred from macrophages to NG2 cells in vivo. 
J. Neurosci. 32, 5374–5384 (2012).
146.	 Goritz, C. et al. A pericyte origin of spinal cord scar tissue. Science 333, 238–242 
(2011).
147.	 Meletis, K. et al. Spinal cord injury reveals multilineage differentiation of 
ependymal cells. PLoS Biol. 6, e182 (2008).
148.	 Ren, Y. et al. Ependymal cell contribution to scar formation after spinal cord 
injury is minimal, local and dpeendent on direct ependymal injury. Sci. Rep. 7, 
41122 (2017).
149.	 Soderblom, C. et al. Perivascular fibroblasts form the fibrotic scar after contusive 
spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 33, 13882–13887 (2013).
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

===== Aztekin2019_Science_scTx+XenopusTailRegeneration =====
science.sciencemag.org/content/364/6441/653/suppl/DC1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supplementary Materials for 
 
Identification of a regeneration-organizing cell in the Xenopus tail 
  
C. Aztekin*, T. W. Hiscock*, J. C. Marioni, J. B. Gurdon, B. D. Simons†, J. Jullien† 
 
*These authors contributed equally to this work. 
†Corresponding author. Email: jj256@gurdon.cam.ac.uk (J.J.); bds10@cam.ac.uk (B.D.S.) 
 
Published 17 May 2019, Science 364, 653 (2019) 
DOI: 10.1126/science.aav9996 
 
This PDF file includes: 
 
Materials and Methods 
Figs. S1 to S11 
Captions for Tables S1 to S3 
References  
 
Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following: 
(available at science.sciencemag.org/content/364/6441/653/suppl/DC1) 
 
Tables S1 to S3 

2 
Materials and Methods 
Tadpole Generation and Husbandry 
Xenopus laevis embryos and tadpoles were generated and maintained in 0.1X MMR (0.1 M NaCl, 2.0 mM 
KCl, 1 mM MgSO4, 2 mM CaCl2, 5 mM HEPES (pH 7.8) as previously described (27), and raised to the 
indicated developmental stages according to Nieuwkoop and Faber (NF) developmental tables (28). Wild-
type Xenopus laevis were used for experiments unless otherwise stated. Animal experiments were approved 
by the University Biomedical Services at University of Cambridge and complied with UK Home Office 
guidelines (Animal Act 1986).  
Regeneration Assays 
Regeneration competent tadpoles were staged as NF stage 40-41, and regeneration-incompetent tadpoles were 
staged as NF stage 46-47. Tadpoles were anesthetized by incubation for 30-60 seconds at room-temperature 
(RT) with 0.1% MS222 (Sigma, E10521) in 0.1X MMR. Anesthetized tadpoles were then transferred to fresh 
0.1X MMR for amputation. Amputation was carried out by removing ~30-50% of the tail using a sterile 
scalpel. To remove posterior trunk ROCs, dorsal and/or ventral fin regions were similarly removed, either at 
the same time, or 12-16 hours post-amputation. Control tadpoles were subjected to the same protocol for 
anesthesia. Regeneration scoring was assessed at 7 dpa, and classified as excellent, good, partial or none, as 
previously described (27). Briefly, “Excellent” tails show an elongation indistinguishable from normal tails, 
except for missing somite segmentation. “Good” tails have either problems with elongation, or are missing 
fin regeneration. “Partial” tails are much shorter, or have defects in patterning with missing fin regeneration, 
or show an elongated bulge formation. “None” tails present either a blunt end or a small bulge. We calculated 
the regeneration index by multiplying the tadpole numbers showing excellent, good, partial, or none 
regeneration phenotypes by 3, 2, 1, or 0 points, respectively, and then divided the result by the total number 
of tadpoles. Any sample with less than 3 tadpoles in a replicate were omitted for analysis. Any experiment 
with visible contamination or unexplained tadpole death was omitted for analysis. A maximum of 10 tadpoles 
were cultured in each well of a 6-well plate. Each experiment was performed with multiple biological 
replicates, with each batch derived from a different male or female adult.  
Single cell dissociation, library preparation and sequencing 
30-40% of intact tails or cells formed posterior to the amputation plane were collected (>20 tadpoles per 
sample) and dissociated to single cells by first washing with Ca-Mg free 1X MBS ((Barth-HEPES Saline) 
10X stock: 88 mM NaCl, 1 mM KCl, 2,4 mM NaHCO3, 0.82mM MgSO4.7H2O, 0.33mM Ca(NO3)2.4H2O, 
0.41 mM Cacl2.6H2O, 10 mM HEPES. Add ∼3 mL of 10N NaOH to obtain a pH of 7.4 to 7.6), then 
incubating with 1X Trypsin (Sigma, 59427C) in Ca-Mg free 1X MBS with 0.5 μM EDTA for 5 minutes at 
room-temperature. Trypsin reaction was diluted with Ca-Mg free 1X MBS after 5 minutes. Before and after 
trypsinization, physical dispersion was applied by trituration with a pipette. Since samples contain few newly-
generated cells at 1dpa, anterior tissues for these samples were also collected. Cells were spun down at 211 g 
for 5 minutes then resuspended in 1X MBS. Cells were passed through a 35 μm diameter cell strainer then 
stained with 2 μg/ml propidium iodide (PI) (Sigma, P4170) and 20 μM Hoechst 33342 (Sigma, 2261) in 1X 
MBS for 5 minutes, and single live cells (PI negative, Hoechst positive) were sorted using a Sony SH800s 
Cell Sorter. scRNA-seq libraries were generated using 10X Genomics and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 
4000. 
scRNA-seq: Data processing 
10X Genomics output files were processed using CellRanger v2.1.0, which aligns, filters and counts unique 
molecular identifiers (UMIs) to generate a (cell x gene) count matrix. Sequences were mapped to the Xenopus 
laevis 9.1 genome (Xenbase, ftp://ftp.xenbase.org/pub/Genomics/JGI/Xenla9.1/Xla.v91.repeatMasked.fa.gz 
and ftp://ftp.xenbase.org/pub/Genomics/JGI/Xenla9.1/1.8.3.2/XL_9.1_v1.8.3.2.allTranscripts.gff3.gz). Cells 
were distinguished from empty droplets using CellRanger; no further cell filtering was performed. Raw counts 
were normalized by total counts per cell, and converted to TPX (29) (transcripts per 104).  
scRNA-seq: Data visualization 
Highly variable genes (Fano factor > 65th percentile, HVGs) were selected for clustering and visualization, 
with both lowly (mean expression < 5th percentile) and highly expressed (mean expression > 80th percentile) 

 
3 
genes removed to minimize batch effects (30). One cell (out of 13,200) showed no expression of any of the 
HVGs and was therefore removed from subsequent analysis. Data were projected onto two dimensions with 
UMAP (6), using log2-transformed values for highly variable genes, cosine distance as a similarity measure, 
and parameters k = 20, min_dist = 0.5. Gene expression plots are colored according to expression level (log10-
transformed, normalized), with zeros colored gray, and non-zero expression colored by a yellow-to-red 
colorscale (R package ggplot2). 
 
scRNA-seq: clustering 
To perform clustering, we first constructed a graph to represent the similarity structure of the data. Rather than 
using a k-nearest-neighbor graph, we constructed the graph in the same way that UMAP describes similarity 
during high dimensional data visualization (31). Specifically, we built a fuzzy topological representation of 
the data as a weighted graph, using fuzzy_simplicial_set from UMAP, using log2-transformed HVGs, cosine 
distance as the similarity measure, and k = 10 nearest-neighbors. Having constructed this graph, we performed 
graphical clustering using the walktrap algorithm (cluster_walktrap from R package igraph, with steps = 10). 
The parameter, k, controls the size of clusters generated: smaller values of k results in more clusters of a 
smaller size. Here, k was manually tuned to generate clusters that were in accordance with manually annotated 
cell types. 
 
scRNA-seq: annotation of cell-types  
Cluster identity was determined by looking for genes uniquely upregulated in different regions of the UMAP 
projection (findMarkers in R package scran (32)), and comparing to expression of known marker genes. 
Where possible, clusters were assigned to a well-characterized, functional cell type; heatmaps of key marker 
genes are provided in fig. S1. However, in 23/46 clusters, an unambiguous annotation was not possible. In 
these cases, clusters were assigned a broad label (e.g. lymphoid), with a numeric label distinguishing between 
clusters within the same broad label; heatmaps of putative marker genes are provided in fig. S1. Marker gene 
expression was visualised using heatmaps (R package ggplot2), coloured by mean expression (log10-
transformed, normalized), and adjusted relative to the cluster with maximum expression of that gene (except 
in fig. S6B, where we do not perform this adjustment). Xenopus laevis is pseudotetraploid, and gene 
expression is available for each allele from the Large (Gene.L) or Short (Gene.S) chromosomes (33). In this 
work, we did not combine these two expression patterns as they may have different functions and we have 
recorded cluster-specific allele expression differences. We report both large and short allele expressions if 
needed. In other figures (such as heatmaps), we report whichever allele has higher maximal expression.  
 
scRNA-seq: differential abundance analysis 
Differential abundance analysis was performed using edgeR (34), following the method introduced for mass 
cytometry data, cydar (35). Briefly, for all samples (all replicates across all experimental conditions), the 
number of each cell type was computed, thereby generating a counts matrix, with columns corresponding to 
cell types and rows corresponding to individual samples. Cell types with low mean abundance (< 5 cells per 
sample) were removed from the analysis; red blood cells were also removed since we observed high variability 
in their capture efficiency. Pairwise differential abundance tests were performed between regeneration-
competent and incompetent 1 dpa conditions, with edgeR accounting for the replicate structure and counts-
based nature of the data.  Note that covariates (such as sequencing batch) were not explicitly considered in 
this analysis.  
 
scRNA-seq:  Gene-ontology and gene set enrichment analysis 
Putative marker genes for ROCs were identified from the HVGs using findMarkers from scran; the top 50 
genes were selected. Gene-ontology analysis was then performed on Homo sapiens orthologs using 
http://geneontology.org/page/go-enrichment-analysis (36). Single cell gene set enrichment analysis (scGSEA) 
was performed using the AUCell R package (37), using manually curated gene lists (38), provided in Table 
S3, and all genes as the background gene set. Cell cycle phase was inferred from the transcriptome using 
CellCycleScoring  (R package Seurat) (39), with the gene set defined previously (40) (see also Table S3). To 
compute the change in proliferation during regeneration (Fig. 3B), we computed the fraction of each cell type 
in either G2/M, or S phases, and compared regeneration-competent 2 dpa and incompetent intact tail samples. 

 
4 
These samples were chosen to have the same developmental stage. Estimates for proliferating fraction are 
noisy for cell types with low abundance (< 10 in either sample); these are not plotted. 
 
Microsurgery 
Graft material was collected from the posterior tail bud of donor embryos; prepared in one of two ways which 
we denote as “large” or “small”. Large grafts are taken directly from the posterior tail bud at stage NF 24-25; 
these grafts likely contain multipotent tailbud progenitors, in addition to the overlying skin in which ROCs 
are present. Small grafts are produced by either peeling off the skin region directly from NF stage 24-25 tails, 
or by isolating skin from the “large” grafts by cleaning them with a needle. For the trunk-to-trunk grafts, donor 
material is sourced by peeling different dorsal or lateral regions of trunk. Then, different regions of trunk 
(dorsal vs. lateral vs. ventral) of an acceptor embryo NF Stage 24-28 were prepared for grafting by peeling 
the skin. Anterior edges of the donor tissues were then put onto the peeled trunk area. These manipulations 
were carried out in high-salt solution (0.7 mM CaCl2, 20 mM NaCl in 1X MBS) on clay, and embryos 
remained on clay for 1 hour before transfer to 0.1X MMR. Stereoscope images were taken 2 days after 
grafting. For experiments using GFP labelled host or donor embryos, Xla.Tg(CMV:GFP)Brown transgenic 
testes were used to generate tadpoles, and tadpoles were sorted for GFP positivity prior to grafting. Images of 
tadpoles were taken on a Leica stereomicroscope with microscope camera DFC7000 T or M80. 
 
Immunofluorescence and Imaging 
Tadpoles were fixed with 4% formaldehyde in 1X PBS for 40 min, permeabilized by three 20 min incubations 
in PBS-T (1X PBS + 0.1 Tween-100), blocked with 100% CAS-Block (Invitrogen, 008120) for 1 hour, and 
then stained with primary antibodies in 100% CAS-Block overnight. Samples were then washed with PBS-T 
for 10 min 3 times, re-blocked in 100% CAS-Block for 30 min, and stained with secondary antibodies for 2 
hours. Samples were then washed 3 times 10 min in PBS-T followed by 3 times 20 min in PBS. Samples were 
incubated in DAPI solution (Invitrogen, P36962) for 10 minutes. The entire procedure is carried out at room 
temperature, except for incubation of the primary antibody at 4 degrees. Samples were mounted in 0.8% ultra-
low gelling temperature agar (Sigma, A5030) in 0.1X MMR, and imaged on a Leica SP8 confocal microscope. 
A 10x/0.4 HC PL Apo CS2 Air objective was used for all images except: Fig. 3B, which is taken with 20x/0.7 
HC PL Apo CS2 Air, and Fig S3B and Fig S5B, which are taken with a 63x/1.2 HC PL Apo CS2 Water 
objective. The following laser lines were used: 405 nm (DAPI), 470-670 nm White Laser (EGFP, Alexa Fluor 
594). Fig S6D and S7E immunofluorescence images were taken via a Leica stereomicroscope with a 
microscope camera DFC7000 T. Fiji was used for maximum projection of z-stacks and to adjust contrast to 
highlight biological relevance. If needed, images were cropped, flipped, and/or rotated to highlight biological 
relevance. Primary antibodies used: TP63 (clone 4A4) (Abcam, ab735, 1:100), EGFP (Invitrogen, A-21311, 
1:500), PCNA (Acris, SM1421P, 1:100), PHH3 (Abcam, ab10543, 1:100). The following primary antibodies 
were purchased from Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank and used with 1:5 dilution: 12/101, NCAM1 
(4D), COL2A1 (CIIC1). Secondary antibodies used were: Alexa Fluor 488 secondary antibody (Invitrogen, 
A11001, 1:500), Alexa Fluor 594 secondary antibody (Invitrogen, R37121, 1:500).  
 
Live imaging 
pbin7Lef:GFP transgenic testes were used to generate tadpoles. After amputations, regeneration-competent 
tadpoles were cultured in 0.8% ultra-low gelling temperature agar (Sigma, A5030) in 0.1X MMR, and imaged 
once every 2 hours using a Leica stereomicroscope with a microscope camera DFC7000 T. Fiji was used to 
adjust contrast to highlight biological relevance. If needed, images were cropped, flipped, and/or rotated to 
highlight biological relevance. 
 
Chemical perturbations to assess ROCs mobilization 
pbin7Lef:GFP transgenic testes was used to generate tadpoles. Lef1 positive tadpoles were sorted prior to 
experiments. Amputated tadpoles were placed in 0.1X MMR containing 0.1% DMSO, Diphenyleneiodonium 
chloride (DPI) (Sigma, D2926), SU5402 (Sigma, 0443), SB-505124 (Sigma, S4696) with indicated 
concentrations. Tadpoles were fixed after 16 hours post amputation and stereoscope images were taken. The 
degree of ROCs mobilization was quantified by measuring the distance of leading Lef1 positive cells (either 
dorsal or ventral) from the edges of the amputation area towards notochord. 
 

 
5 
Genetic ablation experiments 
The 1853 bp region upstream of the Krt.L coding-sequence was amplified from Xla genomic DNA and cloned 
into 
p2 
pTransgenesis 
vector 
(41) 
(XLA 
KRT 
1-8 
F: 
caaaaaagcaggctCgCCaGTCGACACTAATGTTTTTTTTAACATATTGTGTTGGACCCA, 
R: 
TTGTATTCTATAGTGTCACCTAAATTCTGCGCAACAACACTGTTTAGACAA). CFP-Nitroreductase 
was amplified from pCS2.CFPNTR (42) vector via standard PCR protocols and cloned into  p3 pTransgenesis 
vector 
(41) 
using 
In-Fusion 
cloning 
(CFPNTR 
F: 
TTCTTGTACAAAGTGGGGATCCACCATGGTGAGCAAGGG,  
R: CTCACTATAGTTCTAGAGGCTCGAGCACTTCGGTTAAGGTGATGTTTTGCG). Krt.L:CFP-NTR, 
Krt.L:VenusGFP, CMV:VenusGFP, and CMV:dTomato pTransgenesis vectors containing I-SceI cut site 
were generated by Gateway cloning using LR Clonase II Plus (Invitrogen, 12538120) and by cloning into 
pDEST Transgenesis 4-2 (Tol2/ISce-1-CH4-SAR/Tol2). F0 transgenic lines were generated by using I-SceI 
mediated transgenesis as previously described (43). Briefly, 1-cell stage embryos were injected with a 3:1 mix 
of p4_Krt.L:CFPNTR, and p4_CMV:dTomato or p4_CMV:VenusGFP constructs with a I-SceI enzyme 
(NEB, R0694L). After incubation at 14 degrees overnight or until neurula stages, embryos were switched to 
23 degrees, then grown to the indicated stages. Transgenesis efficiency was assessed by evaluating on an 
epifluorescence stereomicroscope the extent of tomato or venusGFP fluorescence in injected tadpoles. Broad 
signal emitting tadpoles were considered as high, and mosaic signal emitting tadpoles were considered as low 
transgenesis. For regeneration assays, tadpoles with high or low dTomato or VenusGFP expression were 
incubated in 10 mM MTZ (Sigma, M1547). MTZ was added one day before amputation, after amputation, 
and 2 days post amputation, then removed on 6 dpa. For the assessment of ablation experiments, Krt.L:NTR 
pTransgenesis was performed on embryos generated using pbin7LEF:GFP testes. Tadpoles were first sorted 
for high Lef1 reporter activity and then put through the ablation protocol. During the regeneration assay, 
ablation of ROCs upon MTZ treatment was checked in these tadpoles at 3 DPA using an epifluorescence 
stereomicroscope. As MTZ is light-sensitive, all samples were maintained in the dark in foiled dishes. 
 
Genetic ablation combined with grafting experiments 
To ablate ROCs from donor grafts, Krt.L:NTR transgenic embryos (together with CMV:VenusGFP, or 
CMV:dTomato) were generated and broad-high signal emitting embryos were sorted at early NF Stage 20 as 
described above; wild type embryos acted as controls. Donor embryos at stages 23-25 were used to generate 
“small grafts”, as described above, which were then implanted onto different trunk regions of wild-type 
acceptor embryos. After grafting, embryos were randomly allocated in wells with or without 10 Mm MTZ for 
2 days (MTZ changed daily).  The extent of the ectopic outgrowths was quantified as the length between the 
visible proximal and distal ends of the outgrowths (Fiji). As MTZ is light-sensitive, all samples were 
maintained in the dark in foiled dishes. 
 
Statistical tests  
For Fig. 3D, and fig. S11D-E, we fit a linear model to the data (function lm() in R) to test for significant 
differences, accounting for experimental batch effects. For fig. S7C and S7E, we first binarized the data: 
"Excellent" and "Good" into one group; "Partial" and "None" into another.  We then perform logistic 
regression (function glm() in R, with family = binomial(link = "logit")), again accounting for batch 
effects.  For each comparison, we report the p-value as the likelihood ratio test between the data and a null 
model where the variables that are being compared are merged (function anova() in R, with method = "LRT"). 
For Fig. S8C, we performed a two tailed t-test assuming unequal variances. 
  
 
 
 
 

 
6 
 
Fig. S1.  Identification of cell states corresponding to 46 scRNAseq clusters based on established 
markers of cell identity. 
Heatmaps showing selected marker genes for (A) skin; (B) immune system and red blood cells (RBCs); (C) 
somite and other tissue types; and (D) nervous system. Detected mRNA values are normalized to the highest 
expressing cell type. (E) Expression of selected genes to visualize differentiation of neurons from progenitors: 
Hes1 is detected specifically in the floor plate and neural progenitor cells. Neurod4 expression is seen only in 
actively differentiating neurons, and not in neural progenitors, nor in terminally differentiated neurons. Tubb3 
is only present in terminally differentiated neurons. (F) Heatmap combining all marker genes and cell types 
from (A-D). 
 

 
7 
 
Fig. S2. Contribution of biological replicates to the UMAP projection of tail scRNA-seq data. 
(A) UMAP visualization of cells from all biological replicates with cells derived from each replicate colour-
coded. Grey dots: cells from all samples; red, blue, green dots: cells from different biological replicates for 
selected sample. Most clusters show mingling of cells from replicates. Regeneration-competent intact tail and 
3 dpa samples have three replicates, all other samples are from two replicates. (B) UMI counts (log10) plotted 
on the UMAP visualization. (C) Heatmap of cell type abundances for each biological replicate. The color 
scale corresponds to the fraction of cells allocated to each cell type per sample (plotted on a log10 scale). Also 
shown are the experimental batch and sequencing lane.  
 

 
8 
 
Fig. S3. Computational inference of cell cycle phase reveals differences between progenitors, terminally 
differentiated cells and erythrocytes. 
(A) Barplot showing the cell cycle status of each cell type as a fraction of cells in G1, G2/M and S phases for 
(Top) Intact tail regeneration-competent, (Mid) Intact tail regeneration–incompetent, and (Bottom) all 
samples. (B) Erythrocytes are positive for cycling protein markers in the scRNA-Seq data. GATA1:GFP 
transgenic line is used to visualize erythrocytes and stained with cycling markers, PCNA (n=7 from 3 
biological replicates) and PHH3 (n=5 from 3 biological replicates) at Stage 40. Green, GATA1:GFP, Red: 
PCNA or PHH3, Blue: DAPI. Scale, 25 µm. Double positive cells (GATA1/cell cycling markers) confirm the 
presence of cycling erythrocytes at this developmental stage. 

 
9 
 
Fig. S4. Developmental, amputation and regeneration related changes are revealed by pairwise 
comparison of samples. 
(A) UMAP visualization for each sample overlaid onto all pooled samples. Red dots represent cells specific 
to a given sample whereas grey dots represent cells from all pooled samples. Days post-fertilization (dpf) and 
days post-amputation (dpa) used for comparisons are indicated for each sample. Transcriptional and cell type 
changes occurring as development proceeds (increasing dpf), regardless of regeneration potential, are 
classified as developmental (examples shown as green arrows). Cell type changes observed between intact 
tail and 1 dpa, regardless of regeneration potential, are classified as amputation response (examples shown as 
purple arrows). Cell type changes that are specific to regeneration-competent samples are classified as 
regeneration-specific (example shown as blue arrow). (B) Regeneration specific changes at 1 dpa were 
assessed using differential abundance analysis between regeneration-competent and incompetent tadpoles. 
Colored dots represent different putative cell types shown in Fig 1B. The ranking of the test statistics by cell 
type highlights the change in ROCs abundance as the most significant change, consistent with the conclusions 
of fig. S4A. The absolute values of the test statistics are large, but this is to be expected given the low replicate 
number (n = 2).  

 
10 
 
Fig. S5. Identification of ROCs as a regeneration-specific epidermal cell type localized to the amputation 
plane. 
(A) UMAP visualization for Tp63.L, Tp63.S, Lef1.L, and Lef1.S expressing cells. (B) High magnification 
image of ROCs (TP63+/LEF1+). Green, pbin7Lef; Red, TP63; Blue, DAPI. Scale bar: 25 µm. (C) ROCs 
(TP63+/LEF1+) are present in regeneration–competent and -incompetent intact tails; are removed following 
amputation; and reappear at the wound epidermis specifically in regeneration competent tadpoles. Green, 
pbin7LEF:GFP; Red, TP63; Blue, DAPI. Scale bars: intact tails 500 µm, otherwise 250 µm; (A total ³3 
tadpoles per conditions were imaged from 2 biological replicates). Note, the 0 hpa and 1 dpa Lef1 images are 
identical to Fig. 3C. 
 

 
11 
 
Fig. S6. Ablation of ROCs using the Krt.L:NTR / MTZ system 
(A) UMAP visualization for Krt.L expressing cells. (B) Heatmap showing Krt.L expression in ROCs, 
epidermis and goblet cells, across the different biological conditions used in this study. (C) Heatmap of 
keratin-family gene expression (from both large and short chromosomes) within the skin, confirming the high 
specificity of Krt.L to ROCs. (D) Mosaic staining of ROCs after GFP immunolabelling in Krt.L:venusGFP 
F0-tadpoles.  Scale bar: 1 mm. (E) Antibody staining of different tissue types following ablation with MTZ 
confirms the absence of gross off-target effects.  
 

 
12 
 
Fig. S7. Removal of ROCs by genetic ablation or manual extirpation reduces regeneration.  
(A) Schematic outline of MTZ treatment timing. (B) Brightfield images of regeneration-competent tadpoles 
at 3 dpa, with or without MTZ-based ROCs ablation. Scale bar: 1mm. Lef1:GFP images of the same tadpoles 
are provided in Fig. 4A. (C) Average regeneration index in Krt.L:NTR ablation experiments. Scorings are 
shown for samples with or without MTZ treatment in high or low transgenic tadpoles as well as in non-
transgenic tadpoles. In non-transgenic tadpoles, MTZ treatment does not significantly affect regeneration 
outcomes compared to no MTZ treatment (p > 0.05). In transgenic tadpoles, MTZ treatment significantly 
reduces regeneration score. All data are mean±std across replicates, *, p < 0. 001;. n.s, not significant. 
Replicates are indicated in figures inside brackets as (total tadpole number, biological replicate number). (D) 
Transgenesis levels were assessed based on dTomato fluorescence intensity from a CMV:dTomato vector co-
injected with a Krt.L:NTR vector. Examples of high- (left) and low-transgenesis (right) are shown. Scale, 1 
mm. (E) Extent of ROC removal during amputation correlates with regeneration outcome. Schematics of 
posterior trunk ROCs removal protocols are shown on the left. Amputations were carried out to remove either 
50% or 10% of the tail (50% and 10% AMP, respectively). In the case of 50% tail amputation, additional 
posterior trunk removals were also performed in the dorsal, ventral, or dorsal and ventral regions of the 
posterior trunk (50% AMP and dorsal cut, 50% AMP and ventral cut, and 50% AMP and DV cut, 
respectively). Lastly dorsal and ventral posterior trunk removal was also carried out 1 day after amputation 
(AMP then DV cut). The extent of ROCs removal is evaluated by imaging GFP fluorescence in 
pbin7LEF:GFP tadpoles (middle panel) at 1 dpa. Regeneration scores were assessed at 7 dpa and shown for 
each condition (left). Replicates are indicated in figures inside brackets as (total tadpole number, biological 
replicate number). *, p < 0.01. All data are mean±std across replicates. 

 
13 
 
Fig S8. Interfering with early signalling pathways inhibits ROCs mobilization. 
(A) Method of quantifying cell migration on the amputation plane.  (B) Representative images of Lef1 positive 
tadpoles treated with chemicals that interfere with regeneration and wound epidermis formation. Scale bars = 
0.5 mm. Note, the control 0.1% DMSO image is identical to Fig. S8A. (C) Chemicals targeting early 
regeneration signalling pathways (DPI, SB-505124) block ROCs migration, meanwhile inhibition of FGF 
pathway via SU5402 does not inhibit ROCs migration at 16 hours post amputation. Replicates are indicated 
in figures inside brackets as (total tadpole number, biological replicate number); *, p-value < 0.001. All data 
are ±std, two tailed t-test. 
 

 
14 
 
Fig. S9. ROCs and progenitors express complementary receptor/ligand pairs. 
Expression of ligands (Left) and receptors (Right) for different signalling pathway were evaluated by scGSEA 
for all cell types, (A) FGF; (B) BMP; (C) WNT; (D) TGFβ; and (E) Notch-Delta. ROCs express high levels 
of ligands, whereas progenitor cell types express high levels of receptors. 
 

 
15 
 
 
Fig S10. ROCs express genes related to limb development. 
(A) Heatmap indicating the relative expression of selected ROCs and limb development genes. (B) 
Transcriptome of ROCs is enriched for limb development-related GO-terms.  
 
 

 
16 
 
Fig. S11. Transplants of ROC-containing regions induce ectopic structures. 
(A) “Large” grafts: Additional images of tail-like ectopic structures obtained by grafting large ROCs 
containing posterior tail bud regions to the trunk region of host embryos. Scale 1 mm. (B) “Small” grafts: 
Additional images of fin-enriched ectopic structures are obtained following the “small” graft procedure. Scale 
bars: 1 mm. (C) Control trunk-to-trunk grafts display no overt outgrowth phenotype. CMV:GFP embryos 
were used as donor to ensure successful grafting (n=11, from 3 biological replicates).  (D) “Small” grafts of 
ROCs-containing tissues result in significantly reduced outgrowth length when treated with the Krt.L:NTR 
/MTZ ROCs ablation protocol (n=27, and n=28 for with and without MTZ added samples, respectively. Both 
are from 6 biological replicates, *: p < 0.001). (E) MTZ treatment alone does not significantly impact length 
of the ectopic outgrowths (n=9, and n=7 for with and without MTZ added samples, respectively. Both are 
from 3 biological replicates, n.s.: not significant, p > 0.05). (F-G) Grafting non-labelled ROCs containing 
tissues to CMV:GFP embryos, or vice-versa, induce ectopic outgrowths with varying contribution from 
acceptor embryos. All ROCs-containing donor tissues remain at the tip of the ectopic structures. Scale bars: 
500 µm.  
 
 
 
 

 
17 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S1: Summary and quality control of single-cell RNA-seq data sets of >13000 Xenopus cells. 
This Excel file contains a summary of each single-cell RNA-sequencing experiment. Samples are labelled 
depending on their developmental stage reflective of their regenerative ability and days post amputation status. 
Sequencing batch, numbers of sequenced cells, mean reads per cell, median genes per cell, median UMI counts 
per cell, total genes detected, and fraction of reads in cells are reported.  
Table S2: Published ROCs marker gene expression labelling the midline edge of epidermis. 
This Excel file lists ROCs marker genes that have reported mRNA in situ hybridization results in the literature. 
These reported findings are provided with their PMID, or PMCID, or DOI, or Xenbase link.  
Table S3: Gene lists for downstream analysis used in this study and ROCs marker genes. 
This Excel file contains the gene lists that are used for cell cycle analysis, and scGSEA analysis. It also 
includes ROCs marker genes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

References and Notes 
1. E. M. Tanaka, The molecular and cellular choreography of appendage regeneration. Cell 
165, 1598–1608 (2016). doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.05.038 Medline 
2. C. L. Stoick-Cooper, R. T. Moon, G. Weidinger, Advances in signaling in vertebrate 
regeneration as a prelude to regenerative medicine. Genes Dev. 21, 1292–1315 
(2007). doi:10.1101/gad.1540507 Medline 
3. C.-H. Chen, K. D. Poss, Regeneration genetics. Annu. Rev. Genet. 51, 63–82 (2017). 
doi:10.1146/annurev-genet-120116-024554 Medline 
4. J. Li, S. Zhang, E. Amaya, The cellular and molecular mechanisms of tissue repair and 
regeneration as revealed by studies in Xenopus. Regeneration (Oxf.) 3, 198–208 
(2016). doi:10.1002/reg2.69 Medline 
5. C. W. Beck, B. Christen, J. M. W. Slack, Molecular pathways needed for regeneration of 
spinal cord and muscle in a vertebrate. Dev. Cell 5, 429–439 (2003). 
doi:10.1016/S1534-5807(03)00233-8 Medline 
6. L. McInnes, J. Healy, J. Melville, UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and 
Projection for Dimension Reduction. arXiv:1802.03426 [stat.ML] (9 February 2018). 
7. C. Gargioli, J. M. W. Slack, Cell lineage tracing during Xenopus tail regeneration. 
Development 131, 2669–2679 (2004). doi:10.1242/dev.01155 Medline 
8. J. Chen, Z. Wang, Z. Zheng, Y. Chen, S. Khor, K. Shi, Z. He, Q. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. 
Zhang, X. Li, J. Li, J. Yin, X. Wang, J. Xiao, Neuron and microglia/macrophage-
derived FGF10 activate neuronal FGFR2/PI3K/Akt signaling and inhibit 
microglia/macrophages TLR4/NF-κB-dependent neuroinflammation to improve 
functional recovery after spinal cord injury. Cell Death Dis. 8, e3090 (2017). 
doi:10.1038/cddis.2017.490 Medline 
9. J. Kang, J. Hu, R. Karra, A. L. Dickson, V. A. Tornini, G. Nachtrab, M. Gemberling, J. A. 
Goldman, B. L. Black, K. D. Poss, Modulation of tissue repair by regeneration 
enhancer elements. Nature 532, 201–206 (2016). doi:10.1038/nature17644 Medline 
10. N. R. Love, Y. Chen, B. Bonev, M. J. Gilchrist, L. Fairclough, R. Lea, T. J. Mohun, R. 
Paredes, L. A. H. Zeef, E. Amaya, Genome-wide analysis of gene expression during 
Xenopus tropicalis tadpole tail regeneration. BMC Dev. Biol. 11, 70 (2011). 
doi:10.1186/1471-213X-11-70 Medline 
11. T. Sugiura, A. Tazaki, N. Ueno, K. Watanabe, M. Mochii, Xenopus Wnt-5a induces an 
ectopic larval tail at injured site, suggesting a crucial role for noncanonical Wnt signal 
in tail regeneration. Mech. Dev. 126, 56–67 (2009). doi:10.1016/j.mod.2008.10.002 
Medline 
12. Y. Taniguchi, T. Sugiura, A. Tazaki, K. Watanabe, M. Mochii, Spinal cord is required for 
proper regeneration of the tail in Xenopus tadpoles. Dev. Growth Differ. 50, 109–120 
(2008). doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.2007.00981.x Medline 
13. N. R. Love, Y. Chen, S. Ishibashi, P. Kritsiligkou, R. Lea, Y. Koh, J. L. Gallop, K. 
Dorey, E. Amaya, Amputation-induced reactive oxygen species are required for 
successful Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration. Nat. Cell Biol. 15, 222–228 (2013). 
doi:10.1038/ncb2659 Medline 
14. H. T. Tran, B. Sekkali, G. Van Imschoot, S. Janssens, K. Vleminckx, Wnt/β-catenin 
signaling is involved in the induction and maintenance of primitive hematopoiesis in 

the vertebrate embryo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 16160–16165 (2010). 
doi:10.1073/pnas.1007725107 Medline 
15. G. Lin, J. M. W. Slack, Requirement for Wnt and FGF signaling in Xenopus tadpole tail 
regeneration. Dev. Biol. 316, 323–335 (2008). doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.01.032 
Medline 
16. A. Tazaki, A. Kitayama, C. Terasaka, K. Watanabe, N. Ueno, M. Mochii, Macroarray-
based analysis of tail regeneration in Xenopus laevis larvae. Dev. Dyn. 233, 1394–
1404 (2005). doi:10.1002/dvdy.20472 Medline 
17. R. I. Martinez-De Luna, M. E. Zuber, Rod-specific ablation using the 
nitroreductase/metronidazole system to investigate regeneration in Xenopus. Cold 
Spring Harb. Protoc. 2018, t100974 (2018). doi:10.1101/pdb.prot100974 Medline 
18. F. Ferreira, G. Luxardi, B. Reid, M. Zhao, Early bioelectric activities mediate redox-
modulated regeneration. Development 143, 4582–4594 (2016). 
doi:10.1242/dev.142034 Medline 
19. F. Ferreira, V. Raghunathan, G. Luxardi, K. Zhu, M. Zhao, Early redox activities 
modulate Xenopus tail regeneration. Nat. Commun. 9, 4296 (2018). 
doi:10.1038/s41467-018-06614-2 Medline 
20. D. M. Ho, M. Whitman, TGF-β signaling is required for multiple processes during 
Xenopus tail regeneration. Dev. Biol. 315, 203–216 (2008). 
doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.12.031 Medline 
21. C. W. Beck, B. Christen, D. Barker, J. M. W. Slack, Temporal requirement for bone 
morphogenetic proteins in regeneration of the tail and limb of Xenopus tadpoles. 
Mech. Dev. 123, 674–688 (2006). doi:10.1016/j.mod.2006.07.001 Medline 
22. Y. Kawakami, C. R. Esteban, T. Matsui, J. Rodríguez-León, S. Kato, J. C. Izpisúa 
Belmonte, Sp8 and Sp9, two closely related buttonhead-like transcription factors, 
regulate Fgf8 expression and limb outgrowth in vertebrate embryos. Development 
131, 4763–4774 (2004). doi:10.1242/dev.01331 Medline 
23. F. Petit, K. E. Sears, N. Ahituv, Limb development: A paradigm of gene regulation. Nat. 
Rev. Genet. 18, 245–258 (2017). doi:10.1038/nrg.2016.167 Medline 
24. K. Kostakopoulou, A. Vogel, P. Brickell, C. Tickle, ‘Regeneration’ of wing bud stumps 
of chick embryos and reactivation of Msx-1 and Shh expression in response to FGF-4 
and ridge signals. Mech. Dev. 55, 119–131 (1996). doi:10.1016/0925-4773(95)00492-
0 Medline 
25. L. Yu, M. Han, M. Yan, E.-C. Lee, J. Lee, K. Muneoka, BMP signaling induces digit 
regeneration in neonatal mice. Development 137, 551–559 (2010). 
doi:10.1242/dev.042424 Medline 
26. G. Lin, Y. Chen, J. M. W. Slack, Imparting regenerative capacity to limbs by progenitor 
cell transplantation. Dev. Cell 24, 41–51 (2013). doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2012.11.017 
Medline 
27. P. D. Nieuwkoop, J. Faber, Normal Table of Xenopus laevis (Daudin) (North-Holland 
Publishing Company, 1967). 
28. S. Hoppler, P. D. Vize, Eds., Xenopus Protocols: Post-Genomic Approaches, vol. 917 of 
Methods in Molecular Biology (Humana Press, 2012). 

29. S. Pandey, K. Shekhar, A. Regev, A. F. Schier, Comprehensive identification and spatial 
mapping of habenular neuronal types using single-cell RNA-seq. Curr. Biol. 28, 
1052–1065.e7 (2018). doi:10.1016/j.cub.2018.02.040 Medline 
30. T. Ilicic, J. K. Kim, A. A. Kolodziejczyk, F. O. Bagger, D. J. McCarthy, J. C. Marioni, S. 
A. Teichmann, Classification of low quality cells from single-cell RNA-seq data. 
Genome Biol. 17, 29 (2016). doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0888-1 Medline 
31. E. Becht, L. McInnes, J. Healy, C. A. Dutertre, I. W. H. Kwok, L. G. Ng, F. Ginhoux, E. 
W. Newell, Dimensionality reduction for visualizing single-cell data using UMAP. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 37, 38–44 (2018). doi:10.1038/nbt.4314 Medline 
32. A. T. L. Lun, D. J. McCarthy, J. C. Marioni, A step-by-step workflow for low-level 
analysis of single-cell RNA-seq data with Bioconductor. F1000 Res. 5, 2122–2168 
(2016). Medline 
33. A. M. Session, Y. Uno, T. Kwon, J. A. Chapman, A. Toyoda, S. Takahashi, A. Fukui, A. 
Hikosaka, A. Suzuki, M. Kondo, S. J. van Heeringen, I. Quigley, S. Heinz, H. Ogino, 
H. Ochi, U. Hellsten, J. B. Lyons, O. Simakov, N. Putnam, J. Stites, Y. Kuroki, T. 
Tanaka, T. Michiue, M. Watanabe, O. Bogdanovic, R. Lister, G. Georgiou, S. S. 
Paranjpe, I. van Kruijsbergen, S. Shu, J. Carlson, T. Kinoshita, Y. Ohta, S. 
Mawaribuchi, J. Jenkins, J. Grimwood, J. Schmutz, T. Mitros, S. V. Mozaffari, Y. 
Suzuki, Y. Haramoto, T. S. Yamamoto, C. Takagi, R. Heald, K. Miller, C. 
Haudenschild, J. Kitzman, T. Nakayama, Y. Izutsu, J. Robert, J. Fortriede, K. Burns, 
V. Lotay, K. Karimi, Y. Yasuoka, D. S. Dichmann, M. F. Flajnik, D. W. Houston, J. 
Shendure, L. DuPasquier, P. D. Vize, A. M. Zorn, M. Ito, E. M. Marcotte, J. B. 
Wallingford, Y. Ito, M. Asashima, N. Ueno, Y. Matsuda, G. J. C. Veenstra, A. 
Fujiyama, R. M. Harland, M. Taira, D. S. Rokhsar, Genome evolution in the 
allotetraploid frog Xenopus laevis. Nature 538, 336–343 (2016). 
doi:10.1038/nature19840 Medline 
34. M. D. Robinson, D. J. McCarthy, G. K. Smyth, edgeR: A Bioconductor package for 
differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26, 
139–140 (2010). doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp616 Medline 
35. A. T. L. Lun, A. C. Richard, J. C. Marioni, Testing for differential abundance in mass 
cytometry data. Nat. Methods 14, 707–709 (2017). doi:10.1038/nmeth.4295 Medline 
36. M. Ashburner, C. A. Ball, J. A. Blake, D. Botstein, H. Butler, J. M. Cherry, A. P. Davis, 
K. Dolinski, S. S. Dwight, J. T. Eppig, M. A. Harris, D. P. Hill, L. Issel-Tarver, A. 
Kasarskis, S. Lewis, J. C. Matese, J. E. Richardson, M. Ringwald, G. M. Rubin, G. 
Sherlock; The Gene Ontology Consortium, Gene ontology: Tool for the unification of 
biology. Nat. Genet. 25, 25–29 (2000). doi:10.1038/75556 Medline 
37. S. Aibar, C. B. González-Blas, T. Moerman, V. A. Huynh-Thu, H. Imrichova, G. 
Hulselmans, F. Rambow, J.-C. Marine, P. Geurts, J. Aerts, J. van den Oord, Z. K. 
Atak, J. Wouters, S. Aerts, SCENIC: Single-cell regulatory network inference and 
clustering. Nat. Methods 14, 1083–1086 (2017). doi:10.1038/nmeth.4463 Medline 
38. J. A. Ramilowski, T. Goldberg, J. Harshbarger, E. Kloppmann, M. Lizio, V. P. 
Satagopam, M. Itoh, H. Kawaji, P. Carninci, B. Rost, A. R. Forrest, A draft network 
of ligand-receptor-mediated multicellular signalling in human. Nat. Commun. 6, 7866 
(2015). doi:10.1038/ncomms8866 Medline

===== Aztekin2020_bioRxiv_XenopusLimbRegen =====
Title: Secreted inhibitors drive the loss of regeneration competence 
1 
in Xenopus limbs 
2 
 
3 
Short title: Extrinsic cues regulate limb regeneration 
4 
 
5 
One Sentence Summary: Extrinsic cues associated with chondrogenic progression inhibit 
6 
AER cell formation and restrict limb regeneration potential. 
7 
 
8 
C. Aztekin1,2*, T. W. Hiscock1,3*, J. B. Gurdon1,2, J. Jullien1,2,4† J. C. Marioni3,5,6†, B. 
9 
D. Simons1,7,8† 
10 
Affiliations 
11 
1Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, 
12 
Cambridge, UK.  
13 
2Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.  
14 
3Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.  
15 
4 Nantes Université, Inserm, Centre de Recherche en Transplantation et Immunologie, UMR 
16 
1064, ITUN, F-44000 Nantes, France 
17 
 
18 
5 EMBL–European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Cambridge, UK.  
19 
6 Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Cambridge, UK.  
20 
7 Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, Centre for Mathematical 
21 
Sciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.  
22 
8 Wellcome Trust Centre for Stem Cell Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.  
23 
*Co-first authors.  
24 
†Corresponding authors; listed in alphabetical order.  
25 
 
26 
Correspondence to: jerome.jullien@inserm.fr (J.J); marioni@ebi.ac.uk  (J.C.M); 
27 
bds10@cam.ac.uk (B.D.S.) 
28 
 
29 
 
30 
 
31 
 
32 
 
33 
 
34 
 
35 
 
36 
 
37 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

Abstract  
38 
 
39 
Absence of a specialised wound epidermis is hypothesised to block limb regeneration in higher 
40 
vertebrates. To elucidate the cellular and molecular determinants of this tissue, we performed 
41 
single-cell transcriptomics in regeneration-competent, -restricted, and -incompetent Xenopus 
42 
tadpoles. We identified apical-ectodermal-ridge (AER) cells as the specialised wound 
43 
epidermis, and found that their abundance on the amputation plane correlates with regeneration 
44 
potential and injury-induced mesenchymal plasticity. By using ex vivo regenerating limb 
45 
cultures, we demonstrate that extrinsic cues produced during limb development block AER 
46 
cell formation. We identify Noggin, a morphogen expressed in cartilage/bone progenitor cells, 
47 
as one of the key inhibitors of AER cell formation in regeneration-incompetent tadpoles. 
48 
Extrinsic inhibitory cues can be overridden by Fgf10, which operates upstream of Noggin and 
49 
blocks chondrogenesis. Together, these results indicate that manipulation of the extracellular 
50 
environment and/or chondrogenesis may provide a strategy to restore regeneration potential in 
51 
higher vertebrates. 
52 
 
53 
 
54 
 
55 
 
56 
 
57 
 
58 
 
59 
 
60 
 
61 
 
62 
 
63 
 
64 
 
65 
 
66 
 
67 
 
68 
 
69 
 
70 
 
71 
 
72 
 
73 
 
74 
 
75 
 
76 
 
77 
 
78 
 
79 
 
80 
 
81 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

Introduction 
82 
 
83 
Amphibian limb regeneration relies on a specialised wound epidermis (also known as the 
84 
apical-epithelial-cap, AEC). It has been hypothesised that the absence of this tissue limits the 
85 
regeneration potential of higher vertebrates, including mammals (1). The AEC was suggested 
86 
to be analogous to the apical-ectodermal-ridge (AER) that is specifically seen during limb 
87 
development, since both tissues are required for proximal-distal outgrowth, and express Fgf8 
88 
at the distal tips of limb buds/amputation planes (2). It has been proposed that the AER 
89 
functions to maintain and enable proliferation of underlying cells in distal mesoderm. 
90 
Similarly, the AEC was hypothesised to be formed upon amputation in order to enable the self-
91 
renewal of underlying progenitor and dedifferentiated cells, leading to the formation of a 
92 
proliferative structure called the blastema (3). Injury was thought to induce dedifferentiation 
93 
of cells that can interact with AEC to build a blastema (4), although it is not clear how a 
94 
specialised wound epidermis forms during regeneration and why it cannot form in some 
95 
instances/species.  
96 
 
97 
Xenopus laevis tadpoles lose limb regeneration ability progressively during their development, 
98 
coinciding with their inability to form a specialised wound epidermis (5, 6). At the 
99 
developmental stages prior to the formation of digits, amputations lead to a complete 
100 
regeneration of the limb (Niewkoop & Faber (7) (NF) ~52-54, regeneration-competent). As 
101 
autopod development proceeds, amputations result in partial regeneration, characterized by 
102 
missing digits (NF ~55-57, regeneration-restricted). Towards metamorphosis, amputations 
103 
either cause the growth of a spike-like cartilaginous structure without joints and muscles, or a 
104 
simple wound healing (NF ~58 and beyond, regeneration-incompetent). Moreover, Xenopus 
105 
limb regeneration ability declines when amputations are performed at more proximal regions 
106 
of the limb, where there are more mature chondrogenic and osteogenic cells (8, 9). Likewise 
107 
amputation through bone results in reduced regeneration compared to amputations at the joints 
108 
(8, 9). Nevertheless, certain procedures (e.g. FGF8 or FGF10 bead applications) can induce 
109 
specialised wound epidermis formation and restore, or contribute to, limb regeneration in 
110 
otherwise regeneration–incompetent species (10, 11).  Therefore, investigating the cellular and 
111 
molecular mechanisms controlling specialised wound epidermis formation can help to devise 
112 
new strategies to promote mammalian limb regeneration. 
113 
 
114 
Single-cell RNA-seq analysis reveals cell type heterogeneity during development and 
115 
following amputation of the limb 
116 
 
117 
To characterise cellular changes associated with regeneration-ability, we first sequenced 
118 
developing intact hindlimbs at particular morphologically-defined stages: NF Stage ~52 (limb 
119 
bud stages), NF Stage ~54 (autopod forming) and NF Stage ~56 (autopod formed) (Fig. 1A). 
120 
Then, to evaluate the cellular responses to injury and regeneration, we profiled cells from 
121 
amputated limbs and their contralateral controls. Specifically, we amputated hindlimbs from 
122 
presumptive knee/ankle levels for regeneration-competent tadpoles (NF Stage ~52-53) and 
123 
ankle level for –restricted (NF Stage ~55-56) and –incompetent tadpoles (NF Stage ~58-60), 
124 
and sequenced cells from newly-generated tissues at 5 days post-amputation (dpa) (Fig. 1B) 
125 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

when the specialised wound epidermis and blastema are seen morphologically (2). 
126 
Contralateral developing limb buds or autopods were sequenced as controls. We did not include 
127 
a contralateral control at the regeneration-incompetent stage as we were not able to obtain cells 
128 
with the dissociation protocol used to process the other samples. 
129 
 
130 
Next, we pooled the single-cell RNA sequencing data derived from at least two replicates for 
131 
each condition (Fig. S1), corrected our atlas for cell cycle effects (Fig. S2), resulting in a total 
132 
of 42,348 cells (Methods; Fig. 1C-D, Fig. S3-4). Following clustering of cells based upon 
133 
their gene expression profiles, examination of multiple marker genes (Fig. S5) revealed at least 
134 
60 distinct clusters representative of putative cell types (Fig. 1C and Fig. S3) including known 
135 
populations (e.g. AER cells) and potentially new uncharacterised cell states (e.g. a Piwil1+ 
136 
population in the mesenchyme) (Fig. 1E). From the cell atlas, we were able to detect cell cycle 
137 
differences between cell types, e.g. distal mesenchyme progenitors were more biased towards 
138 
G2/M phases compared to proximal mesenchyme progenitors (Fig. S2D), as reported in mouse 
139 
(12). The Xenopus limb cell atlas is accessible using an interactive platform 
140 
( https://marionilab.cruk.cam.ac.uk/XenopusLimbRegeneration/). 
141 
 
142 
Quantitative features of AER cell formation are associated with regeneration outcome 
143 
 
144 
We then focused on the specialised wound epidermis, or AEC, that was suggested to be 
145 
analogous to the AER. Although both populations were characterized by Fgf8 expression (2), 
146 
the extent of similarity between these cells was unclear. In our data, we could detect mostly 
147 
quantitative gene expression differences between cells defined as belonging to the AER 
148 
(defined as Fgf8 expressing epidermal cells during limb development) and the AEC (Fgf8 
149 
expressing epidermal cells in 5 dpa samples) (Fig. 2A-B). Moreover, cells related to these 
150 
tissues were aggregated in the same Fgf8+ epidermal cluster (Fig. 2B-C). Additionally, both 
151 
during development and post-amputation, 5 dpa Fgf8+ epidermal cells were mostly detected 
152 
as a monolayer of polarised cuboidal basal cells, (Fig. S6) though multilayers were seen to 
153 
form in some instances (Fig. S7). Hence, based on their transcriptomic signature, tissue 
154 
localisation, and general cellular morphology, the cells populating the AER structure during 
155 
development and the AEC specialised wound epidermis structure found during regeneration 
156 
were referred to as AER cells in this study. Finally, we found that AER cells (limb specialised 
157 
wound epidermal cells) and cells that define the specialised wound epidermis during Xenopus 
158 
tail regeneration (regeneration-organising-cells, ROCs (13)) showed similar, but non-identical 
159 
gene expression profiles (Fig. S8), emphasizing that different cell types operate in different 
160 
appendage regeneration scenarios.  
161 
 
162 
Limb amputation results in the formation of Fgf8 expressing AEC at the amputation plane in 
163 
regeneration–competent tadpoles, but not in –incompetent tadpoles (6), while AEC formation 
164 
has not been characterised previously for –restricted tadpoles. Using our atlas, we found that, 
165 
at 5 dpa, tadpole epidermis contained abundant AER cells in regeneration–competent tadpoles, 
166 
a limited number of AER cells in -restricted tadpoles, and that AER cells were largely absent 
167 
from -incompetent tadpoles (Fig. 2B-D). The signalling centre properties of AER cells was 
168 
reflected in the many diverse ligands they express, which can influence proliferation and cell 
169 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

fate decisions (Fig. 2E and Fig. S9). Although Fgf8 was always expressed in AER cells, 
170 
relative expression of Fgf8 and other ligands varied among conditions (Fig. 2E). Overall, while 
171 
the signalling centre potency of AER cells appears variable, a strong correlation between AER 
172 
cell abundance and regeneration-outcome was evident. 
173 
 
174 
The presence of AER cells has an association with injury-induced mesenchymal plasticity 
175 
 
176 
It has been suggested that the AEC enables the self-renewal activity of dedifferentiated cells, 
177 
leading to blastema formation (3). To identify signatures of dedifferentiation in our atlas, we 
178 
first examined the expression of genes related to dedifferentiation and blastema formation (e.g. 
179 
Sall4, Kazald1, Marcksl1 (14)). We observed that these genes were found to be either already 
180 
expressed before amputation or upregulated upon amputation in a subset of fibroblasts (Fig.  
181 
S10A-B), which were located near the skin and perichondrium (Fig. S11). Likewise, we found 
182 
that a small fraction of these fibroblasts expressed muscle-related genes (e.g. Pax3) before and 
183 
after amputation (Fig. S10B). Moreover, independent of regeneration-outcome, amputation 
184 
resulted in these fibroblast cells to express genes related to distal mesenchyme progenitors (e.g. 
185 
Grem1, Shh, Msx1, Fgf10), and chondrogenesis (e.g. Col8a2, Sox9) (Fig. S10A). Lastly, 
186 
amputation not only increased the expression of known marker genes, but also up-regulated 
187 
the expression of an entire putative distal mesenchyme progenitor gene set (Fig. S10C), with 
188 
the magnitude of this expression being lower in samples having fewer AER cells. Together, 
189 
we concluded that, upon amputation, a subset of fibroblasts manifest injury-induced 
190 
mesenchymal plasticity, the extent of which tracks with AER cell abundance.  
191 
 
192 
AER cell formation requires activation of multiple signalling pathways 
193 
 
194 
To investigate the molecular mechanisms that mediate AER cell formation upon amputation, 
195 
we developed an ex vivo regenerating limb culture protocol, inspired by previous work (15) 
196 
(Fig. 3A). By culturing amputated stylopod or zeugopod/stylopod from regeneration-
197 
competent and –restricted tadpoles, respectively, we observed Fgf8 cell formation at the distal 
198 
part of explants within 3 dpa (Fig. 3B). These explants also exhibited cone-shaped growth as 
199 
cells accumulated uniformly underneath Fgf8 cells, mimicking in vivo regeneration (Fig. 3A-
200 
B, Fig S12B). Interestingly, the proximal site of explants was also covered with epidermis (Fig. 
201 
S13A), but neither Fgf8 expressing cells nor a uniform cell accumulation underneath the 
202 
epidermis was observed (Fig. 3A-B, S12B). Moreover, the proximal site of the explant 
203 
exhibited active chondrogenesis, manifesting in an outwards growth of cartilaginous tissue 
204 
(Fig. 3A, Fig S12C). This phenotype was particularly pronounced when explants were 
205 
harvested from developmental stages in which proximal tissues were advanced in 
206 
chondrogenesis (onset of NF Stage 53-54) (Fig. S12D), and could be further enhanced by 
207 
addition of BMP4, a known chondrogenesis inducer (Fig S12E). Hence, the proximal and distal 
208 
sites of limb explants exhibit different behaviours: the distal sites recapitulate localised AER 
209 
cell formation as seen in vivo, while the proximal site is characterised by active chondrogenesis. 
210 
 
211 
In addition to changes associated with regeneration, explants could be used to determine 
212 
signalling requirements for specialised wound epidermis formation. Inhibition of FGF, BMP, 
213 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

and WNT pathways via small molecule inhibitors blocked AER cell formation in explants (Fig. 
214 
3C), reinforcing the conclusion that the reported in vivo AEC effects are mediated through a 
215 
direct effect on the limb rather than a systemic effect (16–18). Moreover, by using the culture 
216 
assay, we found that active TGF-β and NOTCH signalling are also required for Xenopus AER 
217 
cell formation (Fig. 3C). Overall, we concluded that AER cell formation requires the activity 
218 
of multiple major signalling pathways. 
219 
 
220 
AER cells can form without cell division 
221 
 
222 
Having established the molecular pathways required for AER cell formation, we asked how 
223 
AER cells form on the amputation plane. By tracing skin tissue located on the edge of explants 
224 
we found that they contributed to the covering of both the distal and proximal sites (Fig. S13B). 
225 
As the amputation planes are covered by skin tissue from the surrounding area, we reasoned 
226 
that AER cells are likely to have originated from skin cells. As amputation eliminates the 
227 
majority, if not all, of AER cells in the limb, we hypothesized that AER cells are derived from 
228 
remaining skin stem cells. If AER cells are induced through proliferation and differentiation 
229 
following amputation, all AER cells should be the product of cell division. To test this, we 
230 
assayed the level of EdU incorporation in newly-formed AER cells. Surprisingly, we found 
231 
that only ~40% of AER cells (distal epidermal Fgf8+) were EdU positive at 3 dpa (Fig. S13C), 
232 
suggesting that most AER cells are induced independent of cell division following amputation. 
233 
Consistently, a step-wise activation of Lgr5.S (a WNT target gene) followed by Fgf8.L 
234 
expressions was identified as a possible gene-expression trajectory that could allow basal 
235 
epidermal cells to convert directly to AER cells (Fig. 3D).  Consistent with such a process, 
236 
when visualized in vivo, we found that Fgf8+/Lgr5+ AER cells were flanked by Lgr5+ cells in 
237 
the basal epidermis on the amputation plane or in the developing limb (Fig. 3E, Fig. S6). 
238 
Overall, these results support the hypothesis that basal epidermal cells can acquire AER cell 
239 
identity without cell division.  
240 
 
241 
Loss of regeneration potential is associated with extrinsic cues inhibitory to AER formation 
242 
 
243 
We then asked why fewer, or no, AER cells form on the amputation plane of regeneration-
244 
restricted or -incompetent tadpoles, respectively. Previous studies have shown that addition of 
245 
Fgf10 can induce AER formation in otherwise regeneration-incompetent tadpoles (10), 
246 
suggesting that epidermal cells in these animals are intrinsically competent to form AER cells. 
247 
Hence, we focused on the possibility that extrinsic cues are the basis for a reduced regeneration 
248 
potential. 
249 
  
250 
To test whether environmental factors secreted from -incompetent tadpoles would block AER 
251 
cell formation, we took advantage of our ex vivo cultures. First, we co-cultured ex vivo limbs 
252 
from regeneration-competent and –incompetent tadpoles. Strikingly, when such cultures were 
253 
stained against Fgf8 at 3 dpa, we observed that regeneration-competent tadpole limbs failed to 
254 
form AER cells (Fig. 4A). Second, we collected media from regeneration-incompetent tadpole 
255 
explants and cultured freshly amputated regeneration-competent explants with this conditioned 
256 
media. Consistent with the co-culture experiment, the conditioned media from regeneration-
257 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

incompetent tadpoles blocked AER cell formation in -competent explants (Fig. 4B). By 
258 
contrast, neither co-culturing with regeneration–competent explants, nor preparing conditioned 
259 
media from regeneration-competent explants, affected AER cell formation in regeneration–
260 
competent explants (Fig 4A-B). Additionally, conditioned media from regeneration–
261 
competent explants was unable to induce AER cell formation in –incompetent explants (Fig 
262 
S14). Altogether, these results suggest that secreted inhibitory factors block AER cell 
263 
formation in regeneration-incompetent tadpoles compromising their regeneration potential. 
264 
 
265 
To identify the factors responsible for this inhibitory effect, we surveyed our single-cell atlas 
266 
for the expression of secreted proteins involved in signalling pathways required for AER cell 
267 
formation. We found that that the loss of regeneration potential is associated with an increased 
268 
proportion of chondrogenic lineage cells in the mesenchyme (Fig. 4C), and that these cells 
269 
express multiple inhibitory ligands for BMP and WNT pathways (Fig. 4D). As chondrogenic 
270 
populations specifically express high levels of Noggin (Fig. 4D), a known antagonist of BMP 
271 
signalling, we hypothesised that AER cell formation is antagonised by an excess of secreted 
272 
Noggin in regeneration-incompetent tadpoles. Indeed, consistent with previous observations 
273 
(19), addition of NOGGIN to regeneration-competent ex vivo limbs blocked AER cell 
274 
formation (Fig. S15A). To test if Noggin does indeed act as one of the inhibitory extrinsic cues 
275 
produced following amputation in regeneration-incompetent tadpoles, we blocked NOGGIN 
276 
in our co-culture and conditioned media experiments using anti-NOGGIN antibodies (Fig. 4A-
277 
B). Strikingly, blocking secreted NOGGIN by antibody addition cancelled the inhibitory 
278 
activity on AER cell formation in both co-culture and conditioned media experiments (Fig. 4 
279 
A-B).  
280 
 
281 
As these experiments point towards the chondrogenic lineage as the source of inhibitory 
282 
extrinsic cues, we then asked if limiting chondrogenesis can promote AER cell formation. To 
283 
this end, we generated tip explants by culturing distal limb buds (NF Stage ~52) or early formed 
284 
autopods (NF Stage ~54) without their proximal segment, where the most advanced 
285 
chondrogenesis takes place. Indeed, these tip explants showed ectopic Fgf8 expression at 
286 
different sites of the epidermis further suggesting a localised and/or long-range inhibitory effect 
287 
of secreted factors from mature chondrogenic cells (Fig. S15B). Overall, these results indicate 
288 
that the loss of regeneration ability is associated with extrinsic cues, including NOGGIN, 
289 
inhibitory to AER cell formation.  
290 
 
291 
To test if manipulation of BMP signalling can also enhance AER cell formation in 
292 
regeneration–competent tadpoles, we perturbed the BMP pathway. Indeed, we found that 
293 
inhibiting NOGGIN could increase the formation of AER cells (Fig. S15A). By contrast, the 
294 
addition of BMP4 to regeneration–competent ex vivo cultures blocked AER cell formation 
295 
(Fig. S15A), an effect similar to that reported in AER development in chick embryos (20, 21). 
296 
As BMP4 boosts chondrogenesis (Fig. S12), which can in turn lead to Noggin expression, we 
297 
concluded that localised and/or regulated levels of BMP agonist and antagonists are key for 
298 
AER cell formation.  
299 
 
300 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

FGFR activation negatively regulates progression of chondrogenesis and FGF pathway 
301 
operates upstream of Noggin for AER cell formation 
302 
 
303 
Regeneration competency in late stage tadpoles was previously shown to be restored via 
304 
exogenous application of FGF10, which activates the expression of genes associated with 
305 
regeneration and AER cells (10) (Fig. S16A). However, the mechanism by which FGF10 
306 
regulates the formation of AER cells is not clear. We first asked if all cells in the epidermis are 
307 
competent to induce Fgf8 expression upon Fgf10 exposure. We examined the spatial 
308 
correlation between Fgf10.L expressing mesenchymal cells and Fgf8.L expressing epithelial 
309 
cells in regeneration–competent tadpoles and saw regions in which Fgf10.L but not Fgf8.L was 
310 
present (Fig. S16B). Second, when adding FGF10 to regeneration–competent explants, we 
311 
observed a slight but not statistically significant increase in AER cell formation on the 
312 
amputation plane (Fig. S16C), although this signal was confined to the distal epidermis and 
313 
did not include a substantial signal at the proximal site of explants (Fig. S16D). Collectively, 
314 
we concluded that Fgf10 is not sufficient to induce AER cells across the whole epidermis. We 
315 
next sought to evaluate if the effect of Fgf10 on regeneration is, at least in part, mediated by its 
316 
impact on chondrogenesis. 
317 
 
318 
To test the effect of Fgf10 on chondrogenesis, we used our ex vivo cultures to monitor the 
319 
substantial chondrogenesis occurring at the proximal site of explants. Application of FGF10 
320 
beads to the proximal site of ex vivo cultures, or addition of recombinant FGF10 to their media, 
321 
significantly decreased chondrogenesis at the posterior sites in regeneration-restricted explants 
322 
(Fig. S17A). Conversely, blocking FGFR significantly extended chondrogenesis at the 
323 
proximal site of explants (Fig. S17B-D). Nonetheless, FGF10 treatment was not sufficient to 
324 
induce strong Fgf8 expression at the proximal site of explants (Fig. S16D), presumably due to 
325 
abundant antagonist cues. To test this hypothesis, we treated explants with a combination of 
326 
FGF10 and anti-NOGGIN antibodies. Strikingly, this combination not only enhanced AER cell 
327 
formation at the distal sites, but also induced ectopic Fgf8.L expression near the proximal sites 
328 
of explants (Fig. S16D). Finally, AER cell formation induced by FGF10 addition was cancelled 
329 
by the addition of BMP inhibitors (NOGGIN or small molecule inhibitors) (Fig. S16C), further 
330 
suggesting that FGF10 acts events upstream of potential inhibitory extrinsic cues during AER 
331 
cell formation.  
332 
 
333 
Discussion 
334 
 
335 
Here, we have used single-cell transcriptional profiling to discriminate injury responses from 
336 
regeneration-specific events in Xenopus limbs. Consistent with previous observations based on 
337 
tissue-level characterisations (4), using the single-cell atlas, we found that the abundance of 
338 
AER cells on the amputation plane correlates with regeneration outcome and injury-induced 
339 
mesenchymal plasticity.  
340 
 
341 
Changes in intrinsic properties of mesodermal tissue during development, particularly the loss 
342 
of Fgf10 expression, was suggested to explain regeneration-incompetency (22, 23). Our results 
343 
suggest that extrinsic cues from mesodermal tissue also affect regeneration strongly by 
344 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

inhibiting specialised wound epidermis formation, downstream of Fgf10 signalling. 
345 
Specifically, chondrogenic cells are the main source of secreted extrinsic cues (e.g. Noggin) 
346 
that block AER cell formation. These findings may explain why amputations at proximal 
347 
versus distal sites, associated with different stages of chondrogenesis, exhibit  different 
348 
regeneration outcomes (9).  
349 
 
350 
Whilst manipulation of chondrogenesis in adult frogs and other regeneration–incompetent 
351 
species may lead to novel approaches to promote limb regeneration, it is likely that additional 
352 
barriers to regeneration (e.g. scarring and more complex immune responses) will also have to 
353 
be overcome. Finally, it is tempting to speculate whether limb regeneration-competent 
354 
salamanders can withstand the inhibitory extrinsic cues by having AER cell signals enriched 
355 
in mesenchymal rather than epidermal cells, or whether they utilise different mechanisms 
356 
owing to distinct limb development mechanisms (24–26). Altogether, our work suggests a new 
357 
cellular model of limb regeneration (Fig 5), which unites disparate findings in the field, and 
358 
suggests that modulation of extrinsic cues impacting on epidermal populations has the potential 
359 
to unlock the ability to regrow lost limbs in non-regenerative higher vertebrates. 
360 
 
361 
References and Notes 
362 
 
363 
1.  Tassava RA, Olsen CL. Higher vertebrates do not regenerate digits and legs because the 
364 
wound epidermis is not functional. A hypothesis. Differentiation. 1982;22(3):151-155. 
365 
doi:10.1111/j.1432-0436.1982.tb01242.x 
366 
2.  C. W. Beck, J. C. Izpisúa Belmonte, B. Christen, Beyond early development: Xenopus as 
367 
an emerging model for the study of regenerative mechanisms. Dev. Dyn. 238, 1226–
368 
1248 (2009). 
369 
3.  R. A. Tassava, R. M. Loyd, Injury requirement for initiation of regeneration of newt limbs 
370 
which have whole skin grafts. Nature. 268, 49–50 (1977). 
371 
4.  R. A. Tassava, A. L. Mescher, The Roles of Injury, Nerves, and the Wound Epidermis 
372 
during the Initiation of Amphibian Limb Regeneration. Differentiation. 4, 23–24 (1975). 
373 
5.  J. N. Dent, Limb regeneration in larvae and metamorphosing individuals of the South 
374 
African clawed toad. J. Morphol. 110, 61–77 (1962). 
375 
6.  B. Christen, J. M. W. Slack, FGF-8 Is Associated with Anteroposterior Patterning and Limb 
376 
Regeneration in Xenopus. Developmental Biology. 192, 455–466 (1997). 
377 
7.  P. D. Nieuwkoop, J. Faber, Normal Table of Xenopus Laevis (Daudin): A Systematical and 
378 
Chronological Survey of the Development from the Fertilized Egg Till the End of 
379 
Metamorphosis (Garland Pub., 1994). 
380 
8.  H. L. D. Nye, J. A. Cameron, Strategies to reduce variation inXenopus regeneration 
381 
studies. Dev. Dyn. 234, 151–158 (2005). 
382 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

9.  A. D. Wolfe, H. L. D. Nye, J. A. Cameron, Extent of ossification at the amputation plane is 
383 
correlated with the decline of blastema formation and regeneration in Xenopus laevis 
384 
hindlimbs, 17. 
385 
10.  H. Yokoyama, H. Ide, K. Tamura, FGF-10 Stimulates Limb Regeneration Ability in 
386 
Xenopus laevis. Developmental Biology. 233, 72–79 (2001). 
387 
11.  G. Lin, Y. Chen, J. M. W. Slack, Imparting Regenerative Capacity to Limbs by Progenitor 
388 
Cell Transplantation. Developmental Cell. 24, 41–51 (2013). 
389 
12.  B. Boehm, H. Westerberg, G. Lesnicar-Pucko, S. Raja, M. Rautschka, J. Cotterell, J. 
390 
Swoger, J. Sharpe, The Role of Spatially Controlled Cell Proliferation in Limb Bud 
391 
Morphogenesis. PLoS Biol. 8, e1000420 (2010). 
392 
13.  C. Aztekin, T. W. Hiscock, J. C. Marioni, J. B. Gurdon, B. D. Simons, J. Jullien, 
393 
Identification of a regeneration-organizing cell in the Xenopus tail. Science. 364, 653–
394 
658 (2019). 
395 
14.  B. J. Haas, J. L. Whited, Advances in Decoding Axolotl Limb Regeneration. Trends in 
396 
Genetics. 33, 553–565 (2017). 
397 
15.  S. M. Cannata, S. Bernardini, S. Filoni, Regenerative responses in cultured hindlimb 
398 
stumps of larval Xenopus laevis. J. Exp. Zool. 262, 446–453 (1992). 
399 
16.  C. A. D’Jamoos, G. McMahon, P. A. Tsonis, Wound Repair Regen, in press, 
400 
doi:10.1046/j.1460-9568.1998.60415.x. 
401 
17.  C. W. Beck, B. Christen, D. Barker, J. M. W. Slack, Temporal requirement for bone 
402 
morphogenetic proteins in regeneration of the tail and limb of Xenopus tadpoles. 
403 
Mechanisms of Development. 123, 674–688 (2006). 
404 
18.  H. Yokoyama, T. Maruoka, H. Ochi, A. Aruga, S. Ohgo, H. Ogino, K. Tamura, Different 
405 
Requirement for Wnt/β-Catenin Signaling in Limb Regeneration of Larval and Adult 
406 
Xenopus. PLoS ONE. 6, e21721 (2011). 
407 
19.  E. J. Pearl, D. Barker, R. C. Day, C. W. Beck, Identification of genes associated with 
408 
regenerative success of Xenopus laevis hindlimbs. BMC Dev Biol. 8, 66 (2008). 
409 
20.  Pizette S, Niswander L. BMPs negatively regulate structure and function of the limb 
410 
apical ectodermal ridge. Development. 1999;126(5):883-894. 
411 
21.  Pizette S, Abate-Shen C, Niswander L. BMP controls proximodistal outgrowth, via 
412 
induction of the apical ectodermal ridge, and dorsoventral patterning in the vertebrate 
413 
limb. Development. 2001;128(22):4463-4474. 
414 
22.  S. K. Sessions, S. V. Bryant, Evidence that regenerative ability is an intrinsic property of 
415 
limb cells inXenopus. J. Exp. Zool. 247, 39–44 (1988). 
416 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

23.  H. Yokoyama, S. Yonei-Tamura, T. Endo, J. C. Izpisúa Belmonte, K. Tamura, H. Ide, 
417 
Mesenchyme with fgf-10 Expression Is Responsible for Regenerative Capacity in 
418 
Xenopus Limb Buds. Developmental Biology. 219, 18–29 (2000). 
419 
24.  M.-J. Han, J.-Y. An, W.-S. Kim, Expression patterns of Fgf-8 during development and limb 
420 
regeneration of the axolotl. Developmental Dynamics. 220, 40–48 (2001). 
421 
25.  S. Purushothaman, A. Elewa, A. W. Seifert, Fgf-signaling is compartmentalized within the 
422 
mesenchyme and controls proliferation during salamander limb development. eLife. 8, 
423 
e48507 (2019). 
424 
26.  R. N. Christensen, M. Weinstein, R. A. Tassava, Expression of fibroblast growth factors 4, 
425 
8, and 10 in limbs, flanks, and blastemas of Ambystoma. Developmental Dynamics. 
426 
223, 193–203 (2002). 
427 
27.  E. Becht, L. McInnes, J. Healy, C.-A. Dutertre, I. W. H. Kwok, L. G. Ng, F. Ginhoux, E. W. 
428 
Newell, Dimensionality reduction for visualizing single-cell data using UMAP. Nature 
429 
Biotechnology. 37, 38–44 (2019). 
430 
28.  S. Aibar, C. B. González-Blas, T. Moerman, V. A. Huynh-Thu, H. Imrichova, G. Hulselmans, 
431 
F. Rambow, J.-C. Marine, P. Geurts, J. Aerts, J. van den Oord, Z. K. Atak, J. Wouters, S. 
432 
Aerts, SCENIC: single-cell regulatory network inference and clustering. Nature 
433 
Methods. 14, 1083–1086 (2017). 
434 
29.  A. Butler, P. Hoffman, P. Smibert, E. Papalexi, R. Satija, Integrating single-cell 
435 
transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and species. Nature 
436 
Biotechnology. 36, 411–420 (2018). 
437 
30.  A step-by-step workflow for low-level analysis of... | F1000Research, (available at 
438 
https://f1000research.com/articles/5-2122). 
439 
31.  H. M. T. Choi, M. Schwarzkopf, M. E. Fornace, A. Acharya, G. Artavanis, J. Stegmaier, A. 
440 
Cunha, N. A. Pierce, Third-generation in situ hybridization chain reaction: multiplexed, 
441 
quantitative, sensitive, versatile, robust. Development. 145 (2018), 
442 
doi:10.1242/dev.165753. 
443 
32.  H. M. T. Choi, V. A. Beck, N. A. Pierce, Next-Generation in Situ Hybridization Chain 
444 
Reaction: Higher Gain, Lower Cost, Greater Durability. ACS Nano. 8, 4284–4294 (2014). 
445 
Acknowledgements: We thank Katarzyna Kania and the Cambridge Institute Genomics Core 
446 
for their support with this work on the 10X-Genomics and sequencing library preparations. The 
447 
transgenic testes used in this study was obtained from the European Xenopus Resource Centre, 
448 
curated with funding from the Wellcome Trust/BBSRC, and maintained by the University of 
449 
Portsmouth, School of Biological Sciences. We thank R. Jones-Green for excellent animal care. 
450 
We thank H. Ma for use of her stereomicroscope, and E. Rawlins for use of her Zeiss 
451 
Axiolmager compound microscope. We thank B. Steventon, E. Rawlins, and members of the 
452 
Marioni and Simons labs for general discussion about the project. We thank R. Butler for 
453 
assistance in image analysis. 
454 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
455 
Funding: C.A. is funded by University of Cambridge and Cambridge Trust. J.J. and J.B.G. are 
456 
funded by a grant from the Wellcome Trust (101050/Z/13/Z). T.W.H., J.C.M., and B.D.S. are 
457 
funded as part of a Wellcome Strategic Award to study cell fate decisions (105031/D/14/Z). 
458 
T.W.H. is also supported by an EMBO Long-Term Fellowship (ALTF 606-2018). B.D.S. also 
459 
acknowledges funding from the Royal Society E.P. Abraham Research Professorship 
460 
(RP\R1\180165) and Wellcome Trust (098357/Z/12/Z). J.C.M. acknowledges core funding 
461 
from the European Molecular Biology Laboratory and Cancer Research UK (A17197). This 
462 
work is funded by a grant from the Wellcome Trust (101050/Z/13/Z), Molecular Research 
463 
Council (MR/P000479/1), and supported by the Gurdon Institute core grant from Cancer 
464 
Research UK (C6946/A14492) and the Wellcome Trust (092096/Z/10/Z).  
465 
Author contributions: 
466 
Conceptualization: C.A. with contributions from other authors; Methodology: C.A., and 
467 
T.W.H. for computational analysis; Software: T.W.H.; Validation: C.A., T.W.H.;  Formal 
468 
analysis: T.W.H. with help from C.A.; Investigation: C.A.; Resources: J.B.G., J.C.M.; Data 
469 
curation: C.A., T.W.H; Writing – original draft: C.A. with help from J.J.; Writing - review and 
470 
editing: C.A., T.W.H, J.J., B.D.S., J.C.M.;  Supervision: J.C.M., J.J., B.D.S.; Project 
471 
administration: C.A.; Funding acquisition: C.A., J.J., J.B.G., B.D.S., J.C.M. 
472 
 
473 
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.  
474 
Data and materials availability: Sequencing data and processed gene counts are available 
475 
on ArrayExpress with the accession number E-MTAB-9104. Analysis scripts are available 
476 
at   https://github.com/MarioniLab/XenopusLimbRegeneration2020. Requests for materials 
477 
and code should be addressed to corresponding authors. 
478 
 
479 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
480 
Fig 1. Single-cell transcriptomics reveals cellular heterogeneity in developing and 
481 
amputated Xenopus limbs at different stages of regeneration competence. 
482 
A) Schematic describing Xenopus limb regeneration at different NF Stages. NF Stage ~52-54 
483 
tadpoles are regeneration-competent and amputations result in regeneration of a full limb. 
484 
Regeneration-ability begins to decline at NF Stage ~54. Tadpoles are regeneration-restricted at 
485 
NF ~Stage 56 where 2-3 digits can be regenerated. Beyond NF Stage ~58, tadpoles are 
486 
regeneration-incompetent and amputations result in simple wound healing or unpatterned spike 
487 
formation. Green boxes indicate the samples collected for scRNA-Seq, taken at stages prior to, 
488 
at the onset of and after the loss of regeneration ability. B) Schematic describing 5 days post 
489 
amputation (dpa) samples for regeneration-competent, -restricted, and –incompetent tadpoles. 
490 
Green boxes show the samples collected for scRNA-Seq. C) An atlas of cell types in intact and 
491 
amputated limbs. Samples from each condition are processed separately for sequencing, and 
492 
are then pooled together for UMAP visualization and clustering. Each dot corresponds to a 
493 
single cell, colours indicate cluster identity, text labels highlight important tissue/cell types. 
494 
See Fig. S3 for full annotation. D)  Comparisons can be made between conditions to highlight 
495 
transcriptional changes associated with regeneration; here NF Stage 52 amputated limbs 
496 
(lower) are compared to their contralateral control samples (upper). Red dots denote cells in 
497 
the selected sample; grey dots denote cells in all samples. E) A diversity of mesenchymal cell 
498 
types is detected in our dataset (upper), together with putative gene expression programs 
499 
identified using unbiased factor analysis (lower). 
500 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
501 
Fig 2: Formation of a signalling centre comprising apical-ectodermal-ridge (AER) cells 
502 
is associated with the successful regeneration. 
503 
A) Multiple basal epidermal cell states are detected, including AER cells. B) UMAP 
504 
visualisation of basal epidermis reveals that re-establishment of AER cells is associated with 
505 
successful regeneration. Red dots denote cells in the selected sample; grey dots denote cells in 
506 
all samples. C) (Left) AER cells express Fgf8.L. (Right) Stereomicroscope images of the 5 dpa 
507 
amputation plane of regeneration-competent, restricted, and –incompetent tadpoles. Fgf8.L 
508 
(red) expressing AER cells are formed in regeneration-competent and –restricted tadpoles, but 
509 
not in –incompetent tadpoles. Scale bar = 250 µm.  D) Abundance of basal epidermal cell types 
510 
across conditions reveals a correlation between AER abundance and regeneration outcome.  
511 
AER cells are present in intact –competent samples, and are enriched after amputation. A 
512 
similar pattern is seen in -restricted samples, although abundances of AER cells are reduced. 
513 
Very few AER cells are detected in –incompetent tadpoles. E) Dot plot showing expression of 
514 
selected ligands for AER cells during development and at 5 dpa regeneration-competent, 
515 
restricted, and –incompetent samples. Dot colour indicates mean expression; dot size 
516 
represents the percentage of cells with non-zero expression. 
517 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
518 
Fig 3. Ex vivo regenerating limbs demonstrate that AER cell formation requires 
519 
activation of multiple pathways and can form from basal epidermal cells. 
520 
A) (Left) Schematic for ex vivo regeneration limb culture. (Right) Time-lapse images of a –
521 
competent explant. The explant grows a cone shape at its distal site reminiscent of in vivo 
522 
regeneration (green arrow), whilst the proximal site shows chondrogenesis (blue arrow). 
523 
Scale= 200 µm. B) Example image of a –competent explant at 3-day post culture. Distal site 
524 
of explants is Fgf8.L positive (red arrow), and proximal site is Fgf8.L negative (purple arrow). 
525 
Red, Fgf8.L mRNA. Scale= 200 µm. C) Drug screen to test regulators of AER cell formation. 
526 
(Top) Schematics describing the screen. One limb of a tadpole was used for perturbation and 
527 
the contralateral limb from the same tadpole was used as a control. Samples were treated with 
528 
the indicated drugs for 3 days post culture, and then stained for Fgf8.L mRNA. The extent of 
529 
Fgf8.L expression along the amputation plane was measured. Sample sizes: ICRT3 total n≥9 
530 
from 3 biological replicates; SU5402 total n≥9 from 2 biological replicates; LDN193189 total 
531 
n=8 from 3 biological replicates; DAPT total n=7 from 3 biological replicates. P*< 0.05, and 
532 
P**< 0.001. D) Factor analysis identifies a putative gene expression trajectory from basal 
533 
epidermal cells to AER cells predicting sequential activation of Lgr5.S followed by Fgf8.L. E) 
534 
A proximal-to-distal gradient of Lgr5.S and Fgf8.L is observed in vivo, with Fgf8.L being 
535 
restricted to the most distal regions of the midline epidermis. Black dots represent HCR mRNA 
536 
signal. Scale = 20 µm. 
537 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
538 
Fig 4. Inhibitory factors, such as Noggin, are secreted from chondrogenic populations at 
539 
regeneration incompetent stages, and block AER cell formation 
540 
A) (Top) Schematic describing conditioned media experiments to test the effect of extrinsic 
541 
cues in regeneration-incompetent tadpole limbs. (Mid) Supplying conditioned media (CM) 
542 
from regeneration-incompetent tadpoles to regeneration-competent explants decreases the 
543 
extent of Fgf8.L expression at the amputation plane at 3 dpa. (Bottom) This effect can be 
544 
rescued by adding anti-NOGGIN antibody. -Competent CM to –competent explants: total n=8, 
545 
from 3 biological replicates; -incompetent CM to –competent explants: total n=7, from 3 
546 
biological replicates; -incompetent CM to –competent explants and anti-IGG antibody: total 
547 
n=10, from 3 biological replicates; -incompetent CM and anti-NOGGIN antibody to –
548 
competent explants: total n=10, from 3 biological replicates. P*< 0.05, and P**< 0.001. B) 
549 
(Top) Schematic describing co-culture experiments. (Mid) Co-culturing (CC) -competent 
550 
explants and –incompetent explants decrease the extent of Fgf8.L expression at the amputation 
551 
plane at 3 dpa. (Bottom) This effect can be rescued by adding anti-NOGGIN antibody. -
552 
Competent and –competent CC: total n=26, from 4 biological replicates; -competent and –
553 
incompetent CC: and anti-IGG antibody total n=10, from 3 biological replicates; competent 
554 
and –incompetent CC and anti-NOGGIN antibody: total n=10, from 3 biological replicates. 
555 
P*< 0.05, and P**< 0.001. C) Abundance of mesenchymal populations across conditions 
556 
reveals an enrichment of chondrogenic populations at regeneration-restricted and -incompetent 
557 
stages, in both intact and amputated limbs. D) Multiple BMP/WNT antagonists are expressed 
558 
specifically in chondrogenic populations. 
559 
 
560 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
561 
 
562 
Fig 5. Chondrogenic progression blocks AER cell formation by modulating extrinsic cues. 
563 
Secreted factors such as WNTs and BMPs support AER cell formation at the amputation plane. 
564 
During development, chondrogenesis leads to the accumulation of secreted inhibitory extrinsic 
565 
cues including NOGGIN which results in failure to establish AER cells (Fgf8.L+/Lgr5.S+). 
566 
FGF10 can suppress chondrogenesis. Amputations, independent of the regeneration outcome, 
567 
induce injury-induced mesenchymal transcriptional plasticity. 
568 
 
569 
 
570 
 
571 
 
572 
 
573 
 
574 
 
575 
 
576 
 
577 
 
578 
 
579 
 
580 
 
581 
 
582 
 
583 
 
584 
 
585 
 
586 
 
587 
 
588 
 
589 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

Supplementary Materials  
590 
 
591 
Secreted inhibitors drive the loss of regeneration competence in 
592 
Xenopus limbs 
593 
C. Aztekin1,2*, T. W. Hiscock1,3*, J. B. Gurdon1,2, J. Jullien1,2,4† J. C. Marioni3,5,6†, B. 
594 
D. Simons1,7,8† 
595 
*Co-first authors. 
596 
†Corresponding authors; listed in alphabetical order. 
597 
 
598 
Correspondence to: jerome.jullien@inserm.fr (J.J); marioni@ebi.ac.uk  (J.C.M); 
599 
bds10@cam.ac.uk (B.D.S.) 
600 
 
601 
 
602 
This PDF file includes: 
603 
 
604 
Materials and Methods 
605 
Figs. S1 to S17 
606 
Caption for Table S1 
607 
References 
608 
 
609 
Other Supplementary Materials for this manuscript include the following:  
610 
 
611 
 
612 
Table S1  
613 
 
614 
 
615 
 
616 
 
617 
 
618 
 
619 
 
620 
 
621 
 
622 
 
623 
 
624 
 
625 
 
626 
 
627 
 
628 
 
629 
 
630 
 
631 
 
632 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

Materials and Methods 
633 
 
634 
Tadpole generation and husbandry 
635 
Tadpoles were generated and staged as previously described (13). After NF Stage 45, tadpoles 
636 
were fed once or twice a day with filamentous blue-green algae (ZM spirulina powder) 
637 
suspended in water. Wild-type Xenopus laevis were used for experiments unless otherwise 
638 
stated. Tadpoles classified as regeneration-competent were NF Stage 52-53, regeneration-
639 
restricted were NF 55-56, and regeneration-incompetent were NF Stage 58-60. Animal 
640 
experiments were approved by the University Biomedical Services at the University of 
641 
Cambridge and complied with UK Home Office guidelines (Animal Act 1986). 
642 
 
643 
Single-cell dissociation, library preparation and sequencing 
644 
For developmental samples, tadpoles were killed, and samples were collected at the 
645 
aforementioned stages. For amputation/regeneration samples, tadpoles were anaesthetized by 
646 
incubating them with 0.1X MMR 0.002% MS222 (A0377876, Acros Organics), placed on a 
647 
wet towel and the right hindlimbs were amputated at the presumptive knee/ankle level for 
648 
regeneration-competent tadpoles, and at the ankle level for –restricted or –incompetent 
649 
tadpoles. Afterwards, the tadpoles were returned to fresh water. At 5 days post amputation 
650 
(dpa), tadpoles were killed and the newly generated tissues on the amputation plane were 
651 
collected. Contralateral control samples were also collected from these tadpoles, and intact 
652 
limb buds or autopods including ankle were collected. For each scRNA-Seq experiment, tissues 
653 
were collected from a total of 8-10 tadpoles to reduce variance caused by staging differences. 
654 
Dissociations were performed on a pool of 4 limbs in an Eppendorf tube with the following 
655 
protocol. First the samples were washed with Ca-Mg free 1X MBS ((Barth-HEPES Saline) 
656 
10X stock: 88 mM NaCl, 1 mM KCl, 2,4 mM NaHCO3, 0.82mM MgSO4.7H2O, 0.33mM 
657 
Ca(NO3)2.4H2O, 0.41 mM Cacl2.6H2O, 10 mM HEPES. Add ∼3 mL of 10N NaOH to obtain 
658 
a pH of 7.4 to 7.6). Samples were then incubated with 1X Trypsin (Sigma, 59427C) in Ca-Mg 
659 
free 1X MBS with 0.5 µM EDTA for 10 minutes at room-temperature (RT) on a bench-top 
660 
shaker at a speed of 300 rpm. Trypsin reaction was diluted with Ca-Mg free 1X MBS after 10 
661 
minutes. Physical dispersion was applied (10-15 times up-down trituration with a pipette) to 
662 
samples before, half way, and at the end of trypsinisation. Cells were spun down at 250 g for 
663 
5 minutes, the supernatant was taken out, and cells were then resuspended in 1X Ca-Mg free 
664 
1X MBS. Cells were passed through a 35 µm diameter cell strainer then stained with 20 µM 
665 
Hoechst 33342 (Sigma, 2261) in 1X Ca-Mg free MBS for 10-15 minutes, and Hoechst positive 
666 
cells were sorted using a Sony SH800s Cell Sorter. scRNA-seq libraries were generated using 
667 
10X Genomics (v3 chemistry) and sequenced on an Illumina Novaseq 6000 SP flow cell.  
668 
 
669 
scRNA-seq: data processing 
670 
Output files from 10X Genomics were processed using CellRanger v3.0.2, with  sequences 
671 
mapped 
to 
the 
Xenopus 
laevis 
9.1 
genome 
(Xenbase, 
672 
ftp://ftp.xenbase.org/pub/Genomics/JGI/Xenla9.1/Xla.v91.repeatMasked.fa.gz 
and 
673 
ftp://ftp.xenbase.org/pub/Genomics/JGI/Xenla9.1/1.8.3.2/XL_9.1_v1.8.3.2.allTranscripts.gff
674 
3.gz). Raw counts were normalized by cell library size, and then converted to TPX (transcripts 
675 
per 104). Cell calling was performed using CellRanger with default parameters. We further 
676 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

filtered the data according to library size, discarding cells with a total UMI count in the lowest 
677 
quartile. We note that the main cell types and transcriptional changes remained unchanged if 
678 
we omitted this cell-filtering step, although the clustering and visualization appears less robust 
679 
(Fig. S4).  
680 
 
681 
scRNA-seq: feature selection 
682 
Highly variable genes (HVGs) were selected for clustering and visualization as described 
683 
previously (13) (Fano factor > 65th percentile, mean expression > 5th percentile and mean 
684 
expression < 80th percentile). Our initial analysis revealed that visualization and clustering was 
685 
strongly influenced by cell cycle state (Fig. S2). To further refine the set of HVGs, we 
686 
performed factor analysis with the aim of removing genes significantly associated with the cell 
687 
cycle. Specifically, non-negative matrix factorization was performed on the cosine normalized, 
688 
log2-transformed normalized counts matrix, using k = 30 components (R package nnlm). 
689 
Factors were manually annotated according to their expression on the UMAP projection, and 
690 
by inspection of the highest gene loadings for each factor; 2 factors corresponded to the cell 
691 
cycle. To minimize the effect of the cell cycle signature on projection/clustering, we identified 
692 
genes associated with these cell cycle factors (top 10% gene loadings for each factor) and 
693 
removed these from the set of HVGs. 
694 
 
695 
scRNA-seq: visualization and clustering 
696 
Data were projected onto two dimensions using the UMAP algorithm (27), with log2-
697 
transformed HVGs, cosine distance as a similarity measure, and parameters k = 15, min_dist = 
698 
0.2. Clustering was performed as described previously (13). Briefly, we constructed a graph 
699 
using the UMAP function fuzzy_simplicial_set with k = 10 nearest-neighbors, and then 
700 
performed graphical clustering using the walktrap algorithm (cluster_walktrap from R package 
701 
igraph, with steps = 10).  
702 
 
703 
scRNA-seq:  gene set enrichment and cell cycle analysis 
704 
Single cell gene set enrichment scores were calculated with the AUCell R package (28), using 
705 
HVGs as the background gene set. Cell cycle phase was inferred using CellCycleScoring  (R 
706 
package Seurat) (29).  
707 
 
708 
scRNA-seq: annotation of cell-types 
709 
Cell type annotation was performed by manually comparing cluster-specific gene expression 
710 
patterns (computed using findMarkers in R package scran (30)) with known cell type markers 
711 
from the literature. Many clusters could be assigned to a well-characterized, functional cell 
712 
type (e.g. Satellite cell). Other clusters could not be unambiguously identified, but were 
713 
assigned a broad label together with a numeric identifier (e.g. Blood 1). Finally, a few clusters 
714 
remain unannotated (e.g. Unknown 1). Dotplots of key marker genes of each cell type are 
715 
provided in Fig. S5. 
716 
 
717 
scRNA-seq: gene expression visualization 
718 
Gene expression in individual cells is visualized on the UMAP projection with points colored 
719 
according to expression level (log10-transformed). Gene expression across groups of cells (e.g. 
720 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 2, 2020. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.127654
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint

===== Aztekin2020_Development_Myeloid+Regeneration =====
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
RESEARCH ARTICLE
The myeloid lineage is required for the emergence of
a regeneration-permissive environment following Xenopus
tail amputation
Can Aztekin1,2,*, Tom W. Hiscock1,3, Richard Butler1, Francisco De Jesús Andino4, Jacques Robert4,
John B. Gurdon1,2 and Jerome Jullien1,2,5,*
ABSTRACT
Regeneration-competent vertebrates are considered to suppress
inflammation faster than non-regenerating ones. Hence, understanding
the cellular mechanisms affected by immune cells and inflammation can
help develop strategies to promote tissue repair and regeneration. Here,
we took advantage of naturally occurring tail regeneration-competent
and -incompetent developmental stages of Xenopus tadpoles. We first
establish the essential role of the myeloid lineage for tail regeneration in
the regeneration-competent tadpoles. We then reveal that upon tail
amputation there is a myeloid lineage-dependent change in amputation-
induced apoptosis levels, which in turn promotes tissue remodelling,
and ultimately leads to the relocalization of the regeneration-organizing
cells responsible for progenitor proliferation. These cellular mechanisms
failed to be executed in regeneration-incompetent tadpoles. We
demonstrate that regeneration incompetency is characterized by
inflammatory myeloid cells whereas regeneration competency is
associated with reparative myeloid cells. Moreover, treatment of
regeneration-incompetent tadpoles with immune-suppressing drugs
restores myeloid lineage-controlled cellular mechanisms. Collectively,
our work reveals the effects of differential activation of the myeloid
lineage on the creation of a regeneration-permissive environment and
could be further exploited to devise strategies for regenerative medicine
purposes.
KEY WORDS: Xenopus, Tail regeneration, Myeloid lineage,
Inflammation, Macrophages, Neutrophils
INTRODUCTION
Regeneration-competent vertebrates are considered to have a limited
immune system development and competency (Julier et al., 2017).
However, the immune system has also been demonstrated to
influence regeneration positively in various scenarios, e.g. in
appendages (Godwin et al., 2013; Petrie et al., 2014) and in cardiac
tissue (Godwin et al., 2017; Lavine et al., 2014), and in several
species, e.g. salamander (Godwin et al., 2017, 2013), zebrafish
(Morales and Allende, 2019; Nguyen-Chi et al., 2017; Petrie et al.,
2014) and mouse (Lavine et al., 2014; Simkin et al., 2017). In
particular, myeloid lineage-driven activation and rapid resolution of
inflammation have been suggested to influence the outcome of
regeneration (Godwin, 2014; Mescher et al., 2017). Regeneration-
competent animals are proposed to efficiently suppress damage-
induced inflammation.
By
contrast, regeneration-incompetent
animals have a prolonged inflammatory phase that results in an
impairment of extracellular matrix remodelling mediated by
excessive collagen deposition and scar formation (Godwin, 2014).
In such animals, suppression of inflammation improves injury repair
and regeneration (Chu et al., 2019; Gensel et al., 2017). The positive
effect of the myeloid lineage on tissue repair and regeneration,
mostly characterized in mammalian models, was shown to be
mediated through promotion of repair processes via extracellular
matrix
(ECM)
remodelling,
histolysis,
vascularization,
and
apoptotic cell clearance (Koh and DiPietro, 2011). However, an
overall understanding of the cellular events controlled by the
inflammatory states and their effect in animals with high
regenerative capabilities is lacking.
Xenopus laevis tadpoles can regenerate their tails throughout
development
but
temporarily
lose
this
ability
at
certain
developmental stages (Slack et al., 2004). Previously, we showed
that this loss is caused by failure to mobilize a signal-centre cell
population, the regeneration-organizing-cells (ROCs) (Aztekin
et al., 2019). In regeneration-competent tadpoles, ROCs relocate
from the body to the amputation plane to form a specialized wound
epidermis, and by secreting a cocktail of growth factors they can
increase progenitor cell proliferation. However, the contribution of
the myeloid lineage to this process in regeneration-competent stages
is not known. Moreover, unlike in other regeneration models in
which the presence of the immune system is required for
regeneration, decreasing the immune cells was suggested to boost
regeneration
in
naturally
occurring
regeneration-incompetent
tadpoles
(Fukazawa
et
al.,
2009).
Nonetheless,
how
such
perturbations can reinstate regeneration competency remains unclear.
Here, we first demonstrated the essential role of the myeloid
lineage in regeneration-competent tadpoles using complementary
myeloid lineage-depletion methods. We then functionally tested
which cellular mechanisms are controlled by the myeloid lineage,
the relationship between identified cellular mechanisms, and their
requirement for successful regeneration. Lastly, we characterized
the behaviour of the myeloid lineage in naturally occurring
regeneration-competent and -incompetent tadpoles. Altogether,
our investigation reveals the hierarchy of cellular mechanisms
controlled by the myeloid lineage that is responsible for the
emergence of a regeneration-permissive environment. These
Received 9 October 2019; Accepted 13 January 2020
1Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, CB1 2QN, UK. 2Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, CB2 3EJ, UK. 3Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University
of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UK. 4Department of Microbiology &
Immunology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
5Nantes Université, Inserm, Centre de Recherche en Transplantation et
Immunologie, UMR 1064, ITUN, F-44000 Nantes, France.
*Authors for correspondence (ca477@cam.ac.uk; jj256@gurdon.cam.ac.uk)
C.A., 0000-0002-6544-9752; J.J., 0000-0002-7868-0021
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed.
1
© 2020. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Development (2020) 147, dev185496. doi:10.1242/dev.185496
DEVELOPMENT

findings could be exploited to boost injury repair and regeneration in
regeneration-incompetent animals.
RESULTS
The myeloid lineage is required for Xenopus tail regeneration
We first asked whether the myeloid lineage is required for
regeneration by injecting clodronate-containing liposomes into the
ventral vein area of tadpoles (Fig. 1A) then assessing regeneration
ability after tail amputation. When engulfed by phagocytes,
clodronate induces cell death and leads to myeloid cell depletion
(van Rooijen and Hendrikx, 2010). Upon clodronate-containing
liposome injection, we observed a reduced number of myeloid
lineage cells and reduced expression of genes associated with
myeloid lineage cells at the time of tail amputation (Fig. 1B,C,
Fig. S1A). Moreover, upon tail amputations, these tadpoles had a
reduced tail regeneration compared with control, Encapsome-injected
animals (Fig. 1D, Fig. S1B), suggesting the myeloid lineage is
required for regeneration. To independently assess the role of myeloid
lineage in regeneration, we generated F0 transgenic tadpoles with a
drug-inducible myeloid cell ablation construct in which the
Escherichia coli Nitroreductase (NTR) gene is under the control of
the myeloid marker slurp1l promoter. When metronidazole (MTZ) is
added, NTR-expressing cells are killed (Martinez-De Luna and
Zuber, 2018) (Fig. S2A) as detected at the time of tail amputation.
Upon removal of slurp1l-expressing cells, we again observed reduced
regeneration (Fig. S2B-D). However, upon tail amputation, we also
observed slurp1l promoter activation in non-myeloid lineages,
including ROCs (Fig. S2E). Hence, in later stages of regeneration,
this method might ablate important non-myeloid cell types. To test
further the requirement of the myeloid lineage for regeneration, we
generated
F0
tadpoles
that
have
defective
myeloid
lineage
development but show no lethality induced by mosaic spib gene
knockout (Costa et al., 2008). Perturbing the spib gene reduced the
myeloid gene expressions at the time of tail amputation (Fig. S3A-C).
When these tadpoles were assessed for tail regeneration ability, we
observed reduced growth of regenerated tails, indicative of delay in
the regenerative programme (Fig. S3D,E). Although the myeloid
lineage of F0 tadpoles was decreased at the time of tail amputation, we
observed restoration of myeloid gene expressions at the end of
regeneration (Fig. S3F), presumably because of the mosaic nature of
the knockout. Taken together, these complementary approaches
indicate that the myeloid lineage is required for regeneration.
Fig. 1. Depleting the myeloid lineage impedes Xenopus tail regeneration. (A) Experimental design for assessing the effect of myeloid lineage depletion on
regeneration. Regeneration-competent tadpoles were injected with either control (Encapsome), or clodronate-containing lipids (Clodrosome) before tail
amputation. Regeneration efficiency was assessed at 7 days post-tail amputation (dpa). (B) Clodrosome injection decreases myeloid gene expression compared
with Encapsome injection. Expression of myeloid lineage genes after Encapsome or Clodrosome injections was assessed by RT-qPCR analysis on amputated
tails. All values were normalized to that of the uninjected controls. n≥3 biological replicates for each gene expression quantification, error bars represent s.e.m.
(C) Representative images of Tg(slurp1l:EGFP) tadpoles post Encapsome or Clodrosome injection. A decrease in the slurp1l:EGFP myeloid lineage signal is
particularly seen at dorsal and ventral vein regions. Scale bars: 250 µm. (D) Regeneration outcomes at 7 dpa in uninjected, Encapsome-injected or Clodrosome-
injected regeneration-competent tadpoles. Samples were obtained from three biological replicates: uninjected n=30; Encapsome n=34; Clodrosome n=46.
2
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185496. doi:10.1242/dev.185496
DEVELOPMENT

The myeloid lineage is required for tissue remodelling,
reduced apoptosis, and ROC mobilization in regeneration-
competent tadpoles
Successful regeneration is associated with tissue/ECM remodelling
(Contreras et al., 2009), regulated apoptosis levels (Tseng et al.,
2007), and ROC mobilization (Aztekin et al., 2019). Therefore,
focusing on regeneration-competent tadpoles, we next asked if these
events require the myeloid lineage.
To assess quantitatively the level of tissue remodelling, we
calculated a ‘remodelling index’ as the ratio of the length of the
whole amputation plane to that of the posterior somitic tissue
(Fig. S4A-C). We based this assessment on previously reported
changes occurring at the amputation plane. Particularly, as
previously reported (Beck et al., 2003), at 1 day post-amputation
(dpa), evidence of tissue remodelling can be seen as muscle tissue
degenerates and somitic tissue is reshaped at the amputation plane.
Moreover, ventral and dorsal fin tissues start covering the
amputation plane.
When the myeloid lineage was removed in regeneration-
competent tadpoles, the remodelling was reduced (Fig. 2A,
Fig. S6A). Furthermore, this phenotype mimicked remodelling
levels that were seen in samples immediately after amputation, and
at 1 dpa in regeneration-incompetent tadpoles (Fig. S4D,E). Hence,
the myeloid lineage is required upstream of morphological changes
associated with regeneration competency.
Underlying these morphological changes are alterations in the
biosynthetic pathway of ECM components (Bonnans et al., 2014;
Lu et al., 2011), such as that for hyaluronic acid (HA), which was
previously shown to be required for regeneration (Contreras et al.,
2009). Hence, we investigated whether blocking HA synthesis can
phenocopy myeloid lineage-depleted tadpoles. Indeed, when HA
synthesis was blocked, remodelling was decreased (Fig. 3D). We
conclude that the regulation of tissue remodelling by the myeloid
lineage involves control of HA deposition.
We next asked whether the level of apoptosis associated with
successful regeneration is regulated by the myeloid lineage. A
controlled level of apoptosis is proposed to be necessary for
regeneration (Tseng et al., 2007). By using cytoplasmic acidity as an
indicator of apoptosis (Fig. S5A-C), and consistent with published
results (Tseng et al., 2007), we observed that at 1 dpa regeneration-
incompetent tadpoles have more apoptotic cells compared with
regeneration-competent tadpoles (Fig. S5D). Removal of the
myeloid lineage from regeneration-competent tadpoles led to
increased apoptosis (Fig. 2B, Fig. S6B), indicating that the
myeloid cells are involved in the regulation of apoptotic cell level,
possibly through apoptotic cell clearance (Gordon and Plüddemann,
2018; Zhong et al., 2018). Hence, amputation-induced apoptosis,
and its clearance via myeloid lineage activity, is likely to be crucial
for regeneration.
As the myeloid lineage controls tissue/ECM remodelling and
apoptosis levels, we asked if these events create a regeneration-
permissive environment contributing to ROC relocalization to the
amputation plane. Indeed, removal of myeloid lineage (Fig. 2C,
Fig. S6C), blocking the HA pathway (Fig. 3A,B) or blocking
apoptosis (Fig. 3A,B) interfered with ROC mobilization, indicating
that all these events are upstream of ROC relocalization. Next, to
understand the relationship between remodelling and apoptosis, we
blocked HA synthesis and assessed apoptosis levels. Blocking HA
synthesis did not significantly alter apoptosis levels (Fig. 3C).
Conversely, we observed that blocking apoptosis reduced tissue
remodelling (Fig. 3D). Together, these results indicate that the
myeloid lineage controls apoptosis levels, which is an upstream
event of HA deposition-mediated tissue remodelling, itself leading
to ROC relocalization (Fig. 3E).
The ratio of reparative to inflammatory myeloid cells
following amputation is associated with regeneration
competency
In contrast to our results with regeneration-competent tadpoles in
which the myeloid lineage is required for regeneration, decreasing
immune cell number in regeneration-incompetent tadpoles was
previously suggested to rescue regeneration (Fukazawa et al., 2009).
To clarify the role of the myeloid lineage in regeneration
competency, we investigated the myeloid cell populations present
Fig. 2. The myeloid lineage is required for tissue remodelling, reduction
of apoptosis levels, and relocalization of regeneration-organizing cells.
(A) Left: Representative images of remodelling events occurring at 1 dpa in
Encapsome- or Clodrosome-injected regeneration-competent tadpoles. Red
lines indicate the posterior somitic region. Post-amputation histolysis and
remodelling of tissue is impaired in Clodrosome-injected tadpoles. Scale bars:
250 µm. Right: Remodelling index quantification. All samples were obtained
from at least three biological replicates: Encapsome n=39; Clodrosome n=37.
Student’s t-test was used to assess statistical significance; *P<0.001. (B) Left:
Representative images of apoptosis occurring at 1 dpa in Encapsome- or
Clodrosome-injected regeneration-competent tadpoles. The red arrowheads
indicate the location of the LysoSensor signal used to report apoptosis. Scale
bars: 250 µm. Right: Apoptotic area quantification. All samples were obtained
from at least three biological replicates: Encapsome n=49; Clodrosome n=53.
Student’s t-test was used to assess statistical significance; *P<0.001. A.U.,
arbitrary unit. (C) Left: Representative images of ROC relocalization at 1 dpa
for Encapsome- or Clodrosome-injected regeneration-competent tadpoles.
The 7pbin:EGFP transgenic line was used to assess ROCs relocalization. Red
arrowheads show the location of the leading ROC cells. Scale bars: 250 µm.
Right: ROC relocalization quantification. All samples were obtained from at
least three biological replicates: Encapsome n=19; Clodrosome n=16.
Student’s t-test was used to assess statistical significance; *P<0.001. In
graphs, each dot represents individual tadpoles; red line denotes median.
3
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185496. doi:10.1242/dev.185496
DEVELOPMENT

in regeneration-competent and -incompetent tadpole stages. To that
end, we used our published cellular atlas generated by single cell
mRNA sequencing from intact tail and amputation plane of
regeneration-competent
and
-incompetent
tadpoles
at
1 dpa
(Aztekin et al., 2019). Two uncharacterized myeloid cell clusters,
myeloid 1 and myeloid 2, were present in both regeneration-
competent and -incompetent tails. Myeloid 1 cluster was enriched
for genes associated with inflammation (e.g. tnf) whereas myeloid 2
cluster was enriched for anti-inflammation (e.g. arg1) and reparative
genes (e.g. mmp1/9) (Fig. 4A). Marker genes for these clusters were
also enriched in peritoneal macrophages of adult frogs upon viral
infection or bacterial stimulation (Fig. S7A-D). Based on these gene
expressions, we classified these uncharacterized putative cell types
as ‘inflammatory myeloid cells’ and ‘reparative myeloid cells’.
We observed a difference in the relative abundance of the
inflammatory and reparative myeloid cells after amputation in
regeneration-competent and -incompetent tadpoles. In intact tails,
the ratio of inflammatory to reparative myeloid population was
similar regardless of regeneration competency. However, at 1 dpa,
regeneration-competent tadpoles had a dominant reparative myeloid
cell population, whereas regeneration-incompetent tadpoles had a
dominant inflammatory myeloid activity (Fig. 4B). Previously
conducted bulk-RNA-seq following tail amputation detected
reparative myeloid genes (e.g. mmp7, g6pd, idh2, nampt) as
significantly upregulated (Love et al., 2011a), supporting the
hypothesis that reparative myeloid cells might accumulate at the
amputation plane to resolve inflammation levels in regeneration-
competent tadpoles. Moreover, immune-suppressing drugs that can
rescue the ‘no-regeneration’ phenotype (Fukazawa et al., 2009) also
downregulate inflammatory myeloid gene expressions (Fig. 4C).
Altogether, these observations indicate that the nature of the
activated myeloid lineage differs between regeneration-competent
and -incompetent tadpoles, and that regeneration incompetency
might be associated with a failure to suppress an amputation-
induced inflammatory state.
Inhibition of the inflammatory response enables
establishment of a regeneration-permissive environment in
regeneration-incompetent tadpoles
As our results suggest that a decrease in the abundance of
inflammatory
myeloid
cells
enables
regeneration,
we
hypothesized that suppression of inflammation is required for the
execution of the multiple cellular mechanisms required for
regeneration. To test this, we investigated whether regeneration-
incompetent tadpoles treated with immune-suppressing drugs
mimic
regeneration-competent
tadpoles.
In
agreement
with
previous work (Fukazawa et al., 2009), treatment of regeneration-
incompetent
tadpoles
with
FK506
or
Celastrol
right
after
amputations restored the regenerative abilities of some but not all
tadpoles (Fig. S8A,B). Furthermore, immune-suppressing drugs
were able to reduce apoptosis levels and enable remodelling similar
to regeneration-competent tadpoles (Fig. 5A,B). Moreover, ROC
Fig. 3. Sequential involvement of apoptosis, tissue remodelling and regeneration-organizing cell mobilization following tail amputation.
(A) Experimental setup for assessing the relationship between the cellular mechanisms controlled by amputation-induced myeloid lineage activity. Cellular events
downstream of myeloid lineage activity were assessed after drug treatments. NS3694 (apoptosis inhibitor) and 4-MU (hyaluronic acid synthesis inhibitor) were
used to block apoptosis, and tissue remodelling, respectively. (B) ROC relocalization levels at 1 dpa in DMSO control, or after 4-MU or NS3694 treatment in
regeneration-competent tadpoles. All samples were obtained from two biological replicates: DMSO n=13; 4-MU n=11; NS3694 n=17. One-way ANOVA was used
to assess statistical significance; *P<0.001. (C) Apoptotic area at 1 dpa in DMSO- or 4-MU-treated regeneration-competent tadpoles. All samples were
obtained from four biological replicates: DMSO n=29; 4-MU n=25. Student’s t-test was used to assess statistical significance; *P<0.001. n.s., not significant. A.U.,
arbitrary unit. (D) Quantification of remodelling index at 1 dpa in DMSO-, 4-MU- or NS3694-treated regeneration-competent tadpoles. All samples were obtained
from at least three biological replicates: DMSO n=32; 4-MU n: 43, NS3694 40 µM n=26; NS3694 60 µM n=18. One-way ANOVA was used to assess
statistical significance; *P<0.001. In B-D, each dot represents individual tadpoles; red line denotes median. (E) Epistasis experiments suggest that the myeloid
lineage controls apoptosis levels, which influence tissue/ECM remodelling through HA deposition and, finally, ROCs relocalization.
4
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185496. doi:10.1242/dev.185496
DEVELOPMENT

mobilization was also achieved in treated regeneration-incompetent
tadpoles, although with a slight delay compared with regeneration-
competent tadpoles in which ROCs relocalize within 24 h (Fig. 5C,
Fig. S8C). In these early cellular mechanisms at 1 dpa, treatment with
FK506 and Celastrol revealed two phenotypic populations, mirroring
the ‘regenerated’ and ‘non-regenerated’ tadpoles phenotypes observed
at 7 dpa.
Finally, blocking HA synthesis or apoptosis abrogated the rescue
of regeneration mediated by immunosuppressive drugs (Fig. 5D,
Fig. S8D) further confirming that suppression of inflammation is a
key step to generating a regeneration-permissive environment. We
conclude that the myeloid lineage, and its inflammatory state,
controls apoptosis levels, which then enable remodelling of ECM
and relocalization of ROCs to the amputation plane to ensure
regeneration (Fig. 5E).
DISCUSSION
In this article, we establish the essential role of myeloid lineage on
tail regeneration by utilizing complementary depletion approaches.
All three myeloid depletion strategies impaired regeneration
efficiency, demonstrating the key role of the myeloid lineage in
the process. Interestingly, when we injected control liposomes to
tadpoles, we observed an increased inflammatory response,
presumably occurring at the site of injection (trunk-ventral vein
region). This increased activation of the myeloid lineage has very
moderate impact on the regeneration potential compared with the
effect of clodronate-mediated myeloid cell depletion. This suggests
that the detrimental effect of an increased inflammatory phase
requires the presence of activated myeloid cells at the amputation
plane rather than the production of systemic factors. Our second
approach applied genetic labelling to ablate slurp1l expressing
myeloid cells. Although the slurp1l promoter is historically used to
investigate myeloid lineage (Paredes et al., 2015; Smith et al.,
2002), we found that this reporter is sensitive to amputation as
exemplified by its activation in several additional cell types upon
amputation. Moreover, in the Xenopus tail regeneration cell atlas,
endogenous slurp1l was activated and/or upregulated in amputated
tails in different cell types (e.g. ROCs, sclerotome, mesenchyme)
(Aztekin et al., 2019). Hence, although this promoter seems suitable
for tracing myeloid cell in intact tadpoles, additional markers are
needed to trace myeloid cells in amputated animals.
In contrast to the need for myeloid cells in regeneration-
competent tadpoles, immune cells were suggested to negatively
affect the regenerative response in incompetent stages (Fukazawa
et al., 2009). This prompted us to dissect differences in myeloid
lineage of regeneration-competent and -incompetent tadpoles. By
analysing the Xenopus tail cell atlas, we characterized two myeloid
populations: inflammatory and reparative (Aztekin et al., 2019).
Further work will be required to reveal if they are equivalent to
mammalian polarized M1- and M2-like macrophages. Surprisingly,
we did not record a cluster representing neutrophils in the atlas
although they are suggested to be present in later-stage tadpoles
(3 weeks old) (Paredes et al., 2015). It is unclear if this is because of
a technical challenge of capturing neutrophils or if neutrophils
develop in later stages. Importantly, we detected differential
behaviour of myeloid populations in regeneration-competent and
-incompetent
tadpoles
showing
that
the
suppression
of
inflammation correlates with regeneration. Nonetheless, it remains
uncertain whether inflammatory myeloid cells directly block
regeneration. Identification of tissue-specific promoters for this
population will enable the development of transplantation methods.
Likewise, such promoters could be used to manipulate the
Fig. 4. A post-amputation shift from
inflammatory to reparative myeloid
activity characterizes regeneration-
competent tadpoles. (A) Heat map
showing known myeloid, reparative
and inflammatory gene expression
levels in the Xenopus tail cell atlas
myeloid cell clusters. Values for each
gene were normalized to that of the
highest expressing cluster. Data
were re-analysed from Aztekin et al.
(2019). (B) Relative abundance of
inflammatory and reparative myeloid
lineage cells post-amputation in
regeneration-competent and
-incompetent tadpoles. Data were
re-analysed from Aztekin et al. (2019).
(C) Myeloid cell cluster 1 and 2 gene
expressions were tested 1 day after
treatment of regeneration-incompetent
tadpoles with the immune-
suppressing drugs FK506 or Celastrol.
n>3 biological replicates for each gene
expression quantification; error bars
represent s.e.m.
5
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185496. doi:10.1242/dev.185496
DEVELOPMENT

behaviour of these cells, such as their proliferation, to test if their
increased numbers can directly block regeneration.
Our results show that immunosuppression reduces amputation-
induced apoptosis levels to rescue the ‘no-regeneration’ phenotype,
but that blocking apoptosis altogether abrogates regeneration. These
results further suggest that a certain amount of apoptosis is required
for regeneration (Tseng et al., 2007). Further work will be required
to understand how such a regulated level of apoptosis would
mechanistically lead to successful regeneration. During Hydra head
regeneration and zebrafish epithelial tissue maintenance, damage-
induced apoptotic bodies were suggested to induce proliferation of
cells (Brock et al., 2019; Chera et al., 2009) and this mechanism
might be involved in Xenopus tail regeneration. Another unexplored
possibility would be the recycling of components from dying cells
to re-structure the regenerating tail.
In this work, we detected apoptosis using LysoSensor, which
labels cells based on cytoplasmic acidity, a hallmark of apoptotic
cells. We tested the specificity of this approach by comparing it with
published caspase 3 immunohistochemistry analysis (Tseng et al.,
2007), and tested it against an apoptosis inhibitor. As LysoSensor is
sensitive to pH, we may have recorded high pH-containing cells
other than apoptotic cells, including macrophages. However, as we
detected more LysoSensor signal upon different myeloid lineage-
depletion protocols and we did not detect this signal as sparse
distinct cells, it is unlikely that it originates from recruited
macrophages.
Previous bulk genomics approaches applied to amputation plane
tissues during regeneration led to the hypothesis that tadpoles
activate metabolic gene expression for regeneration (Love et al.,
2011a; Love et al., 2014). Meanwhile, our results suggest that
previously reported metabolic genes (e.g. slc2a3, pkm) are
particularly enriched in the reparative myeloid lineage. Hence, it
remains unclear whether the gene expression signature reported
in previous work reflects a global metabolic change at the
Fig. 5. Suppression of inflammation enables the emergence of a regeneration-permissive environment in regeneration-incompetent tadpoles.
(A) Remodelling index at 1 dpa in FK506- or Celastrol-treated regeneration-incompetent tadpoles. All samples were obtained from three biological replicates:
DMSO n=22; FK506 n=21; Celastrol n=23. Red line denotes median, and black lines denote quartiles. Note that regeneration-competent 1 dpa DMSO data
from Fig. 3B were re-plotted for comparison. DMSO versus Celastrol: P<0.05 (t-test), P<0.01 (Mann–Whitney U-test); DMSO versus FK506: P<0.01 (t-test),
P<0.01 (Mann–Whitney U-test). (B) Apoptotic area levels at 1 dpa in FK506- or Celastrol-treated regeneration-incompetent tadpoles. All samples were obtained
from three biological replicates: DMSO n=19; FK506 n=20; Celastrol n=20. Red line denotes median, and black lines denote quartiles. Note that regeneration-
competent 1 dpa DMSO data from Fig. 3A were re-plotted for comparison. DMSO versus Celastrol: P<0.05 (t-test), P=0.065 (Mann–Whitney U-test); DMSO
versus FK506: P<0.01 (t-test), P<0.01 (Mann–Whitney U-test). A.U., arbitrary unit. (C) ROC relocalization levels at 2 dpa in FK506- or Celastrol-treated
regeneration-incompetent tadpoles. All samples were obtained from two biological replicates: DMSO n=10; FK506 n=15; Celastrol n=10. Red line denotes
median, and black lines denote quartiles. (D) Immune-suppressing drug-mediated rescue of regeneration requires apoptosis and tissue remodelling.
Regeneration-incompetent tadpoles were treated with FK506 or Celastrol either alone or in combination with an inhibitor of tissue remodelling (4-MU to block the
HA pathway) or an inhibitor of apoptosis (NS3694). All samples were obtained from four biological replicates: FK506+DMSO n=33; FK506+4-MU n=20;
FK506+NS3694 n=13; Celastrol+DMSO n=29; Celastrol+4-MU n=15; Celastrol+NS3694 n=28. Red line denotes median, each dot represents individual
tadpoles. (E) Model of myeloid lineage involvement in regeneration-competent and -incompetent tadpoles. The myeloid lineage activity controls hierarchical
cellular mechanisms that create the regeneration-permissive environment required for regeneration.
6
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185496. doi:10.1242/dev.185496
DEVELOPMENT

tissue/animal level or rather indicates a change of the myeloid cell
status. This could happen through the attraction of reparative myeloid
cells to the amputation plane, a switch from inflammatory to reparative
states as seen in zebrafish (Nguyen-Chi et al., 2015), or both.
Although the role of the myeloid lineage is emphasized in
different regeneration paradigms, the cellular mechanisms under its
control are poorly defined. We found that myeloid lineage activity
orchestrates a sequence of events encompassing the control of
apoptosis level, the remodelling of the amputation plane, and the
relocalization of ROCs. Our analysis enables us to position these
essential cellular mechanisms with regard to each other in the
sequence of events leading to regeneration. However, it does not
show whether the relationship is direct. Indeed, although our
proposed hierarchal cellular mechanism is one-directional, it is
likely that reciprocal interactions exist between these cellular
mechanisms. For example, ROCs also express metalloproteases
(Aztekin et al., 2019), wound closure can affect histolysis in mice
digit repair (Simkin et al., 2015), and HA is known to influence
inflammation (Alibardi, 2017; Litwiniuk et al., 2016). Further work
will be required to determine if these cellular mechanisms directly
affect each other and if crosstalk mechanisms are indeed involved.
Altogether, our results suggest that the myeloid lineage contributes
to the establishment of a regeneration-permissive environment.
Understanding the inherent differences between regeneration-
competent
and
-incompetent
tadpoles
will
be
crucial
for
modulating myeloid lineage activity. Hypoxia (Ferreira et al.,
2018), hydrogen pump activity (Adams et al., 2007) and reactive
oxygen species (Love et al., 2013; Ferreira et al., 2018) have been
shown to be required for regeneration, and modulation of their
activity can rescue the ‘no-regeneration’ phenotype. As these
mechanisms are closely linked with attracting and influencing
myeloid lineages (Chen et al., 2018; Tan et al., 2016; Varesio et al.,
2016; Yoo et al., 2011), they may be potential upstream events
impacting myeloid cell behaviour. Further work with transgenic
lines enabling accurate myeloid cell tracking upon amputation will
help to investigate these dynamic phenomena.
A conserved function of myeloid lineage activity might be related
to specialized wound epidermis formation. First, depletion of
macrophages during axolotl limb regeneration was shown to
interfere with the formation of the specialized wound epidermis
and expression of ROC marker genes (e.g. Sp9, Msx2, Dlx3)
(Godwin et al., 2013). Similarly, depletion of macrophages was also
suggested to impair histolysis and wound closure in mammalian
digit tip repair (Simkin et al., 2017). Moreover, interfering with
myeloid lineage limited patterning and proliferation in zebrafish fin
regeneration (Petrie et al., 2014). Hence, characterization of cell
types and cellular mechanisms in different species will be required
to pinpoint the conserved role of the myeloid lineage.
The increased complexity of the immune system may contribute
to an amplified inflammatory response, which would delay or limit
the execution of the regenerative programme. Indeed, pre/post-
metamorphosis amphibians with a more developed immune system
show a reduced regenerative ability (Beck et al., 2009; King et al.,
2012; Mescher et al., 2013; Monaghan et al., 2014). In our rescue
experiments using inflammation-suppressing drugs, we also noted
that ROC mobilization was postponed compared with that of
regeneration-competent tadpoles. Moreover, repeated amputation of
axolotl limb regeneration results in fibrosis reminiscent of a
sustained inflammatory state (Bryant et al., 2017). In these
scenarios, amputation-induced inflammation levels might be
higher, delaying or preventing the creation of a regeneration-
permissive environment.
Altogether, we utilized early Xenopus tadpoles, which have a
developmentally limited type of immune cells, to reveal the
essential role of myeloid lineage and inflammation in the
emergence of a regeneration-permissive environment. Multiple
studies have demonstrated that suppression of inflammatory
myeloid cells can support repair in various mouse injury models
ranging from spinal cord injury to hair regeneration, and reduce scar
formation (Chu et al., 2019; Gensel et al., 2017). Hence, Xenopus
might offer new avenues for drug and genetic screens to identify
factors that can promote reparative myeloid lineage, possibly
enabling new therapeutic approaches.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Tadpole generation and husbandry
Xenopus laevis embryos and tadpoles were generated as previously
described (Aztekin et al., 2019). In vitro fertilization was performed and
embryos/tadpoles were maintained in 0.1× MMR [0.1 M NaCl, 2.0 mM
KCl, 1 mM MgSO4, 2 mM CaCl2, 5 mM HEPES (pH 7.8)]. The
Nieuwkoop
and
Faber
(NF)
developmental
table
was
used
for
developmental staging (Nieuwkoop and Faber, 1994). Unless otherwise
stated, wild-type Xenopus were used for experiments. Tadpole experiments
were approved by the University Biomedical Services at University of
Cambridge and complied with UK Home Office guidelines (Animal Act
1986). Outbred and J inbred frogs used for viral infection and bacterial
stimulation were from the X. laevis research resource for immunology at the
University of Rochester (https://www.urmc.rochester.edu/microbiology-
immunology/research/xenopus-laevis.aspx) following standard husbandry
methodology regularly updated by the Xenopus community (see http://
www.xenbase.org/entry). All animals were handled in accordance with
stringent laboratory and University Committee on Animal Research
regulations (Approval number 100577/2003–151).
Regeneration assays
Regeneration assays were performed as described before with minor
modifications (Aztekin et al., 2019). Briefly, tail amputations were carried
out by removing ∼30-50% of the tail using a sterile scalpel in regeneration-
competent tadpoles (NF stage 40-41), and regeneration-incompetent
tadpoles (NF stage 46-47). At 7 dpa, tadpoles were classified as follows:
excellent (regenerated tail elongation was indistinguishable from normal
tails, except for missing somite segmentation), good (regenerated tails had
either a defect with elongation, or were missing fin regeneration), partial
(regenerated tails were much shorter, or had defects in patterning with
missing fin regeneration, or showed an elongated bulge formation), none
(either a blunt end or a small stump was seen at the amputation plane).
Regeneration index was calculated by multiplying the tadpole numbers
showing excellent, good, partial or none regeneration phenotypes by 3, 2, 1
or 0 points, respectively. Then, this value was divided by the total number of
tadpoles. Quantitative assessment of regeneration was carried out by fixing
tadpoles at 7 dpa and imaging individual tadpoles with a stereomicroscope.
The regenerated tail length to the body length ratio was measured by Fiji and
was used as an indication of the extent of regeneration. Regenerated tail
lacks somite segmentation, and this information was used to locate the
amputation site. For tadpoles that were not able to regrow any tail, the stump
length was measured. Investigators were not blinded during data acquisition
or analysis. Any sample with fewer than three tadpoles in a replicate were
omitted from further analysis. Any experiment with visible contamination or
unexplained tadpole death was omitted from further analysis. A maximum
of ten tadpoles were cultured in each well of a 6-well plate. Samples that had
a problem during the mounting procedure were also excluded from further
analysis. No statistical test was applied to pre-determine the sample sizes.
Each experiment was performed with multiple biological replicates, with
each batch derived from different male or female individuals.
RNA isolation and RT-qPCR
Tadpole tails were collected at indicated times. Eight to ten tails were
transferred into 350 µl of RNeasy Kit Lysis Buffer (Qiagen) and vortexed at
7
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185496. doi:10.1242/dev.185496
DEVELOPMENT

4°C for 2-3 min. Afterwards, samples were placed at −80°C° for a couple of
hours or overnight. RNA was extracted via RNeasy Kit (Qiagen) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA synthesis and RT-qPCR were
carried out as previously described (Jullien et al., 2017). qPCR primers are
listed in Table S1. All qPCR results were analysed by the 2−ΔΔCT method.
Gene expression values were first normalized to the values of housekeeping
genes ef1α (eef1a2) and gapdh in experiments involving tadpoles, and adult
frogs, respectively. Subsequently, values were normalized to a selected
experimental condition.
Liposome-based myeloid lineage removal
Liposomes (4.6 nl) containing PBS (Encapsome, 23 mg/ml, Encapsula
Nano Sciences) or clodronate (Clodrosome, 23 mg/ml, Encapsula Nano
Sciences) were injected to the ventral vein region of NF developmental stage
35 and NF stage 40 tadpoles (approximately 31 and 7 h before tail
amputation). We did not co-inject with a dye to trace successfully injected
embryos, and all samples that went through this protocol were included in
further experiments and analysis. Assessment of the myeloid lineage
removal was carried out by injecting Encapsome or Clodrosome to the
slurp1l:EGFP transgenic line (Smith et al., 2002), and checking the EGFP
signal in the vein regions at indicated time points. The area of veins was
manually selected and the integrated density values were collected using
Fiji. Additionally, tails were collected at the time of amputation to assess
myeloid gene expression by RT-qPCR. Hence, the change in myeloid gene
expression in RT-qPCR results was recorded for 7 h after the final injection.
Encapsome and Clodrosome stocks were used within 2 months of first use.
Genetic ablation of myeloid lineage
Nitroreductase (NTR)/Metronidazole (MTZ)-based genetic ablation of
myeloid lineage was performed as previously described (Aztekin et al.,
2019) except that a slurp1l:NTR construct was used. The slurp1l:NTR
construct was cloned as described before (Love et al., 2011b). F0 transgenic
lines were generated using I-SceI-mediated transgenesis as previously
described (Ogino et al., 2006). Briefly, one-cell-stage embryos were injected
with of a 3:1 mix of p4_Slurp1l:CFPNTR, and p4_Slurp1l:VenusGFP
constructs with I-SceI enzyme (NEB, R0694L). After incubation at 14°C
overnight or until neurula stages, embryos were switched to 23°C, then
grown to the indicated stages. Transgenesis efficiency was assessed by
evaluating
on
an
epifluorescence
stereomicroscope
the
VenusGFP
fluorescence of injected tadpoles. Broad signal-emitting tadpoles were
selected for the experiments. For regeneration assays, tadpoles were
incubated in 10 mM MTZ (Sigma-Aldrich, M1547). MTZ was added
1 day before amputation, immediately after amputation, and 2 days post-
amputation, then removed on 6 dpa. As MTZ is light sensitive, all samples
were maintained in the dark in dishes covered with foil. Myeloid cell
removal was assessed by RT-qPCR analysis of myeloid gene expression
in the amputated tails. Hence, the change in myeloid gene expression in
RT-qPCR results was recorded from samples that had been incubated in
MTZ for 1 day.
CRISPR/Cas9-based myeloid lineage removal
The first exon of Spib.L and Spib.S were sequenced and gRNAs were
designed based on these results. gRNAs were produced as described
(Bassett and Liu, 2014). To target Spib.S and Spib.L in the same tadpole, we
mixed two gRNAs targeting these genes. gRNA targeting Tyrosinase (gTyr)
was generated as previously described (Wang et al., 2015) and used as a
control. Early one-cell-stage embryos were injected with 4.6 nl solution
containing a total of 1 ng Cas9 protein (Invitrogen, A36498) and 1250-
1500 pg gRNAs. Myeloid cell removal was assessed by RT-qPCR analysis
of myeloid gene expression in amputated and in regenerated tails. The
efficiency of gRNA cutting was assessed by TIDE analysis (Brinkman et al.,
2014). Briefly, eight to ten tadpole tails were collected at the time of
amputation and used to isolate genomic DNA using a DNeasy Blood &
Tissue Kit (Qiagen) according to manufacturer instructions. The gRNA
target regions were amplified via PCR and sequenced. Sequencing results
were used to evaluate the insertion/deletion levels by TIDE software.
Briefly, sequencing results of gTyr-injected samples were compared with
sequencing results of gSpib-injected samples to determine the putative
insertion deletion levels. Guide RNA sequences and sequencing primers are
listed in Table S2.
Immunofluorescence and imaging
Immunofluorescence and imaging experiments were carried out as previously
described (Aztekin et al., 2019). Images in Fig. S2E were taken on a Leica
SP8 confocal microscope with a 10×/0.4 HC PL Apo CS2 Air objective. The
following laser lines were used: 405 nm (DAPI), 470-670 nm White Laser
(Alexa Fluor 488, Alexa Fluor 594). Fiji was used for maximum projection of
z-stacks and to adjust contrast to highlight biological relevance. All other
images were taken on a Leica stereomicroscope with a microscope camera
DFC7000T. If needed, images were cropped, flipped, and/or rotated to
highlight biological relevance. Primary antibodies used were: GFP (Abcam,
ab13970, 1:500), TP63 (clone 4A4) (Abcam, ab735, 1:200). Secondary
antibodies used were: goat anti-chicken IgY (H+L) secondary antibody,
Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen, A11039, 1:500), goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L)
cross-adsorbed
ReadyProbes
secondary
antibody,
Alexa
Fluor
594
(Invitrogen, R37121, 1:500).
Drug treatments
Tail amputations were carried out as described above and tadpoles were
transferred to drug-containing wells immediately after tail amputations.
Tadpoles were randomly allocated to drug-containing wells. Drugs were
used with following final concentrations unless otherwise stated: 40 µM
NS3694 (Sigma-Aldrich, N7787); 100 µM 4-MU (Sigma-Aldrich, M1381);
4.5 µM FK506 (Sigma-Aldrich, F4679); and 50 ng/ml Celastrol (Sigma-
Aldrich, C0869). In all experiments, control samples had the same DMSO
concentration as that in drug-treated samples (≤0.1% DMSO for single drug
treatment and ≤0.2% DMSO in combined drug treatments).
Apoptosis assay
LysoSensor (Invitrogen, L7535), LysoTracker (Invitrogen, L7526), Caspase
3/7 Green Detection Kit (Invitrogen, C10423) and MitoTracker (Invitrogen,
M7512) were tested to detect apoptosis. Tail amputations were carried out as
described above and tadpoles were transferred to 0.1× MMR containing
0.25-0.50 µM LysoSensor immediately after amputations. Samples were
imaged at the indicated time points by a stereomicroscope without fixation.
The area that had the highest signal to background ratio at the amputation
plane was manually selected and quantified using Fiji.
Remodelling index scoring
Tadpoles at the indicated time points were imaged by a stereomicroscope.
The ratio of the length of the whole amputation plane to the length of the
exposed posterior somitic region was measured by Fiji, and calculated as the
remodelling index. Examples and schematic description are presented in
Fig. 2 and Fig. S1.
ROC mobilization assay
ROC mobilization was assessed as indicated before (Aztekin et al., 2019) with
minor modifications. pbin7Lef:GFP transgenic testes were used to generate
tadpoles and used for perturbations that are listed above. Lef1-positive
tadpoles were sorted prior to experiments. Tadpoles were fixed 12-16 h after
amputation and stained with anti-EGFP antibody as described above.
Stereoscope images were taken and the degree of ROC mobilization was
quantified by measuring the distance of the leading Lef1-positive cells (either
dorsal or ventral) to the notochord on the amputation plane.
Single cell RNA-sequencing analysis
The single cell RNA-seq data from Aztekin et al. (2019) was used to
generate myeloid lineage heat maps and to estimate abundance of myeloid
cells before and after tail amputation in regeneration-competent and
-incompetent tadpoles. Differential abundance analysis was carried out as
previously described (Aztekin et al., 2019).
Adult frog experiments
FV3 (Iridoviridae) was grown and heat-killed bacteria generated as
previously described (Robert et al., 2014). Two-year-old adult frogs were
intraperitoneally injected with either FV3 (1×106 PFU) or heat-killed
8
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185496. doi:10.1242/dev.185496
DEVELOPMENT

Escherischia coli (107 bacteria) in a volume of 100 µl of amphibian
PBS. Mpeg fluorescent peritoneal leukocytes were harvested by lavage
(Grayfer, 2018), stained with biotinylated anti-X. laevis-specific MHC class
II monoclonal antibody and sorted by flow cytometry as described by
Edholm (2018).
Statistical tests
Statistical tests applied in experiments are indicated in the figure legends.
Two condition comparisons were assessed by unpaired two-tailed Student’s
t-test. Experiments involving more than two conditions were assessed by
ordinary one-way ANOVA. All calculations were done in GraphPad.
Acknowledgements
The transgenic testes used in this study and pTransgenesis vectors were obtained
from the European Xenopus Resource Centre, curated with funding from the
Wellcome Trust/BBSRC, and maintained by the University of Portsmouth, School
of Biological Sciences. The CFP-NTR construct was provided by J. Mumm and
M. Zuber. We thank H. Ma for use of their stereoscopes. We thank R. Jones-Green
for excellent animal care. We thank E. Rawlins, B. Simons and B. Steventon for their
critical reading of the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: C.A., J.J.; Validation: C.A.; Software: T.W.H.; Formal analysis:
C.A., T.W.H., R.B.; Investigation: C.A., F.D.J.A., J.R.; Writing - original draft: C.A.,
J.J.; Writing - review & editing: C.A., J.J., T.W.H., R.B., J.B.G., J.R.; Visualization:
C.A.; Supervision: J.J., J.R., J.B.G.; Project administration: C.A., J.J.; Funding
acquisition: J.J., J.R., J.B.G.
Funding
C.A. is funded by University of Cambridge and Cambridge Trust. J.J. and J.B.G. are
funded by a grant from the Wellcome Trust (101050/Z/13/Z). T.W.H is funded as part
of a Wellcome Trust Strategic Award to study cell fate decisions (105031/D/14/Z)
and EMBO Long-Term Fellowship (ALTF 606-2018). This work is funded by a grant
from the Wellcome Trust (101050/Z/13/Z) and supported by Gurdon Institute core
grants from Cancer Research UK (C6946/A14492) and the Wellcome Trust
(092096/Z/10/Z). Open access funding provided by the University of Cambridge.
Deposited in PMC for immediate release.
Supplementary information
Supplementary information available online at
http://dev.biologists.org/lookup/doi/10.1242/dev.185496.supplemental
Peer review history
The peer review history is available online at https://dev.biologists.org/lookup/doi/10.
1242/dev.185496.reviewer-comments.pdf
References
Adams, D. S., Masi, A. and Levin, M. (2007). H+ pump-dependent changes in
membrane voltage are an early mechanism necessary and sufficient to induce
Xenopus tail regeneration. Development 134, 1323-1335. doi:10.1242/dev.
02812
Alibardi, L. (2017). Hyaluronic acid in the tail and limb of amphibians and lizards
recreates permissive embryonic conditions for regeneration due to its hygroscopic
and immunosuppressive properties. J. Exp. Zool. B Mol. Dev. Evol 328, 760-771.
doi:10.1002/jez.b.22771
Aztekin, C., Hiscock, T. W., Marioni, J. C., Gurdon, J. B., Simons, B. D. and
Jullien, J. (2019). Identification of a regeneration-organizing cell in the Xenopus
tail. Science 364, 653-658. doi:10.1126/science.aav9996
Bassett, A. and Liu, J.-L. (2014). CRISPR/Cas9 mediated genome engineering in
Drosophila. Methods 69, 128-136. doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2014.02.019
Beck, C. W., Christen, B. and Slack, J. M. W. (2003). Molecular pathways needed
for regeneration of spinal cord and muscle in a vertebrate. Dev. Cell 5, 429-439.
doi:10.1016/S1534-5807(03)00233-8
Beck, C. W., Izpisúa Belmonte, J. C. and Christen, B. (2009). Beyond early
development: Xenopus as an emerging model for the study of regenerative
mechanisms. Dev. Dyn 238, 1226-1248. doi:10.1002/dvdy.21890
Bonnans, C., Chou, J. and Werb, Z. (2014). Remodelling the extracellular matrix in
development and disease. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 15, 786-801. doi:10.1038/
nrm3904
Brinkman, E. K., Chen, T., Amendola, M. and van Steensel, B. (2014). Easy
quantitative assessment of genome editing by sequence trace decomposition.
Nucleic Acids Res. 42, e168. doi:10.1093/nar/gku936
Brock, C. K., Wallin, S. T., Ruiz, O. E., Samms, K. M., Mandal, A., Sumner, E. A.
and Eisenhoffer, G. T. (2019). Stem cell proliferation is induced by apoptotic
bodies from dying cells during epithelial tissue maintenance. Nat. Commun. 10,
1044. doi:10.1038/s41467-019-09010-6
Bryant, D. M., Sousounis, K., Payzin-Dogru, D., Bryant, S., Sandoval, A. G. W.,
Martinez Fernandez, J., Mariano, R., Oshiro, R., Wong, A. Y., Leigh, N. D. et al.
(2017). Identification of regenerative roadblocks via repeat deployment of limb
regeneration in axolotls. NPJ Regen Med. 2, 30. doi:10.1038/s41536-017-0034-z
Chen, M., Zhang, J., Chen, Y., Qiu, Y., Luo, Z., Zhao, S., Du, L. and Tian, D.
(2018). Hydrogen protects lung from hypoxia/re-oxygenation injury by reducing
hydroxyl radical production and inhibiting inflammatory responses. Sci. Rep. 8,
1-12. doi:10.1038/s41598-017-17765-5
Chera, S., Ghila, L., Dobretz, K., Wenger, Y., Bauer, C., Buzgariu, W., Martinou,
J.-C. and Galliot, B. (2009). Apoptotic cells provide an unexpected source of
Wnt3 signaling to drive hydra head regeneration. Dev. Cell 17, 279-289. doi:10.
1016/j.devcel.2009.07.014
Chu, S.-Y., Chou, C.-H., Huang, H.-D., Yen, M.-H., Hong, H.-C., Chao, P.-H.,
Wang, Y.-H., Chen, P.-Y., Nian, S.-X., Chen, Y.-R. et al. (2019). Mechanical
stretch
induces
hair
regeneration
through
the
alternative
activation
of
macrophages. Nat. Commun. 10, 1524. doi:10.1038/s41467-019-09402-8
Contreras, E. G., Gaete, M., Sanchez, N., Carrasco, H. and Larrain, J. (2009).
Early requirement of Hyaluronan for tail regeneration in Xenopus tadpoles.
Development 136, 2987-2996. doi:10.1242/dev.035501
Costa, R. M. B., Soto, X., Chen, Y., Zorn, A. M. and Amaya, E. (2008). spib is
required for primitive myeloid development in Xenopus. Blood 112, 2287-2296.
doi:10.1182/blood-2008-04-150268
Edholm, E.-S. (2018). Flow cytometric analysis of Xenopus immune cells. Cold
Spring Harb. Protoc 2018. doi:10.1101/pdb.prot097600
Ferreira, F., Luxardi, G., Reid, B. and Zhao, M. (2016). Early bioelectric activities
mediate redox-modulated regeneration. Development 143, 4582-4594. doi:10.
1242/dev.142034
Ferreira, F., Raghunathan, V., Luxardi, G., Zhu, K. and Zhao, M. (2018). Early
redox activities modulate Xenopus tail regeneration. Nat. Commun. 9, 4296.
doi:10.1038/s41467-018-06614-2
Fukazawa, T., Naora, Y., Kunieda, T. and Kubo, T. (2009). Suppression of the
immune response potentiates tadpole tail regeneration during the refractory
period. Development 136, 2323-2327. doi:10.1242/dev.033985
Gensel, J. C., Kopper, T. J., Zhang, B., Orr, M. B. and Bailey, W. M. (2017).
Predictive screening of M1 and M2 macrophages reveals the immunomodulatory
effectiveness of post spinal cord injury azithromycin treatment. Sci. Rep. 7, 40144.
doi:10.1038/srep40144
Godwin, J. W. (2014). The promise of perfect adult tissue repair and regeneration in
mammals: Learning from regenerative amphibians and fish. BioEssays 36,
861-871. doi:10.1002/bies.201300144
Godwin, J. W., Pinto, A. R. and Rosenthal, N. A. (2013). Macrophages are
required for adult salamander limb regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110,
9415-9420. doi:10.1073/pnas.1300290110
Godwin, J. W., Debuque, R., Salimova, E. and Rosenthal, N. A. (2017). Heart
regeneration in the salamander relies on macrophage-mediated control of
fibroblast activation and the extracellular landscape. NPJ Regen Med. 2, 22.
doi:10.1038/s41536-017-0027-y
Gordon, S. and Plü ddemann, A. (2018). macrophage clearance of apoptotic cells:
a critical assessment. Front. Immunol. 9. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2018.00127
Grayfer, L. (2018). Elicitation of Xenopus laevis tadpole and adult frog peritoneal
leukocytes. Cold Spring Harb. Protoc. 2018. doi:10.1101/pdb.prot097642
Julier, Z., Park, A. J., Briquez, P. S. and Martino, M. M. (2017). Promoting tissue
regeneration by modulating the immune system. Acta Biomater. 53, 13-28. doi:10.
1016/j.actbio.2017.01.056
Jullien, J., Vodnala, M., Pasque, V., Oikawa, M., Miyamoto, K., Allen, G., David,
S. A., Brochard, V., Wang, S., Bradshaw, C. et al. (2017). Gene resistance to
transcriptional reprogramming following nuclear transfer is directly mediated by
multiple chromatin-repressive pathways. Mol. Cell 65, 873-884.e8. doi:10.1016/j.
molcel.2017.01.030
King, M. W., Neff, A. W. and Mescher, A. L. (2012). The developing Xenopus limb
as a model for studies on the balance between inflammation and regeneration.
Anat. Rec. (Hoboken) 295, 1552-1561. doi:10.1002/ar.22443
Koh, T. J. and DiPietro, L. A. (2011). Inflammation and wound healing: The role of the
macrophage. Expert Rev. Mol. Med. 13, e23. doi:10.1017/S1462399411001943
Lavine, K. J., Epelman, S., Uchida, K., Weber, K. J., Nichols, C. G., Schilling,
J. D., Ornitz, D. M., Randolph, G. J. and Mann, D. L. (2014). Distinct
macrophage lineages contribute to disparate patterns of cardiac recovery and
remodeling in the neonatal and adult heart. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111,
16029-16034. doi:10.1073/pnas.1406508111
Litwiniuk, M., Krejner, A., Speyrer, M. S., Gauto, A. R. and Grzela, T. (2016).
Hyaluronic acid in inflammation and tissue regeneration. Wounds 28, 78-88.
Love, N. R., Chen, Y., Bonev, B., Gilchrist, M. J., Fairclough, L., Lea, R., Mohun,
T. J., Paredes, R., Zeef, L. A. and Amaya, E. (2011a). Genome-wide analysis of
9
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185496. doi:10.1242/dev.185496
DEVELOPMENT

gene expression during Xenopus tropicalis tadpole tail regeneration. BMC Dev.
Biol. 11, 70. doi:10.1186/1471-213X-11-70
Love, N. R., Thuret, R., Chen, Y., Ishibashi, S., Sabherwal, N., Paredes, R.,
Alves-Silva, J., Dorey, K., Noble, A. M., Guille, M. J. et al. (2011b).
pTransgenesis: a cross-species, modular transgenesis resource. Development
138, 5451-5458. doi:10.1242/dev.066498
Love, N. R., Chen, Y., Ishibashi, S., Kritsiligkou, P., Lea, R., Koh, Y., Gallop, J. L.,
Dorey, K. and Amaya, E. (2013). Amputation-induced reactive oxygen species
are required for successful Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration. Nat. Cell Biol. 15,
222-228. doi:10.1038/ncb2659
Love, N. R., Ziegler, M., Chen, Y. and Amaya, E. (2014). Carbohydrate metabolism
during vertebrate appendage regeneration: what is its role? How is it regulated?: a
postulation that regenerating vertebrate appendages facilitate glycolytic and
pentose phosphate pathways to fuel macromolecule biosynthesis. BioEssays 36,
27-33. doi:10.1002/bies.201300110
Lu, P., Takai, K., Weaver, V. M. and Werb, Z. (2011). Extracellular matrix
degradation and remodeling in development and disease. Cold Spring Harb.
Perspect. Biol. 3, a005058. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a005058
Martinez-De Luna, R. I. and Zuber, M. E. (2018). Rod-specific ablation using the
nitroreductase/metronidazole system to investigate regeneration in Xenopus.
Cold Spring Harb. Protoc. 2018, pdb.prot100974. doi:10.1101/pdb.prot100974
Mescher, A. L., Neff, A. W. and King, M. W. (2013). Changes in the inflammatory
response to injury and its resolution during the loss of regenerative capacity in
developing Xenopus limbs. PLoS ONE 8, e80477. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0080477
Mescher, A. L., Neff, A. W. and King, M. W. (2017). Inflammation and immunity in
organ regeneration. Dev. Comp. Immunol. 66, 98-110. doi:10.1016/j.dci.2016.02.015
Monaghan, J. R., Stier, A. C., Michonneau, F., Smith, M. D., Pasch, B., Maden,
M. and Seifert, A. W. (2014). Experimentally induced metamorphosis in axolotls
reduces regenerative rate and fidelity. Regeneration 1, 2-14. doi:10.1002/reg2.8
Morales, R. A. and Allende, M. L. (2019). Peripheral macrophages promote tissue
regeneration in zebrafish by fine-tuning the inflammatory response. Front.
Immunol. 10, 253. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00253
Nguyen-Chi, M., Laplace-Builhe, B., Travnickova, J., Luz-Crawford, P., Tejedor,
G., Phan, Q. T., Duroux-Richard, I., Levraud, J.-P., Kissa, K., Lutfalla, G. et al.
(2015). Identification of polarized macrophage subsets in zebrafish. eLife 4,
e07288. doi:10.7554/eLife.07288
Nguyen-Chi, M., Laplace-Builhé, B., Travnickova, J., Luz-Crawford, P., Tejedor,
G., Lutfalla, G., Kissa, K., Jorgensen, C. and Djouad, F. (2017). TNF signaling
and macrophages govern fin regeneration in zebrafish larvae. Cell Death Dis. 8,
e2979-e2979. doi:10.1038/cddis.2017.374
Nieuwkoop, P. D. and Faber, J. (1994). Normal Table of Xenopus laevis (Daudin).
Oxford, UK: Taylor and Francis.
Ogino, H., McConnell, W. B. and Grainger, R. M. (2006). High-throughput
transgenesis in Xenopus using I-SceI meganuclease. Nat. Protoc. 1, 1703-1710.
doi:10.1038/nprot.2006.208
Paredes, R., Ishibashi, S., Borrill, R., Robert, J. and Amaya, E. (2015). Xenopus:
An in vivo model for imaging the inflammatory response following injury and
bacterial infection. Dev. Biol. 408, 213-228. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.03.008
Petrie, T. A., Strand, N. S., Yang, C.-T., Rabinowitz, J. S. and Moon, R. T. (2014).
Macrophages modulate adult zebrafish tail fin regeneration. Development 141,
2581-2591. doi:10.1242/dev.098459
Robert, J., Grayfer, L., Edholm, E.-S., Ward, B. and De Jesús Andino, F. (2014).
Inflammation-Induced Reactivation of the ranavirus frog virus 3 in asymptomatic
Xenopus laevis. PLoS ONE 9, e112904. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0112904
Simkin, J., Sammarco, M. C., Dawson, L. A., Tucker, C., Taylor, L. J., Van Meter,
K. and Muneoka, K. (2015). Epidermal closure regulates histolysis during
mammalian (Mus) digit regeneration. Regeneration 2, 106-119. doi:10.1002/reg2.34
Simkin, J., Sammarco, M. C., Marrero, L., Dawson, L. A., Yan, M., Tucker, C.,
Cammack, A. and Muneoka, K. (2017). Macrophages are required to coordinate
mouse digit tip regeneration. Development 144, 3907-3916. doi:10.1242/dev.
150086
Slack, J. M. W., Beck, C. W., Gargioli, C. and Christen, B. (2004). Cellular and
molecular mechanisms of regeneration in Xenopus. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B
359, 745-751. doi:10.1098/rstb.2004.1463
Smith, S. J., Kotecha, S., Towers, N., Latinkic, B. V. and Mohun, T. J. (2002).
XPOX2-peroxidase expression and the XLURP-1 promoter reveal the site of
embryonic myeloid cell development in Xenopus. Mech. Dev. 117, 173-186.
doi:10.1016/S0925-4773(02)00200-9
Tan, H.-Y., Wang, N., Li, S., Hong, M., Wang, X. and Feng, Y. (2016). The reactive
oxygen species in macrophage polarization: reflecting its dual role in progression
and treatment of human diseases [WWW Document]. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev.
2016, 2795090. doi:10.1155/2016/2795090
Tseng, A.-S., Adams, D. S., Qiu, D., Koustubhan, P. and Levin, M. (2007).
Apoptosis is required during early stages of tail regeneration in Xenopus laevis.
Dev. Biol. 301, 62-69. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.10.048
van Rooijen, N. and Hendrikx, E. (2010). Liposomes for specific depletion of
macrophages from organs and tissues. Methods Mol. Biol. 605, 189-203. doi:10.
1007/978-1-60327-360-2_13
Varesio, L., Raggi, F., Pelassa, S., Pierobon, D., Cangelosi, D., Giovarelli, M.
and Bosco, M. C. (2016). Hypoxia reprograms human macrophages towards a
proinflammatory direction. J. Immunol. 196, 201.2-201.2.
Wang, F., Shi, Z., Cui, Y., Guo, X., Shi, Y.-B. and Chen, Y. (2015). Targeted gene
disruption in Xenopus laevis using CRISPR/Cas9. Cell Biosci. 5, 15. doi:10.1186/
s13578-015-0006-1
Yoo, S. K., Starnes, T. W., Deng, Q. and Huttenlocher, A. (2011). Lyn is a redox
sensor that mediates leukocyte wound attraction in vivo. Nature 480, 109-112.
doi:10.1038/nature10632
Zhong, X., Lee, H.-N., Kim, S. H., Park, S.-A., Kim, W., Cha, Y.-N. and Surh, Y.-J.
(2018). Myc-nick promotes efferocytosis through M2 macrophage polarization
during resolution of inflammation. FASEB J. 32, 5312-5325. doi:10.1096/fj.
201800223R
10
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2020) 147, dev185496. doi:10.1242/dev.185496
DEVELOPMENT

Supplementary Figures 
 
 
Fig S1. Clodrosome injection decreases myeloid lineage and inhibits regeneration. 
(A) Myeloid depletion efficiency following Encapsome or Clodrosome injections was assessed 
by quantifying the amount of Slurp1l expressing cell in the tail vein regions in regeneration-
competent tadpoles 2 days after the last liposome injection. Student`s t-test was used to 
assess statistical significance; *p<0.05. (B) Average regeneration index in Uninjected, 
Encapsome, and Clodrosome injected tadpoles. n = 3 biological replicates for each sample, 
error bars represent ±s.e.m.. One-way ANOVA was used to assess statistical significance, 
*p<0.05. Note that this measurement was carried out on the same data as in Fig 1D. 
Development: doi:10.1242/dev.185496: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

 
Fig S2. Genetic ablation of Slurp1l expressing cells decreases regeneration. 
(A) Experimental design for ablating Slurp1l expressing myeloid cells using NTR/MTZ method. 
F0 transgenic tadpoles that express NTR under the control of Slurp1l promoter were 
generated. MTZ was added one day before, immediately after, and two-day after amputation 
in regeneration-competent tadpoles. Regeneration efficiency was assessed at 7 dpa. (B) 
NTR/MTZ mediated ablation of Slurp1 expressing cells decreases myeloid cell lineage 
expression. Myeloid lineage gene expressions were assessed by RT-qPCR in Slurp1l:NTR 
expressing F0 tadpoles 1 day post MTZ treatment. Tail samples were collected at the time of 
amputation. All values were normalized to that of the controls without MTZ treatment. n ≥ 3 
biological replicates for each gene expression quantification, error bars represent ±s.e.m.. t-
Development: doi:10.1242/dev.185496: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

test was used to assess statistical significance; *p<0.001.(C) Regeneration-outcomes at 7 dpa 
following Slurp1l mediated NTR/MTZ myeloid cell ablation.  All samples were obtained from 
three independent biological batches: Empty without (wo) MTZ n = 31; Empty with (w) MTZ n 
= 34; Slurp1l:NTR wo MTZ n= 47; Slurp1l:NTR w MTZ n= 44.(D) Average regeneration index 
at 7 dpa following Slurp1l mediated NTR/MTZ myeloid cell ablation. n = 3 biological replicates 
for each sample, error bars represent mean ±s.e.m. Student`s t-test was used to assess 
statistical significance, *p<0.05. Note that this measurement was carried out on the same data 
as in Fig 2C. (E) Slurp1l promoter gets activated upon amputation in non-myeloid lineage 
cells. (Left) In an intact tail Tg(Slurp1l:EGFP) transgenic line labels cells that resemble 
macrophages. (Middle) Upon tail amputation at 1 dpa Tg(Slurp1l:EGFP) signal is also seen in 
non-myeloid lineages. (Right) Examples of cells with different morphologies that are labelled 
by Slurp1l promoter. All samples were stained against EGFP (green), and DAPI (blue). 
Number 5 is also stained for TP63. ROCs reside at the edges of TP63 positive epidermal cells, 
and Slurp1l signal can also be seen in these cells. Scale bar= 250 µm for intact tail and 1 dpa 
image, 50 µm for zoomed images. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Development: doi:10.1242/dev.185496: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

 
Fig S3. CRISPR/Cas9 mediated Spib knock-out decreases myeloid lineage gene 
expression and impairs regeneration. 
(A) Experimental design for generating F0 tadpoles with a defective myeloid lineage via 
CRISPR/Cas9 mediated Spib knock-out and for testing regeneration in regeneration-
competent tadpoles. Regeneration efficiency was assessed at 7 dpa. (B) Myeloid lineage gene 
expression was assessed by RT-qPCR in F0 tadpoles injected with guide RNAs targeting 
Development: doi:10.1242/dev.185496: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

either Tyrosinase (gTyr) as control, or Spib (gSpib). Spib-1 and Spib-2 denotes two different 
guide RNA mixes. Samples were collected at the time of tail amputation. All values were 
normalized to guide RNAs against Tyrosinase injected sample. Guide RNAs targeting Spib 
were able to decrease myeloid lineage gene expression. n ≥ 3 biological replicates for each 
gene expression quantification, error bars represents ±s.e.m.. (C) Guide RNA efficiencies 
were assessed via TIDE analysis. At least 10 tails of tadpoles injected with gRNAs targeting 
Tyrosinase or Spib mixes were used for TIDE. (D) Regeneration-outcomes at 7 dpa for guide 
RNA injected tadpoles. (E) Regeneration was assessed in individual tadpoles by comparing 
regenerated tail to body length ratio at the 7 dpa. All samples were obtained from at least three 
independent biological batches: gTyr n = 39; gSpib-1 n= 24; gSpib-2 n= 11. One-way ANOVA 
used to assess statistical significance, red line denotes median, *p<0.05, **p<0.001. Note that 
this measurement was carried out on the same data as in Fig S3D. (F) Myeloid lineage gene 
expressions were assessed by RT-qPCR in F0 tadpoles injected with guide RNAs targeting 
either Tyrosinase (as control), or Spib1. Spib-1 and Spib-2 denotes two different guideRNA 
mix. Samples were collected 7 day post tail amputation. All values were normalized to one 
sample of gTyr sample. GuideRNAs targeting Spib had no major difference in myeloid gene 
expression compared to gTyr control. n = 3 biological replicate for each gene expression 
quantification, and graphed, representing mean with ±s.e.m.. 
 
 
 
Development: doi:10.1242/dev.185496: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

 
Fig S4. Remodelling index captures morphological differences between the amputation 
plane of regeneration-competent and -incompetent tadpoles. 
(A) Schematics for amputation plane morphology immediately after amputation (left), and 
examples at 24 hours post amputation. Upon amputation, the somitic region is exposed to the 
outside medium and present a rectangular shape. Fin regions do not show any inward 
curvatures towards the amputation plane. Within 24 hours, somitic regions undergo histolysis 
and muscle tissue degeneration (Beck et al., 2003), while fin cells from the ventral and dorsal 
sides of the tail start covering the amputation plane. In regeneration-incompetent tadpoles, 
limited changes are observed (right, bottom). (B) Ratio of the length of the amputation plane 
surface to length of open somitic region used to estimate “remodelling index”. (C) Examples 
of images with corresponding regeneration index scores.  (D) Representative images of 
Development: doi:10.1242/dev.185496: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

regeneration-competent and –incompetent tadpoles, 0-hour post amputation and 24 hours 
post amputations. Competent tadpole present extensive remodelling of the somatic and fin 
tissues. Scale bar= 250 µm. (E) Quantification of remodelling index for regeneration-
competent and –incompetent 0 hpa, and 24 hpa samples. All samples were obtained from at 
least two biological replicates: Regeneration-competent 0 hpa n= 15; Regeneration-
competent 24 hpa n= 9; Regeneration-incompetent 0 hpa n= 15; Regeneration-incompetent 
24 hpa n= 28. One-way ANOVA used to assess statistical significance, red line denotes 
median, *p<0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Development: doi:10.1242/dev.185496: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

 
Fig S5. Lysosensor as an apoptosis reporter in amputated tail. 
(A) Representative images for multiple reagents tested to detect apoptosis levels at 1 dpa in 
regeneration-competent tadpoles. Caspase 3/7 sensor and Lysotracker, two commonly used 
apoptosis detection methods present multiple off target signal in the tadpole fin region. 
Meanwhile, Mitotracker, and Lysosensor label more specifically the regions previously 
reported to have amputation induced apoptosis (Tseng et al., 2007). Scale bar= 250 µm. (B) 
Apoptosis inhibitor (NS3694, 60 µM) treatment decreases Lysosensor signal at the 
amputation plane. (C) Apoptosis area quantitation in control and 20, 40 ,60 µM NS3694 
treated regeneration-competent tadpoles at 1 dpa. NS3694 treatments diminished the 
Lysosensor signal at 1 dpa. DMSO n = 35; 20 µM NS3694 n= 8; 40 µM NS3694 n= 15; 60 µM 
NS3694 n= 8. One-way ANOVA used to assess statistical significance, red line denotes 
median, *p<0.05. (D) Apoptotic area at 1 dpa in regeneration-competent and –incompetent 
tadpoles. Observed apoptosis levels are in agreement with the previously published reports 
Development: doi:10.1242/dev.185496: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

(Tseng et al., 2007). All samples were obtained from at least two biological replicates: 
Regeneration-competent n = 29; Regeneration-incompetent n = 28. Student`s t-test was used 
to assess statistical significance, red line denotes median, *p<0.001. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Development: doi:10.1242/dev.185496: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

 
Fig S6. CRISPR/Cas9 Spib knock-out impairs relocalization of regeneration-organizing-
cells, apoptosis levels, and tissue remodelling  
(A) Quantification of ROCs relocalization at 1 day post amputation in regeneration-competent 
gTyr control and gSpib injected tadpoles. All samples were obtained from four independent 
biological batches: gTyr n= 39; gSpib-1 n= 37; gSpib-2 n=20. One-way ANOVA used to assess 
statistical significance, red line denotes median. *p<0.05, **p<0.001. (B) Quantification of 
apoptosis levels at 1 day post amputation in regeneration-competent gTyr control and gSpib 
injected tadpoles. All samples were obtained at least from two independent biological batches 
except gSpib-2 was obtained from one batch: gTyr n= 21; gSpib-1 n= 14; gSpib-2 n=5. One-
way ANOVA used to assess statistical significance, red line denotes median. *p<0.05. (C) 
Quantification of remodelling index for the samples at 1 day post amputation in regeneration-
competent gTyr control and gSpib injected tadpoles. All samples were obtained from two 
biological replicates: gTyr n= 24; gSpib-1 n= 17; gSpib-2 n=13. One-way ANOVA used to 
assess statistical significance, red line denotes median, *p<0.05. 
Development: doi:10.1242/dev.185496: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

===== Aztekin2021_Development_SecretedInhibitor+XenopusLimbRegeneration =====
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Secreted inhibitors drive the loss of regeneration competence
in Xenopus limbs
Can Aztekin1,2,*, Tom W. Hiscock1,3,4,*, John Gurdon1,2, Jerome Jullien1,2,5,‡, John Marioni3,6,7,‡
and Benjamin David Simons1,8,9,‡
ABSTRACT
Absence of a specialized wound epidermis is hypothesized to block
limb
regeneration
in
higher
vertebrates.
However,
the
factors
preventing its formation in regeneration-incompetent animals are
poorly understood. To characterize the endogenous molecular and
cellular regulators of specialized wound epidermis formation in
Xenopus
laevis tadpoles,
and
the
loss
of
their
regeneration
competency during development, we used single-cell transcriptomics
and ex vivo regenerating limb cultures. Transcriptomic analysis
revealed that the specialized wound epidermis is not a novel cell
state, but a re-deployment of the apical-ectodermal-ridge (AER)
programme underlying limb development. Enrichment of secreted
inhibitory factors, including Noggin, a morphogen expressed in
developing cartilage/bone progenitor cells, are identified as key
inhibitors
of
AER
cell
formation
in
regeneration-incompetent
tadpoles. These factors can be overridden by Fgf10, which operates
upstream of Noggin and blocks chondrogenesis. These results
indicate that manipulation of the extracellular environment and/or
chondrogenesis may provide a strategy to restore regeneration
potential in higher vertebrates.
KEY WORDS: Limb regeneration, Xenopus, Apical-ectodermal-
ridge, scRNA-Seq, Ex vivo limbs
INTRODUCTION
Amphibian limb regeneration relies on a specialized wound
epidermis (also known as the apical-epithelial-cap, AEC) that
forms on the amputation plane and has been characterized primarily
as a tissue in regenerating salamander limbs (Campbell et al., 2011;
Campbell and Crews, 2008; Knapp et al., 2013; Monaghan et al.,
2012; Pearl et al., 2008; Tsai et al., 2020, 2019). It has been
hypothesized that the absence or immature state of this tissue limits
the regeneration potential of higher vertebrates, including mammals
(Tassava and Olsen, 1982). The AEC has been suggested to impact
underlying tissues by: degrading extracellular matrix (Kato et al.,
2003; Miyazaki et al., 1996; Yang et al., 1999); secreting growth
factors to promote proliferation (Han et al., 2001; Thornton, 1960;
Thornton and Thornton, 1965; Tsai et al., 2020); enabling the self-
renewal of underlying progenitor and dedifferentiated cells, leading
to the formation of a proliferative structure called the blastema
(Mescher, 1976; Tassava and Loyd, 1977; Tassava and Mescher,
1975); and providing directionality cues for growth (Ghosh et al.,
2008; Thornton, 1960; Thornton and Thornton, 1965). Some
marker genes associated with AEC (e.g. Fgf8 and Fn1) were seen
only in the basal layers of AEC tissue, suggesting there is cellular
heterogeneity within the AEC (Christensen and Tassava, 2000; Tsai
et al., 2020; Yokoyama et al., 2000). However, it remains largely
unclear which cell types within AEC tissue are crucial for
regeneration, which transcriptional and functional properties are
associated with a mature AEC and regeneration, and why the AEC
cannot form or maturate in some instances and/or species.
Owing to their requirement for proximal-distal outgrowth as well
as the similarity in Fgf8 expression patterns, the AEC in regenerating
limbs was suggested to be analogous to the apical-ectodermal-ridge
(AER), a tissue that has been well-studied during mouse and
chicken limb development (Beck et al., 2009). However, current
results suggest that limb regeneration-competent salamanders lack a
developmental AER (Purushothaman et al., 2019). Moreover, recent
findings (including single-cell transcriptomic data) have provided
conflicting results on epidermal Fgf8 expression during axolotl limb
regeneration (Gerber et al., 2018; Han et al., 2001; Leigh et al., 2018;
Li et al., 2020; Nacu et al., 2016; Qin et al., 2020; Rodgers et al.,
2020; Vincent et al., 2020). Therefore, it is unclear whether cells
within AEC tissue use a novel transcriptional programme for
regeneration, or whether they re-deploy a transcriptional programme
associated with developmental AER.
Xenopus laevis is the only commonly used model organism that
develops its limbs in a similar manner to amniotes, has a detectable
AER and shows limb regeneration ability (Purushothaman et al.,
2019). Moreover, tadpoles lose their limb regeneration ability
progressively during development, coinciding with their inability to
form a specialized wound epidermis, although the mechanisms of
regeneration incompetence and their connection to the specialized
wound epidermis remain incompletely understood (Christen and
Slack, 1997; Dent, 1962). At the developmental stages prior to the
formation of digits, amputations lead to a complete regeneration of
the limb [Nieuwkoop and Faber stage (NF) ∼52-54 (Nieuwkoop and
Faber, 1994), regeneration competent]. As autopod development
Handling Editor: Patrick Tam
Received 7 December 2020; Accepted 5 May 2021
1Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK. 2Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 3EJ, UK. 3Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK. 4Institute of Medical Sciences, Foresterhill
Health Campus, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, UK. 5Nantes
Université, Inserm, Centre de Recherche en Transplantation et Immunologie, UMR
1064, ITUN, F-44000 Nantes, France. 6EMBL–European Bioinformatics Institute,
Wellcome Genome Campus, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. 7Wellcome Sanger
Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. 8Department of
Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, Centre for Mathematical Sciences,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0WA, UK. 9Wellcome Trust Centre for
Stem Cell Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0AW, UK.
*These authors contributed equally to this work
‡Authors for correspondence ( jerome.jullien@inserm.fr; marioni@ebi.ac.uk;
bds10@cam.ac.uk)
C.A., 0000-0002-6544-9752; T.W.H., 0000-0002-0319-8679; J.G., 0000-0002-
5621-3799; J.J., 0000-0002-7868-0021; J.M., 0000-0001-9092-0852; B.D.S., 0000-
0002-3875-7071
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed.
1
© 2021. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Development (2021) 148, dev199158. doi:10.1242/dev.199158
DEVELOPMENT

proceeds, amputations result in partial regeneration, characterized by
missing digits (NF ∼55-57, regeneration restricted). Towards
metamorphosis,
amputations
either cause
the growth
of an
unpatterned spike-like cartilaginous structure without joints and
muscles, or a simple wound-healing response (NF ∼58 and beyond,
regeneration incompetent) (Becket al., 2009; Dent, 1962). In addition
to being stage dependent, Xenopus limb regeneration competence
depends on amputation position, and is reduced when amputations
are performed at more proximal regions of the limb, where there are
more mature chondrogenic and osteogenic cells (Nye and Cameron,
2005; Wolfe et al., 2000). Likewise, amputation through bone results
in reduced regeneration compared with amputations at the joints (Nye
and Cameron, 2005; Wolfe et al., 2000). Nonetheless, the association
between this stage and position dependence, and regeneration
competency remains unclear.
Regeneration incompetency was suggested to result from
changes in mesodermal tissue, and may involve defects in
patterning of the blastema (Sessions and Bryant, 1988; Yokoyama
et al., 2001). In particular, the lack of activating signals (e.g. Fgf10)
was proposed to prevent the formation of a specialized wound
epidermis (Yokoyama et al., 2001). However, these studies were
performed at the tissue level, and it remains unclear which
individual cell types within the tissue are responsible for
regeneration
incompetency,
whether
intrinsic
properties
of
mesodermal cell types fail to activate upon injury, and whether
inhibitory secreted factors, rather than a lack of activating factors,
plays a role in determining regeneration-outcome. Additionally,
exogenous perturbations to major signalling pathways [e.g. BMP
(Beck et al., 2006; Pearl et al., 2008), FGF (D’Jamoos et al., 1998)
and WNT (Yokoyama et al., 2011)] have been shown to inhibit
regeneration. However, it is largely unknown how these pathways
endogenously influence cell types and cellular behaviours during
regeneration, or how these different pathways operate in the context
of cell-cell interactions that mediate regeneration. Overall, although
there
are
numerous tissues
and
genes
implicated
in
limb
regeneration competency, there is currently no unifying cellular
model accounting for these disparate observations.
Here, by using single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq), we
define the cellular framework of specialized wound epidermis
formation during regeneration and its failure to form at later
developmental stages. Then, by using scRNA-seq and ex vivo limb
cultures, we reveal the crucial role of secreted inhibitory factors in
determining regeneration competency, and test this phenotype by
using regeneration-associated genes. Together, these findings
implicate a cellular mechanism in which factors secreted during
bone/cartilage formation inhibit the formation of specialized wound
epidermis at later developmental stages, compromising regeneration
competency.
RESULTS
Single-cell RNA-seq analysis reveals cell type heterogeneity
during development and following amputation of the limb
To compare differences in AER and AEC, as well as to detail the
cellular
landscape
of
regeneration,
we
used
single-cell
transcriptomics. To characterize developmental AER and cellular
changes associated with regeneration ability, we first sequenced
developing intact hindlimbs at specific morphologically defined
stages: NF stage ∼52 (limb bud stages), NF stage ∼54 (autopod
forming) and NF stage ∼56 (autopod formed) (Fig. 1A). Then, to
evaluate regeneration-associated AEC and the cellular responses to
amputations, we profiled cells from amputated limbs and their
contralateral controls. Specifically, we amputated hindlimbs from
presumptive knee/ankle levels for regeneration-competent tadpoles
(NF stage ∼52-53) and ankle level for regeneration-restricted (NF
stage ∼55-56) and regeneration-incompetent (NF stage ∼58-60)
tadpoles, and sequenced cells from newly-generated tissues at
5 days post-amputation (dpa) (Fig. 1B) when the specialized wound
epidermis and blastema are seen morphologically (Beck et al.,
2009). Contralateral developing limb buds or autopods were
sequenced as controls. We did not include a contralateral control
at the regeneration-incompetent stage as our dissociation protocol
was unable to dissociate bone cells without compromising other
tissues.
Next, we pooled the single-cell RNA-sequencing data derived
from at least two replicates for each condition (Fig. S1), and
corrected our atlas for cell cycle effects (Fig. S2), yielding a total of
42,348 cells (Materials and Methods; Fig. 1C,D; Figs S3 and S4;
Table S1). After clustering of cells based upon their gene expression
profiles, examination of multiple marker genes (Fig. S5) revealed at
least 60 distinct clusters representative of putative cell types (Fig. 1C
and Fig. S3), including known populations (e.g. AER cells) and
potentially new and uncharacterized cell states (e.g. a Piwil1+
population in the mesenchyme) (Fig. 1E). From the cell atlas, we
were able to detect cell cycle differences between cell types, e.g.
distal mesenchyme progenitors were more biased towards G2/M
phases compared with proximal mesenchyme progenitors (Fig. S2),
as reported in mouse (Boehm et al., 2010). The Xenopus limb cell
atlas is accessible using an interactive platform (https://marionilab.
cruk.cam.ac.uk/XenopusLimbRegeneration/).
Quantitative features of AER cell formation are associated
with regeneration outcome
We then focused on the specialized wound epidermis, or AEC, that
was suggested to be analogous to the AER. Although both
populations are characterized by Fgf8 expression (Beck et al.,
2009), the extent of the similarity between these cells has not been
previously tested beyond assessing the similarity of expression of a
small number of markers. Using our single-cell atlas, we compared
the transcriptional profiles of cells that belonged to the AER
(defined
as
Fgf8-expressing
epidermal
cells
during
limb
development) and the AEC (Fgf8-expressing epidermal cells in
5 dpa samples). Although we did see some quantitative expression
differences between cells related to AEC and AER tissues (Figs S5,
S6A, Table S2), they expressed many genes in common and showed
a high degree of transcriptional similarity (Fig. 2A,B, Fig. S5).
Consistent with this, cells related to these tissues were aggregated
within a single Fgf8+ epidermal cluster (Fig. 2B,C). Additionally,
both during development and 5 days post-amputation, Fgf8+
epidermal cells were mostly detected as a monolayer of polarized
cuboidal basal cells (Fig. S7), although multilayers were seen to
form in some instances (Fig. S8). This suggests that AEC and AER
tissues are not homogenous in their cellular composition, and that it
is only the basal cells that express the key Fgf8+ transcriptional
programme. Overall, based on their transcriptomic signature, tissue
localization and cellular morphology, the Fgf8+ cells that compose
the AEC and AER tissues are very similar. We find that the AEC
tissue does not require a novel cell state, but rather a re-deployment
of the transcriptional programme associated with developmental
AER, albeit with a higher signalling centre potential (Fig. 2E, Fig.
S6C,D). Owing to their high degree of similarity and common
expression of developmental AER genes, we named all cells from
the identified Fgf8+ epidermal cluster as AER cells, and referred to
specific samples to distinguish between cells from the regeneration-
associated AEC and the developmental AER.
2
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2021) 148, dev199158. doi:10.1242/dev.199158
DEVELOPMENT

To test the similarities of cell types composing the specialized
wound epidermis in different regeneration conditions, we compared
transcriptomes of cells corresponding to limb and tail specialized
wound epidermis. We found that AER cells (limb-specialized
wound epidermal cells) and cells that define the specialized wound
epidermis
during
Xenopus
tail
regeneration
(regeneration-
organizing cells, ROCs; Aztekin et al., 2019) showed similar, but
non-identical, gene expression profiles (Fig. S9), emphasizing that
the cellular framework of the specialized wound epidermis is
context dependent and appendage regeneration scenarios can use
different cell types.
Limb amputation is known to result in the formation of a Fgf8-
expressing AEC at the amputation plane in regeneration-competent
tadpoles, but not in regeneration-incompetent tadpoles (Christen and
Slack, 1997), whereas AEC formation has not been characterized
previously for regeneration-restricted tadpoles. Using our atlas, we
found that, at 5 dpa, tadpole epidermis contained abundant AER
cells in regeneration-competent tadpoles and a limited number of
AER cells in regeneration-restricted tadpoles, whereas AER cells
were
largely
absent
from
regeneration-incompetent
tadpoles
(Fig. 2B-D). In parallel, AER cell-associated ligand expression
was lower or absent in regeneration-incompetent tp63+ epidermal
cells (Fig. S6E). In our dataset, we found that different populations
express ligands from different major signalling pathways (FGF,
BMP, WNT, DELTA and TGFβ) (Fig. S6C). However, only AER
cells can express multiple ligands from these gene families
concurrently and at a very high level, making them a highly potent
signalling centre (Fig. 2E, Fig. S6). Although Fgf8 was always
expressed in AER cells, the relative expression of Fgf8 and other
ligands varied among conditions (Fig. 2E, Fig. S6, Table S2),
emphasizing that the detection of Fgf8 alone does not discriminate
the signalling centre potency of AER cells. Indeed, in addition to the
changes in AER cell abundance, we also detected differentially
expressed genes between AER cells from regeneration-competent
and -restricted tadpoles (Fig. S6B). These differences suggest that
AER cells in regeneration-competent 5 dpa samples may be more
Fig. 1. Single-cell transcriptomics reveals cellular heterogeneity in developing and amputated Xenopus limbs at different stages of regeneration
competence. (A) Schematic describing Xenopus limb regeneration at different NF stages. NF stage ∼52-54 tadpoles are regeneration competent and
amputations result in regeneration of a full limb. Regeneration ability begins to decline at NF stage ∼54. Tadpoles are regeneration restricted at NF ∼stage
56, where two or three digits can be regenerated. Beyond NF stage ∼58, tadpoles are regeneration incompetent and amputations result in simple wound
healing or unpatterned spike formation. Green boxes indicate the location of samples collected for scRNA-seq, taken at stages prior to, at the onset of and
after the loss of regeneration ability. (B) Schematic describing 5 days post-amputation (dpa) samples for regeneration-competent, -restricted and
-incompetent tadpoles. Green boxes indicate the location of samples collected for scRNA-seq. (C) An atlas of cell types in intact and amputated limbs.
Samples from each condition are processed separately for sequencing, and are then pooled together for UMAP visualization and clustering. Each dot
corresponds to a single cell, colours indicate cluster identity, text labels important tissue/cell types. See Fig. S3 for full annotation. (D) Comparisons can be
made between conditions to highlight transcriptional changes associated with regeneration; here, NF stage 52 amputated limbs (bottom) are compared with
their contralateral control samples (top). Red dots indicate cells in the selected sample; grey dots indicate cells in all samples. (E) Diversity of mesenchymal
cell types detected in our dataset (top), together with putative gene expression programmes identified using unbiased factor analysis (bottom).
3
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2021) 148, dev199158. doi:10.1242/dev.199158
DEVELOPMENT

‘mature’ compared with regeneration-restricted cells, although
further work on the functional role of these genes (e.g. Sesn1.L,
Cpn1.S, Ddx21.L)
is required. Overall, although the signalling
centre potency of AER cells appeared variable, the redeployment of
this developmental cell type with a high signalling centre potential
had a strong correlation with regeneration outcome.
The presence of AER cells is associated with injury-induced
mesenchymal plasticity
It has been suggested that the AEC enables the self-renewal activity
of dedifferentiated cells, leading to blastema formation (Tassava and
Mescher, 1975; Tassava and Loyd, 1977). To identify signatures of
dedifferentiation in our atlas, we first examined the expression of
genes related to dedifferentiation and blastema formation (Gerber
et al., 2018; Haas and Whited, 2017; Leigh et al., 2018) (e.g. Sall4
and Kazald1). We found that these genes were either already
expressed before amputation or upregulated upon amputation in a
subset of fibroblasts (Fig. S10A,B) that were located near the skin
and perichondrium (Fig. S11). Likewise, we found that a small
fraction of these fibroblasts expressed muscle-related genes (e.g.
Pax3) before and after amputation (Fig. S10B). Moreover,
independently of regeneration outcome, amputation resulted in
these fibroblast cells expressing genes related to distal mesenchyme
progenitors (e.g. Grem1, Shh, Msx1 and Fgf10) and chondrogenesis
(e.g. Col8a2 and Sox9) (Fig. S10A). Finally, amputation not only
increased the expression of known marker genes, but also led to the
upregulation of an entire putative distal mesenchyme progenitor
gene set (Fig. S10C), with the magnitude of this upregulation
being lower in samples that had fewer AER cells. Together, we
concluded that, upon amputation, a subset of fibroblasts manifest
injury-induced mesenchymal plasticity – at least at the transcriptional
level – and its extent correlates with AER cell abundance.
AER cell formation requires activation of multiple signalling
pathways
To investigate the molecular mechanisms that mediate AER cell
formation upon amputation, we developed an ex vivo regenerating
limb culture protocol, inspired by previous work (Cannata et al.,
1992) (Fig. 3A). By culturing amputated stylopod, or zeugopod and
stylopod from regeneration-competent or regeneration-restricted
tadpoles, respectively, we observed Fgf8 cell formation at the distal
part of explants within 3 dpa (Fig. 3B). Regeneration-competent
explants also exhibited cone-shaped growth as cells accumulated
uniformly underneath Fgf8 cells, mimicking in vivo regeneration
(Fig. 3A,B, Fig. S12A,B). Interestingly, the proximal region of
explants was also covered with epidermis (Figs S12A, S13A), but
neither Fgf8-expressing cells nor a uniform cell accumulation
underneath the epidermis was observed (Fig. 3A,B, Figs S12B,
S13A). Moreover, the proximal part of the explant exhibited active
chondrogenesis, manifesting in an outwards growth of cartilaginous
tissue (Fig. 3A and Fig. S12C). This phenotype was particularly
pronounced when explants were harvested from developmental
stages in which proximal tissues were advanced in chondrogenesis
(onset of NF stage 53-54) (Fig. 3A and Fig. S12D), and could be
further enhanced by addition of BMP4, a known chondrogenesis
inducer (Fig. S12E). Hence, the proximal and distal sites of limb
explants exhibit different behaviours: the distal sites recapitulate
localized AER cell formation, as seen in vivo, whereas the proximal
site is characterized by active chondrogenesis without AER cell
formation.
Fig. 2. Formation of a signalling centre
comprising apical-ectodermal-ridge (AER)
cells is associated with the successful
regeneration. (A) Multiple basal epidermal cell
states are detected, including AER cells, in the
pooled dataset. (B) UMAP visualization of basal
epidermis reveals that re-establishment of AER
cells is associated with successful regeneration.
Red dots indicate cells in the selected sample;
grey dots indicate cells in all samples. (C) Left:
UMAP visualization of pooled data for AER cells
expressing Fgf8.L. Right: stereomicroscope
images of the 5 dpa amputation plane of
regeneration-competent, -restricted and
-incompetent tadpoles. Fgf8.L-expressing AER
cells (red) are formed in regeneration-competent
and -restricted tadpoles, but not in regeneration-
incompetent tadpoles. Scale bars: 250 μm.
(D) The abundance of basal epidermal cell
types across conditions reveals a correlation
between AER abundance and regeneration
outcome. AER cells are present in intact
regeneration-competent samples, and are
enriched after amputation. A similar pattern is
seen in regeneration-restricted samples,
although abundances of AER cells are reduced.
Very few AER cells are detected in
regeneration-incompetent tadpoles. (E) Dot plot
showing expression of selected ligands for AER
cells during development and at 5 dpa in
regeneration-competent and -restricted samples.
Dot colour indicates mean expression; dot size
represents the percentage of cells with non-zero
expression.
4
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2021) 148, dev199158. doi:10.1242/dev.199158
DEVELOPMENT

In addition to changes associated with regeneration, explants
could be used to determine signalling requirements for specialized
wound epidermis formation. Inhibition of FGF, BMP and WNT
pathways via small molecule inhibitors blocked AER cell formation
in explants (Fig. 3C), reinforcing the conclusion that the in vivo
AEC effects reported in former studies are mediated through a direct
effect on the limb rather than a systemic effect (Beck et al., 2006;
D’Jamoos et al., 1998; Yokoyama et al., 2011). Moreover, by using
the culture assay, we found that active TGFβ and NOTCH signalling
are also required for Xenopus AER cell formation (Fig. 3C). Overall,
we concluded that AER cell formation requires the activity of
multiple major signalling pathways, although further work is
required to determine what roles these pathways play and whether
they directly or indirectly regulate AER cell formation.
AER cells can form without cell division
Next, we asked how AER cells form on the amputation plane. It has
been suggested that salamander AEC tissue forms by migration of
epidermal cells to the amputation plane, and may not require cell
proliferation (Campbell and Crews, 2008; Hay and Fischman,
1961). Moreover, the mouse AER was previously suggested to be a
largely mitotically inactive tissue (Storer et al., 2013). However, it is
not known whether similar mechanisms apply to AER cells within
the specialised wound epidermis, and also to what extent they are
Fig. 3. Ex vivo regenerating limbs demonstrate that AER cell formation requires activation of multiple pathways and can form from basal epidermal
cells. (A) Left: schematic for ex vivo regeneration limb culture. Right: time-lapse images of a regeneration-competent explant. The explant grows a cone
shape at its distal site reminiscent of in vivo regeneration (green arrowhead), while the proximal site shows chondrogenesis (blue arrowhead). Scale bars:
200 μm. (B) An example image of a regeneration-competent explant at 3 days post-culture. The distal site of explants is Fgf8.L positive (red arrowhead); the
proximal site is Fgf8.L negative (purple arrowhead). Red, Fgf8.L mRNA. Scale bar: 200 μm. (C) Drug screen to test regulators of AER cell formation. Top:
schematics describing the screen. One limb of a tadpole was used for perturbation and the contralateral limb from the same tadpole was used as a control.
Samples were treated with the indicated drugs for 3 days post-culture, and then stained for Fgf8.L mRNA. Bottom: the extent of Fgf8.L expression along the
amputation plane was measured. Sample sizes: ICRT3 total, n≥9 from three biological replicates; SU5402 total, n≥9 from two biological replicates;
LDN193189 total, n=8 from three biological replicates; SB431542 total, n=8 from two biological replicates; DAPT total, n=7 from three biological replicates.
*P<0.05, **P<0.001. Data are mean±s.e.m. (D) Factor analysis identifies a putative gene expression trajectory from basal epidermal cells to AER cells,
predicting sequential activation of Lgr5.S followed by Fgf8.L. (E) A proximal-to-distal gradient of Lgr5.S and Fgf8.L is observed in vivo, with Fgf8.L being
restricted to the most distal regions of the midline epidermis. Black dots represent HCR mRNA signal. Scale bars: 20 μm.
5
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2021) 148, dev199158. doi:10.1242/dev.199158
DEVELOPMENT

seen in Xenopus. Therefore, we first traced skin tissue located on the
edge of explants, and found that they contributed to the covering of
both the distal and proximal sites (Fig. S13B). As the amputation
planes are covered by skin tissue from the surrounding area, we
reasoned that AER cells are likely to have originated from skin cells.
As amputation eliminates the majority, if not all, of AER cells in the
limb, we hypothesized that AER cells are derived from remaining
skin stem cells. If AER cells are induced through proliferation and
differentiation following amputation, all AER cells should be the
product of cell division. To test this hypothesis, we assayed the level
of EdU incorporation (labelling newly synthesized DNA, hence
divided cells) in newly formed AER cells, using Fgf8 positivity to
specifically identify AER cells within the AEC tissue. We found
that only ∼40% of AER cells (distal epidermal Fgf8+) were EdU
positive at 3 dpa (Fig. S13C), suggesting that most AER cells are
induced independently of cell division following amputation. These
results parallel our transcriptomics-based cell-cycle assessment in
which AER cells display low levels of proliferation (Fig. S2D).
Using the transcriptomics data, we identified a stepwise activation
of Lgr5.S (a WNT target gene) followed by Fgf8.L expression as a
possible gene-expression trajectory that could allow basal epidermal
cells to convert directly to AER cells without cell division (Fig. 3D).
Consistent with such a process, when visualized in vivo, we found
that Fgf8+/Lgr5+ AER cells were flanked by Lgr5+ cells in the basal
epidermis on the amputation plane or in the developing limb
(Fig. 3E and Fig. S7A,B). Overall, these results support the
hypothesis that basal epidermal cells can acquire AER cell identity
without cell division, although understanding the functional
relevance of cell division on AER cell fate requires further work.
Loss of regeneration potential is associated with enrichment
in inhibitory secreted factors to AER cell formation
We then asked why fewer or no AER cells form on the amputation
plane of regeneration-restricted or -incompetent tadpoles, respectively.
Previous studies have proposed that lack of activating signals in the
mesodermal
tissue,
specifically
Fgf10,
causes
regeneration
incompetency (Yokoyama et al., 2001). However, these results
cannot explain why regeneration is impaired when amputations are
conducted through bone or at more-proximal limb regions, or why the
proximal site of limb explants cannot form AER cells. Thus, we
assessed whether Fgf10 can induce Fgf8 expression across the whole
epidermis or whether there are additional requirements for distal
epidermal Fgf8 expression, and hence AER cell formation.
When we examined the spatial correlation between Fgf10.L-
expressing mesenchymal cells and Fgf8.L-expressing epithelial
cells in regeneration-competent tadpoles, we saw regions in which
Fgf10.L but not Fgf8.L was present (Fig. S14A). Second, when
adding FGF10 to regeneration-competent explants, we observed a
slight, but not statistically significant, increase in AER cell
formation on the amputation plane (Fig. S14B); however, this
signal was confined to the distal epidermis and did not include a
substantial signal at the proximal site of explants (Fig. S14C), where
chondrogenic populations are more abundant. This suggested that
FGF10 alone cannot induce AER cell formation across the entire
epidermis, and that the presence/absence of further activating/
inhibitory signals are involved in AER cell formation.
To test whether there are inhibitory factors secreted from
regeneration-incompetent tadpole limbs that block AER cell
formation, we took advantage of our ex vivo cultures. First, we
co-cultured ex vivo limbs from regeneration-competent and
-incompetent tadpoles. Strikingly, when such cultures were
stained against Fgf8 at 3 dpa, we observed that regeneration-
competent tadpole limbs failed to form AER cells (Fig. 4A).
Second, we collected media from regeneration-incompetent tadpole
explants and cultured freshly amputated regeneration-competent
explants with this conditioned media. Consistent with the co-culture
experiment, the conditioned media from regeneration-incompetent
tadpoles blocked AER cell formation in regeneration-competent
explants
(Fig.
4B).
By
contrast,
neither
co-culturing
with
regeneration-competent explants nor preparing conditioned media
from regeneration-competent explants affected AER cell formation
in regeneration-competent explants (Fig. 4A,B). Additionally,
conditioned media from regeneration-competent explants was
unable to induce AER cell formation in regeneration-incompetent
explants (Fig. S15A,B), emphasizing that it is the enrichment of
inhibitory secreted factors that is the dominant process interfering
with AER cell formation, rather than a depletion in regeneration-
promoting factors. Altogether, these results suggest that secreted
inhibitory factors block AER cell formation in regeneration-
incompetent tadpoles, presumably compromising their regeneration
potential.
To identify the factors responsible for this inhibitory effect, we
surveyed our single-cell atlas for the expression of secreted proteins
involved in signalling pathways required for AER cell formation.
We found that that the loss of regeneration potential is associated
with an increased proportion of chondrogenic lineage cells in
the mesenchyme [Fig. 4C, aligning with previous tissue-level
observations (Dent, 1962)] and that these cells express multiple
inhibitory ligands for BMP and WNT pathways (Fig. 4D). As
chondrogenic populations specifically express high levels of
Noggin (Fig. 4D), a known antagonist of BMP signalling, we
hypothesized that AER cell formation is antagonized by an excess
of secreted Noggin in regeneration-incompetent tadpoles. Indeed,
consistent with previous observations (Pearl et al., 2008), addition
of NOGGIN to regeneration-competent ex vivo limbs blocked AER
cell formation (Fig. S15C). To test whether endogenous NOGGIN
does indeed act as one of the inhibitory secreted factors produced
following
amputation
in
regeneration-incompetent
tadpoles,
we blocked NOGGIN in our co-culture and conditioned media
experiments using anti-NOGGIN antibodies (Fig. 4A,B). Strikingly,
blocking secreted NOGGIN by antibody addition cancelled the
inhibitory activity on AER cell formation in both co-culture and
conditioned media experiments (Fig. 4A,B). Based on these
observations, we then explored whether anti-NOGGIN application
would improve the in vivo amputation response. Indeed, when beads
loaded with anti-NOGGIN antibodies were implanted on the
amputation plane of regeneration-restricted/incompetent tadpoles,
we saw a mild improvement in the regenerative response (Fig. 5A),
highlighting that secreted inhibitors are influencing the regeneration-
outcome in vivo.
As these experiments point towards the chondrogenic lineage as
the source of inhibitory secreted factors, we then asked whether
limiting chondrogenesis can promote AER cell formation. To this
end, we generated tip explants by culturing distal limb buds (NF
stage ∼52) or early formed autopods (NF stage ∼54) without their
proximal segment, where the most advanced chondrogenesis takes
place. Indeed, these tip explants showed ectopic Fgf8 expression at
different sites of the epidermis, further suggesting a localized and/or
long-range inhibitory effect of secreted factors from mature
chondrogenic cells (Fig. S15D). Moreover, the inability of the
proximal explant epidermis to form AER might be explained, at
least in part, by the abundance of chondrogenic cells at the proximal
site (Fig. 3A,B). Overall, these results indicate that the loss of AER
cell formation ability is associated with an enrichment in inhibitory
6
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2021) 148, dev199158. doi:10.1242/dev.199158
DEVELOPMENT

secreted factors, including NOGGIN, that are secreted primarily
from the chondrogenic lineage.
As NOGGIN is known to neutralize secreted BMPs, we then
focused on assessing the effect of the BMP pathway on AER cell
formation. Previously, it was demonstrated that, not only do mouse
and chicken AER require active BMP signalling, but also excess BMP
activation abolishes AER (Pajni-Underwood et al., 2007; Pizette et al.,
2001; Pizette and Niswander, 1999; Verheyden and Sun, 2008). To
test whether manipulation of BMP signalling can also impact Xenopus
AER cell formation in regeneration-competent tadpoles, we perturbed
the BMP pathway. We found that the addition of BMP4 to
regeneration-competent ex vivo cultures blocked AER cell formation
(Fig. S15C), an effect similar to that reported in chick and mouse
embryos (Pajni-Underwood et al., 2007; Pizette et al., 2001; Pizette
and Niswander, 1999; Verheyden and Sun, 2008). The addition of
NOGGIN to regeneration-competent ex vivo cultures blocked AER
cell formation (Fig. S15C), as reported before in vivo (Beck et al.,
2006; Jones et al., 2013). Moreover, we found that inhibiting
NOGGIN could increase the formation of AER cells (Fig. S15C),
suggesting endogenous BMP4 levels do not reach a level where AER
cell formation is blocked. As BMP4 boosts chondrogenesis
(Fig. S12E), which can, in turn, lead to Noggin expression, these
results suggest that fine-tuning of BMP agonist and antagonists levels
in the growing limb are key for AER cell formation.
Fig. 4. Inhibitory factors, such as Noggin, are secreted from chondrogenic populations at regeneration-incompetent stages and block AER cell
formation. (A) Top: schematic describing co-culture experiments. Middle: co-culturing regeneration-competent and -incompetent explants decreases the
extent of Fgf8.L expression at the amputation plane at 3 dpa. Bottom: this effect can be rescued by adding anti-NOGGIN antibody. Regeneration-competent
and -competent co-culture total, n=26 from four biological replicates; regeneration-competent and -incompetent co-culture total, 15 from four biological
replicates; competent and incompetent co-culture, and anti-IGG antibody total, n=10 from three biological replicates; competent and incompetent co-culture,
and anti-NOGGIN antibody total, n=10 from three biological replicates. *P<0.05 and **P<0.001. Data are mean±s.e.m. (B) Top: schematic describing
conditioned media experiments to test the effect of secreted factors in regeneration-incompetent tadpole limbs. Middle: supplying conditioned media (CM)
from regeneration-incompetent tadpoles to regeneration-competent explants decreases the extent of Fgf8.L expression at the amputation plane at 3 dpa.
Bottom: this effect can be rescued by adding anti-NOGGIN antibody. Regeneration-competent CM to -competent explants total, n=8 from three biological
replicates; regeneration-incompetent CM to -competent explants total, n=7 from three biological replicates; regeneration-incompetent CM to -competent
explants, and anti-IGG antibody total, n=10 from three biological replicates; regeneration-incompetent CM and anti-NOGGIN antibody to regeneration-
competent explants total, n=10 from three biological replicates. *P<0.05 and **P<0.001. Data are mean±s.e.m. (C) Abundance of mesenchymal populations
across conditions reveals an enrichment of chondrogenic populations at regeneration-restricted and -incompetent stages, in both intact and amputated limbs.
(D) Multiple BMP/WNT antagonists are expressed specifically in chondrogenic populations. This dotplot is generated using the pooled dataset, with late-
stage tadpoles having high levels of chondrogenic and fibroblast populations, but not immature mesenchymal cell types, as shown in C.
7
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2021) 148, dev199158. doi:10.1242/dev.199158
DEVELOPMENT

Fig. 5. See next page for legend.
8
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2021) 148, dev199158. doi:10.1242/dev.199158
DEVELOPMENT

FGFR activation negatively regulates progression of
chondrogenesis and the FGF pathway operates upstream of
NOGGIN for AER cell formation
As regeneration competency in late stage tadpoles has bee shown
previously to be restored via exogenous application of FGF10
(Yokoyama et al., 2001), we next sought to evaluate whether the
effect of Fgf10 on regeneration is, at least in part, mediated by its
impact on chondrogenesis and Noggin expression. To test the effect
of Fgf10 on chondrogenesis, we used our ex vivo cultures to monitor
the substantial chondrogenesis occurring at the proximal site of
explants. Application of FGF10 beads to the proximal site of ex vivo
cultures, or addition of recombinant FGF10 to their media,
significantly decreased chondrogenesis at the proximal sites in
regeneration-restricted explants (Fig. 5B). Conversely, blocking
FGFR significantly extended chondrogenesis at the proximal site of
explants (Fig. 5C-D, Fig. S16). Nonetheless, FGF10 treatment was
not sufficient to induce strong Fgf8 expression at the proximal site
of explants (Fig. S14C), which we hypothesize could be, at least in
part, attributable to differences in the abundance of proposed
antagonist cues. To test this hypothesis, we treated explants with a
combination of FGF10 and anti-NOGGIN antibodies. Strikingly,
this combination not only enhanced AER cell formation at the distal
sites, but also induced ectopic Fgf8.L expression near the proximal
sites of explants (Fig. 5E,F), further suggesting that the enrichment
of inhibitory secreted factors from the chondrogenic lineage affects
the ability to form AER cells. Finally, AER cell formation induced
by FGF10 addition was cancelled by the addition of BMP inhibitors
(NOGGIN or small molecule inhibitors) (Fig. 5E), suggesting that
FGF10 acts upstream of the effect of NOGGIN ex vivo. To further
test this finding in vivo, we asked whether the positive effect of
FGF10 in regeneration-incompetent tadpoles could be abrogated by
simultaneous NOGGIN addition. To investigate this, we inserted
beads co-loaded with FGF10 and NOGGIN to the amputation plane
of regeneration-restricted and/or -incompetent tadpoles, and found
this significantly decreased the positive effect of FGF10-only beads
(Fig. 5G). These results further emphasise that FGF10 operates
upstream of NOGGIN, and hence that secreted inhibitors play a
dominant role in determining regeneration outcome.
DISCUSSION
Limb regeneration and its requirement for a mature specialized
wound epidermis (the AEC) is a well-established phenomenon with
extensive tissue and gene level investigations. Here, moving beyond
tissue-level descriptions, we reveal cell types and transcriptional
states that mediate Xenopus limb regeneration and AEC tissue by
using single-cell transcriptomics and ex vivo regenerating limb
cultures. Transcriptome and morphological assessment indicate that
the transcriptional programmes and cells defining AEC and AER
tissues are largely the same, differing only in the magnitude of their
signalling centre potential. Hence, AEC does not seem to involve a
novel
transcriptional
programme
specific
for
regeneration-
competent species, but rather the activation of a programme that
is highly reminiscent of developmental AER, at least in Xenopus.
Moreover,
by
identifying
transcriptomic
and
morphological
differences between the specialized wound epidermis of an
amputated tail and limb, we demonstrated that, at the cellular
level, appendage regeneration is context dependent and warrants
caution for cross-paradigm comparisons. Indeed, it is likely that
other regeneration paradigms may use different cell types and
transcriptional programmes for their specialised wound epidermis
[e.g. zebrafish fin AEC does not express Fgf8 (Shibata et al., 2016)].
Nonetheless, amniotes, including humans, have a developmental
AER (Kelley and Fallon, 1976). Therefore, our results suggest that
mammals have the transcriptional programme to orchestrate limb
regeneration, but fail to redeploy the AER cell transcriptional
programme upon injury. These results prompted us to characterize
regulators of AER cell formation.
Recent research has focused on the intrinsic properties of
mesodermal tissue and its ability to induce specialized wound
Fig. 5. FGF10 impacts chondrogenesis and operates upstream of
NOGGIN. (A) Anti-NOGGIN antibody application to distal amputations
improves regeneration in regeneration-restricted and -incompetent tadpoles.
Regeneration-restricted and -incompetent tadpole right and left hindlimbs
were amputated, and beads containing anti-IGG antibody or anti-NOGGIN
antibody were placed on the right hindlimbs. Formed digits and digit-like
structures were quantified in the right and left hindlimbs, and the difference
calculated. Anti-IGG antibody total, n=17 from three biological replicates;
anti-NOGGIN antibody total, n=28 from four biological replicates. (B) The
effect of FGF10 on chondrogenesis is assessed by measuring the
chondrogenic outgrowth at the proximal sites of regeneration-restricted
explants at 3 dpa. Red lines show measured proximal chondrogenesis.
Implanting 0.1% BSA/PBS beads at the proximal site or supplying 0.1%
BSA/PBS to the media had no significant effect on chondrogenesis, while
implanting Fgf10 beads at the proximal site or supplying FGF10 in media
reduced chondrogenesis. Contralateral limbs were used as controls and are
labelled as empty. From left to right, empty and PBS beads total, n≥7 from
at least two biological replicates; empty and FGF10 bead total, n≥14 from at
least four biological replicates; empty and 0.1% BSA/PBS in media total,
n=10 from three biological replicates; empty and FGF10 in media, n≥14 from
at least three biological replicates. ns, not significant; *P<0.05 and
**P<0.001. Data are mean±s.e.m. Scale bar: 50 µm. (C) Left: example
images of SU5402-treated explants showing extensive chondrogenesis at
the proximal site. Red lines show measured proximal chondrogenesis. Right:
blocking FGFR via the small molecule inhibitor SU5402 extends
chondrogenesis in 3 days for regeneration-competent and -restricted
explants. Contralateral limbs were used as controls and treated with DMSO.
DMSO total, n=29 from seven biological replicates; SU5402 total, n=25 from
seen biological replicates. **P<0.001. Data are mean±s.e.m. Scale bar:
200 µm. (D) Representative sectioned histology images for 3 dpa explants
treated with SU5402. The outgrowing structures are Alcian Blue rich, which
is indicative of chondrogenic cells. (E) Regeneration-competent explants
were treated with a combination of FGF10 and recombinant BMP4, or with
recombinant NOGGIN, with LDN193189 or with anti-NOGGIN antibody.
0.1% BSA/PBS and anti-IGG antibody were used as controls. From left to
right: BSA total, n=8 from two biological replicates; recombinant FGF10 and
recombinant BMP4 total, n=8 from two biological replicates; DMSO and BSA
total, n=8 from two biological replicates; FGF10 and LDN total, n=8 from two
biological replicates; BSA and anti-IGG antibody total, n=12 from three
biological replicates; FGF10 and anti-NOGGIN antibody total, n=10 from
three biological replicates; BSA total, n=8 from two biological replicates;
recombinant FGF10 and recombinant NOGGIN total, n=8 from two biological
replicates. **P<0.001. Data are mean±s.e.m. (F) Representative whole-
mount stereomicroscope image of rFGF10 and anti-NOGGIN antibody
treated explants can show a substantial Fgf8.L expression at different sites
of the explant (n=5/9 from two biological replicates, compared with n=0/121
in controls, P<0.0001). Scale bar: 200 μm. (G) Recombinant FGF10
application to distal amputations restore regeneration in -regeneration-
restricted and -incompetent tadpoles. Regeneration-restricted and
-incompetent tadpole right and left hindlimbs were amputated, and beads
containing 0.1% BSA/PBS or recombinant FGF10 or recombinant FGF10
and NOGGIN were placed on the right hindlimbs. Formed digits and digit-
like structures were quantified in the right and left hindlimbs and the
difference calculated. Box and whisker plots show minimum to maximum for
all data points. Red dots represent individual data points. Where applicable,
boxes show interquartile range (25-75%). Mean for No bead: 0.15; PBS:
−0.5; rFGF10: 1.04; rFGF10 + rNOGGIN: 0. Empty total, n=19 from two
biological replicates; 0.1%/PBS bead total, n=17 from five biological
replicates; recombinant FGF10 bead total, n=25 from five biological
replicates; recombinant FGF10 and NOGGIN bead total, n=25 from four
biological replicates. ns, not significant; **P<0.001.
9
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2021) 148, dev199158. doi:10.1242/dev.199158
DEVELOPMENT

epidermis (via Fgf10 expression), supported by the observation that
transplantation of mesoderm tissue from regeneration-incompetent
limbs prevents regeneration in competent Xenopus limbs (Sessions
and Bryant, 1988; Yokoyama et al., 2000). However, this approach
is
not
able
to
discriminate whether cells
are
intrinsically
incompetent or whether secreted factors cause this effect, as both
would be transferred at the same time (as well as the numerous
caveats associated with tissue transplantation). Moreover, this
hypothesis does not explain why FGF10 is insufficient to induce
AER cells across the entire epidermis or why regeneration outcomes
are significantly correlated with the extent of ossification at the
amputation plane (Dent, 1962; Nye and Cameron, 2005; Wolfe
et al., 2000). Inspired by our scRNA-seq data, we sought to
determine whether other secreted factors could also be contributing
to regeneration incompetency. To our knowledge, there is no
practical way to obtain secreted factors from regeneration-
incompetent tadpoles and transfer them to regeneration-competent
animals in vivo. Therefore, we established ex vivo cultures that
faithfully recapitulated in vivo regeneration to test this critical
hypothesis. We identified AER cells in the ex vivo limbs using
spatially resolved and quantitative measurement of epidermal Fgf8
via HCR (Choi et al., 2018). Our scRNA-seq data demonstrated that
high epithelial Fgf8 expression is a unique late-stage marker in the
establishment of AER cell identity (Fig. 3D), and therefore Fgf8
positivity in our experimental set-up corresponds with high
precision to the AER cell type. By using our explant systems and
conducting co-culture and conditioned media experiments, both of
which would be inaccessible in vivo, we found that secreted
inhibitory factors in regeneration-incompetent tadpoles negatively
impact AER cell formation.
To further explore this observation, we surveyed our scRNA-seq
data and saw that a number of putative inhibitors (e.g. Noggin) were
enriched in chondrogenic cell types, suggesting that factors secreted
from the chondrogenic lineage may prevent AER cell formation. To
test this hypothesis, we perturbed two genes previously associated
with regeneration: Noggin (Beck et al., 2006; Pearl et al., 2008) and
Fgf10 (Yokoyama et al., 2001). Previous analysis of these genes
was limited to the study of exogenous perturbations and their effect
on regeneration outcome, without providing a model involving their
endogenous function and their interaction. For example, although
NOGGIN overexpression was shown to block regeneration, we
show here for the first time that secreted factors in regeneration-
incompetent tadpoles block AERcell formation and that endogenous
NOGGIN is one of the factors causing this effect. Similarly,
although FGF10 was shown to restore regeneration competency, it
was not known that FGF10 activity operates upstream of
chondrogenesis and NOGGIN to influence regeneration-outcome.
Altogether, in this work we have systematically assessed which cell
types express Fgf10 and Noggin, how they act on cell types to impact
regeneration, and how they operate within our proposed cellular
mechanism.
We then tested our model in vivo and found that removal of
secreted inhibitors (e.g. NOGGIN) or blocking the source of secreted
inhibitors (chondrogenic progression via FGF10 application) could
indeed improve the regeneration outcome in regeneration-defective
stages. Moreover, we demonstrated that NOGGIN attenuates the
positive effect of FGF10 application, further highlighting the
downstream role played by the secreted inhibitors. Overall, these
results align with previous transplantation experiments showing that
mesoderm from regeneration-incompetent limbs is inhibitory to
regeneration (Sessions and Bryant, 1988; Yokoyama et al., 2001,
2000). However, in contrast to previous interpretations, we suggest
that an important contributor to this phenomenon is the enrichment
of chondrogenic cell abundance within the mesoderm tissue that
express inhibitory secreted factors.
We further showed that, by manipulating NOGGIN and FGF10
levels, we could improve amputation outcomes in regeneration-
restricted and/or -incompetent tadpoles. We saw that anti-NOGGIN
beads had a mild effect compared with FGF10 beads (Fig. 5A,G),
which may suggest that there are other inhibitors secreted from the
chondrogenic lineage (e.g. Chrdl1 and Frzb) that must also be
eliminated to ensure robust regeneration. However, the mild effect
of anti-NOGGIN may also be due to technical problems with the
perturbation (e.g. limited duration and/or diffusivity of antibody
delivery), and that a more-complete inhibition of NOGGIN function
would further improve the amputation outcome.
It is well established that a salamander blastema will form only in
a location distal to the amputation plane, a phenomenon termed as
the rule of distal transformation (Butler, 1955; Nacu and Tanaka,
2011; Stocum, 1981). In our explants, we also detect that only distal
sites started to form a blastema (Fig. 3A), aligning with the rule of
distal transformation. Interestingly, by manipulating NOGGIN and
FGF10, we also could observe AER cell formation at the proximal
sites of explants (Fig. 5F). However, it remains unclear whether
these proximal AER cells can enable the formation of a proximal
blastema. Further work is required to investigate the relationship
between the rule of distal transformation and AER cells.
Benefiting from the stage-dependent regeneration competency in
Xenopus,
our
scRNA-seq
datasets
can
discriminate
true
regeneration responses from injury responses. The majority of
limb regeneration-associated genes are derived from salamanders,
where an injury control is not necessarily available (as these animals
can always regenerate their limbs). We found that many genes
associated with salamander limb regeneration (e.g. Dpt and Prdx2)
(Gerber et al., 2018; Haas and Whited, 2017; Leigh et al., 2018) are
upregulated upon injury in a subset of fibroblasts, regardless of
regeneration competency. In a different context, recent single-cell
analysis of mouse digit tip amputations suggests that, independent
of the regeneration outcome, some fibroblast populations express
blastema-associated genes (e.g. Prickle1, Fbn2 and Lrrc17) (Storer
et al., 2020). We also see these genes upregulated upon injury in
a subset of fibroblasts, but again this response is not specific
to regeneration. These results suggest that there may be a conserved
response to injury for mesenchymal cells in amphibians and
mammals, and may be reflecting early suggestions by Tassava
et al. that an injury can induce morphologically assigned
‘dedifferentiation’ that fails to establish a blastema without a
specialized wound epidermis (Tassava and Loyd, 1977; Tassava
and Mescher, 1975). Indeed, we observed lower levels of some
regeneration-associated distal mesenchyme genes (e.g. Shh) in the
subset of fibroblasts when there are no AER cells (Fig. S10),
correlating
with
regeneration
competency.
Nonetheless,
our
results are insufficient to determine: (1) whether the fibroblast
cells progressively become intrinsically incompetent to fully
dedifferentiate; or (2) whether, without signals from signalling
centre potent AER cells, they fail to fully dedifferentiate. Moreover,
although a subset of fibroblasts can express genes from multiple
lineages, the functional consequences of this gain of transcriptional
multipotency and how it resolves during varying stages of
regeneration competency remain unclear. Further work on injury-
induced mesenchymal plasticity, its interaction with AER cells and
cross-species
comparison
on
this
topic
will
be
required.
Nevertheless, these results underscore that caution is needed when
interpreting experiments involving injury (e.g. transplantation), as
10
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2021) 148, dev199158. doi:10.1242/dev.199158
DEVELOPMENT

well as the concern that previously implied ‘regeneration-genes’
may be injury response genes.
Overall, we propose a new cellular model of regeneration
incompetency, in which chondrogenesis-associated secreted factors
inhibit AER cell formation. Although it remains unclear whether
chondrogenesis itself directly inhibits limb regeneration, there are
multiple observations from our work and others that support this
hypothesis (Dent, 1962; Nye and Cameron, 2005; Wolfe et al., 2000).
Our model suggests new avenues for cross-species studies aiming to
decipher limb development and regeneration, and can explain why
Xenopus limb amputations at proximal versus distal sites exhibit
different regeneration outcomes, as proximal sites are associated
with more advanced stages of chondrogenesis (Dent, 1962; Nye and
Cameron, 2005; Wolfe et al., 2000). Furthermore, the pace of
chondrogenesis may have an association with limb regeneration
ability across species, such that terrestrial warm-blooded animals
may have a more robust and fast-paced chondrogenesis programme
compared
with
regeneration-competent
aquatic
cold-blooded
animals. Indeed, limb regeneration-incompetent species such as
chicken or mouse have a faster limb chondrogenesis programme
during their development compared with regeneration-competent
axolotl
and
Xenopus.
Additionally,
although
a
side-by-side
comparative study would be required, mice bone fractures have
been documented to heal faster compared with those in axolotl
(Hutchison et al., 2007; Vortkamp et al., 1998). It is well established
that chondrogenic programmes are heavily influenced by BMP
pathway activity. The ratio of BMP agonist/antagonist (e.g. BMP4/
NOGGIN) during development, injury or upon limb amputation may
be different between limb regeneration-competent and -incompetent
animals. This difference may also be connected to observed Noggin
phenotypes across species. Specifically, adding exogenous Noggin
results in extended AER maintenance in chicken (Pizette and
Niswander, 1999) and mouse (Wang et al., 2004), whereas it
abolishes AER in Xenopus (Jones et al., 2013). Targeted comparative
studies on these topics will be the subject of future work.
It remains unclear how our identified cellular mechanisms are
associated with robust regenerative abilities of some salamanders.
Based on current results, regeneration-competent axolotls are
suggested to not have a developmental AER (Purushothaman
et al., 2019), but can form AEC. Meanwhile AER-associated FGFs
are expressed in axolotl mesenchyme (Purushothaman et al., 2019).
Hence, it is tempting to speculate that limb regeneration-competent
salamanders could withstand inhibitory secreted factors because of
the location and, potentially, higher absolute amount of AER cell
signals in mesenchymal rather than epidermal cells. Additionally, in
contrast to axolotl limb regeneration, where a more homogenous
mesenchymal transcriptional response was suggested (Gerber et al.,
2018), we identified that only a subset of fibroblast populations can
gain transcriptional multipotency and express genes associated with
blastema. Whether these differences between species result in more
robust regenerative abilities requires further work.
Finally, in this work we have identified a cellular mechanism
governing regeneration incompetency in developing tadpoles,
although it remains unclear whether similar principles apply in
adult frogs with a more definite limb. Manipulation of chondrogenic
programmes in adult frogs and other regeneration-incompetent
species may lead to novel approaches to promote limb regeneration,
albeit with additional barriers to regeneration (e.g. scarring and
more complex immune responses) that may have to be overcome.
Altogether, our work suggests a new cellular model of limb
regeneration (Fig. 6), which unites disparate tissue and gene
level findings in the field, and suggests that modulation of secreted
factors impacting on epidermal populations has the potential to
unlock the ability to regrow lost limbs in non-regenerative higher
vertebrates.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Tadpole generation and husbandry
Tadpoles were generated and staged as previously described (Aztekin et al.,
2019). After NF stage 45, tadpoles were fed once or twice a day with
filamentous blue-green algae (ZM spirulina powder) suspended in water.
Wild-type Xenopus laevis were used for experiments unless otherwise
stated. Tadpoles classified as regeneration competent were NF stage 52-53,
regeneration restricted were NF stage 55-56, and regeneration incompetent
were NF stage 58-60. Animal experiments were approved by the University
Biomedical Services at the University of Cambridge and complied with
Fig. 6. Schematics describing the proposed model: secreted inhibitory factors associated with chondrogenic progression block AER cell
formation. Secreted factors such as WNTs and BMPs support AER cell formation at the amputation plane. During development, chondrogenesis leads to
the accumulation of secreted inhibitory factors, including NOGGIN, which results in failure to establish AER cells (Fgf8.L+/Lgr5.S+). FGF10 can suppress
chondrogenesis. Amputations, independent of the regeneration outcome, induce injury-induced mesenchymal transcriptional plasticity.
11
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2021) 148, dev199158. doi:10.1242/dev.199158
DEVELOPMENT

UK Home Office guidelines and the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act
1986.
Single-cell dissociation, library preparation and sequencing
For developmental samples, tadpoles were killed and samples were
collected at the aforementioned stages. For amputation/regeneration
samples, tadpoles were anaesthetized by incubating them with 0.1×MMR
0.002% MS222 (A0377876, Acros Organics), placed on a wet towel and the
right hindlimbs were amputated at the presumptive knee/ankle level for
regeneration-competent tadpoles, and at the ankle level for regeneration-
restricted or -incompetent tadpoles. Afterwards, the tadpoles were returned
to fresh water. At 5 days post amputation (dpa), tadpoles were killed and the
newly generated tissues on the amputation plane were collected.
Contralateral control samples were also collected from these tadpoles, and
intact limb buds or autopods, including ankle, were collected. For each
scRNA-seq experiment, tissues were collected from a total of 8-10 tadpoles
to reduce variance caused by staging differences. Dissociations were
performed on a pool of four limbs in an Eppendorf tube with the following
protocol. First, the samples were washed with Ca- and Mg-free 1×MBS
(Barth-HEPES saline 10× stock: 88 mM NaCl, 1 mM KCl, 2.4 mM
NaHCO3, 0.82 mM MgSO4.7H2O, 0.33 mM Ca(NO3)2.4H2O, 0.41 mM
CaCl2.6H2O and 10 mM HEPES with ∼3 ml of 10 N NaOH added to obtain
a pH of 7.4 to 7.6). Samples were then incubated with 1× trypsin (Sigma,
59427C) in Ca- and Mg-free 1×MBS with 0.5 μM EDTA for 10 min at room
temperature on a bench-top shaker at a speed of 300 rpm. Trypsin reaction
was diluted with Ca- and Mg-free 1×MBS after 10 min. Physical dispersion
was applied (10-15 times up and down trituration with a pipette) to samples
before, half way and at the end of trypsinization. Cells were spun down at
250 g for 5 min, the supernatant was taken out and cells were then
resuspended in 1× Ca- and Mg-free MBS. Cells were passed through a
35 μm diameter cell strainer then stained with 20 μM Hoechst 33342
(Sigma, 2261) in 1× Ca- and Mg-free MBS for 10-15 min; Hoechst positive
cells were sorted using a Sony SH800s Cell Sorter. scRNA-seq libraries
were generated using 10X Genomics (v3 chemistry) and sequenced in pools
of two samples per lane on an Illumina Novaseq 6000 SP flow cell, with the
following parameters: 28 bp - read 1; 8 bp - i7 index; and 91 bp - read 2, as
per standard 10X Genomics recommendations.
scRNA-seq: data processing
Output files from 10X Genomics were processed using CellRanger v3.0.2,
with sequences mapped to the Xenopus laevis 9.1 genome (Xenbase, ftp://
ftp.xenbase.org/pub/Genomics/JGI/Xenla9.1/Xla.v91.repeatMasked.fa.gz
and ftp://ftp.xenbase.org/pub/Genomics/JGI/Xenla9.1/1.8.3.2/XL_9.1_
v1.8.3.2.allTranscripts.gff3.gz). Raw counts were normalized by cell
library size, and then converted to TPX (transcripts per 104). Cell calling
was performed using CellRanger with default parameters. We further
filtered the data according to library size, discarding cells with a total UMI
count in the lowest quartile. The main cell types and transcriptional changes
remained unchanged if this cell-filtering step is omitted, although the
clustering and visualization appears less robust (Fig. S4).
scRNA-seq: feature selection
Highly variable genes (HVGs) were selected for clustering and visualization
as described previously (Aztekin et al., 2019) (Fano factor >65th percentile,
mean expression >5th percentile and mean expression <80th percentile).
Our initial analysis revealed that visualization and clustering were strongly
influenced by cell cycle state (Fig. S2). To further refine the set of HVGs, we
performed factor analysis with the aim of removing genes significantly
associated
with
the
cell
cycle.
Specifically,
non-negative
matrix
factorization was performed on the cosine normalized, log2-transformed
normalized counts matrix, using k=30 components (R package nnlm).
Factors were manually annotated according to their expression on the
UMAP projection, and by inspection of the highest gene loadings for each
factor; two factors corresponded to the cell cycle. To minimize the effect of
the cell cycle signature on projection/clustering, we identified genes
associated with these cell cycle factors (top 10% gene loadings for each
factor) and removed these from the set of HVGs.
scRNA-seq: visualization and clustering
Data were projected onto two dimensions using the UMAP algorithm
(Becht et al., 2019), with log2-transformed HVGs, cosine distance as a
similarity measure and parameters k=15, min_dist=0.2. Clustering was
performed as described previously (Aztekin et al., 2019). Briefly, we
constructed a graph using the UMAP function fuzzy_simplicial_set with
k=10 nearest neighbours, and then performed graphical clustering using
the walktrap algorithm (cluster_walktrap from R package igraph, with
steps=10).
scRNA-seq: gene set enrichment and cell cycle analysis
Single-cell gene set enrichment scores were calculated with the AUCell R
package (Aibar et al., 2017), using HVGs as the background gene set. Cell
cycle phase was inferred using CellCycleScoring (R package Seurat) (Butler
et al., 2018).
scRNA-seq: annotation of cell types
Cell type annotation was performed by manually comparing cluster-specific
gene expression patterns [computed using findMarkers in R package
scran (Lun et al., 2016)] with known cell type markers from the literature.
Many clusters could be assigned to a well-characterized functional cell
type (e.g. Satellite cell). Other clusters could not be unambiguously
identified, but were assigned a broad label together with a numeric identifier
(e.g. Blood 1). Finally, a few clusters remain unannotated (e.g. Unknown 1).
Dotplots of key marker genes of each cell type are provided in Fig. S5.
scRNA-seq: gene expression visualization
Gene expression in individual cells is visualized on the UMAP projection
with points coloured according to expression level (log10-transformed).
Gene expression across groups of cells (e.g. for different clusters or for
different stage tadpoles) is shown using dotplots coloured by mean
expression (log10-transformed,
normalized
to group
with
maximal
expression). We can detect alleles from both the large (Gene.L) or short
(Gene.S) chromosomes present in the pseudotetraploid Xenopus laevis
genome. In some figures, we report expression from both the large and
short allele; in others, we report whichever allele has higher expression
for brevity. Differentially expressed genes were identified using the
findMarkers function (using default parameters, and comparing cells from
different conditions); results were then visualized as volcano plots.
Regeneration assay and bead experiments
Affi-gel blue gel beads (BioRad, 1537301) were incubated with the
following proteins overnight at 4°C: 2-3 μg rabbit-IGG isotype control
antibody (ab37415); 2-3 μg anti-NOGGIN antibody (ab16054); 0.1% BSA;
1 μg recombinant human FGF10 (R&D, 345-FG) in 1-2 μl 0.1% BSA; and
1-1.5 μg recombinant human FGF10 (R&D, 345-FG) and 2.5-4 μg
recombinant human NOGGIN (R&D, 6057-NG) in 3-4 μl 0.1% BSA.
Tadpoles were anaesthetized with 0.002% MS222, placed on a wet towel,
and both right and left hindlimbs were amputated from ankle level in
either regeneration-restricted or -incompetent tadpoles. Three or four
beads were placed on the amputation plane of the right hindlimb. Left
hindlimbs served as an internal control for the experiments. Pushing the
bead deep in the tissues at the amputation site was avoided as much as
possible, and beads were gently positioned instead. Tadpoles were
monitored on a wet towel for 3-5 min then tadpoles that retained the
beads were placed in fresh water. Tadpoles were killed in between 18 and
21 dpa to assess the regeneration outcome. The difference in the number of
digits or digit-like structures between the right to the left limb was quantified
for each tadpole.
Whole-mount mRNA visualization and hybridization chain
reaction (HCR), with or without a combination of
immunofluorescence or histology
HCR on whole-limb or tail samples
HCR was applied as described previously (Choi et al., 2018) with
modifications, and materials for HCR were purchased from Molecular
Instruments unless otherwise stated. Limb and tail samples were fixed with
12
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2021) 148, dev199158. doi:10.1242/dev.199158
DEVELOPMENT

4% formaldehyde in 1×PBS for 40-60 min, permeabilized in 70% ethanol in
1×PBS for 2-4 h, washed briefly with 1×PBS and collected in Eppendorf
tubes. These procedures were carried out on a rotator at room temperature.
The supernatant was taken out, 500 μl wash solution was added, and
samples were rotated at room temperature for 5 min. The supernatant was
taken out and replaced by 400-500 μl hybridization buffer for a 30 min
incubation at 37°C. In parallel, the probe solution was prepared by diluting
mRNAs targeting probes to 30-40 nM in 200 μl hybridization buffer and
incubated for 30 min at 37°C. The hybridization buffer from samples were
taken out and probe solution was placed on samples for a 12-16 h incubation
at 37°C. Subsequently, the samples were washed twice for 20 min with wash
buffer and twice for 30 min with 5×SSC-T at room temperature. To visualize
probes, amplification solution was prepared by first heating the fluorophore
attached hairpins pairs (h1 and h2 hairpins) that match to the probes to 95°C
for 90 s. Hairpins were then left in the dark at room temperature for 30 min.
Afterwards, final amplification solution was prepared at 40-60 nM h1 and
h2 in 200 μl amplification buffer. Samples were first incubated in
amplification buffer without hairpins for 10 min, then placed in final
amplification solution at room temperature, protected from light, for 12-16 h
on a rotator. Samples were washed with 2×20 min SSC-T. Samples were
then stored in 1×PBS.
Whole-mount HCR samples imaging
For stereomicroscope or confocal imaging of whole samples, the samples
were mounted in 0.6-0.8% ultra-low gelling temperature agar (Sigma,
A5030) in 1×PBS.
Sectioning of samples after HCR
In the subsequent step of the protocol, the samples were protected from light
to preserve the HCR signal. The samples were incubated in 15% sucrose in
1×PBS at room temperature for 1 h, then 30% sucrose in 1×PBS at 4°C
overnight. Samples were then placed in OCT solution and incubated at −80°C
overnight. Samples were cryosectioned at 5 μm, stained with 20 μM Hoechst
(Sigma, 2261) in 1×PBS at room temperature for 10 min and imaged.
Immunostaining
After sectioning of HCR stained limb, the samples were processed for
immunostaining. Samples were blocked with 50% Cas-Block (Invitrogen,
008120) in 1×PBS-T (1X PBS+0.1 Tween-100) and incubated for 30 min at
room temperature without rotating. Samples were then incubated with
antibodies (listed below) at 4°C overnight without rotating. Samples were
washed with PBS-T for 2×10 min, blocked with 50% Cas-Block in 1×PBS-
T for 30 min, and incubated with secondary antibodies (listed below) for
1 h. All these steps were carried out at room temperature without rotating.
Samples were washed with 1×PBS-T twice for 10 min and with 1×PBS
twice for 20 min at room temperature without rotating. After antibody
staining, samples were stained with Hoechst and washed once for 5 min in
1×PBS at room temperature without rotating. Samples were mounted in 80%
glycerol in 1×PBS with a coverslip and imaged.
Tail whole-mount HCR staining can be combined with whole-mount
immunofluorescence by following the above immunofluorescence protocol,
except that the mounting of whole tails were carried out in ultra-low gelling
temperature agar for imaging.
HCR probes and hairpins
Probes for Fgf8.L, Dpt.L, Htra3.L, Prrx1.L and Sp9.L were purchased from
Molecular Instruments. Probes were designed against the full-length Xenopus
Lgr5.S, Msx1.L and Fgf10.L mRNA sequence as described previously (Choi
et al., 2014). HCR hairpins were purchased from Molecular Instruments.
Primary antibodies and working dilutions
Primary antibodies and working dilutions were as follows: TP63 [4A4]
(Abcam,
ab735,
1:200),
B-CATENIN
(Abcam,
ab6302,
1:2000),
E-CADHERIN (5D3, DSHB, 1:10), ITGB1 (8C8, DSHB, 1:10) and anti-
EGFP (Abcam, ab13970, 1:500).
Secondary antibodies
Secondary antibodies were as follows: goat anti-chicken IgY (H+L)
secondary antibody, Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen, A11039, 1:500), goat
anti-mouse IgG (H+L) cross-adsorbed ReadyProbes secondary antibody,
Alexa Fluor 594 (Invitrogen, R37121, 1:500) and goat anti-mouse IgG
(H+L) cross-adsorbed ReadyProbes secondary antibody, Alexa Fluor 488
(Invitrogen, R37120, 1:500).
A Leica SP8 upright confocal microscope with a 40×/1.3 HC PL Apo
CS2 Oil objective was used for all confocal images except for Fig. S9B,C,
which were taken with a Leica SP8 inverted confocal microscope with a
20×/0.75 HC PL Apo CS2 Multi. LAS X was used for setting tiled images
and a 20% overlap between tiles was used. Limb whole-mount HCR images
were taken via a Leica stereomicroscope equipped with a DFC7000T
camera. Fiji was used for maximum projection of z-stacks and to adjust
contrast to highlight biological relevance. If needed, images were cropped,
flipped and/or rotated to highlight biological relevance.
Histological staining can be carried out on cryosectioned HCR samples.
Briefly, samples were stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin according
to manufacturer’s protocol (Abcam, ab245880) then samples were stained
for Alcian Blue (Sigma, B8438) according to manufacturer’s protocol.
Histology images were captured on a Zeiss AxioImager compound
microscope.
Ex vivo limb culture method to assess AER cell formation and
proximal chondrogenesis
Limbs were first amputated from presumptive knee/ankle level for
regeneration-competent and from ankle level for regeneration-restricted or
-incompetent tadpoles. The distal parts of these amputated explants were
then removed and the remaining proximal segment was placed in 1000, 500
or 200 μl explant media [L-15 (ThermoFisher Scientific, 21083027),
1×Antibiotic-Antimycotic (ThermoFisher Scientific, 15240062) and 20%
Fetal Bovine Serum Superior (Sigma, S0615)] in 12, 24 or 96-well plates,
respectively. Explants were cultured for 3 days without changing the media.
After 3 days, to quantify AER cell formation, the explants were fixed and
proceeded to the HCR protocol; to quantify proximal chondrogenesis, the
explants were fixed with 4% formaldehyde, mounted in 0.6% Low-Melt
agar
and
directly
imaged
by
stereomicroscopy.
Explants
emit
autofluorescence. Although the abundant HCR signal can be seen despite
the autofluorescence, to discriminate the HCR signal from autofluorescence
in finer detail, sample images were taken in red and green channel separately
with the same exposure and gain settings, and then merged in Fiji. In merged
images, the background signal due to autofluorescence was visualized as
yellow and the HCR signal was either red or green. As AER cells were
largely detected as a monolayer population, AER cell formation was
calculated by measuring the length of the Fgf8.L signal on the amputation
plane using Fiji segmented line option. The proximal chondrogenesis can be
visually distinguished and, to determine the chondrogenesis length,
chondrogenic structure length from top to bottom was also measured
using Fiji. Samples where a clear chondrogenesis was not visible were
omitted from further analysis. These images were taken in bright field and
measurements were carried out in Fiji.
For drug and recombinant protein treatments, the explants were placed in
culture media containing the following small molecules concentration or
recombinant protein amounts, unless otherwise stated: 100 μM ICRT3
(Sigma, SML0211), 100 μM SU-5402 (Sigma, SML0443), 50 μM SB-
505124 (Sigma, S4696), 100 μM DAPT (Sigma, D5942), 2.5 μM LDN-
193189 (Stemgent, 04–0074), 500 ng human recombinant FGF10 (R&D,
345-FG), 1.25 μg human recombinant NOGGIN (R&D, 6057-NG) and
500 ng human recombinant BMP4 (R&D, 314-BP). Drugs were prepared in
DMSO, and recombinant proteins were prepared in 0.1% BSA. Small-
molecule experiments were conducted in 24-well plates. Recombinant
protein experiments were carried out in 96-well plates. A maximum of six
explants were placed in 24-well plates. One explant was put in one well of
96-well plate for recombinant protein treatments. In all chemical and
recombinant protein perturbation experiments, one limb of the same animal
was subjected to the perturbation, and the contralateral limb served as a
control. These control explants were exposed to solution containing
matching DMSO or BSA concentration in 1×PBS for chemical or
13
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2021) 148, dev199158. doi:10.1242/dev.199158
DEVELOPMENT

recombinant protein perturbations, respectively. Perturbation and control
samples were pooled separately at the end of the experiments and stained.
EdU labelling
Ex vivo limbs were cultured with 10 μM EdU (ThermoFisher Scientific,
C10337) for 3 days in dark foiled cover. Afterwards, samples were fixed and
Fgf8.L mRNA was stained using the HCR protocol, followed by
cryosectioning, as described above. Sections were subjected to the Click-
It reaction, as described in the manufacturer’s protocol (ThermoFisher
Scientific, C10337). Hoechst was added at the end of the protocol. Samples
were visualized by confocal microscopy as described above. Fgf8.L-positive
cells, and both EdU- and Fgf8.L-positive cells on the amputation plane were
manually counted, and the percentage of EdU-positive Fgf8.L-positive cells
were calculated for each sample.
Bead experiment for proximal chondrogenesis
Beads were prepared as described above. Explants from regeneration-
restricted tadpoles were harvested as described above and beads were
implanted on the proximal site of explants. At 3 dpa, explants that no longer
contained a bead at their proximal site (presumably due to repulsion) were
omitted from further analysis. At 3 dpa, samples were imaged without
fixation and the extent of chondrogenesis was measured by Fiji.
DiO labelling
DiO [DiO′; DiOC18(3) (3,3′-dioctadecyloxacarbocyanine perchlorate),
ThermoFisher Scientific, D275] was prepared by dipping a tip in the
DiO-containing powder tube and placing the tip in a 10 μl of 96-100%
ethanol in an Eppendorf tube. A glass needle tip was then dipped in the
diluted DiO solution and harvested ex vivo limbs were labelled on a wet
towel. These cultures were placed in ex vivo culture media and explants were
imaged every day with a stereomicroscope.
Ex vivo limb co-culture, and conditioned media experiments
For
co-culture
experiments,
one
regeneration-competent
and
one
regeneration-incompetent limb explant were incubated together in 200 μl
explant media in one well of 96-well plate. For antibody experiments, one
limb of each animal served as a control and was incubated with 1 μg rabbit-
IGG isotype control antibody (ab37415), while the contralateral limb was
incubated with 1 μg anti-NOGGIN antibody (ab16054). Antibodies and
media were added only at the beginning of the cultures and were not replaced
during the experiment.
For conditioned media experiments, conditioned media supplying and
receiving explants were prepared separately. Supplying explants were
prepared 1 day before harvesting receiving explants and incubated in 200 μl
explant media in one well of 96-well plate. After 1 day, media from the
supplying explant was collected and used to culture the newly harvested
receiving explant, and fresh media were added for supplying explant. This
change of media procedure was repeated for 3 days. For antibody
experiments, supplying explant media was collected and pre-incubated
with 1 μg antibodies for 25-30 min at room temperature on a rotator, then the
pre-incubated media was placed on the receiving explants.
Replicate information and statistical tests
Sample sizes were not pre-determined in any experimental setup. In this
work, biological replicates refer to samples obtained from multiple animal
batches and to experiments carried out on different days. In all experiments,
the number of independent tadpole limbs assayed is recorded and denoted
by n in the text and figure legends. In all experiments, wild-type tadpoles
were used from tanks that contain multiple batches (tadpoles raised from
different father and/or mother). In all explant perturbation experiments,
samples were compared with their contralateral controls and a Mann–
Whitney U-test was used to determine statistical significance. For
regeneration and bead experiments, a t-test was used. To assess the
significance of proximal Fgf8 expression in explants (Fig. 5F), Fisher’s
exact test was used.
Acknowledgements
We thank Katarzyna Kania and the Cambridge Institute Genomics Core for their
support with this work on the 10X-Genomics and sequencing library preparations.
The transgenic testes used in this study were obtained from the European Xenopus
Resource Centre, curated with funding from the Wellcome Trust/BBSRC, and
maintained by the University of Portsmouth, School of Biological Sciences. We
thank R. Jones-Green for excellent animal care. We thank H. Ma for use of her
stereomicroscope, and E. Rawlins for use of her Zeiss Axiolmager compound
microscope. We thank B. Steventon, E. Rawlins, and members of the Marioni and
Simons labs for general discussion about the project. We thank R. Butler for
assistance in image analysis.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: C.A.; Methodology: C.A., T.W.H.; Software: T.W.H.; Validation:
C.A., T.W.H.; Formal analysis: T.W.H.; Investigation: C.A.; Resources: J.M., J.G.;
Data curation: C.A., T.W.H.; Writing - original draft: J.J., C.A.; Writing - review &
editing: B.D.S., J.J., J.M., C.A., T.W.H.; Supervision: B.D.S., J.J., J.M., J.G.; Project
administration: C.A.; Funding acquisition: B.D.S., J.J., J.M., J.G., C.A.
Funding
C.A. is funded by the University of Cambridge and the Cambridge Trust. J.J. and
J.G. are funded by a grant from the Wellcome Trust (101050/Z/13/Z). T.W.H., J.M.
and B.D.S. are funded as part of a Wellcome Trust Strategic Award to study cell fate
decisions (105031/D/14/Z). T.W.H. is also supported by a European Molecular
Biology Organization Long-Term Fellowship (ALTF 606-2018). B.D.S. also
acknowledges funding from the Royal Society E.P. Abraham Research
Professorship (RP\R1\180165) and the Wellcome Trust (098357/Z/12/Z). J.M.
acknowledges core funding from the European Molecular Biology Laboratory and
Cancer Research UK (A17197). This work is funded by grants from the Wellcome
Trust (101050/Z/13/Z) and the Medical Research Council (MR/P000479/1), and was
supported by a Gurdon Institute core grant from Cancer Research UK (C6946/
A14492) and the Wellcome Trust (092096/Z/10/Z). Open access funding provided
by University of Cambridge. Deposited in PMC for immediate release.
Data availability
Code is available at https://github.com/MarioniLab/
XenopusLimbRegeneration2020. Sequencing data, together with processed
counts matrices, are available on ArrayExpress under the accession number
E-MTAB-9104. We provide an interactive online tool to explore our dataset at
https://marionilab.cruk.cam.ac.uk/XenopusLimbRegeneration/.
Peer review history
The peer review history is available online at https://journals.biologists.com/dev/
article-lookup/doi/10.1242/dev.199158
References
Aibar, S., González-Blas, C. B., Moerman, T., Huynh-Thu, V. A., Imrichova, H.,
Hulselmans, G., Rambow, F., Marine, J.-C., Geurts, P., Aerts, J. et al. (2017).
SCENIC: single-cell regulatory network inference and clustering. Nat. Methods
14, 1083-1086. doi:10.1038/nmeth.4463
Aztekin, C., Hiscock, T. W., Marioni, J. C., Gurdon, J. B., Simons, B. D. and
Jullien, J. (2019). Identification of a regeneration-organizing cell in the Xenopus
tail. Science 364, 653-658. doi:10.1126/science.aav9996
Becht, E., McInnes, L., Healy, J., Dutertre, C.-A., Kwok, I. W. H., Ng, L. G.,
Ginhoux,
F.
and
Newell,
E.
W.
(2019).
Dimensionality
reduction
for
visualizing single-cell data using UMAP. Nat. Biotechnol. 37, 38-44. doi:10.
1038/nbt.4314
Beck, C. W., Christen, B., Barker, D. and Slack, J. M. W. (2006). Temporal
requirement for bone morphogenetic proteins in regeneration of the tail and
limb of Xenopus tadpoles. Mech. Dev. 123, 674-688. doi:10.1016/j.mod.2006.
07.001
Beck, C. W., Izpisúa Belmonte, J. C. and Christen, B. (2009). Beyond early
development: Xenopus as an emerging model for the study of regenerative
mechanisms. Dev. Dyn. 238, 1226-1248. doi:10.1002/dvdy.21890
Boehm, B., Westerberg, H., Lesnicar-Pucko, G., Raja, S., Rautschka, M.,
Cotterell, J., Swoger, J. and Sharpe, J. (2010). The role of spatially controlled
cell proliferation in limb bud morphogenesis. PLoS Biol. 8, e1000420. doi:10.
1371/journal.pbio.1000420
Butler, E. G. (1955). Regeneration of the urodele forelimb after reversal of its
proximo-distal axis. J. Morphol. 96, 265-281. doi:10.1002/jmor.1050960204
Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E. and Satija, R. (2018). Integrating
single-cell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and
species. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 411-420. doi:10.1038/nbt.4096
14
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2021) 148, dev199158. doi:10.1242/dev.199158
DEVELOPMENT

Campbell, L. J. and Crews, C. M. (2008). Molecular and cellular basis of
regeneration and tissue repair: wound epidermis formation and function in urodele
amphibian limb regeneration. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 65, 73-79. doi:10.1007/s00018-
007-7433-z
Campbell, L. J., Suárez–Castillo, E. C., Ortiz-Zuazaga, H., Knapp, D., Tanaka,
E. M. and Crews, C. M. (2011). Gene expression profile of the regeneration
epithelium during axolotl limb regeneration. Dev. Dyn. 240, 1826-1840. doi:10.
1002/dvdy.22669
Cannata, S. M., Bernardini, S. and Filoni, S. (1992). Regenerative responses in
cultured hindlimb stumps of larvalXenopus laevis. J. Exp. Zool. 262, 446-453.
doi:10.1002/jez.1402620412
Choi, H. M. T., Beck, V. A. and Pierce, N. A. (2014). Next-generation in situ
hybridization chain reaction: higher gain, lower cost, greater durability. ACS Nano
8, 4284-4294. doi:10.1021/nn405717p
Choi, H. M. T., Schwarzkopf, M., Fornace, M. E., Acharya, A., Artavanis, G.,
Stegmaier, J., Cunha, A. and Pierce, N. A. (2018). Third-generation in situ
hybridization chain reaction: multiplexed, quantitative, sensitive, versatile, robust.
Development 145, dev165753. doi:10.1242/dev.165753
Christen, B. and Slack, J. M. W. (1997). FGF-8Is associated with anteroposterior
patterning and limb regeneration in Xenopus. Dev. Biol. 192, 455-466. doi:10.
1006/dbio.1997.8732
Christensen, R. N. and Tassava, R. A. (2000). Apical epithelial cap morphology
and fibronectin gene expression in regenerating axolotl limbs. Dev. Dyn. 217,
216-224.
doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-0177(200002)217:2<216::AID-DVDY8>3.0.
CO;2-8
Dent, J. N. (1962). Limb regeneration in larvae and metamorphosing individuals of
the South African clawed toad. J. Morphol. 110, 61-77. doi:10.1002/jmor.
1051100105
D’Jamoos, C. A., McMahon, G. and Tsonis, P. A. (1998). Fibroblast growth factor
receptors regulate the ability for hindlimb regeneration in Xenopus laevis. Wound
Repair. Regen. 6, S-388-S-397. doi:10.1046/j.1460-9568.1998.60415.x
Gerber, T., Murawala, P., Knapp, D., Masselink, W., Schuez, M., Hermann, S.,
Gac-Santel, M., Nowoshilow, S., Kageyama, J., Khattak, S. et al. (2018).
Single-cell analysis uncovers convergence of cell identities during axolotl limb
regeneration. Science 362, eaaq0681. doi:10.1126/science.aaq0681
Ghosh, S., Roy, S., Séguin, C., Bryant, S. V. and Gardiner, D. M. (2008). Analysis
of the expression and function of Wnt-5a and Wnt-5b in developing and
regenerating axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum) limbs. Dev. Growth Differ. 50,
289-297. doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.2008.01000.x
Haas, B. J. and Whited, J. L. (2017). Advances in Decoding Axolotl Limb
Regeneration. Trends Genet. 33, 553-565. doi:10.1016/j.tig.2017.05.006
Han, M.-J., An, J.-Y. and Kim, W.-S. (2001). Expression patterns of Fgf-8 during
development and limb regeneration of the axolotl. Dev. Dyn. 220, 40-48. doi:10.
1002/1097-0177(2000)9999:9999<::AID-DVDY1085>3.0.CO;2-8
Hay, E. D. and Fischman, D. A. (1961). Origin of the blastema in regenerating limbs
of the newt Triturus viridescens: an autoradiographic study using tritiated
thymidine to follow cell proliferation and migration. Dev. Biol. 3, 26-59. doi:10.
1016/0012-1606(61)90009-4
Hutchison, C., Pilote, M. and Roy, S. (2007). The axolotl limb: a model for bone
development, regeneration and fracture healing. Bone 40, 45-56. doi:10.1016/j.
bone.2006.07.005
Jones, T. E. M., Day, R. C. and Beck, C. W. (2013). Attenuation of bone
morphogenetic protein signaling during amphibian limb development results in the
generation of stage-specific defects. J. Anat. 223, 474-488. doi:10.1111/joa.
12098
Kato, T., Miyazaki, K., Shimizu-Nishikawa, K., Koshiba, K., Obara, M., Mishima,
H. K. and Yoshizato, K. (2003). Unique expression patterns of matrix
metalloproteinases in regenerating newt limbs. Dev. Dyn. 226, 366-376. doi:10.
1002/dvdy.10247
Kelley, R. O. and Fallon, J. F. (1976). Ultrastructural analysis of the apical
ectodermal ridge during vertebrate limb morphogenesis: I. The human forelimb
with special reference to gap junctions. Dev. Biol. 51, 241-256. doi:10.1016/0012-
1606(76)90141-X
Knapp, D., Schulz, H., Rascon, C. A., Volkmer, M., Scholz, J., Nacu, E., Le, M.,
Novozhilov, S., Tazaki, A., Protze, S. et al. (2013). Comparative transcriptional
profiling of the axolotl limb identifies a tripartite regeneration-specific gene
program. PLoS ONE 8, e61352. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0061352
Leigh, N. D., Dunlap, G. S., Johnson, K., Mariano, R., Oshiro, R., Wong, A. Y.,
Bryant, D. M., Miller, B. M., Ratner, A., Chen, A. et al. (2018). Transcriptomic
landscape of the blastema niche in regenerating adult axolotl limbs at single-cell
resolution. Nat. Commun. 9, 5153. doi:10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
Li, H., Wei, X., Zhou, L., Zhang, W., Wang, C., Guo, Y., Li, D., Chen, J., Liu, T.,
Zhang, Y. et al. (2020). Dynamic cell transition and immune response landscapes
of axolotl limb regeneration revealed by single-cell analysis. Protein Cell 12,
57-66. doi:10.1007/s13238-020-00763-1
Lun, A. TL., McCarthy, D. J. and Marioni, J. C. (2016). A step-by-step workflow for
low-level analysis of single-cell RNA-seq data with Bioconductor [version 2; peer
review: 3 approved, 2 approved with reservations]. F1000Research 5, 2122.
doi:10.12688/f1000research.9501.2
Mescher, A. L. (1976). Effects on adult newt limb regeneration of partial and
complete skin flaps over the amputation surface. J. Exp. Zool. 195, 117-127.
doi:10.1002/jez.1401950111
Miyazaki, K., Uchiyama, K., Imokawa, Y. and Yoshizato, K. (1996). Cloning and
characterization of cDNAs for matrix metalloproteinases of regenerating newt
limbs. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 6819-6824. doi:10.1073/pnas.93.13.6819
Monaghan, J. R., Athippozhy, A., Seifert, A. W., Putta, S., Stromberg, A. J.,
Maden, M., Gardiner, D. M. and Voss, S. R. (2012). Gene expression patterns
specific to the regenerating limb of the Mexican axolotl. Biol. Open 1, 937-948.
doi:10.1242/bio.20121594
Nacu, E. and Tanaka, E. M. (2011). Limb regeneration: a new development? Annu.
Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 27, 409-440. doi:10.1146/annurev-cellbio-092910-154115
Nacu, E., Gromberg, E., Oliveira, C. R., Drechsel, D. and Tanaka, E. M. (2016).
FGF8 and SHH substitute for anterior–posterior tissue interactions to induce limb
regeneration. Nature 533, 407-410. doi:10.1038/nature17972
Nieuwkoop, P. D. and Faber, J. (1994). Normal Table of Xenopus Laevis (Daudin).
Oxford, UK: Taylor and Francis.
Nye, H. L. D. and Cameron, J. A. (2005). Strategies to reduce variation in Xenopus
regeneration studies. Dev. Dyn. 234, 151-158. doi:10.1002/dvdy.20508
Pajni-Underwood, S., Wilson, C. P., Elder, C., Mishina, Y. and Lewandoski, M.
(2007). BMP signals control limb bud interdigital programmed cell death by
regulating FGF signaling. Development 134, 2359-2368. doi:10.1242/dev.001677
Pearl, E. J., Barker, D., Day, R. C. and Beck, C. W. (2008). Identification of genes
associated with regenerative success of Xenopus laevis hindlimbs. BMC Dev.
Biol. 8, 66. doi:10.1186/1471-213X-8-66
Pizette, S. and Niswander, L. (1999). BMPs negatively regulate structure and
function of the limb apical ectodermal ridge. Development 126, 883-894. doi:10.
1242/dev.126.5.883
Pizette, S., Abate-Shen, C. and Niswander, L. (2001). BMP links limb growth and
dorsoventral patterning. Development 128, 4463-4474. doi:10.1242/dev.128.22.
4463
Purushothaman, S., Elewa, A. and Seifert, A. W. (2019). Fgf-signaling is
compartmentalized within the mesenchyme and controls proliferation during
salamander limb development. eLife 8, e48507. doi:10.7554/eLife.48507
Qin, T., Fan, C.-M., Wang, T.-Z., Sun, H., Zhao, Y.-Y., Yan, R.-J., Yang, L., Shen,
W.-L., Lin, J.-X., Bunpetch, V. et al. (2020). Single-cell RNA-seq reveals novel
mitochondria-related musculoskeletal cell populations during adult axolotl limb
regeneration process. Cell Death Differ. 28, 1110-1125. doi:10.1038/s41418-020-
00640-8
Rodgers, A. K., Smith, J. J. and Voss, S. R. (2020). Identification of immune and
non-immune cells in regenerating axolotl limbs by single-cell sequencing. Exp.
Cell Res. 394, 112149. doi:10.1016/j.yexcr.2020.112149
Sessions, S. K. and Bryant, S. V. (1988). Evidence that regenerative ability is an
intrinsic property of limb cells inXenopus. J. Exp. Zool. 247, 39-44. doi:10.1002/
jez.1402470106
Shibata, E., Yokota, Y., Horita, N., Kudo, A., Abe, G., Kawakami, K. and
Kawakami, A. (2016). Fgf signalling controls diverse aspects of fin regeneration.
Development 143, 2920-2929. doi:10.1242/dev.140699
Stocum, D. L. (1981). Distal transformation in regenerating double anterior axolotl
limbs. Development 65, 3-18. doi:10.1242/dev.65.Supplement.3
Storer, M., Mas, A., Robert-Moreno, A., Pecoraro, M., Ortells, M. C., Di Giacomo,
V., Yosef, R., Pilpel, N., Krizhanovsky, V., Sharpe, J. et al. (2013). Senescence
is a developmental mechanism that contributes to embryonic growth and
patterning. Cell 155, 1119-1130. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.041
Storer, M. A., Mahmud, N., Karamboulas, K., Borrett, M. J., Yuzwa, S. A., Gont,
A., Androschuk, A., Sefton, M. V., Kaplan, D. R. and Miller, F. D. (2020).
Acquisition of a unique mesenchymal precursor-like blastema state underlies
successful adult mammalian digit tip regeneration. Dev. Cell 52, 509-524.e9.
doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2019.12.004
Tassava, R. A. and Loyd, R. M. (1977). Injury requirement for initiation of
regeneration of newt limbs which have whole skin grafts. Nature 268, 49-50.
doi:10.1038/268049a0
Tassava, R. A. and Mescher, A. L. (1975). The roles of injury, nerves, and the
wound
epidermis
during
the
initiation
of
amphibian
limb
regeneration.
Differentiation 4, 23-24. doi:10.1111/j.1432-0436.1975.tb01439.x
Tassava, R. A. and Olsen, C. L. (1982). Higher vertebrates do not regenerate digits
and legs because the wound epidermis is not functional. A hypothesis.
Differentiation 22, 151-155. doi:10.1111/j.1432-0436.1982.tb01242.x
Thornton, C. S. (1960). Influence of an eccentric epidermal cap on limb
regeneration in Amblystoma larvae. Dev. Biol. 2, 551-569. doi:10.1016/0012-
1606(60)90054-3
Thornton, C. S. and Thornton, M. T. (1965). The regeneration of accessory limb
parts following epidermal cap transplantation in urodeles. Experientia 21,
146-148. doi:10.1007/BF02141984
Tsai, S. L., Baselga-Garriga, C. and Melton, D. A. (2019). Blastemal progenitors
modulate immune signaling during early limb regeneration. Development 146,
dev169128. doi:10.1242/dev.169128
Tsai, S. L., Baselga-Garriga, C. and Melton, D. A. (2020). Midkine is a dual
regulator of wound epidermis development and inflammation during the initiation
of limb regeneration. eLife 9, e50765. doi:10.7554/eLife.50765
15
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2021) 148, dev199158. doi:10.1242/dev.199158
DEVELOPMENT

Verheyden, J. M. and Sun, X. (2008). An Fgf/Gremlin inhibitory feedback loop
triggers termination of limb bud outgrowth. Nature 454, 638-641. doi:10.1038/
nature07085
Vincent, E., Villiard, E., Sader, F., Dhakal, S., Kwok, B. H. and Roy, S. (2020).
BMP
signaling
is
essential
for
sustaining
proximo-distal
progression
in
regenerating axolotl limbs. Development 147, dev170829. doi:10.1242/dev.
170829
Vortkamp, A., Pathi, S., Peretti, G. M., Caruso, E. M., Zaleske, D. J. and Tabin,
C. J. (1998). Recapitulation of signals regulating embryonic bone formation during
postnatal growth and in fracture repair. Mech. Dev. 71, 65-76. doi:10.1016/S0925-
4773(97)00203-7
Wang, C.-K. L., Omi, M., Ferrari, D., Cheng, H.-C., Lizarraga, G., Chin, H.-J.,
Upholt, W. B., Dealy, C. N. and Kosher, R. A. (2004). Function of BMPs in the
apical ectoderm of the developing mouse limb. Dev. Biol. 269, 109-122. doi:10.
1016/j.ydbio.2004.01.016
Wolfe, A. D., Nye, H. L. D. and Cameron, J. A. (2000). Extent of ossification at the
amputation plane is correlated with the decline of blastema formation and
regeneration in Xenopus laevis hindlimbs. Dev. Dyn. 218, 681-697. doi:10.1002/
1097-0177(2000)9999:9999<::AID-DVDY1018>3.0.CO;2-6
Yang, E. V., Gardiner, D. M., Carlson, M. R. J., Nugas, C. A. and Bryant, S. V.
(1999). Expression of Mmp-9 and related matrix metalloproteinase genes during
axolotl
limb
regeneration.
Dev.
Dyn.
216,
2-9.
doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-
0177(199909)216:1<2::AID-DVDY2>3.0.CO;2-P
Yokoyama, H., Yonei-Tamura, S., Endo, T., Izpisúa Belmonte, J. C., Tamura, K.
and Ide, H. (2000). Mesenchyme with fgf-10 expression is responsible for
regenerative capacity in Xenopus limb buds. Dev. Biol. 219, 18-29. doi:10.1006/
dbio.1999.9587
Yokoyama, H., Ide, H. and Tamura, K. (2001). FGF-10 stimulates limb regeneration
ability in Xenopus laevis. Dev. Biol. 233, 72-79. doi:10.1006/dbio.2001.0180
Yokoyama, H., Maruoka, T., Ochi, H., Aruga, A., Ohgo, S., Ogino, H. and
Tamura, K. (2011). Different requirement for Wnt/β-catenin signaling in limb
regeneration of larval and adult Xenopus. PLoS ONE 6, e21721. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0021721
16
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2021) 148, dev199158. doi:10.1242/dev.199158
DEVELOPMENT

===== Bando2018_IntJDevBiol_cricket-leg-regeneration-review =====
Molecular mechanisms of limb regeneration: insights from 
regenerating legs of the cricket Gryllus bimaculatus
TETSUYA BANDO1, TARO MITO2, YOSHIMASA HAMADA#,1, YOSHIYASU ISHIMARU2, 
SUMIHARE NOJI2 and HIDEYO OHUCHI*,1
1Department of Cytology and Histology, Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Okayama University, Okayama, Japan and 2Division of Bioscience and Bioindustry, Graduate School of Technology, 
Industrial and Social Sciences, Tokushima University, Tokushima, Japan
ABSTRACT  This review summarizes recent advances in leg regeneration research, focusing on 
the cricket Gryllus bimaculatus. Recent studies have revealed molecular mechanisms on blastema 
formation, establishment of positional information, and epigenetic regulation during leg regen­
eration. Especially, these studies have provided molecular bases in classical conceptual models 
such as the polar coordinate model, the intercalation model, the boundary model, the steepness 
model, etc., which were proposed to interpret regeneration processes of the cockroach legs. When 
a leg is amputated, a blastema is formed through the activation of the Janus-kinase (Jak)/Signal-
Transduction-and-Activator-of-Transcription (STAT) pathway. Subsequently, the Hedgehog/Wing­
less/Decapentaplegic/Epidermal-growth-factor pathways instruct distalization in the blastema, 
designated as the molecular boundary model. Downstream targets of this pathway are transcrip­
tion factors Distal-less (Dll) and dachshund (dac), functioning as key regulators of proximodistal 
pattern formation. Dll and dac specify the distal and proximal regions in the blastema, respectively, 
through the regulation of tarsal patterning genes. The expression of leg patterning genes during 
regeneration may be epigenetically controlled by histone H3K27 methylation via Enhancer-of-zeste 
and Ubiquitously–transcribed-tetratricopeptide-repeat-gene-X-chromosome. For the molecular 
mechanism of intercalation of the missing structures between the amputated position and the 
most distal one, Dachsous/Fat (Ds/Ft) steepness model has been proposed, in which the Ds/Ft 
pathway maintains positional information and determines leg size through dac expression. This 
model was theoretically verified to interpret the experimental results obtained with cricket legs. 
Availability of whole-genome sequence information, regeneration-dependent RNA interference, 
and genome editing technique will have the cricket be an ideal model system to reveal gene func­
tions in leg regeneration. 
KEY WORDS: leg regeneration, distalization, intercalation, steepness model, Gryllus bimaculatus
Introduction
Many regeneration processes exist that allow an organism 
to regrow lost body parts. Despite having distinct morphologies 
of regenerative organs, different organisms may share common 
regeneration processes. In both insects and amphibians, for 
instance, leg regeneration is initiated via macrophage activation 
(Mescher, 2017) and blastema formation, followed by prolifera­
tion, dedifferentiation, and redifferentiation of blastemal cells to 
Int. J. Dev. Biol. 62: 559-569 (2018)
https://doi.org/10.1387/ijdb.180048ho
www.intjdevbiol.com
*Address correspondence to:  Hideyo Ohuchi. Department of Cytology and Histology, Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Oka­
yama University, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, Okayama City, Okayama 700-8558, Japan. Tel:+81-86-235-7083. Fax:+81-86-235-7079. E-mail: hohuchi@okayama-u.ac.jp 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1961-606X  - #Present address: Division of Molecular Biology, Institute for Genome Research, Tokushima University
Supplementary Material (two figures) for this paper is available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1387/ijdb.180048ho
Submitted: 31 January, 2018; Accepted: 9 February, 2018
ISSN: Online 1696-3547, Print 0214-6282
© 2018 UPV/EHU Press
Printed in Spain
Abbreviations used in this paper: Ds/Ft, Dachsous/Fat; Jak, Janus-kinase; STAT, signal-
transduction-and-activator-of-transcription.
generate a functional leg (Nacu and Tanaka, 2011; Das, 2015; 
Tanaka, 2016; Haas and Whited, 2017). Extensive genome and 
transcriptome sequencing data are currently available, and gene 
expression can be easily manipulated by gene editing methods. 
Applying these technological advances, researchers can study 
regeneration processes systematically based on gene function, 

560    T. Bando et al.
compare regeneration processes among animals at the molecular 
level, and identify common basic genetic mechanisms in organ 
regeneration. 
Historically, detailed phenomenological studies on leg regen­
eration of cockroach nymphs (Bohn, 1971; French et al., 1976; 
Truby, 1983) provided important concepts in regeneration including 
positional information and leading models such as the gradient 
(steepness) model (Bohn, 1971), the polar coordinate model (French 
et al., 1976), and the boundary model (Meinhardt, 1982) to explain 
regeneration phenomena. However, the cockroach system has be­
come less used, probably because the fertilized eggs are surrounded 
by an egg case (oothecal), that makes it quite difficult to inject DNA 
or RNA in the egg to produce genetically-modified organisms. In 
contrast, in crickets, which also have remarkable regenerative 
capacity to restore missing distal leg parts of nymphs, eggs are 
easy to isolate and suitable for producing genetically-modified one 
to perform gene functional analyses. In addition, gene function in 
crickets can be studied by means of regeneration-dependent RNA 
interference (rdRNAi). Thus, insect leg regeneration processes 
have been studied at the molecular level using a cricket species 
Gryllus bimaculatus (two-spotted cricket; hereafter, denoted as 
Gb or cricket) (Mito and Noji, 2008; Wilson-Horch et al., 2017). 
As results, several signaling molecules and transcription factors 
have been identified as components of gene network pathways 
regulating regeneration processes in nymphal legs.
Here we review the molecular mechanisms of cricket leg re­
generation, according to the distalization-and-intercalation (D&I) 
principle (Agata et al., 2007), the molecular boundary model for 
distalizaion, and the Dachsous/Fat (Ds/Ft) steepness model for 
intercalary regeneration processes. The cricket can now be used 
as a potent model insect to study mechanisms of leg regeneration 
at the gene functional level.
Early processes in leg regeneration
The cricket leg consists of six segments arranged along the 
proximodistal (P/D) axis in the following order: coxa, trochanter, 
femur, tibia, tarsus, and claw (Fig. 1A). When a metathoracic 
leg of a cricket nymph in the third instar is amputated at a distal 
position of the tibia, the distal missing part is restored after four 
molts during the first month after amputation (Fig. 1B). After leg 
amputation, a blastema forms beneath the wound epidermis in a 
manner akin to that of other regenerative organisms. The lost part 
of the leg is regenerated from blastemal cells, regulated by the 
expression of evolutionally conserved signaling molecules. The 
regeneration process of cricket legs is divided into four steps: (1) 
wound healing with clot/scab formation, (2) blastema formation, 
(3) recognition of positional information and cell proliferation, and 
(4) repatterning (Fig. 1B).
Wound healing and blastema formation in regenerative animals
Wound healing is a conserved process observed in both re­
generative and nonregenerative animals, including human. In 
general, wound healing involves closure of the wound surface 
by a clot/scab and closure of the 
wound surface beneath the scab 
by the wound epidermis. In a ho­
lometabolous insect, such as the 
fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster, the 
molecular basis of wound healing 
and tissue regeneration has been in­
vestigated on epidermis (Tsarouhas 
et al., 2014), imaginal discs (Repiso 
et al., 2011), and midgut (Hong et 
al., 2016). In the wound-healing 
step, the macrophage-activating 
pathway is likely to initiate regenera­
tion (Mescher, 2017). In vertebrates, 
myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase 
substrate (MARCKS)-like protein 
was identified as an extracellularly 
released factor that induces the initial 
cell cycle response during axolotl 
appendage regeneration (Sugiura 
et al., 2016). It is intriguing to know 
whether molecular and cellular bases 
of wound healing in crickets are 
similar to those found in Drosophila 
or in vertebrates.
B
A
Fig. 1. Structure of the cricket leg and four steps of cricket 
leg regeneration. (A) Dorsal view of a cricket nymph at the 
third instar (left) and schematic illustration of its metathoracic 
leg (right). (B) Amputated leg regenerates via four steps: 
(1) wound healing with clot/scab formation, (2) blastema 
formation, (3) recognition of positional information and cell 
proliferation, and (4) repatterning.

Molecular mechanisms of cricket leg regeneration    561 
After wound healing, blastema formation is the key event for 
tissue regeneration. For blastemal formation, there must exist 
certain common basic mechanisms, because insects, small fishes, 
salamanders, and frogs regenerate missing tissue parts through 
proliferation of blastemal cells, a population of dedifferentiated 
proliferating cells that forms adjacently to the wound epidermis. 
Although cellular proliferation modes for regeneration at the stump 
tips differ between hydra (Galliot, 2013) and planarian (Tasaki et 
al., 2011a; Tasaki et al., 2011b), it seems that regeneration is com­
monly regulated via MAPK and Wnt signaling pathways (Petersen 
and Reddien, 2009; Yazawa et al., 2009). Recent advances in 
studies on regeneration of vertebrate appendages were reviewed 
in detail by Tanaka (Tanaka, 2016). Given the knowledge on early 
regeneration processes of invertebrates and vertebrates, secreted 
molecules (e.g. Unpaired (Upd) of Drosophila and MARCKS-like 
protein of axolotl) likely initiate blastema formation after wound 
closure and may regulate blastemal cell proliferation via certain 
signaling pathways. Roles of the signaling pathways in blastema 
formation will be discussed in the next section. 
Jak/STAT signaling is involved in cell proliferation during 
blastema formation in cricket
During cricket leg regeneration, blastema forms within 2 days 
post amputation (dpa). Genes of several signaling molecules, 
including wingless/Wnt (wg/Wnt), hedgehog (hh)/Sonic hh (Shh), 
Epidermal growth factor (EGF), decapentaplegic (dpp)/TGF-b, 
Salvador (Sav)/Hippo (Hpo)/Warts (Wts), and Janus-kinase (Jak)/
Signal-Transduction-and-Activator-of-Transcription (STAT), show 
upregulated expression levels during blastema formation (Mito et 
al., 2002; Bando et al., 2009; Bando et al., 2013). Comparative 
RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) data has revealed similar results in 
other animals (Satoh et al., 2011). Activation of Jak/STAT signaling 
is necessary for regeneration of the midgut and imaginal disc of 
Drosophila and for maintenance of the pluripotency of embryonic 
stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells (Staley and Irvine, 
2010). Thus, it is likely that Jak/STAT signaling plays important 
roles during blastema formation.
Jak/STAT signaling is evolutionarily conserved from insect to 
human (Arbouzova and Zeidler, 2006). Ligands for Jak/STAT sig­
naling are secreted cytokines, including interleukins (IL-6) in verte­
brates and secreted molecules (Upd, Upd2, Upd3) in Drosophila. 
In Drosophila, cytokines bind to an interleukin receptor Domeless 
(Dome) and activate a non-receptor tyrosine kinase Hopscotch 
(Hop), which phosphorylates the transcription factor STAT. The 
phosphorylated STAT homodimerizes and localizes in the nucleus 
to activate transcription of target genes, including cyclins and sup­
pressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS), which negatively regulates 
Jak/STAT signaling by inhibiting Jak activation.
Since expression of Jak/STAT signaling genes Gb’dome and 
Gb’Stat are upregulated during cricket leg regeneration, it is 
suggested that this signaling is involved in the cricket blastema 
formation as well. RNAi-mediated knockdown of Gb’domeRNAi and 
Gb’StatRNAi show regeneration-defective phenotypes; no regenera­
tion of lost parts of the tibia or tarsus. Gb’hopRNAi shows incomplete 
regeneration phenotypes; the lost part is reconstructed but with 
an abnormal morphology. Since expression of Gb’cyclin E is de­
creased in the blastema of Gb’StatRNAi crickets, Jak/STAT signaling 
promotes blastemal cell proliferation during leg regeneration. In 
contrast, Gb’Socs2RNAi, in which Jak/STAT signaling is constitutively 
activated, shows the lengthened regenerated leg phenotype by 
upregulating Gb’cyclin E expression. Thus, Jak/STAT signaling 
is required for cell proliferation during blastema formation in the 
cricket leg (Fig. 2) (Bando et al., 2013).
Sav/Wts/Hpo signaling suppresses blastemal cell proliferation 
in regenerating cricket legs
After tissue loss, blastemal cells proliferate rapidly and differenti­
ate into several cell types to reconstruct lost parts of the tissue. 
Thereafter, proliferation of differentiated blastemal cells should be 
suppressed. A known tumor suppressor pathway in many human 
cancers, Sav/Wts/Hpo is an evolutionarily conserved signaling 
pathway from insects to vertebrates (Harvey et al., 2013). In Dro­
sophila, Sav/Wts/Hpo signaling regulates organogenesis, including 
formation of wings and compound eyes (Staley and Irvine, 2012). 
Key components of Sav/Wts/Hpo signaling (vertebrate homo­
logues) are Hpo (Mst1/2), Sav (Sav1), Wts (Lats1/2), and Mats 
(Mob1/2). Hpo and Wts are serine/threonine kinases, while Sav 
and Mats are adaptor proteins for Hpo and Wts, respectively. Hpo 
phosphorylates and activates Wts, which phosphorylates its target 
protein Yorkie (Yki) to promote proteasomal degradation of Yki. 
Yki, a transcriptional co-activator of transcription factor Scalloped 
(Sd), induces expression of cyclin B, cyclin E, inhibitor of apoptosis 
proteins (IAP), and others. The vertebrate homologue of Yki is 
Yap, a transcriptional co-activator that promotes cell proliferation. 
The vertebrate homologue of Sd is Tead, which is an antiapoptotic 
transcription factor. Thus, activation (or inactivation) of Sav/Wts/
Hpo signaling suppresses (or promotes) cell proliferation via inhibi­
tion (or activation) of Yki activity. Sav/Wts/Hpo signaling activity is 
regulated by two huge protocadherins, Ds and Ft, in Drosophila. 
Interaction of Ft with Ds activates Hpo signaling to suppress cell 
proliferation (Cho et al., 2006).
In the early phase of cricket leg regeneration, some Hpo signal­
ing components are upregulated. Sav/Wts/Hpo signaling may be 
involved in blastemal cell proliferation. RNAi-based knockdown of 
Fig. 2. Involvement of Jak/STAT and Sav/Wts/Hpo signaling pathways 
during cricket leg regeneration. The red line indicates the amputated posi­
tion. Blastema and regenerated tissue are indicated in pink. Macrophage-
like cells may be involved in scab formation, depending on gene functions 
of Grainyhead, Stitcher, Pale, and Dopa decarboxylase (Ddc). Jak/STAT 
signaling promotes blastema formation. Ds/Ft and Sav/Wts/Hpo signaling 
pathways inhibit proliferation of blastemal cells.

562    T. Bando et al.
Sav/Wts/Hpo signaling component genes leads to enlargement of 
the blastemal region and hyperproliferation of blastemal cells in 
regenerating legs of Gb’ftRNAi, Gb’dsRNAi, and Gb’wtsRNAi crickets. 
In Gb’ykiRNAi crickets, hyperproliferation of the enlarged blastemal 
cells is suppressed, presumably through Sav/Wts/Hpo signaling 
that is activated by Ds/Ft and through Yki (Bando et al., 2009;Bando 
et al., 2011b). Taken together, these findings indicate that Jak/
STAT signaling promotes and Sav/Wts/Hpo signaling suppresses 
blastemal cell proliferation (Fig. 2). As almost all components of 
Jak/STAT and Sav/Wts/Hpo signaling are evolutionarily conserved 
from insects to vertebrates, these two signaling pathways may be 
involved in regulation of liver regeneration in vertebrates as well 
(Cressman et al., 1996; Li et al., 2002; Wuestefeld et al., 2003). 
Roles of Sav/Wts/Hpo signaling pathway in size control of organ 
regeneration were discussed by Hayashi et al., (Hayashi et al., 
2015b) and also in this Review.
Molecular systems to establish positional information 
during leg regeneration
The distalization-and-intercalation principle
In the 1900s, Thomas Hunt Morgan categorized tissue regen­
eration in animals into two modes: morphallaxis and epimorphosis 
(Morgan, 1901). In the case of cricket leg regeneration, the residual 
part of the leg appears to remain as it is and the lost parts are added 
on. This kind of regeneration is called “epimorphic regeneration”. 
On the other hand, lost body parts of hydra are reconstructed 
morphallactically: when the head or tail region of hydra is lost, 
whole body parts are completely reconstructed in the remaining 
parts in miniature. The reconstructed miniature part then grows to 
recover the original size and shape without blastema formation in 
the hydra. In 2007, Agata et al., (Agata et al., 2007) observed that 
regeneration of the planarian is neither morphallactic nor epimor­
phic. They proposed a new unifying principle, called “distalization 
and intercalation” (D&I) principle. It is likely that when animals 
lose body parts, such as limbs (for newts and salamanders), tails 
(for tadpoles), caudal fins (for zebrafish), or legs (for insects and 
other cases), animals should recognize the amputated position 
as the most distal position. Then, they reconstruct the lost parts 
similarly to the original ones from blastema by intercalating parts 
between the most distal position and the remained position with 
changing the remaining part of the tissue. So far, the molecular 
boundary model has been proposed for initiation of pattern for­
mation (i.e., “distalization”), while the Ds/Ft steepness model has 
been applied for intercalary pattern formation during regeneration 
(i.e., “intercalation”). 
The molecular boundary model for distalization
In newts and cockroaches as well as crickets, supernumerary 
legs are formed at anterior and posterior sides of the grafting posi­
tion, when the distal graft piece is transplanted to the contralateral 
host stump. French and colleagues proposed the polar coordinate 
Fig. 3. Schematic model of distalization and its molecular 
players. (A) In the early Drosophila leg imaginal disc, hh (green) is 
expressed in the posterior compartment, while dpp (light blue) is 
expressed dorsally and wg (orange) ventrally at the anteroposterior 
boundary. High activity levels of Dpp and Wg induce expression of 
an EGFR ligand at the center of the leg disc. A distal-to-proximal 
gradient of EGFR activity is found in the presumptive distal segments 
(yellow), in which EGFR signaling activation appears inside each 
leg segment (yellow). (B) Regeneration of cricket leg amputated at 
distal tibia. During early regeneration, Gb’hh (green) is expressed 
in the posterior blastemal cells, and Gb’dpp (light blue) and Gb’wg 
(orange) are expressed in dorsal and ventral blastema, respectively. 
Gb’Egfr (blue) is broadly expressed in distal blastema. EGFR activity 
is shown in yellow. In later regenerating legs, Gb’Egfr expression 
forms rings adjacent to presumptive joints between regenerating 
leg segments. Panels A and B are modified from Fig. 7 in Nakamura 
et al., (2008b). (C) A mode of formation of supernumerary legs by 
grafting operation in the cricket nymph based on the CTBM. When 
the right mesothoracic leg (T2) of the graft (ventral view) grafted 
into the left metathoracic leg (T3) of the host (ventral view) to 
reverse the anteroposterior polarity, Gb’Hh (green) in the posterior 
compartment of the host and graft legs induces the expressions 
of Gb’dpp (light blue) and Gb’wg (orange) in the dorsal side and 
ventral side of the anterior compartment (red arrows). The site 
where the Gb’dpp-expression cells abuts the Gb’wg-expressing 
cells becomes an organizer that induces the formation of the P/D 
axis (red circles). Co, coxa; Tr, trochanter; Fe, femur; Ti, tibia; Ta, 
tarsus; 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, tarsal segments 1–5; Pr, pretarsus; A, anterior; 
D, dorsal; P, posterior; V, ventral.
model to interpret this phenomenon (French et al., 1976; Bry­
ant et al., 1981). The model includes two rules: the shortest 
intercalation rule and the full circle rule. The shortest inter­
calation rule states that discontinuity of positional informa­
tion between the host stump and graft piece is recovered 
B
C
A

Molecular mechanisms of cricket leg regeneration    563 
by intercalating the minimum missing positional information to 
continue the discontinuity, although the direction of the intercalate 
is forwarded or reversed. The full circle rule states that leg out­
growth will occur where there is a complement of circumferential 
positional information. According to the polar coordinate model, 
supernumerary leg outgrowth occurs when there is discontinuity 
of circumferential positional information and intercalates the gap 
of positional information (French et al., 1976). 
The boundary model was proposed to explain that these phenom­
ena would be promoted by local interaction of tissue compartments 
(Meinhardt, 1983). Afterward, the molecular basis of the boundary 
model was clarified through intimate gene expression analysis of 
Drosophila leg imaginal disc (Campbell and Tomlinson, 1995). In 
their model (Campbell and Tomlinson boundary model: CTBM), 
the posterior compartment of leg imaginal disc is defined by the 
expression of engrailed, which encodes a homeoprotein. dpp is 
expressed by the dorsal cells at the anteroposterior (A/P) bound­
ary, whereas wg is expressed by the ventral boundary cells (Fig. 
3A). The crossing point of the dpp-expressing cells and the wg-
expressing cells is the presumptive distal tip, which is a molecular 
base for “distalization” during limb development. It should be noted 
that while the number of circumferential positional values are drawn 
to be 12 as a familiar clock face in the polar coordinate model, 
three compartments, posterior, antero-ventral, and antero-dorsal, 
are enough for distalization in insect limb development (Vincent 
and Lawrence, 1994).
The CTBM model was subsequently found to suit well to cricket 
leg regeneration (Mito et al., 2002). Gb’hh is expressed in the pos­
terior compartment in the regeneration blastema, whereas Gb’dpp 
and Gb’wg are expressed in the dorsal and ventral cells at the A/P 
boundary, respectively (Fig. 3B). These gene expression patterns 
are comparable to those of the leg bud of cricket embryo and the 
leg imaginal disc of Drosophila (Niwa et al., 2000; Mito et al., 2002), 
suggesting that leg regeneration along the P/D axis goes through 
a distalization process similarly to normal leg development. In the 
case of grafting experiments involving formation of supernumerary 
legs, the posterior cells are forced to confront the anterior cells 
and two new interfaces are formed (Fig. 3C). Since Hh induces 
dpp or wg expression in the Drosophila leg imaginal disc (Fig. 3A) 
(Campbell et al., 1993; Basler and Struhl, 1994; Diaz-Benjumea et 
al., 1994), Gb’Hh secreted from the posterior compartment likely 
induces expression of Gb’dpp and Gb’wg in the dorsal and ventral 
boundary cells, respectively. In this way, leg regeneration along the 
P/D axis is triggered at the boundary cells of Gb’dpp-expressing 
domain and Gb’wg-expressing domain, which has been verified 
by RNAi-based functional studies (Mito et al., 2002). 
In the Drosophila leg imaginal disc, a combined activity gradient 
of Dpp and Wg activates downstream gene expression along the 
leg P/D axis. The highest dpp and wg expression levels induce vein 
(vn), which encodes a ligand of EGF receptor (EGFR) (Campbell, 
2002; Galindo et al., 2002). Vn acts as a principal morphogen for 
distal leg patterning by activating EGFR signaling, indicating that 
the tarsus may be patterned by a distal-to-proximal gradient of 
EGFR activity (Fig. 3A) (Campbell, 2002; Galindo et al., 2002). 
During leg regeneration, Gb’Egfr expression is observed in the 
blastema, whereas its expression is maintained as ring-like adjacent 
to presumptive intersegmental borders in the later regenerating 
leg (Fig. 3B) (Nakamura et al., 2008b). Gb’Egfr was shown to be 
required for formation of distal leg structures, specifically the distal 
tarsus and claws, in the regeneration process and supernumerary 
leg formation (Nakamura et al., 2008a; Nakamura et al., 2008b). 
Thus, Gb’Egfr is essential for distalization to regenerate distal 
tarsal structures and claws. This finding is consistent with the role 
of EGFR signaling during Drosophila leg development (Campbell, 
2002). These findings indicate that the molecular mechanisms for 
distalization shown in the CTBM model well explain the various 
phenomena observed during formation of the P/D axis in the devel­
oping and regenerating insect leg. Recently, Nacu et al., (Nacu et 
al., 2016) identified single factors that can substitute for functions 
of anterior and posterior tissue, Shh for posterior and Fibroblast 
Growth Factor 8 (FGF8) for anterior tissue, in supernumerary limb 
formation in axolotls. This observation suggests that in axolotls 
the CTBM model works under different molecular players from 
those of insects.
Role of P/D-patterning genes (Gb’EGFR, Gb’al, Gb’Dll and 
Gb’dac) during establishment of segment identity in 
regenerating legs
In Drosophila imaginal disc, genes involved in establishing the 
P/D axis of the leg are induced by the EGFR signaling pathway. 
Dll is indispensable for development of distal leg parts (Cohen 
et al., 1989), dac is required for development of medial leg parts 
(Mardon et al., 1994; Dong et al., 2001), and homothorax (hth) 
instructs proximal leg fates (Rieckhof et al., 1997;Wu and Cohen, 
1999). In the cricket leg bud, segment identity may be determined 
by Gb’Dll, Gb’dac, and Gb’hth genes (Inoue et al., 2002), as in the 
Drosophila imaginal disc (Goto and Hayashi, 1999; Kojima, 2004). 
In the blastema, Gb’Dll, Gb’dac, and Gb’aristaless (al) genes are 
expressed in a manner that is similar to that observed in develop­
ing leg buds (Nakamura et al., 2008a; Nakamura et al., 2008b). 
Thus, a common mechanism for P/D patterning is likely to exist 
between leg buds and blastema.
A model for P/D patterning of regenerating legs is shown in 
Fig. 4 (Ishimaru et al., 2015). Gb’Dll is expressed in the blastema 
that corresponds to tarsal segments 1–3, and higher expression is 
Fig. 4. Schematic model of repatterning process during cricket leg 
regeneration. Schematic of transcriptional regulation by tarsal repatterning 
genes to form tarsal segments (see the text for details). The amputated 
position is shown in red lines. Regenerated segments are indicated in pink. 
Ti, tibia; 1, 2, 3, tarsal segments 1–3.

564    T. Bando et al.
involved in the most distal region. When higher Gb’Dll expression 
is induced by Gb’EGFR signaling in the most distal region, Gb’dac 
expression is substantially reduced, and tarsal appendage-pattern­
ing genes, such as Gb’al, Gb’BarH, and Gb’bric a brac (Gb’bab), 
are expressed in the distal region. Therefore, Gb’Dll is critical for 
tarsus regeneration, and the formation of tarsal segments 2-3 may 
be regulated by expression of these patterning genes. Conversely, 
in the proximal regions where Gb’Dll expression is low, Gb’dac 
expression is increased whereas Gb’bab expression is repressed, 
and consequently formation of tarsal segment 1 is induced. Thus, 
Gb’dac is essential for regeneration of tarsal segment 1. These 
observations lead to the conclusion that Gb’Dll acts as a nega­
tive or positive regulator for Gb’dac expression, depending on its 
expression level, in the formation of tarsal segments along P/D 
axis. During establishment of the P/D axis in leg regeneration, cell 
proliferation appears to be promoted in the presumptive tarsus and 
tibia. Cell proliferation is mainly affected by Gb’dac expression, 
and Gb’dac may contribute to elongation of the regenerating tarsal 
segment 1 (Ishimaru et al., 2015). Furthermore, Gb’dac affects 
tibial cell proliferation and is associated with the size determina­
tion of regenerating tibia along the P/D axis through Gb’Ds/Gb’Ft 
signaling (Ishimaru et al., 2015).
Epigenetic regulation of leg patterning genes during 
repatterning process
Epigenetic control of gene expression via chemical modification 
of the histone tail is a conserved mechanism to regulate pattern 
formation in animal development. However, the way of its involve­
ment in pattern formation may vary among species (Supplemental 
information and Fig. S1). Pattern formation of developing limbs 
in mice is regulated by HOX genes (a subset of homeotic genes) 
whose expressions are epigenetically regulated by Ring finger 
protein 1 (Ring1), an essential component of Polycomb repressive 
complex 1 (Yakushiji-Kaminatsui et al., 2016). Segment patterns in 
insect embryos, including Drosophila, Tribolium, and Gryllus, are 
regulated by HOX genes whose expressions are epigenetically 
controlled by Polycomb group proteins (Matsuoka et al., 2015). 
Expressed-gene sets and gene expression patterns are similar 
between regenerating legs and developing legs in the cricket (Na­
kamura et al., 2008b;Donoughe and Extavour, 2016), indicating 
that epigenetic regulation is involved in nymphal leg regeneration. 
Indeed, comparative transcriptome analysis shows that expressions 
of several epigenetic factor genes are upregulated in regenerating 
legs at 24 hpa compared to 0 hpa (Bando et al., 2013). 
Epigenetic regulation via methylation of the 27th lysine residue 
of histone H3 (H3K27) is known to transform euchromatin into 
heterochromatin, which in turn represses gene expression, and 
vice versa (Tie et al., 2009). Methylation status of histone H3K27 
is regulated by a single histone methyltransferase and a single 
histone demethylase in insects: Gb’Enhancer of zeste (Gb’E(z)) 
Fig. 5. Schematic diagrams of regenerated leg phenotypes in control, 
Gb’E(z)RNAi, and Gb’UtxRNAi crickets. Regenerated metathoracic (T3) adult 
legs shown in pink. Fe, femur; Ti, tibia: Ta 1-3, tarsal segments 1-3; Cl, claw; 
Ex-Ti, extra-tibia (in yellow).
Fig. 6. Typical regenerated leg 
phenotypes, leg patterning 
gene expression, and plausible 
model for repatterning. Plausible 
models of repatterning process in 
control, Gb’E(z)RNAi and Gb’UtxRNAi 
regenerating legs (see details 
in text). Gb’dac and Gb’Egfr are 
illustrated by magenta and blue, 
respectively. Double-headed red 
arrows indicate Gb’dac express­
ing domains in extra-tibia and 
tarsus regions. Blue and orange 
arrowheads indicate Gb’Egfr ex­
pression and diminished Gb’Egfr 
expression, respectively (Partly 
adapted from Fig. 8 of the refer­
ence (Hamada et al., 2015)). Fe, 
femur; Ti, tibia: Ta, tarsal segments; 
Cl, claw; Ex-Ti, extra-tibia (in red).

Molecular mechanisms of cricket leg regeneration    565 
and Gb’Ubiquitously transcribed tetratricopeptide repeat gene, X 
chromosome (Gb’Utx) encode a methyltransferase and demeth­
ylase of histone H3K27, respectively. Gb’E(z) and Gb’Utx expres­
sions are upregulated and ubiquitously expressed in regenerating 
legs, respectively. The distribution of trimethylated histone H3K27 
(H3K27me3) is reduced in Gb’E(z)RNAi legs and increased in 
Gb’UtxRNAi legs. In Gb’UtxRNAi regenerated legs, tarsal segments 
1 and 2 are fused, and tarsal spurs are not restored (Fig. 5). On 
the other hand, in Gb’E(z)RNAi regenerated legs, an additional seg­
ment is regenerated between original tibia and tarsal segment 1 in 
the most severe phenotype (Fig. 5). By analyzing morphological 
structures and expression patterns of leg patterning genes, the ad­
ditional segment by Gb’E(z)RNAi turns out to be a tibia, designated 
extra-tibia (Ex-Ti). 
To elucidate the epigenetic mechanism to induce formation of 
the additional leg segment of Ex-Ti, expression patterns of leg re­
patterning genes, including Gb’dac, Gb’Dll, Gb’Egfr, and Gb’BarH, 
were examined (Hamada et al., 2015). Correlation between the 
RNAi phenotypes and expression patterns of leg patterning genes 
is schematically shown in Fig. 6. In Gb’E(z)RNAi regenerating legs, 
Gb’dac expression is expanded in tarsal segment 1. This ectopic 
expression of Gb’dac may induce tibialization of a part of tarsus, 
resulting in additional tibial formation. In Gb’UtxRNAi regenerating 
legs, expression of Gb’Egfr is diminished in the middle tarsus, 
which may inhibit leg joint formation in the tarsus. Thus, epigenetic 
regulation of gene expression via histone H3K27me3 controls leg 
regeneration along the P/D axis. In conclusion, histone H3K27 meth­
ylation via Gb’E(z) and its demethylation via Gb’Utx epigenetically 
controls the expression of leg patterning genes (Hamada et al., 
2015). Roles of epigenetic regulation via histone H3K27 methyla­
tion during regeneration has been also discussed in Drosophila 
imaginal disc regeneration (Repiso et al., 2011) and Xenopus limb 
regeneration (Hayashi et al., 2015a).
The Ds/Ft steepness model for intercalation
Intercalary regeneration
In 1971, a paper entitled “Intercalary Regeneration and Segmen­
tal Gradients in the Extremities of Leucophaea (Blattaria) Larvae’’ 
was published and a gradient (steepness) model for intercalation 
was proposed (Bohn, 1971). There is a grafting experiment on 
cricket legs, in which a short graft amputated at the distal position 
of the tibia is transplanted into another amputated host, which is 
shortened at the proximal position of tibia, with lacking the middle 
region of the tibia. After transplantation, crickets undergo “intercalary 
regeneration” of the lost middle region between the host and graft 
to recover the discontinuity (Fig. 7). When a long graft that was 
amputated at the proximal position of the tibia is transplanted into 
another long host, which is amputated at the distal position of the 
tibia, with overlapping of the middle region of the tibia from host 
and graft. In this case, “reversed intercalary regeneration” of the 
overlapping middle region is observed in the opposite direction 
along the P/D axis (Fig. 7). In both cases, the intercalated parts 
are originated from the segment that has distal identity. When 
discontinuity of positional information occurs by amputation or 
transplantation of legs, the legs intercalate lost parts to retrieve 
missing positional information (Bohn, 1971; French et al., 1976). On 
the other hand, in 1978, a paper entitled “Intercalary regeneration 
around the circumference of the cockroach leg” was published and 
it was demonstrated that cells at different positions have different 
positional values in a circumferential sequence, which is analogous 
to the proximal/distal sequence (French, 1978). It is interesting 
to note that when the tibia and the femur are amputated at the 
same position and then the tibial graft is transplanted to the host, 
no intercalary regeneration occurs. This indicates that positional 
information along the P/D and circumferential axes is equivalent in 
each leg segment, suggesting that the molecular basis of positional 
information should be reiterated in each leg segment in a gradient 
manner along these axes (Bando et al., 2009).
Involvement of the Ds/Ft signaling pathway in maintaining 
positional information during intercalation
To explain intercalary regeneration at a molecular level, Bando 
et al., (Bando et al., 2009; Bando et al., 2011b) proposed the Ds/
Ft steepness model. It has been known in Drosophila that Ds and 
Ft are expressed in imaginal discs in a counter-gradient manner 
and regulate morphogenesis of several organs, including eyes, 
wings, and legs. As huge protocadherins found at the adherence 
junction of the cell membrane, Ds and Ft interact with each other 
to regulate cell-cell contacts. Heterodimerization of Ft with Ds ac­
tivates Sav/Wts/Hpo signaling to transduce cell-cell contacts and 
regulate cell proliferation, apoptosis, planer cell polarity (PCP), and 
cell morphology. Signal transduction from Ds/Ft to Sav/Wts/Hpo 
is mediated by an unconventional myosin Dachs (D) and a novel 
dsRNA binding protein Lowfat (Lft). Regulation of PCP by Ds/Ft 
involves a multifunctional Golgi kinase, Four-jointed (Fj) (Harvey 
and Hariharan, 2012; Staley and Irvine, 2012). These character­
istics indicated that Ds and Ft are good candidates for molecules 
related to positional information.
In cricket legs, Gb’ds and Gb’ft are expressed in each leg segment 
of developing limbs and regenerating legs in a counter-gradient 
manner along the P/D axis. Gb’d and Gb’fj/Gb’lft are expressed 
Fig. 7. Intercalary regeneration and reversed intercalation in the cricket 
leg. Intercalary regeneration: When distally amputated mesothoracic leg 
(g, graft) is transplanted to proximally amputated metathoracic leg (h, host), 
the middle region is intercalarily regenerated (red numbers). Reversed 
intercalation: When proximally amputated mesothoracic leg (g, graft) is 
transplanted to distally amputated metathoracic leg (h, host), the middle 
region is duplicated in the opposite direction.

566    T. Bando et al.
B
C
A
similarly to Gb’ds and Gb’ft, respectively, suggesting that the 
regulation of positional information may involve Ds/Ft signaling 
(Bando et al., 2011a; Bando et al., 2011b). If this possibility were 
true, then signaling knockdown would cause morphological defects 
along the P/D axis during regeneration and intercalation. As ex­
pected, regenerated legs of Gb’dsRNAi and Gb’ftRNAi are shortened 
and thickened, respectively, and those of Gb’dRNAi and Gb’lftRNAi 
are shortened. Regenerated legs of Gb’dsRNAi, Gb’ftRNAi (Fig. 8A), 
Gb’dRNAi and Gb’lftRNAi are shortened depending on the amputated 
position along the P/D axis, while in control amputation the length 
of regenerated legs is almost the same as that of the contralateral 
legs. Although the regenerated leg of Gb’ftRNAi is very short after the 
tibia is amputated at the proximal position, the tarsus, claw, and 
tibial and tarsal spurs are reconstructed at relative positions (Fig. 
8A). One explanation for this phenomenon is that rearrangement 
of positional information in the amputated leg stump shrinks the 
leg structures (Fig. 8C).
If positional information is rearranged after knockdown of Ds/
Ft signaling, then intercalary regeneration would be changed. In 
the control cricket, when a graft piece is transplanted into the host 
stump at different positions to induce discontinuity of positional in­
formation, intercalary regeneration or reversed intercalation occurs 
to recover the continuity of positional information. In contrast, no 
regeneration phenomenon occurs in Gb’dsRNAi, Gb’ftRNAi (Fig. 8B), 
or Gb’dRNAi crickets (Fig. 8B). Thus, it can be concluded that Ds/
Ft through D maintains positional information along the P/D axis 
Fig. 8. Involvement of Ds/Ft signaling in regeneration 
and a steepness model. Summary of leg regeneration and 
transplantation in control and Gb’ftRNAi crickets. Amputated 
positions are shown in red lines, regenerated tissues in pink, 
and plausible positional information in numbers. (A) In control 
cricket, the lost part of the leg regenerates as the original one 
independently of the amputated position. In Gb’dsRNAi, Gb’ftRNAi, 
Gb’dRNAi, or Gb’lftRNAi crickets, regenerated legs are shortened 
depending on the amputated positions. (B) When a graft piece 
is transplanted into different positions of the host, discontinuity 
is recovered by intercalation in the control. Intercalation does 
not occur in Gb’dsRNAi, Gb’ftRNAi, or Gb’dRNAi crickets. Positional 
information of intercalated regions is shown in red numbers. 
(C) Normal regeneration: schematic of the steepness model 
for leg regeneration. After amputation at positional value (PV) 
= 4 in tibia (with tibial stump in orange), blastemal cells detect 
positional disparity (PV, 4/9). The most distal PV is established 
(distalization) by the mechanism proposed by the molecular 
boundary model. A steep slope is formed, which leads to inter­
calary growth until positional continuity is re-established (yellow, 
PV = 4~9), as epimorphic-like regeneration. Pre-existing stump 
(orange) grows allometrically, retaining the original positional and 
allometric information (PV = 1~4). Ds/Ft RNAi (purple arrows): 
In Gb’dsRNAi or Gb’ftRNAi nymphs after amputation, remodeling 
of the stump takes place as morphallaxis-like regeneration. 
The normal Ds/Ft gradient (dotted line) shifts down with the 
same slope (purple), thus resetting the positional value of the 
amputated surface to the most distal positional value or the 
minimum scalar value of the Ds/Ft gradient.

Molecular mechanisms of cricket leg regeneration    567 
in leg segments during regeneration and intercalation. Lft helps 
to maintain positional information during longitudinal regeneration 
but is not needed during intercalation (Bando et al., 2009;Bando 
et al., 2011a;Bando et al., 2011b). Protocadherins Ds and Ft are 
evolutionarily conserved from insects to vertebrates. However, 
maintenance of positional information via Ds/Ft signaling during 
tissue regeneration has not been analyzed in other regenerative 
animals.
Lawrence et al., (Lawrence et al., 2008) described a steepness 
hypothesis linking PCP and cell growth, which are disconnected 
features of animal development, proposing that Ft and Ds link up 
to determine PCP and organ dimensions. Bando et al., (Bando et 
al., 2011b) proposed the Ds/Ft steepness model for intercalary 
regeneration and leg-size determination (Fig. 8C), based on the 
Ds/Ft trans-dimer system (Fig. 9).
Theoretical verification of the Ds/Ft steepness model
 The Ds/Ft steepness system may provide some positional 
information of the leg (Lawrence et al., 2008). To verify the steep­
ness hypothesis, Yoshida and others proposed a mathematical 
model (Fig. 9) (Yoshida et al., 2014). They assumed that (1) Ds/
Ft trans-heterodimers or trans-homodimers are redistributed dur­
ing cell division, and (2) growth would cease when a differential 
of the dimer across each cell decreases to a certain threshold 
(Yoshida et al., 2014). Their model was applied to simulate the 
results obtained by leg regeneration experiments with crickets. 
The simulated results were qualitatively consistent with the experi­
mental data for leg regeneration of Gb’dsRNAi or Gb’ftRNAi nymphs, 
or intercalary regeneration. The similar results were obtained even 
if the gradient of transheterodimers was not linear. Thus, the Ds/Ft 
steepness model is the probable model for molecular mechanisms 
on leg regeneration.
Concluding remarks
The cricket is a potent model for studying how amputated legs 
can achieve full regeneration. Studies of cricket systems have led 
to an understanding of the molecular basis of the four major steps: 
(1) wound healing with clot/scab formation, (2) blastema formation, 
(3) establishment of positional information, and (4) repatterning of 
the leg (Fig. 10). This review has focused on candidate molecules 
and signaling pathways that are involved in leg regeneration. We 
have proposed a molecular basis of regeneration with the molecular 
boundary model for distalization and the Ds/Ft steepness model 
for intercalation, according to D&I principle (Fig. 8C). Furthermore, 
we have demonstrated that epigenetics plays important roles in 
repatterning during regeneration.
With advances in whole-genome sequencing and gene-editing 
technologies, the tools needed to identify molecules and signal­
ing cascades of leg regeneration processes are available. Genes 
expressed during regeneration can be manipulated to determine 
Fig. 9. The Ds/Ft steepness model. The extended steepness 
model: A Ds/Ft trans-heterodimer case. During cell division, 
the Ds/Ft heterodimers are deemed redistributed on the wall 
of the newly created cell. ld and lf are the initial number of Ds 
and Ft heterodimers in the left cell, while rd and rf are the initial 
number of Ds and Ft heterodimers in the right cell, respec­
tively. The left and the right Ds/Ft molecules are redistributed 
during cell division under Formula 1, where nf and nd are the 
number of Ft and Ds heterodimers in the new membrane of 
the divided cell. Cells can proliferate under Formula 2, where 
diff is a threshold value of the steepness for proliferation.
Fig. 10. Schematic diagrams of cricket leg regeneration process. 
Schematic diagram of the process of leg regeneration in cricket. After 
amputation, Jak/STAT signaling is required for blastema formation. Hh/Dpp/
Wg/EGF pathway instructs distalization in the blastema. Ds/Ft signaling 
establishes positional information of the regenerating tibia through Hippo 
signaling. Epigenetic regulation, EGFR signaling and transcription factors are 
involved in the leg repatterning process of regenerating tarsus. Positional 
value is denoted arbitrarily by numbers 1~9.

568    T. Bando et al.
their functions, using a combination of RNA-seq data, rdRNAi, 
and genome editing methods with CRISPR/Cas (Supplemental 
information and Fig. S2). In addition to more precise investigation 
of molecular mechanisms in each step, how leg regeneration is 
initiated is one of the crucial and elusive questions to be answered 
for understanding the regenerative capacity in animals. This will 
be comprehensively understood soon, focusing on roles of mac­
rophages in cricket.
References
AGATA, K., SAITO, Y. and NAKAJIMA, E. (2007). Unifying principles of regeneration 
I: Epimorphosis versus morphallaxis. Dev Growth Differ 49: 73-78.
ARBOUZOVA, N.I. and ZEIDLER, M.P. (2006). JAK/STAT signalling in Drosophila: 
insights into conserved regulatory and cellular functions. Development 133: 
2605-2616.
BANDO, T., HAMADA, Y., KURITA, K., NAKAMURA, T., MITO, T., OHUCHI, H. and 
NOJI, S. (2011a). Lowfat, a mammalian Lix1 homologue, regulates leg size and 
growth under the Dachsous/Fat signaling pathway during tissue regeneration. 
Dev Dyn 240: 1440-1453.
BANDO, T., ISHIMARU, Y., KIDA, T., HAMADA, Y., MATSUOKA, Y., NAKAMURA, T., 
OHUCHI, H., NOJI, S. and MITO, T. (2013). Analysis of RNA-Seq data reveals 
involvement of JAK/STAT signalling during leg regeneration in the cricket Gryllus 
bimaculatus. Development 140: 959-964.
BANDO, T., MITO, T., MAEDA, Y., NAKAMURA, T., ITO, F., WATANABE, T., OHUCHI, 
H. and NOJI, S. (2009). Regulation of leg size and shape by the Dachsous/Fat 
signalling pathway during regeneration. Development 136: 2235-2245.
BANDO, T., MITO, T., NAKAMURA, T., OHUCHI, H. and NOJI, S. (2011b). Regula­
tion of leg size and shape: involvement of the Dachsous-fat signaling pathway. 
Dev Dyn 240: 1028-1041.
BASLER, K. and STRUHL, G. (1994). Compartment boundaries and the control of 
Drosophila limb pattern by hedgehog protein. Nature 368: 208-214.
BOHN, H. (1971). [Intercalary regeneration and segmental gradients in the extremi­
ties of Leucophaea larvae (Blattaria): III. The origin of the intercalary regenerate]. 
Wilhelm Roux Arch Entwickl Mech Org 167: 209-221.
BRYANT, S.V., FRENCH, V. and BRYANT, P.J. (1981). Distal regeneration and sym­
metry. Science 212: 993-1002.
CAMPBELL, G. (2002). Distalization of the Drosophila leg by graded EGF-receptor 
activity. Nature 418: 781-785.
CAMPBELL, G. and TOMLINSON, A. (1995). Initiation of the proximodistal axis in 
insect legs. Development 121: 619–628.
CAMPBELL, G., WEAVER, T. and TOMLINSON, A. (1993). Axis specification in the 
developing Drosophila appendage: the role of wingless, decapentaplegic, and 
the homeobox gene aristaless. Cell 74: 1113-1123.
CHO, E., FENG, Y., RAUSKOLB, C., MAITRA, S., FEHON, R. and IRVINE, K.D. 
(2006). Delineation of a Fat tumor suppressor pathway. Nat Genet 38: 1142-1150.
COHEN, S.M., BRONNER, G., KUTTNER, F., JURGENS, G. and JACKLE, H. (1989). 
Distal-less encodes a homoeodomain protein required for limb development in 
Drosophila. Nature 338: 432-434.
CRESSMAN, D.E., GREENBAUM, L.E., DEANGELIS, R.A., CILIBERTO, G., FURTH, 
E.E., POLI, V. and TAUB, R. (1996). Liver failure and defective hepatocyte regen­
eration in interleukin-6-deficient mice. Science 274: 1379-1383.
DAS, S. (2015). Morphological, Molecular, and Hormonal Basis of Limb Regeneration 
across Pancrustacea. Integr Comp Biol 55: 869-877.
DIAZ-BENJUMEA, F.J., COHEN, B. and COHEN, S.M. (1994). Cell interaction 
between compartments establishes the proximal-distal axis of Drosophila legs. 
Nature 372: 175-179.
DONG, P.D., CHU, J. and PANGANIBAN, G. (2001). Proximodistal domain speci­
fication and interactions in developing Drosophila appendages. Development 
128: 2365-2372.
DONOUGHE, S. and EXTAVOUR, C.G. (2016). Embryonic development of the cricket 
Gryllus bimaculatus. Dev Biol 411: 140-156.
FRENCH, V. (1978). Intercalary regeneration around the circumference of the cock­
roach leg. J Embryol Exp Morphol 47: 53-84.
FRENCH, V., BRYANT, P.J. and BRYANT, S.V. (1976). Pattern regulation in epimorphic 
fields. Science 193: 969-981.
GALINDO, M.I., BISHOP, S.A., GREIG, S. and COUSO, J.P. (2002). Leg patterning 
driven by proximal-distal interactions and EGFR signaling. Science 297: 256-259.
GALLIOT, B. (2013). Injury-induced asymmetric cell death as a driving force for head 
regeneration in Hydra. Dev Genes Evol 223: 39-52.
GOTO, S. and HAYASHI, S. (1999). Proximal to distal cell communication in the 
Drosophila leg provides a basis for an intercalary mechanism of limb patterning. 
Development 126: 3407-3413.
HAAS, B.J. and WHITED, J.L. (2017). Advances in Decoding Axolotl Limb Regenera­
tion. Trends Genet 33: 553-565.
HAMADA, Y., BANDO, T., NAKAMURA, T., ISHIMARU, Y., MITO, T., NOJI, S., TO­
MIOKA, K. and OHUCHI, H. (2015). Leg regeneration is epigenetically regulated 
by histone H3K27 methylation in the cricket Gryllus bimaculatus. Development 
142: 2916-2927.
HARVEY, K.F. and HARIHARAN, I.K. (2012). The hippo pathway. Cold Spring Harb 
Perspect Biol 4: a011288.
HARVEY, K.F., ZHANG, X. and THOMAS, D.M. (2013). The Hippo pathway and 
human cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 13: 246-257.
HAYASHI, S., KAWAGUCHI, A., UCHIYAMA, I., KAWASUMI-KITA, A., KOBAYASHI, T., 
NISHIDE, H., TSUTSUMI, R., TSURU, K., INOUE, T., OGINO, H. et al., (2015a). 
Epigenetic modification maintains intrinsic limb-cell identity in Xenopus limb bud 
regeneration. Dev Biol 406: 271-282.
HAYASHI, S., YOKOYAMA, H. and TAMURA, K. (2015b). Roles of Hippo signaling 
pathway in size control of organ regeneration. Dev Growth Differ 57: 341-351.
INOUE, Y., MITO, T., MIYAWAKI, K., MATSUSHIMA, K., SHINMYO, Y., HEANUE, 
T.A., MARDON, G., OHUCHI, H. and NOJI, S. (2002). Correlation of expression 
patterns of homothorax, dachshund, and Distal-less with the proximodistal seg­
mentation of the cricket leg bud. Mech Dev 113: 141-148.
ISHIMARU, Y., NAKAMURA, T., BANDO, T., MATSUOKA, Y., OHUCHI, H., NOJI, S. 
and MITO, T. (2015). Involvement of dachshund and Distal-less in distal pattern 
formation of the cricket leg during regeneration. Sci Rep 5: 8387.
KATSUYAMA, T. and PARO, R. (2011). Epigenetic reprogramming during tissue 
regeneration. FEBS Lett 585: 1617-1624.
KOJIMA, T. (2004). The mechanism of Drosophila leg development along the proxi­
modistal axis. Dev Growth Differ 46: 115-129.
LAWRENCE, P.A., STRUHL, G. and CASAL, J. (2008). Do the protocadherins Fat 
and Dachsous link up to determine both planar cell polarity and the dimensions 
of organs? Nat Cell Biol 10: 1379-1382.
LI, W., LIANG, X., KELLENDONK, C., POLI, V. and TAUB, R. (2002). STAT3 contrib­
utes to the mitogenic response of hepatocytes during liver regeneration. J Biol 
Chem 277: 28411-28417.
MARDON, G., SOLOMON, N.M. and RUBIN, G.M. (1994). dachshund encodes 
a nuclear protein required for normal eye and leg development in Drosophila. 
Development 120: 3473-3486.
MATSUOKA, Y., BANDO, T., WATANABE, T., ISHIMARU, Y., NOJI, S., POPADIC, A. 
and MITO, T. (2015). Short germ insects utilize both the ancestral and derived 
mode of Polycomb group-mediated epigenetic silencing of Hox genes. Biol Open 
4: 702-709.
MEINHARDT, H. (1982). Models of biological pattern formation. Academic Press, 
London; New York.
MEINHARDT, H. (1983). Cell determination boundaries as organizing regions for 
secondary embryonic fields. Dev Biol 96: 375-385.
MESCHER, A.L. (2017). Macrophages and fibroblasts during inflammation and tissue 
repair in models of organ regeneration. Regeneration (Oxf) 4: 39-53.
MITO, T., INOUE, Y., KIMURA, S., MIYAWAKI, K., NIWA, N., SHINMYO, Y., OHU­
CHI, H. and NOJI, S. (2002). Involvement of hedgehog, wingless, and dpp in the 
initiation of proximodistal axis formation during the regeneration of insect legs, a 
verification of the modified boundary model. Mech Dev 114: 27-35.
MITO, T. and NOJI, S. (2008). The Two-Spotted Cricket Gryllus bimaculatus: An 
Emerging Model for Developmental and Regeneration Studies. CSH Protoc 
2008: pdb emo110.
MORGAN, T.H. (1901). Regeneration and Liability to Injury. Science 14: 235-248.
NACU, E., GROMBERG, E., OLIVEIRA, C.R., DRECHSEL, D. and TANAKA, E.M. 
(2016). FGF8 and SHH substitute for anterior-posterior tissue interactions to 

Molecular mechanisms of cricket leg regeneration    569 
induce limb regeneration. Nature 533: 407-410.
NACU, E. and TANAKA, E.M. (2011). Limb regeneration: a new development? Annu 
Rev Cell Dev Biol 27: 409-440.
NAKAMURA, T., MITO, T., BANDO, T., OHUCHI, H. and NOJI, S. (2008a). Dissecting 
insect leg regeneration through RNA interference. Cell Mol Life Sci 65: 64-72.
NAKAMURA, T., MITO, T., MIYAWAKI, K., OHUCHI, H. and NOJI, S. (2008b). EGFR 
signaling is required for re-establishing the proximodistal axis during distal leg 
regeneration in the cricket Gryllus bimaculatus nymph. Dev Biol 319: 46-55.
NIWA, N., INOUE, Y., NOZAWA, A., SAITO, M., MISUMI, Y., OHUCHI, H., YO­
SHIOKA, H. and NOJI, S. (2000). Correlation of diversity of leg morphology in 
Gryllus bimaculatus (cricket) with divergence in dpp expression pattern during 
leg development. Development 127: 4373-4381.
PETERSEN, C.P. and REDDIEN, P.W. (2009). A wound-induced Wnt expression 
program controls planarian regeneration polarity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106: 
17061-17066.
REPISO, A., BERGANTINOS, C., COROMINAS, M. and SERRAS, F. (2011). Tissue 
repair and regeneration in Drosophila imaginal discs. Dev Growth Differ 53: 177-185.
RIECKHOF, G.E., CASARES, F., RYOO, H.D., ABU-SHAAR, M. and MANN, R.S. 
(1997). Nuclear translocation of extradenticle requires homothorax, which encodes 
an extradenticle-related homeodomain protein. Cell 91: 171-183.
SATOH, A., MAKANAE, A., HIRATA, A. and SATOU, Y. (2011). Blastema induction 
in aneurogenic state and Prrx-1 regulation by MMPs and FGFs in Ambystoma 
mexicanum limb regeneration. Dev Biol 355: 263-274.
STALEY, B.K. and IRVINE, K.D. (2010). Warts and Yorkie mediate intestinal regenera­
tion by influencing stem cell proliferation. Curr Biol 20: 1580-1587.
STALEY, B.K. and IRVINE, K.D. (2012). Hippo signaling in Drosophila: recent advances 
and insights. Dev Dyn 241: 3-15.
SUGIURA, T., WANG, H., BARSACCHI, R., SIMON, A. and TANAKA, E.M. (2016). 
MARCKS-like protein is an initiating molecule in axolotl appendage regeneration. 
Nature 531: 237-40.
SUZUKI, M., TAKAGI, C., MIURA, S., SAKANE, Y., SUZUKI, M., SAKUMA, T., 
SAKAMOTO, N., ENDO, T., KAMEI, Y., SATO, Y. et al., (2016). In vivo tracking 
of histone H3 lysine 9 acetylation in Xenopus laevis during tail regeneration. 
Genes Cells 21: 358-369.
TANAKA, E.M. (2016). The Molecular and Cellular Choreography of Appendage 
Regeneration. Cell 165: 1598-1608.
TASAKI, J., SHIBATA, N., NISHIMURA, O., ITOMI, K., TABATA, Y., SON, F., SUZUKI, 
N., ARAKI, R., ABE, M., AGATA, K. et al., (2011a). ERK signaling controls blastema 
cell differentiation during planarian regeneration. Development 138: 2417-2427.
TASAKI, J., SHIBATA, N., SAKURAI, T., AGATA, K. and UMESONO, Y. (2011b). 
Role of c-Jun N-terminal kinase activation in blastema formation during planarian 
regeneration. Dev Growth Differ 53: 389-400.
TIE, F., BANERJEE, R., STRATTON, C.A., PRASAD-SINHA, J., STEPANIK, V., ZLO­
BIN, A., DIAZ, M.O., SCACHERI, P.C. and HARTE, P.J. (2009). CBP-mediated 
acetylation of histone H3 lysine 27 antagonizes Drosophila Polycomb silencing. 
Development 136: 3131-3141.
TRUBY, P.R. (1983). Blastema formation and cell division during cockroach limb 
regeneration. J Embryol Exp Morphol 75: 151-164.
UMESONO, Y., TASAKI, J., NISHIMURA, Y., HROUDA, M., KAWAGUCHI, E., 
YAZAWA, S., NISHIMURA, O., HOSODA, K., INOUE, T. and AGATA, K. (2013). 
The molecular logic for planarian regeneration along the anterior-posterior axis. 
Nature 500: 73-76.
VINCENT, J.P. and LAWRENCE, P.A. (1994). Developmental genetics. It takes three 
to distalize. Nature 372: 132-133.
WILSON-HORCH, H., MITO, T., OHUCHI, H. and NOJI, S. (2017). The Cricket as a 
Model Organism. Springer Japan, Japan.
WU, J. and COHEN, S.M. (1999). Proximodistal axis formation in the Drosophila 
leg: subdivision into proximal and distal domains by Homothorax and Distal-less. 
Development 126: 109-117.
WUESTEFELD, T., KLEIN, C., STREETZ, K.L., BETZ, U., LAUBER, J., BUER, J., 
MANNS, M.P., MULLER, W. and TRAUTWEIN, C. (2003). Interleukin-6/glyco­
protein 130-dependent pathways are protective during liver regeneration. J Biol 
Chem 278: 11281-11288.
YAKUSHIJI, N., SUZUKI, M., SATOH, A., SAGAI, T., SHIROISHI, T., KOBAYASHI, H., 
SASAKI, H., IDE, H. and TAMURA, K. (2007). Correlation between Shh expression 
and DNA methylation status of the limb-specific Shh enhancer region during limb 
regeneration in amphibians. Dev Biol 312: 171-182.
YAKUSHIJI-KAMINATSUI, N., KONDO, T., ENDO, T.A., KOSEKI, Y., KONDO, K., 
OHARA, O., VIDAL, M. and KOSEKI, H. (2016). RING1 proteins contribute to early 
proximal-distal specification of the forelimb bud by restricting Meis2 expression. 
Development 143: 276-285.
YAZAWA, S., UMESONO, Y., HAYASHI, T., TARUI, H. and AGATA, K. (2009). Planar­
ian Hedgehog/Patched establishes anterior-posterior polarity by regulating Wnt 
signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106: 22329-22334.
YOSHIDA, H., BANDO, T., MITO, T., OHUCHI, H. and NOJI, S. (2014). An extended 
steepness model for leg-size determination based on Dachsous/Fat trans-dimer 
system. Sci Rep 4: 4335.
YUN, M.H. (2015). Changes in Regenerative Capacity through Lifespan. Int J Mol 
Sci 16: 25392-25432.

Further Related Reading, published previously in the Int. J. Dev. Biol. 
Leg regeneration in Drosophila abridges the normal developmental program
Manel Bosch, Sarah-Anne Bishop, Jaume Baguña and Juan-Pablo Couso
Int. J. Dev. Biol. (2010) 54: 1241-1250
https://doi.org/10.1387/ijdb.093010mb
Regeneration and pattern formation - an interview with Susan Bryant
Michael K. Richardson and Cheng Ming Chuong
Int. J. Dev. Biol. (2009) 53: 827-833
https://doi.org/10.1387/ijdb.082596mr
Limb muscle development
Bodo Christ and Beate Brand-Saberi
Int. J. Dev. Biol. (2002) 46: 905-914
http://www.intjdevbiol.com/web/paper/12455628
The cellular basis of limb regeneration in urodeles
A L Mescher
Int. J. Dev. Biol. (1996) 40: 785-795
http://www.intjdevbiol.com/web/paper/8877452
5 yr ISI Impact Factor (2016) = 2.421
Cell interactions and regeneration control
B Boilly, E Lheureux, Y Boilly-Marer and A Bart
Int. J. Dev. Biol. (1990) 34: 219-231
http://www.intjdevbiol.com/web/paper/2203459
Localization of regenectin in regenerates of American cockroach (Periplaneta ameri­
cana) legs
T Kubo, K Kawasaki, Y Nonomura and S Natori
Int. J. Dev. Biol. (1991) 35: 83-90
http://www.intjdevbiol.com/web/paper/1768603
Purification and localization of p10, a novel protein that increases in nymphal regen­
erating legs of Periplaneta americana (American cockroach)
A Nomura, K Kawasaki, T Kubo and S Natori
Int. J. Dev. Biol. (1992) 36: 391-398
http://www.intjdevbiol.com/web/paper/1445782

===== Barker2018_Nature_BrainRepair =====
Review
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0087-1
New approaches for brain repair—from 
rescue to reprogramming
Roger A. Barker1*, Magdalena Götz2,3* & Malin Parmar4*
The ability to repair or promote regeneration within the adult human brain has been envisioned for decades. Until 
recently, such efforts mainly involved delivery of growth factors and cell transplants designed to rescue or replace a 
specific population of neurons, and the results have largely been disappointing. New approaches using stem-cell-derived 
cell products and direct cell reprogramming have opened up the possibility of reconstructing neural circuits and achieving 
better repair. In this Review we briefly summarize the history of neural repair and then discuss these new therapeutic 
approaches, especially with respect to chronic neurodegenerative disorders.
T
he mammalian central nervous system (CNS), unlike many other 
organs, has a limited capacity for self-repair, and the ability to over-
come this limitation would transform how we could treat patients 
with a vast array of neurological disorders. The relative lack of neurogen-
esis, failure of axonal regeneration and non-permissive local environment 
in the adult CNS have been major—and literal—barriers to CNS repair. 
Nevertheless, in recent years it has become clear that much can be done 
in the mature CNS to foster innate regeneration.
Diseases or disorders of the CNS can be developmental, inherited 
or acquired and acute or chronic, and each presents a different set of 
challenges when developing repair strategies. Both acute damage and 
chronic neurodegenerative disorders are characterized by an inter-related 
macroglial and microglial/inflammatory reaction that involves changes 
in the extracellular matrix and/or alterations in the blood–brain barrier. 
Therefore, agents that improve this environment could be used to help 
to protect neurons from further damage and to promote circuit reforma-
tion and function. Such disease-modifying therapies—using, for example, 
trophic factors or cell transplants that release such factors—could in 
theory be used alone in the early stages of disease or combined with 
approaches designed to replace lost cells through cell transplantation, 
re-activation of endogenous neurogenesis or directed reprogramming 
in situ. In this Review, we discuss three main strategies for restoring func-
tion in the damaged or diseased CNS: (i) cell rescue using neurotrophic 
factors or cell-based approaches with putative-disease modifying effects; 
(ii) cell replacement therapies using transplants of exogenously derived and 
in vitro cultured cells; and (iii) cell replacement using endogenous neural 
precursor cells or strategies that involve the direct reprogramming of 
resident cells within the brain (Fig. 1).
Neurotrophic factors and disease modification
Enhancing the regenerative potential of the CNS in the face of a disease 
process can be done in two major ways. The first is to use approaches 
that restore and maintain the functional integrity of cells that are 
dysfunctional but not lost. This typically involves neurotrophic fac-
tors, some of which could be delivered using cell-based treatments. 
However, grafted cells could also be used to protect dysfunctional cells 
from ongoing insults such as metabolic stress. The second strategy is to 
minimize environmental barriers to repair, for example, by modifying 
the extracellular matrix and/or glial and immune reactions1,2.
Exercise-based therapies and cognitive training have been shown 
experimentally to promote endogenous neurogenesis and the local pro-
duction of growth factors such as BDNF in the brain3. Whether these 
changes in experimental animals can translate into clinical benefits is 
largely unknown, but such interventions do have the potential to be 
used in combination with cell replacement or cell rescue therapies to 
optimize their reparative benefits.
The use of trophic factors has been explored for over 20 years, 
most notably in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Parkinson’s 
disease4,5 (Table 1). These initial studies suffered from major problems 
with delivery—the factors either failed to reach their neuronal targets 
or were rapidly inactivated. This led to a new round of trials using 
intraparenchymal delivery, most notably involving delivery of GDNF 
into the striata of patients with moderately advanced Parkinson’s dis-
ease. In two open-label studies, from two independent centres, this 
produced positive clinical responses, with post mortem and imag-
ing data supporting its mode of action6–9. However, a subsequent 
double-blind placebo-controlled trial in 34 patients with Parkinson’s 
disease found that patients treated with GDNF showed no significant 
benefit over placebo-treated patients after 6 months10.
The reasons for the discordant results from these trials have been 
discussed extensively11, including possible placebo effects, although 
these would not explain the reported changes on PET imaging and at 
post mortem in patients treated with GDNF infusions. Furthermore, in 
the double-blind study, the group treated with saline did not improve, 
which also argues against any placebo effects and suggests that the 
trial failed because the active treatment did not work. This could 
have been due to the dose of GDNF and/or the way in which it was 
delivered, both of which differed from those used in the open-label 
studies. Given this uncertainty, further trials have been undertaken, 
including a double-blind approach with a new convection-enhanced 
delivery system that delivers GDNF more effectively. However, so far 
positive outcomes have not been achieved (https://scienceofparkinsons.
com/2016/07/07/the-gdnf-trial-bristol-initial-results/), which suggests 
that the use of trophic factors alone may not work to treat such chronic 
neurodegenerative disorders. This is reinforced by parallel studies 
involving the delivery of other GDNF-like factors12, such as neurturin 
using an adeno-associated virus (AAV) delivery system (AAV-NTN). 
Here, the initial open-label studies showed efficacy but two subsequent 
1Department of Clinical Neuroscience and Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 2Institute for Stem Cell Research, Helmholtz Center Munich and Physiological 
Genomics, Biomedical Center, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany. 3SyNergy, Excellence Cluster Systems Neurology, Center for Stroke and Dementia, Munich, Germany. 
4Wallenberg Neuroscience Center and Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. *e-mail: rab46@cam.ac.uk; magdalena.goetz@helmholtz-muenchen.de; malin.parmar@med.lu.se
1 7  M A Y  2 0 1 8  |  V O L  5 5 7  |  N A T U R E  |  3 2 9
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Review
insight
double-blind placebo control studies (which differed in terms of where, 
and how, the AAV-NTN was delivered) failed to show efficacy13–15.
So, does this mean that repairing the brain with trophic factors is 
not a viable way forward? This is likely to be the case when the disease 
has advanced beyond a certain stage; once a patient has lost a critical 
number of cells or fibres, it is unrealistic to expect any growth factor 
to work, as there is nothing left for it to regenerate. Given that most 
neurodegenerative disorders present clinically when there has already 
been extensive cell or fibre loss, the early use of these agents will be 
required, and a post hoc analysis of some of the data from GDNF and 
AAV-NTN trials supports this view14,15. Moreover, the disease state 
may also interfere with growth factor function. For example, GDNF 
may not be able to act through its normal receptor in the presence of 
α-synuclein pathology in Parkinson’s disease because the pathology 
causes alterations in NURR1 signalling, which is needed for GDNF to 
produce its therapeutic effect16. Thus, it may be necessary to enhance 
levels of NURR1 before using GDNF to treat Parkinson’s disease for it to 
work efficiently, necessitating the adoption of combination approaches 
in any future trials. Finally, the optimal dose of any growth factor and 
how to best deliver it, including the volume of distribution needed to 
maximise its benefits, are still important questions. To date, GDNF and 
AAV-NTN have been delivered in ways that are insufficient to cover 
the structure being treated, and many of the failures seen clinically 
may relate to this. Post mortem data from both the original GDNF and 
subsequent AAV-NTN studies provide some support for this idea9,15.
Overcoming environmental hurdles to regeneration
Promoting neuronal survival and outgrowth is only one aspect of the 
problem in repairing the CNS. The other is enhancing the environment 
to support that regenerative process. This essentially distils down to 
modifying the glial elements and/or the extracellular matrix (ECM), 
both of which have been reported to produce signals that inhibit repair 
in the adult CNS1,2.
In terms of the glial cells, it has long been known that both astrocytes 
and oligodendrocytes express cell surface molecules that inhibit regener-
ating axons, although the expression and extent of these varies as a func-
tion of disease state (for example, being greater in patients with acute 
traumatic injuries than in chronic neurodegenerative disorders). The 
premise that glial cells produce inhibitory factors that can be blocked 
has led to early clinical trials, most notably using antibodies against 
the myelin-derived molecule NOGO in patients with spinal cord injury 
(http://www.sci-research.uzh.ch/en/research/ClinicalTrials/Nogo.html). 
However, the concept that glia are ‘bad’ for CNS repair has been chal-
lenged, in that the glial scar or glial reaction to injury or disease involves 
a heterogeneous collection of cells, which have a variety of functions. 
So, under some conditions the glial response may be beneficial for 
repair, possibly through effects on the inflammatory response to CNS 
disease1. Conversely under other circumstances, the opposite may occur. 
For example, it has recently been reported that microglia can induce 
astrocytes to become neurotoxic17. This concept of ‘gliopathy’ is not 
new and has been explored in models of ALS, where transplanted glial 
cells have been used to buffer extracellular glutamate and thus protect 
motor neurons18,19. Whether such an approach could be used to treat 
ALS clinically is unknown, but this work highlights the potential use 
of non-neuronal cell transplants to protect neurons in disease states.
More recently there has been interest in the ECM of the brain, and 
especially peri-neuronal nets (PNNs). PNNs are unevenly distributed 
across the brain and spinal cord and appear to have many functions 
during development and in the adult brain, including a role in neural 
plasticity. This role has been shown to extend to neurodegenerative dis-
orders, most notably in transgenic models of Alzheimer’s disease, where 
removal of PNNs, either using chrondoitinase-ABC or genetically, has 
been shown to improve cognitive function without influencing the 
underlying disease process, possibly by enhancing neurite outgrowth 
and synaptic plasticty20,21. These results suggest that the use of this, or 
similar, agents may have benefits when combined with cell therapies 
in which synaptic integration with host cells may be restricted by local 
PNNs and/or a disease-driven increase in expression of inhibitory ECM 
molecules.
Replacement therapies using exogenous cells
When a neurodegenerative disorder or injury reaches the point at 
which a critical number of neurons has been lost, the replacement of 
these neurons is essential for functional improvement. Lost cells could 
be replaced by transplantation into single or multiple brain regions to 
partially recreate complex circuits either locally or over long distances.
For this to work, a number of important questions need to be 
addressed. First, what is the optimal cell type(s) to be transplanted 
and at what developmental stage should they be collected for grafting? 
Second, what CNS location(s) are needed for optimal recovery and 
fibre outgrowth? Third, how many cells are needed for effective repair, 
and finally, should other interventions be done either at the same time 
as grafting or after transplantation to enhance survival, integration or 
function of the cells?
Neuron
Microglia
ECM
Blood vessel
BBB
Astrocytes
Restore or replace
dysfunctional lost neuron
• Neutrotrophic factors
• Cell transplants
• Endogenous cell replacement
• Adult NPCs
• In-situ reprogramming
Reduce ECM
reponse to
neurodegeneration
• Ch-ABC
Reduce or modify glial
inﬂammatory response
• Glial cell transplants
• Anti-inflammatory or
   antibody therapy
a
b
Fig. 1 | Strategies to repair the diseased 
brain. a, In the healthy brain, neurons project 
and form synapses with target neurons. Axons 
are supported by myelinating oligodendrocytes 
(not shown) and astrocytes, which form a 
syncytium that helps to protect neurons and 
maintain the blood–brain barrier (BBB). 
b, In disease states, such as those associated 
with neurodegenerative disorders, neurons 
become dysfunctional and die, and this is 
often accompanied by a glial reaction and a 
change in the ECM. Treatments to repair and 
restore the brain in such conditions could 
include: (i) rescuing cells using neurotrophic 
factors; (ii) cell transplants to replace lost 
cells or support those targeted by the disease 
process; (iii) recruitment of endogenous cells 
to replace those lost to the disease process; 
(iv) modification of the glial or inflammatory 
response; and/or (v) modification of the ECM.
3 3 0  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  5 5 7  |  1 7  M A Y  2 0 1 8
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Review
insight
Cell replacement therapy using human fetal allografts
Parkinson’s disease is one of the least complex neurodegenerative 
disorders to target with cell-based therapies, because local degener-
ation of dopamine neurons in the midbrain is critical for the clinical 
expression of many features of this disorder. It has therefore been the 
subject of a relatively large number of clinical transplantation trials using 
developing midbrain dopamine cells derived from the human fetal ven-
tral midbrain22. Although the outcome of these trials has been highly 
variable23, they have shown that at least a sub-group of patients with 
Parkinson’s disease that receive such transplants at different centres do 
well24–27. However, the results have also shown that, over time, a minority 
of the transplanted cells become affected by the disease process and 
show protein aggregation28,29, and that some patients can experience 
troublesome side effects such as graft-induced dyskinesias30–32 relating 
to graft composition and capacity to innervate the whole putamen22.
Clinical trials using transplants of primary human fetal striatal tissue 
have also been performed in patients with Huntington’s disease33–35, 
on the premise that the medium spiny neurons of the striatum are the 
neurons that are primarily lost in this disease36. In this case, the neurons 
are placed homotopically into the striatum to reconstruct basal ganglia 
circuits. To date the effects in patients have been modest at best33–35, 
with evidence for poor graft survival and integration37.
Other neurodegenerative and CNS disorders have more complex 
pathologies, involving several cell types and/or cells in many regions 
of the CNS, and it is hard to see how these could be treated using 
fetal tissue transplants. However, stem cells may be a more promising 
source of cells for transplantation in such disorders, because they can be 
differentiated into a wide range of neuronal phenotypes.
Cell replacement therapy using stem cells
A major challenge for developing any cell replacement therapy is the 
ability to reliably and robustly generate large numbers of relevant cells. 
Recent developments using human embryonic stem cells (hES cells) 
and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS cells) have now made this 
possible38 and clinical trials using this approach are imminent, for 
example, in patients with Parkinson’s disease39,40.
Stem-cell-derived dopamine neurons have also been used to better 
understand graft function, innervation and integration in pre-clinical 
animal models of Parkinson’s disease. For example, comparative studies 
with human fetal ventral midbrain tissue have shown that both hESC 
and hiPSC-derived dopaminergic progenitors are very similar to their 
fetal counterparts41,42 and mediate functional recovery with equivalent 
potency over a similar time course43. New methodologies have also 
been used to study their mechanism of action, as well as their ability 
to appropriately innervate and integrate into host circuitry. These 
studies have shown that both fetal and stem-cell-derived dopamin-
ergic neurons transplanted to the rat brain can innervate the correct 
target structures when placed either locally at the site of action (in 
the striatum) or back in the midbrain, which requires more extensive 
axonal outgrowth from the cells42,43. Furthermore, these cells not only 
innervate but also integrate into host neuronal circuitry44, and produce 
functional recovery38,45. Similarly, transplantation of stem-cell-derived 
medium spiny neurons have now been shown to survive and function 
in rodent models of striatal degeneration (used to model Huntington’s 
disease)46–48.
Another advantage of using stem-cell-derived transplants is the 
ability to remove or minimize unwanted neuronal subtypes; for exam-
ple, serotonergic neurons that may mediate the graft-induced dyski-
nesias seen in patients that have received transplants of human fetal 
ventral midbrain tissue to treat Parkinson’s disease. Furthermore, it is 
possible to study the effect of grafting pure populations of neurons, or 
a combination of neuronal and or astrocytic cell types. Indeed, defi-
cient astrocyte function may contribute to the loss of neurons in many 
neurodegenerative disorders, and the absence of such cells may affect 
neuronal survival in transplants, as has been shown in fetal striatal 
grafts in patients with Huntington’s disease49. As an alternative to pos-
sible co-grafting with glial cells, other agents or biomaterials engineered 
to express growth factors, immune-modulating components or similar 
substances to provide a supportive and protective microenvironment 
could be delivered together with the transplanted neurons; this could 
even include some form of scaffold for larger lesions such as stroke50.
Genetic modifications or correction of cells could also be used before 
transplantation to make the grafted cells resistant or refractory to the 
disease pathology. This may be of critical importance when the trans-
plants are derived from the patients’ own cells42, or in diseases such as 
ALS, where motor neuron loss is driven in part by astrocytes. However, 
even unrelated healthy donor cells can be affected by proteinopathies 
in some neurodegenerative disorders, as has been seen in trials of 
fetal tissue transplantation for Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s 
disease28,29,51. In these cases, making cells resistant to the disease by 
removing the normal protein onto which the pathological species 
templates could be helpful.
Additionally, as genetic engineering tools become more refined, 
stem cells could be modified to enhance aspects of their behaviour. 
Such techniques could include modifying chemotactic interactions 
between the grafted cells and their progeny to enhance migration52; 
making cells refractory to the inhibitory cues of the glial scar; increas-
ing their innervation potential by enhanced expression of polysialic 
acid53 (all of which would need to done so that the enhanced outgrowth 
was targeted specifically to the area for repair); and/or decreasing their 
immunogenicity54,55. Based on cell transplants in animal models, the 
possibility of engineering stem cell progeny so that their function can 
be modified using optogenetic or chemogenetic interventions is now 
also being considered45,56,57.
Cell replacement therapy for circuit reconstruction
Owing to the complexity of the organization of the cerebral cortex, 
replacing neurons in this part of the brain is a more challenging task, 
and is thus still at the pre-clinical stage. New technologies for studying 
cell integration and function have shown that transplanted cells mature, 
integrate into local host circuitry, form functional synapses, mediate 
recovery and provide circuit repair in animal models of Alzheimer’s 
disease, stroke and cortical lesions58–62. Notably, it has recently been 
shown that the exact brain-wide input connectome of neurons in the 
mouse visual cortex can be replicated by transplanted neurons59. This 
is important, as aberrant connectivity could lead to deleterious conse-
quences such as epileptic seizures. Thus, the adult mammalian brain is 
more plastic than previously thought in terms of accommodating new 
neurons and building new functional circuitry.
Replacement therapies using endogenous cells
Brain repair from endogenous sources has been considered for some 
time63, especially after the (re-)discovery of adult neurogenesis and 
proof of its existence in the human brain64,65, prompting attempts to 
recruit new neurons from endogenous neurogenic niches to achieve 
repair in the injured brain66,67 (Fig. 2). Simply recruiting new neurons 
from active neurogenic sites appears intuitively to be the most prom-
ising approach, and the easiest to achieve. However, in most cases, the 
Table 1 | Clinical trials using cell therapies or growth factors in 
patients with different neurodegenerative disorders
Neurodegenerative 
disease
Use of neurotrophic 
factors in clinical trials
Use of cell transplants in 
clinical trials
Alzheimer’s disease
NGF
No
Parkinson’s disease
NGF  
GDNF/NTN
Human fetal ventral 
midbrain tissue  
Adrenal medulla  
Carotid body 
Retinal pigmentary 
epithelial cells (spheramine)
Amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis
CNTF  
BDNF  
IGF1
Ongoing (neural precursor 
cells delivering GDNF)
Huntington’s disease
CNTF
Human fetal striatal tissue
1 7  M A Y  2 0 1 8  |  V O L  5 5 7  |  N A T U R E  |  3 3 1
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Review
insight
subtypes of neurons needed for repair are different from those gen-
erated endogenously. Hence, attempts to recruit neuroblasts to form 
neurons at other sites have met with only limited success, with many 
of the neuroblasts streaming to the injury site but then failing to fully 
differentiate into appropriate neuronal types that can survive in the 
long term67,68 (Fig. 2). Adult neurogenesis is very species-specific69, 
though, so endogenous striatal neurogenesis that has been said to occur 
in the human (but not rodent)70,71 brain may prove useful and be more 
easily manipulated to generate the relevant neuronal subtypes lost in 
the striatum after stroke or in neurodegenerative disorders72,73.
A further approach to minimize neuronal loss or help repair and 
replacement is through the recruitment of stem-cell-derived astrocytes. 
These differ from the local parenchymal astrocytes and release an array 
of beneficial growth factors74. However, the extent to which this occurs 
in human patients and can be used for therapy is currently unknown.
Excitingly, attempts to turn stem-cell-derived astrocytes or other 
parenchymal glial cells into functional neurons by forced expression 
of neurogenic fate determinants have progressed rapidly. This idea was 
first tested in the nervous system in 2002, by turning glial cells into 
neurons in vitro75. The first attempts to achieve this in an injured brain 
in vivo in 2005 were exciting as proof-of-principle experiments, but 
disappointing in terms of quantitative outcome76–78. However, 
outcomes have improved recently79–81, and there is now encouraging 
data on fate conversion of local non-neuronal cells towards a neuronal 
phenotype of the sort affected by the disease process.
A single neurogenic transcription factor (acting also as potent fate 
determinant in development) can in many cases be sufficient to convert 
glial cells into fully functional neurons82. For example, neurogenin 2 
or NEUROD1 can produce glutamatergic neurons from proliferating 
glial cells in the adult cerebral cortex, including in the highly inflamed 
brain environment found after traumatic brain injury79,83,84. The key to 
generating highly efficient neuronal conversion protocols is not neces-
sarily to add more transcription factors, but rather to keep the induced 
neurons alive by protecting them from death and promoting their 
maturation. Many neurons induced by direct reprogramming from glial 
cells die because of the local generation of excessive reactive oxygen 
species (ROS), in a process known as ferroptosis79,84. By keeping the 
new neurons alive and reducing ROS levels, conversion efficiencies of 
over 90% have been achieved, with almost all glial cells, transduced 
with the neurogenic transcription factor, acquiring a neuronal identity 
within 1–3 weeks84. Importantly, these neurons also acquired a pyra­
midal neuronal morphology with the identity of deep layer neurons, at 
least at the transcriptional level. This approach has also shown promise 
in other brain areas, including in the minimally injured striatum (using 
SOX2 and growth factor treatment), the midbrain and the spinal cord85, 
and in the cerebral cortex using NEUROD1 and an amyloid plaque 
deposition model83. In these latter approaches, a mix of glutamatergic 
or GABAergic (γ-aminobutyric-acid-releasing) neurons has been 
obtained, which may be beneficial if several types of neurons need to be 
replaced or synaptic plasticity increased by providing new GABAergic 
interneurons, as shown through transplantation studies86,87. Synaptic 
plasticity and new circuit formation using these approaches could also 
be further promoted by co-administration of rehabilitation therapies 
(see above).
The promising outcome of direct reprogramming approaches raises 
two important issues: which glial cells to target and which vectors to 
use. Targeting proliferating glial cells has obvious advantages88, but they 
are heterogeneous1,76,89. Specific targeting of glial subtypes has been 
achieved using subtype-specific promoters that either drive reprogram-
ming factors directly83,90,91 or drive cell-type-specific Cre expression 
in transgenic mice80,81,85. This approach has now been shown to work 
with AAVs that not only have been used in patients clinically but also 
can preferentially infect glial cells92–94. AAVs have been used to repro-
gram oligodendrocyte progenitor cells80,95 to a fate that is dependent 
on the transcription factor combination—for example, generating 
fast-spiking parvalbumin-expressing interneurons in the intact stri-
atum95. Moreover, these neurons have been shown to receive input 
from local interneurons80. Finally, recent evidence suggests that striatal 
and midbrain astrocytes and NG2 glia can be converted to neurons 
with functional GABAergic- and dopaminergic-like phenotypes in a 
dopamine depletion model96. While these pioneering studies show that 
newly induced neurons can connect locally and result in behavioural 
changes, their long-distance inputs and outputs and contribution to the 
neuronal network still remain to be explored.
Direct neuronal reprogramming in the adult brain has come a long 
way in the past few years, but it remains to be seen how these exciting 
new approaches will translate to the clinic. While there are no major 
obstacles to turning adult human cells into functioning subtype-specific 
neurons, as has been shown, for example, with fibroblasts or pericytes 
in vitro97–100, neuronal reprogramming in vivo in the diseased brain 
has proven more challenging79. Thus, investigation of differences in 
the starting cells that affect the outcome of neuronal reprogramming, 
as well as influences in the local (disease) environment, is one of the 
next requirements to further this approach79. Moreover, tools need to 
be developed for non-invasive reprogramming techniques, either using 
systemic application of viral vectors (as is the case for some AAVs92–94) 
or using small molecules that have been shown to efficiently achieve 
direct neuronal reprogramming in vitro79,101.
Direct reprogramming also brings new standards to the field, as it 
is important to compare the induced cell type to the endogenous 
counterpart that is being replaced or instructed (for example, iPS 
cells to ES cells). This can be done using functional assessments 
and genome-wide expression analysis. Such techniques are urgently 
needed for the field of neuronal replacement, as it is so far unknown 
how authentic the transplanted or reprogrammed neurons really are, 
compared to their endogenous counterparts. Raising these standards 
Fig. 2 | Strategies for in situ repair. a, Recruitment of new neurons from 
endogeneous precursors originating from sites of adult neurogenesis. 
b, Directed reprogramming of resident non-neuronal, glial cells.
Neural stem cells
Neuroblasts
Recruited neurons
Glial cells
Reprogrammed
neurons
Pyramidal,
GABA and Glu
neurons
GABA, Gly and
Glu neurons
GABA and Glu
neurons
Cortex
Olfactory
bulb
Rostral
migratory
stream
Dendate
gyrus
Supependymal
zone
Lateral
ventricle
a
b
3 3 2  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  5 5 7  |  1 7  M A Y  2 0 1 8
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Review
insight
in basic research and then translating them to the clinic will be a chal-
lenge for the future.
Conclusion and future perspectives
A broad approach will be needed to deliver effective repair strategies 
to the human brain that combine established approaches with new 
technologies, and ultimately may involve combination therapies. This 
progress will be possible only if we better understand disease states and 
the contribution of all cells and the ECM to the processes of damage 
and cell loss, as well as the innate regenerative ability of the adult brain 
and its capacity to be reprogrammed. By combining approaches to opti-
mize the disease environment and synaptic plasticity while providing 
new neurons for replacement therapy, new circuits could be rebuilt 
with functional benefits across a range of disorders, and this could 
eventually develop into a more standard treatment. However, this will 
need to be an iterative approach with an ongoing dialogue between 
preclinical work and clinical trials. It will also be crucial to avoid the 
temptation to short-circuit this approach with premature claims and 
commercialization, which have the potential to derail this whole field.
Received: 18 January 2018; Accepted: 15 March 2018;  
Published online 16 May 2018.
	1.	
Adams, K. L. & Gallo, V. The diversity and disparity of the glial scar. Nat. 
Neurosci. 21, 9–15 (2018).
	2.	
Fawcett, J. W. The extracellular matrix in plasticity and regeneration after  
CNS injury and neurodegenerative disease. Prog. Brain Res. 218, 213–226 
(2015).
	3.	
Chieffi, S. et al. Neuroprotective effects of physical activity: evidence from 
human and animal studies. Front. Neurol. 8, 188 (2017).
	4.	
Bartus, R. T. & Johnson, E. M. Jr. Clinical tests of neurotrophic factors for 
human neurodegenerative diseases, part 1: where have we been and what 
have we learned? Neurobiol. Dis. 97, 156–168 (2017).
	5.	
Bartus, R. T. & Johnson, E. M. Jr. Clinical tests of neurotrophic factors for 
human neurodegenerative diseases, part 2: where do we stand and where 
must we go next? Neurobiol. Dis. 97, 169–178 (2017).
	6.	
Gill, S. S. et al. Direct brain infusion of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor 
in Parkinson disease. Nat. Med. 9, 589–595 (2003).
	7.	
Patel, N. K. et al. Intraputamenal infusion of glial cell line-derived 
neurotrophic factor in PD: a two-year outcome study. Ann. Neurol. 57, 
298–302 (2005).
	8.	
Slevin, J. T. et al. Unilateral intraputamenal glial cell line-derived neurotrophic 
factor in patients with Parkinson disease: response to 1 year of treatment and 
1 year of withdrawal. J. Neurosurg. 106, 614–620 (2007).
	9.	
Love, S. et al. Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor induces neuronal 
sprouting in human brain. Nat. Med. 11, 703–704 (2005).
	10.	
Lang, A. E. et al. Randomized controlled trial of intraputamenal glial cell 
line-derived neurotrophic factor infusion in Parkinson disease. Ann. Neurol. 59, 
459–466 (2006).
	11.	
Barker, R. A. Continuing trials of GDNF in Parkinson’s disease. Lancet Neurol. 5, 
285–286 (2006).
	12.	
Runeberg-Roos, P. et al. Developing therapeutically more efficient Neurturin 
variants for treatment of Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 96, 335–345 
(2016).
	13.	
Marks, W. J. Jr et al. Gene delivery of AAV2-neurturin for Parkinson’s disease: a 
double-blind, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 9, 1164–1172 
(2010).
	14.	
Warren Olanow, C. et al. Gene delivery of neurturin to putamen and substantia 
nigra in Parkinson disease: a double-blind, randomized, controlled trial. Ann. 
Neurol. 78, 248–257 (2015).
	15.	
Bartus, R. T. et al. Post-mortem assessment of the short and long-term effects 
of the trophic factor neurturin in patients with α-synucleinopathies. Neurobiol. 
Dis. 78, 162–171 (2015).
	16.	
Decressac, M. et al. α-Synuclein-induced down-regulation of Nurr1 disrupts 
GDNF signaling in nigral dopamine neurons. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 163ra156 
(2012).
	17.	
Liddelow, S. A. et al. Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated 
microglia. Nature 541, 481–487 (2017).
	18.	
Das, M. M. et al. Human neural progenitors differentiate into astrocytes and 
protect motor neurons in aging rats. Exp. Neurol. 280, 41–49 (2016).
	19.	
Lepore, A. C. et al. Focal transplantation-based astrocyte replacement is 
neuroprotective in a model of motor neuron disease. Nat. Neurosci. 11, 
1294–1301 (2008).
	20.	
Yang, S. et al. Antibody recognizing 4-sulfated chondroitin sulfate 
proteoglycans restores memory in tauopathy-induced neurodegeneration. 
Neurobiol. Aging 59, 197–209 (2017).
	21.	
Bradbury, E. J. et al. Chondroitinase ABC promotes functional recovery after 
spinal cord injury. Nature 416, 636–640 (2002).
	22.	
Barker, R. A., Drouin-Ouellet, J. & Parmar, M. Cell-based therapies for 
Parkinson disease—past insights and future potential. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 11, 
492–503 (2015).
	23.	
Barker, R. A., Barrett, J., Mason, S. L. & Björklund, A. Fetal dopaminergic 
transplantation trials and the future of neural grafting in Parkinson’s disease. 
Lancet Neurol. 12, 84–91 (2013).  
A useful summary of all the data from trials of fetal ventral midbrain 
transplantation in patients with Parkinson’s disease over the last 25 years 
and their conclusions.
	24.	
Li, W. et al. Extensive graft-derived dopaminergic innervation is maintained 24 
years after transplantation in the degenerating parkinsonian brain. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 113, 6544–6549 (2016).  
A key study showing good graft survival and transplantation in a patient with 
Parkinson’s disease 24 years after transplantation.
	25.	 Kefalopoulou, Z. et al. Long-term clinical outcome of fetal cell 
transplantation for Parkinson disease: two case reports. JAMA Neurol. 71, 
83–87 (2014).
	26.	
Hauser, R. A. et al. Long-term evaluation of bilateral fetal nigral transplantation 
in Parkinson disease. Arch. Neurol. 56, 179–187 (1999).
	27.	
Mendez, I. et al. Cell type analysis of functional fetal dopamine cell suspension 
transplants in the striatum and substantia nigra of patients with Parkinson’s 
disease. Brain 128, 1498–1510 (2005).
	28.	
Li, J. Y. et al. Lewy bodies in grafted neurons in subjects with Parkinson’s 
disease suggest host-to-graft disease propagation. Nat. Med. 14, 501–503 
(2008).
	29.	
Kurowska, Z. et al. Signs of degeneration in 12–22-year old grafts of 
mesencephalic dopamine neurons in patients with Parkinson’s disease.  
J. Parkinsons Dis. 1, 83–92 (2011).
	30.	
Politis, M. et al. Serotonergic neurons mediate dyskinesia side effects in 
Parkinson’s patients with neural transplants. Sci. Transl. Med. 2, 38ra46 (2010).
	31.	
Freed, C. R. et al. Transplantation of embryonic dopamine neurons for severe 
Parkinson’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 344, 710–719 (2001).
	32.	
Olanow, C. W. et al. A double-blind controlled trial of bilateral fetal nigral 
transplantation in Parkinson’s disease. Ann. Neurol. 54, 403–414 (2003).
	33.	
Bachoud-Lévi, A. et al. Safety and tolerability assessment of intrastriatal neural 
allografts in five patients with Huntington’s disease. Exp. Neurol. 161, 194–202 
(2000).
	34.	
Barker, R. A. et al. The long-term safety and efficacy of bilateral transplantation 
of human fetal striatal tissue in patients with mild to moderate Huntington’s 
disease. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 84, 657–665 (2013).
	35.	
Hauser, R. A. et al. Bilateral human fetal striatal transplantation in Huntington’s 
disease. Neurology 58, 687–695 (2002).
	36.	
Peschanski, M., Cesaro, P. & Hantraye, P. Rationale for intrastriatal grafting of 
striatal neuroblasts in patients with Huntington’s disease. Neuroscience 68, 
273–285 (1995).
	37.	
Cisbani, G. & Cicchetti, F. The fate of cell grafts for the treatment of 
Huntington’s disease: the post-mortem evidence. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 
40, 71–90 (2014).
	38.	
Steinbeck, J. A. & Studer, L. Moving stem cells to the clinic: potential and 
limitations for brain repair. Neuron 86, 187–206 (2015).
	39.	
Barker, R. A., Parmar, M., Studer, L. & Takahashi, J. Human trials of stem 
cell-derived dopamine neurons for Parkinson’s disease: dawn of a new era. 
Cell Stem Cell 21, 569–573 (2017).
	40.	
Abbott, A. Fetal-cell revival for Parkinson’s. Nature 510, 195–196 (2014).
	41.	
Kirkeby, A. et al. Generation of regionally specified neural progenitors and 
functional neurons from human embryonic stem cells under defined 
conditions. Cell Reports 1, 703–714 (2012).
	42.	
Kikuchi, T. et al. Human iPS cell-derived dopaminergic neurons function in a 
primate Parkinson’s disease model. Nature 548, 592–596 (2017).  
An important study showing the long-term survival and functional efficacy of 
iPS-cell-derived dopamine cells (including from patients with Parkinson’s 
disease) in non-human primate models of Parkinson’s disease.
	43.	
Grealish, S. et al. Human ESC-derived dopamine neurons show similar 
preclinical efficacy and potency to fetal neurons when grafted in a rat model of 
Parkinson’s disease. Cell Stem Cell 15, 653–665 (2014).  
An key study showing that grafted stem-cell-derived dopamine neurons 
function equivalently to fetal cells in terms of maturation, innervation 
capacity, potency and function.
	44.	
Grealish, S. et al. Monosynaptic tracing using modified rabies virus reveals 
early and extensive circuit integration of human embryonic stem cell-derived 
neurons. Stem Cell Reports 4, 975–983 (2015).
	45.	
Chen, Y. et al. Chemical control of grafted human PSC-derived neurons in a 
mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. Cell Stem Cell 18, 817–826 (2016).
	46.	
Delli Carri, A. et al. Human pluripotent stem cell differentiation into authentic 
striatal projection neurons. Stem Cell Rev. 9, 461–474 (2013).
	47.	
Reidling, J. C. et al. Human neural stem cell transplantation rescues functional 
deficits in R6/2 and Q140 Huntington’s disease mice. Stem Cell Reports 10, 
58–72 (2018).
	48.	
Ma, L. et al. Human embryonic stem cell-derived GABA neurons correct 
locomotion deficits in quinolinic acid-lesioned mice. Cell Stem Cell 10, 
455–464 (2012).
	49.	
Cisbani, G. et al. Striatal allografts in patients with Huntington’s disease: 
impact of diminished astrocytes and vascularization on graft viability. Brain 
136, 433–443 (2013).
	50.	
Kokaia, Z. & Lindvall, O. Stem cell repair of striatal ischemia. Prog. Brain Res. 
201, 35–53 (2012).
	51.	
Cicchetti, F. et al. Mutant huntingtin is present in neuronal grafts in Huntington 
disease patients. Ann. Neurol. 76, 31–42 (2014).
	52.	
Ladewig, J., Koch, P. & Brüstle, O. Auto-attraction of neural precursors and their 
neuronal progeny impairs neuronal migration. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 24–26 
(2014).
1 7  M A Y  2 0 1 8  |  V O L  5 5 7  |  N A T U R E  |  3 3 3
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Review
insight
	53.	
Battista, D., Ganat, Y., El Maarouf, A., Studer, L. & Rutishauser, U. Enhancement 
of polysialic acid expression improves function of embryonic stem-derived 
dopamine neuron grafts in Parkinsonian mice. Stem Cells Transl. Med. 3, 
108–113 (2014).
	54.	
Morizane, A. et al. MHC matching improves engraftment of iPSC-derived 
neurons in non-human primates. Nat. Commun. 8, 385 (2017).
	55.	
Gornalusse, G. G. et al. HLA-E-expressing pluripotent stem cells escape 
allogeneic responses and lysis by NK cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 35, 765–772 (2017).
	56.	
Aldrin-Kirk, P. et al. DREADD modulation of transplanted DA neurons reveals a 
novel Parkinsonian dyskinesia mechanism mediated by the serotonin 5-HT6 
receptor. Neuron 90, 955–968 (2016).
	57.	
Steinbeck, J. A. et al. Optogenetics enables functional analysis of human 
embryonic stem cell-derived grafts in a Parkinson’s disease model.  
Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 204–209 (2015).
	58.	
Espuny-Camacho, I. et al. Hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease in stem-cell-
derived human neurons transplanted into mouse brain. Neuron 93, 
1066–1081 (2017).
	59.	
Falkner, S. et al. Transplanted embryonic neurons integrate into adult 
neocortical circuits. Nature 539, 248–253 (2016).
	60.	
Espuny-Camacho, I. et al. Pyramidal neurons derived from human pluripotent 
stem cells integrate efficiently into mouse brain circuits in vivo. Neuron 77, 
440–456 (2013).
	61.	
Tornero, D. et al. Synaptic inputs from stroke-injured brain to grafted human stem 
cell-derived neurons activated by sensory stimuli. Brain 140, 692–706 (2017).
	62.	
Michelsen, K. A. et al. Area-specific reestablishment of damaged circuits in the 
adult cerebral cortex by cortical neurons derived from mouse embryonic stem 
cells. Neuron 85, 982–997 (2015).
	63.	
Grade, S. & Götz, M. Neuronal replacement therapy: previous achievements 
and challenges ahead. NPJ Regen. Med. 2, 29 (2017).
	64.	
Frisén, J. Neurogenesis and gliogenesis in nervous system plasticity and 
repair. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 32, 127–141 (2016).
	65.	
Paredes, M. F., Sorrells, S. F., Garcia-Verdugo, J. M. & Alvarez-Buylla, A. Brain 
size and limits to adult neurogenesis. J. Comp. Neurol. 524, 646–664 (2016).
	66.	
Nakatomi, H. et al. Regeneration of hippocampal pyramidal neurons after 
ischemic brain injury by recruitment of endogenous neural progenitors. Cell 
110, 429–441 (2002).
	67.	
Arvidsson, A., Collin, T., Kirik, D., Kokaia, Z. & Lindvall, O. Neuronal replacement 
from endogenous precursors in the adult brain after stroke. Nat. Med. 8, 
963–970 (2002). An early study that provided important evidence for 
endogenous neurogenesis after brain injury.
	68.	
Thored, P. et al. Long-term neuroblast migration along blood vessels in an area 
with transient angiogenesis and increased vascularization after stroke. Stroke 
38, 3032–3039 (2007).
	69.	
Lipp, H. P. & Bonfanti, L. Adult neurogenesis in mammals: variations and 
confusions. Brain Behav. Evol. 87, 205–221 (2016).
	70.	
Wang, C. et al. Human and monkey striatal interneurons are derived from the 
medial ganglionic eminence but not from the adult subventricular zone.  
J. Neurosci. 34, 10906–10923 (2014).
	71.	
Ernst, A. et al. Neurogenesis in the striatum of the adult human brain. Cell 156, 
1072–1083 (2014).
	72.	
Grande, A. et al. Environmental impact on direct neuronal reprogramming in 
vivo in the adult brain. Nat. Commun. 4, 2373 (2013).
	73.	
Magnusson, J. P. et al. A latent neurogenic program in astrocytes regulated by 
Notch signaling in the mouse. Science 346, 237–241 (2014).  
This work shows the in vivo conversion of astrocytes into neurons solely by 
removing Notch signalling and that this conversion occurs in an interesting 
region-specific manner only in the striatum, showing that these astrocytes 
are more prone to neurogenesis than others.
	74.	
Benner, E. J. et al. Protective astrogenesis from the SVZ niche after injury is 
controlled by Notch modulator Thbs4. Nature 497, 369–373 (2013).
	75.	
Heins, N. et al. Glial cells generate neurons: the role of the transcription factor 
Pax6. Nat. Neurosci. 5, 308–315 (2002).  
This work pioneered the approach of converting glial cells into neurons and 
showed the successful conversion of postnatal glial cells into neurons.
	76.	
Buffo, A. et al. Expression pattern of the transcription factor Olig2 in response 
to brain injuries: implications for neuronal repair. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
102, 18183–18188 (2005).
	77.	
Ohori, Y. et al. Growth factor treatment and genetic manipulation stimulate 
neurogenesis and oligodendrogenesis by endogenous neural progenitors in 
the injured adult spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 26, 11948–11960 (2006).
	78.	
Kronenberg, G. et al. Modulation of fate determinants Olig2 and Pax6 in 
resident glia evokes spiking neuroblasts in a model of mild brain ischemia. 
Stroke 41, 2944–2949 (2010).
	79.	
Gascón, S., Masserdotti, G., Russo, G. L. & Götz, M. Direct neuronal 
reprogramming: achievements, hurdles, and new roads to success. Cell Stem 
Cell 21, 18–34 (2017).
	80.	
Torper, O. et al. In vivo reprogramming of striatal NG2 glia into functional 
neurons that integrate into local host circuitry. Cell Rep. 12, 474–481 (2015).  
This work shows the in vivo connectivity of reprogrammed neurons in the 
striatum that receive local, but not long-distance, inputs.
	81.	
Torper, O. et al. Generation of induced neurons via direct conversion in vivo. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 7038–7043 (2013).
	82.	 Masserdotti, G., Gascón, S. & Götz, M. Direct neuronal reprogramming: 
learning from and for development. Development 143, 2494–2510 (2016).
	83.	
Guo, Z. et al. In vivo direct reprogramming of reactive glial cells into functional 
neurons after brain injury and in an Alzheimer’s disease model. Cell Stem Cell 
14, 188–202 (2014).
	84.	
Gascón, S. et al. Identification and successful negotiation of a metabolic 
checkpoint in direct neuronal reprogramming. Cell Stem Cell 18, 396–409 
(2016).  
This work revealed a metabolic hurdle during the direct reprogramming of 
glia and many other cell types into neurons and showed that protecting 
neurons from death and ROS resulted in very high conversion efficiency in 
the injured mouse cerebral cortex in vivo.
	85.	 Wang, L. L. & Zhang, C. L. Engineering new neurons: in vivo reprogramming 
in mammalian brain and spinal cord. Cell Tissue Res. 371, 201–212  
(2018).
	86.	
Southwell, D. G., Froemke, R. C., Alvarez-Buylla, A., Stryker, M. P. & Gandhi, S. P. 
Cortical plasticity induced by inhibitory neuron transplantation. Science 327, 
1145–1148 (2010).
	87.	
Tang, Y., Stryker, M. P., Alvarez-Buylla, A. & Espinosa, J. S. Cortical plasticity 
induced by transplantation of embryonic somatostatin or parvalbumin 
interneurons. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 18339–18344 (2014).
	88.	
Dimou, L. & Götz, M. Glial cells as progenitors and stem cells: new roles in the 
healthy and diseased brain. Physiol. Rev. 94, 709–737 (2014).
	89.	
Heinrich, C. et al. Sox2-mediated conversion of NG2 glia into induced neurons 
in the injured adult cerebral cortex. Stem Cell Reports 3, 1000–1014 (2014).
	90.	
Niu, W. et al. SOX2 reprograms resident astrocytes into neural progenitors in 
the adult brain. Stem Cell Reports 4, 780–794 (2015).
	91.	
Liu, Y. et al. Ascl1 converts dorsal midbrain astrocytes into functional neurons 
in vivo. J. Neurosci. 35, 9336–9355 (2015).
	92.	
Deverman, B. E. et al. Cre-dependent selection yields AAV variants for widespread 
gene transfer to the adult brain. Nat. Biotechnol. 34, 204–209 (2016).
	93.	
Vagner, T., Dvorzhak, A., Wójtowicz, A. M., Harms, C. & Grantyn, R. Systemic 
application of AAV vectors targeting GFAP-expressing astrocytes in Z-Q175-KI 
Huntington’s disease mice. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 77, 76–86 (2016).
	94.	
Kunze, C. et al. Synthetic AAV/CRISPR vectors for blocking HIV-1 expression in 
persistently infected astrocytes. Glia 66, 413–427 (2018).
	95.	
Pereira, M. et al. Direct reprogramming of resident NG2 glia into neurons with 
properties of fast-spiking parvalbumin-containing interneurons. Stem Cell 
Reports 9, 742–751 (2017).  
This work shows how a very precise neuronal subtype can be achieved by 
targeting a specific glial subtype.
	96.	
Rivetti di Val Cervo, P. et al. Induction of functional dopamine neurons from 
human astrocytes in vitro and mouse astrocytes in a Parkinson’s disease 
model. Nat. Biotechnol. 35, 444–452 (2017).
	97.	 Karow, M. et al. Reprogramming of pericyte-derived cells of the adult human 
brain into induced neuronal cells. Cell Stem Cell 11, 471–476 (2012).  
This study showed that non-neuronal cells from the adult human brain 
could be successfully converted into functional neurons, opening up the 
possibility of using direct in vivo neuronal reprogramming for human 
patients.
	98.	
Pfisterer, U. et al. Direct conversion of human fibroblasts to dopaminergic 
neurons. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 10343–10348 (2011).
	99.	
Drouin-Ouellet, J. et al. REST suppression mediates neural conversion of adult 
human fibroblasts via microRNA-dependent and -independent pathways. 
EMBO Mol. Med. 9, 1117–1131 (2017).
	100.	 Pang, Z. P. et al. Induction of human neuronal cells by defined transcription 
factors. Nature 476, 220–223 (2011).
	101.	 Zhang, L. et al. Small molecules efficiently reprogram human astroglial cells 
into functional neurons. Cell Stem Cell 17, 735–747 (2015).
Acknowledgements R.A.B. is funded by the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre 
in Cambridge, Cure PD, PDUK, European Research Council under the European 
Union’s Seventh Framework Programme: FP/2007-2013 NeuroStemcellRepair 
(no. 602278), Wellcome Trust MRC Stem Cell Institute and MRC UKRMP PSCP. 
He has received consultancy payments from FCDI and LCT. M.G. is funded 
by the German Research Foundation (CRC870, SPP1738, 1757, EXC1010 
Synergy), The Ministry of Science and Research (MAIV), ERANET and the 
ERC (ChroNeuroRepair). M.P. receives funding from the New York Stem Cell 
Foundation, the European Research Council under the European Union’s 
Seventh Framework Programme: FP/2007-2013 NeuroStemcellRepair (no. 
602278) and ERC Grant Agreement no. 30971, the Swedish Research Council 
and the Strategic Research Area Multipark at Lund University. M.P. is a New York 
Stem Cell Foundation Robertson Investigator. We thank D. Daft for her help in 
the preparation of this manuscript.
Reviewer information Nature thanks P. Arlotta, J. Takahashi and the other 
anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Author contributions All three authors contributed to the design, writing and 
critical review of this manuscript.
Competing interests M.P. is the owner of Parmar Cells AB and co-inventor on 
US patent applications 15/093,927 owned by Biolamina AB and EP17181588 
owned by Miltenyi Biotec. Patent WO 2015/114059 A1 patents the use of BCL2 
in reprogramming. R.A.B. and M.G. have no competing interests.
Additional information
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to R.A.B. or 
M.G. or M.P.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
3 3 4  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  5 5 7  |  1 7  M A Y  2 0 1 8
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

===== Barnes2021_EurRespirRev+LungRegen =====
Chronic lung diseases: prospects for
regeneration and repair
Peter J. Barnes1, Gary P. Anderson2, Malin Fagerås3 and Maria G. Belvisi1,4
Affiliations: 1National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK. 2Lung Health Research
Centre, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. 3AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden. 4Respiratory and
Immunology, BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Correspondence: Peter J. Barnes, National Heart & Lung Institute, Dovehouse Street, London, SW3 6LY, UK.
E-mail: p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk
@ERSpublications
Treatment outcomes with COPD and IPF are suboptimal. Better understanding of the diseases, such
as targetable repair mechanisms, may generate novel therapies, and earlier diagnosis and treatment is
needed to stop or even reverse disease progression. https://bit.ly/2Ga8J1g
Cite this article as: Barnes PJ, Anderson GP, Fagerås M, et al. Chronic lung diseases: prospects for
regeneration and repair. Eur Respir Rev 2021; 30: 200213 [https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0213-2020].
ABSTRACT
COPD and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) together represent a considerable unmet
medical need, and advances in their treatment lag well behind those of other chronic conditions. Both
diseases involve maladaptive repair mechanisms leading to progressive and irreversible damage.
However, our understanding of the complex underlying disease mechanisms is incomplete; with
current diagnostic approaches, COPD and IPF are often discovered at an advanced stage and existing
definitions of COPD and IPF can be misleading. To halt or reverse disease progression and achieve
lung regeneration, there is a need for earlier identification and treatment of these diseases. A precision
medicine approach to treatment is also important, involving the recognition of disease subtypes, or
endotypes, according to underlying disease mechanisms, rather than the current “one-size-fits-all”
approach. This review is based on discussions at a meeting involving 38 leading global experts in
chronic lung disease mechanisms, and describes advances in the understanding of the pathology and
molecular mechanisms of COPD and IPF to identify potential targets for reversing disease
degeneration and promoting tissue repair and lung regeneration. We also discuss limitations of
existing disease measures, technical advances in understanding disease pathology, and novel methods
for targeted drug delivery.
Introduction
COPD and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) both represent a substantial unmet clinical need. COPD
has become the third leading cause of death globally [1], and IPF has a median survival of ∼3 years after
diagnosis, with survival rates comparable to some aggressive cancers [2], and no observed improvement in
survival from 2000 to 2012 [3].
In this article, we discuss the current limitations of treatment for COPD and IPF, and potential future
strategies with a focus on disease subtypes and lung regeneration and repair. This article is based on
discussions at a meeting organised by the authors on 28–29 November 2018 in Gothenburg, Sweden, and
supported by AstraZeneca, involving leading global experts in obstructive lung disease who discussed the
latest innovations and issues in chronic lung disease (the participants are listed in the Acknowledgements
section).
Copyright ©ERS 2021. This article is open access and distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Non-Commercial Licence 4.0.
Provenance: Submitted article, peer reviewed
Received: 6 July 2020 | Accepted: 17 Aug 2020
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0213-2020
Eur Respir Rev 2021; 30: 200213
REVIEW
LUNG REGENERATION AND REPAIR

COPD
COPD is a largely preventable and treatable disease characterised by persistent airflow limitation and
respiratory symptoms due to chronic inflammation, which causes structural changes, such as fibrosis of
the small airways and alveolar wall destruction (emphysema) [1, 4]. Early pathological changes occur
in the small airways, with associated inflammation, wall thickening, peribronchiolar fibrosis and loss of
terminal and transitional bronchioles and associated vasculature, before the onset of emphysema [5–9].
These early and irreversible destructive events do not initially affect the lung function parameters usually
used to define COPD (forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1)/forced vital capacity ratio), making early
detection difficult [10]. Smoking is a key risk factor for COPD; however, nonsmokers can also develop
COPD (especially in low- and middle-income countries) and many smokers do not develop COPD [11],
indicating a role of genetic risk, epigenetics and other environmental factors in its development [12]. The
most documented genetic risk factor for COPD is α1-antitrypsin deficiency that represents a specific
subtype of COPD (endotype), although different phenotypes exist within this subtype that appear to be
caused by variations in other factors, such as tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α [13]. Autoimmunity and
aberrant immunity (suppression of host defence mechanisms and dysfunction of innate immunity) may
also contribute to disease progression, especially as the disease advances [14–16].
IPF
IPF is commonly described as a specific form of chronic, progressive, fibrosing, interstitial pneumonia
of unknown cause, usually occurring in the elderly [17]. IPF incidence appears to be increasing: the
diagnosis of IPF in the UK has increased from approximately 20 per 100000 patients in 2000 to nearly
40 per 100000 patients in 2012 [3, 18]. IPF arises from repetitive micro-injuries to the bronchial and
alveolar epithelium, which, along with immune system dysregulation [19, 20], results in progressive
scarring and the destruction of lung structures [18, 21, 22]. The aetiology of IPF is unknown [3], but
smoking is a risk factor and may influence IPF onset [23, 24]. Major genetic risk factors, such as the
mucin 5B gene and defective telomerase, have been identified, pointing to future genetic stratification [25,
26]. Of note, pulmonary emphysema and IPF can co-exist in the same patient as a distinct entity termed
combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema (CPFE) [27]. This condition is characterised by emphysema
in the upper lobes and fibrosis in the lower lobes of the lungs [27, 28]. CPFE is estimated to occur in up
to 35% of patients with IPF [29].
Limitations of current treatment approaches
Commonly used maintenance treatments in COPD include β2-agonists, anticholinergics, theophylline and
corticosteroids [1]. Such treatments are primarily for improving lung function, reducing symptoms and the
risk of exacerbations, and improving exercise tolerance and health status. To date, no disease-modifying
treatments are available [30]. This is in sharp contrast with other chronic inflammatory-based diseases. In
rheumatoid arthritis, for example, scientific advances and early treatment with disease-modifying drugs
have resulted in the prevention of disease progression in up to 90% of patients [31].
Treatment options for IPF are even more limited and represent a pressing unmet clinical need [32].
Currently, only two antifibrotic drugs are recommended; namely, pirfenidone and the tyrosine kinase
inhibitor nintedanib [17]. However, a recent analysis revealed that 40% of patients with confirmed IPF did
not receive antifibrotics, reflecting a possible lack of understanding around the diagnosis and management
of the disease, and problems with treatment access [33]. Furthermore, although these treatments may be
life-extending [34, 35], potential adverse events could negatively impact quality of life [17], such as
gastro-intestinal effects and photosensitivity with pirfenidone, and diarrhoea with nintedanib [36, 37].
Future treatment strategies for COPD and IPF
The marked unmet needs in COPD and IPF therapy highlight the need for new treatment strategies that
focus on underlying disease endotypes, regeneration and repair.
A change in mindset is required among pulmonologists, regulators and policymakers to redefine
perceptions of COPD and IPF. Current treatments have a “magic bullet” approach, where a single drug is
intended to treat all forms of disease. However, both COPD and IPF are heterogeneous diseases with
several clinical phenotypes [38] that may reflect multiple but, as of yet, mostly unidentified endotypes
(subtypes of disease defined functionally and pathologically by molecular mechanism or treatment
response) [39–41]. A move to a “complex subtypes” approach, where precision medicine allows COPD or
IPF subtype-specific treatment, could be possible with combinations of interventions. Future treatment
strategies may target different aspects of these diseases chronologically, or target several disease
mechanisms simultaneously, with subsequent treatment withdrawal upon improvement. For new treatment
strategies that focus on underlying disease endotypes, it will be crucial to study COPD and IPF at an early
stage before confounding factors, comorbidities and disease progression mask subtle differences.
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0213-2020
2
LUNG REGENERATION AND REPAIR | P.J. BARNES ET AL.

In the same way, both diseases have been described as “irreversible” [4, 42, 43]. However, lung
regeneration, disease reversal and even a cure for COPD and IPF are the ultimate goals in disease
management; merely slowing disease progression is important but does not completely address the unmet
clinical need [44, 45]. Regeneration efforts could focus on activating the endogenous repair capacity of the
lungs, and/or adopting exogenous regeneration through tissue engineering, bio-artificial scaffolds or
adding healthy progenitor or stem cells to the lungs [46]. Evidence from retinoic acid studies shows that
lung regeneration is feasible, at least in rodent models [47, 48]; however, we need a clear understanding of
how endogenous repair processes become dysfunctional in the diseased lungs to identify targets for
potential treatment strategies.
New targets for lung regeneration are being identified, but many of these may not be druggable via
conventional approaches using either small-molecule inhibitors/activators or systemic antibodies [49]. New
modality treatments are being developed, such as approaches using proteolysis-targeting chimaera
(PROTAC), inhaled antisense oligonucleotides, gene editing (CRISPR: clustered regular interspaced short
palindromic repeats) or exosomes that will allow us to target all pathways of interest (table 1). Although
direct delivery to the target organ, in this case the lungs, is possible with inhaled approaches, new
methodologies for delivering treatments are also needed.
Several practical considerations must also be borne in mind. The age and frailty of patient populations
with COPD and IPF are likely to be among the greatest challenges to lung regeneration, as well as the
existence of comorbid diseases. To achieve significant lung regeneration, it is likely that COPD and IPF
TABLE 1 Examples of emerging techniques to deliver therapy in patients with COPD and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and
their limitations
Technique
Description
Uses and advances made with the
technique
Current limitations
PROTAC
Proteolysis-targeting chimaera that uses
the cell’s ubiquitin–proteasome system
to target-specific proteins for
degradation
Could induce the degradation of proteins
previously considered “undruggable”
[50]
Highly selective for the target protein, with
rapid, effective and prolonged
degradation of the target [51]
Valuable for mechanisms requiring precise
targeting for degradation
Can only target a protein for
degradation, not for
modification
CRISPR
Can manipulate gene function through
gene deletion, correction or
replacement; enhancement of gene
expression; base editing
Huge potential for target-specific genetic
medication for gene therapy in COPD
and IPF to target dysregulated genes or
pathways (e.g. epigenetic changes to
genes implicated in mucus
hypersecretion in COPD) [52]
Concerns exist around safety
and off-target effects;
these are under
investigation [53]
Inhaled antisense
oligonucleotides
Single-stranded DNA or RNA (20–21 base
pairs) complementary to the target
mRNA
Knocks down the expression of the target
gene [54]
Can modulate molecules that cannot be
targeted using antibodies [54]
Inhalation could minimise toxicities
associated with systemic exposure of
antisense oligonucleotides [54]
Currently in the
investigational stage
Intracellular delivery to the
site of action is a
challenge [54]
Exosomes as
delivery systems
A potential delivery system for nucleic acid
drugs
Potential use in delivering drugs such as
antagomirs or miRNA molecules,
thanks to their low antigenicity and
toxicity [55]
Could target particular cell types
In vitro and in vivo studies have shown
promise in successfully delivering
molecules [56]
Currently in the
investigational stage
PROTAC: proteolysis-targeting chimaera; CRISPR: clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats.
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0213-2020
3
LUNG REGENERATION AND REPAIR | P.J. BARNES ET AL.

treatment will need to be at an earlier stage and in younger patients compared with what currently occurs
in clinical practice. This argument is supported by evidence suggesting that early treatment and early
smoking cessation have a positive effect on longitudinal lung function and symptoms [57]. COPD is
currently diagnosed using spirometry [1], but these changes detected by spirometry occur relatively late in
disease progression and are a poor measurement of peripheral airway obstruction in early disease [10].
Redefining COPD based on abnormalities in small airway function, measured using techniques such as
magnetic resonance imaging and impulse oscillometry [58, 59], may identify disease earlier than current
practises [10, 60] (table 2). Population screening of smokers for COPD could also be a possibility, but
screening for IPF less so as it is an uncommon disease and difficult to diagnose [33].
Biomarkers
Biomarkers are central in identifying patient subgroups, phenotypes and endotypes [8, 78, 79]. They are
crucial in monitoring and predicting disease progression and predicting responders to treatment [8, 79].
COPD and IPF are highly complex and heterogeneous, and no single biomarker has been identified for
clinical applications in either disease [80–82]. Dividing COPD and IPF into endotypes is critical for
breaking the diseases down into molecular pathways and disease mechanisms, and for linking molecular
mechanisms to clinical features. Treatment targets for specific endotypes could thus be identified and
could provide precision treatment to those patients most likely to respond [40, 83]. In the management of
cancer, it has long been recognised that genetic mutations can give rise to cancer subtypes that predict
prognosis and response to treatment [84]. A similar rationale needs to be applied to COPD and IPF to
identify subgroups with distinct disease mechanisms [40, 83].
The Evaluation of COPD Longitudinally to Identify Predictive Surrogate Endpoints (ECLIPSE) and the
Genetic Epidemiology of COPD (COPDGene) studies have identified numerous putative biomarkers in
COPD. These include protein, cellular and genetic biomarkers associated with COPD characteristics and
morbidity (including airflow limitation, emphysema and exacerbation frequency) [85–87]. The analysis of
six inflammatory biomarkers (white blood cell count, C-reactive protein, interleukin-6, C-X-C motif
chemokine ligand 8, TNF-α and fibrinogen) from patients in ECLIPSE led to the identification of a new
COPD phenotype [88].
In IPF, several biomarkers are associated with specific phenotypes [89]. Protein degradation biomarkers
and serum biomarkers have been identified that can discriminate between healthy individuals, patients
with stable IPF and those with progressive IPF [90]. Four serum proteins have been identified from the
metaplastic epithelium that could predict disease progression and mortality; namely, surfactant protein D,
matrix metalloproteinase-7, carbohydrate antigen 19–9 and cancer antigen-125 [91]. A gain-of-function
variant of the promotor of the mucin 5B (MUC5B) gene is associated with the pathogenesis of IPF [25];
identifying this variation in patients with pre-clinical IPF and targeting MUC5B could enable early
diagnosis and prevent the progression of IPF to a state where the lung remodelling is irreversible [25, 92].
Early detection
As we learn more about COPD and IPF endotypes and phenotypes, advances in technology are required
to identify these in patients and to allow for the early detection of disease and to monitor disease
progression. Reliable tests for small airway function and the ability to quantify disease progression and its
links to biomarkers will be essential for advancing our knowledge and for the management of COPD and
IPF. Advances in the “-omics” field (for example, genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, lipidomics and
metabolomics) have led to new discoveries and promises to provide insights into endotypes. For instance,
it may be possible to use blood samples to detect genomic biomarkers [93], and bioinformatic analysis
may identify the activation of particular molecular pathways that could be targeted [94]. Also, breathomics
of exhaled breath may help identify COPD phenotypes and provide biomarkers for diagnosis and disease
progression [77].
A potential barrier to early, preventative therapies may be that patients who do not feel unwell or who are
not experiencing any impact on their quality of life may be reticent about taking medication with
associated side-effects. Payers may also be resistant to paying for medication when the current
classifications of disease categorise the patient as “at risk” rather than having measurable disease, although
it is noteworthy that primary prevention measures do exist in other diseases; for example, the treatment of
systemic hypertension and hypercholesterolaemia to prevent cardiovascular diseases [95].
Since late disease is associated with profound structural damage to the lung that is currently irreversible
[4, 96], there is great interest in identifying potentially treatable processes much earlier in disease,
especially those around regeneration and repair [97–101].
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0213-2020
4
LUNG REGENERATION AND REPAIR | P.J. BARNES ET AL.

TABLE 2 Examples of new or emerging techniques for studying COPD and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF)
Technique
Description
Uses and advances made with the
technique
Current limitations
Micro-CT imaging
High-resolution CT imaging
Higher-resolution versus standard CT
imaging [61]
Can reveal structural changes
associated with small airway
disease [61]
Reveals massive loss in number and
area of terminal bronchioles in
patients with centrilobular
emphysematous COPD [6]
When partnered with parametric
response mapping as an imaging
biomarker, micro-CT could identify
terminal bronchiole pathology in
COPD [62]
Performed on ex vivo samples, or
explants, rather than on the patient
[6, 61, 62]
PET
Molecular imaging; most
commonly measuring 18F-FDG
uptake
Has been explored as a noninvasive
biomarker for pulmonary
inflammation [63]
Ability to quantify inflammation is under
investigation [63]
Validation of imaging approaches
required; changes in lung air, blood
and water volumes depending on
disease severity can cause variations
in signals [63]
Gas diffusion MRI
Noble gases such as 3He and
129Xe used to visualise lung
structure
Could be used to monitor disease
progression and response to
therapy [59]
Can detect microstructural changes in
the lung, even in asymptomatic
smokers [59]
Quantitative microstructure data
obtainable by measuring gas diffusion
in alveoli; the technique can
differentiate between patients with
COPD and healthy individuals [64]
Alveolar sizes can be visualised to form
a picture of alveolar loss in COPD [64]
Provides sensitive and reproducible data
on gas exchange impairment in IPF,
correlating with spirometry data [65]
Adaption of existing scanners is
required [66]
SPECT
Radiotracers used to image the
lung, where both airways and
blood flow can be imaged
Both the airways and blood flow can be
imaged, allowing the detection of
comorbidities such as pulmonary
embolism [67, 68]
Can detect abnormalities in apparently
healthy smokers [69]
Only semi-quantitative [69]
Not as high resolution as other imaging
methods [68]
Takes a long time to acquire an image
(e.g. 45 min) [68]
IOS
Noninvasive measurement of
respiratory mechanics in
response to pressure
oscillations
A reliable tool for investigating proximal
and peripheral airways resistance in
patients with COPD [70]
Peripheral airway resistance and
compliance using IOS closely linked to
COPD severity and exacerbations [58]
Could be used as a screening tool for
early-stage COPD [58]
Useful for patients who cannot perform
spirometry manoeuvres [71]
The minimal clinically important
difference in IOS parameters needs
to be established
Continued
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0213-2020
5
LUNG REGENERATION AND REPAIR | P.J. BARNES ET AL.

Dysregulated processes presenting opportunities for regeneration and repair
Cellular senescence
Accelerated ageing and senescence are evident in the lungs of patients with COPD and IPF [102, 103].
This can be brought on by DNA damage, mitochondrial dysfunction, telomere shortening, reduced
autophagy and stem cell exhaustion, and involves cell cycle arrest and a secretory profile of inflammatory
proteins. This is central to lung development and wound repair. In the healthy individual, once wound
repair is complete, senescent cells are removed following apoptosis triggered by infiltrating immune
phagocytes. However, if senescent cells are not removed, their abnormal secretory profile can lead to
pathological tissue changes [104].
Several steps in the senescence pathway could be targeted to halt accelerated ageing and senescence.
Cellular senescence is associated with a loss of anti-ageing molecules, such as certain sirtuins and Klotho
[105, 106]. The
microRNA miR-34a is increased
by activation of the
phosphoinosite-3-kinase
(PI3K)-mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway, and downregulates the expression of sirtuin-1
and sirtuin-6; up-regulation of miR-34a in the lungs and cells of patients with COPD results in loss of
sirtuin-1 and -6 [106, 107]. miR-570 is also increased in COPD and is activated by p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase, resulting in the downregulation of sirtuin-1 [108]. Inhibition of miR-34a and miR-570 with
antagomirs rescues the loss of sirtuin-1 and sirtuin-6, thereby preventing the induction of senescence [106,
108]; the therapeutic administration of antagomirs, possibly via inhaled exosomes [55], could therefore
represent a strategy to reverse accelerated ageing [106, 108].
Oxidative stress, via increased reactive oxygen species production or decreased antioxidants, is central in
driving senescence in COPD through the activation of the PI3K-mTOR pathway [102, 109]. Reactive
oxygen species are potentially generated by the mitochondria in response to cigarette smoke [102, 103].
This results in secretion of a senescence-associated secretory phenotype of inflammatory proteins, which
include pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, growth factors and proteases and may account for the
low-grade inflammation seen in COPD and the affected patient’s systemic circulation [105, 110]. The
mTOR inhibitor rapamycin prevents senescence and inhibits components of the senescence-associated
secretory phenotype in vitro in pulmonary artery smooth muscle and pulmonary vascular endothelial cells
isolated from patients with COPD [109]. The effective dose of rapamycin was low and did not affect cell
TABLE 2 Continued
Technique
Description
Uses and advances made with the
technique
Current limitations
OCT
A high-resolution optical imaging
method
Resolution down to micrometre
scale [72]
Can be used to accurately measure
distal airways [73]
Could detect early changes to the distal
airways and appears to be more
sensitive than CT [72, 73]
Ultrafine bronchoscopy (with sedation)
required to reach the distal airways
[73]
Multiple-breath
nitrogen
washout
Noninvasive measurement of
residual nitrogen in the airways
to detect any abnormalities in
gas distribution in the lung
Does not require maximal effort and can
be used in a paediatric setting [74]
Provides information on abnormalities in
the small airways, including terminal
bronchioles [75]
Can detect abnormalities in early
disease [76]
Limited standardisation, which impacts
the availability of widely applicable
reference values [75]
Breathomics
Exhaled breath analysis to detect
changes in volatile organic
compounds
Could be used to diagnose COPD and
differentiate COPD from asthma [77]
May be able to predict disease
progression [77]
Could help distinguish COPD
phenotypes [77]
Results can be confounded by
parameters such as medication use,
comorbidities, smoking and study
site [77]
CT: computed tomography; PET: positron emission tomography; 18F-FDG: 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose; MRI: magnetic resonance imaging;
SPECT: single-photon emission computed tomography; IOS: impulse oscillometry; OCT: optical coherence tomography.
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0213-2020
6
LUNG REGENERATION AND REPAIR | P.J. BARNES ET AL.

growth rate, suggesting relatively low doses may be sufficient for a therapeutic effect, thereby reducing
potential toxicity.
Multiple cell types are affected by senescence in COPD and IPF, including epithelial, endothelial, fibroblast
and smooth muscle cells in COPD [108, 109, 111] and epithelial cells and fibroblasts in IPF [104, 112,
113]. The elimination of senescent cells, or senolysis, is another approach to tackle senescence.
Experimental models have shown that the senolytic agents dasatinib and quercetin kill senescent cells and
improve lung function [114], and a pilot study of these agents in patients with IPF has shown
improvements in physical function with an acceptable safety profile over a 3-week period [115]. The
senolytic drug navitoclax (ABT-263) has also been found to reverse pulmonary fibrosis and induce
apoptosis in myofibroblasts implicated in fibrosis in animal models [99, 100].
Wnt/β-catenin signalling
The Wnt signalling pathway guides cells to certain fates during lung development and maintains tissue
homeostasis in adulthood [116]. Wnt/β-catenin signalling is reduced in mouse models of elastase- and
cigarette smoke-induced emphysema, which were attenuated upon Wnt activation with improvements
observed in alveolar epithelial structure and function [98]. Cells affected by this pathway include alveolar
epithelial type II (ATII) cells in the alveolar epithelium, which have self-renewal properties and rely on
Wnt/β-catenin signalling to differentiate to ATI cells in response to alveolar epithelial injury [116]. ATI
cells cover the majority of the lung surface area (95–97%) and are responsible for gas exchange, a key lung
function [117]. The noncanonical Wnt ligand WNT-5A, which is overexpressed in lungs from animal
models of COPD and patients with COPD, antagonises the canonical Wnt/β-catenin signalling pathway
resulting in the inhibition of murine lung epithelial cell wound healing and transdifferentiation from ATII
to ATI cells in vitro [118]. Lung-specific overexpression of WNT-5A exacerbated the development of
emphysema, and prophylactic inhibition of WNT-5A could recuperate alveolar cell function and attenuate
lung pathogenesis in COPD animal models [118]. In addition, activation of canonical Wnt/β-catenin
signalling with lithium chloride improved alveolar epithelial structure and function in experimental models
of
emphysema
[98].
The
canonical
Wnt
receptor
frizzled-4
(FZD4)
facilitates
ATII
to
ATI
transdifferentiation. FZD4 expression was reduced in patients with COPD, correlating positively with lung
function and negatively with smoking (pack-years) [119]. Cigarette smoke directly downregulated FZD4
in vivo and in vitro, thereby preventing Wnt/β-catenin signalling and alveolar tissue repair [119].
Interestingly, activated Wnt/β-catenin signalling in IPF leads to an increase in the Wnt target,
WNT-1-inducible signalling protein-1 (WISP1), which in turn induces the expression and secretion of
profibrotic mediators, contributing to lung fibrosis [120, 121]. Using antibodies to neutralise WISP1,
KÖNIGSHOFF et al. [121] showed reduced pulmonary fibrosis, implicating WISP1 as a potential therapeutic
target in IPF.
Several novel approaches to activating and inhibiting Wnt/β-catenin signalling are now in development
and look promising with regard to restoring normal lung function in COPD and IPF [97, 122]. These
discoveries point to several approaches that could reinstate cell and tissue homeostasis in COPD and IPF.
Stem cell therapy
The basal stem cells (BSCs) in the cartilaginous airways of the lungs are considered to be multipotent lung
progenitor cells [123, 124] and drive homeostasis of the normal epithelium and regeneration following
injury [123]. Therefore, they could be a potential regeneration target; targeting their proliferation and
directing differentiation and stem cell transplantation/bioengineering [123]. In a study of smokers,
reductions in the number and function of BSCs were observed in those with COPD compared with those
without COPD [125]. Interestingly, low BSC counts in smokers without COPD were associated with lower
lung function than in those with high BSC counts [125], which could represent an early pre-diagnostic
stage of COPD. However, BSCs isolated from heavy smokers undergoing lung cancer surgery were found
to have an increased proliferate potential in vitro compared with never-smokers, whereas ATII cell
proliferation decreased [126]. This is in part because BSCs repair damaged DNA by nonhomologous
end-joining, which is faster but more error-prone than homologous repair and increases the risk of
mutagenesis [126].
Elevated BSCs were observed in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from patients with IPF in comparison to
healthy individuals [127]. Normally located at the bronchoalveolar duct junction, BSCs were enriched in
the alveolar compartment and frequently within fibrotic lesions of patients with IPF [127, 128]. This
suggests an unexpected role of BSCs in the pathogenic bronchiolisation of the alveoli in IPF, where
bronchial cells appear in this compartment by migration or transdifferentiation [127, 128].
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0213-2020
7
LUNG REGENERATION AND REPAIR | P.J. BARNES ET AL.

While BSCs theoretically represent an opportunity to reverse COPD- and IPF-associated damage, we need
to distinguish between healthy BSCs and those potentially carrying DNA mutations to enhance the
positive effects without increasing the risk of pathogenic changes. The interactions between BSCs and
immune cells and their role in IPF pathogenesis also need to be understood before BSCs can be
considered as therapy.
A population of mesenchymal progenitor cells positive for stage-specific embryonic antigen (SSEA)-4, a
cell-surface protein expressed by stem cells, has been identified in the lungs of patients with IPF. These
SSEA-4 cells were found to display a pathological gene expression pattern, and their progeny developed a
pathological IPF fibroblast phenotype [129]; these cells could be targeted as a therapeutic intervention,
although it remains to be seen whether some SSEA-4+ cells are beneficial.
Biological molecules
The vasculature should also not be overlooked when elucidating the mechanisms of lung degeneration and
seeking targets for lung regeneration. Retinoic acid is a morphogen that drives tissue regeneration [130, 131]
and can induce alveolar regeneration in animal models [47, 48]. In humans, retinoic acid is involved in
maintaining the lung microvascular endothelium through up-regulating angiogenesis; in emphysema,
expression of the retinoic acid-processing enzyme cytochrome P450 26A1 is elevated in the endothelium,
potentially reducing the availability of retinoic acid [132]. It follows that retinoic acid could be a treatment
option for lung regeneration; however, early-phase clinical trials of retinoic acid in emphysema have failed to
show a clinical benefit [133–135], which underlines the need to understand more about retinoic acid in lung
regeneration and whether retinoids can induce lung regeneration.
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF; also known as scatter factor) promotes airway and bronchoalveolar
branching in the developing lung [136, 137], possibly through interaction with vascular endothelial growth
factor [138]. HGF also promotes the proliferation and survival of airway epithelial cells [139], plays a role in
wound healing [140] and has been shown to improve airspace morphology in emphysema models [139].
Levels of both HGF and vascular endothelial growth factor are reduced in smokers with COPD in
comparison to smokers without COPD and nonsmokers, which could contribute to pathogenesis [141],
indicating that HGF-enhancing therapy could represent a treatment opportunity for COPD and IPF [142].
Receptor tyrosine kinase pathways have been implicated in aberrant lung remodelling, potentially through
growth arrest-specific 6 ligand, TYRO3 protein kinase 3 and Axl [143]. Inhibiting this pathway led to
decreased fibrotic responses in vivo and in vitro, suggesting that targeting the receptor tyrosine kinase
pathway could be a promising therapeutic strategy [143].
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) has been found to be elevated in the lungs of patients with
COPD [101]. Interestingly, deletion of G-CSF in a mouse model of COPD led not only to substantially
less inflammation and reduced fibrosis in the lung parenchyma and small airways, but it also reduced
systemic inflammation and led to improvements in the comorbidities associated with COPD [101],
suggesting that G-CSF is a potential therapeutic target in COPD [101].
Role of the extracellular matrix
The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays a central role in guiding cell behaviour and in tissue repair and
remodelling. An ex vivo model used bronchial ECM from patients with COPD that was stripped of cells
and then repopulated with normal human bronchial cells. The model revealed that the COPD-derived
ECM modified the gene expression profile of these healthy cells upon differentiation, altering the activity
of mediators involved in regeneration, remodelling, apoptosis, vascularisation and inflammation [144].
Similarly, fibroblasts grown on a stiff matrix resembling a fibrotic ECM, as occurs in IPF, were driven to a
myofibroblast phenotype with elevated fibrotic activity, compared with fibroblasts grown on a softer ECM
resembling healthy tissue [145]. Such findings emphasise that we need to fully understand the
contribution of the ECM in disease and lung regeneration, as the enzymes involved in ECM remodelling
could be potential therapeutic targets.
Lessons for the future
Advances in treating obstructive lung diseases such as COPD and IPF have been slow, and improvements
in patient outcomes and drug discovery have been poor in respiratory medicine compared with other
diseases [146]. Currently, clinical trials require a large number of patients to be assessed over a long period
to detect any differences in end-points [146], which could delay results and ultimately slow medical
advances. The high costs of such large trials needed to show clinically meaningful effects have discouraged
investment in new drug development; many drugs also fail in phase 2 and 3 clinical trials, leading to a
rethinking of trial design [146, 147]. Clinical trial design needs to be “smarter”. The design should focus
on the biology of the disease and the drug mechanism of action, and end-points should be appropriate for
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0213-2020
8
LUNG REGENERATION AND REPAIR | P.J. BARNES ET AL.

the drug’s mechanism of action to establish target engagement; improved proof-of-concept or adaptive
trials could help rule out ineffective compounds early on to reduce wasted time and costs [146, 148]. If it
is anticipated that a biological or clinical effect of the drug would be observed after a certain time, the trial
need only last as long as that period. Also, only the subgroup of patients to whom the drug is targeted
should be enrolled, even if this results in a relatively small number of patients. Furthermore, any group of
patients responding particularly well to a drug should be closely investigated to understand why.
Recognition of the limitations in current therapies for COPD and IPF, which result in a substantial unmet
clinical need, points to possible future treatment strategies. For example, a move to precision medicine as
opposed to the “magic bullet” approach could lead to therapeutic advances in these highly complex
diseases of varying endotypes. In addition, a change in mindset is needed from considering these diseases
to be irreversible, to a focus on early diagnosis when reversibility may be possible (figure 1).
The advances in our knowledge of lung degeneration in COPD and IPF raise further questions. For
example, is fibrosis a protective mechanism to prevent peripheral airway destruction? Do terminal
Causes
Smoking, genetic factors
Pathological changes
Oxidative stress
Cell senescence,
immune dysfunction
ECM remodelling
Small airways damage
Alveolar wall destruction
Non-lung changes
Potential biomarkers: examples
Eosinophil count
Cytokines
CRP
Genetic markers
Pulmonary function
Imaging
Therapeutic opportunities 
early in the disease
• Senolytics
• mTOR inhibitors
• miRNA antagomirs
• Signalling pathway inhibitors
• Stem cell therapy
a) COPD
Causes
Not fully elucidated, but smoking and 
occupational exposure implicated
Pathological changes
Micro-injuries in bronchial/ 
alveolar epithelium
Early diagnosis is critical to treating the disease process early
Fibrosis, scarring
Destruction of 
lung structure
Activation of epithelial cells and 
ﬁbroblasts, myoﬁbroblasts
Immune dysregulation
Potential biomarkers: examples
Protein degradation markers
Serum proteins
Therapeutic opportunities 
early in the disease
• Senolytics
• Target dysfunctional
    progenitor cells
• Signalling pathway inhibitors
• Stem cell therapy
b) IPF
FIGURE 1 Causes, pathogenesis and opportunities for therapeutic intervention in a) COPD and b) idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). CRP: C-reactive protein; ECM: extracellular matrix; miRNA: microRNA; mTOR:
mammalian target of rapamycin.
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0213-2020
9
LUNG REGENERATION AND REPAIR | P.J. BARNES ET AL.

bronchioles undergo fibrosis? What is the mechanism for the loss of small airways in early disease? To
understand and treat COPD and IPF more effectively, we need clear molecular profiles of the disease; we
also need to understand why some areas of the lung are affected and why others are not.
Conclusion
In summary, the considerable body of research into COPD and IPF has yet to translate into improvements
in clinical practice. A paradigm shift is required to move the focus to earlier in the disease course, to
understand the disease mechanisms more fully, and to measure multiple aspects of the disease. COPD and
IPF need to be redefined to better capture the patient populations involved and shift the conceptions
about each disease. Novel technologies and the field of “-omics” are providing new insights into COPD
and IPF, increasing our ability to predict outcomes and helping to identify new potential therapies to
achieve lung regeneration.
Acknowledgements: Meeting attendees: Serge Adnot (Hôpital Henri Mondor & Université Paris Est, Créteil, France),
Gary Anderson (University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia), Marie-Liesse Asselin-Labat (Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia; Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, USA),
Jonathan Baker (Imperial College, London, UK), Peter Barnes (Imperial College, London, UK), Maria Belvisi
(AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden), Francois Xavier Blé (AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK), Mia Collins (AstraZeneca,
Gothenburg, Sweden), James Crapo (National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA), Sean Davis (AstraZeneca, Cambridge,
UK), Oliver Eickelberg (University of Colorado Denver, Denver, CO, USA), Malin Fagerås (AstraZeneca, Gothenburg,
Sweden), Donna Finch (MedImmune Ltd, Cambridge, UK), Hani Gabra (AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK), Angus
Hamblin (AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden), Petra Hazon (AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden), Matthew Hind (Royal
Brompton Hospital & Imperial College, London, UK), Cory Hogaboam (Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA,
USA), Jim Hogg (St Paul’s Hospital, Vancouver, Canada), Ellinor Hornberg (AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden), Rod
Hughes (AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK), Simon Johnson (University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK), Christina Keen
(AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK), Roland Kolbeck (MedImmune, Gaithersburg, MD, USA), Melanie Königshoff
(University of Colorado Denver, Denver, CO, USA), Brian Lipworth (University of Dundee, Dundee, UK), Alex Mackay
(AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden), Toby Maher (Royal Brompton Hospital & Imperial College, London, UK), Anna
Malmgren (AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden), Marc Miravitlles (Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona,
Spain), Catherine Overed-Sayer (MedImmune Ltd, Cambridge, UK), Edward Piper (AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK),
Adam Platt (AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK), Ioannis Psallidas (AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK), Steve Rees (AstraZeneca,
Cambridge, UK), Stephen Rennard (AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK), John Taylor (AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden),
and Jim Wild (University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK).
Medical writing support (including development of the first draft under author direction) was provided by Sarah
Hoyle and Kate Silverthorne (CMC Connect, McCann Health Medical Communications Ltd, Macclesfield, UK) and
funded by AstraZeneca (Cambridge, UK), in accordance with Good Publication Practice guidelines.
Conflict of interest: P.J. Barnes reports grants and personal fees from AstraZeneca and Boehringer Ingelheim, and
personal fees from Novartis, Teva and Pieris, outside the submitted work. G.P. Anderson served on secondment as
Chief Scientist in the Respiratory, Inflammation and Autoimmune division of AstraZeneca in 2016. M. Fagerås is an
employee of AstraZeneca. M.G. Belvisi reports personal fees from AstraZeneca, during the conduct of the study.
Support statement: The development of this article was funded by AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK.
References
1
Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD). Global strategy for the diagnosis, management,
and prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (2020 report). Available from: https://goldcopd.org
2
Vancheri C, Failla M, Crimi N, et al. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: a disease with similarities and links to
cancer biology. Eur Respir J 2010; 35: 496–504.
3
Strongman H, Kausar I, Maher TM. Incidence, prevalence, and survival of patients with idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis in the UK. Adv Ther 2018; 35: 724–736.
4
Barnes PJ, Burney PG, Silverman EK, et al. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2015; 1:
15076.
5
Hogg JC. Pathophysiology of airflow limitation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Lancet 2004; 364:
709–721.
6
McDonough JE, Yuan R, Suzuki M, et al. Small-airway obstruction and emphysema in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. N Engl J Med 2011; 365: 1567–1575.
7
Koo HK, Vasilescu DM, Booth S, et al. Small airways disease in mild and moderate chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: a cross-sectional study. Lancet Respir Med 2018; 6: 591–602.
8
Galbán CJ, Han MK, Boes JL, et al. Computed tomography-based biomarker provides unique signature for
diagnosis of COPD phenotypes and disease progression. Nat Med 2012; 18: 1711–1715.
9
Capron T, Bourdin A, Perez T, et al. COPD beyond proximal bronchial obstruction: phenotyping and related
tools at the bedside. Eur Respir Rev 2019; 28: 190010.
10
Johns DP, Walters JA, Walters EH. Diagnosis and early detection of COPD using spirometry. J Thorac Dis 2014;
6: 1557–1569.
11
Rennard SI, Vestbo J. COPD: the dangerous underestimate of 15%. Lancet 2006; 367: 1216–1219.
12
Wain LV, Shrine N, Miller S, et al. Novel insights into the genetics of smoking behaviour, lung function, and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (UK BiLEVE): a genetic association study in UK Biobank. Lancet Respir
Med 2015; 3: 769–781.
13
Wood AM, Simmonds MJ, Bayley DL, et al. The TNFalpha gene relates to clinical phenotype in
alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency. Respir Res 2008; 9: 52.
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0213-2020
10
LUNG REGENERATION AND REPAIR | P.J. BARNES ET AL.

14
Anderson GP. Advances in understanding COPD. F1000Res 2016; 5: 2392.
15
Wang H, Ying H, Wang S, et al. Imbalance of peripheral blood Th17 and Treg responses in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Clin Respir J 2015; 9: 330–341.
16
Donnelly LE, Barnes PJ. Defective phagocytosis in airways disease. Chest 2012; 141: 1055–1062.
17
Raghu G, Rochwerg B, Zhang Y, et al. An official ATS/ERS/JRS/ALAT clinical practice guideline: treatment of
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. An update of the 2011 clinical practice guideline. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2015;
192: e3–e19.
18
Lederer DJ, Martinez FJ. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. N Engl J Med 2018; 378: 1811–1823.
19
Noth I, Zhang Y, Ma SF, et al. Genetic variants associated with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis susceptibility and
mortality: a genome-wide association study. Lancet Respir Med 2013; 1: 309–317.
20
Misharin AV, Morales-Nebreda L, Reyfman PA, et al. Monocyte-derived alveolar macrophages drive lung fibrosis
and persist in the lung over the life span. J Exp Med 2017; 214: 2387–2404.
21
King TE Jr, Pardo A, Selman M. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Lancet 2011; 378: 1949–1961.
22
Fernandez IE, Eickelberg O. New cellular and molecular mechanisms of lung injury and fibrosis in idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis. Lancet 2012; 380: 680–688.
23
Baumgartner KB, Samet JM, Stidley CA, et al. Cigarette smoking: a risk factor for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997; 155: 242–248.
24
Kärkkäinen M, Kettunen HP, Nurmi H, et al. Effect of smoking and comorbidities on survival in idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis. Respir Res 2017; 18: 160.
25
Seibold MA, Wise AL, Speer MC, et al. A common MUC5B promoter polymorphism and pulmonary fibrosis.
N Engl J Med 2011; 364: 1503–1512.
26
Dressen A, Abbas AR, Cabanski C, et al. Analysis of protein-altering variants in telomerase genes and their
association with MUC5B common variant status in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: a candidate gene
sequencing study. Lancet Respir Med 2018; 6: 603–614.
27
Papaioannou AI, Kostikas K, Manali ED, et al. Combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema: the many aspects
of a cohabitation contract. Respir Med 2016; 117: 14–26.
28
Grubstein A, Bendayan D, Schactman I, et al. Concomitant upper-lobe bullous emphysema, lower-lobe
interstitial fibrosis and pulmonary hypertension in heavy smokers: report of eight cases and review of the
literature. Respir Med 2005; 99: 948–954.
29
Cottin V. The impact of emphysema in pulmonary fibrosis. Eur Respir Rev 2013; 22: 153–157.
30
Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD). Global strategy for the diagnosis, management,
and prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (2018 report). Available from: https://goldcopd.org
31
Aletaha D, Smolen JS. Diagnosis and management of rheumatoid arthritis: a review. JAMA 2018; 320:
1360–1372.
32
Kolb M, Bonella F, Wollin L. Therapeutic targets in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Respir Med 2017; 131: 49–57.
33
Maher TM, Molina-Molina M, Russell AM, et al. Unmet needs in the treatment of idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis – insights from patient chart review in five European countries. BMC Pulm Med 2017; 17: 124.
34
Noble PW, Albera C, Bradford WZ, et al. Pirfenidone for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: analysis of pooled data
from three multinational phase 3 trials. Eur Respir J 2016; 47: 243–253.
35
Lancaster L, Crestani B, Hernandez P, et al. Safety and survival data in patients with idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis treated with nintedanib: pooled data from six clinical trials. BMJ Open Respir Res 2019; 6: e000397.
36
Roche GmbH. Esbriet® Summary of product characteristics. www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/product-information/
esbriet-epar-product-information_en.pdf Date last updated: 2019; date last accessed: 11 November 2019.
37
Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH. Ofev® Summary of product characteristics. www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/
product-information/ofev-epar-product-information_en.pdf. Date last updated: 2019; date last accessed: 11
November 2019.
38
Selman M, Martinez FJ, Pardo A. Why does an aging smoker’s lung develop idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and
not chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2018; 199: 279–285.
39
Anderson GP. Endotyping asthma: new insights into key pathogenic mechanisms in a complex, heterogeneous
disease. Lancet 2008; 372: 1107–1119.
40
Barnes PJ. Inflammatory endotypes in COPD. Allergy 2019; 74: 1249–1256.
41
Vukmirovic M, Kaminski N. Impact of transcriptomics on our understanding of pulmonary fibrosis. Front Med
(Lausanne) 2018; 5: 87.
42
Celli BR, MacNee W. Standards for the diagnosis and treatment of patients with COPD: a summary of the ATS/
ERS position paper. Eur Respir J 2004; 23: 932–946.
43
Martinez FJ, Lederer DJ. Focus on idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: advancing approaches to diagnosis, prognosis,
and treatment. Chest 2018; 154: 978–979.
44
Hess MW, Make B. Back to the future: past, present, and future is COPD360. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis 2016; 3:
473–478.
45
Spagnolo P, Bonella F, Vasakova M, et al. Current and future therapies for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Pulm
Ther 2015; 1: 1–18.
46
Ng-Blichfeldt JP, Gosens R, Dean C, et al. Regenerative pharmacology for COPD: breathing new life into old
lungs. Thorax 2019; 74: 890–897.
47
Hind M, Maden M. Retinoic acid induces alveolar regeneration in the adult mouse lung. Eur Respir J 2004; 23:
20–27.
48
Maden M. Retinoids have differing efficacies on alveolar regeneration in a dexamethasone-treated mouse. Am J
Respir Cell Mol Biol 2006; 35: 260–267.
49
Zhang LM, Zhang J, Zhang Y, et al. Interleukin-18 promotes fibroblast senescence in pulmonary fibrosis through
down-regulating Klotho expression. Biomed Pharmacother 2019; 113: 108756.
50
Moon S, Lee BH. Chemically induced cellular proteolysis: an emerging therapeutic strategy for undruggable
targets. Mol Cells 2018; 41: 933–942.
51
Zengerle M, Chan KH, Ciulli A. Selective small molecule induced degradation of the BET bromodomain protein
BRD4. ACS Chem Biol 2015; 10: 1770–1777.
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0213-2020
11
LUNG REGENERATION AND REPAIR | P.J. BARNES ET AL.

52
Moses C, Kaur P. Applications of CRISPR systems in respiratory health: entering a new “red pen” era in genome
editing. Respirology 2019; 24: 628–637.
53
Lee SH, Kim S, Hur JK. CRISPR and target-specific DNA endonucleases for efficient DNA knock-in in
eukaryotic genomes. Mol Cells 2018; 41: 943–952.
54
Liao W, Dong J, Peh HY, et al. Oligonucleotide therapy for obstructive and restrictive respiratory diseases.
Molecules 2017; 22: E139.
55
Ohno S, Kuroda M. Exosome-mediated targeted delivery of miRNAs. Methods Mol Biol 2016; 1448: 261–270.
56
Naseri Z, Oskuee RK, Jaafari MR, et al. Exosome-mediated delivery of functionally active miRNA-142-3p
inhibitor reduces tumorigenicity of breast cancer in vitro and in vivo. Int J Nanomedicine 2018; 13: 7727–7747.
57
Burkes RM, Drummond MB. Initiating drug therapy in early stage chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: does it
impact the course and outcome? Curr Opin Pulm Med 2019; 25: 132–137.
58
Lipworth BJ, Jabbal S. What can we learn about COPD from impulse oscillometry? Respir Med 2018; 139:
106–109.
59
Fain SB, Korosec FR, Holmes JH, et al. Functional lung imaging using hyperpolarized gas MRI. J Magn Reson
Imaging 2007; 25: 910–923.
60
Lowe KE, Regan EA, Anzueto A, et al. COPDGene® 2019: redefining the diagnosis of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis 2019; 6: 384–399.
61
Hoff BA, Pompe E, Galbán S, et al. CT-based local distribution metric improves characterization of COPD. Sci
Rep 2017; 7: 2999.
62
Vasilescu DM, Martinez FJ, Marchetti N, et al. Non-invasive imaging biomarker identifies small airway damage
in severe COPD. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2019; 200: 575–581.
63
Chen DL, Cheriyan J, Chilvers ER, et al. Quantification of lung PET images: challenges and opportunities. J Nucl
Med 2017; 58: 201–207.
64
Chan HF, Stewart NJ, Parra-Robles J, et al. Whole lung morphometry with 3D multiple b-value hyperpolarized
gas MRI and compressed sensing. Magn Reson Med 2017; 77: 1916–1925.
65
Weatherley ND, Stewart NJ, Chan HF, et al. Hyperpolarised xenon magnetic resonance spectroscopy for the
longitudinal assessment of changes in gas diffusion in IPF. Thorax 2018; 74: 500–502.
66
Roos JE, McAdams HP, Kaushik SS, et al. Hyperpolarized gas MR imaging: technique and applications. Magn
Reson Imaging Clin N Am 2015; 23: 217–229.
67
Bajc M, Chen Y, Wang J, et al. Identifying the heterogeneity of COPD by V/P SPECT: a new tool for improving
the diagnosis of parenchymal defects and grading the severity of small airways disease. Int J Chron Obstruct
Pulmon Dis 2017; 12: 1579–1587.
68
Petersson J, Sánchez-Crespo A, Larsson SA, et al. Physiological imaging of the lung: single-photon-emission
computed tomography (SPECT). J Appl Physiol (1985) 2007; 102: 468–476.
69
Bajc M, Markstad H, Jarenback L, et al. Grading obstructive lung disease using tomographic pulmonary
scintigraphy in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and long-term smokers. Ann Nucl
Med 2015; 29: 91–99.
70
Pisi R, Aiello M, Zanini A, et al. Small airway dysfunction and flow and volume bronchodilator responsiveness in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2015; 10: 1191–1197.
71
Oostveen E, MacLeod D, Lorino H, et al. ERS Task Force on Respiratory Impedance Measurements. The forced
oscillation technique in clinical practice: methodology, recommendations and future developments. Eur Respir J
2003; 22: 1026–1041.
72
Coxson HO, Quiney B, Sin DD, et al. Airway wall thickness assessed using computed tomography and optical
coherence tomography. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2008; 177: 1201–1206.
73
Chen Y, Ding M, Guan WJ, et al. Validation of human small airway measurements using endobronchial optical
coherence tomography. Respir Med 2015; 109: 1446–1453.
74
Robinson PD, Latzin P, Verbanck S, et al. Consensus statement for inert gas washout measurement using
multiple- and single- breath tests. Eur Respir J 2013; 41: 507–522.
75
Zimmermann SC, Tonga KO, Thamrin C. Dismantling airway disease with the use of new pulmonary function
indices. Eur Respir Rev 2019; 28: 180122.
76
Bell AS, Lawrence PJ, Singh D, et al. Feasibility and challenges of using multiple breath washout in COPD. Int J
Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2018; 13: 2113–2119.
77
Bos LD, Sterk PJ, Fowler SJ. Breathomics in the setting of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2016; 138: 970–976.
78
Bafadhel M, McKenna S, Terry S, et al. Acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
identification of biologic clusters and their biomarkers. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011; 184: 662–671.
79
Garudadri S, Woodruff PG. Targeting chronic obstructive pulmonary disease phenotypes, endotypes, and
biomarkers. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2018; 15: S234–S238.
80
Fuschillo S, Molino A, Stellato C, et al. Blood eosinophils as biomarkers of therapeutic response to chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: still work in progress. Eur J Intern Med 2019; 68: 1–5.
81
Drakopanagiotakis F, Wujak L, Wygrecka M, et al. Biomarkers in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Matrix Biol
2018; 68–69: 404–421.
82
Cazzola M, Puxeddu E, Ora J, et al. Evolving concepts in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease blood-based
biomarkers. Mol Diagn Ther 2019; 23: 603–614.
83
Magnini D, Montemurro G, Iovene B, et al. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: molecular endotypes of fibrosis
stratifying existing and emerging therapies. Respiration 2017; 93: 379–395.
84
Savas S, Liu G. Studying genetic variations in cancer prognosis (and risk): a primer for clinicians. Oncologist
2009; 14: 657–666.
85
Faner R, Tal-Singer R, Riley JH, et al. Lessons from ECLIPSE: a review of COPD biomarkers. Thorax 2014; 69:
666–672.
86
Fawzy A, Putcha N, Paulin LM, et al. Association of thrombocytosis with COPD morbidity: the SPIROMICS and
COPDGene cohorts. Respir Res 2018; 19: 20.
87
Wells JM, Parker MM, Oster RA, et al. Elevated circulating MMP-9 is linked to increased COPD exacerbation
risk in SPIROMICS and COPDGene. JCI Insight 2018; 3: e123614.
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0213-2020
12
LUNG REGENERATION AND REPAIR | P.J. BARNES ET AL.

88
Agusti A, Edwards LD, Rennard SI, et al. Persistent systemic inflammation is associated with poor clinical
outcomes in COPD: a novel phenotype. PLoS One 2012; 7: e37483.
89
Sauleda J, Núñez B, Sala E, et al. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: epidemiology, natural history, phenotypes. Med
Sci 2018; 6: 110.
90
Jenkins RG, Simpson JK, Saini G, et al. Longitudinal change in collagen degradation biomarkers in idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis: an analysis from the prospective, multicentre PROFILE study. Lancet Respir Med 2015; 3:
462–472.
91
Maher TM, Oballa E, Simpson JK, et al. An epithelial biomarker signature for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: an
analysis from the multicentre PROFILE cohort study. Lancet Respir Med 2017; 5: 946–955.
92
Hancock LA, Hennessy CE, Solomon GM, et al. Muc5b overexpression causes mucociliary dysfunction and
enhances lung fibrosis in mice. Nat Commun 2018; 9: 5363.
93
Obeidat M, Nie Y, Fishbane N, et al. Integrative genomics of emphysema-associated genes reveals potential
disease biomarkers. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2017; 57: 411–418.
94
Yang M, Kohler M, Heyder T, et al. Proteomic profiling of lung immune cells reveals dysregulation of
phagocytotic pathways in female-dominated molecular COPD phenotype. Respir Res 2018; 19: 39.
95
Catapano AL, Graham I, De Backer G, et al. 2016 ESC/EAS guidelines for the management of dyslipidaemias.
Eur Heart J 2016; 37: 2999–3058.
96
Cantor JO, Turino GM. COPD pathogenesis: finding the common in the complex. Chest 2019; 155: 266–271.
97
Huang P, Yan R, Zhang X, et al. Activating Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway for disease therapy: challenges and
opportunities. Pharmacol Ther 2019; 196: 79–90.
98
Kneidinger N, Yildirim AO, Callegari J, et al. Activation of the WNT/β-catenin pathway attenuates experimental
emphysema. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011; 183: 723–733.
99
Pan J, Li D, Xu Y, et al. Inhibition of Bcl-2/xl with ABT-263 selectively kills senescent type II pneumocytes and
reverses persistent pulmonary fibrosis induced by ionizing radiation in mice. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2017;
99: 353–361.
100
Lagares D, Santos A, Grasberger PE, et al. Targeted apoptosis of myofibroblasts with the BH3 mimetic ABT-263
reverses established fibrosis. Sci Transl Med 2017; 9: eaal3765.
101
Tsantikos E, Lau M, Castelino CM, et al. Granulocyte-CSF links destructive inflammation and comorbidities in
obstructive lung disease. J Clin Invest 2018; 128: 2406–2418.
102
Mercado N, Ito K, Barnes PJ. Accelerated ageing of the lung in COPD: new concepts. Thorax 2015; 70: 482–489.
103
Birch J, Barnes PJ, Passos JF. Mitochondria, telomeres and cell senescence: implications for lung ageing and
disease. Pharmacol Ther 2018; 183: 34–49.
104
Waters DW, Blokland KEC, Pathinayake PS, et al. Fibroblast senescence in the pathology of idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2018; 315: L162–L172.
105
Barnes PJ, Baker J, Donnelly LE. Cellular senescence as a mechanism and target in chronic lung diseases. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2019; 200: 556–564.
106
Baker JR, Vuppusetty C, Colley T, et al. Oxidative stress dependent microRNA-34a activation via PI3Kalpha
reduces the expression of sirtuin-1 and sirtuin-6 in epithelial cells. Sci Rep 2016; 6: 35871.
107
Nakamaru Y, Vuppusetty C, Wada H, et al. A protein deacetylase SIRT1 is a negative regulator of
metalloproteinase-9. FASEB J 2009; 23: 2810–2819.
108
Baker JR, Vuppusetty C, Colley T, et al. MicroRNA-570 is a novel regulator of cellular senescence and
inflammaging. FASEB J 2019; 33: 1605–1616.
109
Houssaini A, Breau M, Kebe K, et al. mTOR pathway activation drives lung cell senescence and emphysema.
JCI Insight 2018; 3: e93203.
110
Kadota T, Fujita Y, Yoshioka Y, et al. Emerging role of extracellular vesicles as a senescence-associated secretory
phenotype: insights into the pathophysiology of lung diseases. Mol Aspects Med 2018; 60: 92–103.
111
Dagouassat M, Gagliolo JM, Chrusciel S, et al. The cyclooxygenase-2-prostaglandin E2 pathway maintains
senescence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease fibroblasts. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2013; 187: 703–714.
112
Yanai H, Shteinberg A, Porat Z, et al. Cellular senescence-like features of lung fibroblasts derived from idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis patients. Aging (Albany NY) 2015; 7: 664–672.
113
Minagawa S, Araya J, Numata T, et al. Accelerated epithelial cell senescence in IPF and the inhibitory role of
SIRT6 in TGF-β-induced senescence of human bronchial epithelial cells. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol
2011; 300: L391–L401.
114
Schafer MJ, White TA, Iijima K, et al. Cellular senescence mediates fibrotic pulmonary disease. Nat Commun
2017; 8: 14532.
115
Justice JN, Nambiar AM, Tchkonia T, et al. Senolytics in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: results from a
first-in-human, open-label, pilot study. EBioMed 2019; 40: 554–563.
116
Baarsma HA, Königshoff M. “WNT-er is coming”: WNT signalling in chronic lung diseases. Thorax 2017; 72:
746–759.
117
Williams MC. Alveolar type I cells: molecular phenotype and development. Annu Rev Physiol 2003; 65: 669–695.
118
Baarsma HA, Skronska-Wasek W, Mutze K, et al. Noncanonical WNT-5A signaling impairs endogenous lung
repair in COPD. J Exp Med 2017; 214: 143–163.
119
Skronska-Wasek W, Mutze K, Baarsma HA, et al. Reduced frizzled receptor 4 expression prevents WNT/
β-catenin-driven alveolar lung repair in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2017;
196: 172–185.
120
Königshoff M, Balsara N, Pfaff EM, et al. Functional Wnt signaling is increased in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
PLoS One 2008; 3: e2142.
121
Königshoff M, Kramer M, Balsara N, et al. WNT1-inducible signaling protein-1 mediates pulmonary fibrosis in
mice and is upregulated in humans with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. J Clin Invest 2009; 119: 772–787.
122
Shi J, Li F, Luo M, et al. Distinct roles of WNT/beta-catenin signaling in the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Mediators Inflamm 2017; 2017: 3520581.
123
Rock JR, Randell SH, Hogan BL. Airway basal stem cells: a perspective on their roles in epithelial homeostasis
and remodeling. Dis Model Mech 2010; 3: 545–556.
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0213-2020
13
LUNG REGENERATION AND REPAIR | P.J. BARNES ET AL.

124
Hong KU, Reynolds SD, Watkins S, et al. Basal cells are a multipotent progenitor capable of renewing the
bronchial epithelium. Am J Pathol 2004; 164: 577–588.
125
Ghosh M, Miller YE, Nakachi I, et al. Exhaustion of airway basal progenitor cells in early and established chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2018; 197: 885–896.
126
Weeden CE, Chen Y, Ma SB, et al. Lung basal stem cells rapidly repair DNA damage using the error-prone
nonhomologous end-joining pathway. PLoS Biol 2017; 15: e2000731.
127
Prasse A, Binder H, Schupp JC, et al. BAL cell gene expression is indicative of outcome and airway basal cell
involvement in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2019; 199: 622–630.
128
Shaykhiev R. Basal-like cells in the BAL fluid: an Echo of regenerative crisis in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
lungs. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2019; 199: 555–557.
129
Xia H, Bodempudi V, Benyumov A, et al. Identification of a cell-of-origin for fibroblasts comprising the fibrotic
reticulum in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Pathol 2014; 184: 1369–1383.
130
Maden M, Hind M. Retinoic acid, a regeneration-inducing molecule. Dev Dyn 2003; 226: 237–244.
131
Piersma AH, Hessel EV, Staal YC. Retinoic acid in developmental toxicology: teratogen, morphogen and
biomarker. Reprod Toxicol 2017; 72: 53–61.
132
Ng-Blichfeldt JP, Alcada J, Montero MA, et al. Deficient retinoid-driven angiogenesis may contribute to failure of
adult human lung regeneration in emphysema. Thorax 2017; 72: 510–521.
133
Stolk J, Stockley RA, Stoel BC, et al. Randomised controlled trial for emphysema with a selective agonist of the
γ-type retinoic acid receptor. Eur Respir J 2012; 40: 306–312.
134
Mao JT, Goldin JG, Dermand J, et al. A pilot study of all-trans-retinoic acid for the treatment of human
emphysema. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 165: 718–723.
135
Roth MD, Connett JE, D’Armiento JM, et al. Feasibility of retinoids for the treatment of emphysema study. Chest
2006; 130: 1334–1345.
136
Ohmichi H, Koshimizu U, Matsumoto K, et al. Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) acts as a mesenchyme-derived
morphogenic factor during fetal lung development. Development 1998; 125: 1315–1324.
137
Kato T, Oka K, Nakamura T, et al. Bronchioalveolar morphogenesis of human bronchial epithelial cells
depending upon hepatocyte growth factor. J Cell Mol Med 2015; 19: 2818–2826.
138
Seedorf G, Metoxen AJ, Rock R, et al. Hepatocyte growth factor as a downstream mediator of vascular
endothelial growth factor-dependent preservation of growth in the developing lung. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol
Physiol 2016; 310: L1098–L1110.
139
Calvi C, Podowski M, Lopez-Mercado A, et al. Hepatocyte growth factor, a determinant of airspace homeostasis
in the murine lung. PLoS Genet 2013; 9: e1003228.
140
Cahill EF, Kennelly H, Carty F, et al. Hepatocyte growth factor is required for mesenchymal stromal cell
protection against bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Stem Cells Transl Med 2016; 5: 1307–1318.
141
Kanazawa H, Tochino Y, Asai K, et al. Simultaneous assessment of hepatocyte growth factor and vascular
endothelial growth factor in epithelial lining fluid from patients with COPD. Chest 2014; 146: 1159–1165.
142
Chakraborty S, Chopra P, Hak A, et al. Hepatocyte growth factor is an attractive target for the treatment of
pulmonary fibrosis. Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2013; 22: 499–515.
143
Espindola MS, Habiel DM, Narayanan R, et al. Targeting of TAM receptors ameliorates fibrotic mechanisms in
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2018; 197: 1443–1456.
144
Hedström U, Hallgren O, Öberg L, et al. Bronchial extracellular matrix from COPD patients induces altered gene
expression in repopulated primary human bronchial epithelial cells. Sci Rep 2018; 8: 3502.
145
Balestrini JL, Chaudhry S, Sarrazy V, et al. The mechanical memory of lung myofibroblasts. Integr Biol (Camb)
2012; 4: 410–421.
146
Barnes PJ, Bonini S, Seeger W, et al. Barriers to new drug development in respiratory disease. Eur Respir J 2015;
45: 1197–1207.
147
Morgan P, Brown DG, Lennard S, et al. Impact of a five-dimensional framework on R&D productivity at
AstraZeneca. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2018; 17: 167–181.
148
Medical Research Council. Smarter trials speed up patients’ access to effective treatments. https://mrc.ukri.org/
news/browse/smarter-trials-speed-up-patients-access-to-effective-treatments Date last updated: 2018; date last
accessed: 21 October 2019.
149
Baumgartner KB, Samet JM, Coultas DB, et al. Occupational and environmental risk factors for idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis: a multicenter case-control study. Collaborating Centers. Am J Epidemiol 2000; 152: 307–315.
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0213-2020
14
LUNG REGENERATION AND REPAIR | P.J. BARNES ET AL.

===== Batiuk2020_NatComm_Astrocytes-forebrain-scTx =====
ARTICLE
Identiﬁcation of region-speciﬁc astrocyte subtypes
at single cell resolution
Mykhailo Y. Batiuk
1,2,12, Araks Martirosyan1,2,12, Jérôme Wahis
1,2, Filip de Vin1,2, Catherine Marneffe1,2,
Carola Kusserow1,2, Jordan Koeppen1,2, João Filipe Viana3,4, João Filipe Oliveira
3,4,5, Thierry Voet6,7,
Chris P. Ponting
6,8,9, T. Grant Belgard8,11 & Matthew G. Holt
1,2,10✉
Astrocytes, a major cell type found throughout the central nervous system, have general roles
in the modulation of synapse formation and synaptic transmission, blood–brain barrier for-
mation, and regulation of blood ﬂow, as well as metabolic support of other brain resident
cells. Crucially, emerging evidence shows speciﬁc adaptations and astrocyte-encoded func-
tions in regions, such as the spinal cord and cerebellum. To investigate the true extent of
astrocyte molecular diversity across forebrain regions, we used single-cell RNA sequencing.
Our analysis identiﬁes ﬁve transcriptomically distinct astrocyte subtypes in adult mouse
cortex and hippocampus. Validation of our data in situ reveals distinct spatial positioning of
deﬁned subtypes, reﬂecting the distribution of morphologically and physiologically distinct
astrocyte populations. Our ﬁndings are evidence for specialized astrocyte subtypes between
and within brain regions. The data are available through an online database (https://holt-sc.
glialab.org/), providing a resource on which to base explorations of local astrocyte diversity
and function in the brain.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8
OPEN
1 Laboratory of Glia Biology, VIB-KU Leuven Center for Brain and Disease Research, Leuven, Belgium. 2 Laboratory of Glia Biology, KU Leuven Department of
Neuroscience, Leuven, Belgium. 3 Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), University of Minho, Braga, Portugal. 4 ICVS/3Bs - PT Government
Associate Laboratory, Braga, Portugal. 5 IPCA-EST-2Ai, Polytechnic Institute of Cávado and Ave, Applied Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, IPCA Campus,
Barcelos, Portugal. 6 Sanger Institute–EBI Single-Cell Genomics Centre, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK. 7 KU Leuven Department of Human
Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. 8 MRC Functional Genomics Unit, Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 9 MRC
Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. 10 Leuven Brain Institute, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium. 11Present address: The Bioinformatics CRO, Niceville, Florida 32578, USA. 12These authors contributed equally: Mykhailo Y. Batiuk, Araks
Martirosyan. ✉email: Matthew.Holt@kuleuven.vib.be
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2020) 11:1220 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;

A
strocytes are ubiquitous in the central nervous system
(CNS). They possess thousands of individual processes,
which extend out into the neuropil, interacting with
neurons, other glia, and blood vessels. Paralleling the wide
diversity of their interactions, astrocytes have been reported to
play
key roles
in
supporting
CNS
structure,
metabolism,
blood–brain barrier formation, and control of vascular blood
ﬂow, axon guidance, synapse formation, and modulation of
synaptic transmission1.
This degree of functional diversity begs the question of whether
astrocytes are a homogeneous group of cells or exist in distinct
subtypes with specialized functions. Extensive morphological
heterogeneity of astrocyte populations was described over 100
years ago in seminal work by Ramón y Cajal2. Since then, our
understanding of the molecular and cellular heterogeneity of
astrocytes has remained largely unaltered: astrocyte classiﬁcation
has largely been restricted to two morphological groupings,
ﬁbrous and protoplasmic astrocytes, found in the white and gray
matter of the brain, respectively. The question of whether spe-
cialized astrocyte subtypes exist remains poorly resolved, largely
due to the lack of experimental tools allowing detailed astrocyte
characterization3. This is in contrast to studies on neurons, for
which numerous experimental tools exist and evidence for sub-
stantial diversity within brain regions has accumulated4,5.
However, the issue of astrocyte diversity is now being
addressed and a number of studies are reporting heterogeneity of
form and function, both between and within brain regions (see
reviews by Khakh and Sofroniew6, Ben Haim and Rowitch7,
Khakh and Deneen3 and references therein). The expression of
ﬂuorescent reporter tags in astrocytes has allowed the isolation of
cells from speciﬁc brain regions for RNA proﬁling8,9 and pro-
teomic studies10. Fusion of reporter tags to ribosomal subunits
(TRAP technology) has permitted the isolation of actively
translated mRNAs from astrocytes10–12. Together, these studies
revealed that gene expression varies between brain regions, and
that there is often a subtle gradient of gene expression within
individual brain areas. In addition, astrocytes in different brain
regions also have distinct morphological and functional features,
such as degree of synapse association9,10, intrinsic membrane
properties and Ca2+ signaling10, and ability to promote neuronal
maturation12. Reﬁned labeling strategies using promoter frag-
ments13, or intersectional approaches14,15 to isolate subpopula-
tions of cells have revealed intra-regional heterogeneity in the
cortex13–15, as well as the brainstem, thalamus, olfactory bulb,
cerebellum and spinal cord14, which again correlates to mor-
phology15, cell intrinsic physiology15 and function13,14.
Astrocytes are also involved in disease, as evidenced by exten-
sive cell culture and mouse model studies6, with disruption of
astrocyte functions, such as synapse formation, leading to neu-
ronal network dysfunction13,14. Astrocyte heterogeneity may
underpin the differential transcriptomic responses seen to bac-
terial infection (lipopolysac charide, LPS) treatment and stroke
(middle cerebral artery occlusion, MCAO)16 in mouse astrocytes,
as well as in response to demyelination in the experimental allergic
encephalomyelitis (EAE) model17, suggesting that successful
treatment may have to take account of cell type and brain region,
insult, and insult severity. One possible reason for the regional
difference in tumor susceptibility in the CNS is the location-
dependent ability of astrocytes to proliferate, due to differential
expression of tumor suppressor genes18. Given that analysis of
gene co-variation patterns from human tissue samples indicates
regional speciﬁc astrocyte subtypes19, it is possible that hetero-
geneity plays a role in human conditions, such as Norrie disease13.
Single-cell analysis approaches are revolutionizing our con-
cepts of cell identity and heterogeneity. Widely used in the CNS,
they have revealed a high diversity of neuronal subtypes across
brain regions4,5. In comparison, astrocyte diversity is reported to
be low. Whether this reﬂects the true nature of astrocytes, or is
due to technical issues such as low RNA content20, remains an
open question. Consequently, to address the diversity of astrocyte
types in the adult mouse brain, we systematically optimized the
Smart-seq2 protocol21, including changes to cell isolation steps
and library preparation. We used this pipeline to obtain full-
length coverage of cDNAs prepared from thousands of individual
astrocytes from adult mouse cortex and hippocampus, areas
selected for their well-studied anatomy, physiology, and broad
disease relevance. Cluster-based analysis revealed ﬁve molecularly
distinct astrocyte subtypes, which were conﬁrmed in situ in the
mouse brain. By mapping the spatial position of each subtype, we
found a more reﬁned organization of CNS tissue than previously
anticipated, with unique molecular astrocyte subtypes occupying
distinct positions, suggestive of speciﬁc intra-regional functions.
Furthermore, this spatial patterning correlated to the positions of
astrocytes with unique morphologies and Ca2+ signaling. Our
data provide a valuable resource for future hypothesis-driven
experiments, aimed at dissecting out the contributions of astro-
cyte subtypes to CNS function—and are freely available in a
standalone database accessible at https://holt-sc.glialab.org/. Such
insights might be important to our future understanding of
regional susceptibility to diseases, such as Alzheimer’s and Par-
kinson’s, in which astrocytes are increasingly implicated22.
Results
Single-cell mRNA sequencing reveals astrocyte heterogeneity.
To obtain an unbiased and comprehensive comparison of astro-
cytes in mouse cortex and hippocampus, we performed single-cell
RNA sequencing. Although dissociating adult mammalian brain
tissue into healthy and representative cell suspensions is chal-
lenging, astrocytes show transcriptional changes during devel-
opment (such as in glutamatergic signaling)23, which can obscure
gene expression differences underlying the functional specializa-
tion of cell types5. To avoid these issues, we recovered the cortex
and hippocampus from C57BL/6J mice aged to postnatal (P) day
56, which should avoid introducing bias from transcriptional
programs associated with development5, while maintaining
compatibility with external gene expression databases, such as the
Allen Brain Atlas24. A single-cell suspension for each brain region
was obtained using a papain-based protocol, which was pre-
viously shown to give good tissue dissociation, with high levels of
cell viability25. As adult brain is heavily myelinated, a Percoll
gradient was used to reduce contamination, while ensuring efﬁ-
cient cell recovery (Supplementary Fig. 1 and Supplementary
Note 1). Astrocytes were then labeled with the ACSA-2 antibody
(conjugated to the ﬂuorophore phycoerythrin (PE)). This anti-
body speciﬁcally recognizes the plasma membrane marker
ATP1B2, which is detected at both the mRNA20 and protein25
levels in astrocytes through the adult mouse cortex and
hippocampus (Supplementary Fig. 2). As mature oligoden-
drocytes express low levels of ATP1B2, staining with an anti-
O1 antibody conjugated to eFluor660 was also performed
(Supplementary Fig. 3). Viable astrocytes (as determined with 7-
amino-actinomycin D (7-AAD) staining) were isolated by
ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS), with one cell deposited
per single well of a PCR plate (Supplementary Fig. 4). Preparation
of sequencing libraries was done using the Smart-seq2 protocol21,
in which the concentration of template switching oligonucleotide
(TSO), number of PCR preampliﬁcation cycles, and the DNA
clean-up step were optimized for use with cells with low RNA
content21 (Fig. 1a, Methods, Supplementary Figs. 5 and 6, and
Supplementary Note 1). In all, 2976 individual libraries were
sequenced to optimal coverage (~1 million reads per cell)
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2020) 11:1220 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

(Fig. 1b). Low-quality libraries were removed based on FastQC
and additional quality metrics (see Methods and Supplementary
Fig. 7), leaving 2015 high-quality libraries. On average, each of
these contained 83% exonic reads, mapping to 2148 genes, with
only 11% intronic and 6% intergenic reads (Fig. 1b).
Clustering analysis was performed using Seurat26. Analysis of
these libraries revealed a residual fraction of contaminating
higher-order CNS cell types (Fig. 1c, d and Supplementary
Table 1). Cell-type identiﬁcation was based on the expression of
known marker genes (Fig. 1c). Following removal of contaminat-
ing cell types, 1811 astrocytes remained. These cells were then
reclustered, based on the 886 highly variable genes expressed
across astrocytes (see Methods for more details). This led to the
identiﬁcation of ﬁve distinct Astrocyte SubTypes (AST1–5), each
distinguished by a gene expression ﬁngerprint (Fig. 2a, b).
T-distributed
stochastic
neighbor
embedding
(tSNE)
plots
showed three major “clouds” of cells. AST4 and AST5 formed
distinct clusters, suggesting distinct molecular ﬁngerprints. In
contrast, ASTs 1–3 were grouped together, suggesting much more
subtle differences in gene expression between these subtypes
(Fig. 2a and Supplementary Fig. 8). Astrocyte subtypes con-
stituted different proportions of the total cell population analyzed
using our optimized Smart-seq2 protocol, ranging from 1.4%
(AST5) to 36.5% (AST1) (Supplementary Table 2).
As expected, there was clear separation of subtypes between the
cortex and hippocampus11,12 (Fig. 2c and Supplementary Table 2),
with AST1 and AST4 being predominantly hippocampal, AST2
being mainly cortical, and AST3 and AST5 being distributed
uniformly between brain regions. As control experiments effectively
excluded clustering by batch effects during sample processing
Atp1b2
Slc1a3
Slc1a2
Gjb6
Glul
Aqp4
Fgfr3
Aldh1l1
S100b
Gfap
Pdgfrb
Cspg4
Pid1
Des
Plce1
Col1a2
Itga8
Flt1
Cd34
Pecam1
Icam2
Tie1
Cdh5
Snap25
Celf4
Syt1
Syp
L1cam
Cx3cr1
Aif1
Itgam
Cd68
Mbp
Mog
Mag
Sox10
C57BL/6J at P56
CX
a
CDS
48.52%
Intergenic
Intronic
UTR
100
50
0
–50
–50
0
50
1
2
3
4
5
100
–100
tSNE-2
tSNE-1
34.77%
10.88%
5.83%
~1M
reads/library
HP
Astrocyte
ACSA-2-PE
labeling
FACS isolation
Preparation of
2976 libraries by Smart-seq2
–
+
1
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12
b
c
d
Endothelium
Mural cells
Neurons
Oligodendrocytes
Astrocytes
Microglia
Fig. 1 Single-cell sequencing strategy and cell-type identiﬁcation. a Whole brains were obtained from C57BL/6J mice at postnatal (P) day 56. Cortical
(CX) and hippocampal (HP) astrocytes were prepared separately, using enzymatic digestion followed by mechanical trituration. Two separate batches of
astrocytes for each region were prepared. Cortical cell suspensions were prepared from two littermate animals in parallel using separate tubes.
Hippocampal cell suspensions were also prepared in parallel using separate tubes; in this case, two different sets of four littermate animals were used.
Astrocytes were then speciﬁcally labeled with the ASCA-2-PE antibody and single cells were deposited in individual wells of a PCR plate using FACS.
Single-cell library preparation was performed using a modiﬁed Smart-seq2 protocol. In total, 2976 libraries were prepared and sequenced using a NextSeq
500 system (Illumina). b Each library was sequenced to optimal coverage (on average 1 M reads per library). In total, 2015 high-quality libraries were
retained for further analysis. In these libraries, a high fraction of reads mapped to exons (CDS, coding sequence; UTR, untranslated region). Conversely, a
low fraction of reads mapped to intronic and intergenic regions. c Visualization of the major higher-order cell types (2015 cells) identiﬁed by Seurat using
tSNE plots. Each dot represents a single cell. Cells with similar molecular proﬁles group together; cell types were assigned according to the expression of
speciﬁc marker genes (and are labeled in different colors). d Gene expression heatmap for higher-order cell types (columns) grouped according to the
Seurat classiﬁcation shown in Fig. 1c. Color-coding from Fig. 1c is retained. Gray, no expression; yellow, low expression; red, high expression, In-normalized
gene expression data is shown.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2020) 11:1220 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3

(Supplementary Data 1 and https://holt-sc.glialab.org/sc/), these
data conﬁrmed that our protocol could identify both inter- and
intra-regional heterogeneity of astrocytes in adult mouse brain.
Unique molecular signatures deﬁne astrocyte subtypes. Ana-
lysis of sequencing data showed a number of genes common
across astrocytes (expressed in >60% of cells). However, the
astrocyte subtypes we identiﬁed also showed enrichment of spe-
ciﬁc genes (Figs. 2d and 3a). To gain insight into the possible
roles played by differential gene expression, we analyzed tran-
script lists using gene enrichment and functional annotation
(DAVID)-based approaches27, and manual curation using the
UniProt database28.
Genes commonly expressed across astrocytes (Supplementary
Data 2) include transcription factors known to play a role in
neural patterning (Dbx2) and astrocyte speciﬁcation (Sox9).
Perhaps unsurprisingly, the majority of remaining common genes
were associated with energy production through glycolysis and
oxidative phosphorylation (Eno1, Sdha, Sdhb). Energy supply as a
common function was further indicated by genes associated with
lactate production (Ldha). Cholesterol synthesis and trafﬁcking
(Apoe), glutamate uptake (Slc1a3), and glutamate metabolism
(Glud1) have also been described as common astrocyte processes1
(Fig. 3b).
However, >70% of enriched genes were speciﬁc to a subtype
(Supplementary Table 3 and Supplementary Data 2–4). Further-
more, only one gene among the top ten expressed by each subtype
was shared (Supplementary Table 4). Among differentially
expressed genes, transcription factors (Id3, Etv5, Wfs1) were
prominent, consistent with diverse transcriptional networks
maintaining unique cell identities. Consistent with this, differ-
ential
expression
of
speciﬁc
genes
was
found
across
all
major astrocyte functions (chosen based on a number of recent
reviews)6,7,29–32. These functions include synaptogenesis (Chrdl1,
Lrtm2, and Sema4b), phagocytosis (synapse removal) (Mertk),
AST
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
0
Expression
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
Gfap
Unc13c
Agt
Frzb
Ascl1
Ogt
Fam107a
AST
–1
0
1
1
2
3
4
5
CX
HP
1
2
3
4
5
100
a
50
0
–50
–40
0
40
AST
Region
tSNE-2
100
50
0
–50
tSNE-2
tSNE-1
–40
0
40
tSNE-1
c
d
b
Fig. 2 Identiﬁcation of astrocyte subtypes in adult mouse cortex and hippocampus. Single-cell data were used to identify distinct astrocyte subtypes
(AST). a A total of 1811 astrocytes were identiﬁed from higher-order clustering. This data was extracted and reclustered using Seurat and ﬁve distinct
astrocyte subtypes were identiﬁed. Clusters are presented in tSNE plots, with each AST color-coded. b Hierarchically clustered average gene expression
heatmap for genes overexpressed across subtypes. Rows correspond to cells, columns to genes. Magenta, low gene expression; yellow, high expression.
Scaled ln-normalized data are shown. c Astrocytes derived from the cortex (CX) or hippocampus (HP) segregate based on gene expression. d Expression
of subtype-speciﬁc marker genes selected for in situ hybridization experiments. Markers are classed as absent/low “−” or highly expressed “+,” based on
ln-normalized expression data. See also Supplementary Data.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2020) 11:1220 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

synapse function/plasticity (Agt, Ndrg4, Ppp1ca, Dbi, Slc7a10, and
Glul), neurotransmission (Gria1 and Gabrg1), ion transport
(Kcnj16, Kcnj10, and Kcnk1), water transport (Aqp4), formation
and/or maintenance of the blood–brain barrier (Mfsd2a), and
immune function (Tril and Tlr3) (Fig. 3c).
Hence, our data further conﬁrm the molecular heterogeneity of
astrocytes. This heterogeneity encompasses well-recognized astro-
cyte functions and exists both between and within brain regions.
In situ mapping of astrocyte subtype location. Based on closer
examination of RNA-seq gene lists, a set of markers was identiﬁed
to speciﬁcally label astrocytes (Fig. 2d), based on overall levels of
gene expression (absent/low to high relative expression). These
genes encoded proteins involved in cytoskeletal function (Gfap),
membrane fusion (Unc13c), regulation of cerebral blood ﬂow and
synaptic transmission (Agt), Wnt signaling (Frzb), cell fate spe-
ciﬁcation (Ascl1), post-translational protein modiﬁcation (Ogt),
and actin binding (Fam107a), respectively. To speciﬁcally map
back astrocyte subtypes in brain tissue, we performed multiplexed
ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (ISH) experiments (RNAscope)
on coronal sections of adult mouse brain, using probes speciﬁc for
these markers (see Methods and Supplementary Table 5).
A unique subtype linked to neurogenesis: AST4. Examination
of genes enriched in AST4 revealed a disproportionate number of
them to be involved in mitosis and cell cycle control (Cdk4 and
Sirt2), transcriptional regulation (Ascl1 and Emx1), and neuro-
genesis and neuronal differentiation (Dab1) (Supplementary
Tables 6 and 7). Our initial tissue dissection also recovered the
dentate gyrus of the hippocampus. Based on the high expression
levels of Frzb, Ascl1, and Slc1a3 in our sequencing data, the fact
that Ascl1 is known to be expressed in neural stem cells and
amplifying progenitors, and the known staining patterns of these
genes in the Allen Brain Atlas (Supplementary Fig. 9), we
hypothesized that AST4 represents a population of hippocampal
neural stem or progenitor cells33,34. Coronal sections of adult
mouse brain were stained with probes against Frzb and Ascl1 as
subtype-speciﬁc markers and Slc1a3 as a general marker of stem
cells and astrocytes34 (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Figs. 10
and 11). The anatomical distribution of cells expressing all three
marker genes is shown in the low-magniﬁcation section, using
black dots to mark cells of interest. To allow a detailed description
of astrocyte localization and quantiﬁcation, images were manually
segmented, based on deﬁnitions from the Allen Brain Atlas
(Mouse Reference Atlas, Coronal). Higher magniﬁcation images
conﬁrming colocalization to individual cell nuclei are also shown,
with quantiﬁcation of individual ﬂuorescent puncta per cell used
as a proxy for mRNA expression levels (left hand bar plot Fig. 4a
and Methods). The distribution of AST4 throughout the brain
was quantiﬁed in two separate ways. First, distribution through
the brain was plotted, based on the number of AST4 astrocytes
detected in a given region (middle plot, Fig. 4a). Second, the
proportion of AST4 astrocytes relative to the total number of all
astrocytes in each brain region was determined (right hand plot,
Fig. 4a). As predicted, AST4 localizes predominantly to the
subgranular zone in the hippocampus and forms the majority of
Slc1a3-positive cells detected in this region. This result veriﬁes the
power of our sequencing-based approach to resolve individual
astrocyte subtypes, as well as our ISH-based mapping.
A possible intermediate progenitor: AST5. AST5 was the rarest
subtype we found by Smart-seq2 sequencing (Fig. 2a and Supple-
mentary Table 2). AST5 showed considerable overlap with AST4
AST3
AST4
AST5
345
217
37
126
36
460
AST2
a
AST1
Common
AST
Id3
TFs
TFs
Glycolysis
Lactate
production
Cholesterol
metabolism
Glutamate
dehydrogenase
Homeostasis
Oxidative
phosphory-
lation
Synaptogenesis
Phagocytosis
Synapse function/
plasticity
Neuro-
transmission
Ion transport
Water transport
Blood-brain barrier
Immune
functions
Etv5
Wfs1
Chrdl1
Lrtm2
Sema4b
Mertk
Agt
Ndrg4
Ppp1ca
Dbi
Slc7a10
Bhlhe41
Sox9
Dbx2
Eno1
Ldha
Sdha
Sdhb
Apoe
Slc1a3
Glud1
Glul
Gria1
Gabrg1
Kcnj16
Kcnj10
Kcnk1
Aqp4
Mfsd2a
Tril
Tlr3
1
2
3
4
5
AST
1
2
3
4
5
b
c
Fig. 3 Identiﬁcation of common and differentially expressed genes in astrocytes. a Chart showing the number of genes expressed in at least 60% of
sampled astrocytes (common) and the number of genes speciﬁcally enriched in each subtype. b Examples of genes common across astrocyte subtypes,
classiﬁed by biological function. TFs, transcription factors. c Examples of genes highly enriched in speciﬁc astrocyte subtypes, classiﬁed by biological
function. Note, some genes, e.g. Gabrg1 (γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptor γ1 subunit), could be classiﬁed as either an ion channel or as involved in
synaptic function/plasticity. Here, classiﬁcation was based on the principal identiﬁed function—ion channel activity.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2020) 11:1220 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5

(Supplementary Table 3), being enriched in genes involved in mitosis
and cell cycle control (Sirt2, Sept2, Emp2, etc). However, there were
also considerable differences, with AST5 being enriched for genes
involved in classical astrocyte functions, such as glucose metabolism
and energy production (Supplementary Tables 6 and 8), suggesting
that AST5 represents an intermediate transition state between pro-
genitors and mature astrocytes. The distribution of AST5, based on
relatively high expression of Fam107a and low expression/absence
of Ogt (Fig. 4b and Supplementary Figs. 10 and 11), was difﬁcult
to obtain accurately given the large variability between samples.
AST4Frzb+Ascl1+Slc1a3+
Slc1a3Frzb  Ascl1
Frzb+Ascl1+
Slc1a3+
Frzb+Ascl1+Slc1a3+ (%)
Slc1a3+
Slc1a3 Ogt Fam107a
Ogt-Fam107a+
Slc1a3+
(%)
(%)
Ogt-Fam107a+Slc1a3+ (%)
Slc1a3+
AST5Ogt-Fam107a+Slc1a3+
Pia
Pia
a
b
Pia
Pia
CL5
CL5
CL5
CL5
CL6
CL6
CL6
CL6
SO
SO
SO
SO
SP
SP
SP
SP
SLM
SLM
SLM
SLM
SG
SG
SG
SG
Frzb
Ascl1
Slc1a3
Merge
Ogt
Fam107a
Slc1a3
Merge
\DG
\DG
\DG
\DG
0
0
10
6
Puncta count
Distribution
Normalized distribution
0 4
0
25 50 75 100 0
5
10
15
0
0
5
4
Puncta count
Distribution
Normalized distribution
01
0
10
20
30 0
20 40 60
SR
SR
SR
SR
CL1
CL1
CL1
CL1
CL2/3
CL2/3
CL2/3
CL2/3
CL4
CL4
CL4
CL4
Pia
Pia
Pia
Pia
CL1
CL1
CL1
CL1
CL2/3
CL2/3
CL2/3
CL2/3
SO
SO
SO
SO
SP
SP
SP
SP
SLM
SLM
SLM
SLM
SG
SG
SG
SG
\DG
\DG
\DG
\DG
SR
SR
SR
SR
CL4
CL4
CL4
CL4
CL5
CL5
CL5
CL5
CL6
CL6
CL6
CL6
Fig. 4 Differential patterning of AST4 and AST5 in adult mouse brain. Multiplexed ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization was used to map locations of AST4
and AST5. a AST4 was identiﬁed by high expression levels of Frzb, Ascl1, and Slc1a3. b AST5 was identiﬁed by absence/low expression of Ogt and high
expression of both Fam107a and Slc1a3. Mapping was performed on three sections obtained from three independent animals aged between P56–P60.
Representative images are shown. Top left: low-magniﬁcation image of a coronal section. Black dots show the distribution of the astrocyte subtype through
one brain hemisphere. Brain regions are deﬁned manually based on deﬁnitions from the Allen Brain Atlas. High-magniﬁcation images (below) show the
localization of markers to speciﬁc cells deﬁned on the basis of nuclear (DAPI, blue) staining. Right: bar plots (showing from left to right) ﬂuorescence
counts per RNA marker per cell (shown for all cells across all sections analyzed), the distribution of the subtype between brain regions and the distribution
of the subtype normalized to the total number of astrocytes per brain region (all Slc1a3 + cells). Astrocytes belonging to the subtype of interest are
highlighted by a shaded box (color-coded according to the scheme used in Fig. 2a). Astrocyte numbers across layers are given as average per section
analyzed. Error bars are equivalent across the ﬁgure and represent SEM. Scale bars, low magniﬁcation 1000 µm; high magniﬁcation, 10 µm. “+” high gene
expression, “−” low or absent gene expression. SO Stratum oriens, SP Stratum pyramidale, SR Stratum radiatum, SG Subgranular zone, \DG Dentate gyrus
without SG, SLM Stratum lacunosum-moleculare.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2020) 11:1220 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

However, based on absolute cell numbers, a trend exists towards
enrichment in cortical layers 2/3 and 5. As a proportion of the
Slc1a3-positive cell population, AST5 appeared dominant in the
subpial region, as well as the stratum lacunosum-moleculare and
dentate gyrus of hippocampus.
Mature astrocytes: ASTs 1, 2, and 3. In contrast, AST1, AST2,
and AST3 showed gene-enrichment proﬁles more consistent with
mature astrocyte function.
AST1 is deﬁned by high expression of Gfap and Agt, and was
found at high levels in the subpial layer and hippocampus—both
in terms of absolute distribution and normalized to total astrocyte
number (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Figs. 10, 12, and 13). This is
entirely consistent with previous reports of Gfap staining in the
rodent brain30 and the unique characteristics of marginal
astrocytes9,35.
Gene
enrichment
and
functional
annotation
analysis revealed only a handful of subtype overexpressed genes
and related pathways (Supplementary Tables 6 and 9). With
reference to common astrocyte functions, however, synaptogen-
esis (Nrxn1, Prex2, and Plekhb1), synaptic plasticity (Agt), and
glutamatergic neurotransmission (Arl6ip1) were clearly distinct
from other subtypes (Supplementary Table 9).
Based
on
ISH,
both
AST2
and
AST3
showed
highly
reproducible and speciﬁc distribution patterns across cortical
layers and the hippocampus. AST2 was localized by higher than
average expression of the marker gene Unc13c and low or absent
expression of Agt. It was found in the highest absolute numbers in
cortical layers 2/3 and 5, with lower amounts in layers 1, 4, and 6,
and negligible amounts in the hippocampus (Fig. 5b and
Supplementary Figs. 10 and 14). However, normalized to total
astrocyte number per region, AST2 appears uniformly distributed
across cortical layers. The distribution of AST3 was predicted by
expression of Agt and little or no expression of Unc13c and Gfap.
The limited number of spectral channels available to us at the
time using RNAscope (three markers including Slc1a3) meant we
had to adopt a split-staining approach, performing two different
sets of staining: the ﬁrst for Gfap, Agt, and Slc1a3 (Fig. 6a) and a
second for Unc13c, Agt, and Slc1a3 (Fig. 6b). Both showed AST3
distributed throughout the cortex and hippocampus (see also
Supplementary Figs. 10, 12-14). Based on the high levels of AST1
localizing to the pial layer and stratum lacunosum-moleculare in
the hippocampus (Supplementary Fig. 12), we anticipate it being
the dominant subtype in these regions. Considering the heavy
Gfap staining, and the split staining approach taken for AST3, we
expect that the overall levels of AST3 are relatively low in these
two regions (Fig. 6a vs. Fig. 6b). It is possible that AST2 also
follows a similar distribution pattern in the cortex, and is found in
lower amounts in the pial region, as Gfap expression is also low in
AST2 (Fig. 2). RNAscope stainings across multiple tissue sections
(Supplementary
Fig.
10)
suggest
a
substantial
degree
of
intermixing between these two cell types in mid-cortical layers,
while AST3 appears to be the dominant subtype in layer 6. In this
respect, it is interesting that the two subtypes show differential
gene-enrichment proﬁles for processes relating to synaptic
function (AST2, glutamatergic transmission, Slc7a10, Gria2;
AST3, GABAergic transmission, Gabrg1) and synaptogenesis
and process outgrowth (AST2, Slitrk2, Sema4b; AST3, Etv5, and
Spon1), suggesting differential regulation of functions by these
subtypes (Supplementary Table 9). For ease of interpretation, we
have summarized the complex spatial relationships between
subtypes schematically (Fig. 7).
Morphological correlates of identiﬁed astrocyte subtypes. Dis-
tinct transcriptomic proﬁles and spatial locations for astrocyte
subtypes predict morphological and functional specialization7.
Unfortunately, with the exception of Gfap, the markers exploited
for subtype identiﬁcation currently have a limited range of
molecular reagents available (green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP)-
marker mice, speciﬁc Cre-lines, antibodies, etc.) to facilitate fur-
ther such experiments. However, our ISH-based mapping showed
that subtypes are differentially distributed across the cortex and
hippocampus. Therefore, we used an alternative strategy to
investigate these issues, based on the sampling of large numbers
of astrocytes in speciﬁc brain regions. Our rationale was that by
taking this approach we could correlate the presence of distinct
morphologies or functional characteristics to the spatial pat-
terning of our molecular subtypes. Given the limitations of our
approach, we decided to focus on regions containing ASTs 1, 2,
and 3, as these subtypes most likely represent mature astrocytes.
Previous studies on astrocyte morphology have given variable
results, presumably due to the labeling methods used. Hence, we
examined recent studies in which either regional or sub-regional
differences were measured, using methods that gave high
astrocyte coverage in adult C57BL/6 mice9,36.
Astrocytes positioned in cortical layers 2–4 (which contain
AST2 and AST3) display a smaller territorial volume and
arborization than astrocytes in the hippocampal CA3 region
(containing AST3), as judged by Golgi staining and immunohis-
tochemistry for the astrocyte marker S100β36.
Cortical astrocytes, labeled using genetically encoded marker
proteins, show differences in arborization, territorial volume, and
cell orientation through layers 1–69. These become more
apparent using a hierarchical clustering of ﬁve key morphological
parameters (including elongation, ﬂatness, and various measures
of cell orientation)9. Using this approach, the authors identiﬁed
four prominent morphological subtypes (A–D), which distribute
through the various cortical layers in differing proportions9,
consistent with data from our ISH experiments (Figs. 4–6). Of
note, there is a correlation between the morphologies identiﬁed
and the molecular subtypes we report. Marginal astrocytes
(AST1) showed a substantial similarity to Cluster D, given their
unique morphology and localization in the pial layer9,37. Cluster
B was present in cortical layers 1–6, whereas Cluster C was
present in cortical layers 2–5, with lower proportions in layers 1
and 6. These distributions show remarkable similarities to those
of AST3 and AST2, respectively. However, Cluster A was
restricted to layers 5 and 6, suggesting that the correspondence
between transcriptome and morphology is incomplete (see
below).
Physiological
correlates
of
identiﬁed
astrocyte
subtypes.
Astrocyte activation is commonly associated with a transient rise
in intracellular Ca2+, which has been linked to functional out-
puts6. Hence, heterogeneity in Ca2+ signaling has been proposed
as a mechanism by which astrocytes execute diverse functions6.
We investigated the possibility of differential astrocyte Ca2+
signaling using acute coronal tissue slices, in which cells were
labeled with the Ca2+ indicator Fluo-4, and co-labeled with sul-
forhodamine 101 (SR101) for astrocyte identiﬁcation. Images
were acquired using a two-photon microscope in cortical layer 1,
cortical layers 3–5, and in hippocampal CA1. Cell activity was
measured under three consecutive conditions. Baseline (BASE)
reﬂects astrocyte activity when neurons were spontaneously
active. Application of tetrodotoxin (TTX) was then used to block
neuronal activity, isolating astrocytes from the inﬂuence of local
neuronal network activity. Finally, phenylephrine (PHE) was
applied to TTX-treated slices to directly trigger robust Ca2+
responses in astrocytes38, independent of neuronal activity
(Fig. 8a). Only cells responding to PHE were retained for analysis
(Fig. 8b) and proﬁles showing changes in intracellular Ca2+
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2020) 11:1220 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7

were plotted as fractional ﬂuorescence changes relative to baseline
(dF/Fo) (Fig. 8a). Although we observed signiﬁcant differences in
activity between astrocytes across regions in baseline and TTX
conditions, the most striking differences were seen after appli-
cation of PHE (Fig. 8c).
To eliminate potential bias, caused by manual assignment of
cells to brain regions, we performed unbiased hierarchical
clustering of astrocytes, based on the various Ca2+ peak
parameters recorded following PHE application (Fig. 8d, e). We
identiﬁed three distinct clusters of astrocytes, which were
AST1Gfap+Agt+Slc1a3+
AST2Unc13c+Agt–Slc1a3+
Slc1a3 Agt Gfap
Gfap+Agt +
Slc1a3+
Gfap+Agt +Slc1a3+
Slc1a3+
(%)
(%)
Slc1a3 Agt Unc13c
Unc13c+Agt-
Slc1a3+
Unc13c+Agt -Slc1a3+
Slc1a3+
(%)
(%)
Pia
CL1
Pia
CL1
CL2/3
CL4
CL6
SO
SP
SR
SLM
SG
\DG
0
0
13 012
Puncta count
Distribution
Normalized distribution
010
10
20
30
0
20
40
60
0
0
13 012
Puncta count
Distribution
Normalized distribution
0 8
10 20
40
30
0
10
20
30
CL5
Pia
CL1
CL2/3
CL4
CL6
SO
SP
SR
SLM
SG
\DG
CL5
Pia
CL1
CL2/3
CL4
CL6
SO
SP
SR
SLM
SG
\DG
CL5
Pia
CL1
CL2/3
CL4
CL6
SO
SP
SR
SLM
SG
\DG
CL5
Pia
CL1
CL2/3
CL4
CL6
SO
SP
SR
SLM
SG
\DG
CL5
Pia
CL1
CL2/3
CL4
CL6
SO
SP
SR SLM
SG
\DG
CL5
CL2/3
CL4
SO
SG
\DG
SR
SLM
CL5
CL6
SP
Pia
CL1
CL2/3
CL4
SO
SG
\DG
SR
SLM
CL5
CL6
SP
Unc13c
Agt
Slc1a3
Merge
Gfap
Agt
Slc1a3
Merge
a
b
Fig. 5 Differential patterning of AST1 and AST2 in adult mouse brain. Multiplexed ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization was used to map locations of AST1
and AST2. a AST1 was identiﬁed by high expression levels of Gfap, Agt, and Slc1a3. b AST2 was identiﬁed by low expression/absence of Agt and high
expression of both Unc13c and Slc1a3. Mapping was performed on three sections obtained from three independent animals aged between P56 and P60.
Representative images are shown. Top left: low-magniﬁcation image of a coronal section. Black dots show the distribution of the astrocyte subtype through
one brain hemisphere. Brain regions are deﬁned manually based on deﬁnitions from the Allen Brain Atlas. High-magniﬁcation images (below) show the
localization of markers to speciﬁc cells deﬁned on the basis of nuclear (DAPI, blue) staining. Right: bar plots (showing from left to right) ﬂuorescence
counts per RNA marker per cell (shown for all cells across all sections analyzed), the distribution of the subtype between brain regions, and the distribution
of the subtype normalized to the total number of astrocytes per brain region (all Slc1a3 + cells). Astrocytes belonging to the subtype of interest are
highlighted by a shaded box (color-coded according to the scheme used in Fig. 2a). Astrocyte numbers across layers are given as average per section
analyzed. Error bars are equivalent across the ﬁgure and represent SEM. Scale bars, low magniﬁcation 1000 µm; high magniﬁcation, 10 µm. “+” high gene
expression, “−” low or absent gene expression. SO Stratum oriens, SP Stratum pyramidale, SR Stratum radiatum, SG Subgranular zone, \DG Dentate gyrus
without SG, SLM Stratum lacunosum-moleculare.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2020) 11:1220 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

differentially distributed through cortical layers 1 and 3–5, as well
as hippocampal CA1. Cluster 2 mostly comprised cortical
astrocytes from layer 1 and layers 3–5. In contrast, hippocampal
astrocytes were a minority. Based on comparisons to our ISH
data, it is likely that Cluster 2 contains a mixture of AST1 and
AST2, which are located in the cortex. Cluster 3 contained
roughly equal quantities of astrocytes from across brain regions,
consistent with cells having an AST3 identity. Interestingly,
Cluster 1 was mostly composed of hippocampal CA1 astrocytes
and likely comprised AST3, indicating the potential for further
Pia
CL1
Pia
CL2/3
SR
SG
\DG
SLM
SP
SO
CL6
CL5
CL4
CL1
CL2/3
SP
SR
SG
\DG
SLM
CL4
CL5
SO
CL6
AST3Gfap-Agt+Slc1a3+
AST3Unc13c-Agt+Slc1a3+
Pia
CL5
CL6
SO
SP
SLM
SG
\DG
SR
CL1
a
CL2/3
CL4
Pia
CL5
CL6
SO
SP
SLM
SG
\DG
SR
CL1
CL2/3
CL4
Slc1a3
Gfap-Agt+
Slc1a3+
Gfap-Agt+ Slc1a3+
Slc1a3+
(%)
(%)
Agt
Gfap
Slc1a3
Unc13c-Agt+
Slc1a3+
Unc13c-Agt+ Slc1a3+
Slc1a3+
(%)
(%)
Agt
Unc13c
Pia
CL1
CL2/3
CL4
CL6
SO
SP
SR
SLM
SG
\DG
CL5
Pia
CL1
CL2/3
CL4
CL6
SO
SP
SR
SLM
SG
\DG
CL5
Pia
CL1
CL2/3
CL4
CL6
SO
SP
SR
SLM
SG
\DG
CL5
Pia
CL1
CL2/3
CL4
CL6
SO
SP
SR
SLM
SG
\DG
CL5
0
0
13 010
Puncta count
Distribution
Normalized distribution
012
10 20 30 40
0
20
10
30 40
0
0
13 0 8
Puncta count
Distribution
Normalized distribution
012
10
20
30
0
50
25
75100125
b
Gfap
Agt
Slc1a3
Merge
Unc13c
Agt
Slc1a3
Merge
Fig. 6 Differential patterning of AST3 in adult mouse brain. Multiplexed ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization was used to map the location of AST3. Due to
technical limitations, AST3 was mapped using a split marker approach. Sections were assessed for (a) low expression/absence of Gfap with expression of
Agt and Slc1a3 (to differentiate AST3 from AST1) and (b) low expression/absence of Unc13c with expression of Agt and Slc1a3 (to discriminate between
AST3 and AST2). Mapping was on three sections from three independent animals aged P56–P60. Representative images are shown. Top left: low-
magniﬁcation image of a coronal section. Black dots show astrocyte subtype distribution through one hemisphere. Regions are deﬁned manually based on
the Allen Brain Atlas. High-magniﬁcation images (below) show the localization of markers to speciﬁc cells based on nuclear (DAPI, blue) staining. Right:
bar plots (showing left to right) ﬂuorescence counts per marker per cell (for all cells across all sections analyzed), the distribution of the subtype between
brain regions and the distribution of the subtype normalized to the number of astrocytes per brain region (all Slc1a3 + cells). Astrocytes belonging to the
subtype of interest are highlighted by a shaded box (color-coded according to the scheme used in Fig. 2a). Astrocyte numbers across layers are given
as average per section analyzed. Error bars are equivalent across the ﬁgure and represent SEM. Scale bars, low magniﬁcation 1000 µm; high magniﬁcation,
10 µm. “+” high gene expression, “−” low or absent gene expression. SO Stratum oriens, SP Stratum pyramidale, SR Stratum radiatum, SG Subgranular
zone, \DG Dentate gyrus without SG, SLM Stratum lacunosum-moleculare.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2020) 11:1220 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9

axes of heterogeneity, such as local environment, to also inﬂuence
cell identity (see below). Signiﬁcant differences across clusters
were seen for the measured signal parameters (Fig. 8f).
Taken together, these data indicate that molecularly deﬁned
astrocyte subtypes share overlapping spatial locations with cells
possessing distinct morphologies and physiological responses.
Discussion
Astrocytes have been reported to play many diverse roles in the
CNS, such as synapse formation and elimination, maintenance of
local homeostasis, and modulation of synaptic transmission1.
However, whether astrocytes are functionally specialized to per-
form certain tasks remains unclear. This is despite evidence
supporting the formation of local specialized neuronal micro-
circuits, in areas such as visual cortex39 and hippocampus40.
To measure diversity both between and within brain regions,
we used a single-cell sequencing approach in adult tissues to
achieve an unbiased view of astrocyte heterogeneity, free of
possible interference from transcriptional programs related to
CNS development5. Our results distinguish multiple astrocyte
subtypes at the transcriptomic level. However, the picture is
substantially more complicated than for neurons, with little clear
evidence for distinct cellular hierarchies in clustering, most likely
due to multiple axes of heterogeneity being present4,5,20,41.
However, although astrocyte subtypes share common genes
associated with core functions, the transcriptomic differences
between the subtypes are still sufﬁciently large to suggest distinct
specializations in known astrocyte functions13,42. This is rein-
forced by our ISH results. Differential localization through the
hippocampus and cortex supports the concept of local astrocyte
diversity, whereas consistency across sections from multiple
animals indicates the subtypes identiﬁed are genuine and not
transient cell states. As we performed analysis on sections cut to
maximize the cross-sectional area of the cortex and hippocampus
for imaging (Supplementary Fig. 10), we cannot discount varia-
tions in spatial distribution along the rostro-caudal axis. How-
ever, as the cells recovered for sequencing were obtained from the
whole cortex and hippocampus, we are conﬁdent the overall
subtype distribution will largely reﬂect this fact.
The observation of unique transcriptomic proﬁles and spatial
patterning suggests several intriguing possibilities, including links
between cortical and hippocampal astrocyte populations. Astro-
cyte generation from distinct progenitors in mouse brain and
spinal cord has been proposed, in which broad sections of the
CNS are populated by astrocytes derived from progenitors of
ﬁxed developmental origin43,44. For example, the widespread
distribution of AST1 and AST3 across the cortex and hippo-
campus hints at a common developmental origin from embryonic
pallium45 (Supplementary Fig. 15). Furthermore, AST5 possesses
a unique transcriptome, which appears to be intermediate
between a progenitor (AST4) and a mature astrocyte (AST1)
(Supplementary Tables 3, 4, and 6–9), consistent with the pro-
posed concepts of cortical astrocyte formation from local pro-
liferation of common progenitors followed by non-synchronous
maturation46–48.
The relationship between AST2 and AST3 remains unclear at
present, although a number of possibilities exist. These subtypes
could be formed from a common class of progenitor, deﬁned by
early patterning events and diversiﬁed by cues from neighboring
CNS cells, such as neuronal release of sonic hedgehog (Shh)49,50.
Alternatively, they may be formed from distinct classes of pro-
genitor, which intermix in the cortex51. However, in this latter
scenario it is interesting to note that the morphological devel-
opment of clonally-related astrocytes also appears to be strongly
inﬂuenced by local environment51. A potential role for signals
commonly associated with development (such as Shh signaling) is
interesting, as evidence suggests that persistent activation of these
pathways is necessary to maintain astrocyte diversity52. In this
respect, it is not surprising that genetic ablation of neuronal
vglut1 has been reported to adversely affect postnatal develop-
ment of cortical astrocytes53. In fact, AST2 and AST3, which are
found throughout cortex, differentially express genes involved in
neurotransmission. AST2 is enriched in transcripts linked to
glutamatergic neurotransmission (including Slc7a10, which is
involved in mobilization of the potent NMDA agonist D-serine54);
in contrast, AST3 is enriched in transcripts associated with
GABAergic neurotransmission. This suggests that reciprocal
interactions between astrocytes and neurons may promote
functional diversity at the local circuit level39,40. Consistent with
this, a recent study on the role of astrocytes in glutamatergic
synapse maturation in cortex identiﬁed astrocyte-secreted Chor-
din-like 1 (Chrd1)42 as an essential factor stabilizing synapses,
which we ﬁnd enriched in AST2. In this respect, comparative
studies on the synaptogenic action of Norrin (Ndp) (present in
ASTs 2 and 3) may prove instructive13. Furthermore, genetic
manipulations, such as neuronal deletion of Dab19 or Satb241 also
inﬂuence astrocyte positioning.
Recent years have seen a rapid growth in single-cell CNS
studies4,5,20,55. These studies generally report transcriptomic
differences between astrocytes originating from different brain
regions or, in the case of cortex, an approximate separation in
gene expression between layer 1 and the remaining layers (a
detailed comparison between studies is made in Supplementary
Fig. 16). In contrast, our results point towards a greater degree of
intra-regional heterogeneity in the adult mouse brain. The pos-
sible causes for this discrepancy are unclear at present, but are
AST1
Gfap+Agt+Slc1a3+
AST3
Gfap-Uncl13c-Agt+Slc1a3+
AST4
Frzb+Ascl1+Slc1a3+
AST5
Ogt-Fam107a+Slc1a3+
AST2
Uncl13c+Agt-Slc1a3+
Fig. 7 Schematic summary of astrocyte subtype positions in adult mouse brain. Indicated positions are based on in situ hybridization data (Figs. 4–6) and
are marked on a representative sagittal section of adult mouse brain (adapted from the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas). Subtypes are color-coded (as in Fig. 2a).
Scale bar, 500 µm.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2020) 11:1220 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

likely related to methodological issues (such as age of animals
used4,20,55, mRNA detection sensitivity4,5,20,55,56, etc.). However,
we are conﬁdent that our results provide an accurate survey of
astrocyte subtypes present in both the cortex and hippocampus of
adult mouse brain. Sequencing several hundred cells for optimal
coverage resulted in robust clustering of ASTs 1–4 (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 17). Only in the case of AST5, which is the rarest subtype
we identiﬁed, do we consider that sequencing more cells could
possibly reveal greater diversity. Furthermore, our results largely
recapitulate earlier ﬁndings, produced using a variety of cell
capture technologies and sequencing techniques, such as the
differential expression of Gfap and Mfge8 between upper and
deep cortical layers4,20 (Supplementary Fig. 18). Furthermore,
they show that markers previously reported for cortical (Igfbp2
and Sparc)5 and hippocampal (Nnat and Fabp7)5 astrocytes are
differentially expressed between ASTs 1–5 (see Supplementary
Fig. 19 and online resource), suggesting that the optimized pro-
tocols used in our study actually allow for a more subtle char-
acterization of cells.
The robustness of our data is demonstrated by consistency with
a study from Bayraktar et al.41, which uses large-scale ISH-based
mapping to study gene expression in somatosensory cortex of P14
mice (see Supplementary Fig. 19). In both studies, there was
considerable overlap between astrocyte gene expression and
spatial mapping. For example, Id3+ astrocytes mapped to layer 1
(AST1), Chrdl1+ astrocytes mapped to the middle cortical layers
(AST2), and Il33+ astrocytes were found over-represented in
layers 5 and 6 (AST3). Although there were some differences,
these could be explained by the age of the animals used48 or by
differences in the methodologies employed.
Tissue dissociation has been reported to induce transcriptional
changes57. However, the close correlation between our in silico
a
b
d
e
c
f
SR101 (Astrocytes)
CA1
L1
L3–5
50 s
0.1 dF/F0
BASE
TTX
PHE
50 s
BASE
TTX
PHE
50 s
BASE
TTX
PHE
0
25
50
75
100
1
2
3
Clusters
Brain area
CA1
L1
L3–5
Astrocyte distribution, %
CA1
L1
L3–5
BASE
TTX
BASE
TTX
BASE
TTX
0
25
50
75
100
Inactive
Active
Proportion of PHE-responsive astrocytes, %
–40
0
40
–40
0
40
80
Clusters
1
2
3
PHE, hierarchical clustering
tSNE-2
tSNE-1
*** ***
0.01
0.011
0.0039
0.0045
0.0068
0.0073
0.0058
0.0056
0.0055
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
Mean frequency, Hz
*** ***
386
304
302
385
304
300
416
299
306
400
600
800
AUC
*** ***
1.65
1.46
1.52
2.06
1.59
1.57
2.07
1.45
1.49
0
2
4
6
8
CA1
L1
L3–5
CA1
L1
L3–5
CA1
L1
L3–5
CA1
L1
L3–5
CA1
L1
L3–5
CA1
L1
L3–5
Mean amplitude, dF/F0
***
*** ***
0.47
0.55
0.63
0.93
0.65
0.66
0.73
0.59
0.6
0
2
4
6
Mean peak prominence, dF/F0
***
* ***
0
300
600
900
Clusters
AUC
*** ***
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
Clusters
Mean frequency, Hz
***
*** ***
0
2
4
6
Clusters
***
*** *
0
50
100
150
200
Clusters
*** ***
0
100
200
300
Clusters
***
***
0
2
4
6
Clusters
1
2
3
******* ***
31
6.6
6
44
7.6
10
42
7.4
12
0
100
200
Mean peak width, s
Mean peak prominence, dF/F0
Mean peak width, s
****
***
138
174
148
105
178
150
128
162
195
0
100
200
300
400
500
Mean peak time, s
Mean amplitude, dF/F0
Mean peak time, s
Fluo-4 (Ca2+)
0.3 dF/F0
0.5 dF/F0
BASE
TTX
PHE
BASE
TTX
PHE
BASE
TTX
PHE
BASE
TTX
PHE
BASE
TTX
PHE
BASE
TTX
PHE
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
Fig. 8 Astrocyte subpopulations display distinct Ca2+ transient properties. Calcium transients in SR101-labeled astrocytes were detected using Fluo-4.
Measurements were made in acute brain slices containing cortical layer 1 (L1), cortical layers 3–5 (L3–5), and the CA1 region of the hippocampus (CA1).
Transients were recorded under sequential conditions of baseline activity (BASE), tetrodotoxin (TTX), and TTX plus phenylephrine (PHE). a Representative
astrocytes (arrowheads) and the calcium transients recorded from them under each experimental condition. Scale bar, 50 µm. b The total population
of active astrocytes was deﬁned as cells responding to application of PHE. The fraction of this population displaying Ca2+ transients under BASE and
TTX conditions is shown in blue. c Transient parameters grouped by the brain region recorded. Numerical values are the means for each condition.
d Hierarchical clustering of Ca2+ transient parameters after application of PHE. e Proportion of astrocytes from the various brain regions per cluster deﬁned
in d. f Astrocyte peak parameters grouped per cluster. One dot equals one cell in c, d, and f. Plots in c and f show mean ± SD. Data normality was tested
using a Shapiro–Wilk test. Signiﬁcant differences were veriﬁed using a Kruskal–Wallis test with post-hoc Dunn’s test, with p-values adjusted with the
Benjamini–Hochberg method. *p ≤0.05, **p ≤0.01, ***p ≤0.001. AUC area under the curve. Nine animals were used. In total, 614 cells were analyzed.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2020) 11:1220 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11

analysis and ISH validation suggests this is of limited concern in
our study, possibly due to the fact that we used a rapid one step
isolation procedure run at low temperature (wherever possible).
Another major concern with FACS use is tissue integrity and the
loss of ﬁne astrocyte processes (Supplementary Fig. 5a)58.
Although some mRNAs in astrocytes are actively transported into
processes for local translation58 this does not mean that those
mRNA species will be absent from the soma. In fact, work in
neurons has shown that there is no known case of a mRNA
produced in the nucleus that is localized exclusively outside the
cell body. Extrapolating on this, we expect sequencing the content
of the soma to reﬂect the vast majority of the mRNAs expressed
by an astrocyte59.
Our work provides a detailed characterization of astrocyte
transcriptomic diversity and additional evidence that this can be
linked to cell morphology9,10 and differential Ca2+ signaling10.
However, there are issues that need to be resolved. For example, a
proportion of astrocytes in cortical layer 6, which correlate to
AST3, appear to have a distinct morphology9; the mechanisms
underlying this unique specialization, such as local tissue archi-
tecture and signaling52, require further investigation. Given the
complex molecular ﬁngerprints of the subtypes we identiﬁed,
such experiments will require the development of speciﬁc labeling
techniques, based on intersectional genetics60.
In summary, we have demonstrated both inter- and intra-
regional heterogeneity of astrocytes and have shown distinct
cortical layering and hippocampal compartmentalization of these
unique subtypes. Furthermore, we provide evidence that these
subtypes possess distinct morphologies and physiologies. This
work provides a highly resolved roadmap for future investigations
of astrocyte heterogeneity. Freely available as an online resource,
our data allow the development of testable hypotheses relating to
astrocyte properties, which will ultimately allow their effects on
CNS form and function to be elucidated. Such information will
prove invaluable to our overall understanding of brain activity in
both healthy and diseased states.
Methods
Animal experiments. All experiments were approved by the Ethical Research
Committee of the KU Leuven and were in accordance with the European Com-
munities Council Directive of 22 September 2010 (2010/63/EU) and with the
relevant Belgian legislation (KB of 29 May 2013). C57BL/6J mice were used
throughout. Mice aged to postnatal (P) day 56 were used for single cell RNA-seq.
Male mice aged to P56–P60 were used for ISH experiments. Both male and female
mice aged to P40–P67 were used for Ca2+ imaging experiments.
Preparation of a single-cell suspension. Cortical and hippocampal astrocytes
were prepared independently, at roughly equivalent circadian times. Two separate
batches of astrocytes, originating from each region, were prepared, using multiple
litters of mice. Cortical astrocytes were isolated from litter number 1. Hippocampal
astrocytes were isolated from litter numbers 2 and 3.
Brieﬂy, regions of interest (ROIs; cortex and hippocampus) were quickly
and carefully dissected in cold Hanks’ balanced salt solution (HBSS) buffer without
Ca2+ and Mg2+ (Sigma-Aldrich), under a binocular microscope. Myelinated parts
were discarded, to decrease the amount of debris in the ﬁnal cell suspension.
Cortical cell suspensions were prepared from two littermate animals in parallel
using separate tubes. Two hippocampal cell suspensions were also prepared in
parallel using separate tubes; in this case, two different sets of four littermate
animals were used. Tissue dissociation was run using the neural tissue dissociation
kit (P) (Miltenyi Biotec)25. Tissue was digested at 37 °C using papain,
supplemented with DNAse I. Tissue was mechanically dissociated using three
rounds of trituration with 5 ml serological pipettes. The resulting suspension was
then ﬁltered through a 20 μm Nitex mesh (SEFAR) to remove any remaining
clumps. Contamination by myelin and cell debris was removed by equilibrium
density centrifugation. 90% Percoll PLUS (Life Sciences) in 1× HBSS with Ca2+
and Mg2+ (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the suspension to produce a ﬁnal
concentration of 24% Percoll. Additional DNAse I (Worthington) was added
(125 U per 1 ml), before the cell suspension was centrifuged at 300gAv for 11 min at
room temperature (with minimal centrifuge braking). The resulting cell pellet was
resuspended in Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (dPBS) (without Ca2+/Mg2+)
containing 0.5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) (Sigma-Aldrich). Supernatants were
centrifuged again at 300gAv for 10 min at room temperature. Any pelleted cells
were resuspended in 0.5% BSA/dPBS (without Ca2+/Mg2+). Cells were pooled and
FACS isolated.
FACS isolation of astrocytes. All steps were performed at 4 °C. Cells were
incubated with FcR blocking reagent (Miltenyi Biotec) at a 1:9 dilution for 10 min
to block non-speciﬁc binding of antibodies. This was followed by addition of
antibodies speciﬁc to the cell isolation protocol. ACSA-2-PE antibody (Miltenyi
Biotec, 130102365) (1:140 dilution) and anti-O1-eFluor660 (eBioscience, 50-6506-
80) (1:810 dilution) were added to the cell suspension and incubated for 10 min.
0.5% BSA/dPBS (without Ca2+/Mg2+) was then added to the cell suspension as a
washing step. Cells were recovered by centrifugation at 300gAv for 10 min. The
resulting pellet was then resuspended in 0.5% BSA/dPBS and ﬁltered through a 20
μm Nitex mesh. The vital dye 7-AAD (eBioscience, 00-6993) (1:100 dilution) was
added to exclude dead cells during FACS.
FACS was performed on a BD FACSAria III using a 100 µm nozzle.
Compensations were done on single-color controls and gates were set on unstained
samples. Forward scatter/side scatter gatings were used to remove clumps of cells
and debris. Single ACSA-2-PE-positive/anti-O1-eFluor660-negative/7-AAD-
negative astrocytes were sorted into separate wells of non-skirted 96-well PCR
plates (VWR). Each plate also contained 1 well without any cell(s) (negative
control), 1 well with 40 astrocytes (positive control: astrocytes), and 1 well with 40
7-AAD-negative cells (positive control: viable cells). Each well contained 4.3 µl of
lysis buffer composed of 2.3 µl 0.2% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich) with 2 U μl−1
RNase inhibitor (Clontech), 1 µl of HPLC-puriﬁed 10 µM Oligo-dT30VN
oligonucleotide (5′-AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGTACT30VN-3′), and 1 µl
of dNTP mix (Fermentas). Plates were kept at 4 °C during the sort, sealed
immediately afterwards, vortexed, and spun down at 300gAv for 30 s. Plates were
stored at −80 °C until library preparation.
Single-cell cDNA and library preparation. We used a modiﬁed Smart-seq221
protocol. Brieﬂy, samples were reverse transcribed. ERCC (External RNA Controls
Consortium) control RNAs (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) were added into the reverse
transcription mix at a ﬁnal dilution of 1:160 × 106. TSO (5′-AAGCAGTGGTAT
CAACGCAGAGTACATrGrG + G-3′ in which the last guanosine is a locked
nucleic acid) was used at 0.2 μM in the ﬁnal reaction mix. Subsequent pre-
ampliﬁcation of cDNA used an ISPCR oligonucleotide (5′-AAGCAGTGGTATC
AACGCAGAGT-3′) and 22 PCR cycles. cDNA was puriﬁed from the PCR mix
using Agencourt Ampure XP beads (Beckman Coulter) with a modiﬁed bead:DNA
ratio of 0.8 to 1. The quality of cDNA was checked by analyzing 11 single-cell
libraries from each 96-well plate using a NGS Fragment High Sensitivity Analysis
Kit (Advanced Analytical) and a Fragment Analyzer (Advanced Analytical). Data
were analyzed using PROSize 2.0 software. The cDNA concentration was measured
in every well using a Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA Kit (Invitrogen), using a stan-
dard protocol. A Synergy 2 plate reader controlled by Gen5 software (BioTek) was
used to measure ﬂuorescence.
Libraries were prepared using a Nextera XT DNA Library Preparation Kit
(Illumina) with four sets of Nextera XT v2 index kits (sets A to D) (Illumina FC-
131-2001 to FC-131-2004), using a standard protocol with minor modiﬁcations.
Tagmentation was run on 0.125 ng cDNA (adjusted to a ﬁnal volume of 1.25 μl) in
a reaction mixture containing 2.5 μl Tagment DNA buffer and 1.25 μl of Amplicon
Tagment Mix. This was followed by PCR ampliﬁcation of adapter-ligated
fragments, using a reaction mix consisting of 6.25 μl of Tagmentation product,
3.75 μl of Nextera PCR Master Mix, and 1.25 μl of each Index primer (N7xx and
N5xx). PCR was run using a standard program consisting of 12 cycles. Libraries
prepared with four different sets of index kits were then pooled and cleaned using
Agencourt Ampure XP beads (Beckman Coulter). DNA was mixed with beads at a
1:0.6 ratio. Following an 8 min incubation, beads were recovered using a magnetic
stand, supernatant was removed, and beads were washed twice with 80% ethanol.
Beads were then dried for 10 min before DNA was eluted in 50 μl of EB buffer
(Qiagen). Bead puriﬁcation was repeated a second time using a 1:1 DNA:bead ratio.
Size distribution of library pools was checked using a Fragment Analyzer and a
NGS Fragment High Sensitivity Analysis Kit, according to standard protocols
(Supplementary Fig. 5). Library pools were sequenced (75 bp paired-end reads)
using a NextSeq 500 system (Illumina) and a NextSeq 500/550 High Output Kit v2
(150 cycles) (Illumina). Libraries were sequenced on average to a depth of 1 M
reads per library.
Analysis of RNA sequencing data. An initial quality check of sequenced libraries
was undertaken using FASTQC 0.11.4 software. STAR 2.5.2b software was used to
map sequencing reads against Release M12 (GRCm38.p5) of the mouse reference
genome (Gencode), modiﬁed to take ERCC sequences (https://assets.thermoﬁsher.
com/TFS-Assets/LSG/manuals/cms_095047.txt) into account. Unique read maps
were identiﬁed using STAR, after the removal of non-canonical unannotated
junctions and non-canonical unannotated introns (using software speciﬁed para-
meters). Output alignment BAM ﬁles were then merged and sorted using Samtools
version 1.4. RNA quality metrics were collected with Picard Tools version 1.140.
Gene counts were generated using HTSeq version 0.6.1p1.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2020) 11:1220 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Clustering was done with Seurat version 1.4.0.16, run on RStudio version
1.0.136, using R version 3.4.0. Data were ln-normalized using the default Seurat
method. Sixteen cells out of 2031 that passed FASTQC and additional quality
measures (Supplementary Fig. 7) were discarded at this point, as they did not pass
the minimal total expression threshold of 54 transcripts. High-level cell type
identiﬁcation was performed with a starting base of 24761 genes expressed across
2015 samples. In all, 5455 highly variable genes (ln-mean expression > 0.3 and ln-
variance/mean > 0.1) were identiﬁed and used for clustering with the default Seurat
pipeline. After discarding all other higher-order cell types, astrocytes were
reclustered using the default Seurat method. Analysis was performed based on the
expression of 13087 unique genes across 1811 astrocytes. In total, 886 highly
variable genes (ln-mean expression > 0.5 and ln-variance/mean > 0.5) were
identiﬁed and used for clustering. Unless stated, subsequent identiﬁcation of genes
overexpressed in the astrocyte subtypes, including speciﬁc marker genes, was also
performed using the default Seurat pipeline. Genes were identiﬁed using a number
of criteria. First, only signiﬁcantly upregulated genes (p < 0.01) were considered.
Second, genes had to be at least 1.28-fold overexpressed in the subtype of interest
(when compared with all other astrocytes). This number was empirically chosen to
give the best compromise between the number of marker genes identiﬁed in each
subtype (allowing functional annotation) relative to background noise. Finally,
markers had to be expressed in more than 25% of the cells identiﬁed as belonging
to a particular subtype. These marker genes were further used for gene-enrichment
and functional annotation analysis. Note that the AST2 marker Unc13c was found
using the default PAGODA (R Scde 1.99.1 package) differential gene expression
analysis pipeline61. It has a ln-mean expression of 0.28 and a ln-variance/mean of
0.41. Although it was not considered in our Seurat analysis, it remains the marker
of choice for AST2, due to its remarkably high speciﬁcity.
To exclude a dominant role of batch effects in cluster analysis, extensive
controls were performed and can be found in Supplementary Data 1 and online at
https://holt-sc.glialab.org/.
Gene-enrichment and functional annotation analysis (GO, KEGG, and
BioCarta) of subtype overexpressed genes were performed using DAVID27 version
6.8. All genes detected in astrocytes (13087) were used as the background gene set.
Only pathways with p-values < 0.1 (EASE score; modiﬁed Fisher’s exact test) were
taken into consideration. In addition, only pathways with p < 0.5
(Benjamini–Hochberg test; false discovery rate correction) were analyzed.
Genes identiﬁed as overexpressed in speciﬁc subtypes were also manually
curated with the UniProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/)28 for assignment of
putative gene functions.
RNAscope ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization. RNAscope (Advanced Cell
Diagnostics, ACD) was performed as follows. Brieﬂy, brains were quickly frozen in
Optimum Cutting Temperature compound (Tissue-Tek), using isopentane chilled
with liquid nitrogen. Ten-micrometer thick brain slices were prepared using a
NX70 cryostat (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). Sections were subsequently ﬁxed in ice-
cold 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min. Sections were then dehydrated using a series
of ethanol solutions (50–100%), before drying and incubating with Protease IV for
20 min at room temperature. Slides were washed in phosphate-buffered saline and
hybridized with gene-speciﬁc probes (Supplementary Table 5) for 2 h at 40 °C in a
HybEZ Oven (ACD). Non-annealed probes were removed by washing sections in
1× proprietary wash buffer. Probes were then detected via sequential hybridization
of proprietary ampliﬁers and labeled “secondary” probes (Amp 1–Amp 4). Finally,
sections were stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) and mounted
using ProLong Diamond Antifade Mountant (Life Technologies).
Imaging and data analysis. Brains were imaged using an Axio Scan Z1 micro-
scope (Zeiss), operated by Zen 2.3 software (Zeiss). Images were acquired using
standard excitation and emission ﬁlters. Images were taken in the best focal plane
using a PL APO20×/NA 0.8 objective or a PL APO40×/NA 0.8 objective. Images
were exported as separate TIFF ﬁles and imported into NIS-Elements software
(version 5.02.00) (Nikon) for further analysis. Brain regions were deﬁned according
to the Allen Brain Atlas and were manually superimposed onto the images. The
coloured areas in Figs. 4-6 and Supplementary Figs. 10 and 18 delineate the tissue
regions quantiﬁed. Folded or otherwise distorted areas of tissue (non-coloured)
were excluded from our analysis. Cells were deﬁned as polygons centered on DAPI
spots: each polygon had an average size ~1.3 times larger than that of the DAPI
signal. Individual bright spots of ﬂuorescence (signals higher than a background
threshold) within these boundaries were counted as individual mRNA transcripts.
Astrocytes were deﬁned by expression of the pan astrocytic marker Slc1a3 (coding
for GLAST). Astrocyte subtypes were identiﬁed based on colocalization of speciﬁc
marker genes. Data for each speciﬁc astrocyte subtype was collected from coronal
sections generated from at least three independent animals. Robustness of the
subtype distribution was checked by varying the ﬂuorescence thresholds used to
deﬁne transcripts across a range of intensities.
Preparation of acute brain slices. Preparation followed a published protocol62
and was performed as follows. Animals were anesthetized using intraperitoneal
administration of Nembutal (50 mg/kg). Transcardial perfusion was performed
using 20 ml of ice-cold N-methyl-D-glucamine (NMDG)-based artiﬁcial
cerebrospinal ﬂuid (NMDG-ACSF) dissection solution, containing (in mM):
NMDG 93, KCl 2.5, NaH2PO4 1.25, NaHCO3 30, MgSO4 10, CaCl2 0.5, HEPES 20,
D-glucose 25, L-ascorbic acid 5, thiourea 2, sodium pyruvate 3, N-acetyl-L-cysteine
10; pH 7.4 (HCl). Osmolarity was adjusted to 305–310 mOsm/l if needed. The
solution was bubbled in 95% O2/5% CO2 gas for 20 min before use and bubbling
was maintained throughout the experiment. Following decapitation, the brain was
swiftly removed. Coronal slices (350 µm-thick), containing the posterior cortex
and/or dorsal hippocampus, were obtained using a Leica VT1200s vibratome. Slices
were further hemisected and placed in a chamber containing NMDG-ACSF
maintained at 33 °C. Slices were maintained under these conditions for 25 min,
with the controlled reintroduction of Na+ achieved by gradual addition of 2 M
NaCl to the chamber. Slices were then transferred to another chamber containing
room temperature standard ACSF (in mM) NaCl 124, KCl 4.5, NaH2PO4 1.25,
NaHCO3 26, MgCl2 1, CaCl2 2.5, D-Glucose 10; pH 7.4 (HCl); 95% O2/5% CO2 gas;
osmolarity 305–310 mOsm/l. Slices were removed and transferred to a six-well
plate for loading with dyes (see below), before being returned to the chamber. For
imaging, slices were transferred to a specialized recording chamber and superfused
with normal ACSF (including pharmacological reagents where appropriate) at
33 °C with a ﬂow rate of 2 ml/min.
Preparation and application of pharmacological reagents. Stock solutions were
prepared using ddH2O and stored as frozen aliquots. Final working solutions were
produced from thawed aliquots by dissolving at least 1000-fold in normal ACSF.
TTX citrate (Tocris Biosciences) was used at a ﬁnal concentration of 1 μM. (R)-
(-)-PHE hydrochloride (Tocris Biosciences) was used at a ﬁnal concentration
of 50 μM.
Astrocyte identiﬁcation and calcium imaging. To identify astrocytes, cells were
labeled with SR101. To avoid potential issues associated with high levels of SR101
loading (such as induction of seizure like activity)63, slices were incubated for 20
min in a six-well culture dish containing 1 µM SR101 (Sigma-Aldrich) in ACSF at
33 °C. Labeling of cells appeared homogeneous, as judged by visual inspection, with
the possible exception of cortical layer 1, which is likely due to its high astrocyte
density64. Following SR101 labeling, slices were moved to another well for loading
with the calcium indicator Fluo-4AM. The dye was supplied as a 50 µg ampoule
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) and was solubilized using a mixture of 7 μl dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO), 2 μl 20% Pluronic F-127 in DMSO (Tocris Biosciences), and 1
μl 0.5% Kolliphor EL (Sigma-Aldrich) in DMSO. The ampoule was then incubated
at 41 °C with constant agitation (1400 RPM) for 15 min using a thermomixer.
Concentrated Fluo-4AM was then added to the ACSF in the well, giving a ﬁnal
concentration of 15.2 µM. Slices were loaded for 45–60 min at 35 °C. At the end of
this period, excess AM dye was removed by washing in room temperature ACSF
for at least 1 h. Prior to use, slices were maintained as described above.
All recordings followed the same protocol. First, a ﬁeld of view containing either
layer 1 of the cortex, layers 3–5 of the cortex, or region CA1 of the hippocampus
was chosen. Each ﬁeld of view was recorded under three sequential conditions.
First, baseline activity was recorded. Next, ACSF containing TTX was bath applied
for 5 min before additional imaging. Finally, ACSF containing TTX and PHE was
then added with further imaging. Signals were recorded over a period of 300 s for
each condition.
Live imaging of cells in acute slices was performed using a two-photon imaging
system (VIVO 2-Photon platform, Intelligent Imaging Innovations GmbH),
equipped with a tunable multiphoton laser (MaiTai laser, Spectra-Physics).
Imaging was performed using a Zeiss Axio Examiner Z1, equipped with a W Plan-
Apochromat 20×/NA 1.0 objective. To excite both SR101 and Fluo-4, the excitation
wavelength was tuned to 820 nm. Signals were detected using two fast-gated GaAsP
PMTs (Hamamatsu Photosensor Modules H11706). Images were 512 × 512 pixels
in size and acquired at a frequency between 1.8 and 4 Hz. Acquisition was
controlled using Slidebook 6 software (Intelligent Imaging Innovations GmbH).
Laser power was limited to a maximum of 25 mW at the specimen. The focal plane
used was usually 30–100 μm within the slice.
Image analysis. Images were initially processed using Fiji software with standard
plugins to correct for image drift and noise. ROIs, comprising the cell body plus
proximal processes (when visible), were superimposed onto the images. The
average ﬂuorescence for each ROI per frame was measured and exported to
MATLAB (The Mathworks), using custom-written scripts. Relative variations in
intracellular Ca2+ were estimated as changes in Fluo-4 signal over the baseline
(essentially dF/F0). Baseline (F0) was deﬁned for each ROI to be the average
ﬂuorescence over the ﬁrst 100 s of each recording. To measure Ca2+ transient
parameters, we wrote custom scripts based mainly on the MATLAB function
“ﬁndpeaks”. Ca2+ signals (peaks) were detected and their parameters measured,
using the following thresholds: peaks were isolated when dF/F0 was higher than
1.15, events had a minimal width of 2 s, and there was a minimal separation
between peaks of 1 s. The minimal prominence of a peak compared to its neighbors
was set at 0.1 dF/F0. Only cells that responded to PHE were kept for analysis. This
allowed us to deﬁne for each peak: the amplitude (deﬁned as the maximum dF/F0
reached in the isolated peaks), peak time (the time at which the maximum
amplitude of a given peak occurred), peak prominence (the amplitude of the peak
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2020) 11:1220 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
13

over and above that of the closest neighboring peaks), and peak width (the width of
the peak at the half height of the prominence). Reported values are averages per cell
per treatment. We also measured the peak frequency, deﬁned as the number of
peaks per second (Hz) and the area under the curve, using MATLAB functions, for
each cell under each recording condition. All the data can be found in Supple-
mentary Data 5.
Further analysis was performed using RStudio 1.2.1335 running on R version
3.6.0. For baseline and TTX conditions, only astrocytes showing at least one Ca2+
transient during recordings were retained for analysis. Clustering and tSNE-based
dimensionality reduction were performed on the Ca2+ transient parameters listed
previously. Data were scaled and centered before tSNE analysis or hierarchical
clustering. In the case of hierarchical clustering, the optimal number of clusters was
determined using the silhouette width method, followed by visual inspection to
identify the major branches of the tree. Statistical tests were performed on raw data
(without scaling and centering). Normality was checked using a Shapiro–Wilk test.
As the data was not normally distributed, a Kruskal–Wallis test was used to identify
signiﬁcant differences. A post-hoc Dunn’s test was performed to identify pairs of
measurements that differed signiﬁcantly, with multiple comparison p-values
adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg method. For analysis purposes, data were
compared between brain regions under the same experimental conditions.
Figure preparation. Figures were prepared using Inkscape 0.92.2, GIMP 2.8.22,
Adobe Photoshop CS6 13.0.1, and Adobe Illustrator CS6 16.0.3.
Website preparation. The website was built using R shinyjs_1.0 and shiny_1.2.0
packages.
Reporting summary. Further information on research design is available in
the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
An easily searchable database for ISH and single-cell data generated in this study is
available online at https://holt-sc.glialab.org/sc/. The full list of common genes, markers,
DAVID analysis, sequencing count table (not normalized) and metadata are provided
online as Supplementary Data, as is data from the Ca2+ imaging experiments. Raw
sequencing data are publicly available through the GEO database (GSE114000).
Received: 6 November 2019; Accepted: 17 December 2019;
References
1.
Barres, B. A. The mystery and magic of glia: a perspective on their roles in
health and disease. Neuron 60, 430–440 (2008).
2.
Ramón y Cajal S. Histology of the Nervous System of Man and Vertebrates
(Oxford Univ. Press, 1897).
3.
Khakh, B. S. & Deneen, B. The emerging nature of astrocyte diversity. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 42, 187–207 (2019).
4.
Zeisel, A. et al. Molecular architecture of the mouse nervous system. Cell 174,
999–1014 e1022 (2018).
5.
Saunders, A. et al. Molecular diversity and specializations among the cells of
the adult mouse brain. Cell 174, 1015–1030 e1016 (2018).
6.
Khakh, B. S. & Sofroniew, M. V. Diversity of astrocyte functions and
phenotypes in neural circuits. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 942–952 (2015).
7.
Ben Haim, L. & Rowitch, D. H. Functional diversity of astrocytes in neural
circuit regulation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 31–41 (2017).
8.
Cahoy, J. D. et al. A transcriptome database for astrocytes, neurons, and
oligodendrocytes: a new resource for understanding brain development and
function. J. Neurosci. 28, 264–278 (2008).
9.
Lanjakornsiripan, D. et al. Layer-speciﬁc morphological and molecular
differences in neocortical astrocytes and their dependence on neuronal layers.
Nat. Commun. 9, 1623 (2018).
10. Chai, H. et al. Neural circuit-specialized astrocytes: transcriptomic, proteomic,
morphological, and functional evidence. Neuron 95, 531–549 e539 (2017).
11. Boisvert, M. M., Erikson, G. A., Shokhirev, M. N. & Allen, N. J. The aging
astrocyte transcriptome from multiple regions of the mouse brain. Cell Rep.
22, 269–285 (2018).
12. Morel, L. et al. Molecular and functional properties of regional astrocytes in
the adult brain. J. Neurosci. 37, 8706–8717 (2017).
13. Miller, S. J. et al. Molecularly deﬁned cortical astroglia subpopulation
modulates neurons via secretion of Norrin. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 741–752 (2019).
14. John Lin, C. C. et al. Identiﬁcation of diverse astrocyte populations and their
malignant analogs. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 396–405 (2017).
15. Morel, L. et al. Intracortical astrocyte subpopulations deﬁned by astrocyte
reporter mice in the adult brain. Glia 67, 171–181 (2019).
16. Zamanian, J. L. et al. Genomic analysis of reactive astrogliosis. J. Neurosci. 32,
6391–6410 (2012).
17. Itoh N., et al. Cell-speciﬁc and region-speciﬁc transcriptomics in the multiple
sclerosis model: focus on astrocytes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, E302–E309
(2018).
18. Yeh, T. H., Lee, D. Y., Gianino, S. M. & Gutmann, D. H. Microarray analyses
reveal regional astrocyte heterogeneity with implications for neuroﬁbromatosis
type 1 (NF1)-regulated glial proliferation. Glia 57, 1239–1249 (2009).
19. Kelley, K. W., Nakao-Inoue, H., Molofsky, A. V. & Oldham, M. C. Variation
among intact tissue samples reveals the core transcriptional features of human
CNS cell classes. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1171–1184 (2018).
20. Zeisel, A. et al. Brain structure. Cell types in the mouse cortex and
hippocampus revealed by single-cell RNA-seq. Science 347, 1138–1142 (2015).
21. Picelli, S. et al. Full-length RNA-seq from single cells using Smart-seq2. Nat.
Protoc. 9, 171–181 (2014).
22. Matias, I., Morgado, J. & Gomes, F. C. A. Astrocyte heterogeneity: impact to
brain aging and disease. Front. Aging Neurosci. 11, 59 (2019).
23. Sun, W. et al. Glutamate-dependent neuroglial calcium signaling differs
between young and adult brain. Science 339, 197–200 (2013).
24. Lein, E. S. et al. Genome-wide atlas of gene expression in the adult mouse
brain. Nature 445, 168–176 (2007).
25. Batiuk, M. Y. et al. An immunoafﬁnity-based method for isolating ultrapure
adult astrocytes based on ATP1B2 targeting by the ACSA-2 antibody. J. Biol.
Chem. 292, 8874–8891 (2017).
26. Satija, R., Farrell, J. A., Gennert, D., Schier, A. F. & Regev, A. Spatial
reconstruction of single-cell gene expression data. Nat. Biotechnol. 33,
495–502 (2015).
27. Huang da, W., Sherman, B. T. & Lempicki, R. A. Systematic and integrative
analysis of large gene lists using DAVID bioinformatics resources. Nat. Protoc.
4, 44–57 (2009).
28. The UniProt Consortium. UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase.
Nucleic Acids Res. 45, D158–D169 (2017).
29. Allen, N. J. & Lyons, D. A. Glia as architects of central nervous system
formation and function. Science 362, 181–185 (2018).
30. Verkhratsky, A. & Nedergaard, M. Physiology of astroglia. Physiol. Rev. 98,
239–389 (2018).
31. Allen, N. J. & Eroglu, C. Cell biology of astrocyte-synapse interactions. Neuron
96, 697–708 (2017).
32. Zhang, Y. & Barres, B. A. Astrocyte heterogeneity: an underappreciated topic
in neurobiology. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 20, 588–594 (2010).
33. Pilz, G. A. et al. Live imaging of neurogenesis in the adult mouse
hippocampus. Science 359, 658–662 (2018).
34. Chaker, Z., Codega, P. & Doetsch, F. A mosaic world: puzzles revealed by
adult neural stem cell heterogeneity. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Dev. Biol. 5,
640–658 (2016).
35. Takata, N. & Hirase, H. Cortical layer 1 and layer 2/3 astrocytes exhibit
distinct calcium dynamics in vivo. PLoS ONE 3, e2525 (2008).
36. Grosche, A. et al. Versatile and simple approach to determine astrocyte
territories in mouse neocortex and hippocampus. PLoS ONE 8, e69143 (2013).
37. García-Marqués, J. & López-Mascaraque, L. Clonal identity determines
astrocyte cortical heterogeneity. Cereb. Cortex 23, 1463–1472 (2013).
38. Paukert, M. et al. Norepinephrine controls astroglial responsiveness to local
circuit activity. Neuron 82, 1263–1270 (2014).
39. Yoshimura, Y., Dantzker, J. L. & Callaway, E. M. Excitatory cortical neurons
form ﬁne-scale functional networks. Nature 433, 868–873 (2005).
40. Lee, I., Yoganarasimha, D., Rao, G. & Knierim, J. J. Comparison of population
coherence of place cells in hippocampal subﬁelds CA1 and CA3. Nature 430,
456–459 (2004).
41. Bayraktar O. A., et al. Astrocyte layers in the mammalian cerebral cortex
revealed by a single-cell in situ transcriptomic map. Nat. Neurosci. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41593-020-0602-1 (2020).
42. Blanco-Suarez, E., Liu, T. F., Kopelevich, A. & Allen, N. J. Astrocyte-secreted
Chordin-like 1 drives synapse maturation and limits plasticity by increasing
synaptic GluA2 AMPA receptors. Neuron 100, 1116–1132 e1113 (2018).
43. Hochstim, C., Deneen, B., Lukaszewicz, A., Zhou, Q. & Anderson, D. J.
Identiﬁcation of positionally distinct astrocyte subtypes whose identities are
speciﬁed by a homeodomain code. Cell 133, 510–522 (2008).
44. Tsai, H. H. et al. Regional astrocyte allocation regulates CNS synaptogenesis
and repair. Science 337, 358–362 (2012).
45. Supèr, H., Soriano, E. & Uylings, H. B. The functions of the preplate in
development and evolution of the neocortex and hippocampus. Brain Res.
Brain Res. Rev. 27, 40–64 (1998).
46. Ge, W. P., Miyawaki, A., Gage, F. H., Jan, Y. N. & Jan, L. Y. Local generation
of glia is a major astrocyte source in postnatal cortex. Nature 484, 376–380
(2012).
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8
14
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2020) 11:1220 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

47. Costa, M. R., Kessaris, N., Richardson, W. D., Götz, M. & Hedin-Pereira, C.
The marginal zone/layer I as a novel niche for neurogenesis and gliogenesis in
developing cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci. 27, 11376–11388 (2007).
48. Rusnakova, V. et al. Heterogeneity of astrocytes: from development to injury -
single cell gene expression. PLoS ONE 8, e69734 (2013).
49. Farmer, W. T. et al. Neurons diversify astrocytes in the adult brain through
sonic hedgehog signaling. Science 351, 849–854 (2016).
50. Garcia, A. D., Petrova, R., Eng, L. & Joyner, A. L. Sonic hedgehog regulates
discrete populations of astrocytes in the adult mouse forebrain. J. Neurosci. 30,
13597–13608 (2010).
51. Clavreul, S. et al. Cortical astrocytes develop in a plastic manner at both clonal
and cellular levels. Nat. Commun. 10, 4884 (2019).
52. Farmer, W. T. & Murai, K. Resolving astrocyte heterogeneity in the CNS.
Front Cell Neurosci. 11, 300 (2017).
53. Morel, L., Higashimori, H., Tolman, M. & Yang, Y. VGluT1+ neuronal
glutamatergic signaling regulates postnatal developmental maturation of
cortical protoplasmic astroglia. J. Neurosci. 34, 10950–10962 (2014).
54. Papouin, T., Henneberger, C., Rusakov, D. A. & Oliet, S. H. R. Astroglial
versus neuronal D-serine: fact checking. Trends Neurosci. 40, 517–520 (2017).
55. Hochgerner, H., Zeisel, A., Lönnerberg, P. & Linnarsson, S. Conserved
properties of dentate gyrus neurogenesis across postnatal development
revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 290–299 (2018).
56. Artegiani, B. et al. A single-cell RNA sequencing study reveals cellular and
molecular dynamics of the hippocampal neurogenic niche. Cell Rep. 21,
3271–3284 (2017).
57. van den Brink, S. C. et al. Single-cell sequencing reveals dissociation-induced
gene expression in tissue subpopulations. Nat. Methods 14, 935–936 (2017).
58. Sakers, K. et al. Astrocytes locally translate transcripts in their peripheral
processes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, E3830–E3838 (2017).
59. Fuzik, J. et al. Integration of electrophysiological recordings with single-cell
RNA-seq data identiﬁes neuronal subtypes. Nat. Biotechnol. 34, 175–183 (2016).
60. Beckervordersandforth, R. et al. In vivo fate mapping and expression analysis
reveals molecular hallmarks of prospectively isolated adult neural stem cells.
Cell Stem Cell 7, 744–758 (2010).
61. Kharchenko, P. V., Silberstein, L. & Scadden, D. T. Bayesian approach to
single-cell differential expression analysis. Nat. Methods 11, 740–742 (2014).
62. Ting J. T., et al. Preparation of acute brain slices using an optimized N-
Methyl-D-glucamine protective recovery method. J. Vis. Exp. (2018).
63. Rasmussen, R., Nedergaard, M. & Petersen, N. C. Sulforhodamine 101, a
widely used astrocyte marker, can induce cortical seizure-like activity at
concentrations commonly used. Sci. Rep. 6, 30433 (2016).
64. Nimmerjahn, A., Kirchhoff, F., Kerr, J. N. & Helmchen, F. Sulforhodamine
101 as a speciﬁc marker of astroglia in the neocortex in vivo. Nat. Methods 1,
31–37 (2004).
Acknowledgements
M.G.H. gratefully acknowledges support from the European Research Council (Starting
Grant 281961), Fonds Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek (FWO) (Grants G066715N and
1523014 N), Stichting Alzheimer Onderzoek (SAO) (S#16025), VIB Institutional Sup-
port, and VIB Tech Watch funding. A.M. holds a SAO Pilot Grant (20180024). J.W. is a
FWO Postdoctoral Fellow (12V7519N). T.G.B. and C.P.P. were supported by the Medical
Research Council and received additional support from the European Union Seventh
Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement number 604102
(Human Brain Project). T.V. is supported by the FWO (G066715N and I001818N) and
infrastructure grants (type 1 funding from the Hercules Foundation—AKUL/13/41 and
Foundation Against Cancer project 2015-143). We acknowledge access to various core
units at VIB-KU Leuven during this project. These include the KU Leuven FACS core,
LIMONE imaging unit, VIB Nucleomics core, and VIB Electrophysiology unit. Large
capacity image storage was possible through ISPAMM funding (AKUL/13/39). We
acknowledge Maroussia Hennes, Pieter De Bleser, Mark Fiers, Ligia Mateiu, Pier Andrée
Penttila, and Keimpe Wierda for help at various stages of this project. We also thank Drs
Pierre Vanderhaeghen, Dietmar Schmucker, Carlos Fitzsimons, Omer Bayraktar and
David Rowitch for discussion, critical comments, and advice.
Author contributions
M.G.H. conceived and directed the project. M.Y.B. developed the astrocyte isolation
protocol, developed the modiﬁed Smart-seq2 protocol, and prepared single-cell cDNA
libraries. M.Y.B., F.d.V., C.M., C.K., and J.K. performed ISH experiments. M.Y.B. per-
formed gene function analysis on enriched genes using Uniprot and performed sec-
ondary analysis of the Ca2+ imaging data. M.Y.B. and A.M. performed DAVID analysis.
J.W. obtained the Ca2+ imaging data and performed the primary analysis. A.M. per-
formed bioinformatics analysis of sequencing data, under the guidance of T.G.B. and
C.P.P., as well as quantiﬁcation of ISH data and development of the online database.
J.F.V. and J.F.O. provided expert input on morphology analysis. T.V. provided access to
equipment. M.G.H. performed data analysis and wrote the ﬁnal manuscript, with input
from all co-workers, particularly M.Y.B., A.M., and T.G.B. All authors approved
submission.
Competing interests
T.G.B. is currently chief executive ofﬁcer at The Bioinformatics CRO. The remaining
authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
019-14198-8.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.G.H.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewers for
their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2020
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2020) 11:1220 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14198-8 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
15

===== Bay2012_Cilia_Cilia+NeuralTubes =====
REVIEW
Open Access
What are those cilia doing in the neural tube?
Sarah N Bay1,2 and Tamara Caspary1*
Abstract
Primary cilia are present on almost all vertebrate cells, and they have diverse functions in distinct tissues. Cilia are
important for sensation in multiple capacities in contexts as different as the retina, kidney, and inner ear. In addition
to these roles, cilia play a critical part in various developmental processes. Of particular importance is the
development of the neural tube, where cilia are essential for the transduction of the Sonic Hedgehog (Shh)
signaling pathway that specifies neuronal cell fates. This relationship is well established and is the most
recognizable function for cilia in the neural tube, but it may be part of a larger picture. Here, we discuss the links
between cilia and Shh signaling, as well as suggesting additional roles for cilia, and mechanisms for their
placement, in the neural tube.
Keywords: Cilia, neural tube development, PCP signaling, Shh signaling
Review
Since being functionally linked to the Sonic Hedgehog
(Shh) signaling pathway, primary cilia have sparked
enormous interest. The initial connection came from an
unbiased forward genetic mouse screen in which a num-
ber of the mutations disrupted genes important for cilia;
the resulting mutant embryos showed abnormal pattern-
ing of the neural tube [1,2]. Shh signaling controls
neural tube patterning [3,4], and double mutant analysis
showed cilia are critical for Shh signal transduction [1,2].
Previously, the focus of most research was on the func-
tion of motile cilia, which have a 9 + 2 microtubule
structure, but the past decade has witnessed an explo-
sion of interest in primary cilia, which lack the inner
doublet and instead have a 9 + 0 axonemal arrangement.
These cilia have now been implicated in many biological
processes, from obesity to cancer to learning and mem-
ory [5-8]. Indeed, the widespread role of cilia in various
systems is made clear by the range of phenotypes
present in the ciliopathies, which are human diseases
that arise from mutations in cilia genes [9-13]. In this re-
view, we return to the beginning and the source of all
the excitement - the embryonic neural tube.
Core progress has been made towards understanding
the mechanistic details behind the abnormal neural
patterning
of
mouse
mutants
with
disrupted
cilia
[1,2,14,15], but other roles for cilia in the neural tube
have yet to be explored. Proper positioning of cilia in
several developmental contexts is linked to the planar
cell polarity (PCP) pathway, raising the possibility that
the placement of cilia in the neural tube may be critical
[16-21]. Additionally, specialized ependymal cilia control
circulation and mechanosensation of cerebral spinal
fluid (CSF) in the ventricles of the brain [22-25], which
is derived from the anterior neural tube. Taken together,
these data give us a glimpse of what the cilia in the
neural tube are really doing there.
Formation of the neural tube
Following the specification of the germ layers, the neural
tube starts to form [26,27]. The process proceeds in
three dimensions, most critically along the dorsal-ventral
(D-V) and anterior-posterior (A-P) body axes. Within
the D-V axis, the dorsal ectoderm thickens into the
neural plate (or neuroepithelium) whose borders then
elevate into neural folds and subsequently extend to roll
into a tube. The tops of the neural folds fuse along the
midline to close the neural tube, and the structure then
separates from the overlying surface ectoderm. The floor
plate at the ventral midline is induced by Shh from the
underlying notochord, and neural patterning proceeds as
cell fates are specified along the D-V axis. At the same
time, along the A-P axis, the tube narrows and elongates
in a process termed convergent extension (CE); errors in
* Correspondence: tcaspar@emory.edu
1Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2012 Bay and Caspary; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Bay and Caspary Cilia 2012, 1:19
http://www.ciliajournal.com/content/1/1/19

this step lead to neural tube defects (NTDs), such as cra-
niorachischisis, anencephaly, and spina bifida [28].
Cilia are required for Sonic Hedgehog signaling and
neural tube patterning
Patterning of the neural tube and correct cell fate speci-
fication are integral parts of proper development, and
tight control of the Shh signaling pathway is required for
appropriate ventral patterning and specification of motor
neurons and interneurons [29,30]. The dorsal cell fates
are specified by the BMP and Wnt signaling pathways.
As the links between cilia and Wnt signaling are contro-
versial, they are well reviewed elsewhere [20,31-36].
Clearly, however, cilia are known to be required for Shh
signaling in mammals, with many members of the path-
way localizing to cilia [37-39].
In the ventral neural tube, a combination of the
amount and duration of Shh signaling specifies six
neural progenitor cell fates [29,30,40]. Due to their prox-
imity to the underlying notochord (the initial source of
secreted Shh), the most ventral cells at the midline are
exposed to the highest concentrations of Shh and are
specified as the floor plate and the p3 domain, which
will give rise to V3 interneurons [29,35,41,42]. Inter-
mediate levels of Shh induce the formation of the pMN,
p2, p1, and p0 domains, precursors to motor neurons
and V2, V1, and V0 interneurons, respectively [29,35].
The presence of Shh also inhibits dorsal cell type specifi-
cation [40]. One of the key features of the Shh gradient
that directs patterning is the balance between activator
and repressor transcriptional activities. As cells are
exposed to varying levels of Shh, a signaling cascade is
responsible for the regulation of the Gli family of tran-
scription factors (Gli1 to Gli3), which act as effectors
that can activate (GliA) or repress (GliR) transcription of
target genes. Gli1 acts solely as an activator, and, though
Gli2 and Gli3 both contain repressor domains, Gli2 acts
as the primary activator while Gli3 is the major repres-
sor in the neural tube [43-46]. It is ultimately the bal-
ance of these two opposing signals that is critical for
patterning, and cilia are crucial for maintaining this
balance.
The transduction of the signal from Shh ligand to the
Gli transcription factors is an intricate cascade involving
many elements, including Patched (Ptch1), a transmem-
brane receptor, Smoothened (Smo), a membrane protein,
Suppressor of Fused (SuFu), and Kif7, a possible motor
protein. In the absence of Shh, Ptch1 inhibits Smo and
causes repression of the pathway [39]. This results in the
proteolytic cleavage of Gli3, the major repressor, and the
subsequent repression of target genes [46]. When Shh
ligand is present, it binds to Ptch1, which removes the
repression of Smo [39]. Gli3 is no longer cleaved into
the repressor form, Gli2 is stabilized and activated, and
the transcription of target genes, among them Ptch1 and
Gli1, is promoted.
In vertebrate systems, this signaling cascade happens
in the context of the cilium, and the dynamic transport
of pathway members is key for proper transduction.
When the pathway is off, Ptch1 is localized to the cilium
whereas Smo is not; upon stimulation by Shh ligand,
Ptch1 leaves the cilium while Smo becomes enriched
there [39]. The Gli proteins, Kif7, and SuFu all localize
to the tips of cilia [47-50]. Gli proteins are bound and
stabilized by SuFu and bidirectionally trafficked along
the axoneme; without pathway activation, they are
cleaved to produce GliR [2,49,50]. SuFu also acts to in-
hibit the activation of Gli [49,50]. Kif7, the mouse homo-
log of Drosophila Costal-2, functions between Smo and
the Gli proteins to both negatively and positively regu-
late the pathway [47]. Though they are not the only reg-
ulators, core cilia proteins function prominently in
pathway control.
Intraflagellar transport mutants connect cilia transport
and Sonic Hedgehog signaling
Cilia and Shh were initially linked through forward gen-
etics in the mouse, since mutants defective in intraflagel-
lar transport (IFT) proteins showed improper neural
tube patterning, and IFT is necessary for ciliogenesis
and cilia maintenance [1,2]. The IFT particles are com-
posed of two biochemically distinct complexes: IFTA
and IFTB [51]. IFTB proteins, along with the molecular
motor kinesin-II, are necessary for transport from the
base of the cilium to the tip (anterograde transport), and
it was mutations in members of this complex that gave
the first indication that cilia and Shh signaling were con-
nected. Mutations in IFTB genes, such as Ift88 and
Ift172, lead to either absent or severely shortened cilia;
this results in no Shh signaling and a lack of both GliA
and GliR. Thus, in Ift88pol and Ift172wim mutants, the
lack of activation combined with derepression causes
neural tube mispatterning [1,2].
Together, IFTA proteins and the cytoplasmic motor
dynein power retrograde transport, which traffics pro-
teins from the tip of the cilium back toward the cell
[51]. Unlike anterograde transport mutants, which lack
cilia, retrograde transport mutants have abnormal cilia
morphology due to protein accumulation at the tip of
the cilium [48]. This can result in complete blockage of
signal transduction (as in Dync2h1, discussed below) or
in ectopic pathway activation, as seen in the Ift122 null
allele sister of open brain (sob) [48,52]. These retrograde
defects highlight the fact that the movement of Gli pro-
teins into the cilium is not sufficient to support their
proper activity. IFT proteins are not only crucial to build
and maintain the cilium, but also to regulate Gli activa-
tor and repressor function [48,52].
Bay and Caspary Cilia 2012, 1:19
Page 2 of 6
http://www.ciliajournal.com/content/1/1/19

Though originally a topic of intense debate, the claim
that transduction of the Shh pathway is intricately tied
to proper cilia structure and transport has been sup-
ported by the identification of diverse mutants that all
disrupt cilia structure or impair cilia protein transport.
The simple ability to move pathway components into
and out of the cilium is not enough for proper signal
transduction; instead, the relative rates of anterograde
and retrograde transport are critical. This is demon-
strated most strikingly by the genetic interactions of an-
terograde and retrograde trafficking mutants. Dync2h1
is the heavy chain of dynein, the cytoplasmic motor re-
sponsible for retrograde transport, and when it is dis-
rupted (as in its mutant ling-ling), Ptch1, Smo, and Gli2
are all trafficked into the cilium, but no Shh transduc-
tion occurs, causing a dorsalized neural tube [52,53].
Interestingly, a single copy of a hypomorphic allele of
the anterograde IFTB component, Ift172 (Ift172avc1/+),
rescues the patterning phenotype caused by the absence
of retrograde transport [52]. Even more intriguing is the
demonstration that reduction of IFT122, an IFTA pro-
tein,
via
Ift122sopb/+
is
also
able
to
suppress
the
Dync2h1lln/lln phenotype [52]. Though both Dync2h1
and Ift122 are assumed to be part of the retrograde
transport complex, the fact that Ift122sopb/+ rescues the
Dync2h1lln/lln phenotype suggests that Ift122 may also
act outside retrograde transport, emphasizing the nuan-
ces of transport necessary for proper signaling. This is
further highlighted by recent analysis of an allelic series
of IFTA mutants, which demonstrated that proper Shh
signaling relies on correct cilia architecture and protein
trafficking [54].
In addition to the conserved cilia proteins critical in
building and maintaining cilia through multiple phyla,
other genes that are important for cilia also regulate Shh
signaling. For example, Arl13b and Rab23 are small
GTPases, and mutations in either lead to unique defects
in neural tube patterning. Strikingly, this is due to loss
of Arl13b preventing full activation of GliA but leaving
normal GliR function intact [55]. In genetic analysis,
Arl13b functions downstream of Smo, but cell biological
analysis shows that it also controls entry of Smo into the
cilium, arguing that it may possess an additional up-
stream function [55,56]. Similarly, Rab23 may function
to affect cilia trafficking at multiple points. Rab23
mutants display ventralized neural tube patterning, and
genetic analysis has placed it downstream of Smo, sug-
gesting that it functions primarily through inhibiting the
activation of Gli2 [57-59]. More recently, quantitative
analysis of protein trafficking in the cilium has described
a role for Rab23 in overseeing the recycling rate of Smo
[60]. Furthermore, loss of another Shh inhibitor, TULP3,
leads
to ventralization
of the
neural
tube
[61,62].
TULP3, a tubby-like protein, acts to repress Shh in the
absence
of
ligand
in
a
Gli2-dependent
but
Smo-
independent manner and is vital to balancing progenitor
proliferation with neuron differentiation [61,62]. Path-
way regulators such as these, which act at multiple steps
of the cascade, suggest that the cilium as an organelle
may function for efficiency; this is to say, its small and
controlled environment appears to have evolved to use
some proteins in many different capacities as a way to
maximize the effectiveness of the system.
Right place . . . right time
Although the intricate connections between cilia and
Shh signal transduction are the best understood at
present, the cilia within the neural tube may have add-
itional functions. Cilia on cells that line the ventricular
zone of the neural tube are aligned and extend into the
lumen. This organization is most obvious at the most
ventral levels of the ventricular zone near the floor plate.
It seems unlikely that this specific orientation is an
artifact but rather suggests that the placement of these
cilia may be important to their function, to their ability
to respond to signal, or to the morphology of the neural
tube. For example, it is not yet known whether cilia in
the neural tube function solely to transduce the Shh or
if they actually sense the Shh ligand. Perhaps this
organization of cilia in the ventral neural tube is most
obvious as their length there is proportional to their
ability to detect Shh ligand. On the other hand, the pos-
ition of the cilium directly relates to the plane of cell
division. As the cells lining the lumen are highly prolif-
erative progenitor cells, a subset of which remain pro-
genitors, the positioning of the cilium could be critical
for cellular asymmetry. Shh has a well established role as
a mitogen in other tissues [63,64], and the cells in the
ventricular zone are highly proliferating progenitors; the
cilia could be present for morphogenesis in addition to
patterning. Cilia position is critical to proper function in
other developmental contexts. For example, PCP, or
non-canonical Wnt signaling, controls cilia localization
in the embryonic node [19]. Should cilia position in the
neural tube be shown to be deliberate, PCP signaling is
an excellent candidate for overseeing this process. Add-
itionally, cilia are known for their sensory function in
other contexts. In ependymal cells, which line the ventri-
cles of the brain and are responsible for CSF production
and circulation, cilia are known to have mechano- and
chemosensory roles [23,25]. Thus, it is reasonable to
speculate that properly oriented cilia in the neural tube
may sense multiple cues.
Planar cell polarity signaling is responsible for cilia
orientation
CE is critical to neural tube formation as it elongates the
tissue so that the brain and spinal cord eventually form.
Bay and Caspary Cilia 2012, 1:19
Page 3 of 6
http://www.ciliajournal.com/content/1/1/19

Cells that participate in CE must be polarized, and this
specific cell shape is dependent on the PCP cascade
[17,28,65,66]. While this role for PCP in the neural tube
is well established, recent research connecting PCP sig-
naling to cilia positioning points to another way this
pathway could function in the neural tube. If PCP signal-
ing influences cilia orientation in the neural tube, as it
does in other developmental contexts, this would pro-
vide a mechanism for the cilia to be in the right place at
the right time.
Analyses of mutants in either PCP signaling or cilio-
genesis indicate that neither PCP signaling nor CE
require cilia. Mutants with disrupted cilia display normal
CE, and cilia play no known role in the process. Despite
this, a variety of data link PCP signaling and cilia
[16-20], raising the possibility that there may be inter-
play between the two in the neural tube. Mouse models
of the human ciliopathy Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS)
disrupt any of 12 BBS genes, which are localized to the
basal body and cilium and have phenotypes reminiscent
of PCP mutants [16]. Mutations in either Inturned or
Fuzzy, which regulate PCP signaling and CE, also display
abnormal ciliogenesis and secondary Shh defects [17,21].
Together, these data indicate that PCP signaling and cilia
have a relationship. It appears that PCP function is ne-
cessary for cilia orientation, which then underlies cilia
function. In the embryonic node, PCP signaling posi-
tions cilia in order for the flow necessary for left-right
axis specification to be established [19]. Furthermore, a
core PCP component, Vangl2, genetically interacts with
the core cilia machinery protein, IFT88, in kinocilia in
the organ of Corti [18]. Together, these data show the
reliance of cilia function on proper placement and orien-
tation of the cilium.
Given the role of PCP in cilia orientation, it is vital to
determine whether or not PCP signaling influences the
position and/or organization of cilia in the ventricular
zone of the neural tube. The first step would be to
examine cilia in the neural tube of known PCP mutants
to determine if the anecdotal arrangement of cilia is dis-
turbed. Finding a way to disrupt the placement of cilia
will confirm that their position is indeed deliberate, and
from there we will be able to pose the question of mech-
anism and function.
A sensory role
What remains unclear is whether the cilia in the neural
tube are there solely to transduce Shh signaling. After
all, in the lungs, motile cilia that clear mucus also ex-
press taste receptors [67], so perhaps all cilia can per-
form multiple functions. Several systems are suggestive.
For instance, the Caenorhabditis elegans nervous system
is ciliated, and those cilia are critical for chemosensation
[68]. In the mammalian brain, sensory cilia are found on
ependymal cells, which are multiciliated epithelial cells
that line the ventricles of the brain [23,25]. Additionally,
these cilia are motile and beat to circulate CSF. Mature
ependymal cells develop from radial glial precursors,
whose cilia regulate polarization of the mature epen-
dymal cells, underscoring the importance of cilia orien-
tation [22-24]. Furthermore, cells in the choroid plexus
possess clusters of primary cilia responsible for CSF pro-
duction, and loss of these cilia causes defects in auto-
crine signaling and transcytosis, leading to misregulation
of CSF production [25]. These data establish a sensory
role for many diverse cilia and make us wonder whether
cilia of the neural tube could also have such a function.
Additionally, the idea that neural tube cilia may have a
sensory function similar to that of the motile cilia dis-
cussed raises the question of whether motile cilia could
also be playing a role in Shh signaling. Could both sen-
sory and signaling functions be common to multiple
types of cilia?
Conclusion
Since a mouse mutant linked Shh and cilia almost a dec-
ade ago, the field has focused on understanding the
mechanistic links between the two. This work has
painted a dynamic picture, whereby key components
move into and out of cilia to regulate the ratio of GliA
and GliR and ultimately specify distinct cell fates in the
neural tube. Other signaling pathways have also been
linked to cilia, although whether such links are critical
in the neural tube remains unclear. The projection of
cilia into the lumen of the ventricular zone strongly sug-
gests that they could play a sensory role, in which case
the positioning of these cilia would be crucial and highly
regulated, possibly through PCP signaling. But the big-
gest question remains: do these cilia play another func-
tional
role?
Cilia
in
other
contexts
are
strikingly
suggestive, and the field is poised to investigate for what
other tasks, if any, the cilia of the neural tube may be
responsible.
Abbreviations
A-P: anterior-posterior; BBS: Bardet-Biedl syndrome; CE: convergent extension;
CSF: cerebral spinal fluid; D-V: dorsal-ventral; IFT: intraflagellar transport;
NTD: neural tube defect; PCP: planar cell polarity; Ptch1: Patched; Sh: Sonic
Hedgehog; Smo: Smoothened; SuFu: Suppressor of Fused.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
SNB and TC wrote the manuscript. Neither has any conflict of interest to
report. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We thank Cheryl Timms Strauss for her comments on the manuscript.
Bay and Caspary Cilia 2012, 1:19
Page 4 of 6
http://www.ciliajournal.com/content/1/1/19

Author details
1Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. 2Graduate Program in Genetics and Molecular
Biology, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
Received: 27 April 2012 Accepted: 29 June 2012
Published: 1 October 2012
References
1.
Huangfu D, Liu A, Rakeman AS, Murcia NS, Niswander L, Anderson KV (2003)
Hedgehog signalling in the mouse requires intraflagellar transport proteins.
Nature 426:83–87
2.
Huangfu D, Anderson KV (2005) Cilia and Hedgehog responsiveness in the
mouse. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102:11325–11330
3.
Tanabe Y, Jessell TM (1996) Diversity and pattern in the developing spinal
cord. Science 274:1115–1123
4.
Echelard Y, Epstein DJ, St-Jacques B, Shen L, Mohler J, McMahon J,
McMahon aP (1993) Sonic hedgehog, a member of a family of putative
signaling molecules, is implicated in the regulation of CNS polarity. Cell
75:1417–1430
5.
Han Y-G, Kim HJ, Aa D, Ellison DW, Gilbertson RJ, Alvarez-Buylla A (2009)
Dual and opposing roles of primary cilia in medulloblastoma development.
Nat Med 15:1062–1065
6.
Wong SY, Seol AD, So P-L, Ermilov AN, Bichakjian CK, Epstein EH, Dlugosz
AA, Reiter JF (2009) Primary cilia can both mediate and suppress Hedgehog
pathway-dependent tumorigenesis. Nat Med 15:1055–1061
7.
Guo D-F, Rahmouni K (2011) Molecular basis of the obesity associated with
Bardet-Biedl syndrome. Trends Endocrinol Metab 22:286–293
8.
Amador-Arjona A, Elliott J, Miller A, Ginbey A, Pazour GJ, Enikolopov G,
Roberts AJ, Terskikh AV (2011) Primary cilia regulate proliferation of
amplifying progenitors in adult hippocampus: implications for learning and
memory. J Neurosci 31:9933–9944
9.
Baker K, Beales PL (2009) Making sense of cilia in disease: the human
ciliopathies. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet 151C:281–295
10.
Novarino G, Akizu N, Gleeson JG (2011) Modeling human disease in
humans: the ciliopathies. Cell 147:70–79
11.
Fliegauf M, Benzing T, Omran H (2007) When cilia go bad: cilia defects and
ciliopathies. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8:880–893
12.
Singla V, Reiter JF (2006) The primary cilium as the cell’s antenna: signaling
at a sensory organelle. Science 313:629–633
13.
Na D, Li J, Sun Z (2010) Cilia in cell signaling and human disorders. Protein
Cell 1:726–736
14.
Eggenschwiler JT, Anderson KV (2007) Cilia and developmental signaling.
Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 23:345–373
15.
Dessaud E, Mcmahon AP, Briscoe J (2008) Pattern formation in the
vertebrate neural tube: a sonic hedgehog morphogen-regulated
transcriptional network. Development 2503:2489–2503
16.
Ross AJ, May-Simera H, Eichers ER, Kai M, Hill J, Jagger DJ, Leitch CC,
Chapple JP, Munro PM, Fisher S, Tan PL, Phillips HM, Leroux MR, Henderson
DJ, Murdoch JN, Copp AJ, Eliot M-M, Lupski JR, Kemp DT, Dollfus H, Tada M,
Katsanis N, Forge A, Beales PL (2005) Disruption of Bardet-Biedl syndrome
ciliary proteins perturbs planar cell polarity in vertebrates. Nat Genet
37:1135–1140
17.
Park TJ, Haigo SL, Wallingford JB (2006) Ciliogenesis defects in embryos
lacking inturned or fuzzy function are associated with failure of planar cell
polarity and Hedgehog signaling. Nat Genet 38:303–311
18.
Jones C, Roper VC, Foucher I, Qian D, Banizs B, Petit C, Yoder BK, Chen P
(2008) Ciliary proteins link basal body polarization to planar cell polarity
regulation. Nat Genet 40:69–77
19.
Antic D, Stubbs JL, Suyama K, Kintner C, Scott MP, Axelrod JD (2010) Planar
cell polarity enables posterior localization of nodal cilia and left-right axis
determination during mouse and Xenopus embryogenesis. PLoS One 5:
e8999
20.
Wallingford JB, Mitchell B (2011) Strange as it may seem: the many links
between Wnt signaling, planar cell polarity, and cilia. Genes Dev 25:201–213
21.
Heydeck W, Zeng H, Liu A (2009) Planar cell polarity effector gene Fuzzy
regulates cilia formation and Hedgehog signal transduction in mouse. Dev
Dyn 238:3035–3042
22.
Spassky N, Han Y-G, Aguilar A, Strehl L, Besse L, Laclef C, Ros MR,
Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (2008) Primary cilia are required for
cerebellar development and Shh-dependent expansion of progenitor
pool. Dev Biol 317:246–259
23.
Mirzadeh Z, Han Y-G, Soriano-Navarro M, García-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla
A (2010) Cilia organize ependymal planar polarity. J Neurosci 30:2600–2610
24.
Kishimoto N, Sawamoto K (2012) Planar polarity of ependymal cilia.
Differentiation 83:S86–S90
25.
Narita K, Kawate T, Kakinuma N, Takeda S (2010) Multiple primary cilia
modulate the fluid transcytosis in choroid plexus epithelium. Traffic
11:287–301
26.
Copp AJ, Greene NDE, Murdoch JN (2003) The genetic basis of mammalian
neurulation. Nat Rev Genet 4:784–793
27.
Greene NDE, Copp AJ (2009) Development of the vertebrate central
nervous system: formation of the neural tube. Prenat Diagn 29:303–311
28.
Wallingford JB (2006) Planar cell polarity, ciliogenesis and neural tube
defects. Hum Mol Genet 15(Suppl 2):R227–R234
29.
Briscoe J, Ericson J (1999) The specification of neuronal identity by graded
Sonic Hedgehog signalling. Semin Cell Dev Biol 10:353–362
30.
Jessell TM (2000) Neuronal specification in the spinal cord: inductive signals
and transcriptional codes. Nat Rev Genet 1:20–29
31.
Horner VL, Caspary T (2011) Disrupted dorsal neural tube BMP signaling in
the cilia mutant Arl13b(hnn) stems from abnormal Shh signaling. Dev Biol
355:43–54
32.
Corbit KC, Shyer AE, Dowdle WE, Gaulden J, Singla V, Chen M-H, Chuang P-T,
Reiter JF (2008) Kif3a constrains beta-catenin-dependent Wnt signalling
through dual ciliary and non-ciliary mechanisms. Nat Cell Biology 10:70–76
33.
Ocbina PJR, Tuson M, Anderson KV (2009) Primary cilia are not required for
normal canonical Wnt signaling in the mouse embryo. PLoS One 4:e6839
34.
Huang P, Schier AF (2009) Dampened Hedgehog signaling but normal Wnt
signaling in zebrafish without cilia. Development 136:3089–3098
35.
Briscoe J, Ericson J (2001) Specification of neuronal fates in the ventral
neural tube. Curr Opin Neurobiol 11:43–49
36.
Ma L, Schroth J, Gleeson JG (2011) Subcellular spatial regulation of
canonical Wnt signalling at the primary cilium. Nat Cell Biol 13:700–707
37.
Haycraft CJ, Banizs B, Aydin-Son Y, Zhang Q, Michaud EJ, Yoder BK (2005)
Gli2 and Gli3 localize to cilia and require the intraflagellar transport protein
polaris for processing and function. PLoS genetics 1:e53
38.
Corbit KC, Aanstad P, Singla V, Norman AR, Stainier DYR, Reiter JF (2005)
Vertebrate Smoothened functions at the primary cilium. Nature
437:1018–1021
39.
Rohatgi R, Milenkovic L, Scott MP (2007) Patched1 regulates hedgehog
signaling at the primary cilium. Science 317:372–376
40.
Ericson J, Rashbass P, Schedl A, Brenner-Morton S, Kawakami A, van
Heyningen V, Jessell TM, Briscoe J (1997) Pax6 controls progenitor cell
identity and neuronal fate in response to graded Shh signaling. Cell
90:169–180
41.
Roelink H, Porter JA, Chiang C, Tanabe Y, Chang DT, Beachy PA, Jessell TM
(1995) Floor plate and motor neuron induction by different concentrations
of the amino-terminal cleavage product of sonic hedgehog autoproteolysis.
Cell 81:445–455
42.
Chamberlain CE, Jeong J, Guo C, Allen BL, McMahon AP (2008) Notochord-
derived Shh concentrates in close association with the apically positioned
basal body in neural target cells and forms a dynamic gradient during
neural patterning. Development 135:1097–1106
43.
Persson M, Stamataki D, te Welscher P, Andersson E, Böse J, Rüther U,
Ericson J, Briscoe J (2002) Dorsal-ventral patterning of the spinal cord
requires Gli3 transcriptional repressor activity. Genes Dev 16:2865–2878
44.
Ding Q, Motoyama J, Gasca S, Mo R, Sasaki H, Rossant J, Hui CC (1998)
Diminished Sonic hedgehog signaling and lack of floor plate differentiation
in Gli2 mutant mice. Development 125:2533–2543
45.
Matise MP, Epstein DJ, Park HL, Platt KA, Joyner AL (1998) Gli2 is required
for induction of floor plate and adjacent cells, but not most ventral neurons
in the mouse central nervous system. Development
125:2759–2770
46.
Litingtung Y, Chiang C (2000) Specification of ventral neuron types is
mediated by an antagonistic interaction between Shh and Gli3. Nat
Neurosci 3:979–985
47.
Liem KF, He M, Ocbina PJR, Anderson KV (2009) Mouse Kif7/Costal2 is a
cilia-associated protein that regulates Sonic hedgehog signaling. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 106:13377–13382
48.
Qin J, Lin Y, Norman RX, Ko HW, Eggenschwiler JT (2011) Intraflagellar
transport protein 122 antagonizes Sonic Hedgehog signaling and controls
Bay and Caspary Cilia 2012, 1:19
Page 5 of 6
http://www.ciliajournal.com/content/1/1/19

ciliary localization of pathway components. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
108:1456–1461
49.
Wang C, Pan Y, Wang B (2010) Suppressor of fused and Spop regulate the
stability, processing and function of Gli2 and Gli3 full-length activators but
not their repressors. Development 137:2001–2009
50.
Chen M-H, Wilson CW, Li Y-J, Law KKL, Lu C-S, Gacayan R, Zhang X, C-chung
H, Chuang P-T (2009) Cilium-independent regulation of Gli protein function
by Sufu in Hedgehog signaling is evolutionarily conserved. Genes Dev
23:1910–1928
51.
Rosenbaum JL, Witman GB (2002) Intraflagellar transport. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol 3:813–825
52.
Ocbina PJR, Eggenschwiler JT, Moskowitz I, Anderson KV (2011) Complex
interactions between genes controlling trafficking in primary cilia. Nat
Genet 43:547–553
53.
García-García MJ, Eggenschwiler JT, Caspary T, Alcorn HL, Wyler MR,
Huangfu D, Rakeman AS, Lee JD, Feinberg EH, Timmer JR, Anderson KV
(2005) Analysis of mouse embryonic patterning and morphogenesis by
forward genetics. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102:5913–5919
54.
Liem KF, Ashe A, He M, Satir P, Moran J, Beier D, Wicking C, Anderson KV
(2012) The IFT-A complex regulates Shh signaling through cilia structure
and membrane protein trafficking. J Cell Biol 197:789–800
55.
Caspary T, Larkins CE, Anderson KV (2007) The graded response to Sonic
Hedgehog depends on cilia architecture. Dev Cell 12:767–778
56.
Larkins CE, Aviles GDG, East MP, Ra K, Caspary T (2011) Arl13b regulates
ciliogenesis and the dynamic localization of Shh signaling proteins. Mol Biol
Cell 22:4694–4703
57.
Eggenschwiler JT, Espinoza E, Anderson KV (2001) Rab23 is an essential
negative regulator of the mouse Sonic hedgehog signalling pathway.
Nature 412:194–198
58.
Eggenschwiler JT, Bulgakov OV, Qin J, Li T, Anderson KV (2006) Mouse
Rab23 regulates hedgehog signaling from smoothened to Gli proteins. Dev
Biol 290:1–12
59.
Wang Y, Ng EL, Tang BL (2006) Rab23: what exactly does it traffic? Traffic
7:746–750
60.
Boehlke C, Bashkurov M, Buescher A, Krick T, John A-K, Nitschke R, Walz G,
Kuehn EW (2010) Differential role of Rab proteins in ciliary trafficking: Rab23
regulates smoothened levels. J Cell Sci 123:1460–1467
61.
Norman RX, Ko HW, Huang V, Eun CM, Abler LL, Zhang Z, Sun X,
Eggenschwiler JT (2009) Tubby-like protein 3 (TULP3) regulates patterning
in the mouse embryo through inhibition of Hedgehog signaling. Hum Mol
Genet 18:1740–1754
62.
Patterson VL, Damrau C, Paudyal A, Reeve B, Grimes DT, Stewart ME,
Williams DJ, Siggers P, Greenfield A, Murdoch JN (2009) Mouse hitchhiker
mutants have spina bifida, dorso-ventral patterning defects and polydactyly:
identification of Tulp3 as a novel negative regulator of the Sonic hedgehog
pathway. Hum Mol Genet 18:1719–1739
63.
Va W (1999) Purkinje-cell-derived Sonic hedgehog regulates granule neuron
precursor cell proliferation in the developing mouse cerebellum. Curr Biol
9:445–448
64.
Fuccillo M, Joyner AL, Fishell G (2006) Morphogen to mitogen: the multiple
roles of hedgehog signalling in vertebrate neural development. Nat Rev
Neurosci 7:772–783
65.
Wallingford JB, Fraser SE, Harland RM (2002) Convergent extension: the
molecular control of polarized cell movement during embryonic
development. Dev Cell 2:695–706
66.
Heisenberg CP, Tada M, Rauch GJ, Saúde L, Concha ML, Geisler R, Stemple
DL, Smith JC, Wilson SW (2000) Silberblick/Wnt11 mediates convergent
extension movements during zebrafish gastrulation. Nature 405:76–81
67.
Shah AS, Ben-Shahar Y, Moninger TO, Kline JN, Welsh MJ (2009) Motile cilia
of human airway epithelia are chemosensory. Science 325:1131–1134
68.
Bae Y-K, Barr MM (2008) Sensory roles of neuronal cilia: cilia development,
morphogenesis, and function in C. elegans. Front Biosci 13:5959–5974
doi:10.1186/2046-2530-1-19
Cite this article as: Bay and Caspary: What are those cilia doing in the
neural tube? Cilia 2012 1:19.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Bay and Caspary Cilia 2012, 1:19
Page 6 of 6
http://www.ciliajournal.com/content/1/1/19

===== Beck2008_DevCell_SCI+Xenopus =====
Developmental Cell, Vol. 5, 429–439, September, 2003, Copyright 2003 by Cell Press
Molecular Pathways Needed for Regeneration
of Spinal Cord and Muscle in a Vertebrate
biology technologies available for working on urodeles
are currently limited. By contrast, in Xenopus, it is possi-
ble to manipulate the expression of candidate factors
Caroline W. Beck, Bea Christen,
and Jonathan M.W. Slack*
Centre for Regenerative Medicine
Department of Biology and Biochemistry
involved in regeneration using the transgenic system
developed by Amaya and Kroll (1999). Furthermore, the
University of Bath
Bath BA2 7AY
temperature-sensitive heat shock promoter HSP70
(Wheeler et al., 2000) can be used to activate or inhibit
United Kingdom
selected genes at postembryonic stages. We have used
these new techniques to investigate the molecular
mechanisms of axial regeneration.
Summary
We show that regeneration of tails does not, as pre-
viously thought, occur at all stages of development.
The tail of the frog tadpole, comprising spinal cord,
While the embryonic tail is able to regenerate all the
muscle, and notochord, regenerates following partial
axial tissues (muscle, spinal cord, and notochord), re-
amputation. We show that, in Xenopus, this occurs
generative ability is consistently lost between stages 45
throughout development, except for a “refractory pe-
and 47 (4–6 days of development) and is regained after
riod” between stages 45 and 47, when tails heal over
stage 48. The presence of this refractory period has
without regeneration. Regeneration can be enabled
allowed us to study for the first time, to our knowledge,
during this refractory period by activation of either
the mechanism of acquisition of axial regenerative ability
the BMP or Notch signaling pathways. Conversely,
in a vertebrate. We find that the ability to regenerate a
regeneration can be prevented during the later, regen-
tail correlates with reexpression of genes that are in-
erative, stages by inhibition of either pathway. BMP
volved in the BMP and Notch signaling cascades, the
signaling will cause regeneration of all tissues, whereas
same pathways that drive embryonic tail development
Notch signaling activates regeneration of spinal cord
(Beck and Slack, 1999; Beck et al., 2001). Using an in-
and notochord, but not muscle. An activated form of
ducible transgenic system, we demonstrate that reacti-
Msx1 can promote regeneration in the same way as
vation of these developmental pathways is necessary for
BMP signaling. Epistasis experiments suggest that BMP
regeneration. Furthermore, activation of these pathways
signaling is upstream of Notch signaling but exerts an
during the refractory stage is sufficient to drive regener-
independent effect on muscle regeneration. The re-
ation, resulting in replacement of lost tissues. We have
sults demonstrate that regenerative capability can be
therefore begun to unravel the mechanisms that drive
enabled by genetic modifications that reactivate spe-
epimorphic regeneration in the Xenopus tail. Whether
cific components of the developmental program.
activation of the same pathways could be used to
achieve regeneration of differentiated axial tissues in
Introduction
higher vertebrates will be an interesting question for the
future.
Epimorphic regeneration is defined as the regrowth of
amputated structures from an anatomically complex
Results
stump (Goss, 1991). While thought to be a latent property
of all vertebrates, it occurs rarely in adults, and has been
Analysis of Stage-Specific Regeneration
most extensively studied in urodele amphibians, which
Competence in Xenopus Tadpoles
can regenerate limbs and tails as adults (reviewed in
While Xenopus tadpoles can regenerate their tails up to
Brockes, 1997). Anuran tadpoles can also regenerate
metamorphosis, the embryonic tail bud cannot regener-
their tails, including spinal cord, notochord, and myo-
ate (Tucker and Slack, 1995), and removal of even a
tomes, up until metamorphosis (Bosco, 1979; Filoni et
small part of the tail bud causes a defect in the final tail.
al., 1977). This involves mobilization of cells from the
Because of this discordance between embryonic and
tissues of the stump to form a regenerating bud, growth
tadpole behavior, we investigated the ability of tadpoles
of this bud, and redifferentiation of the various tissue
to regenerate tails during the period from 3 to 7 days
types to produce a near perfect replacement of the origi-
old (stages 42–48). Tadpoles from 11 spawnings from
nal. While it is often suggested that anurans only regen-
females acquired from two different sources were sub-
erate a simple, ependymal tube, lacking nerve fibers,
jected to 50% tail amputation at stages 42, 46/47, and
neurons, and ganglion cells (Goss, 1969; Piatt, 1955),
48. In all cases, regeneration was significantly reduced
in actual fact, the only defect in regenerated tails of
in stage 46/47 tadpoles compared to stage 42 or 48
Xenopus, Rana, or Discoglossus tadpoles is the failure
(Figures 1A–1C). When all the data were pooled and
of the spinal ganglia to reform (Filoni and Bosco, 1981).
standard errors were calculated, 68% of stage 42 tails
Study of urodeles has provided much information
regenerated (6%, N  299) compared to 7% of stage
about gene expression during appendage regeneration
46/47 tails (2%, N  392) and 67% of stage 48 tails
(reviewed in Gardiner et al., 1999), but the molecular
(8%, N  270). Regeneration capability increases to
near 100% in stage 49 and later tadpoles, and is then
maintained until loss of the tail at metamorphic climax.
*Correspondence: j.m.w.slack@bath.ac.uk

Developmental Cell
430
Figure 1. Axial Regenerative Ability in Xenopus laevis Tadpoles Is Lost at Stage 45/47 and Regained at Stage 48 and Later
White arrowheads show the level of tail amputation where appropriate.
(A–C) Tadpoles were subjected to removal of 50% of the postanal tail at different stages of development and allowed to recover for 7 days.
Stage 42 (A), stage 47 (B), and stage 48 (C).
(D) Tadpoles subjected to 50% tail removal at stage 46 do not regenerate a tail, but develop normally, and the remaining stump is resorbed
normally during metamorphosis. Left to right: stage 58; stage 63; stage 66.
(E and F) Tadpole tails amputated at stage 46 (E) will regenerate if they are cut again after stage 48 (F).
(G–P) Tail stumps partially cleared in glycerol and viewed under Nomarski optics.
(G–K) Regeneration process in stage 49 tadpoles. Wound epidermis is indicated by black arrows.
(G) Stage 49 tail fixed immediately after amputation.
(H) After 24 hr, the wound epithelium has formed and blastemal cells are appearing.
(I) Within 48 hr, blastemal cells have migrated into the center of the lesion and are proliferating (“cone” stage).
(J) After 3 days, the proximal blastemal cells are beginning to redifferentiate into the constituent tissues of the tail.
(K) By 4–5 days, new notochord, spinal cord, fin, and presomitic mesoderm have formed and melanocytes (black pigment cells) are migrating
into the new tail.
(L–P) In contrast, tails cut at stage 47 do not regenerate or form a blastema, and the cut surface becomes covered with a skin-like epithelium
(white arrows).
(L) By 24 hr postamputation, a skin-like epithelium has formed over the cut surface of the tail stump (white arrows). The tissue behind this
epithelium does not form a blastema.
(M–P) The wound area does not alter over time, and there is no regeneration of tail tissues.
(M–P) After 48 hr (M), 3 days (N), 4 days (O), and 7 days (P) postamputation. All tail stumps are lateral views oriented anterior to the left, and
dorsal uppermost. b, regeneration bud; f, fin; n, notochord; s, spinal cord.
When nonregenerating cases were kept, they devel-
proximal to the stump after stage 48, normal regenera-
tion did take place, resulting in the formation of a com-
oped normally to later stages and would even undergo
metamorphosis to froglets, but did not regenerate the
plete new tail (10/10 cases; Figure 1F). Xenopus tadpoles
therefore exhibit stage-dependent regenerating and
tail (Figures 1D and 1E) except in rare cases, possibly
resulting from damage to the stump (1/11 cases). How-
nonregenerating capability of tails as well as limbs (Dent,
1962; Muneoka et al., 1986; Overton, 1963). In the limbs,
ever, if the tail of such cases was reamputated just

Molecular Mechanisms of Tail Regeneration
431
regeneration ability is lost in later stages, coincident
nor are they expressed in the nonregenerating tails am-
putated during the refractory period.
with the onset of ossification of the limb skeleton (Wolfe
et al., 2000).
We used Nomarski optics to examine the regenerating
Activating BMP or Notch Signaling Stimulates
and nonregenerating tail stumps over 4 days (Figures
Nonregenerating Tails to Regenerate
1G–1P). In regenerating tadpole tails, a wound epithe-
To investigate whether reactivation of developmental
lium forms rapidly, covering the wound after 6–12 hr, and
pathways is sufficient to stimulate the regeneration pro-
within 24 hr undifferentiated cells appear immediately
gram, we used a transgenic approach. Because interfer-
ence with developmental pathways active during em-
beneath this epithelium (Figure 1H). In 48 hr, a cone-
bryogenesis is likely to prevent generation of viable
shaped bud forms (Figure 1I), and over the next 2 days,
tadpoles for study, we utilized the normally silent Xeno-
it expands rapidly, and the proximal tissues begin to
pus heat shock promoter HSP70 (Bienz, 1984) previously
differentiate into the spinal cord, notochord, myotomes,
used by others (Marsh-Armstrong et al., 1999; Wheeler
and fin of the regenerated tail (Figures 1J and 1K). (De-
et al., 2000) as an inducible transgene system in Xeno-
tailed anatomical study of the regenerating bud will be
pus. We have further validated this system by creating
reported separately; C. Gargioli and J.M.W.S., unpub-
transgenic tadpoles in which the HSP70 promoter drives
lished data). The situation in the nonregenerating tad-
either a myc-tagged protein or GFP expression (Figure
pole tails was very different. Healing of the wound was
3). Under normal culture conditions, neither transgene
observed to take place more slowly. By 24 hr after ampu-
product was detected (Figures 3A and 3C). However,
tation, a thick skin-like epithelium has formed over the
several hours following a 30 min heat shock at 34C,
cut surface, and no accumulation of dedifferentiated
expression is clearly evident (Figures 3B and 3D). This
tissue is seen (Figure 1L). These tail stumps never form
confirms that the HSP70 promoter is not significantly
a regenerating bud and there is no tissue regeneration
leaky at 25C and will generate strong and ubiquitous
(Figures 1M–1P). We conclude that there is a switch
expression following heat shock at 34C.
between two types of response to tail amputation. Am-
Transgenic F0 animals were generated, which carry
putation during the refractory period results in slow heal-
integrated double transgenes comprising active forms
ing, with formation of a full thickness epidermis over the
of either the BMP or Notch receptor under the control of
wound surface. No undifferentiated cells are seen to
the HSP70 promoter, along with a marker that expresses
accumulate beneath this epidermis. In contrast, ampu-
GFP under the control of the -crystallin promoter (Fig-
tation at stage 49 results in much faster healing and
ure 3G). Transgenics, which are identified by virtue of
formation of a specialized wound epidermis, followed
GFP expression in the lens of the eye, should therefore
by mobilization of cells from the stump, bud formation,
also carry the inducible transgene. When subjected to
and replacement of lost tissues.
heat shock, these tadpoles will activate the pathway of
interest in all cells, including those at the site of the
lesioned tail. In order to validate this system functionally,
Genes with Roles in Tail Development Are
transgenic animals carrying the Noggin transgene were
Reexpressed in Regenerating Tails
subjected to heat shock at stage 14. Transgenics exhib-
It has long been postulated that epimorphic regenera-
ited several defects consistent with inhibiting BMP sig-
tion, via the formation of a growing bud, recapitulates
naling postgastrulation, such as lack of a heart and tail
development (Stocum, 1984). By contrast with our rela-
bud-derived somites, reduced eye size, and an abnor-
tive ignorance of the mechanisms of regeneration, the
mal gut compared to nontransgenics (Figures 3E and 3F).
genetic pathways involved in tail development are quite
The transgenic procedure of Amaya and Kroll (1999)
well understood, with the BMP and Notch pathways
generates a mixture of transgenic and nontransgenic F0
being required for formation of the tail bud-derived so-
embryos. Nontransgenic tadpoles were used as controls
mites and neural tube, respectively (Beck and Slack,
for each experiment (designated WT controls), eliminat-
1999, 2002; Beck et al., 2001). We have now analyzed
ing the possibility that the transgenic procedure itself
the expression of several key tail development genes in
can influence regenerative ability. To investigate the ef-
regenerating and nonregenerating tail stumps (Figure
fect of reactivating embryonic gene expression on re-
2). We find that genes expressed in the tail bud during
generative capacity during the refractory period, tad-
early developmental stages are almost always reex-
poles were heat-shocked 3–4 hr before extirpation of
pressed in regenerating tails, but not in nonregenerating
the posterior 50% of the tail at stage 46. A further heat
tails. The reexpression of developmental genes is not
shock was administered each day for 3–4 days following
an immediate-early response to wounding, and seems
amputation. After 7 days, the extent of regeneration was
to require prior formation of a regeneration bud. Genes
scored and the results are shown in Table 1A and Figure
involved in the Notch (Notch-1, X-delta-1, and Lfng) and
4. While very few control tadpoles regenerated a tail
BMP (BMP4, Msx 1, and 2) signaling pathways are all
(Figure 4A), tadpoles carrying either the active Notch or
reexpressed in the regeneration bud, within 24 hr of tail
BMP pathway transgenes regenerated in most cases
amputation, as is the T box transcription factor Xbra.
(Figures 4B–4D).
All the genes shown except Lfng, which is upregulated
Expression of the constitutively active BMP receptor
from a basal low level during regeneration, have expres-
Alk3 frequently resulted in the formation of faithful re-
sion specific to the regeneration bud, and are not nor-
generates (90% of cases; Figure 4B), perfectly aligned
with the stump tissues and containing muscle, spinal
mally expressed in the tail at the level of amputation,

Developmental Cell
432
Figure 2. Analysis of Developmental Gene Expression in Nonregenerating and Regenerating Tail Tissues
In situ hybridization of genes involved in tail development.
(A, E, I, M, Q, and U) Stage 30 embryos.
(B, F, J, N, R, and V) Nonregenerating tail stumps, 50% amputated at stage 47 and fixed 3 days afterward.
(C, G, K, O, S, and W) Stage 49 tail stumps, 50% amputated and fixed immediately.
(D, H, L, P, T, and X) Regenerating tail stumps, 50% amputated at stage 49 and fixed 3 days later. Amputation level is shown by the black line.
(A–D) Xbra is expressed in the developing tail bud (yellow arrow) and reexpressed in the tip of regenerating tails (white arrow).
(E–H) X-delta-1 is expressed in the posterior wall of the tail bud (yellow arrow) and fin and is reexpressed in the fin and bud region (white
arrow) of regenerating tails.
(I–L) lfng is expressed in the dorsal tail bud (yellow arrow) and is expressed weakly at the cut surface of the spinal cord in nonregenerating
tail stumps and more strongly in dorsal components of the regenerating tail (white arrows).
(M–P) X-Notch-1 is expressed in somites, fin margin, and throughout the developing tail bud (yellow arrow) and is reexpressed in the blastema
(white arrow), presomitic mesoderm, and fin margin.
(Q–T) Msx2 is expressed in the tail bud leading edge (yellow arrow) and reexpressed throughout the blastema (white arrow) and fin margin.
(U–X) Msx1 is expressed in the dorsal tail bud (yellow arrow) and reexpressed dorsally in the regenerating blastema (white arrow). All are
lateral views, oriented with anterior to the left.
cord, notochord, and fin (Figures 4I–4K and 4O). Expres-
was around 50% following heat shocks, whereas with
the other transgenes used in this study, mortality was
sion of the constitutively active Notch intracellular do-
main (NICD) during early regeneration results in the for-
no different from wild-type siblings.
mation of imperfect regenerates often growing at an
angle to the stump axis (73% of cases; Figure 4C). On
closer examination, these regenerates were found to
A Hyperactivated Form of Msx1 Can Induce
Tail Regeneration
contain notochord and spinal cord, but muscle cells
were either very few in number or totally absent (Figures
The BMP signaling pathway activates several known
downstream targets, one of which is the homeobox tran-
4L, 4M, and 4P). As such, NICD regenerates scored
only 5 points (see Experimental Procedures) for partial
scription factor Msx1. Expression of Msx1 is directly
activated by BMP signaling (Suzuki et al., 1997), and
regeneration (Table 1A). Mortality rate for this transgene

Molecular Mechanisms of Tail Regeneration
433
Figure 3. Properties of the Type of Con-
structs Used in This Study
(A and B) Embryos transgenic for a myc-
tagged protein under the control of the
HSP70 promoter were either heat-shocked at
stage 14 (B) or not (A), and the expression
was
visualized
by
immunostaining
(dark
blue).
(C and D) Tadpoles transgenic for GFP under
the control of the HSP70 promoter were heat-
shocked (D) or not (C), and expression was
viewed by fluorescence.
(E and F) Embryos heat-shocked at stage 14
develop normally in the absence of the
HSP70-Noggin-Crys-GFP
transgene,
whereas their transgenic siblings develop
multiple defects consistent with BMP inhibi-
tion. Note the GFP expression in the lenses
of the eyes in transgenics.
(G) Transgene constructs used in this study.
Msx1 can induce the dedifferentiation of mouse myo-
Tail Regeneration Can Be Blocked by Preventing
Activation of the BMP or Notch Signaling Pathways
tubes in culture from quiescent multinucleate cells to
mononucleate, proliferating cells (Odelberg et al., 2000).
The above results show that activation of BMP or Notch
signaling is sufficient to promote regeneration in the
Our results show that Msx1 is actively transcribed in
regenerating but not nonregenerating tails (Figures 2V
early Xenopus tadpole tail during its refractory stages.
In order to show that activation of the BMP pathway
and 2X). Furthermore, we find that Msx1 is reexpressed
in Alk3 transgenics operated during the refractory period
is necessary for normal regeneration to occur in later
stages, we generated transgenic tadpoles carrying in-
(Figure 4F). Msx1 is not reexpressed in WT controls
or in the NICD transgenics, which form hypomorphic
hibitory transgenes, expressing either the dominant-
negative BMP receptor tBr (Suzuki et al., 1994) or the
regenerates lacking myotomes (Figures 4G and 4H).
Msx1 is a transcriptional repressor, and replacement
BMP antagonist noggin (Smith and Harland, 1992) under
the control of the HSP70 promoter, again on the same
of the repression domain of the Xenopus protein with the
potent repression domain from Drosophila evenskipped
construct with the -crystallin-GFP reporter (Figure 3G).
Tadpoles were left to develop to stages 50–52, along
creates a hyperactive form of the protein, eveMsx1 (Ya-
mamoto et al., 2000). In order to find out whether this
with their nontransgenic siblings, and both groups were
subjected to heat shock 3 hr before removal of the pos-
reagent can mediate all effects of BMP signaling on
regeneration, we made transgenic tadpoles expressing
terior 50% of the tail. In order to maintain transgene
activity, a further heat shock was given every day during
eveMsx1 under the HSP70 promoter. These develop nor-
mally at 25C, but following heat shock, the tails of stage
the next 6 days before scoring on day 7, and results are
shown in Figure 5 and Table 1B. Among the nontrans-
47 tadpoles, which would not normally regenerate fol-
lowing amputation, regenerate a well-patterned tail in-
genic group, the vast majority regenerated a full tail
within 7 days (Figure 5A). Around 50% of the transgenics
cluding myotomes, spinal cord, and notochord (83%;
see Figure 4D; Table 1A). Activating Msx1 can therefore
failed to initiate regeneration (Figures 5B and 5C),
whereas the rest regenerated anything from a small
substitute for activating the BMP pathway in tail regen-
eration, suggesting that it functions as a key component
spike to a full tail (Table 1B). Although the percentage
regenerating is reduced to only about half that of control,
of the regeneration mechanism. As a control, transgenic
tadpoles containing a truncated version of Msx1 lacking
the size and quality of the regenerates was markedly
reduced as indicated by the reduction in the regenera-
the N-terminal repression domain were tested for stimu-
lation of regeneration in response to heat shock. These
tion score (see Experimental Procedures) by 60%–70%.
The results were similar for tBr, which is a cell surface
did not regenerate any tissue following amputation of
the tail at stage 47 (0%; see Figure 4E; Table 1A).
receptor and should therefore be cell autonomous, and

Developmental Cell
434
Table 1. Effect of Enhancers and Inhibitors of BMP and Notch Signaling on Tail Regeneration
A
Regeneration
Transgene
% of Cases
Mean Regeneration
None
Partial
Total
N
Regenerating
Score (of 10)
2
p Value
HSP70-Alk3-Crys-GFP
3
18
11
32
90
6.3
35.6
0.001
WT control
46
14
3
63
27
1.6
HSP70-eveMsx1-Crys-GFP
4
10
9
23
83
7.3
28.3
0.001
WT control
36
5
2
43
16
1.0
HSP70-NMsx1-Crys-GFP
28
0
0
28
0
0
WT control
53
0
0
53
0
0
HSP70-NICD-Crys-GFP
14
37
0
51
73
3.6
44.9
0.001
WT control
39
0
0
39
0
0
B
Regeneration
Transgene/Treatment
% of Cases
Mean Regeneration
None
Partial
Total
N
Regenerating
Score (of 10)
2
p Value
HSP70-Noggin-Crys-GFP
10
9
2
21
52
3.1
50
0.001
WT control
1
0
41
42
98
9.8
HSP70-Noggin-Crys-GFP F1
22
0
0
22
0
0
WT control F1
0
0
15
15
100
10
HSP70-tBR-Crys-GFP
13
15
4
32
59
3.6
33.8
0.001
WT control
0
1
19
30
95
9.8
10 M MG132
39
3
4
46
15
1.2
78.8
0.001
DMSO control
1
1
43
45
96
9.6
C
Regeneration
HSP70-Alk3-
MG132
% of Cases
Mean Regeneration
Crys-GFP
10 M
None
Partial
Total
N
Regenerating
Score (of 10)
2
p Value
	

20
14
24
58
66
5.3


73
16
9
97
25
1.6
	
	
29
11
6
46
35
2.5
0.4
p  0.1

	
41
14
6
61
32
2.1
D
Regeneration
Transgenes
% of Cases
Mean Regeneration
None
Partial
Total
N
Regenerating
Score (of 10)
2
p Value
HSP70-tBr-Crys-RFP 	
1
3
1
5
80
5
13.4
0.001
HSP70-NICD-Crys-GFP
WT controls
14
0
0
14
100
10
(A) Induction of regeneration during refractory period.
(B) Inhibition of regeneration in older tadpoles.
(C) Epistasis: effect of blocking Notch signaling on BMP-induced regeneration during the refractory period.
(D) Epistasis: effect of induced Notch activity on regeneration in older tadpoles with blocked BMP signaling.
for noggin, which is a secreted factor and is likely to
expression between individuals can be very variable.
We were interested to know whether the incompleteness
act nonautonomously.
Notch signaling during regeneration was inhibited us-
of the inhibition seen with BMP-inhibiting transgenes
resulted from this variability. In order to test this, an F1
ing the cell-permeable protease inhibitor MG132, which
blocks the -secretase proteolysis required for genera-
generation was produced by outcrossing an 8-month-
old male transgenic frog harboring a single insertion site
tion of the Notch intracellular domain (NICD; De Strooper
et al., 1999). We have shown previously that this com-
of the HSP70-Noggin-Crys-GFP transgene. As ex-
pected, around 50% of the F1 individuals inherited the
pound inhibits the neurogenic and tail-forming roles of
Notch in Xenopus embryos (Beck and Slack, 2002).
transgene, as seen by the presence of green fluorescent
eyes. These tadpoles developed normally relative to
MG132 blocks tail regeneration very effectively without
affecting the overall growth of the tadpole (Table 1B;
their nontransgenic siblings and regenerated tails fol-
lowing amputation. However, when subjected to daily
Figure 5D).
heat shocks, 22/22 failed to regenerate their tails (Table
1B; Figure 5E). No Msx1 expression was seen in the tail
Site of Transgene Insertion Influences
Regeneration Phenotype in F0 Animals
stump after 2 days of regeneration (Figure 5F). Wild-type
siblings all regenerated a tail (Figure 5G) and expressed
In F0 transgenics, every individual has a different inser-
tion site and copy number, so the level of transgene
Msx1 in the distal portion of the regenerate (Figure 5H).

Molecular Mechanisms of Tail Regeneration
435
The high reproducibility of this experiment suggests that
much, if not all, of the variation seen in the F0 experi-
ments is due to position and arrangement of the trans-
gene within the genome.
Notch Acts Downstream of BMP Signaling
during Tail Regeneration
We have shown that either Notch or BMP pathways can
initiate tail regeneration at early stages, and inhibition
of either pathway can inhibit regeneration at later stages.
The two systems may form part of a linear pathway,
or act independently in parallel. If they act in a linear
pathway, BMP is likely to be epistatic to Notch, because
it causes regeneration of all the same tissues as Notch
but also causes additional regeneration of muscle. To
investigate this possibility, we carried out two types of
epistasis experiment. First, we looked at the effect of
removing the tails of early stage tadpoles transgenic for
HSP70-Alk3-Crys-GFP in the presence or absence of
10 M protease inhibitor MG132. Alk3 transcription,
when activated by heat shock, leads to constitutive acti-
vation of the BMP pathway and promotes regeneration
in early tadpoles, which would not normally regenerate.
However, in the presence of 10 M MG132, the tadpoles
behave like their nontransgenic control siblings, sug-
gesting that interfering with Notch cleavage suppresses
the regenerative ability of Alk3 (Table 1C; Figures 6A–
6D). A 2 test comparing the mean regeneration scores
showed that there was no significant difference between
transgenic and wild-type animals in the presence of
MG132, confirming our interpretation.
Second, we also looked at the effect of blocking BMP
signaling at late, regenerating, stages in the presence
of an active Notch signal. This was done using double
transgenics. An RFP-tagged version of HSP70-tBr-
Crys-GFP was made and used together with HSP70-
NICD-Crys-GFP to make transgenics. Previous obser-
vations by ourselves and others suggest that two trans-
genes will be cointegrated around 95% of the time if they
are linearized with the same restriction endonuclease.
Double transgenics can be identified by virtue of eye
Figure 4. Activation of BMP or Notch Signaling Pathways during
color, as they will fluoresce amber when viewed with a
the Refractory Stages Promotes Regeneration of Tail Tissues
GFP filter due to the presence of both GFP and RFP
Nontransgenic (A) and transgenic tadpole tails (C–E) shown 7 days
in the lens. Tadpoles were heat-shocked 3 hr before
after removal of 50% of the tail at stage 47. All tadpoles received
amputating the posterior 50% of their tails, and subse-
a heat shock 3–4 hr before amputation and subsequent daily heat
shocks.
quently heat-shocked every day for 7 days. Unfortu-
(A) Wild-type (WT) tadpoles as controls for transgenics. No regener-
nately, the mortality of the double transgenics was very
ation of tail tissues from the stump has occurred.
high, and despite using 55 stage 49	 tadpoles from five
(B) Tadpoles transgenic for the HSP70-Alk3-Crys-GFP construct
separate transgenic experiments, only five survived the
can regenerate their tails completely.
regeneration period and could be scored. However,
(C) Tadpoles transgenic for the HSP70-NICD-Crys-GFP construct
these few cases do show a clear difference of behavior
partially regenerate their tails, reforming the spinal cord and noto-
chord.
when compared to both the WT control tadpole group
(D) Tadpoles transgenic for the HSP70-eveMsx1-Crys-GFP con-
struct can regenerate their tails completely.
(E) Replacing eveMsx1 with the nonfunctional, N-terminal-deleted
NMsx1 in the transgene cassette abolishes regeneration ability.
brown) for muscle (12/101), spinal cord (2G9), and notochord (colla-
White arrows show the level of amputation. Tails are shown in lateral
gen II) in transgenic tadpoles subjected to tail amputation.
view, anterior to the left and dorsal uppermost.
(I–K) Tadpoles expressing HSP70-Alk3-Crys-GFP regenerate mus-
(F–H) Analysis of Msx1 expression (blue staining) in refractory stage
cle (I), spinal cord (J), and notochord (K).
tadpoles 2 days after amputation and heat shock.
(L–N) Tadpoles expressing HSP70-NICD-Crys-GFP do not regenerate
(F) Msx1 is expressed in HSP70-Alk3-Crys-GFP transgenics.
muscle (L), but do regenerate new spinal cord (M) and notochord (N).
(G) Msx1 is not expressed in HSP70-NICD-Crys-GFP transgenics.
(O and P) Transverse histological sections. Tadpoles expressing
(H) Msx1 is not expressed in nontransgenic sibling controls.
HSP70-Alk3-Crys-GFP regenerate spinal cord, myotomes, noto-
(I–N) Analysis of tissue composition of 7 day regenerates during the
chord, and fin (O). Tadpoles expressing HSP70-NICD-Crys-GFP
normal refractory period. Immunohistochemical staining (black/
regenerate spinal cord, notochord, and fin, but not muscle (P).

Developmental Cell
436
Figure 5. Inhibition of the BMP or Notch Signaling Pathways Prevents Tail Regeneration
Nontransgenic (A and D) and transgenic F0 tadpoles (B and C) shown 7 days after removal of the posterior 50% of the tail at stage 50/52.
(A)–(C) are viewed with both fluorescent and low incident light such that the GFP in the lens can be detected, indicating the presence of the
transgene. The tadpoles received a heat shock 3–4 hr before amputation and subsequent daily heat shocks.
(A) A wild-type (WT) tadpole can regenerate a complete tail in 7 days. White arrowheads indicate the level of amputation.
(B) Transgenic tadpole carrying the HSP70-Noggin-Crys-GFP construct. Tail regeneration was completely blocked.
(C) Transgenic tadpole carrying the HSP70-tBr-Crys-GFP construct. Tail regeneration was completely blocked.
(D) Stage 49 WT tadpole cultured in 10 M MG132 immediately after removal of the posterior half of the tail, for 7 days. Tail regeneration was
completely blocked.
(E–H) Regeneration phenotype is linked to inheritance of the transgene in F1 animals derived from crossing a male individual carrying the
HSP70-Noggin-Crys-GFP to a wild-type female. Following heat shocks and amputation, transgenic animals failed to regenerate their tails
(E) and Msx1 (blue staining) was not expressed in the stump (F). WT siblings regenerated normally (G), and expressed Msx1 in the blastema
(H). Black arrowheads in (G) and a black line in (H) mark the level of amputation.
or to tadpoles containing only the tBr transgene. The
remains dormant in all vertebrates. Tail regeneration of
vertebrates occurs in lizards, urodeles, and some fish
regenerates are partial, consisting of spinal cord and
notochord without muscle, and resemble the Notch-
(Bernhard and Wagner, 1992; Bryant and Bellairs, 1970;
Geraudie and Singer, 1992; Iten and Bryant, 1976; San-
induced regenerates in early refractory stage tadpoles
(Table 1D; Figures 6E and 6F). This suggests that the
tamaria and Becerra, 1991; Simpson, 1970; Spallanzani,
1769), and has been most extensively studied in uro-
situation is very similar to that in embryonic tail develop-
ment, where we have shown that Notch acts down-
deles. The urodele’s extensive regenerative capability
results from ability of stump tissue underlying the wound
stream of BMP in formation of the caudal neural tube
but that Notch is not required for muscle formation (Beck
epidermis to dedifferentiate and reenter the cell cycle
(Brockes and Kumar, 2002; Echeverri et al., 2001; Lo et
et al., 2001). Taken together, the current epistasis results
are consistent with a model where BMP signaling acts
al., 1993; Tanaka et al., 1997, 1999). Our results show for
the first time, to our knowledge, that axial regenerative
upstream of Notch in spinal cord regeneration but that
regeneration of muscle requires BMP and not Notch
ability in an anuran amphibian is not continuous through-
out development. Xenopus can regenerate axial tissue
signaling.
at stage 42, but from stages 45 to 47, as in higher verte-
brates, the wound heals over with “normal” epidermis,
Discussion
preventing the progression of the regenerative process.
As the tadpole progresses, axial regeneration ability is
Stage Dependency of Axial Regeneration
reactivated with the formation of a wound epithelium,
Capacity in a Vertebrate
mobilization of cells to form a regeneration bud, and
While mammalian muscle, bone, and skin can regener-
finally, replacement of the original tissues. The behavior
ate to some extent via stem cell expansion (Stocum,
of the tail can be contrasted with the behavior of the
2001), the regeneration of complete appendages, tails,
limbs in Xenopus, which can regenerate during the early
or damaged spinal cord does not take place in mam-
tadpole stages before ossification of the limb skeleton,
mals. In some other animals these do occur via epimor-
but lose regenerative capacity as differentiation be-
phic regeneration, examples of which can be found scat-
comes completed (Dent, 1962; Muneoka et al., 1986;
tered throughout the metazoan phyla. The widespread
Overton, 1963; Wolfe et al., 2000).
but patchy occurrence of epimorphic regeneration ca-
pacity suggests that this is an ancestral trait that has
been generally selected against and therefore lost re-
Generation and Regeneration of the Axial Tissues
Use the Same Genetic Pathways
peatedly during evolution (Goss, 1991; Korscheldt,
1927). If this interpretation is correct, it is likely that the
Notwithstanding the fact that capacity to regenerate the
tail is reacquired postembryonically, key to the process
ability to regrow a limb or repair a damaged spinal cord

Molecular Mechanisms of Tail Regeneration
437
In addition to demonstrating the role of BMP signaling,
we also present evidence for the role of a second path-
way, active specifically in spinal cord and notochord
regeneration. The Notch signaling pathway, among its
many other roles, drives formation of the tail spinal cord
during embryogenesis (Beck and Slack, 1999, 2002).
Here we show that Notch and its ligand, Delta, are spe-
cifically reactivated in regenerating tails and that the
Notch pathway modulator, lunatic fringe, is strongly
upregulated. The addition of an inhibitor known to sup-
press Notch cleavage and subsequent transduction of
the signal will prevent tail regeneration, and activation
of the Notch pathway during the early nonregenerating
stage is sufficient to induce regeneration of spinal cord,
notochord, and some fin, but muscle cells are either
found rarely, or not at all.
We have previously shown that, in development, BMP
signaling acts in two ways to stimulate tail growth, first
to activate the Notch pathway, necessary for generation
of the neural tube, and second, by a Notch-independent
Figure 6. Epistasis Experiments Suggest that BMP Acts Upstream
mechanism to generate segmented muscle. In our epis-
of Notch in Tail Regeneration
tasis experiments, a Notch inhibitor can prevent regen-
(A–D) Effect of a Notch inhibitor on BMP pathway-driven refractory
eration induced by ectopic BMP signaling and a consti-
stage regeneration. Tadpoles were amputated at stage 47 and given
tutive form of Notch can provoke spinal cord and
daily heat shocks for 1 week.
notochord regeneration in the absence of BMP signal-
(A) Wild-type (WT) tadpoles do not regenerate at this stage.
ing. This suggests that a very similar relationship be-
(B) Sibling tadpoles expressing the HSP70-Alk3-Crys-GFP regen-
tween the two pathways exists in regeneration and in
erate all the tail tissues.
(C and D) Neither WT (C) nor transgenic tadpoles (D) will regenerate
embryonic development. Furthermore, activation of
any tail tissue following treatment with 10 M Notch proteolysis
BMP but not Notch induces expression of Msx1 in the
inhibitor MG132.
regenerating tissue, suggesting that Msx1 is a specific
(E and F) Effect of combined inhibition of BMP signaling and activa-
target of BMP signaling during regeneration.
tion of the Notch pathway. The tadpoles express both HSP70-tBr-
Crys-GFP and HSP70-NICD-Crys-RFP. Following amputation
after stage 50, when WT animals regenerate tails normally, these
Experimental Procedures
double transgenics regenerate only notochord and spinal cord tis-
sue. No new muscle is formed. White arrowheads mark the site of
Transgene Constructs
amputation in (B, E, and F).
We designed a modified form of the pBSIIKS	 plasmid vector (Stra-
tagene) to enable the design and insertion of double transgenes
into the genome of Xenopus, called HGEM (heat shock green-eyed
of regeneration is the reactivation of genetic pathways
monster). This contains a Xenopus HSP70 promoter (Marsh-Arm-
strong et al., 1999) upstream of a multicloning site (MCS), followed
utilized during development. We have shown previously
by a 6 myc tag and SV40 poly A, and the Xenopus -crystallin
that BMP signaling is required for formation of all tail
promoter driving expression of GFP (kind gift of Rob Grainger’s lab)
axial tissues during development (Beck et al., 2001).
as a visible marker for transgene insertion. The HGEM vector was
Here we show that components of this pathway are
used to make several transgene constructs used in this study (see
also specifically reexpressed during the early stages of
Figure 3G) by inserting the gene to be expressed into the MCS.
regeneration and that BMP signaling is both sufficient
The entire Xenopus Noggin coding region was amplified from
CSKA-Noggin (a kind gift of Betsy Pownall) using proofreading Pfu
and necessary for tail regeneration in this vertebrate
polymerase (Promega) and primers to amplify amino acids 1–222
model organism. We have shown that the Msx1 gene is
(5
-CCCAAGCTTATGGATCATTCCCAGTGCCT-3
; contains an engi-
likely to be the main target of BMP signaling in this
neered HindIII site upstream of the ATG; 3
-GCATGAGCATTTG
case. In limb development and regeneration it has been
CACTC-5
). The product was digested with HindIII and cloned into
suggested that Msx transcription factors maintain the
the HGEM vector HindIII and SmaI sites to generate a myc fusion
proliferating and undifferentiated state of the cells in the
at the 3
 end of Noggin. HSP70-Noggin-Crys-GFP was linearized
with NotI before use in transgenics. Dominant-negative Xenopus
blastema region (Carlson et al., 1998; Koshiba et al.,
truncated BMP receptor (tBR) from pSP64T- tBR (Suzuki et al., 1994)
1998). Msx expression is downregulated as limb regen-
was excised using HindIII and SmaI to include the globin 5
 and 3
eration progresses, and ectopic expression is also
regions, and cloned into the HindIII and StuI sites of HGEM, eliminat-
known to transform mouse myotubes into mono-
ing the myc tag. HSP70-tBr-Crys-GFP was linearized with NotI
nucleate cells capable of proliferation (Odelberg et al.,
before use in transgenics. An RFP version of this construct was
2000) and to inhibit redifferentiation in cultured myo-
also made by replacing GFP with RFP (Clontech) to make HSP70-
tBr-Crys-RFP.
blasts (Song et al., 1992). Msx expression also correlates
Alk3 (Hsu et al., 1998), a constitutively active form of the BMPR-1
with ear punch healing in the MRL (healer) mouse (He-
receptor (Gln 233-Asp; a kind gift of Richard Harland’s lab), was
ber-Katz, 1999) and digit tip regeneration in wild-type
excised with EcoRI, XbaI (blunt filled) into EcoRI, and SmaI of HGEM.
mice (Reginelli et al., 1995). Taken together, this work
HSP70-Alk3-Crys-GFP was linearized with NotI before use in trans-
suggests real potential for provoking regenerative be-
genics. A truncated, inactive form of Xenopus Msx1 lacking the
havior by manipulation of the BMP pathway and its
repression domain (NMsx1 in CS2	; Yamamoto et al., 2000) was
excised with HindIII and EcoRV and cloned into the HindIII and StuI
targets.

Developmental Cell
438
sites of HGEM to make HSP70-NMsx1-Crys-GFP. Hyperactive
Regeneration Scoring
In order to discriminate between complete and partial regeneration,
Msx1 (eveMsx1 in CS2	; Yamamoto et al., 2000) was cloned using
the same sites to make HSP70- eveMsx1-Crys-GFP. To activate
we used a scale whereby 10 points are given for each tail in which
regeneration is complete (with respect to controls, with muscle seg-
the Notch pathway, a constitutively active form of the Xenopus
Notch-1 intracellular domain in CS2	 (NICD; Coffman et al., 1993)
mentation apparent), 5 points for a spike, indicating partial regenera-
tion, and 0 points for tails that fail to regenerate at all. The mean
was used. The coding region was excised with EcoRI and XbaI (filled
with klenow) and cloned into HGEM using the EcoRI and StuI sites.
regeneration score was calculated from these scores, while the
percentage of regeneration was calculated by including both partial
HSP70-NICD-Crys-GFP was linearized with NotI before use in
transgenics.
and complete regenerates as positive. Embryos made during the
transgenic procedure, but which were negative for transgene ex-
pression, were retained as controls and were treated alongside
Histology, Marker Expression, and Immunohistochemistry
transgenics in all cases. Where clear differences were seen between
Transverse paraffin sections through regenerating transgenic tails
the mean regeneration scores, this was shown to be highly signifi-
were stained using borax carmine and picroblueblack as previously
cant using 2 tests based on the null hypothesis that regeneration
described (Godsave and Slack, 1988). Whole-mount in situ hybrid-
ability in experimental (transgenic) embryos is the same as in wild-
ization for the tail bud markers Xbra, X-delta-1, X-Notch-1, lunatic
type controls (Table 1).
fringe, BMP-4, and Msx1 has been described previously (Beck and
Slack, 1998; Beck et al., 2001; Christen and Slack, 1998). An Msx2
Acknowledgments
EST was obtained from the UK HGMP Resource Centre. Antisense
DIG-labeled Msx2 probe was made from Image 3199584 EST cut
We would like to express our thanks to Malcolm Whitman for draw-
with ClaI and transcribed with T7 RNA polymerase. For whole-mount
ing our attention to the ability of stage 42 tadpoles to regenerate
immunohistochemistry, tadpoles were fixed in Dent’s fixative (80%
tails, and for the sharing of unpublished results. We also thank the
MeOH, 20% DMSO) for 90 min at 4C and stored in MeOH at 
20C.
following colleagues for generous gifts of plasmids used in this
Monoclonal 12/101 antibody was used for the detection of muscle
study: N. Marsh-Armstrong, R. Grainger, M.E. Pownall, R. Harland,
(Kintner and Brockes, 1984), the anti-neural monoclonal antibody
and N. Ueno. This work was supported by grants from the Wellcome
2G9 (Jones and Woodland, 1989) was used for the detection of
Trust and the MRC.
spinal cord, and anti-collagen II (ICN; 1/600) was used for the detec-
tion of notochord. Anti-mouse-POD IgG (Sigma) was used as sec-
ondary antibody in all cases (1/1000), and the signal was developed
Received: February 10, 2003
using an enhanced DAB staining kit (Amersham). Myc staining was
Revised: May 14, 2003
detected using anti-Myc antibody (Evan et al., 1985) and detected
Accepted: June 12, 2003
by incubation with anti-mouse-AP IgG (Vector labs) followed by
Published: September 8, 2003
color development using BM purple precipitating solution (Roche).
References
Transgenic Xenopus Tadpoles
Transgenic Xenopus laevis tadpoles were made according to the
Amaya, E., and Kroll, K.L. (1999). A method for generating transgenic
method of Amaya and Kroll (1999) except that the final high speed
frog embryos. Methods Mol. Biol. 97, 393–414.
cytoplasmic egg extract was heated to 80C for 8 min before brief
Beck, C.W., and Slack, J.M.W. (1998). Analysis of the developing
centrifugation at 70k rpm, and 10 l of the resulting supernatant
Xenopus tail bud reveals separate phases of gene expression during
was used per reaction. Restriction enzyme was omitted from the
determination and outgrowth. Mech. Dev. 72, 41–52.
reaction, and sperm nuclei were frozen in aliquots in sperm suspen-
Beck, C.W., and Slack, J.M.W. (1999). A developmental pathway
sion buffer before use.
controlling outgrowth of the Xenopus tail bud. Development 126,
1611–1620.
Activation of the HSP70 Promoter
Beck, C.W., and Slack, J.M.W. (2002). Notch is required for out-
Tadpoles were grown at 25C in 10% isotonic NAM up to stage 48
growth of the Xenopus tail bud. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 46, 255–258.
and then transferred to a recirculating aquarium. For activation of
the transgene heat shock promoter, tadpoles were placed in 100
Beck, C.W., Whitman, M., and Slack, J.M.W. (2001). The role of BMP
ml jars containing warmed water at 34C, and the jars were placed
signaling in outgrowth and patterning of the Xenopus tail bud. Dev.
in a water bath at the same temperature for 30 min.
Biol. 238, 303–314.
Bernhard, Y.M., and Wagner, G.P. (1992). Regeneration in Salaria
Tail Amputations
pavo (Bleniidae, teleostei). Anat. Embryol. (Berl) 186, 153–165.
If the amputation followed a heat shock, a 3–4 hr period at 25C
Bienz, M. (1984). Developmental control of the heat shock response
was allowed for transgene expression. Tadpoles were anaesthetized
in Xenopus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81, 3138–3142.
in 1/4000 MS222 (3-aminobenzoic acid ethyl ester; Sigma) made up
Bosco, L. (1979). Expression of regenerative capacity of caudal
in NAM/10 without gentamycin, and 50% of the tail was removed
spinal cord during the larval development of Xenopus laevis. Acta
using iridectomy scissors (John Weiss). Amputated tadpoles were
Embryol. Exp. (Palermo) 3, 275–286.
allowed to recover from anesthesia in NAM/10 without gentamycin
Brockes, J.P. (1997). Amphibian limb regeneration: rebuilding a
before returning to aquarium tanks. For Notch inhibition experi-
complex structure. Science 276, 81–87.
ments, tadpoles were incubated following recovery in petri dishes
containing 10 M MG132 (Calbiochem) in NAM/10 without genta-
Brockes, J.P., and Kumar, A. (2002). Plasticity and reprogramming
mycin, and this was refreshed daily. MG132 was made up as a 10
of differentiated cells in amphibian regeneration. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell
mM stock in DMSO, and controls were treated with an equivalent
Biol. 3, 566–574.
DMSO concentration as a vehicle control.
Bryant, S.V., and Bellairs, A. (1970). Development of regenerative
capacity in the lizard, Lacerta vivipara. Am. Zool. 10, 167–173.
Photography and Microscopy
Carlson, M.R., Bryant, S.V., and Gardiner, D.M. (1998). Expression
GFP was visualized in live tadpoles, anaesthetized as above, using
of Msx-2 during development, regeneration, and wound healing in
a Leica Fluo III fluorescent dissecting microscope with a GFP2 filter
axolotl limbs. J. Exp. Zool. 282, 715–723.
set. Images were captured using a SPOT RT camera (Diagnostic
Christen, B., and Slack, J.M.W. (1998). All limbs are not the same.
Instruments). For differential interference contrast microscopy (DIC),
Nature 395, 230–231.
tadpoles were fixed in MEMFA for 2 hr and then rinsed with PBS
before gradual transfer to 100% glycerol. Tails were mounted in
Coffman, C., Skoglund, P., Harris, W., and Kintner, C. (1993). Expres-
sion of an extracellular deletion of Xotch diverts cell fate in Xenopus
glycerol under a cover slip and examined using a Nikon Eclipse
E800 compound microscope with a 10 DIC objective.
embryos. Cell 73, 659–671.

Molecular Mechanisms of Tail Regeneration
439
Dent, J.N. (1962). Limb regeneration in larvae and metamorphosing
Digit tip regeneration correlates with regions of Msx1 (Hox 7) expres-
sion in fetal and newborn mice. Development 121, 1065–1076.
individuals of the South African clawed toad. J. Morphol. 110, 61–78.
Santamaria, J.A., and Becerra, J. (1991). Tail fin regeneration in
De Strooper, B., Annaert, W., Cupers, P., Saftig, P., Craessaerts, K.,
teleosts: cell-extracellular matrix interaction in blastemal differentia-
Mumm, J.S., Schroeter, E.H., Schrijvers, V., Wolfe, M.S., Ray, W.J.,
tion. J. Anat. 176, 9–21.
et al. (1999). A presenilin-1-dependent -secretase-like protease
mediates release of Notch intracellular domain. Nature 398,
Simpson, S.B.J. (1970). Studies on regeneration of the lizard’s tail.
518–522.
Am. Zool. 9, 157–165.
Echeverri, K., Clarke, J.D., and Tanaka, E.M. (2001). In vivo imaging
Smith, W.C., and Harland, R.M. (1992). Expression cloning of noggin,
indicates muscle fiber dedifferentiation is a major contributor to the
a new dorsalizing factor localized to the Spemann organizer in Xeno-
regenerating tail blastema. Dev. Biol. 236, 151–164.
pus embryos. Cell 70, 829–840.
Evan, G.I., Lewis, G.K., Ramsay, G., and Bishop, J.M. (1985). Isola-
Song, K., Wang, Y., and Sassoon, D. (1992). Expression of Hox-
tion of monoclonal antibodies specific for human c-myc proto-onco-
7.1 in myoblasts inhibits terminal differentiation and induces cell
gene product. Mol. Cell. Biol. 5, 3610–3616.
transformation. Nature 360, 477–481.
Spallanzani, L. (1769). Prodromo di un opera da imprimersi sopra
Filoni, S., and Bosco, L. (1981). Comparative analysis of the regener-
ative capacity of caudal spinal cord in larvae of several anuran
la riproduzioni animali (An essay on animal reproduction) (London:
T. Becket and deHondt).
amphibian species. Acta Embryol.Morphol. Exp. 2, 199–226.
Stocum, D.L. (1984). The urodele limb regeneration blastema. Deter-
Filoni, S., Bosco, L., and Carlizzi, C. (1977). La rigenerazione del
mination and organization of the morphogenetic field. Differentiation
midello spinale della coda di larvae di Xenopus laevis operate negli
27, 13–28.
tardivi. Rend. Acc. Naz. Lincei 63, 440–446.
Stocum, D.L. (2001). Stem cells in regenerative biology and medi-
Gardiner, D.M., Carlson, M.R., and Roy, S. (1999). Towards a func-
cine. Wound Repair Regen. 9, 429–442.
tional analysis of limb regeneration. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 10,
385–393.
Suzuki, A., Thies, R., Yamaji, N., Song, J., Wozney, J., Murakami,
K., and Ueno, N. (1994). A truncated bone morphogenetic protein
Geraudie, J., and Singer, M. (1992). The fish fin regenerate. Monogr.
receptor affects dorsal-ventral patterning in the early Xenopus em-
Dev. Biol. 23, 62–72.
bryo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 10255–10259.
Godsave, S.F., and Slack, J.M.W. (1988). Mesoderm-inducing fac-
Suzuki, A., Ueno, N., and Hemmati-Brivanlou, A. (1997). Xenopus
tors: a small class of molecules. Development 102, 555–566.
msx1 mediates epidermal induction and neural inhibition by BMP4.
Goss, R.J. (1969). Principles of Regeneration (New York: Academic
Development 124, 3037–3044.
Press).
Tanaka, E.M., Gann, A.A., Gates, P.B., and Brockes, J.P. (1997).
Goss, R.J. (1991). The natural history (and mystery) of regeneration.
Newt myotubes reenter the cell cycle by phosphorylation of the
In A History of Regeneration Research: Milestones in the Evolution
retinoblastoma protein. J. Cell Biol. 136, 155–165.
of a Science, C.E. Dinsmore, ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Tanaka, E.M., Drechsel, D.N., and Brockes, J.P. (1999). Thrombin
Press), pp. 7–23.
regulates S-phase re-entry by cultured newt myotubes. Curr. Biol.
Heber-Katz, E. (1999). The regenerating mouse ear. Semin. Cell Dev.
9, 792–799.
Biol. 10, 415–419.
Tucker, A.S., and Slack, J.M.W. (1995). The Xenopus laevis tail-
Hsu, D.R., Economides, A.N., Wang, X., Eimon, P.M., and Harland,
forming region. Development 121, 249–262.
R.M. (1998). The Xenopus dorsalizing factor Gremlin identifies a
Wheeler, G.N., Hamilton, F.S., and Hoppler, S. (2000). Inducible gene
novel family of secreted proteins that antagonize BMP activities.
expression in transgenic Xenopus embryos. Curr. Biol. 10, 849–852.
Mol. Cell 1, 673–683.
Wolfe, A.D., Nye, H.L., and Cameron, J.A. (2000). Extent of ossifica-
Iten, L.E., and Bryant, S.V. (1976). Stages of tail regeneration in the
tion at the amputation plane is correlated with the decline of blas-
newt, Notophthalamus viridescens. J. Exp. Zool. 196, 283–292.
tema formation and regeneration in Xenopus laevis hindlimbs. Dev.
Jones, E.A., and Woodland, H.R. (1989). Spatial aspects of neural
Dyn. 218, 681–697.
induction in Xenopus laevis. Development 107, 785–791.
Yamamoto, T.S., Takagi, C., and Ueno, N. (2000). Requirement of
Kintner, C.R., and Brockes, J.P. (1984). Monoclonal antibodies iden-
Xmsx-1 in the BMP-triggered ventralization of Xenopus embryos.
tify blastemal cells derived from dedifferentiating muscle in newt
Mech. Dev. 91, 131–141.
limb regeneration. Nature. 308, 67–69.
Korscheldt, E. (1927). Regeneration und Transplantation (Berlin:
Borntraeger).
Koshiba, K., Kuroiwa, A., Yamamoto, H., Tamura, K., and Ide, H.
(1998). Expression of Msx genes in regenerating and developing
limbs of axolotl. J. Exp. Zool. 282, 703–714.
Lo, D.C., Allen, F., and Brockes, J.P. (1993). Reversal of muscle
differentiation during urodele limb regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 90, 7230–7234.
Marsh-Armstrong, N., Huang, H., Berry, D.L., and Brown, D.D. (1999).
Germ-line transmission of transgenes in Xenopus laevis. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 96, 14389–14393.
Muneoka, K., Holler-Dinsmore, G., and Bryant, S.V. (1986). Intrinsic
control of regenerative loss in Xenopus laevis limbs. J. Exp. Zool.
240, 47–54.
Odelberg, S.J., Kollhoff, A., and Keating, M.T. (2000). Dedifferentia-
tion of mammalian myotubes induced by msx1. Cell 103, 1099–1109.
Overton, J. (1963). Patterns of limb regeneration in Xenopus laevis.
J. Exp. Zool. 154, 153–161.
Piatt, J. (1955). Regeneration in the central nervous system of am-
phibia. In Regeneration in the Central Nervous System, W.F. Windle,
ed. (Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas).
Reginelli, A.D., Wang, Y.Q., Sassoon, D., and Muneoka, K. (1995).

===== Beck2009_DevDyn_Xenopus+Regeneration =====
SPECIAL ISSUE REVIEWS–A PEER REVIEWED FORUM
Beyond Early Development: Xenopus as an
Emerging Model for the Study of Regenerative
Mechanisms
Caroline W. Beck,1* Juan Carlos Izpisu´ a Belmonte,2,3 and Bea Christen2
While Xenopus is a well-known model system for early vertebrate development, in recent years, it has also
emerged as a leading model for regeneration research. As an anuran amphibian, Xenopus laevis can
regenerate the larval tail and limb by means of the formation of a proliferating blastema, the lens of the eye
by transdifferentiation of nearby tissues, and also exhibits a partial regeneration of the postmetamorphic
froglet forelimb. With the availability of inducible transgenic techniques for Xenopus, recent experiments
are beginning to address the functional role of genes in the process of regeneration. The use of soluble
inhibitors has also been very successful in this model. Using the more traditional advantages of Xenopus,
others are providing important lineage data on the origin of the cells that make up the tissues of the
regenerate. Finally, transcriptome analyses of regenerating tissues seek to identify the genes and cellular
processes that enable successful regeneration. Developmental Dynamics 238:1226–1248, 2009.
© 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
Key words: Xenopus; regeneration; blastema; epimorphic; transdifferentiation; tail; limb; lens; transcriptome; Hsp70
Accepted 6 January 2009
INTRODUCTION
While all animals have evolved strat-
egies to respond to injury and disease,
a minority are also able to replace lost
appendages or organ parts. This type
of regeneration occurs rarely and in a
limited way among the well-charac-
terized vertebrate model organisms.
Mice can regenerate their extreme
digit tips and zebraﬁsh their ﬁns,
brain, and heart tissue. Urodele am-
phibians (those that retain the tail af-
ter metamorphosis such as the newts
and salamanders as well as the neo-
tenic axolotl) are much better at re-
generation and can restore limbs,
tails, the lens1 and retina of the eye,
and heart tissue, even as adults. This
remarkable ability makes urodeles a
very attractive model for regeneration
study, and much progress has been
made in recent years in unlocking the
secrets of the urodeles’ regenerative
powers, which seem to depend, at
least in part, on their ability to de-
differentiate adult cells and return
them to a proliferating, embryonic-
like state (for review, see Brockes and
Kumar, 2002; Chaar and Tsilﬁdis,
2006; Straube and Tanaka, 2006).
Here, we review classical and con-
temporary evidence that the aquatic
South African clawed frog Xenopus
laevis, which has contributed so much
to our understanding of vertebrate de-
velopment over the past 20 years, is
also an ideal model to study regener-
ation. The embryos develop ex utero
and have a free-living larval stage,
which makes them accessible for ma-
nipulation at all stages of develop-
ment. Xenopus are easy to keep and
can be spawned all year round in re-
sponse to a simple hormone injection,
1With the exception of the axolotl, which cannot
regenerate a lost lens.
1Department of Zoology and Genetics Otago, University of Otago, New Zealand
2Center of Regenerative Medicine in Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
3Gene Expression Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California
*Correspondence to: Caroline W. Beck, Department of Zoology, University of Otago, P.O. Box 56, Dunedin 9064, New Zealand.
E-mail: caroline.beck@otago.ac.nz
DOI 10.1002/dvdy.21890
Published online 11 March 2009 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).
DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS 238:1226–1248, 2009
© 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

producing thousands of offspring at a
time, and both normal development
and regeneration are well described.
Xenopus and other frogs are anuran
amphibians, that is, they lose their
tails at metamorphosis. Like most
urodeles, they also possess the ability
to regenerate tails, limbs, and the lens
of the eye, but unlike the urodeles,
this regenerative potential is limited.
The
regenerated
tadpole
tail
is
slightly different from the original,
and does not regenerate at all over a
brief developmental period, and the
regenerative capacity of the limbs and
lens undergoes an ontogenic decline,
whereby younger animals regenerate
better than older ones. Far from being
a disadvantage, this stage-dependent
regenerative ability means that Xeno-
pus provides a system in which the
progressive loss of regenerative ability
can be studied. This enables a unique
approach in which both functional loss
and gain of function experiments di-
rected at understanding the molecular
processes controlling regeneration can
be used. In addition, as a well-estab-
lished model organism for the study of
embryonic development, useful tools
are available for this system, such as
grafting protocols, transgenic tech-
niques, extensive collections of ex-
pressed sequence tags (ESTs), and
whole-mount in situ hybridization.
This combination of genetic manipula-
tion, fecundity, and variable regener-
ative ability make the clawed frog an
excellent model system in which to
study the molecular basis of regener-
ative phenomena.
In the ﬁrst section, we review the
process of regeneration in Xenopus.
We will outline and illustrate the mor-
phological stages of each process and
discuss the limits to regenerative abil-
ity. Next, we will summarize and syn-
thesize the results of recent work that
use candidate gene approaches or
gene-hunting strategies to identify
the molecular mechanisms that drive
and control the regenerative process.
Strategies for activating (gain of func-
tion) and inhibiting (loss of function)
biochemical processes in Xenopus lar-
vae have been developed and com-
bined, and a molecular pathway for
regeneration of the tail is beginning to
fall into place. Candidate gene ap-
proaches
are
ideal
for
identifying
mechanisms common to development
or in homeostasis, but it is likely that
novel mechanisms also play a part in
regeneration in Xenopus. We will dis-
cuss
gene-hunting
strategies
that
have been used with a view to identi-
fying genes whose expression appears
to be differentially regulated during
the process of regeneration. There
have been several such studies, and
partial meta-analysis of some of these
data suggests that several genes are
commonly associated with regenera-
tion. In the ﬁnal, perspectives section,
we discuss our vision for the future of
the ﬁeld and describe some exciting
new leads that may establish Xenopus
even more ﬁrmly as a leading regen-
eration model over the next few years.
It would be remiss to write such a
section without mentioning the closely
related Xenopus (Silurana) tropicalis,
which is now the preferred amphibian
species for genetic analyses. With its
true diploid status and shorter gener-
ation time, known genome sequence
and possibilities for true genetic ma-
nipulation, this species opens up new
and exciting possibilities for regener-
ation research. We hope that this re-
view will both enable and encourage
more researchers to take up the chal-
lenge of understanding regenerative
processes in Xenopus.
1. REGENERATIVE
PROCESSES IN XENOPUS
In this ﬁrst section, we will describe
four of the better-known regenerative
processes that occur in Xenopus. Limb
bud, postmetamorphic limb, tail, and
lens regeneration will be discussed in
detail in this review. Due to space con-
straints, neither the regeneration of
the intestine during metamorphosis
nor the regeneration of the neural ret-
ina will be discussed here, and we di-
rect those interested in these pro-
cesses to recent publications by Slack
et al. (2008) and Yoshii et al. (2007).
We will deﬁne the limits of regenera-
tion in each case, and discuss which
processes are thought to inﬂuence
this. Progress toward understanding
the cell biology of the process will be
described speciﬁcally for Xenopus, as
there are some notable differences
from urodeles.
1.1 Tail Regeneration
The ability of Xenopus tadpoles to re-
generate the larval tail is intriguing,
because the tail is composed of the
same axial tissues (spinal cord, noto-
chord2, and somites3) as the trunk,
which cannot regenerate (Fig. 1). The
embryonic tail bud of Xenopus cannot
regenerate and removal of even a
small part of the tail bud results in a
deﬁcit in the ﬁnal tail (Tucker and
Slack, 1995b). In contrast, the larval
tail can regenerate (with the exception
noted below), from st. 404 right up un-
til metamorphic climax (st. 60) when
the tail is absorbed (Filoni et al., 1977;
Bosco, 1979). As much as 75% of the
post-anal tail can be safely removed
without
compromising
the
animal,
and a full-length tail is regenerated
after 10–14 days (Fig. 1A) regardless
of the anterior posterior level at which
the tail is cut. This is intriguing be-
cause the anterior anatomical or post-
anal tail is derived from trunk cells
and not from the tail bud, which con-
tributes just the posterior 40% of the
tail. The tail always regenerates in
the same way, regardless of the level
at which the tail is amputated; hence,
whether cells at the newly formed
stump are trunk or tail bud derived.
The morphology of this process has
been described in detail (Gargioli and
Slack, 2004). After amputation, epi-
dermal cells migrate to cover the
wound with a thin epithelial layer, the
wound
epithelium,
which
lacks
a
basement membrane. Over the next
few days, the cut end of the spinal cord
closes to form a blind-ended tube with
an enlarged distal lumen, the neural
ampulla (Fig. 1C; Stefanelli, 1951;
Filoni et al., 1977). The notochord,
which as a mature structure is com-
posed of large vacuolated cells sur-
2The notochord is an embryonic structure and is
not found in the postmetamorphic frog or the
retained tail of adult urodeles.
3The somites contribute to the vertebrae in the
trunk region, but in the post-anal tail, they de-
velop into muscles that degenerate at metamor-
phosis.
4Xenopus laevis development is divided into 65
anatomically identiﬁable stages according to
Nieuwkoop and Faber (1967). These stages are
referred to throughout this review as st., and
should not be confused with Freeman stages used
in lens regeneration.
XENOPUS REGENERATION 1227

rounded by a sheath of nonvacuolated
cells, develops a bullet-shaped mass of
cells at the cut end that may arise
from the peripheral sheath cells. Mus-
cle ﬁbers at the cut surface appear to
degenerate and undifferentiated, mes-
enchymal-like cells accumulate around
the neural ampulla and notochord tip
(Fig. 1C; Gargioli and Slack, 2004). It
is these mesenchymal-like cells that
most closely resemble a regeneration
blastema in the Xenopus tail (see Box
1).
An exception to the otherwise con-
tinuous regenerative ability of the tail
occurs at around st. 46–47, when the
tadpole begins feeding behavior. The
majority of tadpoles whose tails are
partially removed at this stage, called
the “refractory period,” do not regen-
erate any tail tissues, instead consis-
tently forming skin across the wound
(Beck et al., 2003). Regenerative ca-
pacity then increases from around
70% at st. 48 to close to 100% at st. 49
and above. The reason for the tran-
sient refractory period is not clear, but
wound healing is more rapid in tails
that are going to regenerate success-
fully, taking 6–12 hr, and the result-
ing wound epithelium is very thin. In
contrast, nonregenerating tail stumps
heal slower (24 hr) and become cov-
ered with a much more distinct, skin-
like epidermis. Interestingly, animals
operated at this stage can regenerate
tails if the tip of the stump is removed
after the refractory period is over, so it
seems that the skin-like epidermis
may be nonpermissive to regeneration
(Beck et al., 2003). Other differences
have been noted during the refractory
period, such as lower levels of endog-
enous
bone
morphogenetic
protein
(Bmp) transcripts (Beck et al., 2006), a
higher rate of apoptosis (Tseng et al.,
2007) and a failure of the wound epi-
thelial membrane to re-polarize nor-
mally (Adams et al., 2007). Identiﬁca-
tion of a refractory period in tail
regeneration has enabled researchers
to perform both gain and loss of func-
tion experiments in the same organ-
ism to identify regenerative mecha-
nisms (see Section 2).
The posterior portion of the post-
anal tail develops in part from the tail
bud, initially described as a simple
blastema (Deuchar, 1975a) and now
known to be composed of multiple dis-
crete expression zones established as
Fig. 1.
Regeneration of the tail. A: Time course of tail regeneration. Unoperated tail is shown at
the top (WT), labeled to show the arrangement of the axial tissues. Note that the spinal cord lies on
top of the notochord and is hard to see. After removal of the posterior 20% of the tail length, the
extent of regeneration is shown after 1, 4, 10, and 14 days. Note the continuity of the axial
structures between the original and regenerated tissues. B: Schematic of a transverse section
through a Xenopus tadpole tail to show the arrangement of the tissues that must be regenerated.
C: Sagittal section through a 3 day regenerating tadpole tail to show the spinal cord terminating in
the blind-ended neural ampulla. The neural ampulla typically contains an enlarged lumen, contin-
uous with the lumen of the stump spinal cord. The vacuolated notochord cells of the stump are
continuous with a bullet-shaped structure composed of cells resembling the sheath cells that
surround the notochord; later on, these cells will vacuolate and enlarge, becoming indistinguish-
able from the stump notochord cells. There are also undifferentiated, mesenchymal-like cells found
around these two structures. White arrows indicate amputation plane. Scale bar  200 m.
Box 1: Does the tail regenerate via a blastema or
regeneration bud?
The term blastema, when used to describe the signature epimorphic
regeneration of the urodele limb, is deﬁned as a mass of undifferentiated,
proliferating cells arising from epithelial-mesenchymal interactions and
containing intrinsic morphogenetic information (Carlson, 2007). Where
then, is the tail blastema? In addition to the neural ampulla and notochord,
there are a number of undifferentiated, mesenchymal-like cells found be-
neath the wound epithelium. Gargioli and Slack describe these cells as the
regeneration blastema, and combination of the blastema with the neural
ampulla and notochord cells as the regeneration bud (Gargioli and Slack,
2004). However, the rates of cell proliferation are highest in the spinal cord
and notochord, epithelium and ﬁns, with the lowest rate being found in the
undifferentiated mesenchyme (Beck et al., 2006). Perhaps the safest as-
sumption given current knowledge is that the neural ampulla, bullet like
notochord cells, and mesenchyme together make up the regeneration bud,
and that the term blastema does not really apply to the tail.
1228 BECK ET AL.

a result of interaction between three
key tissues in the posterior of the em-
bryo: the neural plate, posterior meso-
derm,
and
posterior
notochord
(Tucker and Slack, 1995a). In this
sense, the tail bud derived tail can be
thought of as developing rather like
the limb buds, as an outgrowth pro-
duced by the juxtaposition of cells
from different backgrounds. Develop-
ment of the tail bud is well studied
and
known
to
involve
signaling
through Bmp and Notch pathways
(Beck and Slack, 1998, 1999a, 2002;
Beck et al., 2001). During regenera-
tion, the process of replacing the lost
tail might be expected to use the same
mechanisms that were used in its de-
velopment. Several studies have com-
pared gene expression in developing
and regenerating tails. Both, genes
associated with Notch signalling and
Msx genes were expressed similarly
during development and regeneration
of the tail (Beck et al., 2003). Msx1
and 2 are transcriptional repressors
known
to
function
downstream
of
Bmp signalling (Suzuki et al., 1997)
and are associated with dedifferentia-
tion of muscle cells in urodele append-
age
regeneration
(Odelberg
et
al.,
2000). Other genes known to be in-
volved in development, such as poste-
rior Hox genes, are also re-expressed
during tail regeneration (Christen et
al., 2003), and ﬁbroblast growth fac-
tor-2 (fgf-2 or b-fgf) is up-regulated in
the
spinal
cord
after
amputation
(Zhang et al., 2000).
In addition to common mechanisms,
there are also reported differences be-
tween gene expression in developing
and regenerating tails. Two Bmp in-
hibitors, Chordin and Noggin1, are ex-
pressed in the developing tail bud, but
expression was not detected during re-
generation (Sugiura et al., 2004). It is
not known whether other mechanisms
exist in the regenerating tail to regu-
late Bmp signalling, but multiple nog-
gin homologues are known to exist in
Xenopus (Eroshkin et al., 2006). Nog-
gin-2 and -4 are not expressed in the
tail bud, but their expression during
regeneration has not been examined.
Furthermore, expression of the mor-
phogen sonic hedgehog (shh), nor-
mally found in the ﬂoor plate of the
ventral neural tube, appears to be ab-
sent from this tissue in regenerates
(Sugiura et al., 2004), suggesting that
spinal cord patterning of regenerates
may be defective.
Tail regeneration in Xenopus laevis
has been subject to intensive fate
mapping studies, which have yet to be
repeated in the limb or lens. Gargioli
and Slack (Gargioli and Slack, 2004)
used transgenic techniques developed
by Kroll and Amaya (1996) to create
embryos expressing green ﬂuorescent
protein (GFP) at high levels in the
majority of cells, using the viral cyto-
megalovirus (CMV) promoter. Regions
of tissue from CMV-GFP neurula em-
bryos corresponding to the future tail
muscle, notochord or spinal cord were
transplanted
into
wild-type
hosts.
Tadpoles that developed from these
animals were then subjected to partial
tail amputations, cutting through the
labeled region so that stump cells of
each particular axial tissue in turn
could be tracked in the regenerate. Re-
sults showed clearly that the spinal
cord regenerates exclusively from the
stump spinal cord (neural ampulla)
and the notochord from the notochord
stump cells, and that labeled stump
cells do not switch fate, because la-
beled cells are never found in other
tissues of the regenerate (Gargioli and
Slack, 2004; see Fig. 2A,B). The story
for muscle tissue though, was not so
straightforward.
In
tadpoles
with
muscle (presomitic mesoderm) labeled
grafts, no labeled cells were seen in
the regenerate (Fig. 2C). However,
when the same presomitic mesoderm
grafts were done using older embryos,
in which the neural tube has begun to
close and convergence and extension
of the mesoderm has begun, labeled
cells were seen in the regenerate (Fig.
2D).
Further
investigation
showed
that regenerated tail muscle does not
originate from the myoﬁbers, but from
a population of stem like satellite cells
that express pax7. These cells are
present in the later stage grafts but
not in the early stage grafts and are
necessary for muscle regeneration in
the Xenopus tadpole tail (Gargioli and
Slack, 2004; Chen et al., 2006b). While
the mechanisms of muscle regenera-
tion (by means of stem cell recruit-
ment) and that of the spinal cord and
notochord (hyperplasia) differ, an im-
portant observation from these results
is that there is no transdifferentiation
(a type of metaplasia, or switching of
cell fates) between the three axial tis-
sues. This lack of transdifferentiation
has also been conﬁrmed by a second
study utilizing transgenic tadpoles ex-
pressing yellow ﬂuorescent protein
(YFP) in the muscle cells. In this case,
the tissue speciﬁc promoter cardiac
actin was used, by means of a cre-lox
binary system, to show that no major
transdifferentiation of muscle cells to
other cell types occurs in the regener-
ate (Ryffel et al., 2003). This differs
markedly from the situation in urode-
les, for which dedifferentiating muscle
ﬁbers
contribute
to
the
blastema
(Echeverri et al., 2001), and transdif-
ferentiation
has
been
observed
(Echeverri and Tanaka, 2002). When
the tail is partially amputated, the cut
spinal cord is thought to provide neu-
rotrophic factors that promote regen-
eration, and ablation of the spinal
cord5 in adult urodeles completely
prevents blastema formation and sub-
sequent tail regeneration (Holtzer,
1956). In contrast, spinal cord abla-
tion in Xenopus laevis tadpoles re-
duces proliferation and retards differ-
entiation of the notochord cells at the
distal tip, leading to regeneration of a
twisted, shorter tail than controls
(Taniguchi et al., 2008). Early on,
there is no effect of spinal cord abla-
tion on wound healing or muscle
regeneration.
Later,
however,
the
myoﬁbers appear to degenerate, sug-
gesting that the spinal cord provides a
neurotrophic factor needed for sur-
vival of myoﬁbers. One possible rea-
son for the difference in dependence
on the spinal cord for tail regeneration
in urodeles and anurans is that, in
urodeles, cartilage rather than noto-
chord is regenerated after partial tail
removal. In Xenopus, the notochord
provides an additional source of Shh
to the cells near the plane of the am-
putation, so it is conceivable that the
availability of Shh in the stump tis-
sues determines regenerative poten-
tial. In support of this, treatment with
the Shh signaling inhibitor cyclopam-
ine has been shown to prevent tail
regeneration in axolotls (Schnapp et
al., 2005).
The regenerated Xenopus tadpole
tail is not as perfect as it might ﬁrst
5While the regenerating tails have no spinal cord,
peripheral nerves do invade the regenerate (Tan-
iguchi et al., 2008).
XENOPUS REGENERATION 1229

appear (Fig. 1A). The muscle tissue
that is regenerated from the satellite
stem cell population is not clearly seg-
mented (Slack et al., 2008). Spinal
ganglia (dorsal root ganglia), normally
present as organized collections of
neural crest derived sensory neurons
on each somite, are almost entirely
missing, and the normal segmented
pattern of the spinal nerves is not re-
established in the regenerate (Filoni
and Bosco, 1981). Other neural crest
cell derivatives such as melanophores
(pigment cells) are regenerated nor-
mally,
albeit
through
a
different
mechanism (Lin et al., 2007). During
development, the neural crest cells
arise from a region between the neu-
ral plate and ﬂanking epidermis, and
they migrate away after the neural
plate folds up into a tube to form the
spinal cord. This interaction between
epidermal cells and neural plate cells
does not occur during regeneration,
and the replacement melanophores do
not originate from regenerated neural
crest but from existing precursors lo-
cated in the blastema and presumably
recruited from ﬁn tissue near the
stump (Lin et al., 2007).
1.2 Tadpole Hindlimb
Regeneration
Regeneration of the limb buds in Xe-
nopus laevis was ﬁrst described over
50 years ago (Komala, 1957). Regen-
eration of the limb buds is most suc-
cessful during the early stages of limb
differentiation and then declines as
metamorphosis proceeds (Dent, 1962).
The ontogenic decline begins in st. 53
hindlimbs and generally results in a
progressive failure to regenerate toes,
starting with the most anterior toe
(Dent, 1962; Muneoka et al., 1986). A
normal Xenopus hindlimb has ﬁve
toes, and the anterior three toes (dig-
its I, II, and III) have claws on the
distal tip. Dent’s study reports perfect
regeneration at st. 51, failure to re-
cover at least one digit at st. 53, and a
more variable phenotype at st. 55,
with the average number of toes re-
generated being 3.7 at st. 53 and 2.5 at
st. 55. It should be noted that Dent
operated limbs through the distal fe-
mur (stylopod), whereas most contem-
porary studies amputate more dis-
tally, through the knee or ankle joint.
As well as this gradual ontogenic de-
cline, Dent also reports several limbs
that failed to regenerate any struc-
tures (23% at st. 55 and 17% at st. 57).
Development of the skeletal elements
of the hindlimb digits proceeds in a
posterior to anterior order (Alberch
and Gale, 1983), so, the digits that are
last to form are most likely to be ab-
sent from regenerates. At later stages,
the most common outcome after am-
putation was the production of a hy-
pomorphic
regenerate
resembling
those formed after partial amputation
of
postmetamorphic
forelimbs
(see
Section 1.3).
Different laboratories report slightly
different
regenerative
abilities
in
hindlimb buds (see Box 2). It is gener-
ally accepted that limb buds up to st.
52, at which time the ankle constric-
tion is ﬁrst observed (Fig. 3A), are able
to regenerate perfectly. After amputa-
tion the wound is covered quickly by
migrating epithelial cells from the
stump and over the next few days the
multilayered
apical
epithelial
cap
(AEC) is restored (Fig. 3G). The basal
epithelial cells change shape and be-
come columnar (Pearl et al., 2008) and
start expressing AEC markers like
fgf-8 (Christen and Slack, 1997). With
maturation, regeneration ability be-
comes more restricted, resulting in re-
generates that are imperfect, with
missing structures. Therefore, a st. 54
limb, which contains muscle ﬁbers
and cartilage and has a foot with toes
indicated (Fig. 3B), can form a stump
or up to four toes after partial ampu-
tation. A proximal level amputation at
this stage, however, also always leads
to intercalation defects where even
though phalanges are formed, more
proximal elements are missing (Wolfe
et al., 2000; Nye and Cameron, 2005).
Regeneration capacity does not simply
decline in a distal to proximal manner
but also depends on the exact level of
amputation. It has been shown that
regeneration ability is higher if the
amputation plane goes through a joint
region rather than an ossiﬁed region
(Wolfe et al., 2000; Nye and Cameron,
2005). In tadpoles close to metamor-
phosis at st. 57 (Fig. 3C), there is very
little to no regeneration ability left
and amputated limbs either heal the
wound without any visible regenera-
tion or form a small spike. After meta-
morphosis, froglet hindlimbs regain
some capacity of regeneration and
form hypomorphic spikes, containing
mainly cartilage and skin similar to
forelimb regenerates in froglets (Dent,
1962).
Regeneration competent hindlimb
buds consist of mostly undifferenti-
ated mesenchyme, surrounded by epi-
Box 2: Variation in regenerative success of
tadpole hindlimbs
One problem that has come to light in the last few years is the variability
of regeneration success in tadpole hindlimbs. Some labs have seen non-
regenerative limbs at st. 54 while others still report toe regeneration at st.
57 (Slack et al., 2004; Kawakami et al., 2006). This can cause problems when
analysing results from potential gain and loss of function experiments. In
the classical studies, toe regeneration is reported to rapidly fall off between
stages 55 and 57 (Dent 1962, Muneoka 1986) but the number of toes
recovered at earlier stages varies from report to report, possibly due to the
different levels of amputation used (distal femur in Dent, wrist in Muneoka).
Xenopus are not inbred lab strains, and so genetic variation may inﬂuence
regenerative success. To minimise variation in regeneration ability, it has
been suggested that tadpoles used in research should fall within the normal
growth curve for the lab and that any tadpoles taking much longer do
develop will show signiﬁcantly different regeneration ability and add exces-
sively to variation (Nye and Cameron, 2005). These authors also showed
that care should be taken to be consistent in the amputation plane since
small variations in the proximal-distal level of amputation determines
whether the amputation is at the level of a joint or going through a bone
which makes a signiﬁcant difference for regeneration performance (Wolfe et
al., 2000; Nye and Cameron, 2005). We would add to this the need for sibling
and stage matched controls where possible.
1230 BECK ET AL.

dermis. To determine whether the
mesenchyme or the epidermis was re-
sponsible for the decline in regenera-
tion success, Yokoyama et al. created
recombinant limbs, combining mesen-
chyme and epidermis from regenera-
tion competent (st. 52) and incompe-
tent (st. 56) limbs (Yokoyama et al.,
2000). The regenerative mesenchyme
was able to induce fgf-8 expression in
the regenerative incompetent epider-
mis and as a consequence, regenera-
tion could proceed. In contrast, the re-
generative epidermis was unable to
induce nonregenerative mesenchyme
and these limbs failed to regenerate.
These results demonstrate that regen-
eration capacity depends on the mes-
enchyme to supply both signals and
progenitor cells and that nonregen-
erative epidermis retains the capacity
to respond to these stimuli.
The ability of Xenopus to regenerate
limb buds may not seem very remark-
able when compared to the adult limb
regeneration of urodeles such as the
axolotl. However, limb buds do not re-
generate at all in chicks (Summerbell,
1974), and mice can only regenerate
digit tips (Borgens, 1982). The key to
the anuran’s ability to regenerate may
be related to fundamental differences
in the way that limbs develop. The
current model for limb development
has mainly evolved from functional
studies done in chick and mouse and
is generally thought to apply to all
Fig. 2.
Origins of the axial tissues in tail regeneration. A–D: Schematic representation of lineage
labeling by tissue grafts expressing constitutive green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP). A: GFP-positive
neural plate grafted at st. 13, will constitutively label a section of the ventral spinal cord in the
tadpole (see A and inset). After amputation, the entire ventral spinal cord regenerate will be
GFP-positive (A). B: GFP-positive notochord grafted at st. 13 will give rise to a GFP-positive
section in the tadpole (B). After amputation, the complete notochord in the regenerate is GFP
positive (B). C: GFP positive presomitic mesoderm grafted at st. 13 does not contain any muscle
satellite cells, but labels muscle ﬁbers in a section in the tadpole tail (C). After amputation, no
GFP-positive cells are found in the regenerate (C). D: GFP-positive presomitic mesoderm grafted
at st. 17 contains muscle satellite cells and labels similar to the early muscle grafts muscle ﬁbers
and satellite cells in a section of the tadpole tail (D). After amputation, GFP-positive cells are seen
in the regeneration bud and later in the newly formed muscle ﬁbers of the regenerate (D).
Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. Regeneration of Xenopus hindlimbs de-
clines with age. A–C: Developing limbs at
stages indicated. D–F: Whole-mounts of 5 day
blastemas
amputated
at
indicated
stages
through the ankle. G–I: Longitudinal sections of
5 day blastemas stained with hematoxylin and
eosin, amputated at indicated stages through
the ankle. The 5 days of regeneration adds at
least one developmental stage; therefore, prox-
imal limb histology corresponds to st. 53 (G), st.
55 (H), and st. 58 (I). Note that 5 day blastemas
in younger stages are larger than in older stages
(compare G–I). G–I: Higher magniﬁcation of
distal blastema from pictures above. Note the
prominent distal epidermis forming the apical
epithelial cap (AEC; aec), while columnar basal
epithelial cells (be) are lining the blastema. In st.
57 regenerates, no AEC forms and the wound is
just covered by a simple wound epithelium (e).
Black
arrowheads
indicate
the
amputation
plane. fe, cartilage condensation for femur; at
st. 57 the femur is partially ossiﬁed, t/f, cartilage
condensation for tibia and ﬁbula, at st. 57 tibia
and ﬁbula also contain bone; m, muscle; b,
blastema. Scale bars  250 m.
XENOPUS REGENERATION 1231

tetrapod vertebrates. However, there
are several reasons why limb develop-
ment in amphibians might be differ-
ent from that of amniotes. First, there
is a difference in the developmental
timing: in chick and mouse, limb buds
develop during embryogenesis in par-
allel with organogenesis. In contrast,
in Xenopus, limbs develop much later,
after embryogenesis and organogene-
sis is ﬁnished. Second, the origin of
the limb muscle in amphibians is still
unknown. In chick, muscle precursors
from the lateral plate mesoderm mi-
grate into the limb bud (Christ and
Brand-Saberi, 2002), but in Xenopus,
ﬂank muscle in the vicinity of the limb
anlagen is well differentiated by that
time and no migratory muscle precur-
sors have been found (Satoh et al.,
2005b). Third, in chick, the signals for
outgrowth of the limb originate from a
specialized structure at the distal end
of the limb bud, the apical ectodermal
ridge (AER), which extends along the
dorsoventral boundary from anterior
to posterior (Saunders, 1948). Am-
phibians do not have an AER as found
in chick but some anurans, including
Xenopus, have an analogous structure
called the apical epithelial cap (AEC)
that acts to support outgrowth of the
limb bud (Christen and Slack, 1997).
There are also some clear differ-
ences in the expression of key limb
patterning genes between amniotes
and amphibians, suggesting that the
current model for limb development
does not apply to all tetrapod verte-
brates. There is a clear difference in
the initial mechanism of dorsal–ven-
tral
patterning
although
later
re-
stricted expression of lmx1 in the dor-
sal mesoderm appears to be the same
across tetrapod species (Christen and
Slack, 1998; Matsuda et al., 2001).
Genes involved in deﬁning the prox-
imal–distal (P–D) axis such as fgf-10
(Yokoyama et al., 2000) and fgf-8 are
expressed in the distal mesenchyme
and in the apical region of the limb
bud, respectively (Christen and Slack,
1997). However the distal mesenchy-
mal expression of the Bmp inhibitor
Gremlin in mouse limbs, which regu-
lates the growth of the limb by means
of inhibitory effects on the AER spe-
ciﬁc Fgf-8 (Verheyden and Sun, 2008),
is not seen in Xenopus (Pearl et al.,
2008).
Because
regeneration
ability
de-
clines with maturity and there is a
lack of dedifferentiation of mature tis-
sues, such as muscle and cartilage
(from observation of tail regenera-
tion), it has been argued that regener-
ation in Xenopus limbs is not, there-
fore, epimorphic (see Box 3). Limb
stages that are able to regenerate con-
tain undifferentiated cells that would
be able to contribute to the blastema
(see Fig. 3G, proximal limb). There-
fore, it has been suggested that the
lost tissue is replaced by compensa-
tory regulation of normal developmen-
tal mechanisms (Slack et al., 2004).
However, many gene products are ex-
pressed in a different pattern during
regeneration compared with develop-
ment. In a differential screen for
genes involved in lens and st. 51–53
hindlimb regeneration, Wolfe et al.
found half of their 13 selected clones
were highly up-regulated during limb
regeneration but were not expressed
in the early limb bud (Wolfe et al.,
2004; see Section 3.3). Furthermore,
hoxc10 is strongly up-regulated in the
whole regeneration blastema 1 day af-
ter amputation at st. 52 and expres-
sion stays high for at least the next 5
days in the blastema. In contrast,
during limb development, hoxc10 ex-
pression is constant and restricted
to proximal anterior mesenchyme
throughout st. 50–55 (Christen et
al., 2003). Expression of gremlin is
up-regulated in the posterior part of
the blastema mesenchyme during re-
generation (st. 52), but not during
development (Pearl et al., 2008). It
also has been shown that developing
and regenerating limbs react differ-
ently to retinoic acid (Scadding and
Maden, 1986a; see Section 2.2.4).
Thus, there is good evidence that de-
veloping and regenerating limbs are
different and the question of which
cells contribute to the limb blastema
is still open. Unequivocally address-
ing this issue will require lineage
tracing analyses in the limb similar
to those carried out in the regener-
ating tail (Gargioli and Slack, 2004).
1.3 Froglet Forelimb
Regeneration
In contrast to urodele amphibians
such as the axolotl, which is capable of
regenerating a perfect limb as an
adult, Xenopus froglets exhibit a much
more limited regenerative response to
partial amputation of the forelimb,
generating a pattern-deﬁcient struc-
ture known as the hypomorphic spike
(Fig. 4A; reviewed in Suzuki et al.,
2006). These hypomorphic spikes are
equivalent to the structures regener-
ated in postmetamorphic (froglet) Xe-
nopus hindlimbs, originally described
by Dent (1962). Despite the apparent
lack of pattern in the regenerates,
Box 3: Post-metamorphic limb regeneration:
Epimorphosis or tissue regeneration?
A hypomorphic spike is produced when froglet fore or hindlimbs of Xeno-
pus and other anurans are amputated. This contrasts with the situation in
urodeles where a complete and correctly patterned limb is regrown: the
textbook case of epimorphic regeneration (see Box 1 for deﬁnition). Grafting
experiments performed by Goss and Holt in 1992 support the idea that
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions are required for production of the hy-
pomorphic spike (Goss and Holt, 1992). They showed that skinned forelimbs
amputated at wrist level could not form a blastema when inserted into the
abdominal cavity. There is also molecular evidence suggesting that the
forelimb blastema contains intrinsic patterning information (Endo et al.,
2000). Korneluk and Liversage removed the bones of the forearm before
amputation and observed a marked delay in regeneration in Xenopus, but
not in newts. They use this result to argue that regeneration of the froglet
forelimb is a process of tissue regeneration, rather than epimorphosis (Kor-
neluk and Liversage, 1984), a view also expressed by Tassava (Tassava,
2004). However, this interpretation depends on a need for cellular dediffer-
entiation to fulﬁl the deﬁnition of epimorphosis, which was never implied by
Morgan’s original deﬁnition of the term (Morgan, 1901) and is also not
included in more recent deﬁnitions (Carlson, 2007).
1232 BECK ET AL.

similar processes to those described
in urodele limb regeneration occur
initially. A regeneration response is
initiated and proliferation occurs (epi-
morphosis), but subsequently develop-
mental pathways are not re-activated
appropriately to re-establish the axes
of the limb. The froglet forelimb,
therefore, as a “halfway house” regen-
erative event, is a useful system in
which to try and improve regenerative
outcome.
After amputation of the froglet fore-
limb, a wound epidermis forms rap-
idly and covers the cut surface within
24 hr. The wound epidermis has no
accompanying dermis and basement
membrane, and transitions to an or-
ganized, multilayered epithelium, the
AEC. These events lead to the estab-
lishment of a proliferating blastema
(Suzuki et al., 2005), which produces
the hypomorphic spike. While the
spike looks quite well formed from the
outside, the only skeletal structure is
a single, continuous cartilaginous ele-
ment, arising from the cut bone (Fig.
4D). Skin, nerves, and blood vessels
are regenerated normally, but histo-
logical analysis has shown that the
spike contains no muscle, ossiﬁed
bone, tendons, ligaments, or dermis
(Dent, 1962; Korneluk and Liversage,
1984; Satoh et al., 2006). The lack of
Fig. 4.
Regeneration of the froglet forelimb. A: A normal froglet forelimb has 4 digits (far left).
Amputation of the Xenopus froglet forelimb midway along the forearm (zeugopod, white arrow-
heads) results in epimorphic regeneration of a hypomorphic spike. Regenerative progress is shown
at 0 (time of cutting) to 42 days afterward. From days 0–3, soft tissue contracts away from the
wound surface and the wound becomes covered. A blastema is present by day 7 and extends
distally forming a spike. B: In transgenic animals in which the Bmp signalling pathway is inhibited
by induction of ectopic noggin expression with daily heat shocks over 14 days, regeneration of the
spike is completely inhibited. C: Skeletal preparation of a normal froglet forelimb showing the
ossiﬁed bone in red and the cartilage in blue (alizarin red S/alcian blue). The white arrowheads
show the position of amputation. D: Skeletal preparation of normal wild-type regenerating forelimb
after 42 days. The extent of the regenerated spike is outlined by white dots. Only cartilage is
present in the spike, and there are no joints. E: Bmp inhibited animals show no regeneration of
cartilage or other soft tissues. c, cartilage; h, humerus; r/u, radius and ulna; p, phalanges.
Fig. 5.
Fig. 5. Regeneration of the tadpole lens.
A: Schematic showing the process of lentec-
tomy in Xenopus tadpoles and regeneration
of the lens from the outer cornea. The outer
cornea is cut with iridectomy scissors and
ﬂipped
back,
and
the
lens
is
extracted
through the inner cornea using watchmaker’s
forceps. The outer cornea is then replaced.
B–E: Histological sections of eye after lentec-
tomy at st. 50, stained with hematoxylin and
eosin. Freeman’s 1965 regeneration stages
are used, but B  24 hr after lentectomy, C 2
days, D 3 days, and E 8 days. c, cornea; r,
retina; i, iris; v, vitreous; l, lentoid. Arrows
denote the outermost layer of the cornea.
Arrowheads in C mark aggregation of trans-
differentiating cells. F: transgenic tadpole eye
showing green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) in
the lens, driven by the -crystallin promoter.
F: same eye after lentectomy. G–I: Fluores-
cent views, and brightﬁeld views (G–I). G,G:
Transgenic
eye
5
days
after
lentectomy,
green cells in G are newly differentiated lens
cells. H,H: Transgenic eye 14 days after len-
tectomy, a new lens and a rare ectopic lentoid
can be seen (white arrow). I, I: Eye on the left
was subjected to lentectomy and has regen-
erated a new lens. Scale bar  50 M in E
(applies to panels B–E).
XENOPUS REGENERATION 1233

muscle in the spike indicates that the
muscle satellite cells of the stump,
which repopulate the tail in Xenopus,
do not do so in the forelimb. This is not
thought to be due to an unfavorable
blastemal
environment,
because
transplanted muscle satellite cells de-
velop normally into myoﬁbers (Satoh
et al., 2005a). The lack of joints and
ossiﬁcation may be due to failure to
reactivate bone morphogenetic pro-
tein genes such as gdf5 and bmp4 (see
Section 2.2.2).
So what happens to the axes of the
froglet forelimb? Limbs are normally
patterned along three axes during de-
velopment. Lmx-1, a marker of the
dorsal limb, is not re-expressed in fro-
glet forelimb regeneration (Matsuda
et al., 2001). However, male froglets
can regenerate a nuptial pad on the
ventral spike surface (Tassava, 2004)
suggesting dorsal ventral patterning
is re-established through alternative
mechanisms. The nuptial pad consists
of a specialized epidermis character-
ized by regular hook-shaped black
hairs (frog “velcro”) that develops on
the ventral surface of the sexually ma-
ture male forelimb zeugopod and au-
topod and assists the animal in am-
plexus
during
mating
(Deuchar,
1975b). The anterior–posterior axis
depends on expression of shh in the
posterior limb bud early in limb devel-
opment, but again this is not recapit-
ulated during regeneration of the fore-
limb,
where
shh
is
conspicuously
absent (Endo et al., 2000). Indeed, a
superﬁcially similar single spike mor-
phology can be induced by treating re-
generating axolotl limbs with the Shh
inhibitor
cyclopamine
(Roy
and
Gardiner, 2002). However in these
urodeles, bone and joints still form
along the proximodistal axis. Clearly
then, Shh is not the only patterning
molecule deﬁcient in the froglet fore-
limb blastema. There is also molecu-
lar evidence for proximal–distal pat-
terning,
as
hoxA13,
normally
a
marker of the autopod, is expressed in
the distal end of the spike (Endo et al.,
2000).
It is well documented that limb re-
generation in urodeles is nerve depen-
dent (Brockes, 1987). Successful limb
regeneration seems to depend on tro-
phic factors arising from cut axons in
the limb (Brockes, 1984). These fac-
tors are thought to target the wound
epidermis and enable blastema main-
tenance. Nerve dependence has not
been found for Xenopus at a stage
when limbs do regenerate successfully
(Filoni and Paglialunga, 1990; Can-
nata et al., 2001). In contrast, the re-
generation of a hypomorphic spike in
postmetamorphic animals does ap-
pear to be nerve dependent. In Xeno-
pus froglet forelimbs, denervation pre-
vents regeneration, and both blastemal
cell expression of msx1 and wound epi-
dermis expression of fgf8 are known to
be nerve dependent (Endo et al., 2000;
Suzuki et al., 2005).
Like the hindlimb, the froglet fore-
limb regenerates more successfully
when amputated at a more distal level
(Tassava, 2004). Distal amputations
through the radius and ulna (zeugo-
pod) result in 100% spike formation,
with the spike eventually reaching ap-
proximately the same length as the
original limb, and continuing to grow
in homeostasis with the rest of the
body. Amputation through the hu-
merus (stylopod) resulted in 80% re-
generating
spikes,
although
the
spikes
themselves
were
generally
shorter. Body wall level amputations
do not regenerate at all (Tassava,
2004).
1.4 Lens Regeneration
Uniquely
among
the
vertebrates,
some amphibians are able to regener-
ate the lens of the eye after its surgical
removal (lentectomy). The new lens is
formed by transformation of cells from
one differentiated tissue type to an-
other, a process known as transdiffer-
entiation
(reviewed
in
Burke
and
Tosh, 2005). However, the source of
the new lens differs depending on spe-
cies. The best-studied example of lens
regeneration occurs in adult newts,
where the new lens is formed from
pigmented dorsal iris epithelial cells
by a process known as Wolfﬁan regen-
eration (for review see Tsonis, 2006).
In 1963, Freeman described a differ-
ent mechanism in Xenopus laevis tad-
poles, whereby regeneration of the
lens is from cells of the overlying outer
cornea (Freeman, 1963). In lentecto-
mized premetamorphic X. laevis tad-
poles, new lens cells transdifferentiate
from the cells of the central region of
the inner layer of the outer cornea in
response to a factor present in the vit-
reous of the eye (Reeve and Wild,
1981; Filoni et al., 1982). This as yet
unidentiﬁed factor is thought to origi-
nate from the neural retina (Filoni et
al., 1982). This factor, henceforth de-
scribed as the vitreous factor, can
induce lens differentiation in cells
from either the outer cornea or the
surrounding
pericorneal
epidermis,
which together form a region termed
the lentogenic area that covers an
area approximately twice the diame-
ter of the eye (Freeman, 1963). Pieces
of either outer cornea or pericorneal
epidermis from within the lentogenic
area can transdifferentiate into lens
tissue when they are transplanted
into the vitreous chamber of the eye,
where they are exposed to the vitreous
factor (Reeve and Wild, 1978; Bosco et
al., 1980). In this type of assay, which
we suggest could be called an “eye-
steck” graft, the original lens is left in
place, and a new ectopic lens is seen to
develop from the transplant. In con-
trast, epidermal fragments from out-
side the lentogenic area will not form
a lens in this assay and are refractory
to the vitreous factor (Cannata et al.,
2003).
Normally, the outer corneal cells
are protected from contact with the
vitreous factor by means of the physi-
cal barrier formed by the lens itself, as
well as the inner cornea (Fig. 5A). The
ability to replace a lost lens decreases
gradually between st. 50 and 58 and is
lost as the animal progresses through
metamorphosis (Freeman, 1963). The
premetamorphic decline in lens regen-
eration means that, like in the tail and
the limb, it is possible to use both gain
and loss of function approaches to in-
vestigate the mechanisms underlying
lens regeneration. As the tadpole ma-
tures, the inner cornea heals faster,
preventing lens regeneration from oc-
curring (Filoni et al., 1997). If the lens
is replaced by a millipore ﬁlter bar-
rier, corneal transdifferentiation does
not occur either, demonstrating that
mechanical disruption of the contact
between the vitreous factor and the
outer cornea prevents regeneration
(Cioni
et
al.,
1982).
Interestingly,
premetamorphic
Xenopus
tropicalis
tadpoles do not normally regenerate
their lenses due to rapid healing of the
inner cornea in this species, presum-
ably creating such a barrier (Henry
and Elkins, 2001). However, the com-
1234 BECK ET AL.

petence to transdifferentiate X. tropi-
calis cornea to lens can be demon-
strated by transplanting cornea into
the vitreous chamber of the eye, sug-
gesting that both the factor and re-
sponding pathways are conserved be-
tween X. laevis and X. tropicalis. The
competence to respond to this factor is
more restricted than in X. laevis, with
only central corneal cells able to elicit
a regenerative response, while peri-
corneal cells fail (Henry and Elkins,
2001). X. borealis, a closer relative of
X. laevis, similarly appears to have an
active vitreous factor and lens forming
competent
outer
corneal
cells,
as
shown by reciprocal transplantations,
although it does not regenerate a new
lens after lentectomy, probably for the
same reason as X. tropicalis (Filoni et
al., 2006).
Until recently, the loss of regenera-
tive ability at metamorphosis was
thought to be ﬁnal. However, Yoshii et
al. report successful lens regeneration
in juvenile and adult frogs 3–9 months
after metamorphosis, suggesting that,
like limbs, there is some recovery of
regenerative ability after metamor-
phosis is completed (Yoshii et al.,
2007, Box 4). In this case, however,
there does not appear to be any trans-
differentiation of cornea or other eye
tissues, and a possible explanation is
that the lens regenerates from the
lens capsule as it does in mammals
(Gwon et al., 1990).
Several genes encoding transcrip-
tion factors involved in initial develop-
ment of the lens during embryonic
stages (pax6, prox1, otx2, and sox3)
are re-expressed in transdifferentiat-
ing corneal cells, suggesting that re-
generation is at least in part a reca-
pitulation of ontogeny (Schaefer et al.,
1999; Henry et al., 2002). A recent
study showed that the lens regenerat-
ing competence correlates speciﬁcally
to localized pax6 expression in the len-
togenic area, and that misexpression
of pax6 in noncompetent ﬂank epider-
mis enables transdifferentiation into
lens in response to the vitreous factor
(Gargioli et al., 2008). Pax6, then, may
confer on the lentogenic area compe-
tence to respond to the vitreous factor,
re-activating
lens
differentiating
pathways. It would be interesting to
see if pax6 expression is more re-
stricted in X. tropicalis, leading to the
failure of pericorneal cells to respond
to the vitreous factor.
Freeman
described
ﬁve
distinct
stages of cornea-lens transdifferentia-
tion in X. laevis which are still used
today (Freeman, 1963; Fig. 5B–E). In
stage 1, cells of inner layer of the outer
cornea
change
from
squamous
to
cuboidal (1–2 days). By stage 2, small
clusters of these cells are formed by
aggregation (2–3 days). By stage 3,
the aggregate has become a lens vesi-
cle (3–5 days). Stage 4 is deﬁned by
the formation of the primary lens ﬁ-
bers (7–8 days) and stage 5 by forma-
tion
of
the
secondary
lens
ﬁbers
(10–12 days). As Xenopus tadpole de-
velopment varies according to rearing
conditions, these stages should be
used to enable comparison between
results
generated
by
different
re-
searchers. Lentectomy protocols vary
somewhat, but an example is shown in
Figure 5A. After surgical removal of
the lens (lentectomy), the central cells
of the outer cornea, containing the
transit amplifying population, trans-
differentiate into lens, rather than the
peripherally located stem cells. As dis-
cussed
earlier,
these
central
cells
transdifferentiate because they be-
come exposed to an unknown factor
present in the vitreous of the eye, nor-
mally kept separate from the outer
cornea by the neural crest derived in-
ner cornea (Bosco et al., 1979, 1980,
1986; Reeve and Wild, 1981; Filoni et
al.,
1982).
This
factor
appears
to
mimic the lens inducing factors pro-
duced by the optic cup in development
(Cannata et al., 2008). Exposed cor-
neal cells must lose their differenti-
ated state, re-enter the cell cycle and
produce daughter cells of a differently
fated cell type. They must then ar-
range themselves into an organized,
functional lens structure. Three pro-
cesses, therefore, take place sequen-
tially:
de-differentiation
of
corneal
cells, proliferation, and re-differentia-
tion (transdifferentiation) into lens ﬁ-
bers. Of these three processes, only
the ﬁnal two are expected to use mech-
anisms in common with development
of the eye. The earliest stage of regen-
eration is triggered by the unknown
vitreous factor and initiates re-expres-
sion of the developmental genes, such
as pax6, and the functional proteins,
such as the crystallins. As no func-
tional studies have yet been done, it is
not known whether the up-regulation
or activation of one or more of these
eye speciﬁc transcription factors is
sufﬁcient to cause transdifferentia-
tion.
2. MOLECULAR PATHWAYS
INVOLVED IN
REGENERATION
In this section, we will discuss the
ﬁndings of recent functional studies
that implicate certain candidate path-
ways or processes in regeneration. Re-
Box 4: Regenerative decline during metamorphosis
Regeneration experiments involving Xenopus forelimbs almost always use
post-metamorphic froglets, and those involving hindlimbs use pre-metamor-
phic tadpoles. There are two reasons why this is so, ﬁrstly, the tadpole’s
forelimbs develop in a pocket and only break free at st. 58, and secondly,
after metamorphosis and the subsequent loss of the tail, the animals use
their hindlimbs for swimming. This bias conveys the view that forelimbs are
able to regenerate hypomorphic spikes throughout life while hindlimbs
cease to regenerate at around st. 57. In reality, though, both regenerate
hypomorphic spikes post-metamorphosis and hindlimbs often show a refrac-
tory period at around st. 57 when they do not regenerate at all. It has yet to
be demonstrated for forelimbs, but the presence of a refractory period of
failed regeneration during metamorphosis might be more general since
recently it was shown that also lens and retina could regenerate/repair after
metamorphosis contrary to the current paradigm (Yoshii et al., 2007). How-
ever it should be noted that this regeneration of the lens in juvenile frogs
apparently does not involve transdifferentiation from the cornea or other eye
tissues and instead it is thought that the regenerated lens arises from the
remaining lens capsule as in mammals. Dent notes that circulating protein
bound iodine levels rise sharply at st. 57-58 and decline at the time hypo-
morphic spikes are formed (Saxen et al., 1957; Dent, 1962)
XENOPUS REGENERATION 1235

cently, it has also become possible to
chemically
alter
speciﬁc
molecular
pathways by using small molecule in-
hibitors (so-called “chemical genetics,”
Section 2.1 and Table 1). While speci-
ﬁcity can be an issue with this ap-
proach and must be determined for
each new compound, molecules are
usually added directly to the tadpoles’
water, making for a simple assay. The
main disadvantage of a chemical ge-
netic approach is cost, and it is only
really practical when small volumes of
culture medium can be used. While
Xenopus laevis is not considered to be
genetically tractable, there is still
plenty of scope for manipulating gene
expression at late stages (see Section
2.2 and Table 1). Recent studies use a
combination of chemical genetics and
inducible transgenic methodology to
begin to dissect the molecular path-
ways and cellular mechanisms re-
quired for regeneration (Section 2.3).
2.1 Chemical Genetic
Approaches: The Use of
Soluble Inhibitors in
Functional Study of
Regeneration
2.1.1 Tgf- signaling.
Wound healing is the ﬁrst step during
regeneration and it is known that for-
mation of a wound epithelium is an
essential process for successful regen-
eration. Recently, it has been shown
that transforming growth factor-beta
(Tgf-) signaling plays a critical role
in wound healing of the tail (Ho and
Whitman, 2008). Interaction of Tgf-
ligands with two serine-threonine ki-
nase receptors leads to the phosphor-
ylation of these receptors and subse-
quent transduction of the signal to
Smad2 or 3. Upon phosphorylation,
Smad2/3 translocates to the nucleus,
interacts with other transcription fac-
tors, and activates downstream genes.
Several of the Tgf- signaling path-
way components are present in the
right place at the right time to play a
role during tail regeneration. Using a
speciﬁc antibody that recognizes the
activated,
phosphorylated
form
of
Smad2 (pSmad2), Ho and Whitman
showed active Tgf- signaling at the
TABLE 1. Summary of Pathways and Processes Identiﬁed as Required for Regeneration Using a Candidate
Gene Approach
Pathway/process
Effect
Method
Regenerating system
tail
limb
lens
Bmp signalling
LOF
TG, HS-Noggin
(Beck et al., 2003;
Beck et al., 2006)
(Beck et al., 2006)
LOF
TG, HS-tBR
GOF
TG, HS-Alk3
GOF
TG, HS-eveMsx1
(Satoh et al., 2005c)
GOF
TA, Bmp4
Fgf signalling
GOF
TG, HS-Fgf20
(Lin and Slack, 2008)
(Yokoyama et al., 2001)
(Bosco et al., 1997)
GOF
TA, Fgf10, 8
LOF
TA, bFgf,
LOF
CG, SU 5402
LOF
TG, HS-XFD
Notch signalling
GOF
TG, HS-Nicd
(Beck et al., 2003)
LOF
CG, MG132
Tgf signalling
LOF
CG, SB-431542
(Ho and Whitman,
2008)
Wnt signalling
LOF
TG, HS-Dkk1
(Lin and Slack, 2008;
Kawakami et al.,
2006; Yokoyama et
al., 2007; Sugiura et
al., 2008)
(Kawakami et al.,
2006; Yokoyama et
al., 2007)
LOF
Ad-Axin1
GOF
Ad--catenin
GOF
CG, BIO
GOF
Wnt5a mRNA
Apoptosis/caspase
3
LOF
CG, M50054
(Tseng et al., 2007)
Plasma
membrane
polarisation,
H pump V-
ATPase
LOF
CG, Concanamycin
GOF
Yeast H pump
mRNA
(Adams et al., 2007)
Abbreviations: LOF, loss of function; GOF, gain of function; TG, transgenic; TA, topical application (e.g. protein soaked beads); CG,
chemical genetics; Ad, adenovirus; tBR, truncated Bmp receptor; Alk3, constitutively active Bmp receptor; XFD, dominant negative
Fgf receptor.
1236 BECK ET AL.

edge of the cut ﬁn of the tail as early
as 15 min after amputation and,
within 1 hr, it could be seen all along
the distal edge of the forming wound
epidermis. A day later, pSmad2 was
also detected in the regeneration bud
where it remained throughout early
regeneration. Amputated tails of ani-
mals that are treated immediately
and continually with a Tgf- speciﬁc
inhibitor, SB-431542, fail to form a
wound epidermis and, therefore, can-
not regenerate. Furthermore, while
this wound healing defect could be re-
versed on removal of the inhibitor 8 hr
after amputation, regeneration still
failed. If treatment with the inhibitor
was delayed until after the regenera-
tion bud has formed, the tails showed
reduced regenerative capacity and a
lower rate of cell proliferation in the
bud, demonstrating that Tgf- signal-
ing is essential at different time points
for multiple steps throughout regener-
ation (Ho and Whitman, 2008).
2.1.2 Programmed cell death/
apoptosis.
Programmed cell death is required to
control cell number during morpho-
genesis and to shape developing or-
gans like the heart and limb as well as
craniofacial patterning (James, 1994;
Guha et al., 2002; Pajni-Underwood et
al.,
2007).
Recently,
Tseng
et
al.
(2007) found that apoptosis also plays
a crucial role in the early phase of tail
regeneration.
Using
an
antibody
against activated caspase-3, which is
a marker for cell death, they detected
a discrete focus of apoptotic cells in
the regeneration bud 12 hr after am-
putation, which expanded further by
24 hr. To determine the signiﬁcance of
apoptosis during regeneration they
made use of a speciﬁc chemical inhib-
itor of caspase-3 activation, M50054.
Tadpoles exposed to M50054 right af-
ter amputation failed to regenerate.
By adding and removing the com-
pound at different time points it was
determined that apoptosis was essen-
tial in the ﬁrst 24 hr after amputation
but was not needed during the prolif-
erative stage of regeneration or for re-
patterning. Interestingly, this study
also showed that a refractory stage
tail exhibited an expanded apoptotic
domain, suggesting that, while apo-
ptosis is necessary for regeneration,
its rate must be carefully regulated
(Tseng et al., 2007).
2.1.3 Electric currents and
regeneration.
Another early mechanism that deter-
mines regeneration success is the abil-
ity to establish an electric potential
across the wound epidermis in re-
sponse to amputation. It is well docu-
mented that endogenous electric ﬁelds
play a role in regeneration, and it has
been shown that applied electric ﬁelds
are able to enhance regeneration and
repair in vertebrates (Borgens et al.,
1977, 1981; Kerns and Lucchinetti,
1992; McCaig et al., 2005). Adams et
al. (2007) have recently demonstrated
a molecular link between electric cur-
rents and tail regeneration in Xeno-
pus. In a pharmacological loss-of-func-
tion screen they identiﬁed V-ATPase
H
pump
as
the
endogenous
ion
transporter that establishes repolar-
ization of the plasma membrane after
amputation. Tail regeneration fails
when the activity of the V-ATPase is
blocked with concanamycin, a speciﬁc
inhibitor, or when a dominant-nega-
tive V-ATPase is overexpressed. Cru-
cially, this study also used a gain of
function approach to overexpress a ho-
mologous H pump from yeast and
showed that H efﬂux is sufﬁcient to
rescue regeneration during the refrac-
tory period.
2.2 Candidate Gene
Approaches Using Topical
Application and Transgenic
Techniques
It is not considered practical to use
classical genetic approaches to dissect
the molecular mechanisms that are
controlling regeneration in Xenopus
laevis,
because
this
species
is
pseudotetraploid and has a relatively
long generation time of up to 1 year.
Most important to the ﬁeld was the
establishment of a reliable transgenic
method that is based on restriction
enzyme
mediated
gene
integration
(REMI) and sperm nuclear transfer
into eggs (Kroll and Amaya, 1996).
More recently, the method has been
simpliﬁed (Sparrow et al., 2000) and a
second method using SceI meganucle-
ase has also been introduced (Ogino et
al., 2006; Pan et al., 2006). Either
method allows the creation of 50–100
founder transgenics in 1 day. Many
labs use F0 founders for regeneration
research because of the long genera-
tion time of Xenopus laevis. When this
is the case, it is important to remem-
ber that each founder has a different
integration site and copy number of
the transgene, which leads to a more
heterogenous sample population and
more variation in the experimental re-
sults. The transgenic method com-
bined with the heat inducible pro-
moter hsp70 (HS) is a powerful tool to
manipulate speciﬁc pathways at a
speciﬁc time during the regeneration
process. It has been used many times
in Xenopus and zebraﬁsh to dissect a
speciﬁc molecular pathway used dur-
ing
regeneration
(see
Section
2.2;
Beck et al., 2003, 2006; Lee et al.,
2005;
Stoick-Cooper
et
al.,
2007b;
Yokoyama et al., 2007; Lin and Slack,
2008). To direct the spatial action of a
protein more precisely, beads soaked
in recombinant protein solution or cell
aggregates expressing a speciﬁc pro-
tein have been grafted into the ampu-
tation stump (Yokoyama et al., 2001;
Satoh et al., 2005a; Sugiura et al.,
2008) and virus infection has also
been used (Kawakami et al., 2006).
2.2.1 Fgf signaling.
Fgf ligands signal through tyrosine ki-
nase receptors, activating the MAP ki-
nase
pathway.
The
Fgf
signalling
pathway seems to be generally in-
volved in development and regenera-
tion of the limbs, tail and eye. Re-
cently, it was shown that several of
the Fgf ligands are up-regulated in
the regeneration bud of the tail as
early as 24 hr after amputation and
that their receptors, Fgfr1 and 2, are
present in the regenerating tail (Lin
and Slack, 2008). Loss-of-function ex-
periments using either the soluble Fgf
signaling inhibitor, SU5402, or by over-
expression of a dominant-negative Fgf
receptor transgene, (HS-XFD), abol-
ished regeneration of the tail (Lin and
Slack, 2008). The importance for Fgf
signalling has also been functionally
demonstrated for limb regeneration. A
correlation between Fgf-10 expression
in the limb bud mesenchyme and the
ability to regenerate has been observed
(Yokoyama et al., 2000) and a gain-of-
function approach showed that Fgf-10
is indeed responsible for the regenera-
XENOPUS REGENERATION 1237

tive capacity (Yokoyama et al., 2001).
Beads soaked in recombinant Fgf-10
protein and then placed in the stump of
a nonregenerative limb (st. 56) were
able to restore some regenerative capac-
ity to the limb (Yokoyama et al., 2001).
However, Slack et al. were unable to
signiﬁcantly enhance limb regeneration
either by overexpression of Fgf-10 ei-
ther with a transgenic approach, sup-
plying the protein in the whole tadpole,
or with beads soaked in Fgf-10 protein
(Slack et al., 2004). It is possible that
the difference in this outcome results
from variation in regenerative ability,
which naturally occurs within different
batches of tadpoles (see Box 3).
Unlike the limbs and tail, func-
tional experiments addressing cornea
to
lens
transdifferentiation
are
sparse. To date, the only factor known
to induce lens ﬁber formation from
cornea is acidic Fgf (Fgf-1) in culture
(Bosco et al., 1997). A normally orga-
nized lens does not form in these cul-
ture conditions, however. Fgf-2 (basic
Fgf) has been shown to induce chick
pigmented epithelial cells to transdif-
ferentiate into lens ﬁbers, suggesting
a conserved mechanism (Hyuga et al.,
1993). There are also studies demon-
strating up-regulation of Fgf receptors
in lens regeneration (Del Rio-Tsonis et
al., 1997; McDevitt et al., 1997; Ar-
resta et al., 2005). Fgf signaling is,
therefore, a strong candidate for initi-
ating transdifferentiation in compe-
tent tissues, but whether or not it is
indispensible for the process has yet to
be determined.
2.2.2 Bmp signalling.
Bone morphogenetic proteins (Bmps)
form a subset of the Tgf- signaling
molecules and are important at all
stages of development. Bmps signal
through Type I and II receptors, as do
other Tgf- ligands, but the signal is
transduced through different Smads
(Smads 1, 5, and 8). The Bmp pathway
seems to be indispensable for any type
of regeneration to occur in Xenopus.
Inhibition or activation of the Bmp
pathway leads to regeneration failure
or
rescue
of
regeneration,
respec-
tively. It has been shown previously
that blocking the Bmp pathway either
by overexpressing a dominant-nega-
tive Bmp receptor (tBr) or Noggin, an
endogenous, extracellular inhibitor of
Bmp, will lead to inhibition of both tail
and tadpole hindlimb regeneration
(Beck et al., 2003, 2006). More re-
cently, it has also been shown that
Smad1 is speciﬁcally activated in the
regeneration bud (Ho and Whitman,
2008). Here, we present data that
Bmp signaling is also needed for suc-
cessful regeneration of the hypomor-
phic spike formed after partial ampu-
tation of the postmetamorphic froglet
forelimb (Fig. 4B,E).
By activating a HS-noggin trans-
gene at different time points during
regeneration, it was shown that Bmp
signaling
is
not
required
during
wound healing but during the next
phase of blastema accumulation and
expansion. Conversely, if the Bmp
pathway was activated by overex-
pressing Alk3, a constitutively acti-
vated Bmp receptor, tail regeneration
during the refractory period could be
rescued, demonstrating that Bmp sig-
naling is sufﬁcient for tail regenera-
tion (Beck et al., 2003). In froglet fore-
limb regeneration, Bmp is involved in
joint
formation.
The
hypomorphic
spike of the forelimb regenerate lacks
bone and joint formation as discussed
in Section 1.3. This lack of patterning
was attributed to the absence of bmp
expression, which is normally present
in the developing limb. Implantation
of Bmp-4 soaked beads into the fore-
limb regenerate induced joint like
structures in the cartilage of the spike
(Satoh et al., 2005c). This indicates
that joint formation in regeneration is
dependent on Bmp signalling, as it is
during limb development (Dahn and
Fallon, 2000).
The transcription factor Msx-1, a di-
rect downstream target of Bmp signal-
ling, has been implicated in regenera-
tion
of
various
appendages
and
tissues (Odelberg et al., 2000; Kumar
et al., 2004). Expression of a hyperac-
tive version of HS-Msx-1 transgene in
tails cut during the refractory period
was also able to restore regeneration.
This suggests that Msx-1 can fully
substitute for Bmp function during
tail regeneration (Beck et al., 2003).
Furthermore, induction of the same
transgene after limb amputation is
able to enhance limb regeneration at a
stage when regeneration success is de-
clining, although it is not able to res-
cue limb regeneration at nonregenera-
tive stages (Barker and Beck, 2009).
2.2.3 Wnt signaling.
In the past few years, several studies
demonstrated a role for the Wnt/-
catenin signaling pathway during re-
generation (Kawakami et al., 2006;
Yokoyama et al., 2007; Lin and Slack,
2008; Sugiura et al., 2008). Wnt sig-
naling can be blocked by over-express-
ing the secreted antagonist dickkopf-1
(Dkk-1) using a heat inducible trans-
gene (HS-dkk-1). Overexpression of
HS-dkk-1 at the beginning of regener-
ation is sufﬁcient to efﬁciently inhibit
both tail and limb regeneration in Xe-
nopus. This role of canonical Wnt sig-
naling mirrors axolotl regeneration,
where it has been shown that overex-
pression of dkk-1 in the amputated
limb by adenovirus delivery abolishes
regeneration (Kawakami et al., 2006).
The pathway can also be overstimu-
lated either by over-expressing acti-
vated -catenin or with the compound
BIO, a Gsk-3 inhibitor and thus an
activator of Wnt/ signaling. Overac-
tivation of Wnt signaling by BIO stim-
ulates cell proliferation and, hence,
leads to enhanced outgrowth of the
regenerating
tail
(Lin
and
Slack,
2008). In the limb, regeneration was
enhanced by infection of regenerating
limbs with an activated -catenin ad-
enovirus (Ad-CA--catenin) at a stage
when regeneration success normally
declines. The same treatment, though,
did not rescue regeneration ability at
a later stage when regeneration suc-
cess is at its lowest (Kawakami et al.,
2006). Very recently, a role for nonca-
nonical Wnt signaling has also been
demonstrated during tail regenera-
tion. Sugiura et al. (2008) developed
an accessory tail model similar to the
accessory limb model, which has been
developed to study axolotl limb regen-
eration (Endo et al., 2004). In this
model, candidate genes can be tested
for their ability to induce/regenerate a
tail from a dorsal incision through the
spinal cord and muscle by ﬁlling the
incision with an animal cap graft ex-
pressing the candidate gene. Making
use of this assay, Sugiura et al. deter-
mined that Wnt-5a is sufﬁcient to in-
duce/regenerate a tail while other Wnt
ligands were unable to induce an ec-
topic tail. Noncanonical Wnt signaling
acts through the JNK pathway and
regenerating
tails
treated
with
SP600125, a speciﬁc JNK inhibitor,
1238 BECK ET AL.

failed to regenerate, providing further
evidence that noncanonical Wnt sig-
naling also determines regeneration
success. In zebraﬁsh ﬁn regeneration,
however, noncanonical Wnt signaling
seems to have the opposite function,
since it was shown to act as brake to
limit regeneration (Stoick-Cooper et
al., 2007b).
2.2.4 Notch signaling pathway.
The Notch pathway has also been im-
plicated in regeneration of the tail
(Beck et al., 2003). Blocking Notch sig-
naling with the protease inhibitor
MG132, which inhibits the cleavage of
the Notch intracellular domain and,
hence, Notch signaling, blocked tail
regeneration. Thus, Notch signaling is
necessary for tail regeneration. Fur-
thermore, overexpression of the con-
stitutively active Notch intracellular
domain (Nicd) during the tail refrac-
tory period was able to rescue regen-
eration of spinal cord and notochord
but not muscle (Beck et al., 2003). Pre-
viously, it was shown that Bmp acti-
vates Notch during tail development.
Notch signaling was shown to be nec-
essary for generation of spinal cord
and notochord, while muscle forma-
tion was stimulated directly by Bmp
(Beck and Slack, 1999a). This sug-
gests conservation of the molecular re-
lationship between the two pathways
in regeneration and embryonic devel-
opment.
2.2.5 Hgf and Pax7.
Another factor that may inﬂuence re-
generative
success
is
hepatocyte
growth factor (Hgf). Hgf is expressed
in the ventral mesoderm early in em-
bryogenesis where it is regulated by
activin and Fgf (Nakamura et al.,
1995). Implantation of Hgf releasing
cell aggregates into the froglet fore-
limb blastema was reported to rescue
the muscle-less phenotype of the hy-
pomorphic spike (Satoh et al., 2005a).
The authors suggest that Hgf is stim-
ulating migration of muscle satellite
cells from the stump into the regener-
ation blastema in a similar manner as
has been described for the migration
of myogenic precursor cells into the
chick limb bud (Brand-Saberi et al.,
1996; Heymann et al., 1996). Our own
observation is, however, that muscle
development in the regenerate is de-
pendent on level of the amputation
along the proximal–distal axis. If fore-
limbs are amputated at wrist level, as
done in the above study, muscle is
rarely seen in the regenerate. How-
ever, if amputations are performed at
a more proximal level, through the
middle of the zeugopod, muscle is reg-
ularly seen in the regenerate (J.C.I.B.
and B.C., unpublished results).
In the tail, it has been shown that
the transcription factor Pax7 is essen-
tial for regenerating muscle (Chen et
al., 2006b). Pax7 is expressed in the
muscle
satellite
cells
where
it
is
needed for maintenance and renewal
of this cell population. Using a heat
inducible
dominant-negative
pax7
(HS-pax7EnR) construct, Chen et al.
showed that satellite cells were re-
duced in the muscle of the ﬁrst regen-
erate and upon a second round of re-
generation the tail was void of almost
any muscle in the regenerate. This
proved that the pax7-positive satellite
cells are the stem cells for regenerat-
ing muscle in the tail (see Section 1.1).
2.2.6 Retinoic acid signalling.
Retinoic acid (RA) is a steroid hor-
mone that binds to intracellular recep-
tors that directly translocate to the
nucleus and alter gene expression.
RA, which is chemically synthesized
in vivo from vitamin A, and its deri-
vates, were some of the ﬁrst reagents
used in regeneration research. In the
late 1970s, classical studies used reti-
noids to study limb regeneration in
tadpoles of the toad Bufo andersonii.
This toad has similar regenerative ca-
pacity to Xenopus, in that regenera-
tive success declines with advance-
ment
of
limb
development.
After
treatment of hindlimbs with retinoic
palmitate during regeneration, they
saw in histological analysis an aug-
mentation
of
early
regenerative
events, which they interpreted as ex-
tensive dedifferentiation of stump tis-
sue (Saxena and Niazi, 1977). In a
second study, the same authors dis-
covered that retinoids could proximal-
ize regenerating limbs leading to du-
plication of limb elements (Niazi and
Saxena, 1978). Maden and Scadding
went on to test the retinoids and their
proximalizing effect in both the axo-
lotl Ambystoma mexicanum and Xeno-
pus
laevis
(Scadding
and
Maden,
1986a,b). The basic rule determined
for axolotl also applied to Xenopus in
that the extent of proximalization
depended
on
developmental
stage,
length of treatment, and the concen-
tration. By st. 54, duplications became
a rare event, suggesting a correlation
between the ability to regenerate nor-
mal structures and formation of dupli-
cates in regenerate. In developing
hindlimbs of the same stages, duplica-
tions have never been observed after
retinoic acid treatment. Therefore, de-
veloping and regenerating limbs seem
to react differently to retinoic acid, in-
dicating that regeneration in Xenopus
is different from development. For ax-
olotl, it has been demonstrated that
retinoids are present endogenously
during regeneration, using a reporter
construct containing RA response ele-
ments (Brockes, 1992). Moreover, it
has been shown in the axolotl and a
different species of anuran that RA is
absolutely required for regeneration,
because inhibition of RA synthesis
with disulﬁram, which blocks the con-
version of retinaldehyde to RA, is able
to inhibit limb and tail regeneration in
a
concentration-dependent
manner
(Maden and Corcoran, 1996; Maden,
1998). The duplication of more proxi-
mal limb elements seen in the regen-
erating Xenopus limb suggests that
the RA pathway is conserved between
these amphibians and that RA might
also have a functional role to play in
Xenopus regeneration.
2.3 Putting Things in Order:
Epistasis of Genetic
Pathways Involved in
Regeneration
In the past few years, progress has
been made in characterizing the mo-
lecular network that regulates regen-
eration. It is possible to inhibit one
molecular pathway and activate an-
other one by using different combina-
tions of gain- or loss-of-function trans-
genes and chemical inhibitors (see
Table 1). In this way, it has been
shown that Bmp signaling lies up-
stream of Notch signaling in tail re-
generation. Activation of the Bmp
pathway by expression of the consti-
tutive active Bmp receptor Alk3 (HS-
Alk3) during regeneration of refrac-
tory tails is unable to rescue tail
regeneration if Notch signaling is in-
hibited at the same time with the pro-
tease inhibitor, MG132. On the other
XENOPUS REGENERATION 1239

hand, activation of Notch signaling by
overexpressing the HS-Nicd trans-
gene was sufﬁcient to overcome the
block of regeneration introduced by
overexpression of a dominant negative
Bmp
receptor
(HS-tBR)
simulta-
neously in double transgenic tadpoles.
These animals regenerated their tails
similarly to the HS-Nicd single trans-
genics (Beck et al., 2003). Therefore,
Notch signaling is epistatic over Bmp
signaling and can be placed down-
stream.
In a more recent report, three of the
main pathways involved in regenera-
tion have been ordered epistatically
during tail regeneration and shown to
act in a linear pathway (Lin and
Slack, 2008). For regeneration, both
activation of Wnt/-catenin signaling
and Fgf signaling are needed. To de-
termine
the
relationship
between
these two pathways, transgenics har-
boring heat inducible transgenes for
both Fgf20 (HS-fgf20) and the Wnt
inhibitor Dkk1 (HS-dkk1) were cre-
ated. These transgenic tadpoles were
able to regenerate their tails despite
having
Wnt/-catenin
signaling
blocked, signifying that Fgf signaling
is sufﬁcient to overcome this block
and, therefore, must act downstream
of Wnt/-catenin signaling. In the re-
verse experiment, activating Wnt sig-
naling with the chemical compound
BIO was unable to rescue regenera-
tion in tadpoles for which Fgf signal-
ing was inhibited with the dominant-
negative
Fgf
receptor
(HS-XFD).
Circumstantial
expression
evidence
rather than functional results indi-
cate that Bmp signaling lies upstream
of Wnt signaling. If Bmp signaling is
blocked during tail regeneration in a
transgenic line for HS-noggin, expres-
sion of wnt3a, wnt5a, fgf10, and fgf20
is blocked. In HS-Dkk1 transgenics or
SU5402 treated tadpoles, however,
Bmp4 expression is unaltered. These
results show that Bmp signaling is
needed for induction of Wnt and Fgf
expression
and
strongly
suggest,
therefore, that Bmp is upstream of
Wnt and Fgf signaling (Lin and Slack,
2008).
Whether this linear pathway (Bmp-
Wnt-Fgf) is also true for limb and lens
regeneration has not been determined
yet. However, in the limb, similar cir-
cumstantial
expression
data
also
places Wnt signaling upstream of Fgf
(Yokoyama et al., 2007). Brief induc-
tion of an HS-Dkk1 transgene on day
5 of limb regeneration abolished fgf8
expression 8 hr later, while fgf10,
lmx1, msx2, and hoxa13 expression
are unaltered. This demonstrates that
blocking Wnt signaling does not gen-
erally inhibit gene expression but spe-
ciﬁcally the expression of fgf8. In the
regenerating limb, the wnt3a expres-
sion domain overlaps with the expres-
sion domain of fgf8, plus it is known
that wnt3a induces fgf8 expression
during AER formation in the chick
limb bud (Kengaku et al., 1998), thus
it is likely that wnt3a plays a role in
the induction of fgf8 expression during
Xenopus limb regeneration.
The three molecular pathways de-
scribed above, Bmp, Wnt, and Fgf, do
not seem to be necessary for the ﬁrst
two
phases
of
tail
regeneration,
namely wound healing and formation
of a regeneration bud. Histology re-
veals that wound healing and regen-
eration bud formation proceeds nor-
mally after blocking either of these
pathways (Beck et al., 2006; Lin and
Slack, 2008). Their main action seems
to be primarily expansion of the re-
generation bud by stimulating cell
proliferation and patterning. The fac-
tor most upstream of the regeneration
cascade described so far is Tgf-,
which is needed for wound healing
and establishment of a regeneration
blastema (Ho and Whitman, 2008).
Also upstream of the main molecular
pathways lies the physiological mod-
ule driven by the activity of the H
pump. How exactly the membrane
voltage is translated into activation of
gene
expression
is
not
known
at
present,
but
mechanisms
able
to
transduce changes in membrane volt-
ages to second messengers are known
(Cherubini et al., 2005; Murata et al.,
2005). In tail regeneration, results
suggest that the H pump driven pro-
ton ﬂux controls regeneration by two
mechanisms: control of cell number by
means of apoptosis and guidance of
axons into the regeneration bud. Fi-
nally, epigenetic changes triggered by
amputation might also be an early
mechanism determining regeneration
success. However, up to now very few
epigenetic studies on amphibian re-
generation have been conducted (see
Section 4.2; Yakushiji et al., 2007).
3. FINDING NEW TARGETS
FOR REGENERATION
RESEARCH
Xenopus, with its stage-dependent re-
generative abilities, provides a unique
opportunity to compare gene expres-
sion relative to successful and failed
or limited regeneration in the same
organism. The use of broad or tran-
scriptome-wide analyses enables iden-
tiﬁcation
of
particular
functional
groupings of genes that are involved
in the complicated cellular processes
described in Section 1. Unlike the can-
didate gene approach, in which well-
studied genes have been selected,
these larger screens could potentially
identify novel mechanisms for regen-
eration.
3.1 EST Approaches
Using a subtractive library approach,
Henry et al. isolated and sequenced
250 clones preferentially expressed in
transdifferentiating corneas6 in the
ﬁrst 4 days after lentectomy (Henry et
al., 2002). After selection to remove
duplicated genes, a further 157 clones
were sequenced, resulting in identiﬁ-
cation of a total of 233 unique 5 EST
sequences. At the time of this initial
screen, 74% of these ESTs could not
be
identiﬁed
based
on
homology
searches. Enriched genes coded for
proteins
including
lens
crystallins,
matrix metalloproteinases, enzymes,
and some receptors and transcrip-
tional cofactors. While no obvious de-
velopmental pathways were identiﬁed
in this initial screen, this collection of
ESTs has since been expanded to in-
clude
838
clones,
available
as
a
searchable database from the Henry
lab, which includes embryonic expres-
sion data (CLT database, www.life.uiuc.
edu/henry).
In a slightly different approach,
Tazaki and colleagues used a mac-
roarray to screen 42,240 clones gener-
ated from neurula and tail bud stage
ESTs, together representing approxi-
mately 17,000 unigenes. These devel-
opmentally
expressed
genes
were
then screened using probes made from
tail tissue after 0, 1.5, and 3 days of
regeneration. After 2 rounds of screen-
6This library was subtracted against a control
cornea library.
1240 BECK ET AL.

ing and removal of duplicates, 56 up-
regulated
and
28
down-regulated
genes were identiﬁed. Many of the
down-regulated genes were associated
with muscle expression, possibly re-
ﬂecting the breakdown of myoﬁbers
near the stump that occurs in the Xe-
nopus tail after partial amputation.
48 of the 56 up-regulated genes were
conﬁrmed by in situ hybridization to
be expressed in regenerating tails and
were identiﬁed with roles in wound
healing, inﬂammation, cell prolifera-
tion,
and
cell
signaling
(including
Sfrp, a Wnt inhibitor, and Ptk7, a re-
ceptor tyrosine kinase), cell differenti-
ation, and cell structure. Interest-
ingly, only two of these genes had
regeneration speciﬁc expression, that
is they were not expressed during de-
velopment of the tail, and both were
also expressed in limb regeneration
(Tazaki et al., 2005).
Subtractive hybridization was also
used by King et al. (2003) to identify
regeneration
speciﬁc
genes
in
the
hindlimb bud. By subtracting combi-
nations of cDNA obtained from com-
petent (st. 53) vs. incompetent (st. 59)
7 day blastemas, or control, unoper-
ated limbs at the same stage, they
identiﬁed genes that were preferen-
tially expressed in regenerating limbs,
nonregenerating limbs, or both, rela-
tive to uncut limbs. The choice of 7 day
blastemas in this study is puzzling,
because differentiation is well under
way in the regenerating st. 53 limb 7
days after amputation and, therefore,
we would argue that these are not, in
fact, blastemas.
3.2 Microarray Approaches
Commercially
available
microarray
chips for transcriptome analysis are
available for Xenopus laevis and tropi-
calis. Two independent groups have
used the Affymetrix Xenopus laevis
GeneChip to identify genes preferen-
tially expressed during regeneration
of the limb. However, the approaches
used were rather different. Grow et al.
(2006) compared the transcriptome of
regeneration competent (st. 53) and
incompetent (st. 57) limb after 1 or 5
days of regeneration. Pearl et al.
(2008) compared st. 52 regenerating
limbs to those blocked by transgenic
expression of the Bmp inhibitor Nog-
gin, 3 days after amputation. In the
ﬁrst study, the tissues being compared
are also at very different stages of de-
velopment: where st. 53 limb buds are
relatively
undifferentiated,
st.
57
limbs have differentiated muscle, car-
tilage, and ossiﬁed bone. The authors,
therefore, focused on genes that were
differentially regulated between 1 and
5 days after amputation and were
preferentially expressed at regenera-
tion competent stages. As expected,
many more genes were differentially
expressed between 1 and 5 days after
amputation at regeneration compe-
tent stage (st. 53, 218 probesets) than
at noncompetent stages (st. 57, 15
probesets). A larger number of genes
was differentially expressed between
regenerating
and
nonregenerating
limbs at either 1 or 5 days after am-
putation. Genes associated with pat-
terning,
the
stress
response,
and
inﬂammation were preferentially ex-
pressed in the regenerating blaste-
mas. Speciﬁc genes with a subse-
quently demonstrated functional role
in Xenopus tail regeneration were also
identiﬁed, such as V-ATPase (see Sec-
tion 2.1.3).
One limitation with this approach,
and with the previous library screen
by King et al., is that different stage
tissue must be used to generate regen-
erating vs. nonregenerating limbs. In
a more recent study, Pearl et al. used
a transgenic line of Xenopus laevis
that can be used to overexpress the
Bmp inhibitor Noggin at any time
during the life of the animal by the
application of a heat shock (Pearl et
al., 2008). Attenuation of Bmp signal-
ing by Noggin can block regeneration
of the tail and limb (see Section 2.2;
Beck et al., 2003, 2006). It is, there-
fore, possible to compare transcrip-
tomes from same-stage regeneration
competent and regeneration blocked
limb buds, avoiding interference from
genes that are differentially regulated
as the limb develops from a simple
mesenchymal bud to a functional limb
containing cartilage, bone, muscle,
nerves, and blood vessels. The Noggin
inhibited limb stumps appeared simi-
lar to later stage, refractory limbs at a
histological level, and the tissue was,
therefore, referred to as the pseudo-
blastema. St. 52 hindlimbs from ei-
ther transgenic tadpoles or their wild-
type siblings were operated at the
level of the future ankle and subjected
to heat shock. After 3 days, blastemas
were harvested from the wild-types
and pseudoblastemas from the trans-
genics, and the transcriptomes com-
pared using genechips. Using a cutoff
of 1.5-fold change in expression, 676
up-regulated genes and 1,170 down-
regulated
genes
were
identiﬁed.
Genes associated with embryonic de-
velopment, stress, and growth, as well
as rRNA processing, were statistically
up-regulated
in
regenerating
limb
buds. Two genes were followed up us-
ing in situ hybridization. Gremlin, an-
other Bmp inhibitor, was associated
with development and regeneration of
the regeneration competent st. 52
limb bud but not the incompetent st.
57 limb or the larval tail. Hsp60, a
stress response gene that is develop-
mentally regulated, was found to be
absent during limb development but
expressed during regeneration of the
limb or the tail (Pearl et al., 2008).
Both Gremlin and Hsp60 are being
functionally tested to see if they can
enhance regeneration (C.W.B., un-
published observations). Although the
two studies identiﬁed similar func-
tional groupings of genes, there is lit-
tle overlap between the two datasets,
as might be expected due to the differ-
ent stages of regeneration examined
in the studies. Both studies are also
somewhat limited due to the presence
of probesets representing only 14,400
transcripts in the ﬁrst generation Af-
fymetrix Xenopus laevis genechip. A
second generation chip has since been
released, which has 29,900 transcripts
represented and is likely to be closer
to a unigene set.
3.3 Can We Identify
Common Mechanisms and
Genes?
One question that has yet to be ad-
dressed fully is how many of these as
yet
functionally
uncharacterized
genes are involved in all regeneration
responses in Xenopus. It might be ex-
pected that the early triggers which
promote regenerative responses over
simple wound healing would be con-
served regardless of the system stud-
ied, be it limb, tail or lens, whereas
later tissue speciﬁc patterning events
would be different depending on the
system analyzed. This seems to be the
case in some urodele amphibians,
XENOPUS REGENERATION 1241

where the clotting protease thrombin
is linked to the de-differentiation pro-
cess in regeneration of tail and limb,
but is not involved in development
(Tanaka et al., 1999; Imokawa et al.,
2004) This system, however, does not
seem to play the same role in Xenopus,
perhaps explaining the more limited
regenerative power of anurans. In an
attempt to identify the shared genes,
Wolfe et al. (2004) used differential
screening to identify genes that were
preferentially expressed in both hind-
limb regeneration (st. 51–53, 1–3 days
after amputation) and cornea to lens
trandifferentiation.
Thirteen
clones
were identiﬁed that fulﬁlled these cri-
teria and were not signiﬁcantly up-
regulated during normal wound heal-
ing. All 13 were expressed, although
not exclusively, in the lens or lens
forming region during development,
and 5 were also expressed during limb
development.
Taking
this
example
then, one could predict that either re-
generation is entirely controlled by re-
activation of developmental mecha-
nisms, or that the triggers that drive
the choice between regeneration and
wound healing vary between different
tissues. One of these genes, Xnlrr-1,
was also identiﬁed by Grow et al. in
their limb screen, as differentially ex-
pressed in st. 53 limbs at 1 and 5 days
after amputation (Grow et al., 2006).
Grow et al. also identiﬁed several
other
genes
in
common
with
the
Tazaki list (Grow et al., 2006).
Tazaki et al. looked for genes up-
regulated during both tail and limb
regeneration
using
a
macroarray
(Tazaki et al., 2005). A total of 15
genes were identiﬁed as being in com-
mon, including keratin 8, which had
already been identiﬁed as differen-
tially regulated during newt limb re-
generation
(Ferretti
et
al.,
1989).
When Tazaki’s list of tail regeneration
is compared with limb regeneration
data from Pearl (Pearl et al., 2008),
using unigene identiﬁers, a few genes
can be identiﬁed as common to both
lists (C.W.B., unpublished observa-
tions). Of 44 identiﬁable unigenes
from the Tazaki screen, 26 are repre-
sented on the Xenopus genechip. Of
these, 19% (5 genes) are also preferen-
tially expressed in 3 day regenerating
hindlimb buds, these genes are pre-
sented in Table 2. One of these, nrp-1b
or msi1 (mushashi-1), is a neural spe-
ciﬁc RNA binding protein associated
with neural stem cells. Mushashi-like
homologues are involved in planarian
regeneration (Higuchi et al., 2008).
By comparing the hindlimb regen-
eration data from Pearl et al. (2008)
and Grow et al. (2006), 21 genes (22
probesets) were identiﬁed that appear
to be consistently preferentially ex-
pressed in regenerating limb buds at
1, 3, and 5 days after amputation. Sev-
eral of these have annotations and are
shown in Table 2, the rest are tran-
scribed loci of unknown function. This
number is likely artiﬁcially small be-
cause of the very different source of
nonregenerating comparative tissue
and the different criteria used to de-
termine differential expression in the
two studies (P value in Grow vs. fold
difference in Pearl). However, it does
identify a select group of genes that
could potentially be investigated us-
ing functional methods as detailed in
Section 2.
4. PERSPECTIVES AND
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
4.1 MicroRNAs
While
recent
efforts
have
concen-
trated on identiﬁcation of differen-
tially transcribed genes during regen-
eration in Xenopus, there is growing
evidence for control of translation in
regenerative mechanisms (reviewed
in Tanaka and Weidinger, 2008). Mi-
croRNAs (miRNAs) are small (20–23
nucleotide) molecules, which exert a
recently discovered additional level of
control on gene activity, by binding to
speciﬁc complementary sites in the 3-
untranslated regions (UTRs) of target
genes and blocking translation in a
way that is not yet fully understood
(reviewed in Kozak, 2008). Multiple
roles in development, cancer, and dis-
ease are being uncovered (Klooster-
man and Plasterk, 2006). Recent evi-
dence supports the idea that miRNA
expression acts to limit the expression
of target mRNAs to appropriate cells
TABLE 2. Genes Associated with Regeneration in More Than One Transcriptome Analysis
Unigene ID
Gene Title
Human homologue
Function
Analysis
xl.318
Gremlin
GREM1
Bmp signalling
(1)
xl.387
Enhancer of split groucho
TLE1
Notch signalling, transcription factor
(1)
xl.266
HoxA11
HOXA11
Morphogenesis
(1)
xl.7590*
XDCoH
PCBD1
Phenylalaninie hydroxylation, regulates
homodimerisation of HNF1
(1, 2)
xl.7260
Nrp-1B
MSI1
RNA binding, post-transcriptional gene
regulation, stem cell marker
(1)
xl.179
Lmyc-b
MYCL1
Oncogene, DNA replication
(1)
xl.11312
MCG81285
(EPS8)
Egf-R pathway
(1)
xl.4150
HMG-X
HMGB2
chromatin binding
(2)
xl.1120
Muscle AChR subunit
CHRNG
Embryonic AchR
(3)
xl.24294
Cico01
ES1/HES1
Transcription factor, Notch signalling
(3)
xl.9407
SEC24B homologue
SEC24B
Vesicle trafﬁcking
(3)
xl.20790
MGC53350
(LSM14A)
RNA binding
(2)
(1) Up regulated in 1, 3 and 5 day st. 52 hindlimb blastemas, information from analysis of data from (Grow et al., 2006; Pearl et al.,
2008). (2) Up regulated in tail regeneration (Tazaki et al., 2005) and limb regeneration (Pearl et al., 2008). (3) Up regulated in tail
and limb regeneration (Tazaki et al., 2005) and limb regeneration (Pearl et al., 2008). * Identiﬁed by more than one probeset in both
analyses.
1242 BECK ET AL.

and tissues (Sood et al., 2006); thus,
miRNAs could be acting to prevent
transdifferentiation
by
preventing
translation of potentially leaky mas-
ter
switch
genes—in
other
words,
have a protective role. This is sup-
ported by studies of pancreas regener-
ation in mammals, where Neurogenin
3 is silenced by miRNA after partial
pancreatectomy
(Joglekar
et
al.,
2007). MiRbase currently has 184 re-
ported miRNAs for Xenopus tropicalis
and just 7 for Xenopus laevis (MIr-
Base). Many miRNAs are expressed in
a tissue speciﬁc or developmentally
regulated
manner,
and
their
se-
quences are often highly conserved in
all animals.
Few miRNAs have been assigned
functions, but a recent study of newt
eyes showed that miR-124a was ex-
pressed at much higher levels in the
regeneration
competent
dorsal
iris
compared with that of the regenera-
tion
incompetent
ventral
iris
(Makarev et al., 2006). Since this
study, many other miRNAs have been
isolated and shown to have differen-
tial expression in regenerating newt
lens (Tsonis et al., 2007). In Xenopus,
miRNAs have been shown to be both
speciﬁcally expressed (Watanabe et
al., 2005) and to play a role in differ-
entiation (Chen et al., 2006a). In ze-
braﬁsh, the caudal ﬁn regenerates by
means of an epimorphic process simi-
lar to that of amphibian limbs, includ-
ing the formation of a blastema (Poss
et al., 2003), and involving many of
the same signaling molecules, includ-
ing Fgf20 (Whitehead et al., 2005; Sto-
ick-Cooper et al., 2007a). In a recent
study, Yin et al. (2008) describe sev-
eral miRNAs that are differentially
expressed between normal and Fgf in-
hibited zebraﬁsh tails. One of these,
miR-133, is dramatically down-regu-
lated during caudal ﬁn regeneration,
but high in normal tails. They suggest
that Fgf signaling normally promotes
proliferation of blastema cells by in-
hibiting miR-133. The potential tar-
gets of miR-133 include cell cycle reg-
ulators,
including
mps1,
which
is
known to be required for ﬁn regener-
ation (Poss et al., 2002). Another mi-
croRNA, miR-203, blocks caudal ﬁn
regeneration by attenuating Wnt sig-
naling through reduction of Lef1 pro-
tein (Thatcher et al., 2008). Clearly, a
better understanding of the role of
miRNA and other posttranscriptional
modiﬁers of protein function in the
process of successful vs. failed regen-
eration is needed.
4.2 Epigenetics
A further level of transcriptional con-
trol is provided by epigenetics. It has
been recognized in recent years that
the complex chromatin structure that
packages DNA is much more dynamic
than previously thought and that it
plays an active role in controlling gene
expression by regulating accessibility
of transcription factors to the DNA.
Two mechanisms that regulate chro-
matin remodeling and accessibility to
DNA have been identiﬁed. DNA meth-
ylation of CpG sites in promoter and
enhancer regions, which prevent tran-
scription factors from binding, and co-
valent histone modiﬁcations, which
control compaction of the chromatin.
That epigenetic changes can control
development and disease is well ac-
cepted (see recent reviews: Rajas-
ekhar and Begemann, 2007; Soshni-
kova and Duboule, 2008); therefore, it
is reasonable to believe that epige-
netic mechanisms will also play a role
in
regeneration.
Yakushiji
et
al.
(2007) studied the methylation level of
the enhancer region of a limb-speciﬁc
shh enhancer, which has been con-
served from ﬁsh to mammals (Sagai et
al., 2005), in amphibians with differ-
ent regenerative abilities. In Xenopus
hindlimbs that regenerate and ex-
press shh, the enhancer was methyl-
ated on approximately half the CpG
sites (40–50%) in either developing or
regenerating limbs, while in the pat-
tern-deﬁcient
regenerating
froglet
forelimb, it was hypermethylated (84–
91%). In contrast, in axolotls and
newts, which regenerate perfectly pat-
terned limbs and re-express shh in the
blastema, the shh enhancer was hy-
pomethylated
(20–50%).
This
sug-
gests a correlation between shh ex-
pression and DNA methylation level
at
the
enhancer
region.
However,
when they studied the same shh en-
hancer in other tissues (eye and heart)
that do not express shh, they found
that this enhancer was similarly hy-
pomethylated
(30–40%)
in
axolotl
and newt, whereas in Xenopus the
enhancer was hypermethylated (90–
100%). This observation can either be
interpreted as underlining the impor-
tance of DNA methylation and the
regulatory effect it has on gene ex-
pression, as discussed by the authors
(Yakushiji et al., 2007) or it could
mean that there are fundamental dif-
ferences in epigenetic control between
urodeles and Xenopus. It will be nec-
essary to wait for more results from
epigenetic studies to resolve this.
There are further indications though
that there might be epigenetic dif-
ferences between animals that can
regenerate and those that cannot. In
embryonic stem cells, it has been
shown that many silent loci coding for
developmental genes are associated
with nucleosomes containing not only
the
inhibitory
trimethyl
lysine
27
mark on Histone H3 (me3 K27 H3) but
also the trimethyl lysine 4 Histone H3
(me3 K4 H3) mark, which normally
indicates active loci. Therefore, it has
been proposed that this bivalent his-
tone code poises the developmental
genes for later activation during the
differentiation process (Bernstein et
al., 2006). Scott Stewart, from the Iz-
pisua´-Belmonte lab at the Salk Insti-
tute presented some intriguing results
at a recent meeting showing that this
bivalent histone code is also present in
the intact nonregenerating ﬁn of the
zebraﬁsh (Scott Stewart and J.C.I.B.,
unpublished observations). Only fur-
ther investigation will tell whether
this bivalent histone code is some-
thing that all regenerating animals
have in common. However, these two
studies illustrate that epigenetics will
have its part to play in regeneration
research.
4.3 Functional Assays for
Regeneration
As we have discussed in this review,
the majority of functional studies of
Xenopus regeneration have been di-
rected at tail regeneration. One of the
strengths of Xenopus for this kind of
assay is the ability to produce large
numbers of tadpoles that can be cul-
tured in relatively small volumes of
soluble inhibitors or activators of ge-
netic pathways (Adams and Levin,
2006). Such experiments are likely to
continue to be important ﬁrst steps in
the process of functionally testing
genes identiﬁed from microarray data,
but are only useful where the bio-
XENOPUS REGENERATION 1243

chemical pathway in which the gene
product functions is already charac-
terized. The type of tail regeneration
experiments being done by the Levin
lab, using st. 40 tadpoles rather than
more mature feeding larvae (Tseng
and Levin, 2008), would be expected to
be amenable to gene knockdown using
morpholino antisense compounds di-
rected at speciﬁc genes of interest.
Morpholinos are stable nucleotide an-
alogues that can be designed to bind to
translation initiation sites or splice
sites of pre-mRNA, resulting in inhi-
bition of translation or intron removal
of the target protein. Another option,
allowing for temporal control of inhi-
bition, are caged morpholinos, which
contain a complementary inhibitor se-
quence, tethered to the morpholino by
a photo-cleavable linker (Shestopalov
et al., 2007). This approach has the
advantage of precluding any prior
knowledge of the function of a partic-
ular gene, and so could be used to test
the role of genes of unknown or uncon-
ﬁrmed function, such as those discov-
ered by transcriptome analyses (Sec-
tion 3 above). However, it is difﬁcult to
imagine these methods working well
for older tadpoles or froglets, and so
they will be unlikely to be the method
of choice for those studying limb or
lens regeneration.
Any approach that is designed to
interrupt or promote gene function
and is not controllable in terms of the
time that the animal is exposed to the
factor is liable to cause problems with
genes that are pleiotropic in function.
An example of pleiotropy would be the
Bmp pathway, which is required for
multiple developmental events during
early embryogenesis and organ forma-
tion. To test the role of Bmp signaling
in regeneration, inducible transgenic
constructs have been used to avoid
this problem. The use of the heat
shock promoter to control expression
of transgenes has proved robust but is
limited because, although the timing
of expression can be somewhat con-
trolled, the transgene is activated glo-
bally in all tissues; therefore, one can-
not investigate the role of Bmps in
say, AEC function or blastema func-
tion in isolation during limb regener-
ation. An alternative is to use a cre-lox
binary system (Ryffel et al., 2003) to
drive expression of a transgene in spe-
ciﬁc tissues. The identiﬁcation of suit-
able promoters is required for this ap-
proach to be useful in addressing real
biological questions about regenera-
tion. Mammalian promoters and en-
hancers can be used to drive gene ex-
pression in Xenopus (Beck and Slack,
1999b). New promoters need to be
identiﬁed that can drive expression in
speciﬁc regions of the limb, tail, and
eye.
These
could
be
activated
by
means of a HS-cre transgene. Non-
transgenic alternatives such as Ade-
novirus transfection and grafting of
transgenic embryos can also be used,
as discussed above for Wnt signaling
(Section 2.2.3).
4.3 Xenopus tropicalis: The
New Frog in the Pond
While Xenopus laevis continues to be
preferred
for
regeneration
studies,
there is likely to be strong contention
in the future from the closely related
Xenopus tropicalis. Unlike X. laevis,
X. tropicalis is being developed as a
genetic model organism (Carruthers
and Stemple, 2006), and in the future,
mutant strains will be available. The
genome sequence for this species is
already available and both forward
and reverse genetic techniques are de-
scribed for this species (Goda et al.,
2006). Forward genetic screens make
use of ENU mutagen to create point
mutations in sperm. Female F1 carri-
ers of the mutations are then used to
produce gynogenetic diploid F2 ani-
mals enabling faster screening of re-
cessive phenotypes. The reverse ge-
netic technique TILLING (targeting
induced
local
lesions
in
genomes)
method has been used to detect muta-
tions in speciﬁc genes and is also ame-
nable to large-scale mutant produc-
tion (Goda et al., 2006). Insertional
mutation strategies that take advan-
tage of transposable elements are also
being pursued (Yergeau and Mead,
2007). There are currently no pub-
lished data on the regenerative abil-
ities of Xenopus tropicalis limbs and
tails, although they would be ex-
pected to react in a similar way to X.
laevis. As we have explained above,
Xenopus tropicalis is known to be
much less efﬁcient at regenerating
the lens from the cornea, due to me-
chanical obstruction; however, the
cornea is competent to transdifferen-
tiate if transplanted into the vitre-
ous (Henry and Elkins, 2001), and
so assays could still be designed
against a mutant background.
5. SUMMARY
Xenopus laevis is fast becoming a lead-
ing model organism for regeneration
research, and one in which it is possi-
ble to use diverse methods to perform
gain- and loss-of-function studies. Al-
ready, an ordered pathway for the mo-
lecular mechanisms controlling re-
generation
is
emerging,
and
new
promising target genes are being iden-
tiﬁed from transcriptome analysis. In
addition, there are hints of epigenetic
and translational regulation being in-
volved in the regenerative process,
and this promises to bring together
new and exciting directions for the
ﬁeld. With the ever-increasing inter-
est in regenerative medicine, the next
10 years will be an exciting time for
regeneration research, and the advan-
tages of the Xenopus system will en-
sure that amphibians continue to lead
the way.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Dr. Scott Stewart
of the Salk Institute for permission to
communicate results before publica-
tion. We also thank Tamsin Jones, Dr.
Angel
Raya,
Alexandre
Rodrigues,
and Dr. Lyle Zimmerman for provid-
ing critical comments on the manu-
script before submission. C.W.B. ac-
knowledges the support of the RSNZ
Marsden
Fund
and
University
of
Otago. J.C.I.B. and B.C. acknowledge
the support of The G. Harold and
Leyla Y. Mathers and The Cellex
Foundations.
REFERENCES
Adams DS, Levin M. 2006. Inverse drug
screens: a rapid and inexpensive method
for implicating molecular targets. Gene-
sis 44:530–540.
Adams DS, Masi A, Levin M. 2007. H
pump-dependent changes in membrane
voltage are an early mechanism neces-
sary and sufﬁcient to induce Xenopus
tail
regeneration.
Development
134:
1323–1335.
Alberch P, Gale EA. 1983. Size dependence
during the development of the amphib-
ian foot. Colchicine-induced digital loss
and reduction. J Embryol Exp Morphol
76:177–197.
1244 BECK ET AL.

Arresta E, Bernardini S, Gargioli C, Filoni
S, Cannata SM. 2005. Lens-forming com-
petence in the epidermis of Xenopus lae-
vis during development. J Exp Zoolog A
Comp Exp Biol 303:1–12.
Barker DM, Beck CW. 2009. Overexpres-
sion of the transcription factor Msx1 is
insufﬁcient to drive complete regenera-
tion of refractory stage Xenopus laevis
hindlimbs. Dev Dyn (in press).
Beck CW, Slack JM. 1998. Analysis of the
developing Xenopus tail bud reveals sep-
arate phases of gene expression during
determination and outgrowth. Mech Dev
72:41–52.
Beck CW, Slack JM. 1999a. A developmen-
tal pathway controlling outgrowth of the
Xenopus tail bud. Development 126:
1611–1620.
Beck CW, Slack JM. 1999b. Gut speciﬁc
expression using mammalian promoters
in transgenic Xenopus laevis. Mech Dev
88:221–227.
Beck CW, Slack JM. 2002. Notch is re-
quired for outgrowth of the Xenopus tail
bud. Int J Dev Biol 46:255–258.
Beck CW, Whitman M, Slack JM. 2001.
The role of BMP signaling in outgrowth
and patterning of the Xenopus tail bud.
Dev Biol 238:303–314.
Beck CW, Christen B, Slack JM. 2003. Mo-
lecular pathways needed for regenera-
tion of spinal cord and muscle in a ver-
tebrate. Dev Cell 5:429–439.
Beck CW, Christen B, Barker D, Slack JM.
2006. Temporal requirement for bone
morphogenetic proteins in regeneration
of the tail and limb of Xenopus tadpoles.
Mech Dev 123:674–688.
Bernstein BE, Mikkelsen TS, Xie X, Kamal
M, Huebert DJ, Cuff J, Fry B, Meissner
A, Wernig M, Plath K, Jaenisch R, Wag-
schal A, Feil R, Schreiber SL, Lander ES.
2006. A bivalent chromatin structure
marks key developmental genes in em-
bryonic stem cells. Cell 125:315–326.
Borgens RB. 1982. Mice regrow the tips of
their foretoes. Science 217:747–750.
Borgens RB, Vanable JW Jr, Jaffe LF.
1977. Bioelectricity and regeneration:
large currents leave the stumps of regen-
erating newt limbs. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 74:4528–4532.
Borgens RB, Roederer E, Cohen MJ. 1981.
Enhanced spinal cord regeneration in
lamprey by applied electric ﬁelds. Sci-
ence 213:611–617.
Bosco L. 1979. Expression of regenerative
capacity of caudal spinal cord during the
larval development of Xenopus laevis.
Acta Embryol Exp (Palermo) :275–286.
Bosco L, Filoni S, Cannata S. 1979. Rela-
tionships between eye factors and lens-
forming transformations in the cornea
and pericorneal epidermis of larval Xe-
nopus laevis. J Exp Zool 209:261–282.
Bosco L, Filoni S, Cioni C. 1980. Lens for-
mation from cornea in the presence of
the old lens in larval Xenopus laevis. J
Exp Zool 213:9–14.
Bosco L, Filoni S, Cioni C, Bernardini S.
1986.
Eye
factors
and
lens-forming
transformations of outer cornea in Xeno-
pus laevis larvae. J Exp Zool 240:401–
407.
Bosco L, Venturini G, Willems D. 1997. In
vitro lens transdifferentiation of Xeno-
pus laevis outer cornea induced by Fibro-
blast Growth Factor (FGF). Develop-
ment 124:421–428.
Brand-Saberi B, Muller TS, Wilting J,
Christ B, Birchmeier C. 1996. Scatter
factor/hepatocyte
growth
factor
(SF/
HGF) induces emigration of myogenic
cells at interlimb level in vivo. Dev Biol
179:303–308.
Brockes JP. 1984. Mitogenic growth factors
and nerve dependence of limb regenera-
tion. Science 225:1280–1287.
Brockes JP. 1987. The nerve dependence of
amphibian limb regeneration. J Exp Biol
132:79–91.
Brockes JP. 1992. Introduction of a retin-
oid reporter gene into the urodele limb
blastema. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 89:
11386–11390.
Brockes JP, Kumar A. 2002. Plasticity and
reprogramming of differentiated cells in
amphibian regeneration. Nat Mol Cell
Biol 3:566–574.
Burke ZD, Tosh D. 2005. Therapeutic po-
tential of transdifferentiated cells. Clin
Sci (Lond) 108:309–321.
Cannata
SM,
Bagni
C,
Bernardini
S,
Christen B, Filoni S. 2001. Nerve-inde-
pendence of limb regeneration in larval
Xenopus laevis is correlated to the level
of fgf-2 mRNA expression in limb tis-
sues. Dev Biol 231:436–446.
Cannata SM, Arresta E, Bernardini S,
Gargioli C, Filoni S. 2003. Tissue inter-
actions and lens-forming competence in
the outer cornea of larval Xenopus lae-
vis. J Exp Zoolog Part A Comp Exp Biol
299:161–171.
Cannata SM, Bernardini S, Filoni S, Gar-
gioli C. 2008. The optic vesicle promotes
cornea to lens transdifferentiation in lar-
val Xenopus laevis. J Anat 212:621–626.
Carlson BM. 2007. Principles of regenera-
tive biology. San Diego: Academic Press.
Carruthers S, Stemple DL. 2006. Genetic
and
genomic
prospects
for
Xenopus
tropicalis research. Semin Cell Dev Biol
17:146–153.
Chaar ZY, Tsilﬁdis C. 2006. Newt opportu-
nities for understanding the dedifferen-
tiation process. ScientiﬁcWorldJournal
6(suppl 1):55–64.
Chen JF, Mandel EM, Thomson JM, Wu Q,
Callis TE, Hammond SM, Conlon FL,
Wang
DZ.
2006a.
The
role
of
mi-
croRNA-1 and microRNA-133 in skeletal
muscle proliferation and differentiation.
Nat Genet 38:228–233.
Chen Y, Lin G, Slack JM. 2006b. Control of
muscle regeneration in the Xenopus tad-
pole tail by Pax7. Development 133:
2303–2313.
Cherubini
A,
Hofmann
G,
Pillozzi
S,
Guasti L, Crociani O, Cilia E, Di Stefano
P, Degani S, Balzi M, Olivotto M, Wanke
E, Becchetti A, Deﬁlippi P, Wymore R,
Arcangeli A. 2005. Human ether-a-go-go-
related gene 1 channels are physically
linked to beta1 integrins and modulate
adhesion-dependent signaling. Mol Biol
Cell 16:2972–2983.
Christ B, Brand-Saberi B. 2002. Limb mus-
cle development. Int J Dev Biol 46:905–
914.
Christen B, Slack JM. 1997. FGF-8 is as-
sociated with anteroposterior patterning
and limb regeneration in Xenopus. Dev
Biol 192:455–466.
Christen B, Slack JMW. 1998. All limbs
are not the same. Nature 395:230–231.
Christen B, Beck CW, Lombardo A, Slack
JM. 2003. Regeneration-speciﬁc expres-
sion
pattern
of
three
posterior
Hox
genes. Dev Dyn 226:349–355.
Cioni C, Filoni S, Bosco L. 1982. Inhibition
of lens regeneration in larval Xenopus
laevis. J Exp Zool 220:103–108.
Dahn RD, Fallon JF. 2000. Interdigital
regulation of digit identity and homeotic
transformation by modulated BMP sig-
naling. Science 289:438–441.
Del Rio-Tsonis K, Jung JC, Chiu IM, Tso-
nis PA. 1997. Conservation of ﬁbroblast
growth factor function in lens regenera-
tion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94:13701–
13706.
Dent JN. 1962. Limb regeneration in lar-
vae and metamorphosing individuals of
the South African clawed toad. J Mor-
phol 110:61–78.
Deuchar EM. 1975a. Regeneration of the
tail bud in Xenopus embryos. J Exp Zool
192:381–390.
Deuchar EM. 1975b. Xenopus: the South
African clawed frog. New York: John
Wiley and Sons.
Echeverri K, Tanaka EM. 2002. Ectoderm
to mesoderm lineage switching during
axolotl tail regeneration. Science 298:
1993–1996.
Echeverri K, Clarke JD, Tanaka EM. 2001.
In vivo imaging indicates muscle ﬁber
dedifferentiation is a major contributor
to the regenerating tail blastema. Dev
Biol 236:151–164.
Endo T, Tamura K, Ide H. 2000. Analysis
of
gene
expressions
during
Xenopus
forelimb regeneration. Dev Biol 220:
296–306.
Endo T, Bryant SV, Gardiner DM. 2004. A
stepwise model system for limb regener-
ation. Dev Biol 270:135–145.
Eroshkin FM, Ermakova GV, Bayramov
AV, Zaraisky AG. 2006. Multiple noggins
in vertebrate genome: cloning and ex-
pression of noggin2 and noggin4 in Xe-
nopus laevis. Gene Expr Patterns 6:180–
186.
Ferretti P, Fekete DM, Patterson M, Lane
EB. 1989. Transient expression of simple
epithelial keratins by mesenchymal cells
of regenerating newt limb. Dev Biol 133:
415–424.
Filoni S, Bosco L. 1981. Comparative anal-
ysis of the regenerative capacity of cau-
dal spinal cord in larvae of several anu-
ran amphibian species. Acta Embryol
Morphol Exp 2:199–226.
Filoni S, Paglialunga L. 1990. Effect of de-
nervation on hindlimb regeneration in
Xenopus laevis larvae. Differentiation
43:10–19.
XENOPUS REGENERATION 1245

===== Becker2018_ProgNeuro_SCI+Vertebrate+Review =====
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Progress in Neurobiology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pneurobio
Review article
The spinal ependymal zone as a source of endogenous repair cells across
vertebrates
Catherina G. Beckera,⁎,1, Thomas Beckera,⁎,1, Jean-Philippe Hugnotb,c,⁎⁎,1
a Centre for Discovery Brain Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Biomedical Sciences, The Chancellor’s Building, 49 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4SB, UK
b INSERM U1051, INM, Hopital Saint Eloi, 80 avenue Augustin Fliche, 34091 Montpellier, France
c Université de Montpellier, Place Eugène Bataillon, 34095 Montpellier, France
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Spinal cord
Regeneration
Ependymo-radial glia
Ependymal cells
CSF-contacting neurons
Adult neurogenesis
Evolutionary comparison
Cilia
Foxj1
A B S T R A C T
Spinal cord injury results in the loss of neurons and axonal connections. In mammals, including humans, this loss
is permanent, but is repaired in other vertebrates, such as salamanders and ﬁshes. Cells in the ependymal niche
play a pivotal role for the outcome after injury. These cells initiate proliferation and generate new neurons of
diﬀerent types in regenerating species, but only glial cells, contributing to the glial scar, in mammals. Here we
compare the cellular and molecular properties of ependymal zone cells and their environment across vertebrate
classes. We point out communalities and diﬀerences between vertebrates capable of neuronal regeneration and
those that are not. Comparisons like these may ultimately lead to the identiﬁcation of factors that tip the balance
for ependymal zone cells in mammals to produce appropriate neural cells for endogenous repair after spinal cord
injury.
1. Introduction
After spinal injury or in neurodegenerative diseases, lost neurons
are not replaced in mammals, including humans. In anamniotes, par-
ticularly ﬁshes and salamanders, this is not the case. These species
readily regenerate neurons (Grandel and Brand, 2013; Becker and
Becker, 2015; Alunni and Bally-Cuif, 2016; Cardozo et al., 2017; Tazaki
et al., 2017). Newly generated neurons may replace those that are lost
after an injury. This is signiﬁcant, because secondary neuron loss after
spinal injury can be quite extensive in mammals (Park et al., 2004).
Moreover, in anamniotes, new neurons can contribute to an axonal
bridge that reconnects the spinal cord, potentially acting as relay neu-
rons for the injured spinal cord (Goldshmit et al., 2012). In mammals,
embryonic or induced neural progenitor cells transplanted into the le-
sioned spinal cord can generate relay neurons. This leads to promising
axon growth from these cells and some functional recovery (Lu et al.,
2012, 2014). However, network integration of these cells is limited and
immune reactions to transplants, as well as tumour formation by
transplanted cells present additional problems to overcome (Sharp
et al., 2014). Therefore, ﬁnding and reprogramming endogenous spinal
stem cells for neurogenesis could be of great beneﬁt to repairing spinal
cord lesions. Endogenous spinal stem cells exist in the adult mammalian
spinal cord around the central canal (Weiss et al., 1996). These cells
start to proliferate after a lesion, but in situ environmental factors
prevent them from generating neurons and oligodendrogliogenesis is
rare. Instead, these cells generate mainly astrocytes that contribute to a
scar in the lesion site that prevents axons from crossing (Stenudd et al.,
2015). In anamniotes, progenitor cells are likewise located at the cen-
tral canal, proliferate after a lesion, express similar genes as in mam-
mals, but contribute to a very diﬀerent regenerative outcome, namely
neurogenesis and functional spinal cord repair (Becker and Becker,
2015). For these reasons, it is worthwhile to undertake a comparative
description of the importance of cells in the ependymal zone between
regenerating and non-regenerating vertebrate species. However, other
cell types in the parenchyma, such as oligodendrocyte progenitor cells
and astrocytes that react to a lesion with proliferation may also have
stem cell potential, which is reviewed elsewhere (Almad et al., 2011;
Dimou and Gotz, 2014; Gotz et al., 2015; Magnusson and Frisen, 2016).
Here we discuss mainly the zebraﬁsh as a regenerating species, and
compare it to diﬀerent mammalian species, namely rodents, monkeys,
and humans. We present evidence that ventricular cells across verte-
brates are a major source of new cells after injury and we describe some
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2018.04.002
Received 15 October 2017; Received in revised form 30 January 2018; Accepted 5 April 2018
⁎ Corresponding authors at: Centre for Discovery Brain Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Biomedical Sciences, The Chancellor’s Building, 49 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16
4SB, UK.
⁎⁎ Corresponding author at: Université de Montpellier, Place Eugène Bataillon, 34095 Montpellier, France.
1 Equal contributions, listed alphabetically.
E-mail addresses: catherina.becker@ed.ac.uk (C.G. Becker), thomas.becker@ed.ac.uk (T. Becker), jean-philippe.hugnot@umontpellier.fr (J.-P. Hugnot).
Abbreviations: ERG, ependymo-radial glia; EZ, ependymal zone; CSF-N, CSF contacting neurons; Acc, central canal contacting astrocytes
Progress in Neurobiology 170 (2018) 67–80
Available online 09 April 2018
0301-0082/ © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
T

interesting similarities between the likely spinal stem cells in species
capable and not capable of lesion-induced neurogenesis, in terms of cell
morphology, molecular signals, and transcription factors that are acti-
vated in these cells after a lesion. We believe that from comparing the
cellular and molecular reactions of the spinal ependymal zone between
anamniotes and mammals, important principles of regenerative neu-
rogenesis may be gleaned that could be used in future experiments to
boost neurogenesis from endogenous neural stem cells in the injured
spinal cord of mammals.
2. The spinal ependymal zone (EZ) in zebraﬁsh and other species
showing regenerative neurogenesis in successful spinal cord
regeneration
The spinal cord of species showing regenerative neurogenesis, such
as ﬁshes and salamanders, consists of peripheral white matter tracts of
large diameter myelinated axons, ascending sensory axons that project
dorsally and descending axons that are located ventrally. Dorsal and
ventral grey matter areas are equivalent to dorsal and ventral horns in
mammals and the spinal cord contains motor neurons and a high di-
versity of interneurons, including central canal contacting neurons,
such as GABAergic Kolmer-Agduhr cells that are located in the epen-
dymal layer (Djenoune and Wyart, 2017). Other resident cell types are
oligodendroglial cells, microglial cells, and blood vessel-associated
cells. A similar layout is found in all vertebrate classes.
However, whereas the mammalian spinal cord contains ependymal
cells around the ventricle and free astrocytes in the parenchyma, ﬁsh
and salamander spinal cords contain only one astroglia-like cell type,
sometimes called “radial glia” or “ependymoglia”. In zebraﬁsh, we call
this cell type ependymo-radial glia (ERG) (Becker and Becker, 2015), as
a way to describe that these cells have their soma at the central canal,
thereby forming the ependymal layer, and have radial processes that
span the entire thickness of the spinal cord to form endfeet at the pia.
ERGs possess 1 or 2 cilia, as shown by light and electron microscopy
(Hui et al., 2015). These are likely to be motile, as there is a constant
ﬂow of cerebrospinal ﬂuid (Grimes et al., 2016) and most ERGs express
the transcription factor foxj1, which is involved in motile cilia gen-
eration (Ribeiro et al., 2017). Hence, ERGs must fulﬁl a number of
homeostatic functions of ependymal cells and astrocytes. Much like
those of astrocytes, most ERG processes are positive for the glial ﬁ-
brillary acidic protein (GFAP), the glutamate transporter GLAST, brain
lipid binding-protein (BLBP), are highly branched and thus in a position
to share the homeostatic functions of astrocytes (Hui et al., 2015). Their
ciliated ependymal somata may sense signals from the central canal
milieu. It has been proposed that ERGs may not be a physically sus-
tainable cell type in species with thicker parenchyma, such as mammals
(Reichenbach and Wolburg, 2013). This correlates with the emergence
of free astrocytes from radial glial cells, which are only present during
development in mammals.
2.1. Ependymo-radial glial cells as promoters of axonal regeneration
ERGs represent a unique cell type that also has multiple roles after
injury. An injury to the spinal cord in zebraﬁsh leads to proliferation of
ERGs in the ependymal layer (Reimer et al., 2008; Ogai et al., 2014;
Ribeiro et al., 2017), again similar to mammals (Meletis et al., 2008).
One role of new glial cells near the lesion site is presumably to seal the
blood-brain barrier, as it has been shown that this proliferation of as-
trocytes (astrogliosis) is beneﬁcial for lesion outcome also in mammals
(Sabelström et al., 2013; Anderson et al., 2016). In mammals, astro-
gliosis is often considered inhibitory for the regeneration of axons over
the lesion site (Lang et al., 2014). In contrast, in zebraﬁsh, processes of
GFAP+ astrocyte-like cells, derived from ERGs, elongate across the le-
sion site and fasciculate with regenerating axons to reconnect the spinal
cord (Goldshmit et al., 2012; Mokalled et al., 2016; Wehner et al.,
2017). Hence, ERG-derived glia in zebraﬁsh is permissive to axon
regeneration by not forming a barrier as in mammals. In addition, glial
processes that connect the two ends of the severed spinal cord, termed
“glial bridge” (Goldshmit et al., 2012) could provide a scaﬀold for re-
generating axons. A number of experimental studies show a correlation
between disruption of the glial bridge, axon crossing and functional
recovery in zebraﬁsh. For example, ERGs and lesion site cells produce
connective tissue growth factor a (ctgfa). Disrupting ctgfa expression in
a mutant impaired glial bridging and axonal regeneration, which could
both be restored by global over-expression of ctgfa or applying re-
combinant human CTFG (Mokalled et al., 2016). ERGs/lesion site glia
also produce and are responsive to ﬁbroblast growth factor (Fgf). In-
hibition of Fgf signalling disrupted both glial bridging and axon re-
growth. Moreover, experimentally increasing FGF pathway activity
accelerated glial and axonal regeneration (Goldshmit et al., 2012). Fi-
nally, activity of the Wnt pathway has been reported in ERGs of le-
sioned larval and adult zebraﬁsh and inhibition of the pathway in-
hibited both glial bridging and axon regrowth (Briona et al., 2015;
Strand et al., 2016).
However, in larval zebraﬁsh, live observations indicate dynamic
growth of axons into the lesion site, mostly independently of glial
processes (Wehner et al., 2017). Moreover, “axonal bridging” (con-
tinuity of axon labelling between the spinal cord ends) was established
earlier than glial bridging. Importantly, when GFAP+ glia, and there-
fore most of the glial bridge, was conditionally ablated, axonal bridging
was unimpaired (Wehner et al., 2017). Similarly, spinal cord transec-
tion in the adult eel led to bridging of the gap by glial processes and
axons, with axons “always the most rostral component in the bridge”
(Dervan and Roberts, 2003b; Dervan and Roberts, 2003a). These ob-
servations suggest that the relative importance of the glial scaﬀold
function may depend on species and developmental stage of ﬁshes. The
glial scaﬀold function could be particularly important in adult ﬁsh, in
which distances that axons have to bridge are larger than in larvae. In
addition, ERG-derived growth factors, such as Ctgfa and Fgf could
promote axon regeneration directly. To further elucidate the inter-
dependency of axonal and glial bridging in the future, three-dimen-
sional whole-mount analyses of the adult lesion site using tissue
clearing methods, in combination with cell type-speciﬁc manipulations
of the above pathways will be informative.
It has to be kept in mind that a spinal lesion site shows high cellular
complexity. For example, cell type speciﬁc manipulation of the Wnt
pathway using the TetON system have indicated that Wnt activity is
most important in lesion-site ﬁbroblasts to induce deposition of re-
generation-promoting Col XII. (Wehner et al., 2017). How ERGs in-
teract with important non-neural lesion site cells remains to be eluci-
dated.
2.2. Ependymo-radial glial cells as progenitor cells
Besides roles in re-establishing spinal cord integrity and continuity,
ERGs function as progenitor cells for neurons after a lesion. In mam-
mals, progeny of ependymal cells is restricted mostly to glial fates
(Barnabe-Heider et al., 2010). In contrast, early observations of histo-
logical preparations indicated that the injured spinal cord of ﬁshes is
capable of regenerating neurons from the ependymal zone (Kirsche,
1950). After a lesion of the spinal cord in adult zebraﬁsh, birth of new
motor neurons, serotonergic interneurons, V2-like interneurons, and
other interneuron cell types has been observed (Reimer et al., 2008;
Kuscha et al., 2012a; Kuscha et al., 2012b). These cell types are likely
derived from ERGs based on the following evidence: Proliferating cells
at the central canal vastly outnumber parenchymal proliferating cells
and diﬀerent types of neurons show wedge-shaped distributions with
the tip of the wedge in speciﬁc dorso-ventral positions of the ependymal
layer (Reimer et al., 2008). For example in the ventral spinal cord, new
serotonergic neurons are generated and serotonin-positive neurons can
be found within the ependymal zone during regeneration, but never in
unlesioned spinal cords (Kuscha et al., 2012a). In the case of motor
C.G. Becker et al.
Progress in Neurobiology 170 (2018) 67–80
68

neurons, speciﬁc ventricular ERGs are labelled for both GFP, driven by
the regulatory sequences of the motor neuron progenitor gene olig2, and
the transcription factor mnx1 (also known as Hb9) during regeneration,
but never in the unlesioned spinal cord. A likely explanation for this
double-labeling is that diﬀerentiating motor neurons express the early
marker mnx1, while they retain the relatively stable GFP protein from
the time the ventricular cell was still a progenitor (Reimer et al., 2008).
In this case, GFP protein acts as a short-term lineage tracer. In injured
larval zebraﬁsh, genetic lineage tracing using inducible Cre re-
combinase under the gfap promoter, an ERG marker, has been used to
demonstrate that HuC positive neurons are generated from spinal ERGs
(Briona et al., 2015). This matches similar experiments from other CNS
areas (Kroehne et al., 2011). In summary, ERGs are the only known
source for neurons after injury to the spinal cord.
2.3. Ependymo-radial glial cells retain their neural tube identities from
development
The observation that diﬀerent cell types appear to derive from dif-
ferent dorso-ventral positions of the ependymal layer is reminiscent of
the developing spinal cord, in which ventral and dorsal morphogen
gradients set up discrete progenitor domains that express diﬀerent
combinations of transcription factors in the neural tube (Ferg et al.,
2014). Indeed, though apparently of homogeneous morphology, adult
ERGs express low levels of domain-deﬁning transcription factor com-
binations along the dorso-ventral axis in the intact late larval and adult
spinal cord (Reimer et al., 2009; Briona and Dorsky, 2014) (Fig. 1). The
ERGs at the ventral midline express sonic hedgehog (shh), a ventralising
morphogen derived from the embryonic ﬂoorplate. Adjacent domains
express other transcription factors, similar to those expressed during
development of the ventral spinal cord, e.g. nkx6.1, dbx1, as well as
olig2 as the single deﬁning transcription factor of the motor neuron
progenitor domain (Fig. 1). pax6 is not expressed in the very ventral
spinal cord, but is expressed around the rest of the central canal. This is
a diﬀerence to the developing neural tube, where pax6 is also not
present in the most dorsal region (Wilson and Maden, 2005). A likely
explanation for this discrepancy between the dorsal aspects of the de-
veloping and adult spinal cord is that during conversion of the primitive
neural tube lumen to the central canal, dorsal regions of the neural tube
are not included in the central canal ependyma (Kondrychyn et al.,
2013). Consistent with this idea, we failed to detect markers for dorsal
progenitor identity, such as pax7 and the dorsal morphogens bmp 2 and
4 in the adult zebraﬁsh spinal cord (Kuscha et al., 2012b). In contrast,
ERGs in the dorsal spinal cord of salamanders are immuno-positive for
Pax7 (Schnapp et al., 2005). Adult ERGs appear to display a degree of
lineage restriction, which depends on their developmental dorso-ven-
tral position of origin (Fig. 1). Therefore, the possibility exists that in
adult zebraﬁsh, neuronal cell types that during development are de-
rived from very dorsal ventricular cells are not regenerated. Dorsal
neuronal cell types are mostly sensory and lack of regeneration of these
could contribute to the previously reported failure of re-innervation of
sensory axon targets after injury (Becker et al., 1997, 2005). Of note,
after tail amputation, salamanders regenerate the entire tail, including
a fully reformed spinal cord (Schnapp et al., 2005). This is also the case
in the weakly electric ﬁsh Sternarchus albifrons (Anderson and Waxman,
1981). Lineage analysis in axolotls by grafting genetically labelled
tissue early in development has shown that the regenerated spinal cord
is formed by cells of the pre-existing cord, with clonal analysis showing
plasticity
of
progenitors
between
dorsal
and
ventral
fates
(McHedlishvili et al., 2007). However, it is not known whether re-
generated salamander or ﬁsh spinal cords contain the full complement
of (dorsal) neurons.
After a transection lesion in zebraﬁsh, the spinal cord fuses at the
lesion site in an incomplete physical structure consisting mostly of
myelinated and unmyelinated axons crossing the lesion site (Becker
et al., 1997). However, the central canal adjacent to the lesion site
widens considerably, a feature shared with other regenerating and non-
regenerating species (Cardozo et al., 2017). Concomitant with this
widening, progenitor domains expand. At the same time, expression
levels of signals, e.g. shh mRNA, and transcription factors (nkx6.1, olig2,
pax6), found at low levels in ERGs of the unlesioned spinal cord, in-
crease (Reimer et al., 2008). However, the spatial relationships between
expression domains of these factors are comparable in the developing
neural tube, the adult EZ, and the lesioned EZ. In other words, adult
ERGs are likely the direct progeny of the early neuroepithelial cells in
the same relative positions. Whether ERGs intrinsically retain their
positional identity and potential to generate speciﬁc neuronal cell types
or whether this has to be maintained by constant low-level homeostatic
signalling, for example by Shh (see below), remains to be determined.
All ERGs could represent spinal neural stem cells. Alternatively, true
stem cells may generate speciﬁc ERGs that act as transit amplifying cells
and are then lineage-restricted. ERGs express the neural stem cell
marker sox2 and other stem cell-related markers, such as pou5f1 (also
known as oct4), which is essential for their lesion-induced proliferation
(Ogai et al., 2014; Hui et al., 2015). Evidence for the presence of dis-
tinct stem cells in the ventricular zone comes from label-retaining ex-
periments with the base-analog BrdU. These experiments indicated that
the ventricular zone of the lesioned spinal cord contains a subpopula-
tion of cells that retain BrdU labelling for a long time after injury and
are therefore slow-proliferating cells (Reimer et al., 2008). Slow pro-
liferation is one deﬁning criterion for neural stem cells (Johansson
et al., 1999). Whether these potential stem cells are also lineage-re-
stricted is unknown.
ERGs may show some ﬂexibility in their potential to generate dif-
ferent cell types. For example, the pMN-like progenitor domain starts to
generate motor neurons during early development, followed by oligo-
dendrogliogenesis during later development (Ravanelli and Appel,
2015). Upon a spinal lesion in adult zebraﬁsh, this domain reverts back
to generating motor neurons (Reimer et al., 2008). In fact, we have
been able to demonstrate that at late larval stages, a spinal lesion leads
to re-initiation of motor neuron generation at the expense of devel-
opmentally on-going oligodendrogliogenesis from the pMN-like domain
(Ohnmacht et al., 2016).
2.4. Signals in regenerative neurogenesis
A mechanical lesion of the spinal cord elicits regenerative pro-
liferation in ERGs (Reimer et al., 2008; Ogai et al., 2014; Hui et al.,
Fig. 1. Distinct progenitor domains give rise to diﬀerent types of neurons after
spinal cord transection of adult zebraﬁsh. A schematic cross-section through the
adult spinal cord is shown, indicating domains of ependymo-radial glial cells
(ERGs) that are deﬁned by expression of the indicated transcription factors.
These ERG domains give rise to the indicated neuronal cell types in response to
recapitulated developmental signals and injury-related signals. See Sections 2.3
and 2.4 for relevant references.
C.G. Becker et al.
Progress in Neurobiology 170 (2018) 67–80
69

2015; Ribeiro et al., 2017). Genetically ablating motor neurons in the
absence of a mechanical lesion has the same eﬀect. Both types of injury
induce an immune response, indicated by increased presence of mi-
croglial cells and macrophages (Becker and Becker, 2001; Ohnmacht
et al., 2016), important mediators of the regenerative response. Indeed,
inhibiting the innate immune response using the drug dexamethasone,
reduced microglia activation in larval zebraﬁsh and reduced numbers
of regenerated motor neurons after injury (Ohnmacht et al., 2016). It
has been shown that in the stab-lesioned telencephalon of zebraﬁsh, the
immune response is necessary and suﬃcient to induce regenerative
neurogenesis by a mechanism that involves Leukotriene C4 and its
cognate receptor Cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1, which is present on
progenitor cells (Kyritsis et al., 2012). It is not known whether spinal
ERGs receive the same or diﬀerent signals from the immune system.
Recently, a role for the adaptive immune system has been described
for zebraﬁsh spinal cord regeneration. Regulatory T cells (Tregs) accu-
mulate in the adult spinal cord after injury and show secretion of
Neurotrophin 3 (Nt3). This is an organ-speciﬁc reaction, as Tregs secrete
other factors in the injured retina or heart. Lack of Tregs impaired ERG
proliferation, neurogenesis, axon regrowth and behavioural recovery,
whereas application of recombinant Nt3 rescued proliferation and
neurogenesis (Hui et al., 2017). This demonstrates a direct promoting
inﬂuence of Tregs on regenerative neurogenesis.
Spinal ERGs also react to classical developmental signals during
regeneration. For example, Shh, derived from ventral ERGs, stimulates
generation of serotonergic and motor neurons. This has been shown by
blocking Shh signalling with the plant-derived small molecule inhibitor
cyclopamine (Reimer et al., 2009; Kuscha et al., 2012a). In the future it
will be interesting to determine how this ventrally derived signal
reaches the more dorsal progenitor cells in the adult spinal cord, which
is larger and more complex than the developing neural tube, in which
Shh acts in a comparable fashion.
Notch signalling is a developmental short-range signal involved in
determining fate of adult stem cells and maintenance of “stemness” in
zebraﬁsh (Alunni and Bally-Cuif, 2016). Ligands (deltaC, jagged1b),
receptors (notch1a/b) and down-stream eﬀectors (her4.1, her4.5, her9)
are strongly upregulated from undetectable levels after an injury of the
adult spinal cord. These genes are expressed in partially non-over-
lapping domains of ERGs and may reﬂect diﬀerent notch activities in
diﬀerent progenitor domains. Functional analyses using the gamma-
secretase inhibitor DAPT to inhibit notch signalling and heat-shock
inducible over-expression of the active intracellular domain of the
notch receptor have shown that notch activity attenuates lesion-in-
duced neurogenesis of motor neurons (Dias et al., 2012).
In the unlesioned spinal cord, manipulations of notch had no eﬀect,
as opposed to diﬀerent brain regions, where notch inhibition led to ERG
proliferation (Alunni et al., 2013; de Oliveira-Carlos et al., 2013). Thus,
the notch pathway is probably not constitutively active in the zebraﬁsh
spinal cord. This indicates that adult ERGs in the spinal cord are not
only diﬀerent from constitutively active ERGs in other CNS regions, but
also from other quiescent ERGs, inasmuch as quiescence in spinal ERGs
is not dependent on notch signalling.
Wnt signalling regulates proliferation of spinal ERGs after injury, as
the pathway is active in some ERGs and pharmacological or genetic
global interference with the Wnt pathway inhibited neurogenesis in
injured larvae (Briona et al., 2015). The eﬀect on some ERGs could be
indirect, as only a minority of ERGs show pathway activity after injury
in larval zebraﬁsh (Wehner et al., 2017). Future research will have to
elucidate source and target cells of Wnt signalling.
FGF signalling is upregulated in ERGs of the lesioned spinal cord, as
indicated by increased expression of the FGF receptor 2 and target
genes pea3, erm and spry4 in these cells. FGF controls proliferation of
ERG-derived glia, as shown by global pharmacological inhibition and
over-expression
of
a
dominant-negative
FGF
receptor
variant.
Conversely, in a mutant for the FGF-downstream gene and inhibitor
spry4, proliferation was enhanced. The source for FGF ligands are ERGs
themselves and neurons (Goldshmit et al., 2012). It has not been ana-
lysed whether neurogenesis was altered after FGF manipulations, but
given the inﬂuence on proliferation this seems likely. Other well-known
developmental pathways, such as retinoic acid signalling, components
of which are upregulated after a lesion (Reimer et al., 2009), or BMP
signalling have not been functionally analysed.
Descending dopaminergic and serotonergic axons promote re-
generation of motor neurons, as shown by a reduction in motor neuron
regeneration following pharmacological ablation of serotonergic (by
5,7-dihydroxytryptamine)
or
dopaminergic
axons
(by
6-hydro-
xydopamine). Under these conditions, ERG proliferation and motor
neuron regeneration was impaired. ERGs express dopamine (drd4a) and
serotonin receptors (hrt1aa and hrt3a) (Reimer et al., 2013; Barreiro-
Iglesias et al., 2015). Due to the fact that almost all dopaminergic and
serotonergic innervation of the spinal cord is derived from the brain,
this eﬀect is only seen rostral to a lesion site. That is because caudal to
the lesion site, dopaminergic and serotonergic axons degenerate by
Wallerian degeneration even without toxin-mediated ablation. Con-
versely, addition of dopamine agonists or serotonin augments motor
neuron regeneration caudal to a lesion site that is normally deprived of
these molecules (Reimer et al., 2013; Barreiro-Iglesias et al., 2015).
Both signals also enhance developmental motor neuron generation,
such that sensitivity to dopamine and serotonin during regeneration can
be considered a recapitulation of a developmental mechanism. Inter-
estingly, neither serotonin nor dopamine injections into unlesioned
animals led to any motor neuron generation. Hence, while these signals
modulate the regenerative neurogenesis programme, they are in-
suﬃcient to elicit regenerative neurogenesis from quiescent spinal
ERGs.
2.5. Gene expression changes in Ependymo-radial glial cells
The transitions from quiescence to proliferation and to neurogenesis
necessarily lead to changes in the gene expression programmes in ERGs.
Expression proﬁles of a spinal lesion site have revealed a number of
transcription factors and other genes that change expression after in-
jury, such as those involved in the inﬂammatory response, cell pro-
liferation, neurogenesis, patterning, and axon outgrowth-related genes
(Hui et al., 2014). Other genes found to be upregulated in spinal ERGs
after injury are hmgb1, syntenin-a, contactin-2, major vault protein,
sox11b, mcam, and l1.2 (Guo et al., 2011b; Lin et al., 2012; Pan et al.,
2013; Yu and Schachner, 2013; Fang et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2016; Liu
et al., 2016). Functional studies, relying on anti-sense morpholino ap-
plication to a spinal lesion site, have found beneﬁcial roles for re-
generation of these genes, which might have been due to morpholino
uptake into axotomised neurons, ERGs or both. Speciﬁc gene manip-
ulation in ERGs will be needed to discern a role for these genes in ERG
function. We anticipate that expression proﬁling of highly puriﬁed
progenitor cell populations in combination with cell type speciﬁc ma-
nipulations, e.g. using the TetON system (Wehner et al., 2017) or
conditional CRISPR interference (Yin et al., 2016) will clarify the
contribution of speciﬁc genes and pathways in ERGs to functional
spinal cord regeneration in the future.
3. The spinal ependymal zone in mammals
3.1. Rodents
3.1.1. Ependymal zone composition and regionalisation
The rodent ependymal zone (EZ) is a pseudo-epithelium originating
mainly from the ventral part of the developing neuroepithelium, as the
dorsal walls of the neuroepithelium fuse at approximately E15 in the
mouse (Fu et al., 2003). Cells from the roof plate in the developing
spinal cord may also contribute to dorsal EZ cells (Sevc et al., 2009).
The formation of the EZ zone is controlled by SHH signalling, as in-
dicated by the observation that in the absence of late SHH production it
C.G. Becker et al.
Progress in Neurobiology 170 (2018) 67–80
70

Fig. 2. The organisation of the ependymal zone is complex across vertebrates. A schematic representation of the EZ is shown for diﬀerent species. Note that for
humans, the EZ is represented for a young adult before obstruction of the central canal (see text). The presence of radial cells contacting vessels in humans is
extrapolated from the macaque EZ, but has not been directly shown.
Source: 1-Sabourin et al. (2009); 2-Yu et al. (2013); 3-Gensat Atlas (2018); 4-Khazanov et al. (2016); 5-Dromard et al. (2008); 6-Reimer et al. (2009); 7-Reimer et al.
(2008).
C.G. Becker et al.
Progress in Neurobiology 170 (2018) 67–80
71

is not formed (Yu et al., 2013). In the caudal part of the spinal cord, the
EZ might be derived from a secondary neurulation process through a
mesenchymal-neuroepithelial conversion (Lowery and Sive, 2004). In
adults, the cervical EZ has a wide lumen while in the thoracic and
lumbar regions, the lumen is reduced to a slit (Sturrock, 1981). The EZ
contains diﬀerent types of highly-polarized ependymocytes which can
be distinguished both morphologically and using marker expression. As
in zebraﬁsh, dorsal and ventral midline cells are characterized by a very
long radial morphology (Fig 2). These cells maintain long ﬁlament-rich
processes extending to the pia and are sometimes referred as tanycytes
(Seitz et al., 1981; Sturrock, 1981; Mothe and Tator, 2005; Rodriguez
et al., 2005). At the lateral level, ependymocytes are either cuboid or
show a radial morphology with a process ending on a vessel. Compared
to the ependymocytes in the subventricular zone (SVZ), in the spinal
cord, these cells are not multiciliated but mostly feature two motile cilia
(occasionally one, three or four cilia can be found) associated with large
basal bodies but without daughter centriole (Alfaro- Cervello et al.,
2012).
Two other non-ependymocyte cell types are also encountered in the
EZ region. 1/ cerebral-ﬂuid contacting neurons (CSF-N), which are cells
equivalent to Kolmer-Agduhr cells in zebraﬁsh. These neurons have
been observed in many species, including lamprey and macaques. In
rodents they are present at the diﬀerent levels of the spinal cord (Vigh
et al., 2004; Djenoune et al., 2014). Two types of CSF-N, lateral and
ventral CSF-N, with diﬀerent developmental origin and properties have
been described (Petracca et al., 2016). These neurons have immature
electrophysiological properties and express Dcx, a marker expressed by
immature neurons during development and in adult neurogenesis
(Shechter et al., 2007; Marichal et al., 2009; Sabourin et al., 2009; Orts-
Del’Immagine et al., 2014; Orts-Del’Immagine et al., 2017). They also
maintain expression of transcription factors found in the developing
spinal cord, such as NKX6.1, NKX2.2, FOXA2, GATA2/3 N (Sabourin
et al., 2009; Petracca et al., 2016). However, CSF-N are not produced by
ongoing adult neurogenesis, but instead are produced late during de-
velopment from two ventral domains of the spinal cord (Kútna et al.,
2014; Petracca et al., 2016). These neurons express functional ATP-
gated P2X2 receptors, as well as high levels of the polycystic kidney
disease-like channels (PKD2L1 and PKD1L2), which are very good
markers for these cells (Huang et al., 2006). CSF-N are mostly GA-
BAergic and send axons toward the caudal part of the spinal cord
(Stoeckel et al., 2003). Their role in mammals remains enigmatic, but
they express ion channels responsive to pH, osmolarity, and mechanical
stimulation. This suggests that they are involved in the monitoring of
CSF composition and movement. These cells send a process into the
lumen and this process is terminated by a large vesicle-containing
structure called budge (several μm in size). Presence of this structure
indicates the potential for an intense secretory activity into the CSF.
The role of these cells in the control of cell proliferation in the adult
ependyma remains unexplored. In other CNS niches, GABA signalling
controls neural stem cell quiescence and proliferation (Alfonso et al.,
2012; Pontes et al., 2013). Thus GABAergic CSF-N may serve a similar
function in the spinal cord. 2/ the second type of non-ependymocyte
cell found in the EZ region are central-canal contacting astrocytes
(Accs) which can be observed using GFAP-GFP reporter mice (Sabourin
et al., 2009), electron microscopy (Alfaro- Cervello et al., 2012) and
marker expression (Sabourin et al., 2009; Fiorelli et al., 2013). These
infrequent cells, are mostly situated in the dorsal and ventral parts of
the EZ (80% of cells) and unlike ependymocytes, they have a single
cilium with a daughter centriole. In some cases, Accs send long pro-
cesses along the ventral and dorsal midline ﬁssure (i.e. a fold of the pia
mater into the parenchyma) and appear to reach the pia or midline-
located pial-lined interstitial perivascular spaces that are ﬂuid-ﬁlled
(also known as Virchow-Robin spaces). Accs represent a heterogeneous
population, as only some of these cells contain NESTIN and VIMENTIN
intermediate ﬁlaments (Alfaro- Cervello et al., 2012). Accs do not
proliferate (Alfaro- Cervello et al., 2012) or at very low levels (Fiorelli
et al., 2013). However, NESTIN+ proliferating cells have been reported
in the dorsal region of the EZ (Hamilton et al., 2009), suggesting cel-
lular heterogeneity in this part of the EZ.
With regard to marker expression, most ependymocytes have a
NESTIN−, VIMENTIN+, S100b+, CD24+, EphrinB1+, SOX2+, SOX9+
and CD133+ phenotype (Sabourin et al., 2009; Pfenninger et al., 2011)
and weakly express GFAP (Alfaro- Cervello et al., 2012). In comparison,
radial midline glia cells located at the roof and ﬂoor of the EZ, show
lower VIMENTIN/CD24 expression and higher levels of GFAP expres-
sion (Alfaro- Cervello et al., 2012). Further marker analysis has re-
vealed that the adult EZ is in fact a mosaic of cells that show diﬀerent
developmental gene expression, notably along the dorsal-ventral and
rostro-caudal axes. Almost all EZ cells express the ventral transcription
factor NKX6.1 (Fu et al., 2003; Sabourin et al., 2009), but PAX6 is
expressed only in the dorsal part of the EZ (Yu et al., 2013) and NATO3
is expressed only in the ventral region (Khazanov et al., 2016). NATO3
is a transcription factor found in the ﬂoor plate during development.
Data from the gene atlas and transgenic mice conﬁrm that genes that
during development are speciﬁcally expressed in the dorsal EZ, e.g. Mdk
(Hugnot and Franzen, 2011), or its ventral part, e.g. Nkx2.2 (Yu et al.,
2013) or Shh (Hugnot and Franzen, 2011), are maintained at the adult
stage. Radial cells found in the roof of the EZ express the Ret receptor
tyrosine kinase (Pfenninger et al., 2011), as well as ZEB1, a transcrip-
tion factor regulated by TGF-β signalling (Sabourin et al., 2009). These
cells form the dorsal median septum and may have speciﬁc functions,
which could also be shared by radial cells found in the ventral part of
the EZ (Alfaro- Cervello et al., 2012).
During development, the spinal cord is regionalised along the
rostro-caudal axis by expression of diﬀerent Hox transcription factors,
the so-called “Hox code”. Ependymocytes of the adult spinal cord
maintain expression of developmental Hox genes (Pfenninger et al.,
2011). In addition, neurospheres, derived from cervical, thoracic and
lumbar spinal levels maintain the expression of the combination of Hox
genes corresponding to the segment they were isolated from over sev-
eral passages in vitro (Sabourin et al., 2009).
3.1.2. Proliferation in the adult spinal cord
EZ cells strongly proliferate after birth, corresponding to the elon-
gation of the spinal cord, which doubles its length over the ﬁrst nine
post-natal weeks. During this period, proliferation is progressively re-
duced until the spinal cord reaches its ﬁnal size at around postnatal
week 12 in mice (Sabourin et al., 2009; Alfaro- Cervello et al., 2012).
However, adult EZ cells maintain a low level of proliferation which
declines with age (Gonzalez-Fernandez et al., 2016). The main other
cell type to proliferate in the adult spinal cord are oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells in the parenchyma. Proliferating cells in the EZ have
been mainly observed in its dorsal (Hamilton et al., 2009) or dorsal and
ventral region (Alfaro- Cervello et al., 2012). Electron microscopy in-
dicates that bi-ciliated ependymocytes are the main source of pro-
liferative cells in the EZ (Alfaro- Cervello et al., 2012). This low number
of cilia in spinal cord ependymocytes correlates with proliferative ac-
tivity, because ependymocytes in the brain are multiciliated and do not
proliferate (Spassky et al., 2005; Mirzadeh et al., 2008). Cilia are cel-
lular organelles controlling proliferation (Han and Alvarez-Buylla,
2010) and the presence of multiple cilia might not be compatible with
proliferation (Brooks and Wallingford, 2014).
The growth factors and molecular mechanisms underlying ependy-
mocyte proliferation in the spinal cord remain ill-deﬁned. Comparative
gene expression analysis revealed that in the spinal cord these cells are
enriched for expression of retinoic acid (RA)-responsive genes, in-
cluding Hox genes (Pfenninger et al., 2011). In contrast, ependymocytes
at the lateral ventricle of the brain show higher expression levels of
Hey1, a transcription factor downstream of Notch signalling, as well as
expression of several genes related to the TGF-β1 signalling (Pfenninger
et al., 2011). Treatment of puriﬁed spinal ependymocytes with RA in-
creases their proliferation in vitro and these cells also appear to respond
C.G. Becker et al.
Progress in Neurobiology 170 (2018) 67–80
72

to RA injection in vivo (Pfenninger et al., 2011). Hox genes are con-
trolled by RA and are involved in the proliferation of many cell types
(Foronda et al., 2009), thus the strong expression of Hox genes in spinal
cord ependymocytes may indicate the involvement of these genes in the
proliferative response to RA. Endogenous growth factors such as FGF2
and EGF may also be involved in the proliferation of adult ependy-
mocytes, as infusion of these growth factors into the CSF increases
proliferation of these cells in vivo and in vitro (Weiss et al., 1996;
Kojima and Tator, 2002; Martens et al., 2002). FGF2 and EGF may be
derived from the vasculature, as some ependymocytes send radial ex-
tension to vessels. This suggests intimate cross-talk between these cells,
a situation reminiscent of the neurovascular niche in the SVZ and
hippocampus. Interestingly, exercise increases ependymocytes pro-
liferation (Cizkova et al., 2009) in the spinal cord. Several growth
factors have been shown to be increased in expression after physical
exercise, including FGF2 (Gómez-Pinilla et al., 1997) which might
contribute to ependymocyte proliferation. Ependymocytes also express
high levels of receptor B for endothelins (EDNRB), which are cytokines
expressed by vascular cells (Peters et al., 2003; Sabourin et al., 2009).
Endothelin 1 and 3 enhance the proliferation of embryonic spinal cord
stem cells in vitro, suggesting that these growth factors may also be
involved in the proliferation of EZ cells in adults (Sabourin et al., 2009).
Finally, another signal to be considered with respect to the control of
adult EZ proliferation is Wnt, as several ligands and receptors for this
pathway are found to be expressed in this region (Gonzalez-Fernandez
et al., 2016) and Wnt-reporter mice reveal Wnt pathway activity in
some EZ cells (White et al., 2010; Garbe and Ring, 2012; González-
Fernández et al., 2014).
The vast majority of proliferating cells remain in the EZ and there is
no clear evidence for substantial migration into the parenchyma. Few
cells expressing oligodendrocytic markers (OLIG2, SOX10) are pro-
duced during postnatal development and adulthood in the EZ (Sevc
et al., 2014) but their contribution to formation of new oligoden-
drocytes in the parenchyma is still undeﬁned. Endogenous neurogenesis
has been described in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord (Shechter et al.,
2007; Rusanescu, 2016). These new neurons are involved in nocicep-
tion (Rusanescu and Mao, 2015) and their production is enhanced by
mechanosensation (Shechter et al., 2011) and peripheral nerve injury
(Rusanescu and Mao, 2017). However, it is more likely that these cells
are produced by local progenitors rather than by EZ cells.
3.1.3. Neural stem cell functions of the adult ependymal zone
The EZ is a pseudo-epithelium in contact with the CSF and under-
goes mechanical stress. Like in most adult epithelia in the body, cells in
the EZ probably have to self-renew, at least to some extent. Most epi-
thelial tissues are renewed from resident multipotent stem cells and/or
unipotent progenitor cells (Blanpain et al., 2007). These stem cells can
exist in a dormant or activated state. This is controlled by the en-
vironment, physiological cycles or pathological conditions. Once acti-
vated, they produce transiently amplifying cells (TA) before diﬀer-
entiated cells are ﬁnally generated. This is the case in the subventricular
zone in the brain, where neural stem cells underlie adult neurogenesis
(Lim and Alvarez-Buylla, 2016). Stem cells in adults are often main-
tained in specialised structures called niches that are found in speciﬁc
locations in the respective organs. These niches are highly organized
structures composed of stem and non-stem cells, in which activity of
canonical signalling pathways, such as Notch, Wnt and BMP is ade-
quately maintained to control stem cell status and fate. It is worth
noting that some tissues do not regenerate from stem cells, but by self-
duplication of diﬀerentiated cells (for instance liver and pancreas) (Dor
et al., 2004; Yanger et al., 2014).
With regard to the EZ in the spinal cord, the situation appears
complex, as on the one hand self-duplication of ependymocytes (which
show some degrees of diﬀerentiation) has been observed using electron
microscopy (Alfaro- Cervello et al., 2012), and on the other hand, in
vitro studies provide compelling evidence for the presence of sub-
populations of stem cells in the EZ. The presence of neural stem cells in
the adult spinal cord EZ has been demonstrated in 1996 using the
neurosphere assay (Weiss et al., 1996) in which cells are seeded at low
density on a non-adherent substrate and allowed to grow in suspension
in the presence of a deﬁned medium. Weiss et al. found that compared
to lateral ventricles, stem cells from the spinal cord required both FGF2
and EGF to generate these neurospheres, which could be expanded for
several passages and generated oligodendrocytes, neurons, and astro-
cytes when placed in diﬀerentiation conditions. Several groups have
conﬁrmed that spinal EZ tissue from both mice and rats form neuro-
spheres. The demonstration that neurospheres are derived from the EZ
has been obtained using i/ microdissection of the central canal region
(Martens et al., 2002; Sabourin et al., 2009), ii/ animals in which the EZ
cells are ﬂuorescently labelled by transgenes that are controlled by
speciﬁc promoters (FoxJ1, Nestin) (Meletis et al., 2008; Li et al., 2016),
iii/ and by puriﬁcation of EZ cells based on surface protein presence
(CD24, CD133) (Pfenninger et al., 2011). Interestingly, the capacity of
EZ cells to form neurospheres is much higher in juveniles than in older
animals (Li et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2017). At least two cell types found in
the EZ are able to form multipotent neurospheres in vitro. Using
hGFAP-CreERT2 and hGFAP-GFP mice, two groups (Sabourin et al.,
2009; Fiorelli et al., 2013) have demonstrated that GFAP+ cells found
in the EZ region generate neurospheres, which diﬀerentiate into as-
trocytes and neurons. The presence of GFAP-expressing cells in primary
neurospheres was established using marker expression (Sabourin et al.,
2009) and with GFAP-GFP mice (Xu et al., 2017). However, only Sa-
bourin et al. could demonstrate long-term propagation of these cells,
while Fiorelli et al. reported limited self-renewal properties. Diﬀerent
culture conditions, i.e. sorted (Sabourin et al., 2009) vs. non-sorted
GFAP cells (Fiorelli et al., 2013), used in these studies could account for
this discrepancy. In addition to GFAP+ cells, Fiorelli et al. found a
second population of neurosphere-forming EZ cells, the identity of
which remains to be speciﬁed (Fiorelli et al., 2013). These cells gen-
erate neurospheres that can be propagated for at least 7 passages.
Moreover, it is possible that additional rare neurosphere-forming cells
are present in the EZ region, as illustrated recently by the isolation of
Oct4+ primitive neural stem cells (Xu et al., 2017). Using genetic
lineage tracing in two transgenic mice, Nestin-CreERT and Foxj1-
CreERT mice (Meletis et al., 2008), it has been found that FoxJ1+ and
Nestin+ cells generate passageable and multipotent neurospheres.
FOXJ1 is detected in most EZ cells including GFAP+ cells (Hugnot,
2012). This is reminiscent of the brain subventricular zone, where
FOXJ1 is present in neurogenic GFAP+ cells (Jacquet et al., 2009).
Thus, it remains to be explored whether FOXJ1+/GFAP−and FOXJ1+/
GFAP+ EZ cells have distinct abilities to form neurospheres. In the
subventricular zone (Pastrana et al., 2009), both activated stem cell
astrocytes and transit amplifying type C cells can generate neuro-
spheres. Thus the situation could be similar in the spinal cord EZ region
where, as mentioned previously, several cell types co-exist. As these
cells have diﬀerent morphologies and express diﬀerent proteins, no-
tably developmental genes, e.g. PAX6, ZEB1, NATO3, new lines of
transgenic mice should be designed to further explore the diversity and
properties of these EZ cells in vitro and in vivo. The recent advances to
perform single cell RNA proﬁling should also shed light on the diversity
of EZ cells and the presence of distinct types of stem cells. This will
show whether mammalian EZ cells have a potential to generate dif-
ferent neurons that is similar to that observed for ERGs in zebraﬁsh.
While the presence of stem cells in the adult EZ has been reported by
many groups, the type of neurons they generate in vitro and the signals
regulating the gliogenic versus neurogenic choice remain ill-deﬁned.
The default neuronal subtype appears to be GABAergic (Weiss et al.,
1996; Sabourin et al., 2009). However, it is very interesting that by
treating rat spinal cord neurospheres with developmental ventralizing
and caudalizing factors, SHH and retinoic acid, respectively, a high rate
of HB9+ and MAP2+ motoneuron-like cells with diﬀerent levels of
electrophysiological maturity can be obtained (Moreno-Manzano et al.,
C.G. Becker et al.
Progress in Neurobiology 170 (2018) 67–80
73

2009). In addition, a high rate of oligodendrocyte production in vitro
has been reported after diﬀerentiation of rat neurospheres, which re-
veals the potential of these cells for myelin repair (Kulbatski et al.,
2007; Kulbatski and Tator, 2009). However, neurospheres derived from
diﬀerent spinal cord regions express speciﬁc combination of Hox genes
(Sabourin et al., 2009) and have diﬀerent abilities to diﬀerentiate
(Kulbatski and Tator, 2009), thus the full capacity of these cells to
generate diﬀerent types of spinal neurons remains to be established.
3.1.4. The ependymal zone, spinal cord injury and regeneration
The capacity of ependymal cells to rapidly react to spinal cord in-
jury has been observed around 30 years ago in rats and rabbits
(Matthews et al., 1979; Vaquero et al., 1981; Bruni and Anderson,
1987). Diﬀerent types of lesions (compression, contusion, dorsal funi-
culus incision or hemisection, transection) have been shown to trigger
intense cell proliferation within a few days. For a review on diﬀerences
observed in EZ proliferation in the diﬀerent models used for spinal cord
injury, see (McDonough and Martínez-Cerdeño, 2012). Spinal cord in-
jury appears to be accompanied by an increase in the stem cell pool as
the formation of neurospheres formed in vitro is increased when the
tissue is taken from the injured spinal cord (Xu et al., 2006; Moreno-
Manzano et al., 2009; Barnabe-Heider et al., 2010; Fiorelli et al., 2013;
Li et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2017). However, it cannot be excluded that a
fraction of these neurospheres were derived through a de-diﬀerentia-
tion process of reactive astrocytes situated in the parenchyma (Sirko
et al., 2013). Interestingly, after injury, these neurospheres generate
more oligodendrocytes suggesting that spinal cord injury aﬀects spinal
cord stem cell fate (Li et al., 2016). Indeed, modiﬁcations of EZ prop-
erties by spinal cord injury are indicated by several changes in gene
expression. A number of studies have reported a signiﬁcant increase in
expression of the neural progenitor cell marker Nestin in EZ cells
(Frisén et al., 1995; Namiki and Tator, 1999; Liu et al., 2002; Shibuya
et al., 2002; Takahashi et al., 2003; Orendáčová et al., 2004; Xu et al.,
2006; Foret et al., 2010). In addition, GFAP, a marker for astrocytes, but
also for neural stem cells, is increased in EZ cells (Takahashi et al.,
2003; Xu et al., 2006). Expression of ICAM-1, an adhesion molecule
involved in leukocyte transmigration, is increased in EZ cells after
spinal cord injury in rats (Isaksson et al., 1999). Notably, cell fate
regulators, like β1-integrin (North et al., 2015), Bmp4, Msx2, Notch1,
Numb, Pax6, and Shh show higher expression levels after injury
(Yamamoto et al., 2001; Chen et al., 2005), suggestive of a partial re-
capitulation of a developmental program for neurogenesis. The re-in-
itiation of basic developmental processes after spinal cord injury is
further illustrated by the observation of asymmetric divisions of EZ
cells, involving the Notch1 receptor after injury (Johansson et al.,
1999). This is an evolutionarily conserved feature with zebraﬁsh (Dias
et al., 2012) and indicates that Notch signalling may fulﬁl essential
functions in regenerative neurogenesis.
The molecular mechanisms governing the activation of the EZ after
injury are not fully explored. EZ cells express several receptors, such as
purinergic receptors and Ednrb (Hugnot and Franzen, 2011) and may
rapidly detect molecules released by the lesion site, such as ATP
(Franke and Illes, 2014) and inﬂammatory cytokines. In the uninjured
state, some microglial cells are located very close to the EZ (Alfaro-
Cervello et al., 2012) and could rapidly relay lesion-induced signals to
EZ cells. Apparently, ras signalling is required, as in the “rasless”
mouse,
proliferation
of
EZ
cells
after
spinal
injury
is
reduced
(Sabelström et al., 2013). With regard to Wnt signalling, despite the
downstream eﬀector beta-catenin being expressed by EZ cells, Wnt-
signalling reporter mice did not reveal increased activation of this
pathway after spinal cord injury (White et al., 2010; González-
Fernández et al., 2014). This is similar to observations in zebraﬁsh
(Wehner et al., 2017). Compared to trauma, demyelinating lesions
appear not to be able to trigger acute proliferation in the EZ (Guo et al.,
2011a; Lacroix et al., 2014) indicating that a mechanical damage with
disruption of the blood-spinal cord barrier (Maikos and Shreiber, 2007)
is probably needed.
In addition to proliferation, migration of EZ cells to the lesion site
and contribution to the glial scar have been reported using genetic li-
nage-tracing tools (Meletis et al., 2008) or EZ dye-labelling (Mothe and
Tator, 2005). Recent evidence indicates that the contribution of EZ-
derived cells to the scar depends on age, type, and severity of the injury
(Li et al., 2016; Ren et al., 2017). The migration of EZ cells to the lesion
site could be analogous to an epithelial-mesenchymal transition pro-
cess, especially as these cells already display mesenchymal traits such
as the expression of the intermediate ﬁlament VIMENTIN and the
transcription factor ZEB1, both of which are involved in migration and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (Cheng and Eriksson, 2017). EZ cells
also express the polysialylated form of NCAM (Oumesmar et al., 1995),
as well as the CXCR4 receptor (Tysseling et al., 2011). These cell surface
proteins are both involved in neural precursor migration (Cremer et al.,
2000). Whether EZ-derived cells migrate freely through the par-
enchyma or are associated with other cells such as vessels or astrocytes
is currently unknown. Using post-natal spinal cord sections maintained
in vitro, dorsal and ventral migration of cells from the EZ, named fu-
nicular migratory stream, has been observed (Mladinic et al., 2014).
This is associated with a nuclear localization of the ATF3 transcription
factor. Whether a funicular migratory stream exists after spinal cord
injury in mice remains to be analysed.
After injury, the fate of EZ cells appears to be primarily glial. Using
genetic lineage-tracing tools and lesions of the dorsal funiculus, Meletis
et al. have shown that EZ-derived cells give rise to SOX9+/VIMENTIN+
astrocytes (80%, only part of them express GFAP) and only few mye-
linating oligodendrocytes (3%) (Meletis et al., 2008). These astrocytes,
which contribute to the core of the glial scar (for review on glial scar see
(Cregg et al., 2014; Gregoire et al., 2015)), are beneﬁcial for recovery,
as their reduction using genetic tools provoked further axonal loss and
secondary enlargement of the lesion volume (Sabelström et al., 2013).
This positive eﬀect of ependymal cell–derived astrocytes on the le-
sioned tissue could be mediated by their expression of neurotrophic
factors, such as CNTF, HGF, and IGF-1. Hence, whereas spinal cord-
derived neurospheres generate neurons in vitro, the spinal cord en-
vironment after injury appears to restrict the fate of progenitor cells to
glial phenotypes. This notion is also supported by transplantation ex-
periments showing that multipotent progenitors of the adult spinal cord
generate mostly glial cells when grafted into the spinal cord, but gen-
erate neurons when placed in the hippocampus, a neurogenic en-
vironment (Shihabuddin et al., 2000). It is not clear whether this re-
presents a true fate switch in EZ progenitors, or instead if this is a
selective eﬀect on survival or diﬀerentiation of a heterogeneous po-
pulation of EZ progenitors. After spinal cord injury, the strong in-
ﬂammation and the presence of gliogenic cytokines such as BMPs
(Setoguchi et al., 2004) are likely to bias EZ cell progeny toward an
astrocytic fate at the expense of neurons and oligodendrocytes. Myelin-
associated inhibitors have also been demonstrated to promote diﬀer-
entiation of neural progenitor cells into the glial lineage (Li et al.,
2013).
Consequently, achieving extensive regeneration of the spinal cord
and production of new neurons from the EZ will need genetic (over-
expression of neurogenic transcription factors) or biochemical (infusion
with neurogenic molecules) intervention. For instance, Kojima and
Tator (Kojima and Tator, 2002) have found that intrathecal adminis-
tration of FGF2 and EGF boosts EZ proliferation and leads to functional
improvements, but not to production of new neurons after spinal cord
injury. In addition, Kim et al. (Kim et al., 2011) have found that
treatment of exogenous progenitors in vitro or in vivo with dibutyrylic
cyclic AMP, a cell-permeable analog of cyclic AMP, enhances their
neuronal diﬀerentiation and survival after spinal cord injury. Com-
bining these two approaches might lead to new neurons being gener-
ated from the EZ.
Migration of newly produced cells from the EZ is also an important
issue and enhancing migration could be beneﬁcial for recovery. This
C.G. Becker et al.
Progress in Neurobiology 170 (2018) 67–80
74

could be achieved by various strategies, such as chemokine application
(Merino et al., 2015), use of biomaterials, such as a collagen scaﬀold (Li
et al., 2013), or even by applying electric ﬁelds and electromagnetic
waves. Indeed, following pioneering work of Borgens in 1981, showing
positive inﬂuence of applied electric ﬁelds on spinal cord regeneration
in lamprey (Borgens et al., 1981), it has been shown that migration and
diﬀerentiation of neural stem cells and their progeny can be modulated
by current (Huang et al., 2015; Yao and Li, 2016; Feng et al., 2017;
Iwasa et al., 2017; Samaddar et al., 2017) or electromagnetic ﬁeld
application (Cui et al., 2017).
3.2. The ependymal zone in primates
Cell types and their proliferative activity have been studied in the
EZ region of adult macaques (Alfaro- Cervello et al., 2014). As in ro-
dents, cellular heterogeneity has been observed using marker analysis
and electron microscopy. One distinguishing feature of primate EZ cells
compared to those in rodents is the presence of lateral ependymocytes
with multiple ciliae. These cells do not express Nestin and do not pro-
liferate. In comparison, dorsal and ventral cells are uniciliated or bici-
liated, express Nestin and/or GFAP and proliferate. Like in rodents,
astrocytes contacting the central canal and CSF-contacting neurons are
also present in the macaque EZ.
Even though the human spinal cord EZ region has been studied
since 1890 (von Lenhossék, 1891) using several histological techniques
on post mortem tissue, there is relatively little available data on it. As in
rodents, this region shows cellular heterogeneity during early and
prenatal development. Roof and ﬂoor plate cells diﬀerentiate ﬁrst, ex-
press Nestin (Sakakibara et al., 2007) and acquire a long radial mor-
phology extending to the pial surface (Sarnat, 1992). These cells con-
stitute the midline dorsal and ventral septa which might be involved in
guiding descending and ascending axons, notably by preventing their
decussation (Sarnat, 1992). These cells could also have a supply role for
neurons before vessels appear. Indeed, ependymal cells from the ﬂoor
plate ensheath axons during spinal cord development (Gamble, 1968).
Moreover, electron microscopy of the developing ﬂoor plate neuroe-
pithelium has also revealed that this structure has an intense secretory
activity, suggesting that, as in rodents, this region works as an orga-
nizing centre (Tanaka et al., 1988; Wagner et al., 1990). In human in-
fants (0.5–18 months), two subtypes of ependymocytes can be found
showing either two (exceptionally one) or more cilia (Alfaro- Cervello
et al., 2014). Astrocytes contacting the lumen are also found. In adult
humans, most ependymal cells appear to be multi-cilialed, but a sub-
population with two cilia, resembling macaque or rodent ependymal
cells, are also present (Alfaro- Cervello et al., 2014). In contrast to ro-
dents or macaques, no proliferating cells have been found in the
ependymal zone of adult humans using the Ki67 antibody (Dromard
et al., 2008; Alfaro- Cervello et al., 2014; Garcia-Ovejero et al., 2015).
However, low levels of proliferation could have been missed. As the
spinal cord and ependyma are subjected to mechanical stress (twisting,
bending), it is likely that cells of the central canal very slowly self-
renew, similar to many epithelia of the body. Accumulation of muta-
tions in these proliferative cells may be at the origin of spinal cord
ependymoma, an infrequent tumour representing 2% of all primary
brain tumours (Weller et al., 2015).
One major structural diﬀerence between the human and rodent
central canal is that after the ﬁrst decade of life, a central lumen is not
patent and an obliteration process is observed at diﬀerent levels of the
spinal cord in humans. However, the central canal at the level of the
medulla is maintained. This observation was initially made by histology
(Motavkin and Bakhtinov, 1973; Milhorat et al., 1994; Yasui et al.,
1999) but was then conﬁrmed using MRI on 59 healthy volunteers
(Garcia-Ovejero et al., 2015). The lumen is replaced by a cellular mass,
which is highly vascularized. This mass is surrounded by radially ar-
ranged cells, giving a pseudo-rosette appearance. More rarely, pseudo-
canals, surrounded with epithelial cells with beta-catenin+ junctions,
are found in these masses (Garcia-Ovejero et al., 2015). Multi-ciliated
VIMENTIN+ ependymocytes remain in this structure but astrocytes are
also found, suggesting a process of gliosis (Alfaro- Cervello et al., 2014).
Some authors have proposed that this obliteration should not be re-
garded as an entirely passive process but rather as formation of a se-
cretory organ with physiological functions (Motavkin and Bakhtinov,
1973). However, this remains to be fully established.
In contrast to macaques, rodents, and ﬁsh, the presence of CSF-N
has not yet been reported for the human spinal cord (Dromard et al.,
2008; Alfaro- Cervello et al., 2014; Djenoune et al., 2014). In zebraﬁsh,
these cells are implicated in locomotor behaviour by responding to both
passive and active bending of the spinal cord and regulating the tail
beat frequency (Böhm et al., 2016). It is tempting to speculate that loss
of the tail, which occurred during human and chimpanzee evolution
around 4–7 millions ago (Kumar et al., 2005), or acquisition of biped-
alism, was accompanied by a reduction or loss of CSF-N. Despite the
presumptive lack of CSF-N, the EZ receives innervation which appears
to increase with age (Motavkin and Bakhtinov, 1973). The role of this
innervation, which is also present in rodents, is unknown, but may be
involved in the proliferation of EZ cells as in the SVZ, where various
nervous ﬁbre subtypes (notably 5-HT and dopamine) control pro-
liferation and fate of neural stem and progenitor cells (Bond et al.,
2015). This innervation may also control some secretory functions of EZ
cells, which has been suggested in salamanders (Zamora, 1978). In
zebraﬁsh, this innervation controls regenerative neurogenesis from the
EZ (Reimer et al., 2013; Barreiro-Iglesias et al., 2015).
With regard to expression of markers by adult human EZ cells, only
a few studies have been carried out and results are not always con-
sistent. This might be due to the quality of human samples (post-
mortem delay), the precise anatomical location of the studied tissues
and the implemented techniques (paraﬃn-embedding or cryosection).
In addition, for some markers with many isoforms, like GFAP with 10
isoforms (Hol and Pekny, 2015), diﬀerent antibodies may only detect
speciﬁc forms of the protein. This could lead to discrepancy between
ﬁndings of diﬀerent laboratories. However, the available data indicate
that in young adults (second decade), subsets of cells express several
markers typically found in immature neural cells, such as CD15,
FOXA2, NESTIN, PAX6, SOX2, SOX11, and VIMENTIN (Dromard et al.,
2008; Cawsey et al., 2015). There is obvious cellular heterogeneity, as
only a subset of EZ cells express GFAP or NESTIN. In addition, some
markers are mostly expressed in the dorsal part (CD15, PAX6), while
radial NESTIN+ cells are observed in the ventral and dorsal parts of the
EZ (Dromard et al., 2008; Cawsey et al., 2015). This indicates a dorsal-
ventral regionalization of the adult human spinal cord EZ, similar to
that observed in the mouse (Sabourin et al., 2009; Yu et al., 2013;
Khazanov et al., 2016) and zebraﬁsh (Figs. 1 and 2). In older in-
dividuals, even after EZ obstruction, cells of the remaining mass may
retain some immature features, as indicated by the presence of CD15,
SOX2, PAX6, PAX7, and several HOX proteins. This has been detected
by tissue labeling and/or PCR (Garcia-Ovejero et al., 2015).
Evidence for the persistence of neural progenitor cells in the adult
human spinal cord also comes from in vitro studies. Dromard et al.,
were able to generate SOX2+/NESTIN+ neurospheres from the gray
matter central region using deﬁned media containing EGF and FGF2
(Dromard et al., 2008). These neurospheres were multipotent and
generated neurons and glial cells after diﬀerentiation. However, the
neurospheres could not be passaged, suggesting that they were derived
from proliferation-limited neural progenitors rather than bona ﬁde
stem cells. Using diﬀerent culture conditions (adherent substrate and
Matrigel) Mothe et al. were able to isolate SOX2+/NESTIN+ multi-
potent cells that could be passaged for at least 9 months (Mothe et al.,
2011). These cells generate glial and neuronal cells after transplanta-
tion into spinal-injured rats and are thus of great interest with respect to
understanding the molecular mechanisms controlling their proliferation
and fate.
There are several critical points when considering human EZ cells as
C.G. Becker et al.
Progress in Neurobiology 170 (2018) 67–80
75

a suitable cellular source for regeneration. Human EZ cells appear to
react to spinal cord injury with an increase in NESTIN expression
(Cawsey et al., 2015), but whether these cells proliferate and migrate
has not been reported. In macaques, production of new glial cells and
neurons has been observed after injury (Yang et al., 2006; Vessal et al.,
2007). However, whether these cells originate from the EZ remains to
be established.
An essential diﬀerence between rodents and primates is the pre-
sence of a high level of GFAP intermediate ﬁlaments in a hypocellular
layer, which surrounds the EZ region in primates (Dromard et al., 2008;
Alfaro- Cervello et al., 2014) (Fig. 2). A similar hypocellular GFAP+
layer is also found adjacent to the SVZ neural stem cell niche in mar-
mosets, macaques, and humans (Sanai et al., 2004; Quiñones- Hinojosa
et al., 2006; Gil- Perotin et al., 2009; Sawamoto et al., 2011) and thus
appears to be a distinctive feature of primates. The role of this layer is
currently unknown but its presence may represent an obstacle for re-
generation, as EZ cells would have to migrate through this dense layer
to reach lesioned areas. The large size of the spinal cord might also be
an obstacle to regeneration for three reasons. Firstly, cellular re-
generation in anamniotes is achieved notably by ependymo-radial glia
spanning from the EZ to the pial surface. While radial glial cells are
clearly present in rodents and macaque around the canal, it is not
known whether these cells reach the meninges, which are an important
source of signals for neural stem cell maintenance and fate determi-
nation during CNS development (Siegenthaler and Pleasure, 2011). It
can be speculated that with the increase in size, radial cells around the
EZ can no longer extend to the pial surface in mammals and have lost
some of their capacity for regeneration. Secondly, longer spinal cords
with a larger central canal cavity could have favoured selection of
multi-ciliated ependymocytes during evolution (Nakayama and Kohno,
1974), so as to move the CSF ﬂuid over a greater distance. To support
this hypothesis, it would be informative to study the cellular compo-
sition of the EZ region in mammals with a long vertebral column, such
as giraﬀes and whales, to see if multi-ciliated ependymocytes found in
primates are also present. The presence of multi-ciliated ependymo-
cytes could have been selected for at the expense of proliferative ca-
pacity and stemness, as multi-ciliated cells are post-mitotic (Brooks and
Wallingford, 2014). Thirdly, diﬀerences in myelin between anamniotes
and mammals may also account for the contrasting ability to regenerate
neurons from EZ cells. Whereas the basic structure of myelin is con-
served between ﬁshes and mammals, some diﬀerences exist. Myelin
Protein zero, a protein possibly involved in zebraﬁsh CNS regeneration
(Schweitzer et al., 2003), is present in both CNS and PNS myelin of ﬁsh,
in contrast to the mammalian homolog, which is expressed only in PNS
myelin (Bai et al., 2011). Recent results indicated that proteins of
myelin, such as myelin basic protein, can inhibit spinal cord neural
stem cell proliferation in vitro and such mechanisms could also operate
in vivo to limit regeneration in mammals (Xu et al., 2017).
4. Comparing regenerating and non-regenerating species
From the above comparisons, far reaching similarities between EZ
cells in anamniotes and mammals become apparent (summarized in
Table 1 and Fig. 2). Morphologically, cells in the EZ are ciliated and
have radial processes. In anamniotes, these processes form endfeet at
the pial surface. In mammals, only EZ cells at the dorsal and ventral
midline appear to have endfeet at the pial surface, whereas the radial
processes of most EZ cells are shorter and end on parenchymal blood
vessels. EZ cells in anamniotes and amniotes also share expression of
structural and functional genes, such as GFAP and VIMENTIN.
Spinal EZ cells are not a homogeneous population, with dorso-
ventral and rostro-caudal diﬀerences in expression of developmental
transcription factors that confer regional identity. This may be related
to a degree of lineage restriction of progenitor cells. Remarkably, both
anamniote and mammalian EZ cells express transcription factors re-
lated to « stemness », such as Sox2. However, in anmniotes, the
Table 1
Evolutionary comparison of cells in the ependymal zone of the spinal cord.
Cilia
CSF-N
Dorsol-ventral
regionalisation
Rostro-caudal
regionalisa-tion
Retention of developmental
gene expression
Shared ependyma speciﬁc
gene expression
Expression of other
genes
Cell types generated after lesion
Zebraﬁsh
✓
✓
✓
Not known
FoxA2?, Nkx6.1, Pax6, Shh,
Sox2, Sox11
FoxJ1
GFAP, Vimentin,
nestin, CD15?
Motor neurons, interneurons,
astrocyte-like bridging glia
Rodents
✓
✓
✓
✓
FoxA2, Nkx6.1, Pax6, Shh,
Sox2, Sox9
FoxJ1
GFAP, Vimentin,
Nestin, CD15
Astrocytes, Oligodendro-cytes
Primates
✓(presence of multi-
ciliated cells)
✓(macaque) No
evidence in human
✓
Not known
FoxA2, Nkx6.1, Pax6, Sox2
FoxJ1
GFAP, Vimentin,
Nestin, CD15
Not known
C.G. Becker et al.
Progress in Neurobiology 170 (2018) 67–80
76

neuronal lineages of progenitor cells are fully expressed, whereas in
mammals environmental factors appear to restrict this potential.
After a lesion, EZ cells in both anamniotes and mammals react to
lesion signals with strongly increased proliferation. Hence, any lesion
stimulus is adequate in anamniotes and mammals to bring EZ cells out
of relative quiescence to start proliferating. This suggests that lesion-
induced intracellular mechanisms may be similar. Indeed, as we discuss
above, the Notch pathway, which attenuates neurogenesis, is upregu-
lated in EZ cells of regenerating and non-regenerating species.
Moreover, activity of the hedgehog pathway is observed across verte-
brates. It is therefore likely that diﬀerences in intracellular signalling
are not fundamental, but that diﬀerent levels of activity of these
pathways lead to dramatically diﬀerent net outcomes in terms of glio-
genesis versus neurogenesis.
However, fundamental diﬀerences are likely to exist between pro-
genitor cells in anamniotes and mammals. For example, ERGs in an-
mniotes have to fulﬁl the functions of ependymal cells and astrocytes,
as there is little evidence for the presence of “free” astrocytes in ana-
mniotes. In mammals, there is a clear distinction between ependymal
cells and parenchymal astrocytes. Nevertheless, a closer comparison
between cells in the EZ between regenerating and non-regenerating
species may be informative in order to determine where lesion reactions
diverge. Analyses should also be performed in less-studies species such
as turtles (Marichal et al., 2009), birds, large or aquatic mammals and
non-human primates such as marmoset to bring additional molecular
and cellular insights into the functions of the EZ regions across species.
5. Outlook
Based on transgenic marker expression, speciﬁc EZ cell populations
can be highly puriﬁed and subjected to gene expression proﬁling
techniques. This can be done in a systematic comparison between re-
generating and non-regenerating species and on an EZ domain-speciﬁc
basis, in order to follow up on potential lineage restrictions of pro-
genitor domains. Moreover, single cell sequencing has the capacity to
identify unanticipated subpopulations of progenitor cells (Cuevas-Diaz
Duran et al., 2017). This has the potential to unravel the gene expres-
sion programmes that are being switched on after a lesion.
Three-dimensional ultrastructural analyses by serial block-face
scanning electron microscopy (Denk and Horstmann, 2004; Titze and
Genoud, 2016) can serve to describe the morphological diversity of cell
types in the EZ and be correlated with expression proﬁles. This can
address whether similar niches, with the presence of stem cells and
transit amplifying cells, exist as in neurogenic areas in the brain (Chang
et al., 2016).
It will also be important to elucidate how EZ cells receive signals
that are crucial for regeneration. For example, the ventral source of
SHH is much more remote from target cells during regeneration of the
adult spinal cord than during neural tube development. A common
denominator between cells in the EZ is their close and often direct
contact with the central canal, which may transport signals (Zappaterra
and Lehtinen, 2012). Hence, analysing the composition of the CSF and
receptors on EZ cells after injury should be informative.
Finally, zebraﬁsh are the foremost vertebrate in vivo model for
automated drug screening (White et al., 2016). Screening whole zeb-
raﬁsh larvae for drugs that enhance lesion-induced neurogenesis
(Reimer et al., 2013) combined with those on spinal neurospheres from
mammals (Cheng et al., 2017) may yield important tools to tweak the
lesion-induced gene expression programmes in EZ cells towards a more
pro-regenerative phenotype. We conclude that a comparative approach
to the analysis of spinal EZ cells holds considerable promise to identify
critical steps that decide between inhibitory gliogenesis and pro-re-
generative neurogenesis after spinal cord injury.
Acknowledgements
We thank the 2017 cohort of the Wellcome Trust 4 year PhD pro-
gramme in Tissue Repair at the University of Edinburgh for critically
reading the manuscript. This work was supported by BBSRC to CGB and
TB; INSERM, AFM, IRME and IRP to JPH’s team; ERA-NET NEURON
CoFund Consortium NEURONICHE (MRC, Spinal Research, ANR) to all
authors.
References
Alfaro- Cervello, C., Soriano- Navarro, M., Mirzadeh, Z., Alvarez- Buylla, A., Garcia-
Verdugo, J.M., 2012. Biciliated ependymal cell proliferation contributes to spinal
cord growth. J. Comp. Neurol. 520, 3528–3552.
Alfaro- Cervello, C., Cebrian- Silla, A., Soriano- Navarro, M., Garcia- Tarraga, P., Matías-
Guiu, J., Gomez- Pinedo, U., Molina Aguilar, P., Alvarez- Buylla, A., Luquin, M.R.,
Garcia- Verdugo, J.M., 2014. The adult macaque spinal cord central canal zone
contains proliferative cells and closely resembles the human. J. Comp. Neurol. 522,
1800–1817.
Alfonso, J., Le Magueresse, C., Zuccotti, A., Khodosevich, K., Monyer, H., 2012. Diazepam
binding inhibitor promotes progenitor proliferation in the postnatal SVZ by reducing
GABA signaling. Cell Stem Cell 10, 76–87.
Almad, A., Sahinkaya, F.R., McTigue, D.M., 2011. Oligodendrocyte fate after spinal cord
injury. Neurotherap. J. Am. Soc. Exp. NeuroTherap. 8, 262–273.
Alunni, A., Bally-Cuif, L., 2016. A comparative view of regenerative neurogenesis in
vertebrates. Development 143, 741–753.
Alunni, A., Krecsmarik, M., Bosco, A., Galant, S., Pan, L., Moens, C.B., Bally-Cuif, L., 2013.
Notch3 signaling gates cell cycle entry and limits neural stem cell ampliﬁcation in the
adult pallium. Development 140, 3335–3347.
Anderson, M.J., Waxman, S.G., 1981. Morphology of regenerated spinal cord in
Sternarchus albifrons. Cell Tissue Res. 219, 1–8.
Anderson, M.A., Burda, J.E., Ren, Y., Ao, Y., O’Shea, T.M., Kawaguchi, R., Coppola, G.,
Khakh, B.S., Deming, T.J., Sofroniew, M.V., 2016. Astrocyte scar formation aids
central nervous system axon regeneration. Nature 532, 195–200.
Bai, Q., Sun, M., Stolz, D.B., Burton, E.A., 2011. Major isoform of zebraﬁsh P0 is a 23.5
kDa myelin glycoprotein expressed in selected white matter tracts of the central
nervous system. J. Comp. Neurol. 519, 1580–1596.
Barnabe-Heider, F., Goritz, C., Sabelstrom, H., Takebayashi, H., Pfrieger, F.W., Meletis,
K., Frisen, J., 2010. Origin of new glial cells in intact and injured adult spinal cord.
Cell Stem Cell 7, 470–482.
Barreiro-Iglesias, A., Mysiak, K.S., Scott, A.L., Reimer, M.M., Yang, Y., Becker, C.G.,
Becker, T., 2015. Serotonin promotes development and regeneration of spinal motor
neurons in zebraﬁsh. Cell. Rep. 13, 924–932.
Becker, T., Becker, C.G., 2001. Regenerating descending axons preferentially reroute to
the gray matter in the presence of a general macrophage/microglial reaction caudal
to a spinal transection in adult zebraﬁsh. J. Comp. Neurol. 433, 131–147.
Becker, C.G., Becker, T., 2015. Neuronal regeneration from ependymo-radial glial cells:
cook, little pot, cook!. Dev. Cell 32, 516–527.
Becker, T., Wullimann, M.F., Becker, C.G., Bernhardt, R.R., Schachner, M., 1997. Axonal
regrowth after spinal cord transection in adult zebraﬁsh. J. Comp. Neurol. 377,
577–595.
Becker, T., Lieberoth, B.C., Becker, C.G., Schachner, M., 2005. Diﬀerences in the re-
generative response of neuronal cell populations and indications for plasticity in
intraspinal neurons after spinal cord transection in adult zebraﬁsh. Mol. Cell.
Neurosci. 30, 265–278.
Blanpain, C., Horsley, V., Fuchs, E., 2007. Epithelial stem cells: turning over new leaves.
Cell 128, 445–458.
Böhm, U.L., Prendergast, A., Djenoune, L., Figueiredo, S.N., Gomez, J., Stokes, C., Kaiser,
S., Suster, M., Kawakami, K., Charpentier, M., 2016. CSF-contacting neurons regulate
locomotion by relaying mechanical stimuli to spinal circuits. Nat. Commun. 7.
Bond, A.M., Ming, G.-l., Song, H., 2015. Adult mammalian neural stem cells and neuro-
genesis: ﬁve decades later. Cell Stem Cell 17, 385–395.
Borgens, R.B., Roederer, E., Cohen, M.J., 1981. Enhanced spinal cord regeneration in
lamprey by applied electric ﬁelds. Science 213, 611–617.
Briona, L.K., Dorsky, R.I., 2014. Radial glial progenitors repair the zebraﬁsh spinal cord
following transection. Exp. Neurol. 256, 81–92.
Briona, L.K., Poulain, F.E., Mosimann, C., Dorsky, R.I., 2015. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
is required for radial glial neurogenesis following spinal cord injury. Dev. Biol. 403,
15–21.
Brooks, E.R., Wallingford, J.B., 2014. Multiciliated cells. Curr. Biol. 24, R973–R982.
Bruni, J., Anderson, W., 1987. Ependyma of the rat fourth ventricle and central canal:
response to injury. Cells Tissues Organs 128, 265–273.
Cardozo, M.J., Mysiak, K.S., Becker, T., Becker, C.G., 2017. Reduce, reuse, recycle - de-
velopmental signals in spinal cord regeneration. Dev. Biol. 432, 53–63.
Cawsey, T., Duﬂou, J., Weickert, C.S., Gorrie, C.A., 2015. Nestin-positive ependymal cells
are increased in the human spinal cord after traumatic central nervous system injury.
J. Neurotrauma 32, 1393–1402.
Chang, E.H., Adorjan, I., Mundim, M.V., Sun, B., Dizon, M.L., Szele, F.G., 2016. Traumatic
brain injury activation of the adult subventricular zone neurogenic niche. Front.
Neurosci. 10, 332.
Chen, J., Leong, S.Y., Schachner, M., 2005. Diﬀerential expression of cell fate determi-
nants in neurons and glial cells of adult mouse spinal cord after compression injury.
C.G. Becker et al.
Progress in Neurobiology 170 (2018) 67–80
77

Eur. J. Neurosci. 22, 1895–1906.
Chen, T., Yu, Y., Hu, C., Schachner, M., 2016. L1.2, the zebraﬁsh paralog of L1.1 and
ortholog of the mammalian cell adhesion molecule L1 contributes to spinal cord
regeneration in adult zebraﬁsh. Restor. Neurol. Neurosci. 34, 325–335.
Cheng, F., Eriksson, J.E., 2017. Intermediate ﬁlaments and the regulation of cell motility
during regeneration and wound healing. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 9 a022046.
Cheng, C., Fass, D.M., Folz-Donahue, K., MacDonald, M.E., Haggarty, S.J., 2017. Highly
expandable human iPS cell-derived Neural Progenitor Cells (NPC) and neurons for
Central nervous system disease modeling and high-throughput screening. Curr.
Protoc. Hum. Genet. 92 21 28 21-21 28 21.
Cizkova, D., Nagyova, M., Slovinska, L., Novotna, I., Radonak, J., Cizek, M., Mechirova,
E., Tomori, Z., Hlucilova, J., Motlik, J., 2009. Response of ependymal progenitors to
spinal cord injury or enhanced physical activity in adult rat. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 29,
999–1013.
Cregg, J.M., DePaul, M.A., Filous, A.R., Lang, B.T., Tran, A., Silver, J., 2014. Functional
regeneration beyond the glial scar. Exp. Neurol. 253, 197–207.
Cremer, H., Chazal, G., Lledo, P.-M., Rougon, G., Montaron, M., Mayo, W., Le Moal, M.,
Abrous, D., 2000. PSA-NCAM: an important regulator of hippocampal plasticity. Int.
J. Dev. Neurosci. 18, 213–220.
Cuevas-Diaz Duran, R., Wei, H., Wu, J.Q., 2017. Single-cell RNA-sequencing of the brain.
Clin. Transl. Med. 6, 20.
Cui, M., Ge, H., Zhao, H., Zou, Y., Chen, Y., Feng, H., 2017. Electromagnetic ﬁelds for the
regulation of neural stem cells. Stem Cells Int. 2017, 9898439.
de Oliveira-Carlos, V., Ganz, J., Hans, S., Kaslin, J., Brand, M., 2013. Notch receptor
expression in neurogenic regions of the adult zebraﬁsh brain. PLoS One 8, e73384.
Denk, W., Horstmann, H., 2004. Serial block-face scanning electron microscopy to re-
construct three-dimensional tissue nanostructure. PLoS Biol. 2, e329.
Dervan, A.G., Roberts, B.L., 2003a. The meningeal sheath of the regenerating spinal cord
of the eel, Anguilla. Anat. Embryol. (Berl.) 207, 157–167.
Dervan, A.G., Roberts, B.L., 2003b. Reaction of spinal cord central canal cells to cord
transection and their contribution to cord regeneration. J. Comp. Neurol. 458,
293–306.
Dias, T.B., Yang, Y.J., Ogai, K., Becker, T., Becker, C.G., 2012. Notch signaling controls
generation of motor neurons in the lesioned spinal cord of adult zebraﬁsh. J.
Neurosci. 32, 3245–3252.
Dimou, L., Gotz, M., 2014. Glial cells as progenitors and stem cells: new roles in the
healthy and diseased brain. Physiol. Rev. 94, 709–737.
Djenoune, L., Wyart, C., 2017. Light on a sensory interface linking the cerebrospinal ﬂuid
to motor circuits in vertebrates. J. Neurogenet. 31, 113–127.
Djenoune, L., Khabou, H., Joubert, F., Quan, F.B., Figueiredo, S.N., Bodineau, L., Del
Bene, F., Burcklé, C., Tostivint, H., Wyart, C., 2014. Investigation of spinal cere-
brospinal ﬂuid-contacting neurons expressing PKD2L1: evidence for a conserved
system from ﬁsh to primates. Front. Neuroanat. 8.
Dor, Y., Brown, J., Martinez, O.I., Melton, D.A., 2004. Adult pancreatic beta-cells are
formed by self-duplication rather than stem-cell diﬀerentiation. Nature 429, 41.
Dromard, C., Guillon, H., Rigau, V., Ripoll, C., Sabourin, J.C., Perrin, F.E., Scamps, F.,
Bozza, S., Sabatier, P., Lonjon, N., et al., 2008. Adult human spinal cord harbors
neural precursor cells that generate neurons and glial cells in vitro. J. Neurosci. Res.
86, 1916–1926.
Fang, P., Pan, H.C., Lin, S.L., Zhang, W.Q., Rauvala, H., Schachner, M., Shen, Y.Q., 2014.
HMGB1 contributes to regeneration after spinal cord injury in adult zebraﬁsh. Mol.
Neurobiol. 49, 472–483.
Feng, J.F., Liu, J., Zhang, L., Jiang, J.Y., Russell, M., Lyeth, B.G., Nolta, J.A., Zhao, M.,
2017. Electrical guidance of human stem cells in the rat brain. Stem Cell Rep. 9,
177–189.
Ferg, M., Armant, O., Yang, L., Dickmeis, T., Rastegar, S., Strahle, U., 2014. Gene tran-
scription in the zebraﬁsh embryo: regulators and networks. Brief. Funct. Genom. 13,
131–143.
Fiorelli, R., Cebrian- Silla, A., Garcia- Verdugo, J.M., Raineteau, O., 2013. The adult
spinal cord harbors a population of GFAP‐positive progenitors with limited self‐-
renewal potential. Glia 61, 2100–2113.
Foret, A., Quertainmont, R., Botman, O., Bouhy, D., Amabili, P., Brook, G., Schoenen, J.,
Franzen, R., 2010. Stem cells in the adult rat spinal cord: plasticity after injury and
treadmill training exercise. J. Neurochem. 112, 762–772.
Foronda, D., de Navas, L.F., Garaulet, D.L., Sánchez-Herrero, E., 2009. Function and
speciﬁcity of Hox genes. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 53, 1409–1419.
Franke, H., Illes, P., 2014. Nucleotide signaling in astrogliosis. Neurosci. Lett. 565, 14–22.
Frisén, J., Johansson, C.B., Török, C., Risling, M., Lendahl, U., 1995. Rapid, widespread,
and longlasting induction of nestin contributes to the generation of glial scar tissue
after CNS injury. J. Cell. Biol. 131, 453–464.
Fu, H., Qi, Y., Tan, M., Cai, J., Hu, X., Liu, Z., Jensen, J., Qiu, M., 2003. Molecular
mapping of the origin of postnatal spinal cord ependymal cells: evidence that adult
ependymal cells are derived from Nkx6.1+ ventral neural progenitor cells. J. Comp.
Neurol. 456, 237–244.
Gamble, H., 1968. Axon ensheathing by ependymal cells in the human embryonic and
foetal spinal cord. Nature 218, 182–183.
Garbe, D.S., Ring, R.H., 2012. Investigating tonic Wnt signaling throughout the adult CNS
and in the hippocampal neurogenic niche of BatGal and ins-TopGal mice. Cell. Mol.
Neurobiol. 32, 1159–1174.
Garcia-Ovejero, D., Arevalo-Martin, A., Paniagua-Torija, B., Florensa-Vila, J., Ferrer, I.,
Grassner, L., Molina-Holgado, E., 2015. The ependymal region of the adult human
spinal cord diﬀers from other species and shows ependymoma-like features. Brain
138, 1583–1597.
The Gene Expression Nervous System Atlas (GENSAT) Project, NINDS Contracts
N01NS02331 & HHSN271200723701C to The Rockefeller University (New
York, NY).
Gil- Perotin, S., Duran- Moreno, M., Belzunegui, S., Luquin, M.R., Garcia- Verdugo, J.M.,
2009. Ultrastructure of the subventricular zone in Macaca fascicularis and evidence
of a mouse‐like migratory stream. J. Comp. Neurol. 514, 533–554.
Goldshmit, Y., Sztal, T.E., Jusuf, P.R., Hall, T.E., Nguyen-Chi, M., Currie, P.D., 2012. Fgf-
dependent glial cell bridges facilitate spinal cord regeneration in zebraﬁsh. J.
Neurosci. 32, 7477–7492.
Gómez-Pinilla, F., Dao, L., So, V., 1997. Physical exercise induces FGF-2 and its mRNA in
the hippocampus. Brain Res. 764, 1–8.
González-Fernández, C., Fernández-Martos, C.M., Shields, S.D., Arenas, E., Javier
Rodríguez, F., 2014. Wnts are expressed in the spinal cord of adult mice and are
diﬀerentially induced after injury. J. Neurotrauma 31, 565–581.
Gonzalez-Fernandez, C., Arevalo-Martin, A., Paniagua-Torija, B., Ferrer, I., Rodriguez,
F.J., Garcia-Ovejero, D., 2016. Wnts are expressed in the ependymal region of the
adult spinal cord. Mol. Neurobiol. 1–14.
Gotz, M., Sirko, S., Beckers, J., Irmler, M., 2015. Reactive astrocytes as neural stem or
progenitor cells: in vivo lineage, in vitro potential, and genome-wide expression
analysis. Glia 63, 1452–1468.
Grandel, H., Brand, M., 2013. Comparative aspects of adult neural stem cell activity in
vertebrates. Dev. Genes Evol. 223, 131–147.
Gregoire, C.A., Goldenstein, B.L., Floriddia, E.M., Barnabe-Heider, F., Fernandes, K.J.,
2015. Endogenous neural stem cell responses to stroke and spinal cord injury. Glia
63, 1469–1482.
Grimes, D.T., Boswell, C.W., Morante, N.F., Henkelman, R.M., Burdine, R.D., Ciruna, B.,
2016. Zebraﬁsh models of idiopathic scoliosis link cerebrospinal ﬂuid ﬂow defects to
spine curvature. Science 352, 1341–1344.
Guo, F., Maeda, Y., Ma, J., Delgado, M., Sohn, J., Miers, L., Ko, E.M., Bannerman, P., Xu,
J., Wang, Y., 2011a. Macroglial plasticity and the origins of reactive astroglia in
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J. Neurosci. 31, 11914–11928.
Guo, Y., Ma, L., Cristofanilli, M., Hart, R.P., Hao, A., Schachner, M., 2011b. Transcription
factor Sox11b is involved in spinal cord regeneration in adult zebraﬁsh. Neuroscience
172, 329–341.
Hamilton, L., Truong, M., Bednarczyk, M., Aumont, A., Fernandes, K., 2009. Cellular
organization of the central canal ependymal zone, a niche of latent neural stem cells
in the adult mammalian spinal cord. Neuroscience 164, 1044–1056.
Han, Y.-G., Alvarez-Buylla, A., 2010. Role of primary cilia in brain development and
cancer. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 20, 58–67.
Hol, E.M., Pekny, M., 2015. Glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and the astrocyte in-
termediate ﬁlament system in diseases of the central nervous system. Curr. Opin. Cell
Biol. 32, 121–130.
Huang, A.L., Chen, X., Hoon, M.A., Chandrashekar, J., Guo, W., Trankner, D., Ryba, N.J.,
Zuker, C.S., 2006. The cells and logic for mammalian sour taste detection. Nature
442, 934–938.
Huang, Y., Li, Y., Chen, J., Zhou, H., Tan, S., 2015. Electrical stimulation elicits neural
stem cells activation: New perspectives in CNS repair. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 9, 586.
Hugnot, J.P., 2012. The spinal cord neural stem cell niche. Neural Stem Cells and
Therapy. InTech pp. 71-92.
Hugnot, J.-P., Franzen, R., 2011. The spinal cord ependymal region: a stem cell niche in
the caudal central nervous system. Front. Biosci. (Landmark Ed.) 16, 1044–1059.
Hui, S.P., Sengupta, D., Lee, S.G., Sen, T., Kundu, S., Mathavan, S., Ghosh, S., 2014.
Genome wide expression proﬁling during spinal cord regeneration identiﬁes com-
prehensive cellular responses in zebraﬁsh. PLoS One 9, e84212.
Hui, S.P., Nag, T.C., Ghosh, S., 2015. Characterization of proliferating neural progenitors
after spinal cord injury in adult zebraﬁsh. PLoS One 10, e0143595.
Hui, S.P., Sheng, D.Z., Sugimoto, K., Gonzalez-Rajal, A., Nakagawa, S., Hesselson, D.,
Kikuchi, K., 2017. Zebraﬁsh regulatory T cells mediate organ-speciﬁc regenerative
programs. Dev. Cell 43, 659–672 e655.
Isaksson, J., Faroque, M., Holtz, A., Hillered, L., Olsson, Y., 1999. Expression of ICAM-1
and CD11b after experimental spinal cord injury in rats. J. Neurotrauma 16,
165–173.
Iwasa, S.N., Babona-Pilipos, R., Morshead, C.M., 2017. Environmental factors that in-
ﬂuence stem cell migration: an "Electric Field". Stem Cells Int. 2017, 4276927.
Jacquet, B.V., Salinas-Mondragon, R., Liang, H., Therit, B., Buie, J.D., Dykstra, M.,
Campbell, K., Ostrowski, L.E., Brody, S.L., Ghashghaei, H.T., 2009. FoxJ1-dependent
gene expression is required for diﬀerentiation of radial glia into ependymal cells and
a subset of astrocytes in the postnatal brain. Development 136, 4021–4031.
Johansson, C.B., Momma, S., Clarke, D.L., Risling, M., Lendahl, U., Frisen, J., 1999.
Identiﬁcation of a neural stem cell in the adult mammalian central nervous system.
Cell 96, 25–34.
Khazanov, S., Paz, Y., Hefetz, A., Gonzales, B.J., Netser, Y., Mansour, A.A., Ben-Arie, N.,
2016. Floor plate descendants in the ependyma of the adult mouse central nervous
system. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 61, 257–265.
Kim, H., Zahir, T., Tator, C.H., Shoichet, M.S., 2011. Eﬀects of dibutyryl cyclic-AMP on
survival and neuronal diﬀerentiation of neural stem/progenitor cells transplanted
into spinal cord injured rats. PLoS One 6, e21744.
Kirsche, W., 1950. Die regenerativen Vorgänge am Rückenmark erwachsener Teleostier
nach operativer Kontinuitätstrennung. Z. Mikrosk Anat. Forsch. 77, 190–265.
Kojima, A., Tator, C.H., 2002. Intrathecal administration of epidermal growth factor and
ﬁbroblast growth factor 2 promotes ependymal proliferation and functional recovery
after spinal cord injury in adult rats. J. Neurotrauma 19, 223–238.
Kondrychyn, I., Teh, C., Sin, M., Korzh, V., 2013. Stretching morphogenesis of the roof
plate and formation of the central canal. PLoS One 8, e56219.
Kroehne, V., Freudenreich, D., Hans, S., Kaslin, J., Brand, M., 2011. Regeneration of the
adult zebraﬁsh brain from neurogenic radial glia-type progenitors. Development 138,
4831–4841.
Kulbatski, I., Tator, C.H., 2009. Region-speciﬁc diﬀerentiation potential of adult rat spinal
cord neural stem/precursors and their plasticity in response to in vitro manipulation.
C.G. Becker et al.
Progress in Neurobiology 170 (2018) 67–80
78

J. Histochem. Cytochem. 57, 405–423.
Kulbatski, I., Mothe, A.J., Keating, A., Hakamata, Y., Kobayashi, E., Tator, C.H., 2007.
Oligodendrocytes and radial glia derived from adult rat spinal cord progenitors:
morphological and immunocytochemical characterization. J. Histochem. Cytochem.
55, 209–222.
Kumar, S., Filipski, A., Swarna, V., Walker, A., Hedges, S.B., 2005. Placing conﬁdence
limits on the molecular age of the human–chimpanzee divergence. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 102, 18842–18847.
Kuscha, V., Barreiro-Iglesias, A., Becker, C.G., Becker, T., 2012a. Plasticity of tyrosine
hydroxylase and serotonergic systems in the regenerating spinal cord of adult zeb-
raﬁsh. J. Comp. Neurol. 520, 933–951.
Kuscha, V., Frazer, S.L., Dias, T.B., Hibi, M., Becker, T., Becker, C.G., 2012b. Lesion-
induced generation of interneuron cell types in speciﬁc dorsoventral domains in the
spinal cord of adult zebraﬁsh. J. Comp. Neurol. 520, 3604–3616.
Kútna, V., Ševc, J., Gombalová, Z., Matiašová, A., Daxnerová, Z., 2014. Enigmatic cere-
brospinal ﬂuid-contacting neurons arise even after the termination of neurogenesis in
the rat spinal cord during embryonic development and retain their immature-like
characteristics until adulthood. Acta Histochem. 116, 278–285.
Kyritsis, N., Kizil, C., Zocher, S., Kroehne, V., Kaslin, J., Freudenreich, D., Iltzsche, A.,
Brand, M., 2012. Acute inﬂammation initiates the regenerative response in the adult
zebraﬁsh brain. Science 338, 1353–1356.
Lacroix, S., Hamilton, L.K., Vaugeois, A., Beaudoin, S., Breault-Dugas, C., Pineau, I.,
Levesque, S.A., Gregoire, C.-A., Fernandes, K.J., 2014. Central canal ependymal cells
proliferate extensively in response to traumatic spinal cord injury but not demyeli-
nating lesions. PLoS One 9, e85916.
Lang, B.T., Cregg, J.M., DePaul, M.A., Tran, A.P., Xu, K., Dyck, S.M., Madalena, K.M.,
Brown, B.P., Weng, Y.L., Li, S., et al., 2014. Modulation of the proteoglycan receptor
PTPsigma promotes recovery after spinal cord injury. Nature 518, 404–408.
Li, X., Xiao, Z., Han, J., Chen, L., Xiao, H., Ma, F., Hou, X., Li, X., Sun, J., Ding, W., et al.,
2013. Promotion of neuronal diﬀerentiation of neural progenitor cells by using EGFR
antibody functionalized collagen scaﬀolds for spinal cord injury repair. Biomaterials
34, 5107–5116.
Li, X., Floriddia, E.M., Toskas, K., Fernandes, K.J.L., Guerout, N., Barnabe-Heider, F.,
2016. Regenerative potential of ependymal cells for spinal cord injuries over time.
EBioMedicine 13, 55–65.
Lim, D.A., Alvarez-Buylla, A., 2016. The adult ventricular–subventricular zone (V-SVZ)
and olfactory bulb (OB) neurogenesis. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 8, a018820.
Lin, J.F., Pan, H.C., Ma, L.P., Shen, Y.Q., Schachner, M., 2012. The cell neural adhesion
molecule contactin-2 (TAG-1) is beneﬁcial for functional recovery after spinal cord
injury in adult zebraﬁsh. PLoS One 7, e52376.
Liu, K., Wang, Z., Wang, H., Zhang, Y., 2002. Nestin expression and proliferation of
ependymal cells in adult rat spinal cord after injury. Chin. Med. J. 115, 339–341.
Liu, C.J., Xie, L., Cui, C., Chu, M., Zhao, H.D., Yao, L., Li, Y.H., Schachner, M., Shen, Y.Q.,
2016. Beneﬁcial roles of melanoma cell adhesion molecule in spinal cord transection
recovery in adult zebraﬁsh. J. Neurochem. 139, 187–196.
Lowery, L.A., Sive, H., 2004. Strategies of vertebrate neurulation and a re-evaluation of
teleost neural tube formation. Mech. Dev. 121, 1189–1197.
Lu, P., Wang, Y., Graham, L., McHale, K., Gao, M., Wu, D., Brock, J., Blesch, A.,
Rosenzweig, E.S., Havton, L.A., et al., 2012. Long-distance growth and connectivity
of neural stem cells after severe spinal cord injury. Cell 150, 1264–1273.
Lu, P., Woodruﬀ, G., Wang, Y., Graham, L., Hunt, M., Wu, D., Boehle, E., Ahmad, R.,
Poplawski, G., Brock, J., et al., 2014. Long-distance axonal growth from human in-
duced pluripotent stem cells after spinal cord injury. Neuron 83, 789–796.
Magnusson, J.P., Frisen, J., 2016. Stars from the darkest night: unlocking the neurogenic
potential of astrocytes in diﬀerent brain regions. Development 143, 1075–1086.
Maikos, J.T., Shreiber, D.I., 2007. Immediate damage to the blood-spinal cord barrier due
to mechanical trauma. J. Neurotrauma 24, 492–507.
Marichal, N., Garcia, G., Radmilovich, M., Trujillo-Cenoz, O., Russo, R.E., 2009.
Enigmatic central canal contacting cells: immature neurons in "standby mode"? J.
Neurosci. 29, 10010–10024.
Martens, D.J., Seaberg, R.M., Van Der Kooy, D., 2002. In vivo infusions of exogenous
growth factors into the fourth ventricle of the adult mouse brain increase the pro-
liferation of neural progenitors around the fourth ventricle and the central canal of
the spinal cord. Eur. J. Neurosci. 16, 1045–1057.
Matthews, M., Onge, M.S., Faciane, C., 1979. An electron microscopic analysis of ab-
normal ependymal cell proliferation and envelopment of sprouting axons following
spinal cord transection in the rat. Acta Neuropathol. 45, 27–36.
McDonough, A., Martínez-Cerdeño, V., 2012. Endogenous proliferation after spinal cord
injury in animal models. Stem Cells Int. 2012.
McHedlishvili, L., Epperlein, H.H., Telzerow, A., Tanaka, E.M., 2007. A clonal analysis of
neural progenitors during axolotl spinal cord regeneration reveals evidence for both
spatially restricted and multipotent progenitors. Development 134, 2083–2093.
Meletis, K., Barnabé-Heider, F., Carlén, M., Evergren, E., Tomilin, N., Shupliakov, O.,
Frisén, J., 2008. Spinal cord injury reveals multilineage diﬀerentiation of ependymal
cells. PLoS Biol. 6, e182.
Merino, J.J., Bellver-Landete, V., Oset-Gasque, M.J., Cubelos, B., 2015. CXCR4/CXCR7
molecular involvement in neuronal and neural progenitor migration: focus in CNS
repair. J. Cell. Physiol. 230, 27–42.
Milhorat, T.H., Kotzen, R.M., Anzil, A.P., 1994. Stenosis of central canal of spinal cord in
man: incidence and pathological ﬁndings in 232 autopsy cases. J. Neurosurg. 80,
716–722.
Mirzadeh, Z., Merkle, F.T., Soriano-Navarro, M., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., Alvarez-Buylla,
A., 2008. Neural stem cells confer unique pinwheel architecture to the ventricular
surface in neurogenic regions of the adult brain. Cell Stem Cell 3, 265–278.
Mladinic, M., Bianchetti, E., Dekanic, A., Mazzone, G.L., Nistri, A., 2014. ATF3 is a novel
nuclear marker for migrating ependymal stem cells in the rat spinal cord. Stem Cell
Res. 12, 815–827.
Mokalled, M.H., Patra, C., Dickson, A.L., Endo, T., Stainier, D.Y., Poss, K.D., 2016. Injury-
induced ctgfa directs glial bridging and spinal cord regeneration in zebraﬁsh. Science
354, 630–634.
Moreno-Manzano, V., Rodriguez-Jimenez, F.J., Garcia-Rosello, M., Lainez, S., Erceg, S.,
Calvo, M.T., Ronaghi, M., Lloret, M., Planells-Cases, R., Sanchez-Puelles, J.M., et al.,
2009. Activated spinal cord ependymal stem cells rescue neurological function. Stem
Cells 27, 733–743.
Motavkin, P., Bakhtinov, A., 1973. Postnatal development of human spinal cord epen-
dymal innervation. Neurosci. Behav. Physiol. 6, 253–259.
Mothe, A., Tator, C., 2005. Proliferation, migration, and diﬀerentiation of endogenous
ependymal region stem/progenitor cells following minimal spinal cord injury in the
adult rat. Neuroscience 131, 177–187.
Mothe, A.J., Zahir, T., Santaguida, C., Cook, D., Tator, C.H., 2011. Neural stem/pro-
genitor cells from the adult human spinal cord are multipotent and self-renewing and
diﬀerentiate after transplantation. PLoS One 6, e27079.
Nakayama, Y., Kohno, K., 1974. Number and polarity of the ependymal cilia in the central
canal of some vertebrates. J. Neurocytol. 3, 449–458.
Namiki, J., Tator, C.H., 1999. Cell proliferation and nestin expression in the ependyma of
the adult rat spinal cord after injury. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 58, 489–498.
North, H.A., Pan, L., McGuire, T.L., Brooker, S., Kessler, J.A., 2015. β1-Integrin alters
ependymal stem cell BMP receptor localization and attenuates astrogliosis after
spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 35, 3725–3733.
Ogai, K., Nakatani, K., Hisano, S., Sugitani, K., Koriyama, Y., Kato, S., 2014. Function of
Sox2 in ependymal cells of lesioned spinal cords in adult zebraﬁsh. Neurosci. Res. 88,
84–87.
Ohnmacht, J., Yang, Y., Maurer, G.W., Barreiro-Iglesias, A., Tsarouchas, T.M., Wehner,
D., Sieger, D., Becker, C.G., Becker, T., 2016. Spinal motor neurons are regenerated
after mechanical lesion and genetic ablation in larval zebraﬁsh. Development 143,
1464–1474.
Orendáčová, J., Račeková, E., Kuchárová, K., Poušová, B., Ondrejčák, T., Martončíková,
M., Daxnerová, Z., Maršala, J., 2004. Ependyma as a possible morphological basis of
ischemic preconditioning tolerance in rat spinal cord ischemia model: nestin and
Fluoro-Jade B observations. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 24, 477–489.
Orts-Del’Immagine, A., Kastner, A., Tillement, V., Tardivel, C., Trouslard, J.,
Wanaverbecq, N., 2014. Morphology, distribution and phenotype of polycystin
kidney disease 2-like 1-positive cerebrospinal ﬂuid contacting neurons in the brain-
stem of adult mice. PLoS One 9, e87748.
Orts-Del’Immagine, A., Trouslard, J., Airault, C., Hugnot, J.P., Cordier, B., Doan, T.,
Kastner, A., Wanaverbecq, N., 2017. Postnatal maturation of mouse medullo-spinal
cerebrospinal ﬂuid-contacting neurons. Neuroscience 343, 39–54.
Oumesmar, B.N., Vignais, L., Duhamel- Clérin, E., Avellana- Adalid, V., Rougon, G.,
Evercooren, A., 1995. Expression of the highly polysialylated neural cell adhesion
molecule during postnatal myelination and following chemically induced demyeli-
nation of the adult mouse spinal cord. Eur. J. Neurosci. 7, 480–491.
Pan, H.C., Lin, J.F., Ma, L.P., Shen, Y.Q., Schachner, M., 2013. Major vault protein pro-
motes locomotor recovery and regeneration after spinal cord injury in adult zebra-
ﬁsh. Eur. J. Neurosci. 37, 203–211.
Park, E., Velumian, A.A., Fehlings, M.G., 2004. The role of excitotoxicity in secondary
mechanisms of spinal cord injury: a review with an emphasis on the implications for
white matter degeneration. J. Neurotrauma 21, 754–774.
Pastrana, E., Cheng, L.-C., Doetsch, F., 2009. Simultaneous prospective puriﬁcation of
adult subventricular zone neural stem cells and their progeny. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
(U. S. A.) 106, 6387–6392.
Peters, C.M., Rogers, S.D., Pomonis, J.D., Egnazyck, G.F., Keyser, C.P., Schmidt, J.A.,
Ghilardi, J.R., Maggio, J.E., Mantyh, P.W., 2003. Endothelin receptor expression in
the normal and injured spinal cord: potential involvement in injury-induced ischemia
and gliosis. Exp. Neurol. 180, 1–13.
Petracca, Y.L., Sartoretti, M.M., Di Bella, D.J., Marin-Burgin, A., Carcagno, A.L., Schinder,
A.F., Lanuza, G.M., 2016. The late and dual origin of cerebrospinal ﬂuid-contacting
neurons in the mouse spinal cord. Development 143, 880–891.
Pfenninger, C.V., Steinhoﬀ, C., Hertwig, F., Nuber, U.A., 2011. Prospectively isolated
CD133/CD24‐positive ependymal cells from the adult spinal cord and lateral ven-
tricle wall diﬀer in their long‐term in vitro self‐renewal and in vivo gene expression.
Glia 59, 68–81.
Pontes, A., Zhang, Y., Hu, W., 2013. Novel functions of GABA signaling in adult neuro-
genesis. Front. Biol. 8, 496–507.
Quiñones- Hinojosa, A., Sanai, N., Soriano- Navarro, M., Gonzalez- Perez, O., Mirzadeh,
Z., Gil- Perotin, S., Romero- Rodriguez, R., Berger, M.S., Garcia- Verdugo, J.M.,
Alvarez- Buylla, A., 2006. Cellular composition and cytoarchitecture of the adult
human subventricular zone: a niche of neural stem cells. J. Comp. Neurol. 494,
415–434.
Ravanelli, A.M., Appel, B., 2015. Motor neurons and oligodendrocytes arise from distinct
cell lineages by progenitor recruitment. Genes Dev. 29, 2504–2515.
Reichenbach, A., Wolburg, W., 2013. Astrocytes and ependymal glia. In: Kettenmann, H.,
Ransom, B.R. (Eds.), Neuroglia. Oxford University Press pp. 35-49.
Reimer, M.M., Sorensen, I., Kuscha, V., Frank, R.E., Liu, C., Becker, C.G., Becker, T., 2008.
Motor neuron regeneration in adult zebraﬁsh. J. Neurosci. 28, 8510–8516.
Reimer, M.M., Kuscha, V., Wyatt, C., Sorensen, I., Frank, R.E., Knuwer, M., Becker, T.,
Becker, C.G., 2009. Sonic hedgehog is a polarized signal for motor neuron re-
generation in adult zebraﬁsh. J. Neurosci. 29, 15073–15082.
Reimer, M.M., Norris, A., Ohnmacht, J., Patani, R., Zhong, Z., Dias, T.B., Kuscha, V.,
Scott, A.L., Chen, Y.C., Rozov, S., et al., 2013. Dopamine from the brain promotes
spinal motor neuron generation during development and adult regeneration. Dev.
Cell 25, 478–491.
Ren, Y., Ao, Y., O’Shea, T.M., Burda, J.E., Bernstein, A.M., Brumm, A.J., Muthusamy, N.,
C.G. Becker et al.
Progress in Neurobiology 170 (2018) 67–80
79

Ghashghaei, H.T., Carmichael, S.T., Cheng, L., 2017. Ependymal cell contribution to
scar formation after spinal cord injury is minimal, local and dependent on direct
ependymal injury. Sci. Rep. 7.
Ribeiro, A., Monteiro, J.F., Certal, A.C., Cristovao, A.M., Saude, L., 2017. Foxj1a is ex-
pressed in ependymal precursors, controls central canal position and is activated in
new ependymal cells during regeneration in zebraﬁsh. Open Biol. 7.
Rodriguez, E.M., Blazquez, J.L., Pastor, F.E., Pelaez, B., Pena, P., Peruzzo, B., Amat, P.,
2005. Hypothalamic tanycytes: a key component of brain-endocrine interaction. Int.
Rev. Cytol. 247, 89–164.
Rusanescu, G., 2016. Adult spinal cord neurogenesis: a regulator of nociception.
Neurogenesis 3, e1256853.
Rusanescu, G., Mao, J., 2015. Immature spinal cord neurons are dynamic regulators of
adult nociceptive sensitivity. J. Cell. Mol. Med. 19, 2352–2364.
Rusanescu, G., Mao, J., 2017. Peripheral nerve injury induces adult brain neurogenesis
and remodelling. J. Cell. Mol. Med. 21, 299–314.
Sabelström, H., Stenudd, M., Réu, P., Dias, D.O., Elﬁneh, M., Zdunek, S., Damberg, P.,
Göritz, C., Frisén, J., 2013. Resident neural stem cells restrict tissue damage and
neuronal loss after spinal cord injury in mice. Science 342, 637–640.
Sabourin, J.C., Ackema, K.B., Ohayon, D., Guichet, P.O., Perrin, F.E., Garces, A., Ripoll,
C., Charité, J., Simonneau, L., Kettenmann, H., 2009. A Mesenchymal‐Like ZEB1+
Niche Harbors Dorsal Radial Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein‐Positive Stem Cells in the
Spinal Cord. Stem Cells 27, 2722–2733.
Sakakibara, A., Aoki, E., Hashizume, Y., Mori, N., Nakayama, A., 2007. Distribution of
nestin and other stem cell‐related molecules in developing and diseased human spinal
cord. Pathol. Int. 57, 358–368.
Samaddar, S., Vazquez, K., Ponkia, D., Toruno, P., Sahbani, K., Begum, S., Abouelela, A.,
Mekhael, W., Ahmed, Z., 2017. Transspinal direct current stimulation modulates
migration and proliferation of adult newly born spinal cells in mice. J. Appl. Physiol.
(1985) 122, 339–353.
Sanai, N., Tramontin, A.D., Quinones-Hinojosa, A., Barbaro, N.M., 2004. Unique astrocyte
ribbon in adult human brain contains neural stem cells but lacks chain migration.
Nature 427, 740.
Sarnat, H.B., 1992. Regional diﬀerentiation of the human fetal ependyma: im-
munocytochemical markers. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 51, 58–75.
Sawamoto, K., Hirota, Y., Alfaro- Cervello, C., Soriano- Navarro, M., He, X., Hayakawa-
Yano, Y., Yamada, M., Hikishima, K., Tabata, H., Iwanami, A., 2011. Cellular com-
position and organization of the subventricular zone and rostral migratory stream in
the adult and neonatal common marmoset brain. J. Comp. Neurol. 519, 690–713.
Schnapp, E., Kragl, M., Rubin, L., Tanaka, E.M., 2005. Hedgehog signaling controls
dorsoventral patterning, blastema cell proliferation and cartilage induction during
axolotl tail regeneration. Development 132, 3243–3253.
Schweitzer, J., Becker, T., Becker, C.G., Schachner, M., 2003. Expression of protein zero is
increased in lesioned axon pathways in the central nervous system of adult zebraﬁsh.
Glia 41, 301–317.
Seitz, R., Lohler, J., Schwendemann, G., 1981. Ependyma and meninges of the spinal cord
of the mouse. A light-and electron-microscopic study. Cell Tissue Res. 220, 61–72.
Setoguchi, T., Nakashima, K., Takizawa, T., Yanagisawa, M., Ochiai, W., Okabe, M., Yone,
K., Komiya, S., Taga, T., 2004. Treatment of spinal cord injury by transplantation of
fetal neural precursor cells engineered to express BMP inhibitor. Exp. Neurol. 189,
33–44.
Sevc, J., Daxnerova, Z., Miklosova, M., 2009. Role of radial glia in transformation of the
primitive lumen to the central canal in the developing rat spinal cord. Cell. Mol.
Neurobiol. 29, 927–936.
Sevc, J., Matiasova, A., Kutna, V., Daxnerova, Z., 2014. Evidence that the central canal
lining of the spinal cord contributes to oligodendrogenesis during postnatal devel-
opment and adulthood in intact rats. J. Comp. Neurol. 522, 3194–3207.
Sharp, K.G., Yee, K.M., Steward, O., 2014. A re-assessment of long distance growth and
connectivity of neural stem cells after severe spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol. 257,
186–204.
Shechter, R., Ziv, Y., Schwartz, M., 2007. New GABAergic interneurons supported by
myelin‐speciﬁc T cells are formed in intact adult spinal cord. Stem Cells 25,
2277–2282.
Shechter, R., Baruch, K., Schwartz, M., Rolls, A., 2011. Touch gives new life: mechan-
osensation modulates spinal cord adult neurogenesis. Mol. Psychiatry 16, 342.
Shibuya, S., Miyamoto, O., Auer, R., Itano, T., Mori, S., Norimatsu, H., 2002. Embryonic
intermediate ﬁlament, nestin, expression following traumatic spinal cord injury in
adult rats. Neuroscience 114, 905–916.
Shihabuddin, L.S., Horner, P.J., Ray, J., Gage, F.H., 2000. Adult spinal cord stem cells
generate neurons after transplantation in the adult dentate gyrus. J. Neurosci. 20,
8727–8735.
Siegenthaler, J.A., Pleasure, S.J., 2011. We have got you ‘covered': how the meninges
control brain development. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 21, 249–255.
Sirko, S., Behrendt, G., Johansson, P.A., Tripathi, P., Costa, M.R., Bek, S., Heinrich, C.,
Tiedt, S., Colak, D., Dichgans, M., 2013. Reactive glia in the injured brain acquire
stem cell properties in response to sonic hedgehog. Cell Stem Cell 12, 426–439.
Spassky, N., Merkle, F.T., Flames, N., Tramontin, A.D., García-Verdugo, J.M., Alvarez-
Buylla, A., 2005. Adult ependymal cells are postmitotic and are derived from radial
glial cells during embryogenesis. J. Neurosci. 25, 10–18.
Stenudd, M., Sabelstrom, H., Frisen, J., 2015. Role of endogenous neural stem cells in
spinal cord injury and repair. JAMA Neurol. 72, 235–237.
Stoeckel, M.E., Uhl-Bronner, S., Hugel, S., Veinante, P., Klein, M.J., Mutterer, J., Freund-
Mercier, M.J., Schlichter, R., 2003. Cerebrospinal ﬂuid-contacting neurons in the rat
spinal cord, a gamma-aminobutyric acidergic system expressing the P2X2 subunit of
purinergic receptors, PSA-NCAM, and GAP-43 immunoreactivities: light and electron
microscopic study. J. Comp. Neurol. 457, 159–174.
Strand, N.S., Hoi, K.K., Phan, T.M., Ray, C.A., Berndt, J.D., Moon, R.T., 2016. Wnt/beta-
catenin signaling promotes regeneration after adult zebraﬁsh spinal cord injury.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 477, 952–956.
Sturrock, R., 1981. An electron microscopic study of the development of the ependyma of
the central canal of the mouse spinal cord. J. Anat. 132, 119.
Takahashi, M., Arai, Y., Kurosawa, H., Sueyoshi, N., Shirai, S., 2003. Ependymal cell
reactions in spinal cord segments after compression injury in adult rat. J.
Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 62, 185–194.
Tanaka, O., Yoshioka, T., Shinohara, H., 1988. Secretory activity in the ﬂoor plate neu-
roepithelium of the developing human spinal cord: morphological evidence. Anat.
Rec. 222, 185–190.
Tazaki, A., Tanaka, E.M., Fei, J.F., 2017. Salamander spinal cord regeneration: the ulti-
mate positive control in vertebrate spinal cord regeneration. Dev. Biol. 432, 63–71.
Titze, B., Genoud, C., 2016. Volume scanning electron microscopy for imaging biological
ultrastructure. Biol. Cell 108, 307–323.
Tysseling, V.M., Mithal, D., Sahni, V., Birch, D., Jung, H., Miller, R.J., Kessler, J.A., 2011.
SDF1 in the dorsal corticospinal tract promotes CXCR4+ cell migration after spinal
cord injury. J. Neuroinﬂamm. 8, 16.
Vaquero, J., Ramiro, M., Oya, S., Cabezudo, J., 1981. Ependymal reaction after experi-
mental spinal cord injury. Acta Neurochir. 55, 295–302.
Vessal, M., Aycock, A., Garton, M.T., Ciferri, M., Darian- Smith, C., 2007. Adult neuro-
genesis in primate and rodent spinal cord: comparing a cervical dorsal rhizotomy
with a dorsal column transection. Eur. J. Neurosci. 26, 2777–2794.
Vigh, B., Frank, C., Vincze, C., Czirok, S., Szabó, A., Lukáts, A., Szél, A., 2004. The system
of cerebrospinal ﬂuid-contacting neurons. Its supposed role in the nonsynaptic signal
transmission of the brain. Histol. Histopathol. 19, 607–628.
von Lenhossék, M., 1891. Zur Kenntnis der Neuroglia des menschlichen Rückenmarkes.
Verh. Anat. Ges. 5, 193–221.
Wagner, M., Thaller, C., Jessell, T., Eichele, G., 1990. Polarizing activity and retinoid
synthesis in the ﬂoor plate of the neural tube. Nature 345, 819.
Wehner, D., Tsarouchas, T.M., Michael, A., Haase, C., Weidinger, G., Reimer, M.M.,
Becker, T., Becker, C.G., 2017. Wnt signaling controls pro-regenerative collagen XII in
functional spinal cord regeneration in zebraﬁsh. Nat. Commun. 8, 126.
Weiss, S., Dunne, C., Hewson, J., Wohl, C., Wheatley, M., Peterson, A.C., Reynolds, B.A.,
1996. Multipotent CNS stem cells are present in the adult mammalian spinal cord and
ventricular neuroaxis. J. Neurosci. 16, 7599–7609.
Weller, M., Wick, W., Aldape, K., Brada, M., Berger, M., Pﬁster, S.M., Nishikawa, R.,
Rosenthal, M., Wen, P.Y., Stupp, R., et al., 2015. Glioma. Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers 1,
15017.
White, B.D., Nathe, R.J., Maris, D.O., Nguyen, N.K., Goodson, J.M., Moon, R.T., Horner,
P.J., 2010. β- Catenin signaling increases in proliferating NG2++ progenitors and
astrocytes during post‐traumatic gliogenesis in the adult brain. Stem Cells 28,
297–307.
White, D.T., Eroglu, A.U., Wang, G., Zhang, L., Sengupta, S., Ding, D., Rajpurohit, S.K.,
Walker, S.L., Ji, H., Qian, J., et al., 2016. ARQiv-HTS, a versatile whole-organism
screening platform enabling in vivo drug discovery at high-throughput rates. Nat.
Protoc. 11, 2432–2453.
Wilson, L., Maden, M., 2005. The mechanisms of dorsoventral patterning in the vertebrate
neural tube. Dev. Biol. 282, 1–13.
Xu, Y., Kitada, M., Yamaguchi, M., Dezawa, M., Ide, C., 2006. Increase in bFGF-responsive
neural progenitor population following contusion injury of the adult rodent spinal
cord. Neurosci. Lett. 397, 174–179.
Xu, W., Sachewsky, N., Azimi, A., Hung, M., Gappasov, A., Morshead, C.M., 2017. Myelin
basic protein regulates primitive and deﬁnitive neural stem cell proliferation from the
adult spinal cord. Stem Cells 35, 485–496.
Yamamoto, S.-i., Nagao, M., Sugimori, M., Kosako, H., Nakatomi, H., Yamamoto, N.,
Takebayashi, H., Nabeshima, Y.-i., Kitamura, T., Weinmaster, G., 2001. Transcription
factor expression and Notch-dependent regulation of neural progenitors in the adult
rat spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 21, 9814–9823.
Yang, H., Lu, P., McKay, H.M., Bernot, T., Keirstead, H., Steward, O., Gage, F.H.,
Edgerton, V.R., Tuszynski, M.H., 2006. Endogenous neurogenesis replaces oligo-
dendrocytes and astrocytes after primate spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 26,
2157–2166.
Yanger, K., Knigin, D., Zong, Y., Maggs, L., Gu, G., Akiyama, H., Pikarsky, E., Stanger,
B.Z., 2014. Adult hepatocytes are generated by self-duplication rather than stem cell
diﬀerentiation. Cell Stem Cell 15, 340–349.
Yao, L., Li, Y., 2016. The role of direct current electric ﬁeld-guided stem cell migration in
neural regeneration. Stem Cell Rev. 12, 365–375.
Yasui, K., Hashizume, Y., Yoshida, M., Kameyama, T., Sobue, G., 1999. Age-related
morphologic changes of the central canal of the human spinal cord. Acta
Neuropathol. 97, 253–259.
Yin, L., Maddison, L.A., Chen, W., 2016. Multiplex conditional mutagenesis in zebraﬁsh
using the CRISPR/Cas system. Methods Cell. Biol. 135, 3–17.
Yu, Y., Schachner, M., 2013. Syntenin-a promotes spinal cord regeneration following
injury in adult zebraﬁsh. Eur J. Neurosci. 38, 2280–2289.
Yu, K., McGlynn, S., Matise, M.P., 2013. Floor plate-derived sonic hedgehog regulates
glial and ependymal cell fates in the developing spinal cord. Development 140,
1594–1604.
Zamora, A.J., 1978. The ependymal and glial conﬁguration in the spinal cord of urodeles.
Anat. Embryol. (Berl.) 154, 67–82.
Zappaterra, M.W., Lehtinen, M.K., 2012. The cerebrospinal ﬂuid: regulator of neuro-
genesis, behavior, and beyond. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 69, 2863–2878.
C.G. Becker et al.
Progress in Neurobiology 170 (2018) 67–80
80

===== Belrose2020_BMCGenomics_OpticN+CNS+XenopusRegeneration =====
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Open Access
Comparative gene expression profiling
between optic nerve and spinal cord injury
in Xenopus laevis reveals a core set of
genes inherent in successful regeneration
of vertebrate central nervous system axons
Jamie L. Belrose1,2, Aparna Prasad1,2, Morgan A. Sammons1, Kurt M. Gibbs3 and Ben G. Szaro1,2*
Abstract
Background: The South African claw-toed frog, Xenopus laevis, is uniquely suited for studying differences between
regenerative and non-regenerative responses to CNS injury within the same organism, because some CNS neurons
(e.g., retinal ganglion cells after optic nerve crush (ONC)) regenerate axons throughout life, whereas others (e.g.,
hindbrain neurons after spinal cord injury (SCI)) lose this capacity as tadpoles metamorphose into frogs. Tissues
from these CNS regions (frog ONC eye, tadpole SCI hindbrain, frog SCI hindbrain) were used in a three-way RNA-
seq study of axotomized CNS axons to identify potential core gene expression programs for successful CNS axon
regeneration.
Results: Despite tissue-specific changes in expression dominating the injury responses of each tissue, injury-
induced changes in gene expression were nonetheless shared between the two axon-regenerative CNS regions
that were not shared with the non-regenerative region. These included similar temporal patterns of gene
expression and over 300 injury-responsive genes. Many of these genes and their associated cellular functions had
previously been associated with injury responses of multiple tissues, both neural and non-neural, from different
species, thereby demonstrating deep phylogenetically conserved commonalities between successful CNS axon
regeneration and tissue regeneration in general. Further analyses implicated the KEGG adipocytokine signaling
pathway, which links leptin with metabolic and gene regulatory pathways, and a novel gene regulatory network
with genes regulating chromatin accessibility at its core, as important hubs in the larger network of injury response
genes involved in successful CNS axon regeneration.
(Continued on next page)
© The Author(s). 2020 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the
data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.
* Correspondence: bszaro@albany.edu
1Department of Biological Sciences, University at Albany, State University of
New York, 1400 Washington Avenue, Albany, NY 12222, USA
2Center for Neuroscience Research, University at Albany, State University of
New York, 1400 Washington Avenue, Albany, NY 12222, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-020-06954-8

(Continued from previous page)
Conclusions: This study identifies deep, phylogenetically conserved commonalities between CNS axon
regeneration and other examples of successful tissue regeneration and provides new targets for studying the
molecular underpinnings of successful CNS axon regeneration, as well as a guide for distinguishing pro-
regenerative injury-induced changes in gene expression from detrimental ones in mammals.
Keywords: Xenopus laevis, Spinal cord injury, Optic nerve injury, Axon regeneration, Central nervous system, RNA-
seq
Background
The capacity for regeneration is an ancient characteristic
of metazoa. Although many invertebrates can reconsti-
tute an entire body from residual tissue fragments [7,
60], vertebrates regenerate only tissues and organs. This
capacity becomes more restricted both phylogenetically
in the progression from anamniote to amniote and de-
velopmentally during the transition from embryo to
adult (Fig. 1a). For example, most vertebrates are able to
regenerate
peripheral
nervous
system
(PNS)
axons
throughout life and central nervous system (CNS) axons
as embryos, but only anamniotes can also regenerate
CNS axons as adults. Anuran amphibians, such as the
frog Xenopus laevis, occupy a transition point in this
progression [105]. Like other anamniotes, Xenopus re-
generates optic
axons sufficiently
to restore vision
throughout life [12, 39, 135], but like amniotes, it loses
its capacity to functionally regenerate spinal cord axons
developmentally, because of the surge of thyroid hor-
mone that drives metamorphosis in frogs [42] and late
fetal development in mammals [8]. Thus, Xenopus offers
a unique opportunity for exploring within the same or-
ganism why some regions of the CNS lose their ability
to regenerate axons in development, whereas others re-
tain it. In this study, we exploited these features of Xen-
opus in a novel three-way comparison of RNA-seq data
from two regions of the CNS that regenerate axons, one
throughout life (juvenile frog eye after optic nerve crush
(ONC) [39, 127, 135]) and one that does so only transi-
ently, before and after this transition (tadpole vs. juvenile
frog hindbrain after spinal cord injury (SCI) [11, 43]), to
identify potential core features that distinguish CNS
axon-regenerative responses from failed ones.
With the exception of an mRNA-seq study in lamprey,
which demonstrated that the response of brain and
spinal cord to SCI indeed differ [48], previous genome-
wide expression studies on spinal cord regeneration have
focused on either the spinal cord itself, with the lesion at
the epicenter (Xenopus laevis tadpole and frog [70], tur-
tle [142], zebrafish [50]), or on a regenerating tail (e.g.,
salamander [87], Xenopus tropicalis tadpole [21, 55, 80,
102]). Such regeneration involves not only axon regener-
ation, but also considerable wound repair and tissue
restoration. Xenopus laevis hindbrain, which is the prin-
cipal source of descending axons that project from brain
to spinal cord [43, 143], provides an opportunity to
compare transcriptional responses to SCI between axon-
regenerative
and
non-regenerative
states
of
CNS
neurons and their support cells, separately from the
lesion site and its attendant wound repair and tissue res-
toration. Moreover, hindbrain neurons that regenerate
descending axons after SCI (i.e., reticular and raphe nu-
clei) in the tadpole are the very same cells that fail to do
so in the frog [43]. The Xenopus eye after ONC provides
a similar opportunity to study an injury response, separ-
ately from the injury site (Fig. 1d), but after metamor-
phosis. To date, genome wide studies in the regenerating
Xenopus visual system have been limited to SDS PAGE
[126, 128] and TRAP (RNA-Seq after Translating Ribo-
some Affinity Purification of mRNAs) studies [151].
Thus, both systems would benefit from baseline RNA-
Seq studies of their responses to axotomy.
In performing such an RNA-Seq study, we found that
the injury responses of the two regenerative tissues (frog
eye after ONC and tadpole hindbrain after SCI) shared
features in common with each other not seen in the
non-regenerative
tissue
(frog
hindbrain
after
SCI).
Injury-induced genes uniquely shared between the two
regenerative tissues included many previously implicated
in promoting cell survival and regeneration of neural
and non-neural tissues alike, and revealed cellular and
physiological processes potentially at the core of a suc-
cessful regenerative response to CNS injury. We offer
these results and the insights gained from their analyses
as a resource to stimulate new avenues of investigation
into the molecular underpinnings of successful recovery
from CNS traumatic injury.
Results
Experimental design – animal procedures, sample and
data collection, and Bioinformatic analyses
Studies documenting regeneration of CNS axons with
return of function after ONC in frogs and the transient
nature of functional recovery from SCI injury in tadpoles
go back decades [36, 125]. Although initially done in
other
species,
subsequent
studies
extended
these
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 2 of 27

Fig. 1 (See legend on next page.)
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 3 of 27

findings to Xenopus laevis [11, 39]. Electrophysiological
[40, 128], anatomical [33, 128, 152, 160], and ultrastruc-
tural [98] studies of X. laevis frog optic axon regener-
ation, as well as behavioral and anatomical studies of
tadpole SCI [11, 42, 43], both established the time
course of recovery and demonstrated true regeneration
of cut axons from surviving neurons, laying the founda-
tion for much subsequent work (e.g., reviewed in [68, 69,
127]). From these studies, three time points can be
gleaned for making appropriate comparisons between
the two systems (Fig. 1c): 1) an early phase of recovery
at three days, when histological studies observed regen-
erating axons in both systems first penetrate the lesion
[11, 160]; 2) the peak phase of regenerative axon out-
growth at seven days for SCI and eleven days for ONC,
when the density of regenerating hindbrain axons cross-
ing the lesion nears its peak [11, 42], and when regener-
ating optic axons fill the optic tract but have not yet
arrived at their targets in the tectum [160], respectively;
3) a late recovery phase at three weeks, when regenerat-
ing optic axons cover the tectum, but have not yet fully
restored a retinotopic map [128, 160], and behavioral re-
covery is largely but not yet complete in SCI [11, 42].
These
same
time
points
were
used
for
the
non-
regenerative juvenile frog SCI to obtain data on kinetic
differences.
In planning the workflow for this study (Fig. 1d), we
used the entire tissue encompassing the axotomized
neurons, because the cells responding to CNS injuries
also included interneurons [2], glia [84], macrophages
and other myeloid cells [45, 152], as well as the axoto-
mized neurons themselves. Analyzing complex tissues
requires efforts to reduce technical variation as much as
possible. By using animals of the same strain and from
the same supplier, preparing RNA and cDNA libraries in
parallel, and then mixing and sequencing all samples to-
gether on the same flow cells, we sought to minimize
technical variability, which is otherwise inherent in post
hoc comparisons derived from separate studies. To bal-
ance budgetary tradeoffs between read depth and the
statistical power gained from multiple biological repli-
cates, we sequenced at a nominal depth of 30 million
reads per sample, each of which was derived from either
five pooled hindbrains or six pooled eyes from co-reared
animals, with three such pooled biological replicates for
each condition at each time point [25]. This yielded 51
samples representing 17 conditions (Fig. 1e, F3). Because
SCI tadpoles were still developing, the unoperated con-
trols for each time point were age-matched and co-
reared. For juvenile frog SCI hindbrain, a single control
group sufficed for all three time points. For ONC, the
left, contralateral unoperated eye served as controls for
(See figure on previous page.)
Fig. 1 Using Xenopus laevis to discover prospective core genetic programs for functional recovery from central nervous system (CNS) injury. a
Xenopus laevis occupies a transition point in the phylogenetic decline (green to red) of functional recovery after CNS injury in vertebrates. Like
other anurans (yellow), X. laevis regenerates optic axons to restore vision throughout life, but only successfully regenerates spinal cord axons as
tadpoles. b A three-tissue comparison was designed to parse out core sets of genes most closely associated with successful CNS axon
regeneration. Injury-induced gene expression profiles (RNA-seq) were compared between two regenerative tissues [stage 53 tadpole hindbrain
after spinal cord transection (SCI) and 1–3 month, post-metamorphic, juvenile frog eye after optic nerve crush (ONC)] and a non-regenerative
tissue [1–3 month, post-metamorphic, juvenile frog hindbrain after SCI] to find injury-induced genes that were uniquely shared between the
regenerative CNS tissues but not with the non-regenerative one. c Previous histological, electrophysiological, and behavioral studies in X. laevis
were consulted to select three time points after optic nerve crush (ONC) and spinal cord transection (SCI) for making suitable comparisons
among the tissues - an early trauma phase, when damaged axons first begin to cross the lesion site (3 days), a peak period of maximal
regenerative axon outgrowth (7 days for SCI & 11 days for ONC), and a late period, after regenerative axon regrowth is largely completed, but
synaptic refinement and behavioral recovery continues (3 weeks) [11, 33, 40, 42, 43, 98, 126, 128, 152, 160]. d Scale drawing of the CNS
superimposed on the outline of a juvenile frog, to illustrate the injury sites and harvested tissues (ONC and SCI surgeries were done in separate
animals; the tadpole is not illustrated, but its hindbrain and spinal cord transection site were similar in location to those of juvenile frog). For
tadpole SCI, hindbrains were harvested from operated animals and age-matched unoperated controls (5 pooled hindbrains per biological
replicate, with 3 paired injury and control replicates per time point). For juvenile frog SCI, the same unoperated controls were used for all three
SCI time points (5 animals pooled into each of 3 biological replicates). For ONC, both eyes of juvenile frogs receiving an orbital nerve crush on
the right side were harvested; the right eye provided the ONC samples and the left, contralateral, unoperated eye provided the control (6 pooled
eyes for each of three biological replicates per time point). Three biological replicates of surgically naive eyes were also collected (see text). Red
bars indicate the anatomical locations of the optic nerve crush and spinal cord lesions. Dotted red arrows indicate the trajectories of the axons
injured by the surgeries whose cell bodies are located in the tissues sampled for RNA-seq. e Diagram summarizing the workflow of the study (see
text for details). f1–3 Summary characteristics of the RNA-seq data. f1, a histogram of the number of successfully aligned reads in each of the 51
samples (17 conditions, 3 biological replicates each). f2, an example of histograms of expression values [log10(FPKM)] per gene, averaged across
the biological replicates, normalized for the total number of genes assayed (Gene Density). Data for the 1 week SCI tadpole hindbrain (gray) is
superimposed upon that of its age-matched control (blue). The inflection point (dotted vertical line) was used to set a threshold for the fpkm of
actively expressed genes. Values below this were categorized as representing no expression. f3, Whisker plot summarizing the data dispersion for
all 17 conditions (3 biological replicates per condition). The median log10(FPKM) is represented as a horizontal line through the box, which in turn
delimits the 2nd (lower) and 3rd (upper) quartiles of the data. Whiskers illustrate the 1st and 4th quartiles, with their minimum and maximum
values, respectively. Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; Cntrl, control; FPKM, fragments per kilobase of exon mapped; Juv., juvenile frog;
ONC, optic nerve crush; SCI, spinal cord injury; Tad., tadpole; Tx, transection; Unop, unoperated
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 4 of 27

each time point to further distinguish effects directly as-
sociated with axon regeneration from indirect injury re-
sponses [126, 128]. This is important because the
unoperated contralateral eye also responds to a unilat-
eral nerve crush through indirect effects on retinal cir-
cuitry [3, 41, 127]. To assay this indirect response, we
included for eye an extra control group of surgically
naive, unoperated animals for future studies; this group
was included in the PCA but was not used otherwise for
differential gene expression analysis (see below).
Fastq files containing the sorted raw sequences were
aligned against the Xenopus laevis genome (Xenbase
v9.1; http://www.xenbase.org/ RRID:SCR_003280) using
Bowtie2 (v2.2.9) [66] and TopHat (v2.1.1) [138], and an-
notated using the Mayball gene model [24, 106, 108].
The alignments yielded 34.4 ± 3.1 (S.D.) million success-
fully aligned reads per sample (Fig. 1f1), with only 9.6 ±
2.9%, (S.D.) reads initially flagged as potentially duplicate
alignments. Such potential duplicates can occur in Xen-
opus laevis due to its ancestrally (~ 30 Mya) duplicated
genome [121]. The vast majority of these potential dupli-
cates were resolved by assigning the alignment with the
higher score to separate genes on different chromosomes
(referred to in X. laevis as S and L homeologs). For the
small remainder (< 10% of potentially duplicate align-
ments), reads were randomly distributed between the
two homeologs. To confirm the accuracy of this proced-
ure, we visualized a subset directly (Integrative Genom-
ics Viewer (IGV), v2.3.88 [115, 136]). The fastq files and
gene counts are both available in Gene Expression
Omnibus
(GEO;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/)
under accession number GSE137844. Note here that
gene nomenclature in Xenopus laevis is based on pro-
spective orthology with human genes [121]. Due to the
ancient genome duplication and long evolutionary diver-
gence time between X. laevis and human (> 300 Mya),
the L and S X. laevis homeologs may have more or fewer
paralogs than their human orthologs. For the initial gene
counts, we enumerated these separately, because dupli-
cate genes can have different expression patterns, poten-
tially leading to different functions [96, 116]. Generally
speaking, L homeologs are expressed at higher levels
than S homeologs [121], and not surprisingly, they ap-
peared more frequently than S homeologs in our gene
lists, since efficiency of gene calls tends to correlate with
expression level.
Functional comparisons
necessarily
combined homeologs and paralogs under a single gene
term, since most functional studies are done in other
species and we cannot a priori evaluate the significance
of homeologs and paralogs for these genes. In addition,
for this study, we looked only at genes that have been
annotated in X. laevis, since the principal aim was to
evaluate these genes with regard to what is known from
other models about function. We left the analysis of
fastq files for the biological significance of multiple
homeologs and paralogs, as well as of novel genes lack-
ing human orthologs and other gene features such as
long non-coding RNAs, to future studies. Nonetheless,
for the interested reader, we have noted in Additional_
File4_DESR_Data.xlsm
the
expression
behavior
of
remaining homeologs and paralogs that were not differ-
entially expressed in our current analysis.
To generate gene lists for downstream data analysis of
differentially expressed genes (Fig. 1e), we used Cuf-
flinks/CuffDiff2 [113, 114, 137, 139, 140] and the associ-
ated utilities of CummeRbund (v2.16.0) [139]. We made
this choice primarily because CuffDiff2 uses a paired
means test to estimate Type I errors (p-values) for each
gene pair, independently of other genes. For each pair-
wise comparison, these unadjusted p-values were then
ranked among the other pair-wise comparisons to assess
the probability of false discovery (q) [14]. Because sam-
ples were complex tissues, with multiple cell types po-
tentially responding differently to the lesion, we felt that
this procedure of evaluating each gene pair independ-
ently was biologically more appropriate for our study
than other programs, such as DESeq2, which use a dif-
ference of variance test that incorporates the variance of
all the genes in a sample into its calculations [4, 79]. In
addition, unlike DESeq2, CuffDiff2 normalizes genes for
transcript length, making it possible to compare expres-
sion levels (FPKM) among different genes. Although we
used the CuffDiff2 outputs for downstream analyses
(Additional_File1_Differential_Expression_Analysis_by_
Cuffdif.xlsm),
we
provide
DESeq2
outputs
for
the
interested reader (Additional_File2_Differential_Expres-
sion_Analysis_by_DESeq2.xlsm). Note that the overall
trends in the data with respect to temporal patterns of
differentially expressed genes and the degree of overlap
between
different
experiments
at
each
time
point
matched well between the two programs (seen by com-
paring the CuffDiff2 data of Fig. 2 with that of DESeq2
in Additional_File3_DESeq2_Metadata.pdf), except that
DESeq2 identified fewer differentially expressed genes
than CuffDiff2, with > 85% of them also called by
CuffDiff2.
We used an FDR ≤0.05 as the criterion for selecting
differentially expressed genes without regard to fold-
change, since cell types responding to axotomy represent
only a subset of cells in each tissue, and regulatory genes
typically exhibit smaller fold-changes in expression than
structural genes. We did, however, filter out genes with
expressions that fell below the minimal threshold in
both
the
experimental and
paired
control
samples
(FPKM = 0.45; Fig. 1f2 [47]). Under these criteria and
sampling conditions, differentially expressed genes gen-
erally had |log2(fold-changes)| > 0.3, and unadjusted p
values
of
< 0.02.
The
percentage
of
differentially
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 5 of 27

Fig. 2 (See legend on next page.)
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 6 of 27

expressed genes in each sample ranged from 1.4% (3 day,
juvenile frog ONC eye) to 11.6% (3 day juvenile frog SCI
hindbrain) of the total annotated X. laevis genome (Fig.
2b; 100% = 24,382 genes).
Identifying shared features of injury-induced gene
expression between axon-regenerative vs. non-
regenerative CNS
The principal goal of this study was to identify cellular
processes potentially shared between the two regenerative
cases that were not shared with the non-regenerative case.
The first indication that such processes existed came from
the
temporal
patterns
of
numbers
of
differentially
expressed genes (Fig. 2a). The numbers of such genes in
the axon-regenerative tadpole SCI hindbrain and juvenile
ONC eye both reached their maximum at the peak
phase
of
regenerative
axon
outgrowth
(7/11 days),
whereas that of the non-regenerative, juvenile frog
SCI hindbrain did so at 3 days.
To assess the degree to which these shared responses
involved the same genes, we examined at each time
point, the overlap among the three tissues (Fig. 2c,d,e).
This analysis identified 324 genes that were differentially
expressed in the two axon-regenerative CNS regions but
not in the non-regenerative one. We termed these genes
“Differentially Expressed in Successful Regeneration”
(DESR genes: 253 up-regulated; 71 down-regulated, with
some appearing at multiple time points). Although the
differentially expressed genes in each individual tissue
had a predicted FDR of < 0.05, because DESR genes were
the result of combining data from two independent ex-
periments,
their
expected
FDR
was
actually
much
smaller (< 0.052, which for 324 genes would be ~ 1 gene).
Overall, DESR genes comprised approximately 2.7%
(324/12,059)
of
all the
injury-induced,
differentially
expressed genes (Fig. 2c,d,e). This relatively small frac-
tion indicated that the vast majority of differentially
expressed
genes
in
each
tissue
represented
tissue-
specific responses to axotomy. The DESR expression
data, segregated by time point and including information
about related paralogs and homeologs, is provided in
Additional_File4_DESR_Data.xlsm. Meta analysis con-
ducted on DESeq2 data yielded very similar results
(Additional_File3_DESeq2_Metadata.pdf), indicating that
these findings were not simply an artifact of the differen-
tial expression algorithm.
We next used Principal Component Analysis to obtain
an overview of the relationships among gene expression
profiles of the various samples (Fig. 3). As implemented
in the Tuxedo Protocol (of which CuffDiff2 is a part),
PCA generates eigenvectors for each set of pooled bio-
logical replicates, with the angles between eigenvectors
indicating how well gene expression profiles are corre-
lated between conditions. Diminishing acute angles indi-
cate more highly correlated expression profiles, and
orthogonal and increasing divergent angles indicate
poorly and negatively correlated profiles, respectively.
When all 17 conditions were analyzed (Fig. 3a), the close
clustering of the eigenvectors of the eye samples and
their large divergence from the closely clustered hind-
brain vectors confirmed the conclusion from the overlap
analysis that tissue of origin exerted the strongest influ-
ence on expression profiles. Developmental stage, injury
condition, and time elapsed since injury exerted much
less influence. Separate PCA of only the SCI hindbrain
expression profiles (Fig. 3b) revealed that within this tis-
sue, regenerative capacity exerted the next strongest in-
fluence, with axon-regenerative tadpole eigenvectors
clustering separately from those of the non-regenerative
juvenile frog. As indicated by the angles between eigen-
vectors, the injury responses of the axon-regenerative
tadpole hindbrains differed more between the operated
samples and their age-matched, unoperated controls
than was the case for the non-regenerative frog hind-
brains, which were more tightly clustered. Moreover, the
large divergence between the SCI eigenvectors of their
respective peak time points for differential expression (7
days for tadpole and 3 days for frog) indicated that these
peak responses involved mostly different genes rather
than differences in the timing of differential expression
among the same genes. Similarly to tadpole SCI, the ei-
genvectors of the operated frog ONC eye also diverged
(See figure on previous page.)
Fig. 2 Temporal patterns of gene expression and shared injury-response genes between regenerative vs. non-regenerative tissues. a Regenerative
tissues [i.e., SCI tadpole hindbrain (SCI Tadpole) and ONC juvenile frog eye (ONC Juvenile)] shared similar temporal patterns of numbers of
significant (FDR < 0.05) differentially expressed genes, which differed markedly from that of the non-regenerative tissue [SCI juvenile frog
hindbrain (SCI Juvenile)]. Whereas the expression response of the two regenerative tissues peaked during the mid recovery phase (1 week/11
days), that of the non-regenerative tissue peaked at the early, post trauma phase (3 days). Up- and down-regulated genes are shown in green
and red, respectively; S & L gene homeologs were tallied separately. b Plot illustrating the percentage of annotated genes that were significantly
(FDR < 0.05) differentially expressed with injury (100% = 24,382 genes). Additional_File1_Differential_Expression_Analysis_by_Cuffdif.xlsm contains
the CuffDiff2 output files from which A and B were derived. c - e UpSet plots illustrating the number of genes overlapping between the samples
indicated by the circles below each bar at 3 days (c), 7/11 days (d), and 3 weeks (e) after injury. Numbers of shared up- and down-regulated
genes are indicated above and below each bar, respectively. The maximum number of overlapping genes between the two successfully
regenerative tissues (DESR: Differentially Expressed in Successful Regeneration) occurred during the peak phase of regenerative CNS axon
outgrowth. Additional_File4_DESR_Data.xlsm contains the DESR data
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 7 of 27

extensively from those of their paired, contralateral
unoperated eye controls (Fig. 3c). Also similar to tadpole
SCI, the close proximity of the 3-week operated and
contralateral unoperated eigenvectors with that of eyes
from unoperated animals (termed surgically naïve) fur-
ther indicated that by 3 weeks, the injury response had
nearly, but not quite, returned to the pre-injury state. In
addition, the divergence of the eigenvectors of all the
contralateral unoperated controls diverged from that of
surgically naive eye, consistent with the expectation aris-
ing from biochemical studies demonstrating that the
unoperated eye in a unilateral ONC also responds to the
injury [3, 41, 127]. This observation further supports our
decision to compare operated eye with its unoperated
contralateral control to better emphasize changes dir-
ectly associated with regenerating an axon, as opposed
to more generalized responses associated with the trau-
matic disruption of visual neural circuitry [3]. Because
the bilateral nature of SCI abrogated such a distinction
in hindbrain, this comparison in eye acted as an add-
itional filter in the three-way comparison, to resolve
those injury-induced differences most directly related to
axon regeneration from those related more generally to
trauma. Scatterplot PCAs (Additional_File5_PCA_Scat-
terplot.pdf) generally confirmed the eigenvector PCA
analyses, while revealing additional details about the
variability of individual biological replicates. For ex-
ample, the known variability of the ONC injury response
at its beginning [3, 41, 151] was readily visible in the
PCA scatterplots at 3 days. Similarly in the scatter-
plots of tadpole SCI hindbrain at 3 weeks, two of
three replicates of the operated animals clustered
closely with their age-matched unoperated controls,
suggesting that animals in these two groups had re-
covered more fully than had those of the third. Such
variability is consistent with the large amount of vari-
ability seen from behavioral studies of full recovery
times from SCI in tadpoles [11, 42].
Identifying functional processes in successful CNS axon
regeneration
An initial examination of DESR genes supported their
biological relevance to CNS axon regeneration, since
many had been previously implicated in aspects of
neural injury, including (but not exclusive to) axon re-
generation [e.g., socs3 (Suppressor of Cytokine Signaling
3 [32, 107, 134, 151]), leptin [9, 13], fabp7 (fatty acid
binding protein 7, a.k.a. brain-lipid binding protein [6,
42, 52, 111]), mapk8 (JNK1 [51, 97]), sox11 [95]; sdcbp
(syntenin [158]), and prph (peripherin [41, 84], among
Fig. 3 Eigenvector representation of the Principal Component Analyses (PCA) of gene expression profiles. Eigenvectors depict relative degrees of
similarity among data sets, as indicated. Black points represent individual genes plotted against the principal axes of similarity (PC1, PC2). a, PCA
of all 17 experimental conditions and controls. b, PCA of SCI hindbrain samples and their unoperated controls. c, PCA of ONC operated eye
expression profiles, as well as those of their paired, contralateral unoperated control eyes and eyes of uninjured animals (surgically naive).
Abbreviations: Cntrl, control hindbrain; Juv, juvenile (1–3 month post-metamorphic) frog; ONC, optic nerve crush; PC1, principal component axis 1;
PC2, Principal Component axis 2; SCI, spinal cord injured; Tx, spinal cord transection; Unop, unoperated eye, contralateral to the ONC; Wk, week.
Additional_File5_PCA_Scatterplot.pdf shows PCA scatterplots
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 8 of 27

others]. The hypothesis that CNS axon regeneration also
shares functional processes with other forms of tissue re-
generation was supported by some DESR genes having
been previously implicated in successful regeneration in
other contexts, including axolotl limb [e.g., tmsb4x [73,
109], anxa5 [62], and crabp2 [85])] and mammalian liver
[e.g., top2A (DNA topoisomerase 2a [28], C9 (comple-
ment C9 [112, 133]), and rrm2 (ribonucleoside reductase
regulatory subunit M2 [77])].
Thus, we felt justified in using DESR genes to further
explore potential cellular processes in successful CNS
axon regeneration. For this analysis, we combined two
approaches. First, we conducted an automated gene
ontology analysis (GO term; Metascape [141]) of the
DESR genes at the peak period of regenerative axon out-
growth (1 week/ 11 days for SCI hindbrain and ONC
eye, respectively), for significant enrichment (−log10(P) >
4) of processes associated with these genes. This analysis
primarily yielded GO terms related to cell division and
mitotic control, inflammatory responses, innate immun-
ity, wound healing, and stress responses, as well as terms
associated with RNA trafficking and turnover, JAK/
STAT signaling, development and differentiation, mye-
loid cell activity, control of gene expression and chroma-
tin remodeling, microfilament/microtubule dynamics,
and cellular metabolism. Because relatively few DESR
genes were represented at the early and late time points,
GO term analysis for these time points was less fruitful,
since many genes were omitted. Thus, we complemented
the GO term analysis with a manual survey of every
DESR gene’s known functions. For this stage of the ana-
lysis, we consulted PubMed and Gene Cards for the
known functions related to each gene’s orthologs across
species, paying special attention to functions related to
injury (both traumatic and disease-related) and regener-
ation (both neural and non-neural), as well as processes
identified by the GO term analysis. These functions are
listed for each gene individually in Additional_File4_
DESR_Data.xlsm. We then grouped DESR genes into
categories.
The
results
of
this
combined
summary
analysis, with genes arranged according to functional
categories and time of differential expression in axon-
regenerative CNS regions, are presented in Additional_
File6_DESR_Functional_Categories.pdf.
In this analysis, DESR genes fell into eleven such cat-
egories (Fig. 4; ordered from largest to smallest): Inflam-
matory Response and Wound Healing, Cytoskeletal, Cell
Signaling, Intracellular Transport, Post-transcriptional
Regulation of gene expression, Epigenetic control of
gene expression, Axon Outgrowth (tropic and trophic
effectors and inhibitors), DNA Replication/Repair, Lipid
Metabolism, Transcription Factors, and Cellular Metab-
olism. All eleven categories were represented during the
peak regenerative phase, reflecting the wide range of
cellular processes that are active then. Five of these
eleven were limited to just the peak phase, indicating
these processes were relatively inactive at other time
points: 1) Cell Signaling, 2) Intracellular Transport, 3)
Axon Outgrowth, 4) Lipid Metabolism, and 5) Cellular
Metabolism.
DNA Replication/Repair DESR genes were found at
only the early and middle time points. At the early time
point, one gene in this category was down-regulated in
successful but up-regulated in unsuccessful CNS axon
regeneration, suggesting it is important for determining
regenerative success (hp1bp3, a mitotic checkpoint pro-
tein involved in maintaining heterochromatin integrity
during the G1/S transition [30, 31]). At the middle time
point, 5 additional mitotic checkpoint proteins were up-
regulated, suggesting mitotic checkpoint-related genes
are especially important for promoting the peak phase of
regenerative outgrowth. Because injured neurons are
post-mitotic, these checkpoint genes may have other
functions in regeneration than regulating mitosis. In that
regard, mitotic checkpoint genes are increasingly under-
stood as important for giving cells time to rearrange
their chromosomes in preparation for major changes in
gene expression [90]. The remaining twelve up-regulated
genes at 7/11 days are typically considered to be more
directly involved in DNA replication and repair. They
may thus reflect the proliferation of glia and myeloid
cells that influence the injury response, since the axoto-
mized neurons themselves are post-mitotic. None of
these DNA Replication/Repair genes were found at 3
weeks, indicating that by this time, such activities were
no longer active.
The remaining five categories spanned all three time
points, providing insights into how these functions
evolved throughout recovery. The largest category com-
prised Inflammatory Response DESR genes. These genes
represented functions related to regulating inflamma-
tion, innate immunity, wound healing, and cell survival
responses, as well as tissue repair and regeneration. Such
genes are known principally from mammalian studies,
wherein inflammation is crucial for initiating and main-
taining pro-regenerative responses to injury [16]. How-
ever, because inflammation also damages tissues, it has
been
difficult
from
mammalian
studies
to
parse
inflammation-related pro-regenerative genes from those
detrimental to recovery. Their preferential up- or down-
regulation in Xenopus axon-regenerative CNS tissues
thus provides clues as to which genes are beneficial to
regeneration. Moreover, the involvement of many of
these genes in wound responses and inflammation is
known from studies that either included the injury site
or involved non-neural tissues, such as liver or fish tail
fin. Thus, their identification in this study also shows
their relevance extends more broadly, beyond tissue
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 9 of 27

Fig. 4 (See legend on next page.)
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 10 of 27

repair, to CNS axon regeneration. At the early time
point, up-regulated Inflammatory Response DESR genes
(i.e., recovery promoting) were dominated by ones typic-
ally considered pro-inflammatory (7 genes) and genes
activated by JAK/STAT signaling through cytokine re-
ceptors (3 genes). The two down-regulated genes in this
category (i.e., recovery inhibiting) at this early time point
were a cytokeratin that is otherwise up-regulated at
mammalian wound sites (krt6a) and a pro-inflammatory,
calcium-binding
protein
secreted
by
macrophages
(ocm2). At the middle time point marking the peak
axon-regenerative response, there were two up-regulated
pro-inflammatory genes held over from 3 days, and
seven
new
ones,
along
with
many
additional
up-
regulated genes implicated in other inflammatory and
wound-healing processes: protein ubiquitination and
turnover (11 genes), chaperones (4 genes), cell survival
and tissue repair (10 genes), stress response (7 genes),
myeloid cell activity (5 genes), and the transition from
M1 to M2 macrophages (3 genes). Conversely, down-
regulated DESR genes (i.e., regeneration inhibiting) at
the middle time point included genes previously associ-
ated with exacerbating inflammation, cell death, and scar
formation (10 genes), genes associated with oxidative
stress (2 genes), myeloid cell activities (2 genes), and
with maintaining the blood-brain barrier (1 genes), plus
a heat-shock protein (1 gene). At the late time point (3
weeks), all nine Inflammatory Response DESR genes
were up-regulated genes previously implicated in pro-
tecting cells from detrimental hyper-inflammation and
in promoting cellular repair and regeneration, mostly in
contexts not previously directly associated with CNS
axon regeneration.
The second largest category of DESR genes found at
all three time points were those associated with the cyto-
skeleton. At three days, all four cytoskeletal-related
DESR genes were down-regulated: two cytokeratins and
two specific actin subtypes. One of the cytokeratins,
krt6a (previously mentioned in wound healing), has been
previously associated with epithelial lesions in mice
[153]. Knocking it out makes such wounds more fragile
[153], suggesting that in the CNS, this gene helps re-
model
tissues
to
promote
early
stages
of
axon
outgrowth. Moreover, because our sampled tissues did
not include the lesion, this function is likely important
even at distances removed from the injury site itself. At
the peak phase of regenerative axon outgrowth, all the
cytoskeletal-related DESR genes were specific tubulin
and actin subtypes, along with proteins associated with
regulating
microtubule-
and
microfilament-mediated
transport and dynamics. All but four were up-regulated
(27 total). Collectively, they emphasized the importance
of microfilament and microtubule-associated dynamics
for axon outgrowth, intracellular transport, cell motility,
and
cellular
proliferation
for
successful
axon-
regeneration, while at the same time confirming and ex-
tending the identification of specific genes associated
with these processes in CNS axon regeneration. For ex-
ample, tuba1a and tubb2b, which are neuronal α- and
β-tubulin subtypes, had been previously associated with
developing and regenerating CNS axons [88, 144],
whereas
dynnl2,
a
minus
end-directed
microtubule
motor protein involved in the retrograde transport of
proteasomes, is novel to axon regeneration. At the late
time point, there were only two cytoskeletal-related
DESR genes, both of which were up-regulated. They
were an intermediate filament gene, prph (peripherin),
which was already known to be up-regulated in both re-
active glia and regenerating optic axons in Xenopus [41,
84]. Prph was also up-regulated in both regenerative and
non-regenerative cases at earlier time points, but its
preferential
up-regulation
at
3 weeks
in
axon-
regenerative CNS over non-regenerative CNS suggests
its importance in successful regeneration persists into
late recovery. The remaining up-regulated cytoskeletal-
related gene at 3 weeks, ebf3, has dual functions in pro-
moting microtubule bundling and as a transcription co-
factor that inhibits gliogenesis [17, 72], suggesting novel
functions for promoting recovery during the late phase.
The third category of DESR genes represented at all
three time points comprised genes involved in post-
transcriptional
control
of
gene
expression.
Post-
transcriptional control of gene expression is already
known to be important for successful CNS axon regen-
eration [51, 76], but the specific genes involved are still
being discovered. This study suggests new genes. For
(See figure on previous page.)
Fig. 4 Grouping DESR genes by known functions provided insights into processes underlying successful CNS axon regeneration. a Curating DESR
genes based on functions documented in the scientific literature (see text for details) parsed them into eleven categories. Vertical boxes outline
functional categories present at all three time points. Boxes with arrows list prominent functional sub-categories at the different time points (see
text for details). Green shades, upregulated genes; red shades, down-regulated genes (S & L homeologs tallied separately).b Pie charts display
data from (a) according to each category’s relative contribution (%) to the total number of DESR genes and are scaled in size to reflect the total
number of DESR genes at each time point (N). Additional_File6_DESR_Functional_Categories.pdf contains a list of the DESR genes, separated by
time point and category, along with relevant literature citations supporting the functional categorization. Because functions are mostly based on
mammalian studies, and Xenopus generally has more than one homeolog for each human gene, they are listed without regard to which
homeolog is differentially expressed. Detailed data for individual homeologs are in Additional_File4_DESR_Data.xlsm
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 11 of 27

example, at the early time point, DESR genes in this cat-
egory primarily reflected changes in translational control
of
mRNAs.
This
is
an
understudied,
potentially
important function for promoting successful recovery
from CNS injury, because stressed cells utilize cap-
independent mRNA translation to ensure that proteins
needed for survival are synthesized, while they simultan-
eously inhibit cap-dependent translation to facilitate cel-
lular reprogramming in preparation for the next phase
of the stress response [64]. Our data identified eif5b, a
translation
initiation
factor
that
promotes
IRES-
dependent mRNA translation [38], as one such gene po-
tentially important for CNS axon regeneration. Another
Post-transcriptional Regulation DESR gene at 3 days was
a 60S ribosomal protein, rplp1, which is essential for
brain development due to its effects on cyclin and p63
protein expression [103]. During neural development,
specific ribosomal proteins are often needed for selective
translation of individual mRNAs [132], and this gene
was down-regulated in the two regenerative tissues but
up-regulated in non-regenerative frog SCI hindbrain,
suggesting a purposeful role in determining regenerative
success. The middle time point saw the up-regulation,
and no down-regulation, of multiple Post-transcriptional
Regulation DESR genes, spanning a range of RNA-
related functions, including eight splicing factors, four
additional ribosomal subunits, five mRNA translation
initiation and elongation factors, and three regulators of
mRNA trafficking and turnover. These most likely repre-
sent post-translational aspects of the onset of expression
of the many genes involved in CNS axon regeneration.
Most of these DESR genes were newly implicated here
in CNS axon regeneration, although a few had been im-
plicated previously in related contexts. For example, two
up-regulated splicing factors, snrpd3 and snrpn, have
been
associated
with
neurodegeneration
in
Spinal
Muscular Atrophy [37] and with developmental axon
outgrowth [157], respectively. Prmt1 is the primary
methylase targeting hnRNP K [20], which is an RNA-
binding protein that regulates nuclear export and trans-
lation of cytoskeletal-related mRNAs essential for optic
axon regeneration in Xenopus [76]. Its selective up-
regulation in the two regenerative CNS regions suggests
a
previously
unrecognized
role
for
methylation
of
hnRNP K, as well as its histone targets, in recovery from
CNS trauma. The late recovery phase saw only the up-
regulation of two transcripts of RNA-binding proteins
that regulate trafficking, translation, and turnover of spe-
cific mRNAs: AldoA stabilizes mRNAs of neurofilaments
[19]), which consolidate axonal growth and expand axon
caliber once growing axons contact their targets [118,
120, 146]. Thus, this aldoA increase is consistent with 3
weeks being a phase of consolidation and refinement of
synaptic connections [128]. The other up-regulated
mRNA, mex3a, encodes an RNA-binding protein impli-
cated in regulating neurogenesis and degeneration [10],
suggestive of a previously unrecognized role for mex3a
target-transcripts in CNS axon regeneration.
The fourth most numerous category with representa-
tion at all 3 time points (26 genes) comprised genes im-
plicated in epigenetic control of gene expression, which
is increasingly recognized as crucial for regeneration of
organs and tissues in other contexts (reviewed in [83]).
At the 3-day time point, the two DESR genes in this cat-
egory were down-regulated, specialized histone variants:
hist1h4k, an H4 gene variant implicated in protecting
cells from DNA damage by facilitating DNA double
strand break repair [71], suggesting it may play a role
here in protecting injured cells; and hist2h2ab, an H2
gene variant involved in nucleosome repositioning in
preparation for transcription [119]). Nucleosome reposi-
tioning is a theme that persisted into the peak phase of
regenerative axon outgrowth, with hist2hab at this next
phase now switching from a down-regulated to an up-
regulated DESR gene, and five additional genes known
to be involved in nucleosome repositioning (four up-
regulated;
one
down-regulated)
appearing.
The
remaining 19 DESR genes in the Epigenetic category (13
up-regulated, 6 down-regulated) are all known to play
various roles in enzymatically modifying histones and
DNA through acetylation and methylation. Two of these
were down-regulated components of the Polycomb Re-
pressive Complex (PRC), newly implicating it here in
successful CNS axon regeneration, although the PRC
has already been implicated in tissue regeneration in
other contexts [23, 27, 81, 122]. One of these two PRC
genes, jarid2, persisted as the sole epigenetic-related
gene in the late recovery phase, when it continued to be
down-regulated.
The final DESR category represented at all three time
points comprised genes associated with transcriptional
control. At the earliest time point, only one such gene
was up-regulated, ddit3, which is a C/EBP-related tran-
scription factor needed to activate pro-inflammatory
signals [101]. Ddit3 has been previously reported as up-
regulated in response to optic nerve injury in mouse
[34] but had not been previously implicated in successful
CNS
axon
regeneration.
No
transcriptional
control
DESR genes were down-regulated at this early time
point. The peak phase of regenerative axon outgrowth
saw eight up-regulated and three down-regulated tran-
scription factors and co-factors. Two of the up-regulated
ones were already known from previous studies in mam-
mals to play important roles in SCI – hes5 and sox11
[56, 95, 149]; two additional ones (bcl6 and mllt11) were
known from cancer studies as modulators of STAT3 [89,
99], which is a transcription factor known to play an im-
portant
role
in
regulating
inflammation-mediated
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 12 of 27

responses during tissue regeneration. However, to our
knowledge, neither of these two regulatory STAT3 co-
factors had previously been implicated in successful
CNS axon regeneration. Another down-regulated gene
in this category at the middle time point was znf395, a
zinc-finger
transcription
factor
that
activates
pro-
inflammatory cytokines [49], newly implicating it here in
limiting aspects of inflammation that are detrimental to
CNS axon regeneration. The two sole transcription fac-
tor DESR genes at 3 weeks were both up-regulated (ebf3
and irf8). Each has known roles in regulating genes in-
volved in apoptosis and in suppressing a hyper-immune
response in macrophages, respectively [53, 72]. These
functions are consistent with limiting inflammation and
its detrimental effects continuing to be important well
into the late stages of recovery.
The KEGG Adipocytokine signaling pathway comprised
multiple DESR genes
Gene regulatory networks often comprise genes with dif-
ferent cellular functions. Therefore, to identify gene
regulatory networks potentially involved in successful
CNS axon regeneration, we analyzed KEGG (Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathways for en-
richment in DESR genes. In one such analysis we input
all the DESR genes found at more than one time point,
with the aim of highlighting regulatory networks that
were active throughout regeneration. This analysis iden-
tified a single network, the KEGG Adipocytokine signal-
ing pathway (map04920; Fig. 5). This network contained
four up-regulated DESR genes: lep (leptin), socs3 (sup-
pressor of cytokine signaling 3), mapk8 (JNK1) and
acsbg2 (Acetyl-CoA synthetase bubblegum family mem-
ber 2; labeled as FACS in Fig. 5). The up-regulation of
these genes suggested they were all pro-regenerative in
this context, which was surprising for socs3, because in
mammalian studies, it is generally considered inhibitory
to CNS axon regeneration [123] (but see [107] for a po-
tential resolution to this paradox). In mammalian stud-
ies, this pathway interconnects the control of cellular
metabolism with inflammatory and stress responses, in-
tegrating downstream pathways known from studies
across different systems to be involved in various aspects
of tissue regeneration. These sub-pathways include JAK/
STAT signaling [15, 16, 107, 134], control of axonal
transport and synthesis of axonal cytoskeletal proteins
via JNK signaling [51, 97], cap-dependent mRNA trans-
lation through mTOR [1, 82, 100], and the metabolic
regulation of both DNA methylation and histone acetyl-
ation/methylation [148, 150]. In addition to these four
DESR genes, a further 60% (69/115) of the annotated X.
laevis genes belonging to this pathway were found to be
potentially differentially expressed (either up- or down-
regulated) upon injury (p ≤0.02) during at least one time
point, in at least one of the three tissues (Fig. 5). Such
complex, temporally variable behavior of these additional
network elements suggested that maintaining flexibility
of this network throughout regeneration is an important
feature for CNS axon regeneration. Collectively, these
properties implicate this network as a key hub within
the larger network of CNS injury response genes.
The majority (55%) of DESR genes exhibiting opposing
expression between successful and unsuccessful
regeneration were functionally inter-connected
We next reasoned that genes that were significantly, dif-
ferentially expressed in opposing directions in the two
regenerative cases (R) vs. the non-regenerative case (NR)
(i.e., up-regulated in the first two and down-regulated in
the last, and vice versa) would be especially instructive
in providing insights into changes in gene expression
that are purposeful for determining the success or failure
CNS axon regeneration. Thirty-three DESR genes exhib-
ited such opposing expression (Fig. 6a; also green and
red fonts in Additional_File6_DESR_Functional_Cate-
gories.pdf). Genes up-regulated in the regenerative cases
and down-regulated in the non-regenerative case, and
vice versa, were classified as regeneration-promoting and
-inhibiting, respectively. The identities and known func-
tions
of
thirteen
of
these
genes
supported
this
classification. Nine regeneration-promoting genes were
previously known to promote either tissue regeneration
and axon outgrowth in general, or cell survival in trauma
and
degenerative
diseases: ltf
(lactoferrin,
an
iron-
binding, neuroprotective gene [117]), otop3 (otopetrin 3,
a member of a gene family that down-regulates inflam-
mation [147]), mcm6 (minichromosome maintenance
complex component 6, implicated in Müller cell-derived
neurogenesis in retinal regeneration [92]), tubb2b and
tuba3d (neuronal tubulins upregulated in axonogenesis
[86, 88]), ttl (tubulin tyrosine ligase, required for retro-
grade transport of pro-regenerative signals after axotomy
[124]), fabp3 (fatty acid binding protein 3, linked to par-
tially successful recovery from spinal cord injury in
opossum neonates [94]), fabp7 (brain lipid binding pro-
tein, a marker for radial glial endfeet, which guide grow-
ing axons [6]), and fads1 (fatty acid desaturase 1, linked
with suppressing inflammation in liver disease [46]). The
functions of the previously known four inhibitory genes
were all associated with aggravating inflammation, pro-
moting degeneration, and inhibiting tissue regeneration
in various contexts: enpp2 (autotaxin, a stimulator of in-
flammation [22, 63]), slc9a3R2 (a suppressor of STAT3,
pro-healing
signaling
in
colon
cancer
[156]),
plp1
(proteolipid protein 1, a major component of mature oli-
godendrocytes, which inhibit CNS axon regeneration
[65, 155]), and znf395 (zinc finger protein 395, a tran-
scriptional activator of pro-inflammatory cytokines [49]).
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 13 of 27

The remaining twenty oppositely expressed DESR genes
had not previously been associated with processes po-
tentially relevant for CNS injury, inviting further study.
To
further
explore
potential
functional
inter-
relationships among these 33 oppositely expressed DESR
genes, we performed STRING analysis for known/pre-
dicted protein-protein interactions and functional inter-
relationships [130] (Fig. 6b). Eighteen of the 33 genes
had such interactions, generating a network of five inter-
connected
clusters
(confidence = 0.300):
1)
two
Fig. 5 KEGG pathway analyses of DESR genes expressed across multiple time points implicated the Adipocytokine signaling pathway as playing a
prominent role in successful CNS axon regeneration. Black pentagons identify DESR’s. Ellipses indicate differential expression (DE; FDR < 0.05) in
response to injury (up or down) in at least one tissue, during at least one time point. The Adipocytokine signaling pathway image was obtained
from KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes). Additional_File7_Adipocytokine_Signaling_Pathway_Gene_Expression_Data.xlsm
contains an Excel spreadsheet with all 115 genes (S&L homeologs are separate entries) belonging to this pathway, together with their ΔFPKM
values [log2(fold change, injury/control)], and their p and q (FDR-adjusted p) values for differential expression, at each time point, for all
three tissues
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 14 of 27

Fig. 6 (See legend on next page.)
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 15 of 27

regulators of mRNA translation; 2) three specialized his-
tones; 3) six other genes associated with epigenetic
changes in gene expression, including one such regu-
lated gene that is part of and therefore potentially con-
nects
this
network
to
the
adipocytokine
signaling
pathway, abcb1 [154]; 4) three metabolic enzymes, one
of which (idh1) regulates the TET enzymes that modu-
late
DNA
methylation
states
[110];
5)
and
four
microtubule-related genes, which serve to drive cell mo-
tility, axonal transport, and axon outgrowth (e.g., [61]).
These genes thus form a nascent gene regulatory net-
work potentially linking changes in cellular metabolism
with
epigenetic
reprogramming
and
post-
transcriptionally regulated changes in gene expression,
converging upon cytoskeletal structural genes to drive
axon outgrowth. At the regulatory heart of this network
were genes involved in the epigenetic control of gene ex-
pression (dotted-lined box, Fig. 6).
In situ hybridization of retina to identify cell types
expressing key DESR genes
To begin to identify cell types responding to axotomy
through expression changes in key DESR genes, we per-
formed in situ hybridization on retina at the peak phase
of regenerative axon outgrowth for select genes, focusing
primarily, but not exclusively, on the two networks just
discussed (Fig. 7). We chose retina over hindbrain for
these studies because the anatomical organization of ret-
ina greatly simplifies identifying cell types. For example,
because frog retina receives no external afferents, ONC
damages only the optic axons, which originate from ret-
inal ganglion cells. These cells constitute the vast major-
ity of cells in the ganglion cell layer, making them
anatomically distinct from other local circuitry neurons,
such as bipolar cells, and Müller cell astroglia. Both cell
types can be indirectly affected by optic nerve injury and
their cell bodies occupy other retinal layers [2, 84]. The
situation is more complex in hindbrain, which harbors
not only the axotomized neuronal cell bodies but also
ascending axons damaged by the SCI. In addition, the
axotomized hindbrain neurons are anatomically inter-
mixed with other local neurons, making it essential to
distinguish them through applying retrograde tracers
[44]. Finally, because the injured and control hindbrain
are necessarily in different animals, it is harder to ensure
that hybridization conditions are precisely matched than
it is for retina, where both the operated and unoperated
eye occupy the same section.
For key up-regulated DESR genes, we chose leptin and
socs3 from the Adipocytokine Signaling pathway, prmt1,
which methylates both hnRNP K and histones, and idh1
and ezh2, which are two epigenetic-related genes from
the network of Fig. 6b. For down-regulated genes, we
chose jarid2 and suz12, which belong to the Polycomb
Repressive Complex 2 and are also part of the same net-
work as idh1 and ezh2 (Fig. 6b). These genes were also
chosen because they represented a wide range of expres-
sion levels, from abundantly expressed (FPKM > 100) to
moderately and poorly expressed genes (FPKM < 50),
and because they spanned the range of FDRs from <.002
to 0.05. Relative differences in expression from experi-
mental to control (|log2(fold-change)|) also spanned the
full spectrum – from 0.3 (the smallest significant
change) to 2.8 (one of the largest). (It should be noted
here that because probes for in situ hybridization do not
distinguish between homeologs, the RNA-seq data in
Fig. 7 represent values combined for the two homeo-
logs). In all cases, the overall intensity of labeling and
the relative difference between operated and unoperated
eyes reflected the magnitudes seen in the RNA-seq data.
Increases in the two up-regulated adipocytokine signal-
ing pathway genes, and in idh1 and ezh2 were confined
to the retinal ganglion cell layer. The changes in expres-
sion of the remaining up-regulated gene, prmt1, as well
(See figure on previous page.)
Fig. 6 DESR genes exhibiting opposing expression changes in regenerative vs. non-regenerative CNS identified inter-relationships among genes
involved in cellular metabolism, post-transcriptional and epigenetic gene regulation, and microtubule dynamics in successful vs. unsuccessful CNS
axon regeneration. a DESR genes that exhibited opposing expression between the two regenerative tissues (R: tadpole SCI hindbrain & juvenile
frog ONC eye) vs. the non-regenerative tissue (NR: juvenile frog SCI hindbrain), sorted by the functional categories of Fig. 4. Green and red
indicate genes that were up- and down-regulated significantly, respectively, with injury in the two regenerative tissues (R); these also exhibited
significant differential expression with injury in the non-regenerative, juvenile frog SCI hindbrain (NR), but in the opposing direction. Gene
symbols correspond with their human orthologs, and S & L homeologs/paralogs are combined into a single listing (see the explanation in Fig. 5).
b The protein-protein interaction network of the genes in (a), as predicted by Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING,
v10.5). Fifty five per cent (18/33) of oppositely expressed genes between regenerative and non-regenerative tissues were interconnected through
interacting functions and molecular interactions associated with the cytoskeleton, DNA methylation, mRNA translation, histones and their
epigenetic modifications, and cellular metabolism. The image was generated by STRING (https: //string-db.org; confidence level, 0.300; K-means
clustering, k = 5). There were 22 edges with a PPI (protein-protein interaction) enrichment p-value = 0.0005. Colors of edges refer to the type of
evidence linking the corresponding proteins (see Edge Legend, lower left). Inter-cluster edges are represented as dashed-lines. The dotted square
highlights genes directly involved in epigenetic regulation of gene expression at promoters and enhancers. JARID2, SUZ12, and EZH2 are
components of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2). EZH2 also plays a role in targeting DNMT3 to DNA. JHDM1D (also known as KDM7) is a
principal demethylase for H3K9 and H3K27, prominent sites that interact with PRC2. IDH1 is a metabolic enzyme that stimulates TET, the enzyme
principally responsible for converting 5mC to 5hmC & 5C
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 16 of 27

Fig. 7 (See legend on next page.)
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 17 of 27

as the two down-regulated components of the Polycomb
Repressive Complex 2 (jarid2, suz12), included but also
extended beyond the retinal ganglion cell layer, indicat-
ing that these changes in expression occurred more glo-
bally throughout the retina.
Discussion
We used a novel three-way comparison between a re-
gion of the CNS that successfully regenerates axons
throughout life (retina) against another that successfully
regenerates axons only transiently in development (hind-
brain), before and after the transition, to serve as a bio-
logical data filter for parsing core features of a successful
CNS axon-regenerative response from the thousands of
injury-induced changes in gene expression that other-
wise represented region-specific responses. The first in-
dication that the two regenerative cases uniquely shared
core features was the temporal pattern of the number of
injury-induced genes. Whereas this number reached a
maximum in the two regenerative cases during the peak
phase of axonal regrowth, it did so in the non-
regenerative case at the earliest time point. PCA corrob-
orated the conclusion that gene expression profiles were
largely tissue-specific, but closer inspection identified
shared features between the two regenerative tissues. For
example, PCA eigenvectors (Fig. 3) and scatter plots
(Additional_File5_PCA_Scatterplot.pdf)
differed
more
between injury and controls for both regenerative cases
than was the case for the non-regenerative case. The
lack of overlap between regenerative tadpole and non-
regenerative frog SCI hindbrain, even for different time
points, further indicated that the genes induced by SCI
were quite different between these two tissues through-
out regeneration. Individual DESR genes (324) far out
numbered injury-induced genes shared by all three tis-
sues (19 genes) at all time points, as well as the number
shared between regenerative and non-regenerative SCI
hindbrain at the peak phase of axonal regrowth (284
DESR genes vs. 101 shared regenerative/non-regenera-
tive SCI hindbrain genes). Collectively, these data sup-
ported the conclusion that beginning relatively soon
after injury, having the capacity to mount a successful
axon-regenerative response stimulates a markedly differ-
ent injury response from that of a non-regenerative
tissue, which in the latter, is more focused on attempting
rapid repair for survival than on axon regeneration.
Further insights into the nature of the cellular pro-
cesses uniquely shared between the two regenerative
cases came from the identities and subsequent analyses
of the DESR genes. In support of these genes being rele-
vant to CNS axon regeneration, DESR genes included
multiple genes previously implicated in CNS injury, al-
though mostly in other contexts, such as studies that in-
cluded the injury site, peripheral axon regeneration, and
resistance to neurodegenerative disease. This observation
emphasized the universality of those genes in other types
of CNS injury, as well as the phylogenetic conservation
of the processes they represented, thereby building con-
fidence in the data set. The data also included a large
number of DESR genes shared across a broad spectrum
of non-neural regenerating tissues, including zebrafish
tail fin, axolotl limbs, and mammalian liver, arguing fur-
ther that their importance extends beyond CNS axon re-
generation to vertebrate tissue regeneration in general,
and providing clues into aspects of a successful regen-
erative response that are universally shared among all
vertebrate regenerating tissues. The many additional,
novel genes implicated here for the first time in CNS
axon regeneration provide new targets for investigation.
Surveying the literature for what is known about each
DESR gene’s function sorted them into eleven broad
functional categories. Temporal differences in the com-
position of these categories provided further insights
into how core processes associated with successful CNS
axon regeneration shifted as axon regeneration pro-
gressed. For example, the onset of axon regeneration (3
days) was dominated by up-regulated pro-inflammatory
genes, several down-regulated cytoskeletal genes poten-
tially associated with scarring, and by genes indicative of
cellular reprogramming events. The latter included an
up-regulated gene associated with promoting non-cap
dependent mRNA translation (eif5b) and several down-
regulated ribosomal subunits, two down-regulated his-
tone subtypes associated with transcriptional activation,
a down-regulated mitotic check point protein (hp1bp3),
and an up-regulated C/EBP-related transcription factor
(ddit3) that is regulated by stress factors associated with
bacterial infections and with mammalian optic nerve in-
jury but which had not previously been implicated in
(See figure on previous page.)
Fig. 7 Cellular localization of select DESR genes by in situ hybridization of retina at the peak phase of regenerative axon outgrowth after optic
nerve injury. Genes are as indicated in their respective panels and represent a range of fold-change values (0.03 < |log2(fold change)| < 3), and
FDRs (0.002–0.05), as well as relatively low (FPKM < 50) and high (FPKM > 100) levels of expression. Examples of up-regulated (a – e) and down-
regulated (f, g) genes are included. Column 1 (left), operated eye; column 2 (right), contralateral unoperated eye from the same animal and
processed on the same slide as that of its adjacent column. Arrows indicate cells of the retinal ganglion cell layer, which comprises the neurons
that regenerate an axon. Abbreviations: RGC, retinal ganglion cells; INL, inner nuclear layer; PR, photoreceptors. Scale bar in G2 applies to
all panels
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 18 of 27

successful CNS axon regeneration [34, 101]. At the peak
phase of regenerative axon outgrowth, all eleven func-
tional categories were represented, indicating high levels
of activity associated with these functional categories at
the most active time point. While the presence of DESR
genes previously implicated in regenerative and develop-
mental axon outgrowth helped to provide confidence in
the relevancy of the data to CNS axon regeneration, our
finding additional genes associated more generally with
cellular processes previously associated with wound
healing and tissue repair in other contexts provides new
gene targets for studying how the cellular processes with
which they are connected function specifically in CNS
axon regeneration. These processes included modulators
of Wnt-signaling [48], macrophage invasion and the
complement cascade [35, 74, 104], and modulators of
JAK/STAT signaling [54, 134]). Still more genes offered
important clues about which aspects of an inflammatory
response are pro-regenerative (i.e., up-regulated DESR
genes) as opposed to detrimental (i.e., down-regulated
DESR genes) to CNS axon regeneration, a distinction
that has been difficult to make from mammalian studies
[16]. Other DESR genes implicated cellular processes
that are new to CNS recovery (e.g., regulators of mitotic
checkpoints). The late time point, when axonal regrowth
was largely finished but synaptic connections were still
being refined, was dominated by up-regulated genes
known to promote cellular repair, suppress hyper-
inflammation, and stabilize the cytoskeleton. These func-
tions are understandable during a time when the initial
effects of trauma have been overcome, terminal axonal
arbors are being refined and consolidated, and physio-
logical gene functions are returning; the identification of
new, specific genes involved in these processes provide
new entry points for studies aimed at understanding and
promoting these beneficial processes.
To begin to elucidate gene regulatory networks poten-
tially occupying important hubs in the network of gene
responses promoting successful CNS axon regeneration,
we engaged in two exercises. In the first, we surveyed
KEGG pathways enriched with DESR genes, especially
genes that were differentially expressed at multiple time
points. This analysis identified the KEGG Adipocytokine
signaling pathway as enriched both for DESR genes and
for injury-induced differentially expressed genes in gen-
eral, independent of tissue regenerative capacity. The
four DESR genes in this pathway were uniformly up-
regulated, suggesting that their activation within this
network
promotes
regeneration.
However,
multiple
other differentially expressed genes belonging to this
network exhibited both up- and down-regulation at vari-
ous times in each of the tissues, further suggesting that
the dynamic behavior of this network influences regen-
erative
success.
The
importance
of
individual
components of this pathway for wound repair and re-
generation had already been noted across a range of sys-
tems, both neural and non-neural. For example, leptin in
mammals has been implicated in the regenerative suc-
cess of both liver and muscle [67, 91, 145], and in zebra-
fish, it has been implicated in both restoration of a
damaged retina [159] and in recovery from heat-induced
stress [78]. In Xenopus, up-regulation of leptin has also
been noted in the regenerative response of the spinal
cord itself to SCI [134], and during development, it is in-
volved in activating canonical Wnt-signaling in neuro-
genic regions of the brain [13]. Our linking leptin to
axon-regenerative regions of the CNS that are otherwise
uninjured, and localizing the increased expression to the
axotomized retinal ganglion cells, which do not them-
selves undergo active proliferation after axotomy, sug-
gests that these cells use leptin to signal nearby support
cells, such as invading macrophages [45, 152] and react-
ive Müller glia [84]. Canonically, leptin and the adipocy-
tokine
signaling
pathway
play
a
crucial
role
in
thermoregulation and dietary intake in mammals [18,
26]. Thus, our data from Xenopus adds to a growing
body of evidence supporting a phylogenetically ancient
linkage in vertebrates between the regulation of cellular
metabolism, the stress response, and the success or fail-
ure of organ and tissue regeneration both within and
outside the CNS, where the axotomized neurons them-
selves may be actively involved in the signaling.
Next, we examined the subset of DESR genes that ex-
hibited opposing expression patterns between regenera-
tive and non-regenerative tissues, reasoning that these
genes could provide insights into purposeful differences
between the two. For example, genes that were up-
regulated in the regenerative cases but down-regulated
in the non-regenerative case would likely be pro-
regenerative
and
vice
versa.
Of
the
33
oppositely
expressed DESR genes, nine pro-regenerative (i.e., upreg-
ulated in axon-regenerative CNS and down-regulated in
non-regenerative CNS) and four regeneration inhibitory
(i.e., down-regulated in axon-regenerative CNS and up-
regulated in non-regenerative CNS) genes had previously
been implicated in either promoting or inhibiting regen-
eration and cell survival, respectively, in one or more
contexts, thereby helping to validate the list while
expanding its relevance to include CNS axon regener-
ation. Whereas KEGG analysis fits gene sets into known
biological pathways, STRING analysis can be used to
discover new gene networks from known interactions,
both physical and functional. STRING analysis of these
33 oppositely expressed DESR genes placed the majority
(18) into five interconnected clusters, with three clusters
comprising specialized histones and genes associated
with epigenetic control of gene expression at the center.
These five clusters could thus conceivably comprise the
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 19 of 27

core of a nascent gene regulatory network for successful
CNS axon regeneration. In situ hybridization of a subset
of genes in this network found that all the pro-
regenerative genes were specifically up-regulated in the
axotomized retinal ganglion cells, whereas the two
regeneration-inhibitory
components
of
the
network,
which are part of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2,
were down-regulated in multiple retinal layers. Surpris-
ingly, another member of Polycomb Repressive Complex
2, ezh2 was up-regulated in axotomized retinal ganglion
cells. Since ezh2 functions extend beyond the complex
to include methylation of DNA as well as histone sites
[75], its pro-regenerative activity is therefore likely to be
separate from its functions within the Polycomb Repres-
sive Complex. Examination of the known functions of
the genes in the central three clusters, together with
other epigenetic-related DESR genes (25 total), strongly
implicate increasing the accessibility of DNA for tran-
scription as being of central importance to determining
the success or failure of CNS axon regeneration.
Conclusions
A
novel
three-way
comparison
identified
candidate
genes belonging to core processes shared by two CNS
regions that successfully regenerate axons, that distin-
guished them from one that does not (i.e., juvenile frog
ONC eye vs. tadpole SCI hindbrain vs. juvenile frog SCI
hindbrain, respectively). Unlike earlier studies of SCI
that included the lesion in the analyzed tissues, by ana-
lyzing the tissues of origin of the regenerating axons, this
study emphasized genes relevant for CNS axon regener-
ation over wound repair and tissue restoration. Even so,
many of the genes identified in our study were previ-
ously implicated in wound healing, tissue repair, and cell
survival, demonstrating that these processes are shared
with successful CNS axon regeneration. Because these
studies were mostly conducted in other tissues and spe-
cies, our study both demonstrated their phylogenetic
conservation and identified many new individual genes
associated with these processes as worthy targets of
study in CNS axon regeneration. Finally, because many
of these genes were implicated in mammals, where re-
covery is often incomplete, their identification in this
study provides clues as to which are beneficial to recov-
ery and which ones are detrimental. Network analyses of
DESR genes that were up-regulated at multiple time
points
and
of
DESR
genes
that
were
oppositely
expressed
in
axon-regenerative
vs.
non-regenerative
CNS regions, respectively, identified the Adipocytokine
signaling pathway and a novel gene regulatory network
with epigenetic control of gene expression at its core, as
important hubs in the larger network of injury-response
genes associated with successful CNS axon regeneration.
In situ hybridization in ONC retina of representative
genes from these networks showed that the injury re-
sponse of some elements of these networks were re-
stricted to the axotomized neurons, whereas others
extended to neighboring cells, demonstrating that a suc-
cessful CNS axon-regenerative response to axotomy in-
directly invokes responses in neighboring cells that
could influence its success. This study thus provides
both a resource and a starting point for future investiga-
tions into the molecular underpinnings of successful
CNS axon regeneration.
Methods
Animal and surgical procedures
All animal procedures were approved by the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUC) of the Uni-
versity at Albany (optic nerve crush) and Morehead State
University (spinal cord transection), in accordance with
the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and
Use of Laboratory Animals. For the sake of consistency,
Xenopus laevis tadpoles and juvenile frogs were all from
an albino strain obtained from the same supplier (Xenopus
Express, Brooksville, FL). Prior to surgery, animals were
acclimated to the lab for at least a week, under a 12-h
light:12-h dark photoperiod, in tanks of conditioned water
at 22 °C, where they were fed every other day (Xenopus
Express SFF and TP, for frogs and tadpoles, respectively).
Optic nerve crush (ONC) surgeries were performed on
fully anesthetized (0.1% MS222, Sigma-Aldrich), 1–3
month, post-metamorphic albino frogs (unsexed juve-
niles), as described [160]. Briefly, the surgically exposed
optic nerve on the right side of the animal was crushed at
the orbit, approximately 0.5–1 mm from the eye, using #5
Dumont forceps (Fig. 1d), 2–4 times, until the nerve
turned visibly clear within the epineural sheath. The
contralateral left eye served as the unoperated control.
Spinal cord transections (SCI) were performed on fully
anesthetized NF [93] stage 53 tadpoles (0.02–0.04%
MS222) and 1–3 month post-metamorphic juvenile frogs
(Fig. 1d) of the same age as those used for ONC [42, 44].
The surgically exposed spinal cord was completely trans-
ected at the mid-thoracic level, and the success of the sur-
gery was confirmed at the time of surgery by passing a
Minutien pin (Fine Science Tools) through the injury site
while observing the spinal cord. To further confirm that
spinal cord transections were complete, animals were
tested the next day for residual movement. After surgery,
animals were maintained in tanks filled with aerated,
sterile-filtered, conditioned rearing water containing 4
mg/l gentamicin sulfate (Sigma-Aldrich) to guard against
infection.
RNA isolation
For each biological replicate, either five hindbrains (SCI)
or six eyes (ONC) were rapidly dissected from fully
Belrose et al. BMC Genomics          (2020) 21:540 
Page 20 of 27

===== Bely2010_ICB_RegenerationLoss+Evolution =====
SYMPOSIUM
Evolutionary Loss of Animal Regeneration: Pattern and Process
Alexandra E. Bely1
Biology Department, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
From the symposium ‘‘Animal Regeneration: Integrating Development, Ecology and Evolution’’ presented at the annual
meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology, January 3–7, 2010, at Seattle, Washington.
1E-mail: abely@umd.edu
Synopsis The ability to regenerate lost or damaged body parts is widespread among animals and provides obvious
potential benefits. It is therefore perplexing that this ability has become greatly restricted or completely lost in many
lineages. Despite growing interest in the cellular and molecular basis of regeneration, our understanding of how and why
regenerative abilities are lost remains rudimentary. In an effort to develop a framework for studying losses of regener-
ation, here I outline an approach for rigorously identifying such losses, review broad patterns of regenerative ability
across animals, describe some of the clearest examples of regeneration loss, discuss some possible scenarios by which
regeneration may be lost, and review recent work in annelids that is providing new insights into loss of regenerative
ability.
Introduction
The evolutionary loss of regenerative ability repre-
sents a fundamental and perplexing problem in bi-
ology. Although the complex question of how many
times regeneration has evolved anew among animals
remains to be resolved, it is evident that regenerative
ability is widespread. Regeneration provides obvious
benefits to an injured individual, yet regenerative
abilities appear to have been greatly restricted or
completely lost in many animal lineages (Bely and
Nyberg 2010). Why should regenerative abilities
ever
be
lost
and
how
do
such
losses
occur?
Although regeneration has long fascinated humans
(Morgan 1901; Dinsmore 1991), undoubtedly in
part because of our own frustratingly limited regen-
erative potential, and although the process of regen-
eration has now been analyzed in considerable detail
in a few model organisms (Sa´nchez et al. 2006;
Carlson 2007; Brockes and Kumar 2008), our under-
standing of why and how regenerative abilities are
lost (and possibly gained) through evolution remains
extremely limited.
Developing a good understanding of the ultimate
and proximate mechanisms of the loss of regenera-
tion will require a targeted and multidisciplinary
approach. It will be necessary to identify unambigu-
ous
losses
of
regeneration
through
comparative
studies interpreted in a phylogenetic context, to
reveal the ecological correlates and developmental
basis of such losses, and to formulate and test
specific models for how and why loss of regeneration
occurs. Investigating a broad range of animals in this
way will also be essential in order to assess the extent
to which regeneration loss proceeds in a similar way
across different groups.
As a step towards focusing efforts on this fasci-
nating phenomenon, here I begin developing a
framework for identifying and investigating regener-
ation losses in the Metazoa, review available data
bearing on this topic, and suggest important avenues
for future research. Specifically, I outline how to
identify regeneration losses rigorously; review broad
patterns of regenerative ability across animals; de-
scribe some of the clearest examples of regeneration
loss; discuss some possible scenarios by which regen-
eration may be lost; and review recent data in anne-
lids
that
are
providing
new
insights.
Although
regeneration can occur at a range of biological
levels of organization (cells, tissues, internal organs,
structures) (Bely and Nyberg 2010), here I focus
Integrative and Comparative Biology, volume 50, number 4, pp. 515–527
doi:10.1093/icb/icq118
Advanced Access publication August 19, 2010
 The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology. All rights reserved.
For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icb/article/50/4/515/653177 by Ulsan Natl Inst of Science & Technology user on 04 March 2021

specifically on the regeneration of structures (e.g.,
limbs, fins, heads, tails), as loss of such structures
occurs widely in nature and thus structure-level re-
generation has a clear ecological and evolutionary
context.
Identifying losses of regeneration
How to identify losses of regeneration
Identifying lineages that have lost regenerative abili-
ties is an obvious first step in studying regeneration
loss. Although loss of regeneration is thought to have
occurred in many groups of animal and the optimal
approach for recognizing such cases is straightfor-
ward in principle, regeneration losses have rarely
been identified rigorously. Identifying losses of re-
generation requires both thorough comparative ex-
periments
on
regenerative
ability
and
a
robust
phylogenetic framework for interpreting the pattern
of the evolution of regeneration. Comparative exper-
iments on regenerative ability should be performed
on a range of species in the target group and homol-
ogous regions of the body should be removed in
each species to ensure that amputations represent a
comparable challenge across the species tested. If
successful regeneration ensues, the presence of regen-
eration is demonstrated unambiguously. However,
demonstrating the absence of regenerative potential
is inherently problematic, since ‘‘absence of evidence
is not evidence for absence.’’ If regeneration does not
occur (or does not occur normally), further studies
should be performed to confirm the inability of the
species in question to regenerate successfully under a
broad range of biologically relevant conditions. For
example, amputations should be performed on indi-
viduals at different life-history stages (e.g., young/
old, sexually immature/mature), of different nutri-
tional status (e.g., starved/well fed), and under dif-
ferent
environmental
conditions
(e.g.,
different
temperatures) to determine whether the success of
regeneration is merely a function of one of these
variables. If such follow-up studies demonstrate
that, rather than completely losing regeneration, a
lineage has experienced a great narrowing in the con-
ditions permissive of regeneration, this may itself be
of
considerable
interest
for
understanding
early
stages
of
regeneration
loss
(see
next
section).
Controls are especially important in trials of species
suspected of not regenerating. Uncut individuals
should be maintained to gauge the rate of mortality
under the experimental conditions so comparisons
can be made with cut animals. If it is possible to
assess during the trial the investment by individuals
into other developmental processes (e.g., growth,
reproduction), this can also strengthen the case for
the absence of regeneration. For example, if ampu-
tated animals continue to grow or reproduce during
the trial, even as they fail to regenerate, this demon-
strates that individuals have sufficient resources
available for these other processes and that these re-
sources can be mobilized under the experimental
conditions.
Once thorough experiments on regenerative ability
have been completed, the resulting data should be
interpreted in the context of a robust phylogeny to
reconstruct the pattern of evolution of regeneration.
Although the loss of regeneration is generally as-
sumed to be much more likely than the gain of re-
generation,
non-regenerating
species
should
not
necessarily be assumed to represent losses (Brockes
et al. 2001); gains of regeneration, although poorly
documented, are certainly possible. A loss of regen-
eration
is
most
easily
identified
when
non-
regenerating taxa are nested well within clades that
otherwise have the ability to regenerate. When the
phylogenetic distribution of the presence/absence of
regeneration makes the polarity of change less obvi-
ous, additional taxonomic sampling or further work
on the developmental basis of regeneration (or fail-
ure of regeneration) may be necessary in order to
confidently reconstruct the direction of evolutionary
change.
In practice, the approach outlined above has rarely
been followed. Thus, although a number of losses of
regeneration have been tentatively identified, most
still await rigorous confirmation. A number of chal-
lenges have hindered the identification of regenera-
tion losses thus far. First, published information on
regenerative
ability
remains
limited.
For
many
animal groups, even some entire phyla, there is
simply
no
information
on
regenerative
ability
(Fig. 1) (Bely and Nyberg 2010), and if documen-
tation is available, it is often available for only a tiny
fraction of the species in a group. Furthermore, only
a few studies have systematically performed studies
of regenerative ability using comparable amputations
across a range of related species (e.g., Scadding 1977,
1981; Vollrath 1990; Wagner and Misof 1992; Bely
and Sikes 2010). Instead, most available data on the
distribution
of
regeneration
are
gleaned
from
single-species laboratory studies (typically develop-
mental or physiological studies) or field studies re-
porting naturally regenerating individuals, such that
amputations and conditions are often inconsistent
across species. Follow-up studies to confirm the ab-
sence of regeneration under a range of conditions are
rarely conducted.
516
A. E. Bely
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icb/article/50/4/515/653177 by Ulsan Natl Inst of Science & Technology user on 04 March 2021

Second, even for groups for which a considerable
amount of published information is available, there
has undoubtedly been a strong publication bias
against reporting failure of regeneration. The absence
of regeneration is often interpreted as inconclusive,
uninteresting, or simply not worth publishing. As an
example, it is widely known that the nematode
model organism Caenorhabditis elegans cannot regen-
erate at the ‘‘structure’’ level, such as after a trans-
verse body amputation (although this speci es is
capable of axonal regeneration; Yanik et al. 2004).
Indeed, this species, and possibly nematodes in gen-
eral, appear unable to wound-heal or even to survive
body amputation because high internal pressure
causes internal organs to be propelled from the
body following a breach of the body wall. I could
find no published documentation for this inability to
survive body amputation or to regenerate, however,
despite the fact that C. elegans is one of the most
intensively studied animals in biology. The bias
against publishing failure of regeneration has likely
been pervasive, and this should be considered care-
fully whenever information on regenerative ability is
gleaned solely from the published literature. Ignoring
this potential bias may lead to the false impression
that certain groups (e.g., planaria, echinoderms, as-
cidians) are uniformly good regenerators.
Third, reconstructing evolutionary changes in re-
generative ability has been hampered by the lack of
formal mapping onto robust phylogenies in some
groups. Even if good information is available on
the regenerative ability of many species in a group,
without an estimate of their relationships it is simply
not possible to reconstruct evolutionary changes in
regenerative ability. The fact that regenerative ability
appears common in a group does not imply that it is
necessarily ancestral; if the most deeply branching
lineages are all non-regenerating, or the developmen-
tal basis of regeneration differs in fundamental ways
among lineages, a gain of regeneration may be a
more likely reconstruction (e.g., Garza-Garcia et al.
2010). One group in which considerable information
is available but no formal mapping has been per-
formed is spiders. Many species can regenerate
their legs and many species cannot (Vollrath 1990).
Until these data are mapped onto a robust phyloge-
ny, viewing non-regenerating species as representing
losses should be considered tentative at best. A relat-
ed problem inherent in character mapping is the ne-
cessity to make assumptions about the relative
probability of gains versus losses. There is extremely
limited knowledge of this for regeneration, leading
different authors to sometimes make opposite con-
clusions about the polarity of change, based on the
same information (Brockes et al. 2001). Even if rea-
sonable estimates of the probabilities of transition
can be obtained, these are likely to be taxon-specific
and not easily applied more broadly.
Finally, the problem of homology is significant
when different species exhibit high morphological
disparity. Comparing regenerative potential across
Fig. 1 Phylogenetic distribution of regenerative ability across the
Metazoa. Regeneration is scored at two levels of organization:
whole-body and structure-level regeneration. Whole-body
regeneration is defined as the ability to regenerate every part of
the body, although not necessarily simultaneously. Structure-level
regeneration is defined as the ability to regenerate a multicellular
structure of the organism (e.g., a head, tail, limb, or siphon)
and excludes regeneration of internal organs or tissues. Black
indicates that regenerative abilities are present in the phylum
(regardless of whether non-regenerating species are also known
from the phylum). White indicates that there is at least one
substantiated report for the lack of regeneration in the phylum,
and no evidence for the presence of regeneration. ‘‘?’’ indicates
uncertainty in the phylogenetic position of this lineage. Modified
from Bely and Nyberg (2010).
Regeneration loss in animals
517
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icb/article/50/4/515/653177 by Ulsan Natl Inst of Science & Technology user on 04 March 2021

different animal phyla, for instance, is inherently
problematic because homologizing body parts is dif-
ficult at best, and can be downright nonsensical. For
example, regeneration of sea star arms is a classic
example of regeneration in deuterostomes, yet it is
not possible to homologize sea star arms in any
simple way to structures in other deuterostomes,
such as hemichordates or chordates. Unlike the
first three challenges listed above, which can be ad-
dressed relatively easily through targeted efforts, the
‘‘homology
problem’’
is
not
easily
overcome.
Comparisons of regeneration across highly divergent
taxa may need to focus specifically upon gains and
losses
of
homologous
developmental
processes,
rather than upon gains and losses of the ability to
regenerate homologous morphological structures.
It should be noted that the cellular and molecular
basis of regeneration can serve as an important
source of evidence supporting or refuting the hy-
pothesis of homology of regeneration across taxa,
bearing directly on how gains and losses of regener-
ation are reconstructed. Obtaining this kind of infor-
mation requires sustained, targeted efforts and a
considerable financial investment, and it is thus cur-
rently not possible to use this approach across large
comparative datasets. As the process of regeneration
becomes increasingly well understood in a few model
organisms, however, comparing findings across these
models will become a key source of information for
inferring how regenerative capabilities have evolved
(e.g., Garza-Garcia et al. 2010). With the advent of
molecular technologies that can be applied across a
wide array of organisms (e.g., RNA interference,
next-generation sequencing), it is becoming feasible
to branch out from a model system to investigate the
regenerative process in close relatives. Such studies
will undoubtedly provide a rich source of informa-
tion for evaluating where losses and gains of regen-
eration have occurred across animals.
Overview of regenerative abilities across the
Metazoa
As discussed above, comparing regenerative ability
across phyla is inherently problematic because body
plans are so divergent that it is difficult to compare
the ability to regenerate specific, homologous body
parts. Even so, evaluating broad patterns in regener-
ative ability across the Metazoa is useful background
for identifying losses of regeneration. Even a cursory
survey of regenerative ability reveals marked varia-
tion among animals (Vorontsova and Liosner 1960;
Goss 1969; Bely and Nyberg 2010). At one extreme,
some groups such as sea stars, planaria, sponges, and
hydrozoans have representatives capable of regener-
ating a complete individual from just a tiny fragment
of the original, while at the other extreme, groups
such as nematodes, leeches, and birds appear to be
nearly or entirely unable to regenerate any structure.
Are there broad patterns to this variation?
Among animals, all of the outgroup lineages to the
protostomes and deuterostomes include powerful re-
generators; sponges, cnidarians, placozoans, cteno-
phores, and acoels each have representatives that can
regenerate following a range of amputations, even
severe ones, and all have representatives with the po-
tential to regenerate every structure in the body (Fig.
1). These groups also have few or no known species
incapable of regeneration. Given this information, it
seems likely that the common ancestor of animals,
and early animals in general, were good regenerators.
Consistent
with
this
conclusion,
many
simple,
soft-bodied animals today have high regenerative abil-
ities. The alternative scenario, that most or all of these
animal lineages acquired regenerative abilities indepen-
dently, seems unlikely, although this possibility cannot
be formally excluded based on available data.
Within the main bilaterian clade, comprised of the
deuterostomes, ecdysozoans, and lophotrochozoans,
regenerative abilities are, by contrast, highly variable
(Fig. 1) (Needham 1952; Vorontsova and Liosner
1960; Goss 1969; Bely and Nyberg 2010). While re-
generation of structures occurs in all three of these
bilaterian clades (e.g., regeneration of siphons of
ascidians, limbs of arthropods, heads and tails of
planarians), many taxa in all three clades are capable
of only limited regeneration, or of no regeneration at
all (e.g., birds, nematodes, leeches). Assuming the
ancestral animal could regenerate well, these non-
regenerating bilaterians must represent losses of re-
generation at some level, but determining when
losses occurred relative to their closest regenerating
relatives is not necessarily straightforward. This is
because, although this phenomenon remains poorly
documented, regenerative abilities can surely increase
as well as decrease, and the pattern and timing of
gains and losses can therefore be difficult to evaluate.
The distribution of regeneration of tails across major
groups of vertebrates illustrates this point. The tails
of fish, amphibians, mammals, reptiles, and birds are
homologous, but the ability to regenerate this body
region varies considerably among them. Available ev-
idence suggests that cartilaginous and ray-finned fish
cannot regenerate their tails (the tail fin of some fish
can regenerate, but not the bony elements), some
amphibians can, mammals cannot, many lizards
can, and birds cannot (Needham 1952; Vorontsova
and Liosner 1960; Goss 1969). The evolutionary
518
A. E. Bely
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icb/article/50/4/515/653177 by Ulsan Natl Inst of Science & Technology user on 04 March 2021

pattern of regeneration of tails is clearly not simple
even within vertebrates, as it must involve multiple
gains and/or multiple losses. In vertebrates, as in
many other bilaterian groups in which regenerative
ability is variable, confidently reconstructing the pat-
tern of the evolution of regeneration will require ad-
ditional sampling, rigorous phylogenetic mapping,
and optimally, data on the developmental basis of
regeneration.
Some likely losses of regeneration
In some animal groups, the case for loss of regener-
ation is quite strong. One of the clearest examples
comes from a recent study on annelids indicating
that multiple losses of the ability to regenerate the
head have occurred within a subfamily of aquatic
clitellates, the Naidinae (Bely and Sikes 2010; see
penultimate section). Comparative experiments on
regenerative ability were performed on a range of
species and, in each, the species-specific number of
‘‘head’’ segments was removed, such that amputa-
tions represented a comparable challenge across spe-
cies. Mapping results onto a molecular phylogeny
indicated that three losses of the ability to regenerate
the head have occurred in this group.
Although this study represents the first to explic-
itly map regenerative ability onto a phylogeny as a
means of reconstructing the pattern of losses, data
from several other groups suggest additional likely
losses when interpreted in the context of current un-
derstanding of phylogenetic relationships. For exam-
ple, in lepidosaur vertebrates (lizards and close
relatives), the ability to regenerate the tail is wide-
spread, having been reported in the tuatara (the
sister group to the rest of the lepidosaurs), geckos,
skinks, iguanids, some agamids, chameleons, and
lacertids, but it appears to be absent in a few
groups, including snakes, amphisbaenids, and some
agamids (Gans 1978; Arnold 1984; Bellairs and
Bryant 1985; Seligmann et al. 2008). Based on a
recent phylogeny of the group (Vidal and Hedges
2005), this distribution strongly suggests that tail re-
generation is ancestral for lepidosaurs and that the
non-regenerating groups likely represent at least
three independent losses of the ability to regenerate
the tail. Further support for tail regeneration being
ancestral (and thus for the lack of tail regeneration
being derived) comes from the regeneration process
itself. When regeneration of the tail occurs in lepi-
dosaurs, it consistently produces a regenerated tail
that is distinctly different from the original; most
notably, the regenerated tail has a continuous, carti-
laginous rod at its center rather than an articulated
column composed of vertebrae (Etheridge 1959;
Arnold 1984; Bellairs and Bryant 1985; Seligmann
et al. 2008).
The distribution of regeneration of fins in fish
provides another likely example of regeneration
loss. Fin regeneration occurs in lungfish (an out-
group to the teleosts), salmoniforms and esociforms
(which together likely represent the sister group to
the spiny-rayed teleosts), and numerous species of
spiny-rayed teleosts (the most diverse group of
living teleosts), including the cyprinodontiforms,
atheriniforms, and perciforms (Wagner and Misof
1992 and references therein). However, regeneration
of fins appears to be absent or heteromorphic (pro-
ducing a misshapen, abnormal fin) in representatives
of at least three groups of spiny-rayed teleosts: the
scorpaeniforms, the cyprinodontiforms, and the per-
ciforms (Wagner and Misof 1992). In the context of
a recent summary of fish phylogeny (Nelson 2006),
this distribution would suggest that regeneration of
fins is ancestral for fish and that there have been
multiple losses of normal fin regeneration.
A number of additional animal groups are known
to possess a mix of species (sometimes even very
closely related species) that can and cannot regen-
erate a specific body region, a pattern suggestive of
loss of regeneration. Such groups include arachnids,
hexapods,
annelids,
platyhelminths,
nemerteans,
hemichordates,
urochordates,
and
amphibians,
among
others
(Needham
1952;
Kolmayer
and
Ste´phan-Dubois
1960;
Vorontsova
and
Liosner
1960; Stephan-Dubois and Bautz 1975; Scadding
1977, 1981; Vollrath 1990; Tsonis 2000; Brockes
et al. 2001; Bely 2006). Although it is likely that
many of the non-regenerating taxa represent losses
of regeneration, better sampling and formal phyloge-
netic mapping are needed in most cases to provide
evidence for this.
Finally,
although
comparisons
of
regeneration
among phyla are inherently problematic, owing to
the extreme morphological disparity among groups,
a broad, phylum-level view of animal regeneration
nevertheless suggests that an important restriction
in regenerative ability occurred near the base of the
Ecdysozoa, the molting clade of bilaterians. While
non-bilaterians, acoels, deuterostomes, and lophotro-
chozoans each possess many representatives capable
of ‘‘whole-body’’ regeneration (defined as being able
to regenerate every part of the body), no such abil-
ities
are
known
from
ecdysozoans
(Fig.
1).
Furthermore, while there is ample evidence that a
broad range of body structures (e.g., heads, tails,
limbs, siphons) can potentially regenerate in the
other two main bilaterian clades (the deuterostomes
Regeneration loss in animals
519
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icb/article/50/4/515/653177 by Ulsan Natl Inst of Science & Technology user on 04 March 2021

and lophotrochozoans), the only structure-level re-
generation known from ecdysozoans is the regenera-
tion of arthropods’ appendages (limbs and antennae)
(Vorontsova
and
Liosner
1960;
Goss
1969).
Regeneration of appendages occurs in many, al-
though by no means all, arthropods, and because
regeneration in arthropods depends on molting, no
regeneration can occur in individuals after their ter-
minal molt. The inferred restriction of regenerative
ability near the base of the Ecdysozoa likely repre-
sents the oldest major loss of regeneration repre-
sented
among
metazoans,
and
may
have
been
related to the evolution of the protective cuticle
characteristic of this clade.
The process of loss of regeneration
Very little work has been aimed at understanding the
process of regeneration loss, and we therefore know
little about why and how this process occurs. For
well over a century there has been speculation
about the factors leading to loss of regeneration
(Morgan 1901; Dinsmore 1991; Goss 1992; Wagner
and Misof 1992; Bely and Nyberg 2010), but there
remains a real need to define and evaluate specific
evolutionary and developmental scenarios that could
account for this phenomenon. To begin developing a
framework for investigating this process, below I dis-
cuss some possible scenarios for both why and how
regeneration could be lost. It will be important to
evaluate such scenarios using actual data, ideally by
investigating very recent losses in which the signa-
tures of regeneration loss are most likely to still be
detectable.
Why might regeneration be lost?
With regard to the ultimate, or evolutionary, causes
of regeneration loss, a range of possible explanations
have recently been outlined and discussed (Bely and
Nyberg
2010).
In
summary,
regeneration
could
be lost either because it is selected against in some
way, or because it is a neutral trait. Regarding
the first, selection could directly disfavor regeneration
because it somehow contributes to lower fitness, as
could occur if a partially regenerated structure impairs
an organism’s function more than the total absence
of the structure (Vollrath 1990). Regeneration could
also be disfavored indirectly, for example if there is
an energetic trade-off between regeneration and anoth-
er process, such as growth (e.g., Lawrence 2010; Wulff
2010) and investment in the latter becomes favored
at the expense of the former. Adaptive explanations
need not be invoked for loss of regeneration, however.
If
regeneration
confers
no
significant
selective
advantage, then it could be lost as a neutral trait. A
straightforward scenario under which regeneration
might be neutral is if the structure in question is infre-
quently lost or damaged in nature. There is ample
evidence that even traits recently under strong selection
can be rapidly lost or modified when selection in
the
wild
becomes
relaxed
(Lahti
et
al.
2009).
Sublethal predation is a prevalent cause of regeneration
in nature (Lindsay 2010), and thus this is presumably
a common selective force maintaining regeneration.
A simple change in predator-prey dynamics that
decreases the frequency of sublethal predation in a
population could therefore lead to regeneration no
longer being actively maintained. Regeneration could
also be neutral if the functional importance of
the structure in question is so high that the animal
cannot survive without it long enough to regenerate
it, or so low that the structure is not worth replacing
given the costs of replacement (Goss 1969; Reichman
1984). Neutral loss of regeneration could also occur
if previously tight developmental pleiotropies between
regeneration and another process (e.g., embryogenesis)
simply break down, such that redeployment of the
latter’s developmental program is no longer possible
in the adult stage (Galis et al. 2003). This scenario
could explain decreases in regenerative ability that
correlate with changes in morphology or changes
in
the
developmental
processes
underlying
the
morphology.
Distinguishing between these possible ultimate ex-
planations for loss of regeneration is no small task.
Doing so will require collecting and integrating func-
tional, ecological, and developmental data for both
regenerating and non-regenerating species, preferably
closely related ones. Only by tackling this problem
with hypothesis testing and actual data, however, can
we begin moving away from the pervasive specula-
tion that has thus far characterized discussions about
the ultimate causes of regeneration loss.
How might regeneration be lost?
Uncovering the proximate causes of regeneration loss
involves deciphering which steps of regeneration
have become abrogated. Some of the broader ques-
tions we should be aiming to address with such data
include: Does regeneration fail in different ways in
different groups of animals? Are certain steps of re-
generation particularly prone to becoming blocked?
Does loss of regeneration occur all at once or grad-
ually, and, if the latter, what do intermediate stages
of the process look like?
The first step towards addressing these questions is
to determine when and how the regenerative process
520
A. E. Bely
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icb/article/50/4/515/653177 by Ulsan Natl Inst of Science & Technology user on 04 March 2021

halts or becomes abnormal. Does wound-healing fail?
Does a blastema (the mass of undifferentiated cells
from which new structures form) not develop? Is the
blastema improperly patterned? Is the regenerated
structure
missing
certain
functionally
important
elements? Although data are still limited, it is clear
that failure to regenerate can manifest itself in a variety
of ways and, interestingly, that there may be phyloge-
netic trends in how regeneration tends to fail. For ex-
ample, when regeneration of fish fins fails, a structure
often regenerates but is heteromorphic and misshapen
(Wagner and Misof 1992); with amphibian limbs, a
blastema often forms but is poorly patterned, such
that no obvious structures are formed (Scadding
1977, 1981); with annelids’ heads or tails, animals
typically wound-heal but fail even to develop a blaste-
ma (Bely 2006; Bely and Sikes 2010); and with spider
legs, wound-healing itself often fails if the amputation
is positioned somewhere other than at a limb joint,
such that animals leak body fluid and die from the
amputation, never properly wound-healing (Vollrath
1990). Thus, available evidence suggests that regenera-
tion may fail in predictable ways within a taxonomic
group. This could occur if, within a given lineage,
certain steps of the regenerative process are particularly
prone to becoming blocked.
Although loss of regeneration theoretically could
occur by the evolution of a single mutation that com-
pletely abrogates regeneration, it is also possible that
regeneration is lost gradually, with populations at suc-
cessively more advanced stages of regeneration loss
showing increasingly restricted or poorer regenerative
abilities. Specific hypotheses for how such gradual
losses might occur need to be developed. It is already
known that speed or success of regeneration can be
sensitive
to
a
variety
of
factors,
such
as
the
Fig. 2 Some hypothetical models for the gradual loss of regenerative abilities in a lineage. ‘‘Regeneration success’’ could be measured
a number of ways, such as the frequency of successful regeneration, the morphological fidelity of the regenerated structure, or the
functionality of the regenerated structure. Graphs on the left (A1, B1, and C1) show scenarios in which loss of regeneration is sensitive
to a particular factor (developmental stage, energy available in an organism, and environmental conditions); graphs on the right (A2, B2,
and C2) show scenarios in which loss of regeneration is insensitive to these factors. Solid lines denote the ancestral condition; dashed
and dotted lines denote populations progressively farther along on the trajectory to total loss of regeneration. Curves for populations
that have completely lost regenerative abilities would lie along the x-axis.
Regeneration loss in animals
521
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icb/article/50/4/515/653177 by Ulsan Natl Inst of Science & Technology user on 04 March 2021

developmental age of the stump tissue and the energet-
ic resources of the individual (e.g., Muller et al. 1999;
Han et al. 2008; Lawrence 2010). In populations that
are in the process of losing regenerative abilities, the
success of regeneration could be contingent upon such
factors as well, and, if so, identifying the specific factors
that are still permissive of regeneration may point to an
underlying mechanism for the loss.
Figure 2 shows several possible scenarios for
how regeneration success could change through time
in a lineage that is gradually losing regenerative
abilities. One possibility is that successful regeneration
becomes increasingly restricted across the life cycle. For
example, regeneration could become restricted to ear-
lier ontogenetic stages (Fig. 2A1), perhaps because
younger tissues are comprised of cells with greater
developmental flexibility. Another possibility is that
the energetic threshold for investment in regeneration
gradually increases (Fig. 2B1). Energetic tradeoffs be-
tween regeneration and other process, such as growth,
are common (Maginnis 2006; Lawrence 2010), and
if investment in other processes becomes favored at
the expense of regeneration, the energy threshold for
investment into regeneration could increase to the
point that investment in regeneration effectively
never occurs. Yet another possibility is that the envi-
ronmental conditions permissive of regeneration could
become increasingly narrow (Fig. 2C1). For example,
regeneration might only occur within an increasingly
narrow range of temperature or salinity. Other models
for a gradual loss of regeneration may involve less easily
quantifiable factors. For instance, success in regenera-
tion may correlate with the degree of pleiotropy
between regeneration and a core process, such as
embryogenesis. If regeneration is being lost because
this pleiotropy is breaking down, the fidelity of regen-
erated structures might gradually decrease through
time. Models such as the ones shown in Fig. 2 provide
clear predictions about how success of regeneration
might differ in lineages at different stages of regenera-
tion loss. To test the validity of such models, the con-
tingency of regeneration success on internal and
external factors should be evaluated in taxa that have
lost or appear to be losing regenerative abilities, as well
as in closely related, fully-regenerating taxa which can
serve as a proxy for the ancestral, fully-regenerating
population.
The holy grail for understanding how regeneration
has been lost is to identify the actual genetic
change(s) responsible for the original failure of re-
generation. Although this is an important goal, it is
essential to recognize that once a block to normal
regeneration has evolved in a lineage, rendering re-
generation non-functional, additional blocks may
rapidly accumulate. Thus, in all but the most
recently evolved cases of regeneration loss, regenera-
tion is likely to fail for multiple reasons, and pin-
pointing
the
first
block(s)
responsible
for
the
abrogation of regeneration will be challenging at
best. Currently no species are known that show nat-
ural, intraspecific variation in success of regenera-
tion, but if such species can be identified, they will
be extremely useful for elucidating the earliest steps
of loss of regeneration at the molecular level.
Annelids as a model for studying loss
of regeneration
Annelids exhibit extensive variation in regenerative
ability, making them useful models for understand-
ing regeneration loss. The ability to regenerate a new
tail is widespread across the phylum, having been
lost in only a few taxa (Bely 2006). The ability to
regenerate the head is much more variable, however,
suggesting numerous losses. Evidence for regenera-
tion of anterior segments was recently compiled for
the phylum (Bely 2006). By mapping this informa-
tion onto a molecular phylogeny for the group from
Struck et al. (2007), I show here that annelids inca-
pable of regenerating anterior segments are scattered
across the phylum (Fig. 3A). There is still consider-
able uncertainty about the deep-level phylogeny of
annelids (Rousset et al. 2007; Struck et al. 2007;
Zrzavy´ et al. 2009) and greater sampling of regener-
ative ability is clearly needed, but the available data
are consistent with the ability to regenerate anterior
segments being ancestral for the phylum and subse-
quently being lost many times. Some groups, most
notably the Hirudinida and Nereididae, are large
clades thought to be comprised entirely of species
that cannot regenerate anterior segments; these taxa
likely represent relatively old losses of the ability to
regenerate anteriorly. However, seven annelid fami-
lies (representing over one quarter of the families for
which there are relevant data) possess both anteriorly
regenerating and anteriorly non-regenerating species
(Fig. 3A, split black/white circles), suggesting at least
this many recent losses. As sampling for regenerative
ability is increased, the number of suggested losses is
likely to increase as well. Groups in which regenera-
tion has been lost relatively recently are particularly
useful for investigating the mechanisms underlying
the loss of regeneration.
To identify recent regeneration losses rigorously,
fine-scale sampling and detailed phylogenies must
be obtained. Such work has recently been carried
out within the family Naididae (former Tubificidae
[Erse´us et al. 2008]), focusing specifically on the
522
A. E. Bely
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icb/article/50/4/515/653177 by Ulsan Natl Inst of Science & Technology user on 04 March 2021

subfamily Naidinae (Bely and Sikes 2010). Naidines
are a group of small freshwater oligochaetes that re-
produce asexually by fission, a process thought to
have evolved from regeneration (Bely and Wray
2001). Because several naidine species possess excel-
lent abilities to regenerate both the anterior and pos-
terior ends, and because naidines are all capable of
asexual reproduction, it had long been assumed that
this entire group consisted of excellent regenerators.
However, Bely (1999) demonstrated that at least
one naidine species, Paranais litoralis, could not
regenerate anterior segments, even though it could
regenerate posterior segments. Following up on this
study, Bely and Sikes (2010) sampled more widely
within the naidines and found that six of the
18 naidine species investigated are incapable of
regenerating
the
head
segments.
Mapping
these
comparative data onto a robust, five-gene molecular
phylogeny of the group indicates that these six
species represent three independent losses of the
ability to regenerate the head region, with the
genera
Paranais,
Chaetogaster,
and
Amphichaeta
each representing a loss (Fig. 3B). It should be
noted, however, that other phylogenetic studies of
Fig. 3 Phylogenetic distribution of anterior regeneration in the annelids across (A) the entire phylum and (B) the clitellate subfamily
Naidinae. Black circles denote groups in which all taxa investigated have been shown to have the ability to regenerate anterior
segments; white circles denote groups in which all investigated taxa lack the ability to regenerate anterior segments; split black/white
circles denote groups in which some species have been shown to regenerate anterior segments while others have been shown to be
incapable of doing so. Data on regeneration are based on (A) Bely (2006) and (B) Bely and Sikes (2010). Phylogenetic relationships are
based on (A) Struck et al. (2007) and Erse´us and Ka¨llersjo¨ (2004) and (B) Bely and Sikes (2010). In (A), all taxa are annelids, and most,
although not all, groups represented are families. In (B), all species shown are naidines with the exception of the outgroups
Monopylephorus, Pristina, Branchiura, Tubifex, and Lumbriculus.
Regeneration loss in animals
523
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icb/article/50/4/515/653177 by Ulsan Natl Inst of Science & Technology user on 04 March 2021

naidines, based on smaller datasets, indicate the pos-
sibility of fewer losses (Bely and Wray 2004; Envall
et al. 2006; Erse´us et al. 2010). One of the species
found incapable of regenerating anterior segments,
Chaetogaster diaphanus, is a common and abundant
species and one of the naidine subjects of an early,
thorough description focusing on fission and, to a
lesser extent, regeneration (Dehorne 1916). That no
mention of this species’ inability to regenerate ante-
riorly has surfaced until now likely speaks to the
publication
bias
against
reporting
failure
to
regenerate.
The study by Bely and Sikes (2010) also found
that regeneration fails at approximately the same
point in the process in the non-anteriorly regenerat-
ing naidines, suggesting that some aspects of regen-
eration loss may be predictable within this group.
After anterior amputation, these species wound-heal
but fail to form a detectable blastema, although in
one lineage post-amputation cell proliferation is still
initiated. Interestingly, other non-regenerating anne-
lids
similarly
fail
at
this
same
point:
after
wound-healing and before formation of the blastema
(Bely 2006). This suggests that, at least in annelids,
regeneration is either preferentially, or most easily,
blocked about the time of blastema formation. This
could occur, for example, if selection is acting to halt
regeneration as early as possible (e.g., if optimal
allocation of energy favors investment in another
process, such as asexual reproduction), if initiation
of regeneration is the most susceptible phase of
regeneration (e.g., if this phase represents the largest
mutational target), or if initiation of regeneration is
the least pleiotropic phase of regeneration, such that
a block at this phase does not impair other critical
processes that are being maintained (e.g., wound-
healing, embryogenesis, and growth). Determining
the underlying cause for the repeated evolution of
early-acting blocks to regeneration in annelids clearly
warrants further investigation.
The study by Bely and Sikes (2010) provides a rare
glimpse at an intermediate phase of the loss of re-
generation. Specifically, the data are consistent with a
model in which regeneration becomes gradually re-
stricted to earlier ontogenetic stages, as diagrammed
in Fig. 2A1. Because naidines (and some of their
close relatives) typically reproduce asexually by para-
tomic fission, in which a new head and tail form in
the middle of the body (Fig. 4A), amputations can be
performed within young developing tissue, yet still
within the context of an otherwise fully formed
adult (Fig. 4B, right). Such amputations were per-
formed on three species, specifically bisecting the de-
veloping head (leaving a stump comprised of young
developing tissue), or, for a control, cutting imme-
diately behind the developing head (leaving a stump
of old adult tissue). Results showed that Pristina
leidyi, a close naidine outgroup capable of regenerat-
ing anteriorly from adult tissue, can regenerate ante-
riorly from a stump comprised of young developing
tissue. At a first approximation, then, this species
matches the solid line of Fig. 2A1 and likely repre-
sents
the
ancestral,
fully-regenerating
condition.
Chaetogaster diaphanus,
which cannot regenerate
anteriorly in the adult, was found to also lack
the ability to regenerate anteriorly from young
developing tissue. Thus, this species appears to
have completely lost the ability to regenerate anteri-
orly, regardless of the developmental age of the
stump, and would be represented on the graph in
Fig. 2A1 by a flat line along the x-axis. However,
Paranais litoralis, a naidine incapable of anterior re-
generation from adult tissue, was found still to be
capable of anterior regeneration when the stump was
comprised of young developing tissue (Fig. 4B, lower
right), suggesting an intermediate phase of regener-
ation loss as represented by the dotted or dashed
lines of Fig. 2A1. Although it is not known whether
C. diaphanus actually represents an older loss of
regeneration than does P. litoralis, the fact that
C. diaphanus has lower regenerative potential by
several additional criteria (Bely and Sikes 2010) is
consistent with this lineage being ‘‘farther along’’
on
the
trajectory
to
regeneration
loss
than
is
P. litoralis.
The study of naidines is the first to provide clear
evidence for regeneration being lost in an uneven
way across the life cycle. A few other taxa, most
notably some vertebrates, are known to possess
higher regenerative abilities during the embryonic
or juvenile phases of the life cycle than in the adult
phase (Vorontsova and Liosner 1960; Wallace 1981).
For example, human children and mouse embryos
are capable of regenerating digit tips, even though
adults of these species are not (Illingworth 1974;
Han et al. 2008). However, no extant mammals are
known to regenerate digit tips as adults, and there is
no evidence that the mammalian ancestor could do
so either. Thus, interpreting the vertebrate pattern as
a phase of regeneration loss is problematic at best.
Instead, it may be that actively developing tissue is
generally more permissive of regeneration, and that
this may be manifest in lineages that are losing re-
generation, gaining regeneration, or experiencing no
change in regeneration. It should also be noted that
early phases of the life cycle are not necessarily more
regenerative, as exemplified by groups such as ascid-
ians which may have extremely high regenerative
524
A. E. Bely
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icb/article/50/4/515/653177 by Ulsan Natl Inst of Science & Technology user on 04 March 2021

abilities as adults yet none demonstrated during the
larval phase (Vorontsova and Liosner 1960).
Why, ultimately, regeneration has been lost in
several naidines is as of yet unclear. There is ample
evidence that some annelids experience high levels of
sublethal predation (De Vlas 1979a, 1979b; Clavier
1984; Berke et al. 2009; Lindsay 2010), and thus it
is likely that regeneration is selectively favored in
many annelid species. Sublethal predation has even
been demonstrated in a naidine species (Kaliszewicz
2003; Kaliszewicz et al. 2005). However, there is no
information on the incidence of sublethal predation
for most naidines, including the six non-anteriorly
regenerating species studied. Therefore, the hypothe-
sis that regeneration loss in naidines occurred be-
cause of a decrease in the direct selective advantage
for anterior regeneration remains to be evaluated.
The possibility that regeneration may have been
lost
through
indirect
negative
selection
should
also be evaluated in the future, since there are
likely energetic tradeoffs between the multiple post-
embryonic developmental capabilities of naidines
(tissue turnover, growth, fission, regeneration). An
anteriorly amputated naidine can potentially invest
in several different developmental processes, and if
optimal allocation of energy favors investment in fis-
sion at the cost of regeneration, for example, regen-
eration could be indirectly selected against, possibly
resulting in regeneration loss as diagrammed in
Fig.
2B1.
Indeed,
when
anteriorly
amputated,
Paranais litoralis is known to accelerate the fission
process such that amputated individuals produce de-
tached offspring more quickly than do unamputated
individuals (Bely 1999). Whether regeneration is ac-
tually delayed or inhibited when a fission zone is
present should be studied in both anteriorly regen-
erating and anteriorly non-regenerating species to
further investigate this possibility.
Future directions
Because regenerative ability can be influenced by a
wide range of factors, developing a good understand-
ing of the mechanisms responsible for evolutionary
loss of regeneration will require taking a broad, in-
tegrative approach. Developing animal models that
are amenable to a range of investigations will be
particularly important, as this will allow studies of
the functional biology, ecology, evolutionary history,
and developmental genetic basis of regeneration to
be integrated for the purpose of testing alternative
hypotheses about loss of regeneration. While research
into regeneration has traditionally been carried out
on a few, distantly related model organisms, under-
standing the ultimate and proximate causes of regen-
eration loss requires a shift in approach; comparative
studies, focused on closely related regenerating and
non-regenerating taxa, are critical for investigating
why and how regenerative abilities are lost. Groups
Fig. 4 Paratomic fission in naidines (A) and the ability to regenerate anteriorly in the naidine Paranais litoralis (B). (A) During paratomic
fission, a new tail (dark gray) and a new head (light gray) are intercalated in the middle of the body of an adult worm, forming a
transiently linked chain of individuals. Worms eventually separate and can reinitiate the process. In P. litoralis (diagrammed here),
the new head made within the fission zone is comprised of three head segments, which are devoid of dorsal chaetae (bristles), and the
asegmental cap of tissue bearing the mouth. (B) P. litoralis cannot regenerate if the amputation leaves a stump consisting entirely of
old segments (white) (diagrams at top left, bottom left, and top right) but can regenerate if the amputation leaves even a small zone
of actively developing tissue (light gray) at the distal end of the stump (diagram at bottom right). Diagrams on the left portray
amputations in adult tissue: removal of all three head segments (top), two head segments (bottom), or even a single segment (not
shown) result in wound-healing but not in regeneration. Diagrams on the right portray amputations adjacent to, or within, the fission
zone: removal of all three head segments forming within the fission zone (top) results in wound-healing but not in regeneration,
while removal of two head segments (bottom) or one head segment (not shown) from the fission zone can result in regeneration
of a complete head. Results are from Bely and Sikes (2010).
Regeneration loss in animals
525
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icb/article/50/4/515/653177 by Ulsan Natl Inst of Science & Technology user on 04 March 2021

in which regeneration has been lost multiple times
among close relatives represent particularly attractive
systems for study, as these ‘‘natural replicates’’ may
reveal separate steps in the process of regeneration
loss and suggest which aspects may be predictable.
Acknowledgments
I thank L. Shapiro for comments on the manuscript
and members of the Bely laboratory for helpful
discussions.
Funding
Participation in the SICB 2010 Animal Regeneration
symposium was supported by the National Science
Foundation
(IOS-0940753
to
Sara
Lindsay
and
A.E.B.); the Society for Integrative and Comparative
Biology, including the divisions of Developmental
and
Cell
Biology,
Evolutionary
Developmental
Biology, Invertebrate Zoology, and Ecology and
Evolution; The American Microscopical Society; and
the Society for Developmental Biology. A.E.B.’s re-
search is funded by the National Science Foundation
(IOS-0920502).
References
Arnold EN. 1984. Evolutionary aspects of tail shedding in
lizards and their relatives. J Nat Hist 18:127–69.
Bellairs A, Bryant S. 1985. Autotomy and regeneration in
reptiles. In: Gans C, Billett F, editors. Biology of the
reptilia. New York: Wiley. p. 301–410.
Bely
AE.
1999.
Decoupling
of
fission
and
regenerative
capabilities
in
an
asexual
oligochaete.
Hydrobiologia
406:243–51.
Bely AE. 2006. Distribution of segment regeneration ability in
the Annelida. Integr Comp Biol 46:508–18.
Bely AE, Nyberg KG. 2010. Evolution of animal regeneration:
re-emergence of a field. Trends Ecol Evol 25:161–70.
Bely AE, Sikes JM. 2010. Latent regeneration abilities persist
following recent evolutionary loss in asexual annelids.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:1464–9.
Bely AE, Wray GA. 2001. Evolution of regeneration and fis-
sion in annelids: insights from engrailed- and orthodenticle-
class gene expression. Development 128:2781–91.
Bely AE, Wray GA. 2004. Molecular phylogeny of naidid
worms (Annelida: Clitellata) based on cytochrome oxidase
I. Mol Phylogen Evol 30:50–63.
Berke SK, Cruz V, Osman RW. 2009. Sublethal predation and
regeneration in two onuphid polychaetes: patterns and
implications. Biol Bull 217:242–52.
Brockes JP, Kumar A. 2008. Comparative aspects of animal
regeneration. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 24:525–49.
Brockes JP, Kumar A, Velloso CP. 2001. Regeneration as an
evolutionary variable. J Anat 199:3–11.
Carlson
BM.
2007.
Principles
of
regenerative
biology.
Burlington (MA): Academic Press.
Clavier J. 1984. Production due to regeneration by Euclymene
oerstedi (Polychaeta: Maldanidae) in the maritime basin of
the Rance (Northern Brittany). J Exp Mar Biol Ecol
75:97–106.
De Vlas J. 1979a. Annual food intake by plaice and flounder
in a tidal flat area in the Dutch Wadden Sea, with special
reference to consumption of regenerating parts of macro-
benthic prey. Neth J Sea Res 13:117–53.
De Vlas J. 1979b. Secondary production by tail regeneration
in a tidal flat population of lugworms (Arenicola marina),
cropped by flatfish. Neth J Sea Res 13:362–93.
Dehorne L. 1916. Les naı¨dimorphes et leur reproduction asex-
ue´e. Arch Zool exp ge´n 56:25–157.
Dinsmore
CE,
editor.
1991.
A
history
of
regeneration
research:
Milestones
in
the
evolution
of
a
science.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Envall I, Ka¨llersjo¨ M, Erse´us C. 2006. Molecular evidence for
the
non-monophyletic
status
of
Naidinae
(Annelida,
Clitellata, Tubificidae). Mol Phylogen Evol 40:570–84.
Erse´us C, Envall I, Marchese M, Gustavsson L. 2010. The
systematic position of Opistocystidae (Annelida, Clitellata)
revealed by DNA data. Mol Phylogen Evol 54:309–13.
Erse´us C, Ka¨llersjo¨ M. 2004. 18S rDNA phylogeny of Clitellata
(Annelida). Zool Scr 33:187–96.
Erse´us C, Wetzel MJ, Gustavsson L. 2008. ICZN rules: a
farewell
to
Tubificidae
(Annelida,
Clitellata).
Zootaxa
1744:66–8.
Etheridge
R.
1959.
Lizard
caudal
vertebrae.
Copeia
1967:699–721.
Galis F, Wagner GP, Jockusch EL. 2003. Why is limb regen-
eration possible in amphibians but not in reptiles, birds,
and mammals? Evol Dev 5:208–20.
Gans C. 1978. The characteristics and affinities of the
Amphisbaenia. Trans Zool Soc Lond 34:347–416.
Garza-Garcia AA, Driscoll PC, Brockes JP. 2010. Evidence
for the local evolution of mechanisms underlying limb
regeneration in salamanders. Integr Comp Biol, Advance
Access published online on April 21, 2010; doi:10.1093/
icb/icq022.
Goss
RJ.
1969.
Principles
of
regeneration.
New
York:
Academic Press.
Goss RJ. 1992. The evolution of regeneration: adaptive or
inherent? J Theor Biol 159:241–60.
Han M, Yang X, Lee J, Allan CH, Muneoka K. 2008.
Development and regeneration of the neonatal digit tip in
mice. Dev Biol 315:125–35.
Illingworth CM. 1974. Trapped fingers and amputated finger
tips in children. J Pediatr Surg 9:853–8.
Kaliszewicz A. 2003. Sublethal predation on Stylaria lacustris:
a
study
of
regenerative
capabilities.
Hydrobiologia
501:83–92.
Kaliszewicz A, Johst K, Grimm V, Uchmanski J. 2005.
Predation effects on the evolution of life-history traits in
a clonal oligochaete. Am Nat 166:409–17.
526
A. E. Bely
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icb/article/50/4/515/653177 by Ulsan Natl Inst of Science & Technology user on 04 March 2021

Kolmayer
S,
Ste´phan-Dubois
F.
1960.
Ne´oblastes
et
limitation du pouvoir de re´ge´ne´ration ce´phalique chez la
planaire Dendrocoelum lacteum. J Embryol Exp Morphol
8:376–86.
Lahti DC, Johnson NA, Ajie BC, Otto SP, Hendry AP,
Blumstein DT, Coss RG, Donohue K, Foster SA. 2009.
Relaxed selection in the wild. Trends Ecol Evol 24:487–96.
Lawrence JM. 2010. Energetic costs of loss and regeneration
of arms in stellate echinoderms. Integr Comp Biol, Advance
Access published online on May 6, 2010; doi:10.1093/icb/
icq027.
Lindsay SM. 2010. Frequency of injury and the ecology of
regeneration in marine benthic invertebrates. Integr Comp
Biol, Advance Access published online on August 7, 2010;
doi:10.1093/icb/icq099.
Maginnis TL. 2006. The costs of autotomy and regeneration
in animals: a review and framework for future research.
Behav Ecol 17:857–72.
Morgan TH. 1901. Regeneration. London: Macmillan & Co.
Muller TL, Ngo-Muller V, Reginelli A, Taylor G, Anderson R,
Muneoka K. 1999. Regeneration in higher vertebrates: limb
buds and digit tips. Semin Cell Dev Biol 10:405–13.
Needham
AE.
1952.
Regeneration
and
wound-healing.
London: Methuen & Co.
Nelson JS. 2006. Fishes of the world. New York: John Wiley &
Sons.
Reichman OJ. 1984. Evolution of regeneration capabilities.
Am Nat 123:752–63.
Rousset V, Pleijel F, Rouse GW, Erse´us C, Siddall ME. 2007.
A molecular phylogeny of annelids. Cladistics 23:41–63.
Sa´nchez Alvarado A, Tsonis PA. 2006. Bridging the regener-
ation gap: genetic insights from diverse animal models. Nat
Rev Genet 7:873–84.
Scadding SR. 1977. Phylogenic distribution of limb regenera-
tion capacity in adult Amphibia. J Exp Zool 202:57–68.
Scadding SR. 1981. Limb regeneration in adult amphibia. Can
J Zool 59:34–46.
Seligmann H, Moravec J, Werner YL. 2008. Morphological,
functional and evolutionary aspects of tail autotomy and
regeneration in the ‘living fossil’ Sphenodon (Reptilia:
Rhynchocephalia). Biol J Linn Soc 93:721–43.
Stephan-Dubois F, Bautz A. 1975. Etude histologique et cyto-
logique des neoblastes et des cellules fixes du parenchyme
chez des planaires Dendrocoelum lacteum privees de region
anterieure. Arch Anat Microsc Morphol Exp 64:75–89.
Struck TH, Schult N, Kusen T, Hickman E, Bleidorn C,
McHugh D, Halanych KM. 2007. Annelid phylogeny and
the status of Sipuncula and Echiura. BMC Evol Biol 7:57.
Tsonis PA. 2000. Regeneration in vertebrates. Dev Biol
221:273–84.
Vidal N, Hedges SB. 2005. The phylogeny of squamate reptiles
(lizards, snakes, and amphisbaenians) inferred from nine
nuclear protein-coding genes. C R Biol 328:1000–8.
Vollrath F. 1990. Leg regeneration in web spiders and its
implications for orb weaver phylogeny. Bull Br Arachnol
Soc 8:177–84.
Vorontsova MA, Liosner LD. 1960. Asexual propagation and
regeneration. London: Pergamon Press.
Wagner GP, Misof BY. 1992. Evolutionary modification of
regenerative capability in vertebrates: a comparative study
on teleost pectoral fin regeneration. J Exp Zool 261:62–78.
Wallace H. 1981. Vertebrate limb regeneration. New York:
John Wiley & Sons.
Wulff J. 2010. Regeneration of sponges in ecological context:
is regeneration an integral part of life history and morpho-
logical
strategies?
Integr
Comp
Biol,
Advance
Access
published online on August 17, 2010; doi:10.1093/icb/
icq100.
Yanik MF, Cinar H, Cinar HN, Chisholm AD, Jin Y, Ben-
Yakar A. 2004. Functional regeneration after laser axotomy.
Nature 432:822.
Zrzavy´ J, Rˇ ı´ha P, Pia´lek L, Janousˇkovec J. 2009. Phylogeny
of Annelida (Lophotrochozoa): total-evidence analysis of
morphology and six genes. BMC Evol Biol 9:189.
Regeneration loss in animals
527
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icb/article/50/4/515/653177 by Ulsan Natl Inst of Science & Technology user on 04 March 2021

===== Bely2010_TrendsEvol_AnimalRegeneration =====
Evolution of animal regeneration:
re-emergence of a ﬁeld
Alexandra E. Bely and Kevin G. Nyberg
Biology Department, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
Regeneration, the replacement of lost body parts, is
widespread yet highly variable among animals. Explain-
ing this variation remains a major challenge in biology.
Great strides have been made in understanding the
phylogenetic distribution, ecological context and devel-
opmental basis of regeneration, and these new data are
yielding novel insights into why and how regeneration
evolves. Here, we review the phylogenetic distribution
of regeneration and discuss how the origin, maintenance
and loss of regeneration can each be driven by distinct
factors. As the complexity of factors affecting regener-
ation evolution is increasingly appreciated, and as expli-
citly evolutionary studies of regeneration become more
common, the coming years promise exciting progress in
revealing the underlying mechanisms that have shaped
animal regeneration.
A long-standing problem
The ability to replace lost body parts varies widely among
animals for reasons that have long perplexed biologists.
Beginning with the earliest experimental studies of regen-
eration (see Glossary) during the 1700s, such as Abraham
Trembley’s work documenting the extensive regeneration
properties of Hydra, it has been clear that animals vary
substantially in their ability to regenerate lost body parts
[1]. Whereas some animals, such as many cnidarians and
ﬂatworms, can regenerate an entire individual from a
small body fragment, others, such as birds, nematodes
and leeches, are largely or completely incapable of regen-
erating any structure [2,3]. Regeneration can vary even
among parts of the same organism. Many lizards, for
example, can easily replace a tail but not a limb [4] and
many annelid worms can regenerate a tail but not a head
[5]. Key questions regarding the evolution of regeneration
have been debated for more than a century [6–10]. Is
regeneration an adaptive trait? Is it merely a by-product
of normal development? Do all structures capable of regen-
erating share certain properties? There has been a long-
standing desire to identify a single cause for regeneration
variation. However, as we discuss here, it is increasingly
evident that regeneration is shaped by a multiplicity of
ecological and evolutionary factors.
Advances are currently being made in regeneration
biology, most notably in understanding the developmental
basis and functional ecology of regeneration. Although
most regeneration research is not explicitly evolutionary,
these new data are collectively beginning to shed light on
the questions of why and how regeneration evolves. Here,
we provide an overview of regeneration ability across
animals and discuss recent literature that is providing
new insights into the origin, maintenance and loss of
animal regeneration.
What is regeneration?
Simply, regeneration is the restoration of a lost body part,
although the term has been applied to a broad range of
processes. Regeneration can occur at multiple levels of
biological organization (Figure 1), can be triggered by a
variety of insults, can occur at different parts of the life
cycle, can proceed via a diversity of developmental pro-
cesses and can produce structures of variable ﬁdelity
relative to the original. Some phenomena referred to as
‘regeneration’ might have arisen independently and thus
not even be homologous. These issues complicate any
attempt to examine the evolutionary history of regener-
ation and necessitate the clear deﬁnition of speciﬁc pro-
cesses under consideration.
Here, we focus speciﬁcally on regeneration at the whole-
organism level, namely, structure or whole-body regener-
ation. Regeneration at this level has a clear ecological
context, as animals in the wild can lose body parts to
predators or other natural traumas. We consider regener-
ation following either amputation or autotomy, occurring
during any post-embryonic part of the life-cycle, occurring
by any developmental mechanism (either epimorphosis or
morphallaxis), and producing structures that are identical
or largely similar to the original.
Although regeneration has sometimes been equated
with other developmental phenomena, such as growth,
Review
Glossary
Amputation: an externally induced injury that severs a body part from the rest
of the animal.
Autotomy: self-amputation, or the severing of a body part at a predictable
breakage plane. Autotomy typically occurs at a weak body connection, and
often occurs entirely or largely under control of the animal. It typically results in
a more limited wound than does regular amputation and is considered to be an
adaptation to frequent tissue loss. Autotomy can be, but is not necessarily,
followed by regeneration.
Blastema: a mass of undifferentiated cells that forms at a wound site and
ultimately gives rise to the regenerated body part. The blastema arises through
proliferation of undifferentiated cells, either dedifferentiated cells or stem cells.
Epimorphosis: a mechanism of regeneration involving cell proliferation and
the formation of a blastema, from which the replaced structure originates.
Morphallaxis: a mechanism of regeneration involving no (or limited) cell
proliferation. New structures are formed from remodeled existing tissue rather
than from new cells.
Regeneration: the replacement of a body part lost through traumatic injury
(either amputation or autotomy). Regeneration can occur at multiple
hierarchical levels, including cellular, tissue, internal organ, structure and
whole-body regeneration. It can occur through epimorphosis, morphallaxis or
a combination of the two.
Corresponding author: Bely, A.E. (abely@umd.edu).
0169-5347/$ – see front matter  2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2009.08.005 Available online 30 September 2009
161

asexual reproduction (e.g. ﬁssion or budding), or embryo-
genesis, it must be treated as a distinct evolutionary
phenomenon. First, only regeneration is initiated speciﬁ-
cally by an unpredictable injury that severs a piece of the
body, leaving a wounded, multicellular stump. Second,
regeneration can involve regeneration-speciﬁc developmen-
tal features, such as nerve dependence or regeneration-
speciﬁc gene expression [11,12]. Finally, regeneration has
a unique phylogenetic distribution, different to that of other
developmental phenomena, such as embryogenesis and
asexual reproduction. It occurs in only a subset of animals,
unlike embryogenesis, which is ubiquitous, and despite
the close evolutionary and developmental links between
regeneration and asexual reproduction [11,13], regener-
ation can be lost even in asexually reproducing groups
[14]. Thus, although it is related to these other modes of
development, regeneration has a distinct developmental
basis and evolutionary fate.
Regeneration across animal phylogeny
The ability to regenerate at least some body structures is
common, occurring in most phyla that have been investi-
gated (Figure 2). Extensive regeneration ability, as deﬁned
by the ability to regenerate all body parts (whole-body
regeneration), is also widespread, occurring in all basal
metazoan lineages and in several lophotrochozoan and
deuterostome phyla. Thus, it is likely that the metazoan
ancestor, the bilaterian ancestor, the deuterostome ances-
tor and the lophotrochozoan ancestor were all capable of
extensive regeneration.
The phylogenetic distribution of regeneration also
indicates that restriction or loss of regeneration ability
has occurred many times among animals (Figure 2). One
of the largest and oldest clades with greatly reduced
regeneration ability is the Ecdysozoa (Figure 2a). No
examples of whole-body regeneration or primary body axis
regeneration are known from any ecdysozoan phyla
(although many arthropods are able to regenerate limbs
and antennae) [15]. Among annelids, multiple losses of
regeneration are indicated, with the ability to regenerate
heads and tails being widespread in the phylum yet com-
pletely absent in several groups, including leeches [5].
Among chordates, the directionality of change is less
obvious. However, whereas some urochordates can regen-
erate an entire body from just a small blood vessel frag-
ment [16] and some amphibians can regenerate their tails,
limbs and jaws [3,17], birds and mammals appear to have
lost the ability to regenerate nearly all structures [18]
(Figure 2b) (although some fetal and juvenile mammals
can regenerate digit tips [19,20], some mammals can
regenerate ear tissue [21], and deer can repeatedly shed
and regrow antlers [22]).
The extensive variation in regeneration capabilities
across animals is not easily explained. To identify and
disentangle the many factors potentially shaping the
distribution of regeneration, the origin, maintenance and
loss of regeneration must each be addressed separately.
Here, we present hypotheses and discuss available data
relevant to each of these components of the evolution of
regeneration.
Origin of regeneration
Based on the phylogenetic distribution of regeneration, it
seems likely that regeneration ﬁrst arose in early animals,
Figure 1. Regeneration at different levels of biological organization. A particular species might regenerate at all, none, or just a subset of these levels. Functional links
between regenerative processes at successive levels are probable, but it remains unclear which aspects of regeneration are homologous across levels. Colony-level
‘regeneration’, as seen in colonial animals such as corals and ascidians, occurs through asexual reproduction rather than through regeneration of individuals and thus is not
included here. Dashed red lines indicate amputation planes; solid red lines indicate wound surfaces; and blue fill indicates regenerated body parts.
Review
Trends in Ecology and Evolution Vol.25 No.3
162

possibly coincident with the origin of multicellularity. If
this origin of regeneration gave rise to all regeneration
seen today, then commonalities in the process should be
apparent, reﬂecting that homology, even across divergent
species and structures. Many advances are currently being
made in understanding the developmental mechanisms of
regeneration in a small set of animal regeneration models,
the most intensively studied being amphibian limbs and
tails, ﬁsh ﬁns, planarians and hydra. This research is
revealing some widely shared features of animal regener-
ation [12,18,23–25]. In disparate taxa, re-epithelialization
(the formation of an intact epithelium covering the wound)
can occur by similar processes [18,26]; interactions be-
tween tissues with different positional identities (e.g. dor-
sal
and
ventral
tissues)
are
involved
in
initiating
regeneration [27,28]; matrix metalloproteinases, enzymes
involved in degrading or remodeling the extracellular
matrix, are upregulated after wounding [29–31]; bioelec-
tric events (e.g. ion ﬂuxes or membrane voltage changes)
are implicated in regeneration initiation [32,33]; immune
response genes are upregulated in early regeneration
[34,35]; cell signaling, especially Wnt and ﬁbroblast growth
factor (FGF) signaling, is important for regeneration
initiation and blastema development [11,31,36–39]; and
an important role has been demonstrated or suggested for
innervation
of
the
regenerating
tissue
[3,18,40,41].
Although it could be argued that some of these processes
might be general features of development, nerve depen-
dence is a common (although not universal) regeneration-
speciﬁc feature, providing support for the homology of
Figure 2. Phylogenetic distribution of regeneration across (a) the Metazoa and (b) the Chordata. ‘Presence of regeneration’ indicates that at least one well-substantiated
report exists for regeneration in that taxon and does not imply that all species in that taxon can regenerate. ‘Absence of regeneration’ indicates that there is at least one well-
substantiated report for the lack of regeneration in that taxon (and none indicating the presence of regeneration). We define ‘whole-body regeneration’ as the potential to
regenerate every part of the body (although not necessarily simultaneously or from a tiny fragment). The ability to regenerate the primary body axis is scored independently
for each taxon and does not assume homology of body axes across or within phyla. Tree topologies are based on Refs [46,97–99]. Regeneration data are based largely on
Refs [2,3]; a complete list of references is provided in the Online Supplementary Material.
Review
Trends in Ecology and Evolution
Vol.25 No.3
163

animal regeneration. Little is known about the injury
signals indicating that tissue loss has occurred and trig-
gering regeneration, but if such signals are conserved
across animals, this could lend additional support to the
homology of regeneration mechanisms.
Beyond these similarities, the regeneration process can
differ in profound ways among animal groups, and some of
these differences might represent the evolution of novel
components of the process. For example, regeneration can
occur via a blastema of presumably undifferentiated cells
(e.g. epimorphic regeneration of a salamander limb);
through proliferation of existing cell types (e.g. restoration
of a tadpole tail); without any proliferation (e.g. morphal-
laxis in Hydra); or by some combination of these mechan-
isms
(e.g.
combined
epimorphic
and
morphallactic
regeneration in annelids and planarians) [12,18,23,42].
A blastema, where one occurs, can be formed primarily
through stem cells (e.g. neoblasts in planarians), dediffer-
entiation of mature tissue (as in vertebrate limb regener-
ation), or by some combination of these (as in annelids and
echinoderms) [3,12,18,42,43,44]. How does this variation
map onto animal phylogeny? Morphallaxis is widespread,
occurring in both bilaterians and non-bilaterians, and
might represent the ancestral mode of regeneration,
whereas epimorphosis appears to be a bilaterian inno-
vation. Important similarities between morphallaxis and
epimorphosis [23,45] suggest that the two are evolutiona-
rily related processes. With respect to blastema formation,
both dedifferentiated cells and stem cells contribute to
blastemas in several deuterostomes and protostomes,
but in platyhelminths and acoels, blastemas form exclu-
sively through stem cell contributions. With acoels now
thought to represent the most basal bilaterian lineage [46],
an important question is whether the exclusively stem cell-
based mode of regeneration (and growth) of acoels and
platyhelminths reﬂects homology and, thus, possibly the
ancestral condition for bilaterians.
By what evolutionary mechanism did regeneration ﬁrst
originate? Extensive similarities between regeneration
and other forms of development, particularly post-embryo-
nic development, suggest that regeneration originated as
an epiphenomenon of development rather than through a
step-by-step assembly of an independent process. Under
the epiphenomenon hypothesis, regeneration was origin-
ally (and in some lineages or structures might still be) a
natural consequence of an accessible developmental pro-
gram that could be automatically redeployed when a struc-
ture was lost. In diverse animals, important parallels are
evident between regeneration and asexual reproduction
[2,11,13,42,47–49], tissue homeostasis and growth [13,37],
and even embryogenesis [26,38,49,50], consistent with the
epiphenomenon
hypothesis.
Furthermore,
in
basal
animals, such as sponges and cnidarians, asexual repro-
duction and post-embryonic growth are particularly com-
mon, suggesting that early animals probably had a diverse
developmental repertoire from which regeneration could
have evolved. Given the relative ease with which regener-
ation can evolve if it arises as an epiphenomenon, con-
sideration should be given to the possibility that some
occurrences of regeneration in animals are the result of
secondary gains.
The epiphenomenon hypothesis for the origin of regen-
eration in early animals does not necessarily preclude a
role for selection in the early evolution of regeneration.
Predation or other aggressive biotic interactions are the
predominant selective force favoring regeneration today
(Box 1), but available evidence suggests that predators
were absent during the earliest phase of animal evolution
[51]. However, abiotic factors can be signiﬁcant causes of
tissue loss and regeneration in sponges [52]. Thus, abioti-
cally induced injury could have had a role in favoring
regeneration during its early evolution.
Maintenance of regeneration
Once regeneration ability evolved, it could be maintained
through mechanisms other than those responsible for its
origin. Speciﬁcally, regeneration could be maintained
through direct selection, pleiotropy with a related phenom-
enon, or phylogenetic inertia. The ecological context of
regeneration is key to understanding its maintenance,
and this context is increasingly well characterized for
several groups of animals.
Adaptive hypothesis
If the ability to regenerate a particular structure is actively
maintained by selection, several predictions should be met.
First, the structure should be frequently lost in the ﬁeld,
indicating that regeneration of that structure is relevant to
the ecology of the organism. Second, absence of the structure
should result in signiﬁcant ﬁtness-related costs to the indi-
vidual, such that replacing the structure could present some
beneﬁt, yet those costs cannot be so great that the animal
dies before regenerationhas restoredthe functionality ofthe
structure [3]. Third, the beneﬁts of replacing the lost struc-
ture should outweigh the costs of regeneration (Boxes 2,3).
Certain regenerating species experience high frequen-
cies of structure loss in nature, most commonly from pre-
dation and, in such taxa, regeneration is likely to be
actively maintained (Box 1, Figure 3). A high incidence
of structure loss and regeneration in natural populations is
well documented for a range of structures and animals,
including tails of lizards and salamanders [17]; arms of
Box 1. Causes of tissue loss in the wild
The most commonly recognized cause of tissue loss in natural
populations is sublethal predation; that is, the loss of a body part (by
either amputation or autotomy) following a predator attack
[59,62,63,78]. Sublethal predation is likely to be a dominant force
maintaining regeneration in many animal lineages and paleontolo-
gical evidence suggests that it has long been important in groups
such as echinoderms [54,79].
In some habitats, sublethal predation and subsequent prey
regeneration can be so prevalent that they have a significant role
in community dynamics [58,78]. In soft-sediment aquatic habitats,
for example, fish and other predators repeatedly crop extended
siphons, feeding tentacles and tail tips of buried bivalves and
annelids. One study of an estuary-dwelling bivalve population in
Japan estimated that each individual experienced siphon cropping
by predatory fish > 25 times each year [80].
Although sublethal predation is the predominant mechanism of
tissue loss in many animals, tissue loss can also occur from
aggressive intraspecific encounters [56,75], molting complications
[81], autotomy to eliminate a toxin-laden body part [82,83] and
abiotic physical damage [52].
Review
Trends in Ecology and Evolution Vol.25 No.3
164

ophiuroid, asteroid and crinoid echinoderms [53], including
fossil forms [54]; limbs of decapods, insects and spiders
[15,55]; caudal lamellae of aquatic insect larvae [56];
siphons of infaunal bivalve molluscs [57]; tails, heads
and feeding tentacles of polychaete annelids [58]; and parts
of sponges [59]. In groups such as these, a large fraction of
the population might be regenerating at any given time
(e.g. 97% in Antarctic ophiuroids) [60] and an individual’s
risk of experiencing repeated tissue loss might be high. (A
high level of tissue loss, of course, is not always associated
with regeneration ability, as demonstrated by certain
rodents that frequently autotomize their tails but cannot
regenerate them [61].)
There is now extensive evidence from a range of taxa
that tissue loss and regeneration can impart severe func-
tional,
energetic,
reproductive
and
survival
costs
[15,17,53,62,63], and even potentially affect offspring ﬁt-
ness via maternal effects [17]. Unfortunately, much of this
literature remains of limited use for testing the second and
third predictions of the adaptive hypothesis (i.e. that
structure absence is costly and that beneﬁts of regener-
ation outweigh costs) because nearly all studies confound
the effects of structure loss and structure regeneration
[62]. Studies typically compare undamaged, non-regener-
ating individuals with damaged, regenerating individuals
and, thus, cannot address the value of regenerating versus
not regenerating in already damaged individuals. Some
short-term costs of structure loss can be measured ade-
quately immediately after tissue loss (before energy has
been invested into regeneration) [57,64–67]. However,
many of the costs and beneﬁts of tissue loss and regener-
ation (Boxes 2,3) need to be assessed using more targeted
experiments, for example, by inhibiting regeneration in
some damaged individuals and allowing it to proceed in
others. Although challenging, it will be important to do this
for regenerating species in which natural tissue loss is
infrequent, making it less obvious that regeneration is
selectively advantageous.
Perhaps surprisingly, for some of the most highly regen-
erative animals, there is no evidence of high amputation
frequencies in the wild. We could ﬁnd no published records
of amputation in the ﬁeld for either Hydra or for planar-
ians, and ﬁeld collections of Hydra from many localities on
multiple continents have not yielded any amputated or
obviously regenerating animals (D.E. Martı´nez, pers. com-
mun.). Although these animals regenerate rapidly, which
would quickly eliminate evidence of past amputations, the
lack of evidence for high amputation rates in nature for
these common animals suggests they might only rarely
suffer amputation in the wild. We should therefore con-
sider the possibility that the extraordinary regeneration
abilities of Hydra and planarians, two important develop-
mental models of regeneration, are maintained largely by
mechanisms other than direct selection.
Alternatives to the adaptive hypothesis: pleiotropy and
phylogenetic inertia
Although
rarely
considered
formally,
pleiotropy
and
phylogenetic inertia could also be common explanations
for the retention of regeneration, especially in species
Box 2. Costs and benefits of structure loss
The adaptive value of regeneration depends on the risk of tissue loss
in natural populations and on the diverse costs and benefits of
structure loss (this box) and regeneration (Box 3). Changes in any of
these could alter the net selective advantage of regeneration.
 Benefit of autotomy: in animals that have evolved autotomy, this
process can increase the chance of survival by facilitating escape,
for example by enabling the individual to avoid entrapment (e.g.
by a predator, web, or molt) or by distracting a predator (e.g.
thrashing of an autotomized lizard tail) [15,62,63]. Autotomy also
provides a predictable wound plane and can minimize fluid loss
and tissue damage, thus reducing the cost of injury [75,84].
 Cost of injury: structure loss can lead to local tissue damage, loss
of body fluids and infection. In some situations, injury costs can
be almost trivial, as in blue crabs, which rapidly seal the wound
after limb autotomy and suffer a physiological burden compar-
able to merely walking a few hours [85]. By contrast, in mammals,
the leakage of body fluids, drop in body temperature and
significant risk of infection resulting from amputation can be life
threatening. Although injury, by definition, inflicts a cost, there is
some suggestion that injury can also provide unexpected side
benefits, such as prolonged lifespan [86].
 Cost of structure absence: once a structure is lost, individuals can
bear costs related to the services of the missing structure (e.g.
decreased locomotory function, feeding, social status, reproduction
and survival) [62,63] and often display compensatory behaviors to
minimize these costs [87–89]. The magnitude of these costs can
depend on the extent of injury and environmental variables [66,90].
(Although structure absence typically imparts a non-trivial cost, in
some cases it results in little or no functional impairment [67,68]
and, in rare instances, can even provide benefits [91].) If the
structure does not regenerate, the cost of structure loss is borne
permanently by the individual; if it does regenerate, costs decrease
as the structure regrows and regains functionality [92,93].
Box 3. Costs and benefits of regeneration
Regeneration can impart a range of costs and benefits distinct from
those associated with structure loss.
 Energy allocation cost: regeneration can be energetically expen-
sive [65] and the energetic burden of regeneration on an
individual, termed the ‘regenerative load’ [55], can cause a
decrease in growth, reproduction and other body functions, as
well as developmental tradeoffs [94]. These effects are exacer-
bated if structure loss results in a significant loss of energy stores
(e.g. as with the loss of echinoderm arms or lizard tails) [17,53] or
reduces the ability to acquire new resources.
 Cost of intermediate regeneration stages: a structure that is
partially but not yet fully regenerated might, in some cases, hinder
organismal function more than the absence of the structure, as
has been suggested for partially regenerated limbs of some
spiders [73]. The result is a transient performance cost, borne only
during the process of regeneration.
 Fidelity cost: if the regenerated structure is an imperfect copy of
the original, the animal can bear a permanent cost related to the
low fidelity of the regenerate. Imperfect regenerates might be
permanently smaller or might be missing certain structures, as is
common for regenerated arthropod limbs and vertebrate tails
[62]. The functionality of the imperfect regenerate might be
impaired relative to the original, although recent work on fiddler
crabs suggests that an imperfect structure can perform some key
functions as well as the original [95]. Imperfections could result
from developmental constraints or could be adaptive if imperfect
regeneration represents an optimal investment into regeneration
for the injured animal.
 Benefit of structure replacement: unless there is a fidelity cost, the
benefit of structure replacement should exactly negate the
original cost of structure absence. The lifetime benefit of structure
replacement will depend on the age of the animal at injury and its
expected longevity [96].
Review
Trends in Ecology and Evolution
Vol.25 No.3
165

experiencing infrequent tissue loss in the wild. The pleio-
tropy hypothesis posits that the ability to regenerate a
particular structure is retained because it is developmen-
tally tightly coupled with a related phenomenon, such as
asexual reproduction, growth, embryogenesis, or even the
ability to regenerate another body part. Under this
scenario, amputation triggers the deployment of this
shared developmental process, without regeneration of
that structure being a speciﬁc adaptation. Large clades
of highly regenerative species, such as cnidarians and
turbellarians, for which regeneration and normal growth
are based on largely overlapping mechanisms [24,29,42],
are prime candidates for investigating the role of pleio-
tropy in maintaining regeneration. The phylogenetic iner-
tia hypothesis proposes that regeneration is retained
simply for historical reasons. Under this scenario, regen-
eration ability is an ancestral trait that is neither currently
selectively advantageous (although it might have been in
the past) nor retained by pleiotropy: it has simply not been
eliminated from the developmental repertoire of the
species. Groups in which regeneration is widespread but
has been lost multiple times (indicating that pleiotropy is
not present or can be easily broken down), such as annelids
[5], would be ideal clades in which to test this hypothesis.
Loss of regeneration
Restriction or loss of regeneration ability has been common
across animal phylogeny. All three major bilaterian clades
include groups with no or extremely limited powers of
regeneration (Figure 2). Why would such a seemingly
Figure 3. The ecological context of regeneration. A variety of animals frequently lose body parts to predators or other traumas and subsequently regenerate them,
providing strong evidence for the adaptiveness of regeneration in these organisms. (a) To escape predation, some lizards, such as this alligator lizard (Elgaria coerulea
principis), autotomize the tail and later regenerate it. (b) Fiddler crabs (e.g. Uca mjoebergi) can lose limbs, including their major claw, to predators. A regenerated major
claw is weaker than the original but just as effective in conspecific signaling [95]. (c) Fossil evidence for predator-induced regeneration comes from crinoid assemblages, in
which the frequency of crinoid arm regeneration tracks that of predator frequency [54]. The Carboniferous crinoid Agaricocrinus splendens is shown here regenerating one
of its arms (arrow). (d,e,f,g) In soft-bottom aquatic habitats, the protruding siphons of bivalves (Leukoma staminea, shown in d and e) or tentacles of spionid polychaetes
(f,g) can be frequently lost to browsing predators, such as fish. (h) A stick insect will autotomize a limb during molting if it is unable to extract its elongate limbs from the
shed exoskeleton [81]. Here, a male Wu¨ lfing’s stick-insect nymph, Acrophylla wuelfingi, is undergoing the delicate process of molting, characteristically hanging upside
down. Reproduced with permission from Gary Nafis (a), Tanya Detto (b), Forest Gahn (c), Peter Bryant (d, e), Marc Levenson (f), Greg Rouse (g) and Paul D. Brock (h).
Review
Trends in Ecology and Evolution Vol.25 No.3
166

beneﬁcial trait ever be lost? An increasing number of
diverse hypotheses have been proposed to account for this
perplexing phenomenon.
If regeneration confers no selective advantage, it could
be lost as a neutral trait, for several possible reasons.
First, tissue loss could be uncommon in the ﬁeld. There is
growing evidence that the frequency of structure loss
can vary among species (even among closely related,
morphologically similar species) and that the value of
regeneration might therefore vary among species and
through time [15,53,54,63]. Even if structure loss used
to be common in the past, a change in the species itself
(e.g. increased predator avoidance or defense ability) or a
change in the source of damage (e.g. an increase in pred-
ator efﬁciency that causes predators to inﬂict lethal
rather
than
sublethal
damage)
could
signiﬁcantly
decrease structure loss frequency, making regeneration
ecologically irrelevant.
Second, the functional importance of the structure could
greatly decrease or increase, thus no longer satisfying the
principle that regenerating structures must be important
but not crucial [3,7]. The regeneration of trivial structures
will impart little or no beneﬁt, whereas the loss of crucial
structures might lead to death before the animal can
regenerate. Multiply redundant structures might fall into
the ‘too trivial to regenerate’ category and some evidence
now supports this. For example, the loss of one or two legs
in some arachnids imparts undetectable or only marginal
functional or reproductive cost, presumably because the
eight legs are largely redundant structures [68–70]. The
‘spare legs hypothesis’ [68] could therefore explain why
certain groups of arachnids (e.g. harvestmen) have lost the
ability to regenerate legs.
Finally, a neutral loss of regeneration could also occur if
previously tight pleiotropic interactions between regener-
ation and another developmental process break down,
allowing regeneration to be lost if it is not itself under direct
selection. Galis et al. [71] recently proposed an interesting
mechanism for such a pleiotropic breakdown. They hypoth-
esized that vertebrate limb regeneration can occur only
when embryonic limb development is self-organized and
occurs without interactions with transient (non-limb) struc-
tures, making redeployment during a post-embryonic state
possible. The loss of these two permissive properties, crucial
to the pleiotropy between regeneration and embryonic de-
velopment, could have abrogated limb regeneration ability
in reptiles, birds and mammals, whereas retention of these
properties would have permitted regeneration to persist in
amphibians.
Regeneration could also be lost through negative selec-
tion, either indirect selection mediated by tradeoffs or
direct selection against regeneration. Energy allocation
tradeoffs associated with regeneration are pervasive [62]
and optimal allocation will depend heavily on life-history
parameters, such as longevity and reproductive mode. As
these parameters evolve through time, optimal allocation
could ﬂuctuate and possibly no longer favor regeneration.
For
example,
short-lived
species
or
individuals
are
expected to invest more in reproduction at the expense
of regeneration, as suggested for lizards [17,72]; thus, a
decrease in lifespan could lead to the loss of regeneration.
Similarly, in species capable of asexual reproduction (e.g.
ﬁssion or budding), selection might favor investing in
asexual reproduction at the expense of regeneration, which
could explain the loss of head regeneration in an asexual
annelid [14]. Non-energetic tradeoffs might also mediate
the restriction of regeneration ability. For example, corre-
lations have been noted between poor regeneration ability
and endothermy (in mammals and birds) [3], determinate
growth (e.g. in some annelids) [5], and a tougher skeleton
(e.g. in some sponges) [52], the last of which could also
reduce the selective value of regeneration by decreasing
the risk of injury. The restricted regeneration abilities of
the Ecdysozoa might similarly have been related to the
acquisition of a protective cuticle. Finally, regeneration
could be directly selected against because some aspect of
regeneration
directly
decreases
ﬁtness.
It
has
been
suggested, for example, that certain orb-weaving spiders
actively suppress regeneration because the presence of a
partially regenerated leg could hinder web-building more
than would a missing leg, which often has little if any effect
[73].
The hypotheses described above relate to the ultimate,
evolutionary causes of regeneration, that is, why regener-
ation is lost. What is known about how regeneration is lost?
Interestingly, available data suggest phylogenetic pat-
terns in how regeneration tends to fail. Annelids, for
example, tend to evolve an early, complete block to regen-
eration: species in which regeneration fails, even those that
have lost regeneration relatively recently, wound heal but
do not form even a regeneration blastema [5,14]. In con-
trast, some amphibians and teleost ﬁsh produce non-func-
tional
malformed
hypomorphic
outgrowths
upon
amputation [10,74]. Regeneration might also be lost by a
gradual reduction in regeneration speed, as suggested for
some reptiles [75], or by having regenerative ability
become increasingly restricted to particular ontogenetic
stages. Ontogenetically restricted regenerative ability is
known for
several vertebrates
[2,19,20,76],
although
whether this actually represents a stage of regeneration
loss is uncertain.
If we are to make headway in understanding the loss of
regeneration, we must focus on close comparisons be-
tween regenerating and non-regenerating individuals.
Two particularly promising avenues are to investigate
ontogenetic losses of regeneration within a species and to
investigate clades that include both regenerating and
non-regenerating close relatives for which the evidence
for regeneration loss (rather than secondary gain) is
strong. Regeneration ability can vary across ontogenetic
or life history stages [2] and this phenomenon provides a
powerful approach for identifying factors that are per-
missive or inhibitory to regeneration within a given
species [31]. For example, recent studies in Xenopus
laevis [33,77] have showed that proton pumping or
immune response suppression are sufﬁcient to rescue
crucial aspects of tail regeneration during a transient
non-regenerative period of development. Although a
mechanistic understanding of regeneration loss is thus
far missing from comparative studies of close relatives,
groups that include closely related regenerating and non-
regenerating species are known, for example, among the
Review
Trends in Ecology and Evolution
Vol.25 No.3
167

annelids [5] and agamid lizards [75], and these will be
ideal models in which to elucidate the causes of regen-
eration loss.
Summary and future directions
Animal regeneration is evolutionarily highly labile and is
driven by a multiplicity of factors. Regeneration probably
originated as an epiphenomenon of development, not
necessarily under selection, and early animals probably
had extensive regeneration abilities. In many extant, and
some extinct, taxa, there is strong evidence that regener-
ation is now adaptive, most commonly owing to tissue loss
from sublethal predation [54,62,63]. Regeneration should
not be assumed to be necessarily adaptive, however, as
evidence for the ecological relevance of regeneration is
surprisingly lacking in several highly regenerative taxa.
Regeneration losses have been frequent across animal
phylogeny. The proximate and ultimate causes of regen-
eration loss remain poorly understood, but many testable
hypotheses have now been proposed to explain this
phenomenon.
Although important progress has been made toward
understanding why and how regeneration evolves, some
important questions remain unexplored. Can regeneration
capacity increase through time, or even originate anew in
lineages that have lost it? Why does regeneration persist in
taxa in which it appears to be ecologically irrelevant? What
are the correlates of regeneration loss and by what mech-
anisms do such losses occur? Thus far, nearly all regener-
ation studies have involved developmental or ecological
work performed on single species in a non-comparative
context. As research that is explicitly evolutionary becomes
more common, as new regeneration models are developed
for addressing evolutionary questions, and as developmen-
tal, evolutionary and ecological approaches to regeneration
become integrated, we can expect the coming years to bring
exciting new answers to the long-standing question of why
animals exhibit such extraordinary variation in their abil-
ity to regenerate.
Acknowledgements
We thank members of the Bely Lab and Leo Shapiro for helpful
discussions, and Leo Shapiro, Gunter Wagner and two anonymous
reviewers for comments on the manuscript. We apologize to the many
authors whose work could not be cited owing to space constraints. A.E.B.’s
research is funded by the National Science Foundation.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can
be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.tree.
2009.08.005.
References
1 Dinsmore, C.E. (ed.) (1991) A History of Regeneration Research:
Milestones in the Evolution of a Science, Cambridge University Press
2 Vorontsova, M.A. and Liosner, L.D. (1960) Asexual Propagation and
Regeneration, Pergamon Press
3 Goss, R.J. (1969) Principles of Regeneration, Academic Press
4 Alibardi, L. and Toni, M. (2005) Wound keratins in the regenerating
epidermis of lizard suggests that the wound reaction is similar in the
tail and limb. J. Exp. Zool. 303A, 845–860
5 Bely, A.E. (2006) Distribution of segment regeneration ability in the
Annelida. Integr. Comp. Biol. 46, 508–518
6 Goss, R.J. (1992) The evolution of regeneration: Adaptive or inherent?
J. Theor. Biol. 159, 241–260
7 Reichman, O.J. (1984) Evolution of regeneration capabilities. Am. Nat.
123, 752–763
8 Morgan, T.H. (1901) Regeneration, Macmillan
9 Weismann, A. (1899) Regeneration: facts and interpretations. Nat. Sci.
14, 305–328
10 Wagner, G.P. and Misof, B.Y. (1992) Evolutionary modiﬁcation of
regenerative capability in vertebrates: a comparative study on
teleost pectoral ﬁn regeneration. J. Exp. Zool. 261, 62–78
11 Lengfeld, T. et al. (2009) Multiple Wnts are involved in Hydra
organizer formation and regeneration. Dev. Biol. 330, 186–199
12 Brockes, J.P. and Kumar, A. (2008) Comparative aspects of animal
regeneration. Annu. Rev. Cell. Dev. Biol. 24, 525–549
13 Bely, A.E. and Wray, G.A. (2001) Evolution of regeneration and ﬁssion
in annelids: insights from engrailed- and orthodenticle-class gene
expression. Development 128, 2781–2791
14 Bely, A.E. (1999) Decoupling of ﬁssion and regenerative capabilities in
an asexual oligochaete. Hydrobiologia 406, 243–251
15 Fleming, P.A. et al. (2007) Leave it all behind: a taxonomic perspective
of autotomy in invertebrates. Biol. Rev. 82, 481–510
16 Rinkevich, Y. et al. (2007) Systemic bud induction and retinoic acid
signaling underlie whole body regeneration in the urochordate
Botrylloides leachi. PLoS Biol. 5, e71
17 Bernardo, J. and Agosta, S.J. (2005) Evolutionary implications of
hierarchical impacts of nonlethal injury on reproduction, including
maternal effects. Biol. J. Linn. Soc. 86, 309–331
18 Carlson, B.M. (2007) Principles of Regenerative Biology, Academic
Press
19 Illingworth, C.M. (1974) Trapped ﬁngers and amputated ﬁnger tips in
children. J. Pediatr. Surg. 9, 853–858
20 Han, M. et al. (2008) Development and regeneration of the neonatal
digit tip in mice. Dev. Biol. 315, 125–135
21 Williams-Boyce, P.K. and Daniel, J.C., Jr (1986) Comparison of ear
tissue regeneration in mammals. J. Anat. 149, 55–63
22 Kierdorf, U. et al. (2007) Deer antler regeneration: cells, concepts, and
controversies. J. Morphol. 268, 726–738
23 Agata,
K.
et al.
(2007)
Unifying
principles
of
regeneration
I:
Epimorphosis versus morphallaxis. Dev. Growth Differ. 49, 73–78
24 Sa´nchez
Alvarado,
A.
and
Tsonis,
P.A.
(2006)
Bridging
the
regeneration gap: genetic insights from diverse animal models. Nat.
Rev. Genet. 7, 873–884
25 Galliot, B. and Schmid, V. (2002) Cnidarians as a model system for
understanding evolution and regeneration. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 46, 39–48
26 Martin, P. and Parkhurst, S.M. (2004) Parallels between tissue repair
and embryo morphogenesis. Development 131, 3021–3034
27 Kato, K. et al. (2001) Dorsal and ventral positional cues required for the
onset of planarian regeneration may reside in differentiated cells. Dev.
Biol. 233, 109–121
28 Campbell, L.J. and Crews, C.M. (2008) Wound epidermis formation
and function in urodele amphibian limb regeneration. Cell. Mol. Life
Sci. 65, 73–79
29 Bosch, T.C.G. (2007) Why polyps regenerate and we don’t: Towards a
cellular and molecular framework for Hydra regeneration. Dev. Biol.
303, 421–433
30 Quin˜ones, J.L. et al. (2002) Extracellular matrix remodeling and
metalloproteinase involvement during intestine regeneration in the
sea cucumber Holothuria glaberrima. Dev. Biol. 250, 181–197
31 Yokoyama, H. (2008) Initiation of limb regeneration: the critical steps
for regenerative capacity. Dev. Growth Differ. 50, 13–22
32 Levin, M. (2007) Large-scale biophysics: ion ﬂows and regeneration.
Trends Cell Biol. 17, 261–270
33 Adams, D.S. et al. (2007) H+ pump-dependent changes in membrane
voltage are an early mechanism necessary and sufﬁcient to induce
Xenopus tail regeneration. Development 134, 1323–1335
34 Kimura,
Y.
et
al.
(2003)
Expression
of
complement
3
and
complement 5 in newt limb and lens regeneration. J. Immunol.
170, 2331–2339
35 Ramı´rez-Go´mez, F. et al. (2008) Immune-related genes associated with
intestinal
tissue
in
the
sea
cucumber
Holothuria
glaberrima.
Immunogenetics 60, 57–71
36 Lin, G. and Slack, J.M. (2008) Requirement for Wnt and FGF signaling
in Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration. Dev. Biol. 316, 323–335
Review
Trends in Ecology and Evolution Vol.25 No.3
168

37 Gurley, K.A. et al. (2008) b-catenin deﬁnes head versus tail identity
during planarian regeneration and homeostasis. Science 319, 323–327
38 Nakamura, T. et al. (2008) EGFR signaling is required for re-
establishing the proximodistal axis during distal leg regeneration in
the cricket Gryllus bimaculatus nymph. Dev. Biol. 319, 46–55
39 Adell, T. et al. (2009) Smed-Evi/Wntless is required for b-catenin-
dependent
and
-independent
processes
during
planarian
regeneration. Development 136, 905–910
40 Kumar, A. et al. (2007) Molecular basis for the nerve dependence
of limb regeneration in an adult vertebrate. Science 318, 772–
777
41 Monaghan, J.R. et al. (2009) Microarray and cDNA sequence analysis
of transcription during nerve-dependent limb regeneration. BMC Biol.
7, 1
42 Berrill, N.J. (1952) Regeneration and budding in worms. Biol. Rev. 27,
401–438
43 Biressi, A.C.M. et al. (2010) Wound healing and arm regeneration in
Ophioderma longicaudum and Amphiura ﬁliformis (Ophiuroidea,
Echinodermata):
comparative
morphogenesis
and
histogenesis.
Zoomorphology 129, 1–19
44 Kragl, M. et al. (2009) Cells keep a memory of their tissue origin during
axolotl limb regeneration. Nature 460, 60–65
45 Candia Carnevali, M.D. (2006) Regeneration in echinoderms: repair,
regrowth, cloning. Invert. Surv. J. 3, 64–76
46 Halanych, K.M. (2004) The new view of animal phylogeny. Annu. Rev.
Ecol. Syst. 35, 229–256
47 Kawamura, K. et al. (2008) Multipotent epithelial cells in the process of
regeneration and asexual reproduction in colonial tunicates. Dev.
Growth Differ. 50, 1–11
48 Martinez, V.G. et al. (2005) Regeneration and asexual reproduction
share
common
molecular
changes:
upregulation
of
a
neural
glycoepitope during morphallaxis in Lumbriculus. Mech. Dev. 122,
721–732
49 Burton, P.M. and Finnerty, J.R. (2009) Conserved and novel gene
expression
between
regeneration
and
asexual
ﬁssion
in
Nematostella vectensis. Dev. Genes Evol. 219, 79–87
50 Ghosh, S. et al. (2008) Analysis of the expression and function of Wnt-5a
and Wnt-5b in developing and regenerating axolotl (Ambystoma
mexicanum) limbs. Dev. Growth Differ. 50, 289–297
51 Huntley, J.W. and Kowaleski, M. (2007) Strong coupling of predation
intensity and diversity in the Phanerozoic fossil record. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104, 15006–15010
52 Wulff, J.L. (2006) Resistance vs recovery: morphological strategies of
coral reef sponges. Funct. Ecol. 20, 699–708
53 Lawrence, J.M. and Va´squez, J. (1996) The effect of sublethal predation
on the biology of echinoderms. Oceanol. Acta 19, 431–440
54 Baumiller, T.K. and Gahn, F.J. (2004) Testing predator-driven
evolution with Paleozoic crinoid arm regeneration. Science 305,
1453–1455
55 Juanes, F. and Smith, L.D. (1995) The ecological consequences of limb
damage and loss in decapod crustaceans: a review and prospectus. J.
Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 193, 197–223
56 Robinson, J.V. (1991) The ecological role of caudal lamellae loss in the
larval damselﬂy, Ischnura posita (Hagen) (Odonata: Zygoptera).
Oecologia 87, 1–7
57 Meyer, J.J. and Byers, J.E. (2005) As good as dead? Sublethal
predation facilitates lethal predation on an intertidal clam. Ecol.
Lett. 8, 160–166
58 De Vlas, J. (1979) Annual food intake by plaice and ﬂounder in a tidal
ﬂat area in the Dutch Wadden Sea, with special reference to
consumption of regenerating parts of macrobenthic prey. Neth. J.
Sea Res. 13, 117–153
59 Henry, L-A. and Hart, M. (2005) Regeneration from injury and resource
allocation in sponges and corals - a review. Int. Rev. Hydrobiol. 90, 125–
158
60 Clark, M.S. et al. (2007) Delayed arm regeneration in the Antarctic
brittle star Ophionotus victoriae. Aquat. Biol. 1, 45–53
61 Shargal, E. et al. (1999) Ecological and histological aspects of tail loss in
spiny mice (Rodentia: Muridae, Acomys) with a review of its occurrence
in rodents. J. Zool. 249, 187–193
62 Maginnis, T.L. (2006) The costs of autotomy and regeneration in
animals: a review and framework for future research. Behav. Ecol.
17, 857–872
63 Bateman, P.W. and Fleming, P.A. (2009) To cut a long tail short: a
review of lizard caudal autotomy studies carried out over the last 20
years. J. Zool. 277, 1–14
64 Gillis, G.B. et al. (2009) Losing stability: tail loss and jumping
in the arboreal lizard Anolis carolinensis. J. Exp. Biol. 212,
604–609
65 Naya, D.E. et al. (2007) Some vaguely explored (but not trivial) costs of
tail autotomy in lizards. Comp. Biochem. Physiol., A: Mol. Integr.
Physiol. 146, 189–193
66 Wrinn, K.M.
and Uetz, G.W. (2008) Effects
of autotomy
and
regeneration on detection and capture of prey in a generalist
predator. Behav. Ecol. 19, 1282–1288
67 Lutzy, R.M. and Morse, D.H. (2008) Effects of leg loss on male crab
spiders Misumena vatia. Anim. Behav. 76, 1519–1527
68 Guffey, C. (1999) Costs associated with leg autotomy in the harvestmen
Leiobunum nigripes and Leiobunum vittatum (Arachnida: Opiliones).
Can. J. Zool. 77, 824–830
69 Brueseke, M.A. et al. (2001) Leg autotomy in the wolf spider Pardosa
milvina: a common phenomenon with few apparent costs. Am. Midl.
Nat. 146, 153–160
70 Brautigam, S.E. and Persons, M.H. (2003) The effect of limb loss on the
courtship and mating behavior of the wolf spider Pardosa milvina
(Araneae: Lycosidae). J. Insect Behav. 16, 571–587
71 Galis, F. et al. (2003) Why is limb regeneration possible in
amphibians but not in reptiles, birds, and mammals? Evol. Dev.
5, 208–220
72 Fox, S.F. and McCoy, J.K. (2000) The effects of tail loss on survival,
growth, reproduction, and sex ratio of offspring in the lizard Uta
stansburiana in the ﬁeld. Oecologia 122, 327–334
73 Vollrath, F. (1990) Leg regeneration in web spiders and its
implications for orb weaver phylogeny. Bull. Br. Arachnol. Soc. 8,
177–184
74 Scadding, S.R. (1981) Limb regeneration in adult amphibia. Can. J.
Zool. 59, 34–46
75 Arnold, E.N. (1984) Evolutionary aspects of tail shedding in lizards and
their relatives. J. Nat. Hist. 18, 127–169
76 Beck, C.W. et al. (2003) Molecular pathways needed for regeneration of
spinal cord and muscle in a vertebrate. Dev. Cell 5, 429–439
77 Fukazawa, T. et al. (2009) Suppression of the immune response
potentiates tadpole tail regeneration during the refractory period.
Development 136, 2323–2327
78 Tomiyama, T. et al. (2007) Feeding and growth of juvenile stone
ﬂounder in esturaries: generality and the importance of sublethal
tissue cropping of benthic invertebrates. Mar. Biol. 151, 365–
376
79 Gahn,
F.J.
and
Baumiller,
T.K.
(2005)
Arm
regeneration
in
Mississippian crinoids: evidence of intense predation pressure in the
Paleozoic? Paleobiology 31, 151–164
80 Sasaki, K. et al. (2002) Predation pressure on the siphons of the bivalve
Nuttallia
olivacea
by
the
juvenile
stone
ﬂounder
Platichthys
bicoloratus in the Natori River estuary, north-eastern Japan. Fish.
Sci. 68, 104–116
81 Maginnis, T.L. (2008) Autotomy in a stick insect (Insecta: Phasmida):
predation versus molting. Fla. Entomol. 91, 126–127
82 Moore, A. et al. (1989) Leg autotomy: a novel mechanism of protection
against insecticide poisoning in diamondback moth (Lepidoptera:
Plutellidae). J. Econ. Entomol. 82, 1295–1298
83 Vidal, D.E. and Horne, A.J. (2003) Mercury toxicity in the aquatic
oligochaete Sparganophilus pearsei II: autotomy as a novel form of
protection. Arch. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 45, 462–467
84 Wilkie, I.C. (2001) Autotomy as a prelude to regeneration in
echinoderms. Microsc. Res. Tech. 55, 369–396
85 McGaw,
I.J.
(2006)
Cardiovascular
and
respiratory
responses
associated with limb autotomy in the blue crab, Callinectes sapidus.
Mar. Freshwat. Behav. Physiol. 39, 131–141
86 Martı´nez, D.E. (1996) Rejuvenation of the disposable soma: repeated
injury extends lifespan in an asexual annelid. Exp. Gerontol. 31,
699–704
87 Lindsay, S.M. and Woodin, S.A. (1995) Tissue loss induces switching
of feeding mode in spionid polychaetes. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 125,
159–169
88 Cooper, W.E. (2008) How to stay alive after losing your tail. Behav. 145,
1085–1099
Review
Trends in Ecology and Evolution
Vol.25 No.3
169

89 Taylor, P.W. et al. (2006) Compensation for injury? Modiﬁed multi-
modal courtship of wolf spiders following autotomy of signalling
appendages. Ethol. Ecol. Evol. 18, 79–89
90 Barrios, J.V. et al. (2008) Effect of the degree of autotomy on
feeding, growth, and reproductive capacity in the multi-armed
sea
star
Heliaster
helianthus.
J.
Exp.
Mar.
Biol.
Ecol.
361,
21–27
91 Ramos, M. et al. (2004) Overcoming an evolutionary conﬂict: Removal
of a reproductive organ greatly increases locomotor performance. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101, 4883–4887
92 Lindsay, S.M. et al. (2008) Morphology of anterior regeneration in two
spionid
polychaete
species:
implications
for
feeding
efﬁciency.
Invertebr. Biol. 127, 65–79
93 Dupont, S. and Thorndyke, M.C. (2006) Growth or differentiation?
Adaptive regeneration in the brittlestar Amphiura ﬁliformis. J. Exp.
Biol. 209, 3873–3881
94 Maginnis, T.L. (2006) Leg regeneration stunts wing growth and
hinders ﬂight performance in a stick insect (Sipyloidea sipylus).
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 273, 1811–1814
95 Lailvaux, S.P. et al. (2009) Dishonest signalling of ﬁghting ability and
multiple performance traits in the ﬁddler crab Uca mjoebergi. Funct.
Ecol. 23, 359–366
96 Vitt, L.J. and Cooper, W.E. (1986) Tail loss, tail color and predator
escape in Eumeces (Lacertilia: Scincidae): age-speciﬁc differences in
costs and beneﬁts. Can. J. Zool. 64, 583–592
97 Giribet, G. (2008) Assembling the lophotrochozoan (=spiralian) tree of
life. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 363, 1513–1522
98 Telford, M.J. et al. (2008) The evolution of the Ecdysozoa. Philos. Trans.
R. Soc. B 363, 1529–1537
99 Swalla, B.J. and Smith, A.B. (2008) Deciphering deuterostome
phylogeny:
molecular,
morphological
and
palaeontological
perspectives. Phil Trans R Soc B 363, 1557–1568
Review
Trends in Ecology and Evolution Vol.25 No.3
170

===== Bertolini2019_CellStemCell_Sox2+NSCs =====
Article
Mapping the Global Chromatin Connectivity Network
for Sox2 Function in Neural Stem Cell Maintenance
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Sox2-bound enhancers are enriched within long-range
interactions in neural stem cells
d SOX2 loss decreases chromatin interactivity genome-wide
d Sox2-bound enhancers from interactions activate reporter
genes in zebraﬁsh forebrain
d Socs3, a gene downregulated in Sox2 mutant NSCs, rescues
their self-renewal
Authors
Jessica A. Bertolini, Rebecca Favaro,
Yanfen Zhu, ..., Francois Guillemot,
Silvia K. Nicolis, Chia-Lin Wei
Correspondence
silvia.nicolis@unimib.it (S.K.N.),
chia-lin.wei@jax.org (C.-L.W.)
In Brief
Bertolini et al. report that long-range
chromatin interactions in neural stem
cells (NSCs) are enriched in Sox2-bound
enhancers; in Sox2-deleted NSCs,
interactions are reduced. Genes
downregulated in Sox2-deleted cells are
enriched in interactions with enhancers
normally Sox2-bound. Overexpression of
Socs3, a gene downregulated in mutant
NSCs, rescues long-term NSC self-
renewal.
Bertolini et al., 2019, Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476
March 7, 2019 ª 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2019.02.004

Cell Stem Cell
Article
Mapping the Global Chromatin Connectivity Network
for Sox2 Function in Neural Stem Cell Maintenance
Jessica A. Bertolini,1,9 Rebecca Favaro,1,9 Yanfen Zhu,2,9 Miriam Pagin,1 Chew Yee Ngan,2 Chee Hong Wong,2
Harianto Tjong,2 Marit W. Vermunt,3,8 Ben Martynoga,4 Cristiana Barone,1 Jessica Mariani,1 Marcos Julia´ n Cardozo,5
Noemi Tabanera,5 Federico Zambelli,6 Sara Mercurio,1 Sergio Ottolenghi,1 Paul Robson,2,7 Menno P. Creyghton,3
Paola Bovolenta,5 Giulio Pavesi,6 Francois Guillemot,4 Silvia K. Nicolis,1,10,* and Chia-Lin Wei2,*
1Department of Biotechnology and Biosciences, University Milano-Bicocca, 20126 Milano, Italy
2The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA
3Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht 3584CT, Utrecht, the Netherlands
4The Francis Crick Institute, Midland Road, London NW 1AT, UK
5Centro de Biologı´a Molecular Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientı´ﬁcas-Universidad Auto´ noma de Madrid and Ciber
de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII Madrid, Spain
6Department of Biosciences, University of Milano, 20133 Milano, Italy
7Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore
8Present address: Division of Hematology, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA
9These authors contributed equally
10Lead Contact
*Correspondence: silvia.nicolis@unimib.it (S.K.N.), chia-lin.wei@jax.org (C.-L.W.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2019.02.004
SUMMARY
The SOX2 transcription factor is critical for neural
stem cell (NSC) maintenance and brain development.
Through
chromatin
immunoprecipitation
(ChIP)
and chromatin interaction analysis (ChIA-PET), we
determined genome-wide SOX2-bound regions and
Pol II-mediated long-range chromatin interactions
in brain-derived NSCs. SOX2-bound DNA was highly
enriched in distal chromatin regions interacting with
promoters and carrying epigenetic enhancer marks.
Sox2 deletion caused widespread reduction of Pol
II-mediated long-range interactions and decreased
gene expression. Genes showing reduced expres-
sion in Sox2-deleted cells were signiﬁcantly enriched
in interactions between promoters and SOX2-bound
distal enhancers. Expression of one such gene, Sup-
pressor of Cytokine Signaling 3 (Socs3), rescued the
self-renewal defect of Sox2-ablated NSCs. Our work
identiﬁes SOX2 as a major regulator of gene expres-
sion through connections to the enhancer network in
NSCs. Through the deﬁnition of such a connectivity
network, our study shows the way to the identiﬁca-
tion of genes and enhancers involved in NSC mainte-
nance and neurodevelopmental disorders.
INTRODUCTION
Neural stem cells (NSCs) are critical for brain development and
for postnatal maintenance of neurogenesis in speciﬁc brain
areas. SOX2, a transcription factor (TF) essential for pluripotency
(Avilion et al., 2003; Takahashi and Yamanaka, 2006), is
also required for correct brain development. In humans, SOX2
mutations cause genetically dominant nervous system disease
involving hippocampus and eye defects, epilepsy, and learning
disabilities (OMIM 206900). In mice, Sox2 ablation causes similar
defects, such as hippocampal hypoplasia, microcephaly, ventral
forebrain depletion, and anophthalmia, some of which may result
from a defect in NSC self-renewal (Favaro et al., 2009; Ferri et al.,
2013). These in vivo defects are reﬂected in the inability of Sox2-
deleted NSCs to self-renew in long-term cultures (Favaro et al.,
2009). SOX2 functions and targets are the subject of intense
investigation (Engelen et al., 2011; Gonc¸ alves et al., 2016; Hagey
et al., 2016; Lodato et al., 2013; Zhu et al., 2013).
Transcriptional regulation is mediated via DNA looping
between gene promoters and their corresponding distal en-
hancers, often located at large distances and skipping inter-
vening genes (de Laat and Duboule, 2013; Rivera and Ren,
2013; Sanyal et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2013). Genome-wide an-
alyses of long range interactions in chromatin (Sanyal et al.,
2012; Zhang et al., 2013) deﬁne complex three-dimensional net-
works (the connectome), whereby a promoter may interact not
only with enhancers but also with additional promoters, which
are in turn connected to further promoter(s) and/or enhancer(s).
The genome-wide connectome is cell-type speciﬁc (Gorkin
et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2013), presumably reﬂecting cell-
type-speciﬁc transcription factor representation. So far, it is
unknown to what extent a single transcription factor inﬂuences
the function of genome-wide interaction networks in controlling
cell-speciﬁc transcriptional activity.
We previously used chromatin interaction analysis with
paired-end tag sequencing (ChIA-PET) to identify RNA polymer-
ase II (Pol II)-mediated long-range interactions in embryonic
stem cells (ESCs) and in brain-derived NSC or progenitor cell
cultures (Zhang et al., 2013). In the present work, we sought to
identify molecular mechanisms underlying Sox2-dependent
gene regulation in NSCs, as well as genes involved in Sox2-
dependent maintenance of long-term NSC self-renewal. We
thus deleted Sox2 in NSCs in mouse embryonic brain and
462
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476, March 7, 2019 ª 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

studied the effects of embryonic loss of Sox2 on RNA expression
in neonatal NSCs grown in vitro (see Favaro et al. 2009) and its
relationship to the Pol II-mediated chromatin long-range interac-
tion network. We identiﬁed thousands of genes connected via
long-range interactions to distal SOX2-bound, epigenetically
deﬁned enhancers; many of these genes, including important
neurodevelopmental genes, were downregulated upon Sox2
ablation. We validated one of these as a critical downstream
SOX2 target whose re-expression in Sox2 mutant NSCs is sufﬁ-
cient to rescue their self-renewal defect.
RESULTS
Comparison of Genome-wide Pol II-Mediated
Long-Range Chromatin Interactions in Wild-Type and
Sox2-Deleted NSC
We established NSC cultures from the neonatal forebrain of
conditionally (at E11.5) Sox2-ablated mice and their control
non-deleted littermates (Favaro et al., 2009). Freshly isolated
Sox2-deleted (mutant; MUT) and control (wild-type; WT) NSCs
efﬁciently expand in culture at early passages (Favaro et al.,
2009), however, MUT NSCs later fail to self-renew long-term,
pointing to a requirement for Sox2 in NSC maintenance that
matches a defect observed also in vivo after P0 in the hippocam-
pus (Favaro et al., 2009). Sox2-deleted NSCs retain the ability to
differentiate into glia and neurons upon differentiation induction,
however, under self-renewal culture conditions, they do not
spontaneously differentiate, as indicated by morphological and
immunochemical criteria and by comparison of RNA sequencing
(RNA-seq) data (by Pearson correlation, hierarchical clustering,
and principal component analysis) of un-induced WT and
MUT cells (day 0) with WT cells induced to initial differentiation
(day 4) (data not shown).
To determine the effect of Sox2 loss on the genome-wide
pattern of Pol II-mediated long-range chromatin interactions,
we ﬁrst performed ChIA-PET analysis with anti-polII antibodies,
speciﬁc for the preinitiation complex (Zhang et al., 2013),
comparing ex vivo NSC cultures derived at P0. These cultures
express forebrain-speciﬁc transcripts, indicating that the NSCs
maintain a forebrain identity (Zappone et al., 2000; Zhang
et al., 2013). ChIA-PET identiﬁes protein-mediated genome-
wide long-range chromatin contacts through proximity ligation
and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). We generated
ChIA-PET data from both normal (WT) and Sox2-ablated (MUT)
brain cells to determine Pol II-mediated long-range connectivity
(distant enhancer-promoter and promoter-promoter connec-
tivity) (Figure S1). We began to analyze the chromatin connectiv-
ity by following the original version of the protocol (Zhang et al.,
2013) that performed nuclei lysis followed by proximity ligation
and Pol II ChIP from hundreds of million pooled NSCs from WT
and Sox2-deleted (MUT) neonatal (P0) forebrains (4 WT and
6 MUT, deleted at E11.5) (Favaro et al., 2009) neonates. These
datasets (Table S1) are referred to as wTR1 and mTR1, respec-
tively. We observed a substantial reduction of normalized inter-
actions (numbers of signiﬁcant interactions per million intra-mo-
lecular ligation PETs) in Sox2-deleted (2,295 in mTR1) versus WT
NSCs (10,197 in wTR1) (Table 1 and Figure 1, discussed below).
We further veriﬁed that such reduction of overall Pol II connec-
tivity observed in MUT NSCs did not result from different Pol II
immunoprecipitation efﬁciencies between WT and MUT cells;
indeed, we observed highly similar normalized density proﬁles
between WT and MUT genomic regions (Figure S2). Speciﬁcally,
the vast majority (92%) of the ChIA-PET-deﬁned Pol II binding
regions in WT NSCs were retained in MUT NSCs, irrespective
of whether or not they were connected (Figures 1 and S2). To
conﬁrm that the reduction of Pol II-mediated interactions in
MUT NSCs was not inﬂuenced by the pooling of heterogeneous
samples or correlated with the experimental procedure, we
subsequently generated additional replicate datasets using an
improved ChIA-PET method (named in situ ChIA-PET) (Fig-
ure S1). In the in situ Pol II ChIA-PET protocol, instead of per-
forming proximity ligation in chromatin mixtures from hundreds
of million cells that is intrinsically noisy (as evident by the high
level of inter-chromosomal PETs), proximity ligation was per-
formed in permeabilized intact nuclei, followed by ChIP and a
transposase-mediated ‘‘tagmentation’’ to generate PETs for
sequencing analysis (Figure S1; STAR Methods). As such, the
in situ ChIA-PET method results in higher efﬁciency in capturing
Table 1. Summary of the ChIA-PET Sequencing and Interaction Analysis
wTR1
wTR2
wTR3
mTR1
mTR2
mTR3
1
Total PETs with linker
143.3 M
35,295,370
33,767,613
151.9 M
24,976,862
21,514,824
2
Mapped PETs
143.1 M
23,672,163
20,624,486
151.7 M
16,512,951
11,050,816
3
Unique PETs
6.8 M
22,208,305
16,873,008
22.6 M
15,756,748
10,160,601
4
Self-ligated PETs
684 K
4,296,406
2,869,465
2.7 M
2,185,670
1,729,424
5
Number of Pol II binding sites (p < 1e5)
11,819a
41,187a
36,641a
12,068a
21,020a
36,139a
6
Intra-molecular chromatin ligated PETs
691 K
13,105,813
10,207,155
1.3 M
9,360,576
6,119,151
7
Signiﬁcant interactions (loops) (FDR <0.05, p < 0.05)
7,046a
96,295
63,458
2,984a
29,713
15,561
8
Signiﬁcant loops with Pol II peaks on both anchors
18,022a
7,346a
2,878a
3,202a
9
Number of signiﬁcant loops per million intra-chr PETs
10,197
7,348
6,217
2,295
3,174
2,543
10
Number of signiﬁcant Pol II-bound loops per million
intra-chr PETs
1,375
720
307
523
ChIA-PET data in triplicates were processed to deﬁne the binding peaks and signiﬁcant interactions (see STAR Methods). For full list of signiﬁcant
interactions, see Table S1. PET, paired end tag; unique PETs, PETs for which the sequence of either side of the linker (e.g., the biotinylated linker
in Figure S1B) can be uniquely mapped to one speciﬁc point in the reference genome.
aNumbers of the signiﬁcant interactions used in further analyses are indicated.
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476, March 7, 2019
463

(legend on next page)
464
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476, March 7, 2019

intra-molecular ligation PETs, thus requires signiﬁcantly lower
numbers of cells to yield highly sensitive detection of protein-
mediated chromatin interactions (Mumbach et al., 2016; Table 1).
Therefore, this approach allowed us to analyze cultures from
individual neonatal forebrains (two WT, wTR2 and wTR3, and
two MUTs, mTR2 and mTR3). The improvement can be shown
by the ratio of the intra-molecular interaction PETs; in the TR1
(original version), only 5%–10% of the uniquely aligned paired
reads (unique PETs, Table 1, line 3) were intra-molecular chro-
matin ligated PETs (deﬁned by cis-interaction PETs, Table 1,
line 6), whereas in TR2 and TR3, 50%–60% of the uniquely
aligned paired reads were intra-molecular chromatin ligated
PETs (Table 1). Despite two versions of the protocols being
applied, the three ChIA-PET experiments (TR1, TR2, and TR3)
showed overall highly similar interaction patterns when the
same genotypes (WT or MUT) were considered, at different res-
olution (Figure S2); 74% and 80% of the interactions detected in
wTR1were also detected in the combined (i.e., the sum of) wTR2
and wTR3 interactions (within a window ± 5 kb and ± 10 kb,
respectively). Further, the average reproducibility score between
wTR2 and wTR3 based on SCC (stratum-adjusted correlation
coefﬁcient) (Yang et al., 2017) over all 20 chromosomes was
0.935 and 0.839 for wTR2-wTR3 and mTR2-mTR3, respectively
(Table S2).
The in situ proximity ligation adopted in the improved ChIA-
PET method effectively captures speciﬁc Pol II-mediated long-
range interactions between regulatory elements through the
Pol II ChIP enrichment (Figure S1). From a total of 6–13 million
intra-molecular PETs in WT and MUT TR2 and TR3, we deﬁned
between 15,000 to 96,000 ‘‘signiﬁcant interactions (loops)’’ (false
discovery rate [FDR] <0.05, p < 0.05), enriched in Pol II-mediated
interactions) (Table 1, line 7; Figure S1; STAR Methods). Among
these signiﬁcant interactions from TR2 and TR3, 2,878–18,022
interactions were mediated by Pol II (deﬁned by the interactions
with Pol II binding at both DNA regions connected by the interac-
tions) (Table 1, line 8, and STAR Methods). We deﬁned DNA re-
gions connected by an interaction as ‘‘anchors’’ and overlapping
anchors as ‘‘nodes’’ (Figure 1B). We further annotated nodes and
anchors as promoter nodes or anchors if they resided within
2.5 kb from annotated transcription start sites (TSS) and the
remaining ones as non-promoter nodes/anchors. Based on
PhastCons Score Threshold analysis, these non-promoter
nodes were signiﬁcantly more conserved among vertebrate
genomes relative to random intergenic regions, suggesting their
potential function in chromatin organization (not shown).
Similarly to mTR1 NSCs, mTR2 and mTR3 exhibited a global
reduction in the numbers of chromatin interactions from both
the general chromatin contacts and the speciﬁc Pol II-mediated
interactions if compared to WT NSCs (wTR2 and wTR3, respec-
tively) (Figure 1B). The number of normalized signiﬁcant interac-
tions (‘‘number of loops detected per million of intra-molecular
ligated reads’’) ranged between 6–10 K in WT but were reduced
to only 2–3 K in MUT cell samples (Table 1, line 9), while the
normalized signiﬁcant Pol II-mediated interactions were 719
and 1,374 in WT, but only 307 and 525 in MUT cells samples,
respectively (Table 1, line 10). Consistent with the reduction of
the Pol II-mediated interactions in MUT cells, the number of no-
des was lower in MUT cells (Figure 1B). Indeed, from 8,295 pro-
moter nodes and 6,549 non-promoter nodes in combined wTR2
and wTR3, the corresponding numbers in MUT cells were
reduced to 3,356 and 1,726, respectively. On the other hand,
the majority of the nodes observed in mTR2 and mTR3 samples
were detected in WT cells as well. These changes of interactions
can be found in many speciﬁc loci. The changes were not uni-
form across the genome, but rather highly variable, exhibiting
loci showing drastic reduction interspersed with loci showing lit-
tle or no reduction (Figure 1; see also Figures S3 and S5, Table
S3, and screenshots throughout the paper). In some cases, while
the data from mTR1 showed apparent loss of interactions (as
compared to wTR1), the data obtained by the more sensitive in
situ ChIA-PET, providing a higher depth in the intra-molecular
ligated PETs, showed a reduction in frequency instead of a
complete loss of the interactions (Figures 1D and 1G, compare
TR2 with TR1; see also Figure S3); the above discussed
dependence of the detection of some interactions on obtaining
high numbers of interacting PETs makes it difﬁcult to prove the
complete loss of any speciﬁc interaction. In some regions, we
actually observed new sets of loops emerging in MUT cells
(Figure 1).
In conclusion, the data indicate that in the absence of Sox2,
chromatin connectivity was substantially altered genome-wide,
with an overall decreased interaction frequency, in particular at
selected loci.
SOX2-Bound Distal Regions Carrying Enhancer Marks
Are Highly Enriched Within Interactions
The changes in connectivity observed following Sox2 ablation
point to a role for SOX2 DNA binding within chromatin in the gen-
eration and/or maintenance of long-range interactions. We thus
identiﬁed SOX2-bound sites through genome-wide ChIP-seq of
WT brain-derived NSCs in culture (Figure S4; STAR Methods).
We also performed ChIP-seq, in both WT and MUT NSCs, for
histone modiﬁcations H3K27ac and H3K4me1 (Figure S4, two
replicates), allowing for the identiﬁcation of active (H3K27ac+
Figure 1. Sox2 Ablation Causes Major Loss of Long-Range Interactions in Brain-Derived NSCs
(A) Functional genomics analyses.
(B) Top: ‘‘anchors’’ and ‘‘nodes’’ connected by long-range interactions; bottom: numbers of promoter/non-promoter nodes in WT and MUT NSCs, left: TR1 and
right: TR2 and TR3 combined.
(C–G) Connectivity diagrams in WT NSCs (WT interactions; red) and MUT NSCs (MUT interactions; blue), across 5 different chromosome regions, in the wTR1,
wTR2, and mTR1, mTR2 analysis; regions coordinates are: chr8:87120161-87587163 (C), chr13:25372775-31004673 (D), chr11:117736788-117873172 (E),
chr12:56459922-56634834 (F) and chr8:48254658-48486144 (G). Their genomic coordinates are indicated above each panel, and genes within each region
shown below the panels. Pol II- and SOX2-binding peaks are shown. PET counts (Y axes); note different (log10) scales in some panels. In MUT NSCs, an overall
decrease of ‘‘looping’’ is seen, but some interactions are lost, others are maintained. Note the persistence of Pol II binding in MUT NSCs and the frequent
coincidence (in C) of SOX2 peaks with interaction anchors.
See also Figures S1, S2, S3 and Table 1.
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476, March 7, 2019
465

and H3K4me1+), as well as ‘‘poised’’ (H3K4me1+ only) en-
hancers, with the potential to be activated (Cantone and Fisher,
2011; Creyghton et al., 2010; Rivera and Ren, 2013). For the
latter analysis, we used both a ‘‘peak-calling’’ and a ‘‘segmenta-
tion’’ approach (chromHMM), which both led to qualitatively
consistent results (see STAR Methods).
Finally, we linked SOX2-binding sites to both epigenetic marks
and interacting anchors, as deﬁned in WT NSCs by Zhang et al.
(2013) (corresponding to wTR1) and in in situ ChIA-PET experi-
ments (wTR2, wTR3) (Figure 2). For a summary of data, see
Tables S4 and S5.
SOX2-bound sites were rarely located at promoters (±1 kb
TSS of RefSeq genes) and more frequently in intronic and inter-
genic distal regions (Figure 2A and data not shown). Over 90% of
SOX2-bound sites were associated with nucleosomes charac-
terized by the presence of either or both the histone modiﬁca-
tions investigated in WT NSCs (Figure 2A, histograms: peak
calling and chromHMM); in particular, both SOX2-bound pro-
moters and distal regions were mostly (90%) H3K27ac+. On
the other hand, within H3K27ac+ regions, a much smaller pro-
portion of promoters than of distal regions were SOX2-bound
(Figures 2B, right, and S4); indeed, within distal H3K27ac+ re-
gions, SOX2-bound regions were highly enriched in comparison
to 1,000 sets of random genomic loci (p < 0.001, random sam-
pling, see STAR Methods).
To identify the binding of SOX2, if any, within long-range inter-
actions, we ﬁrst classiﬁed interactions in WT cells according to
the type of interacting element (i.e., promoter [P] or non-pro-
moter [non-P]) (Figure 2C). Approximately 85%–90% of the inter-
actions were mediated through promoters (promoter-promoter
[P-P] or promoter-non-promoter
[P-non-P] interactions) in
both WT and MUT cells, equally subdivided between P-P and
P-non-P classes (Figure 2C); within P-non-P interactions, a
promoter is connected to either an intergenic or an intragenic
region. Only a small number (10%–15%) of interactions connect
two non-promoter regions (Figure 2C). An almost identical distri-
bution was observed using interactions deﬁned from TR2 and
TR3 (Figure 2C).
Within interactions, SOX2 peaks were highly abundant; ca.
35%–46% of all interactions in WT NSCs (TR1, TR2, and TR3)
carried a SOX2-bound site within at least one of the two interact-
ing anchors (Figure 2D; Tables S4 and S5). Speciﬁcally, approx-
imately half (44%–53%) of P-nonP interactions (also called P-E,
see below) were SOX2-positive with 34%–43% of distal ele-
ments (putative enhancers) being SOX2-bound (Figure 2D).
Approximately 95% of SOX2-bound distal anchors were in
regions carrying both active enhancer marks (H3K27ac+,
H3K4me1+) and the remainder with either one or the other
mark; among non-SOX2-bound distal anchors, 70% were
associated with both marks and 15% with either (not shown).
From now on, we refer to these interactions as ‘‘promoter-
enhancer’’ (P-E) interactions. Importantly, SOX2-positive epige-
netically marked (EM) distal regions (whether H3K27Ac+ and/or
H3K4Me1+) were signiﬁcantly more involved in interactions
than SOX2-negative EM regions: this was observed in the orig-
inal ChIA-PET (TR1), as well as in in situ ChIA-PET data (TR2
and TR3) (Figures 2E and S4 and data not shown). Thus, the
high frequency of SOX2-bound distal anchors is the result of
both the enrichment of SOX2 binding within EM distal regions
(Figure 2B) and the preferential engagement in long-range inter-
actions of SOX2-positive EM regions versus non-SOX2-bound
regions (Figure 2E).
In conclusion, the high enrichment of SOX2-positive EM re-
gions within distal anchors in P-E interactions points to a func-
tional role of SOX2 binding at the level of these interactions.
Interestingly, the loss of SOX2 in MUT NSCs does not lead
to important changes (loss or gain) in the patterns of histone
modiﬁcations: enrichment in H3K27ac, H3K4me1, both, or
none (Figure S4).
SOX2-Dependent Long-Range Interactions Predict
Novel Forebrain Enhancers
The strong enrichment of anchors in epigenetic EMs suggested
that long-range interaction anchors might be used to identify reg-
ulatory elements driving gene expression in the developing brain
(Figures 3 and S5; Table S6). We identiﬁed several genes playing
important developmental roles in the forebrain, some of which are
homologs of human genes involved, when mutated, in inherited
brain diseases (microcephaly, intellectual disability, etc.) (Table
S6), which were connected by multiple P-E (and P-P) interactions
to SOX2-bound elements (possible enhancers). Some of the
distal anchors connected to these genes by P-E interactions
overlapped with previously identiﬁed p300-bound enhancers,
already shown to be active in forebrain as transgenic constructs
(VISTA enhancers, https://enhancer.lbl.gov) (Visel et al., 2009;
Figures 3 and S5). Interestingly, VISTA enhancers were enriched
within TR1, TR2, and TR3 interaction anchors (with 13% to 23%
of VISTA enhancers overlapping with anchors), and particularly
so within distal non-promoter interaction anchors; in Sox2 MUT
cells the proportion of VISTA enhancers overlapping with anchors
dropped to ca. 4%, and their representation in distal anchors was
drastically reduced (Figure S5). These data point to potential
functional roles of distal non-promoter anchors identiﬁed by
ChIA-PET in gene regulation in vivo in the developing brain.
Next, we tested distal regions involved in SOX2-bound long-
range interactions using a transgenic enhancer assay in zebra-
ﬁsh. Fifteen out of seventeen reporter constructs containing
SOX2-bound distal anchors directed GFP expression to the
developing forebrain (Figure 4; Table S7). GFP expression
matched part of, or the whole, forebrain expression pattern of
the endogenous zebraﬁsh ortholog of the mouse gene con-
nected to the analyzed enhancer (Figure 4). Similar data were
obtained with anchors connected to important regulators of fore-
brain development, including Sp8, Cxcr4, Sox3, Nr2f1, Irx1,
Socs3 and c-fos (Figure 4; Table S6). Further, the expression
of 3 out of 7 enhancers tested was affected by anti-Sox2
morpholinos or by injected Sox2 mRNA (Figure S6 and data
not shown). Thus, RNA-polII-mediated, SOX2-bound interac-
tions identify with high conﬁdence novel forebrain enhancers.
SOX2-Bound Promoter-to-Enhancer Long-Range
Interactions Are the Main Determinant of SOX2-
Dependent Transcription
To correlate the expression of genes to the observed pattern of
long-range interactions, we analyzed by RNA-seq the transcrip-
tomes of WT and MUT NSCs (Tables S4 and S5).
To determine how the presence of Pol II-mediated interactions
is reﬂected into gene expression levels, we subdivided genes
466
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476, March 7, 2019

Figure 2. SOX2-Bound Regions Carrying Epigenetic Enhancer Marks (EM) Show Signiﬁcantly Higher Overlap with Anchors Than SOX2-
Negative EM-Positive Regions
(A) Left: number of SOX2-bound sites in regions linked to annotated TSS (±1,000 nt) and in distal, non-P regions. Right (histograms): percentage of different
enhancer marks (EMs)-positive regions within SOX2-bound TSS-linked (SOX2+ TSS) or distal (SOX2+ distal) regions (left histograms, peak calling; right histo-
grams, chromHMM).
(B) Fraction of SOX2-bound sites within EM-positive regions (H3K27Ac+) on TSS-linked or distal regions (peak calling).
(C) Interaction types according to the nature of the connected regions, for wTR1, wTR2, wTR3, mTR1, mTR2, and mTR3. ‘‘Prom,’’ annotated TSS-containing
region (i.e., promoter).
(D) Numbers of P-P and P-nonP (P-E) SOX2-positive interactions in WT cells in wTR1, wTR2, and wTR3. See also Table S4.
(E) Fraction of SOX2+ (left) versus SOX2 (right) EM-positive regions that overlap with anchors in wTR1, wTR2, and wTR3. Top: distal epigenetically marked regions
(H3K27Ac+andH3K4me1+)overlapwithdistalanchors.Bottom:allepigeneticallymarkedregions(H3K27Ac+orH3K4me1+)overlapwithallanchortypes,chromHMM.
See also Figure S4 and Tables S4 and S5.
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476, March 7, 2019
467

according to the Pol II ChIA-PET connectivity of their promoters
(Zhang et al., 2013) (non-connected promoter, promoter con-
nected with promoters or enhancers, or promoter connected
speciﬁcally with enhancers, see Figure 2D). Then, we determined
the distribution of transcript levels in both WT and MUT NSCs for
the different interaction categories (Figure 5A). Considering only
Figure 3. Distal Anchors Connected by Sox2-Dependent Interactions to Genes Important in Neural Development and Disease
(A and B) Sox2-dependent ChIA-PET interactions (TR1) between two different genes (Sox4, A; Zbtb18, B) and distal regions overlapping previously characterized
‘‘VISTA’’ enhancers (Visel et al., 2009); SOX2 ChIP-seq peaks (present paper), lacZ-stained transgenic embryos (from https://enhancer.lbl.gov), and evolutionary
conservation (ECR browser).
(C and D) Sox2-dependent interactions (wTR1, wTR2, wTR3, mTR1, mTR2, and mTR3) involving Gpr56 (C) and Arid1a (D), two genes whose human homologs are
involved in neurodevelopmental brain disease.
See also Figure S5 and Tables S5 and S6.
468
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476, March 7, 2019

transcribed genes, those involved in interactions (P-P and P-E)
showed a distribution of expression levels shifted toward higher
values than the overall population of expressed genes (data for
TR1, TR2, and TR3, Figure 5A); the highest expression levels
were seen with genes involved speciﬁcally in interactions with
enhancers (P-E) (Figure 5A) (p value < 2.2 3 1016). Interestingly,
higher expression levels were also associated with an increase in
number of interactions per gene, particularly with P-E interac-
tions, which show a clear trend toward higher expression values
for every added ‘‘enhancer’’ (TR1, TR2, and TR3, Figure 5B).
Moreover, genes whose promoter interacted with SOX2-bound
enhancers were more expressed than those connected to en-
hancers not bound by SOX2 (TR1, TR2, and TR3, Figure 5A).
Very similar results were obtained by both the analysis of data
obtained by the original ChIA-PET (Zhang et al., 2013) (TR1)
and by in situ ChIA-PET (TR2 and TR3).
We next compared gene expression between MUT and WT
NSCs. In MUT NSCs, the distributions of expression levels of
all genes, and of each category of genes, had lower median
and mean values than in WT NSCs, with an overall distribution
signiﬁcantly shifted toward lower values (Figure 5A). Indeed, a
Wilcoxon paired signed-rank test (see STAR Methods) showed
that the differences between WT and MUT distributions of
gene expression were highly signiﬁcant (p value < 2.2 3
1016 for every pair considered), for TR1, TR2, and TR3 (Fig-
ure 5A). To further assess the signiﬁcance of the observed
expression decrease in MUT NSC, we also plotted the
distribution of the variation of the expression of each gene be-
tween WT and MUT cells, deﬁned as log-fold ratios (log2
[TPM_wild-type/TPM_mutant]) (TPM, transcripts per million)
(Figure 5C). To avoid bias from genes with low transcript levels,
we considered only genes with TPM >1. The plot was clearly
shifted toward positive values, indicating that the majority of
genes were more highly expressed in WT than in MUT NSCs
(Figure 5C).
Taken together, the above results indicate that loss of Sox2 is
associated with an overall gene expression decrease that is
more relevant for genes involved in Pol II-mediated P-E interac-
tions in WT NSCs; moreover, genes with SOX2-positive P-E
interactions were more expressed than genes with P-E interac-
tions in general. To further validate these results, we considered
genes with TPM >5 in either WT or MUT cells and divided
them into three groups (Figure 5D): group 1, genes showing a
signiﬁcant decrease of expression in MUT versus WT NSCs
(677 genes); group 2, genes showing a visible but not statistically
signiﬁcant decrease of expression in MUT (2194 genes); group 3,
all the other genes with TPM >5 (see STAR Methods). We then
considered the different types of interactions associated with
genes to determine whether genes in each expression variation
group could be signiﬁcantly associated with any type of interac-
tion (i.e., if their number, within a given interaction class, was
higher or lower than the number expected by chance). We sum-
marized the results by deﬁning a ‘‘co-association score’’ (see
Figure 4. Distal Anchors in Sox2-Dependent Interactions Drive GFP
Transgene Activity to Zebraﬁsh Brain
Top: enhancer-dependent GFP-reporter (ZED): distal anchors (DA) from Sox2-
dependent interactions are cloned upstream to a minimal promoter and GFP.
Bottom: ﬁrst and second left columns, GFP expression in transgenic embryos
and bright-ﬁeld images (F1 of stable lines, except for c-fos, transient trans-
genics). Third column: expression (in situ hybridization from http://zﬁn.org) of
the endogenous zebraﬁsh gene corresponding to the gene connected, in
mouse, to the tested anchor. Fourth column: forebrain lacZ staining driven by
transgenes carrying the human enhancers corresponding to the anchor (from
https://enhancer.lbl.gov) (Visel et al., 2009).
See also Figure S6 and Table S6.
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476, March 7, 2019
469

Figure 5. Reduced Gene Expression in Sox2 MUT NSCs Correlates with Loss of Long-Range Interactions
(A) Distribution of expression values (TPM) of genes with TPM >0. Blue, WT NSCs; orange, MUT NSCs. From left to right: all genes; genes whose promoter is a
node (P-P, P-E interactions); genes whose promoter is connected to an enhancer (P-E interactions); genes with SOX2-positive P-E interactions.
(B) Distribution of expression values (y axis) of genes according to the number and type of element (enhancer or promoter anchors) interacting with the gene
promoter (x axis) in wTR1, wTR2, and wTR3. Top: interactions with enhancers. Bottom: interactions only with promoters. The number of genes involved is shown
in each diagram inside the box along the x axis.
(C) Distribution of the fold ratio values for all genes with TPM >0 deﬁned as log2 (TPM_WT/TPM_MUT). It conﬁrms results shown in (B): the fold ratio is shifted
toward positive values (i.e., a majority of genes have expression in WT higher than in MUT NSCs).
(legend continued on next page)
470
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476, March 7, 2019

STAR Methods) as the -log10 p of the probability of observing, in
each of the three expression groups, a given number of genes
associated with a given type of interaction. We denoted a num-
ber lower than the expected value by multiplying the result by 1
(Figure 5D; Table S8). In all three experiments (wTR1, wTR2, and
wTR3), the results conﬁrmed a highly signiﬁcant overlap be-
tween genes showing signiﬁcantly decreased expression in
MUT NSCs (group 1 genes) and those characterized, in WT
NSCs, by a promoter to enhancer interaction (Figure 5D, lanes
1, 5, and 9). Moreover, the inﬂuence of SOX2 binding was evident
by comparing group 1 genes connected to enhancers bound by
SOX2, which yielded highly signiﬁcant coassociation scores
(lanes 2, 6, and 10), with those connected to enhancers not
bound by SOX2 (lanes 3, 7, and 11), which yielded only margin-
ally signiﬁcant scores in wTR1 and nonsigniﬁcant scores in wTR2
and wTR3. On the other hand, SOX2 binding to promoters was
only marginally associated to genes showing signiﬁcantly
decreased expression levels (p value >0.01, not shown), pointing
to the fact that binding of SOX2 to a connected distal enhancer is
much more functionally effective than its binding to a promoter.
Finally, the P-P interactions category had no signiﬁcant overlap
with genes showing signiﬁcant expression changes (group 1).
However, group 2 genes showing only mildly decreased expres-
sion in MUT cells (not reaching the threshold requested for sta-
tistical signiﬁcance), were signiﬁcantly associated with the P-P
interaction category (lanes 4, 8, and 12); we speculate that P-P
interactions might be responsible for moderate positive effects
on transcription, and their loss in MUT cells might predominantly
result into a minor decrease of expression (as observed for
group 2 genes), rather than into the stronger decrease observed
with group 1 genes.
In conclusion, the identiﬁcation of thousands of long-range
interaction enhancers in NSCs, many of which are bound by
SOX2, demonstrates an important role of SOX2 in controlling
gene expression at the connected promoter.
Overexpression of Socs3, a Multi-Connected SOX2
Target, Rescues Long-Term Self-Renewal of MUT NSC
Sox2 MUT NSCs have a severe self-renewal defect, and their
growth in culture becomes exhausted after 7–10 passages
(30 days) (Favaro et al., 2009). To evaluate if any speciﬁc
gene (from among those whose expression is affected by Sox2
loss) was able to rescue long-term self-renewal in MUT NSC,
we expressed in MUT NSCs the Socs3 gene, an inhibitor of
Jak/Stat signaling, which antagonizes precocious differentiation
of NSCs into astroglia (Cao et al., 2006). Socs3 is strongly down-
regulated (down to 10%–15% of WT values) in MUT NSCs
(Tables S4 and S5) and shows both a SOX2 peak on the pro-
moter and multiple interactions (Figure 6A; see also Figure 1E),
including one with a SOX2-bound anchor that already tested
active in transgenic Zebraﬁsh assays (Figure 4). We transduced
both WT and Sox2 MUT NSCs with a lentiviral Socs3-vector co-
expressing GFP, performing three experiments at virus-to-cell
ratios transducing 20%, 30%, or 50% of the NSCs. Socs3-trans-
duced WT NSCs grew at a similar rate as untransduced WT
NSCs and continued to grow long-term, whereas untransduced
MUT NSCs stopped growing between passages 8–12 (Figures
6B and 6C). In contrast, Socs-3 transduced MUT NSCs
continued to grow long term, even after the untransduced MUT
NSCs had stopped growing and could eventually be grown in
bulk to generate large cell populations. At the time of initial diver-
gence of the growth curves of transduced and untransduced
MUT NSCs (experiment 3), most or all neurospheres (from trans-
duced MUT NSCs) contained GFP+ cells, and over 70% of the
cells were positive by ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS), indicating a strong enrichment of the transduced cells;
eventually, all cells became GFP+ (Figure 6D). Note that Socs3-
transduced WT NSCs were not positively selected relative
to untransduced WT NSCs, indicating that in WT NSCs, the
endogenous SOCS3 level was not limiting for optimal growth
(not shown). This result identiﬁes a SOX2-regulated gene,
involved in SOX2-dependent interactions, whose abnormal
regulation in MUT NSCs may be responsible for their defective
long-term maintenance.
DISCUSSION
We show that SOX2 is critically involved in long-range chromatin
interactions in NSCs; its ablation during early mouse develop-
ment leads to a predominant decrease in long-range chromatin
connectivity, particularly at some loci, when tested in neonatal
forebrain-derived NSC cultures. SOX2 binding is greatly en-
riched on DNA regions connected by interactions (anchors) at
either promoters or enhancers. The loss of Sox2 decreases the
expression of 1,000 genes. The identiﬁcation of thousands
of epigenetically deﬁned enhancers involved in long-range
interactions allowed us to demonstrate that SOX2-bound long-
range interactions represent the most relevant functional
category associated with the observed gene downregulation in
MUT NSCs (Figure 5D). mRNAs encoding important transcrip-
tion factors, and signal transduction molecules, are signiﬁcantly
reduced in MUT cells; among these factors, SOCS3 is able
to rescue long-term self-renewal in MUT NSC, when overex-
pressed in these cells.
SOX2 Enrichment in Pol II-Mediated Long-Range
Interactions between Promoters and Epigenetic
Enhancers in NSC
A relevant role for SOX2 in long-range interactions can be hy-
pothesized on the basis of the following observations: distal
interaction anchors are highly enriched in epigenetic enhancer
marks (Figure 2) and are highly represented in enhancers
active in transgenic zebraﬁsh (Figure 4) and in forebrain VISTA
enhancers (Visel et al., 2009) (see Figures 3, 4, and S5). In addi-
tion, SOX2-bound sites are highly enriched in regions marked
by epigenetic enhancer signatures (Figure 2B); in particular,
(D) Coassociation scores (histograms, -log10 p) calculated for genes (TPM >5) showing either reduced gene expression in MUT NSCs (red), or no relevant change
(green), and the indicated categories of interactions detected in wTR1, wTR2, and wTR3 (see STAR Methods). DOWN_MUT, genes showing statistically sig-
niﬁcant expression reduction; DOWN_MUT NO_SIGN, genes showing moderate expression reduction; OTHERS, all other genes. The types of interactions are
shown on the right; data for ‘‘SOX2 promoter target’’ are not signiﬁcant.
See also Tables S5 and S8.
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476, March 7, 2019
471

SOX2-bound epigenetically deﬁned enhancer regions are much
more represented than non-SOX2-bound regions in anchors
(Figure 2E). Finally, upon ablation of Sox2, there is a reduction
in interactions frequency, which is detected by ChIA-PET
(Figures 1, 3, S3, and S5; Table 1) at large numbers of loci. It is
thus possible to hypothesize that SOX2, perhaps in complex
Figure 6. SOCS3 Re-expression in MUT NSCs Prevents NSC Exhaustion and Restores Self-Renewal
(A) Top: Socs3 gene. ChIA-PET interactions, SOX2 peaks, and ChIA-PET reads in WT NSCs. Bottom: loss of interactions in Sox2-MUT NSCs.
(B) Growth curves of MUT NSCs, not transduced (MUT) or transduced (MUT Socs3) with a Socs3-GFP-expressing lentivirus, and of WT controls (WT or
WT Socs3).
(C) Images (phase-contrast) of MUT or Socs3-transduced MUT NSCs 3 days after passage 12; neurospheres develop only from Socs3-transduced NSCs. For
comparison, WT NSCs.
(D) FACS analysis (GFP) of MUT, WT, and MUT Socs3 cells at the indicated passage number. With passaging, the fraction of GFP+ NSCs progressively increases
in MUT Socs3 NSCs, eventually reaching 100%.
472
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476, March 7, 2019

with additional factors, may contribute to generate, or maintain,
the network of interactions characteristic of NSCs.
A subset of P-P and P-E interactions is decreased in frequency
in MUT cells. This might result from the loss of SOX2 from the in-
teracting anchors (an appealing hypothesis) and the ensuing
global chromatin conformation changes; an additional contribu-
tion to interaction loss might be represented by the transcrip-
tional deregulation of many SOX2-controlled transcription fac-
tors (Tables S4 and S5) potentially contributing to interactions.
Further, SOX2 interacts with several TFs, as well as with proteins
involved in determining chromatin structure, such as NurD
complex, SWI/SNF, CHD7, and SMRT/NCOR (Engelen et al.,
2011), which are thus possible candidates for mediating such
interactions.
Decreased Gene Expression in Sox2 MUT Cells Is
Signiﬁcantly Correlated with Genes Whose Promoter Is
Connected with an Enhancer Bound by SOX2 in WT Cells
The decreased transcription of 1,000 genes (Tables S4 and S5)
in Sox2 MUT cells could in principle be ascribed to either loss of
an effect of SOX2 on the gene promoter, or to loss of an effect
on a connected enhancer. We demonstrate a predominant role
of SOX2-bound enhancers versus non-SOX2-bound enhancers
on the regulation of their connected genes (Figure 5D); in
contrast, SOX2 binding to promoters is much less functionally
relevant. Some interacting promoters may inﬂuence each other’s
activities (Li et al., 2012); our data, while not ruling out this model,
suggest that, overall, the numerous P-P interactions detected in
NSCs play a comparatively minor role relative to P-E interactions
in SOX2-dependent regulation (Figures 5B and 5D). This is
consistent with our observation (Zhang et al., 2013) that P-E
interactions are more cell-type speciﬁc than P-P interactions,
and is in agreement with the known cell-type speciﬁcity of
SOX2 functions in neural cells. The predominant transcriptional
effect of SOX2 at distal enhancer regions might be related either
to an activating effect of SOX2 onto the connected promoter or
to a stabilizing effect of SOX2 onto the interaction itself (as sug-
gested by the decreased frequency of the interaction upon Sox2
ablation), or both.
The role of interactions in controlling gene activity has
been addressed by the knockout of genes encoding CTCF
or Cohesin components in regulating chromatin interactions
in cell lines. Only moderate transcriptional deregulation was
observed in connection with widespread and deep changes
in long-range interactions (Merkenschlager and Odom, 2013;
Rao et al., 2017; Schwarzer et al., 2017); these proteins, how-
ever, are thought to act primarily as architectural proteins (Phil-
lips-Cremins et al., 2013), in contrast to the well-established
role of SOX2 as a transcription factor. During completion of
this manuscript, the transcription factor YY1 was identiﬁed
as a mediator of promoter-enhancer interactions in embryonic
stem cells (Weintraub et al., 2017). YY1, contrary to SOX2,
is ubiquitously expressed and acquires cell-type speciﬁcity of
binding to DNA thanks to RNA and other undeﬁned factors
(Weintraub et al., 2017). Intriguingly, in neural progenitor cells
(NPCs), YY1 is bound to a large subset of NPC-speciﬁc pro-
moter-enhancer interactions (Beagan et al., 2017). It will be
interesting to ask whether SOX2 and YY1 may functionally
interact at this level.
Sox2 Loss Does Not Substantially Alter Epigenetic
Enhancer Marks
While SOX2 is bound to a very large proportion of epigenetic en-
hancers in NSC and plays an important role in the regulation of a
subset of genes, epigenetic marks on enhancers are not lost in
Sox2 MUT NSCs (Figure S4). This might be explained by the
fact that no gene is completely silenced in the absence of
SOX2, and interactions might be decreased, but not completely
lost. Additionally, Sox2 was ablated at a stage (E11.5) when spe-
ciﬁc EM might already have been established within NSCs;
SOX2 might be initially important in determining the transition
from an ectodermic cell to a NSC, and thus the establishment
of proper chromatin EM, but might not be required after-
ward for their maintenance. These observations dissociate the
presence of an epigenetic EM from the actual presence of a
critical transcription factor on interacting promoter-enhancer
complexes.
SOX2 Loss Affects the Activity of Key Genes Relevant to
Cell Proliferation Control
Sox2 is expressed in NSCs throughout life (Zappone et al., 2000)
and is essential for NSC maintenance in culture and in vivo in the
hippocampus (Favaro et al., 2009). It is unknown which genes
downstream to Sox2 mediate its function in long-term NSC
maintenance. Socs3, a highly connected gene (Figures 1
and 6) is strongly downregulated in Sox2 MUT NSCs. Socs3
transduction of a proportion of Sox2 MUT cells leads to a slow
but progressive increase of the growth rate of the culture, with
eventual recovery of a population of actively growing cells,
providing evidence for a crucial role of Socs3 in Sox2-dependent
NSC maintenance (Figure 6). Interestingly, several additional
genes (c-fos, Jun, JunB, Btg2, Egr1, and Egr2), encoding well-
known regulators of cell proliferation, are expressed at high
levels in WT NSCs and are substantially downregulated in
Sox2 MUT cells (Tables S4 and S5). These genes show multiple
promoter-enhancer interactions in WT NSCs (not shown and
Table S5) and might be part of a network of interacting genes
required, together with Socs3, for optimal Sox2-dependent
maintenance of NSCs. Hippocampal defects observed in Sox2
MUT mice have been related to defects in NSCs (Favaro et al.,
2009). The discovery of mediators of Sox2 function in NSCs
may be relevant to the understanding of in vivo defects.
Many Mouse Homologs of Genes Affected in
Neurodevelopmental Brain Diseases Are Involved in
Long-Range Interactions with Distant Regions Carrying
Enhancer Marks
Thousands of polymorphisms in non-coding elements in man
may be linked to brain disease or neurodevelopmental disorders
(Nord et al., 2015). In NSCs, between ca. 1,750 and 3,500
expressed genes (Figure 5B, wTR1, wTR2, and wTR3) present
long-range promoter-enhancer connections; the comparison
of the regulatory elements that we identiﬁed in mouse with
conserved orthologous sequences in man may allow identiﬁ-
cation of genes regulated by such enhancers, which might
be dysfunctional in individuals carrying mutations at these
elements.
Interestingly, the mouse homologs of several genes known
to be involved in human neural disease show SOX2-bound
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476, March 7, 2019
473

interactions (Figures 3B–3D and S5). A SOX2-bound neural
enhancer within the Akt3 gene is connected to the Zbtb18
(ZFP238 in man) TF gene (Figure 3B), whose mutation causes
microcephaly in man and mouse (de Munnik et al., 2014); in
man, deletions including AKT3, or translocations separating
AKT3 from ZFP238 (Boland et al., 2007) (Figure 3B) also cause
microcephaly. Both Gpr56, a gene whose promoter is bound
by SOX2, and Arid1a (Figure 3) are connected to distant SOX2-
bound epigenetic enhancers; mutation of the GPR56 promoter
causes structural neocortical abnormalities and ARID1A muta-
tion is responsible for intellectual disability (Bae et al., 2014;
Lee and Young, 2013, and references therein). The mutation of
SOX3 (see its enhancer in Figure 4) causes mental retardation
and hypothalamic-pituitary defects (Laumonnier et al., 2002).
Table S6 (see also Figure S5) lists additional genes involved in
long-range interactions (many of which are SOX2-bound), whose
human homologs are affected in neurodevelopmental disorders.
In particular, Table S6 includes a large proportion of genes
mutated in primary recessive microcephaly, severe intellectual
disability, and eye disease. Signiﬁcantly, the pathology of
SOX2 mutant patients includes brain (mainly hippocampal) ab-
normalities, some degree of mental retardation, and eye defects
(Ragge et al., 2005; Sisodiya et al., 2006); microcephaly and
some of the pathology observed in humans are also prominent
in mouse Sox2 mutants (Favaro et al., 2009; Ferri et al., 2004,
2013). Our data suggest that some of the genes showing con-
nections in Table S5 might play a role in human and mouse
Sox2-dependent pathology; additionally, it might be interesting
to search for mutations of the connected enhancers in human
diseases such as intellectual disability and microcephaly.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d CONTACT FOR REAGENTS AND RESOURCE SHARING
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAIL
B Animals
B Cell lines, primary cultures, microbe strains
d METHOD DETAILS
B Cultures of neural stem/progenitor cells from wild-type
and Sox2-deleted mouse P0 forebrain
B ChIA-PET experiments
B ChIA-PET data analyses
d CHIP-SEQ ANALYSES
B SOX2 ChIPseq
B H3K27Ac and H3K4me1 ChIPseq
B Analysis of histone modiﬁcations colocalization by
ChromHMM
B Enrichment of SOX2-bound sites within H3K27Ac-en-
riched regions
B Zebraﬁsh transgenesis
B RNA-Seq analysis
B Co-association scores
B Socs3 transduction in NSC
d DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
B Accession numbers
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information can be found with this article online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.stem.2019.02.004.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Daofeng Li and Ting Wang (Washington University, http://wang.
wustl.edu/) for helping us host and visualize our genomic data on the WashU
browser. We thank Dr. Tae-Kyung Kim for the c-fos enhancers. Research re-
ported in this publication was supported by Telethon, AIRC, Regione Lombar-
dia ASTIL, Fondazione Cariplo, ERANET ImprovVision (NEURON8-Full-815-
091 to S.K.N.), MINECO (BFU2013-43213-P and BFU2016-75412-R with
FEDER support), CIBERER, ISCIII, ERANET/PCIN-2015-176-C02-01, an Insti-
tutional Grant from Fundacio´ n Ramon Areces and Banco Santander (to P.B.),
the 4DN (U54 DK107967), ENCODE Consortia (UM1 HG009409 to C.-L.W.),
NCI (P30CA034196 to C.-L.W. and C.Y.N. ), the Francis Crick Institute (which
receives its core funding from Cancer Research UK; FC0010089), the UK Med-
ical Research Council (FC0010089), the Wellcome Trust (FC0010089 to F.G.
and B.M.), and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Coun-
cil (BB/K005316/1 to F.G.). J.B. was supported by short-term fellowships from
EMBO and Fondazione Cariplo for two stays in Madrid.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
C.-L.W. and S.K.N. designed the study. S.K.N., C-L.W., G.P., S.O., F.G., M.C.,
and P.B. discussed the results and wrote the manuscript with input from all
other authors. R.F. and M.P. prepared NSCs for all chromatin studies. Y.Z.
and H.T. performed and analyzed the TR2 and TR3 ChIA-PET data. C.-H.W.
analyzed TR1 ChIA-PET data. C.Y.N. performed RNA-seq. B.M. and M.V.
did Sox2 and histone marks ChIP-seq. P.R. and J.M. did initial RNA-seq
work. G.P. and F.Z. planned and performed bioinformatics and biostatistics
analyses. R.F., C.B., J.B., and S.M. made DNA constructs and transfections.
J.B., M.J.C., and N.T. performed zebraﬁsh studies under the guidance of
P.B. M.P. did the MUT NSC rescue experiments.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: January 30, 2018
Revised: July 16, 2018
Accepted: February 6, 2019
Published: March 7, 2019
REFERENCES
Avilion, A.A., Nicolis, S.K., Pevny, L.H., Perez, L., Vivian, N., and Lovell-Badge,
R. (2003). Multipotent cell lineages in early mouse development depend on
SOX2 function. Genes Dev. 17, 126–140.
Bae, B.I., Tietjen, I., Atabay, K.D., Evrony, G.D., Johnson, M.B., Asare, E.,
Wang, P.P., Murayama, A.Y., Im, K., Lisgo, S.N., et al. (2014). Evolutionarily
dynamic alternative splicing of GPR56 regulates regional cerebral cortical
patterning. Science 343, 764–768.
Beagan, J.A., Duong, M.T., Titus, K.R., Zhou, L., Cao, Z., Ma, J., Lachanski,
C.V., Gillis, D.R., and Phillips-Cremins, J.E. (2017). YY1 and CTCF orchestrate
a 3D chromatin looping switch during early neural lineage commitment.
Genome Res. 27, 1139–1152.
Bessa, J., Tena, J.J., de la Calle-Mustienes, E., Ferna´ ndez-Min˜ a´ n, A., Naranjo,
S., Ferna´ ndez, A., Montoliu, L., Akalin, A., Lenhard, B., Casares, F., and
Go´ mez-Skarmeta, J.L. (2009). Zebraﬁsh enhancer detection (ZED) vector: a
new tool to facilitate transgenesis and the functional analysis of cis-regulatory
regions in zebraﬁsh. Dev. Dyn. 238, 2409–2417.
Boland, E., Clayton-Smith, J., Woo, V.G., McKee, S., Manson, F.D., Medne, L.,
Zackai, E., Swanson, E.A., Fitzpatrick, D., Millen, K.J., et al. (2007). Mapping of
deletion and translocation breakpoints in 1q44 implicates the serine/threonine
kinase AKT3 in postnatal microcephaly and agenesis of the corpus callosum.
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81, 292–303.
474
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476, March 7, 2019

Cantone, I., and Fisher, A.G. (2011). Unraveling epigenetic landscapes: the
enigma of enhancers. Cell Stem Cell 8, 128–129.
Cao, F., Hata, R., Zhu, P., Ma, Y.J., Tanaka, J., Hanakawa, Y., Hashimoto, K.,
Niinobe, M., Yoshikawa, K., and Sakanaka, M. (2006). Overexpression of
SOCS3 inhibits astrogliogenesis and promotes maintenance of neural stem
cells. J. Neurochem. 98, 459–470.
Creyghton, M.P., Cheng, A.W., Welstead, G.G., Kooistra, T., Carey, B.W.,
Steine, E.J., Hanna, J., Lodato, M.A., Frampton, G.M., Sharp, P.A., et al.
(2010). Histone H3K27ac separates active from poised enhancers and pre-
dicts developmental state. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 21931–21936.
de Laat, W., and Duboule, D. (2013). Topology of mammalian developmental
enhancers and their regulatory landscapes. Nature 502, 499–506.
de Munnik, S.A., Garcı´a-Min˜ au´ r, S., Hoischen, A., van Bon, B.W., Boycott,
K.M., Schoots, J., Hoefsloot, L.H., Knoers, N.V., Bongers, E.M., and
Brunner, H.G. (2014). A de novo non-sense mutation in ZBTB18 in a patient
with features of the 1q43q44 microdeletion syndrome. Eur. J. Hum. Genet.
22, 844–846.
Engelen, E., Akinci, U., Bryne, J.C., Hou, J., Gontan, C., Moen, M., Szumska,
D., Kockx, C., van Ijcken, W., Dekkers, D.H., et al. (2011). Sox2 cooperates
with Chd7 to regulate genes that are mutated in human syndromes. Nat.
Genet. 43, 607–611.
Ernst, J., and Kellis, M. (2012). ChromHMM: automating chromatin-state dis-
covery and characterization. Nat. Methods 9, 215–216.
Esteve, P., Lopez-Rios, J., and Bovolenta, P. (2004). SFRP1 is required for the
proper establishment of the eye ﬁeld in the medaka ﬁsh. Mech. Dev. 121,
687–701.
Favaro, R., Valotta, M., Ferri, A.L., Latorre, E., Mariani, J., Giachino, C., Lancini,
C., Tosetti, V., Ottolenghi, S., Taylor, V., and Nicolis, S.K. (2009). Hippocampal
development and neural stem cell maintenance require Sox2-dependent regu-
lation of Shh. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1248–1256.
Ferri, A.L., Cavallaro, M., Braida, D., Di Cristofano, A., Canta, A., Vezzani, A.,
Ottolenghi, S., Pandolﬁ, P.P., Sala, M., DeBiasi, S., et al. (2004). Sox2 deﬁ-
ciency causes neurodegeneration and impaired neurogenesis in the adult
mouse brain. Development 131, 3805–3819.
Ferri, A., Favaro, R., Beccari, L., Bertolini, J., Mercurio, S., Nieto-Lopez, F.,
Verzeroli, C., La Regina, F., De Pietri Tonelli, D., Ottolenghi, S., et al. (2013).
Sox2 is required for embryonic development of the ventral telencephalon
through the activation of the ventral determinants Nkx2.1 and Shh.
Development 140, 1250–1261.
Fishman, M.C., Stainier, D.Y., Breitbart, R.E., and Westerﬁeld, M. (1997).
Zebraﬁsh: genetic and embryological methods in a transparent vertebrate em-
bryo. Methods Cell Biol. 52, 67–82.
Francipane, M.G., Eterno, V., Spina, V., Bini, M., Scerrino, G., Buscemi, G.,
Gulotta, G., Todaro, M., Dieli, F., De Maria, R., and Stassi, G. (2009).
Suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 sensitizes anaplastic thyroid cancer to
standard chemotherapy. Cancer Res. 69, 6141–6148.
Gonc¸ alves, J.T., Schafer, S.T., and Gage, F.H. (2016). Adult Neurogenesis in
the Hippocampus: From Stem Cells to Behavior. Cell 167, 897–914.
Gorkin, D.U., Leung, D., and Ren, B. (2014). The 3D genome in transcriptional
regulation and pluripotency. Cell Stem Cell 14, 762–775.
Hagey, D.W., Zaouter, C., Combeau, G., Lendahl, M.A., Andersson, O., Huss,
M., and Muhr, J. (2016). Distinct transcription factor complexes act on a
permissive chromatin landscape to establish regionalized gene expression
in CNS stem cells. Genome Res. 26, 908–917.
Langmead, B. (2010). Aligning short sequencing reads with Bowtie. Curr.
Protoc. Bioinformatics Chapter 11. Unit 11.17.
Laumonnier, F., Ronce, N., Hamel, B.C., Thomas, P., Lespinasse, J., Raynaud,
M., Paringaux, C., Van Bokhoven, H., Kalscheuer, V., Fryns, J.P., et al. (2002).
Transcription factor SOX3 is involved in X-linked mental retardation with
growth hormone deﬁciency. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71, 1450–1455.
Lee, T.I., and Young, R.A. (2013). Transcriptional regulation and its misregula-
tion in disease. Cell 152, 1237–1251.
Li, B., and Dewey, C.N. (2011). RSEM: accurate transcript quantiﬁcation from
RNA-Seq data with or without a reference genome. BMC Bioinformatics
12, 323.
Li, H., and Durbin, R. (2009). Fast and accurate short read alignment with
Burrows-Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics 25, 1754–1760.
Li, G., Fullwood, M.J., Xu, H., Mulawadi, F.H., Velkov, S., Vega, V., Ariyaratne,
P.N., Mohamed, Y.B., Ooi, H.S., Tennakoon, C., et al. (2010). ChIA-PET
tool for comprehensive chromatin interaction analysis with paired-end tag
sequencing. Genome Biol. 11, R22.
Li, G., Ruan, X., Auerbach, R.K., Sandhu, K.S., Zheng, M., Wang, P., Poh,
H.M., Goh, Y., Lim, J., Zhang, J., et al. (2012). Extensive promoter-centered
chromatin interactions provide a topological basis for transcription regulation.
Cell 148, 84–98.
Lodato, M.A., Ng, C.W., Wamstad, J.A., Cheng, A.W., Thai, K.K., Fraenkel, E.,
Jaenisch, R., and Boyer, L.A. (2013). SOX2 co-occupies distal enhancer ele-
ments with distinct POU factors in ESCs and NPCs to specify cell state.
PLoS Genet. 9, e1003288.
Mateo, J.L., van den Berg, D.L., Haeussler, M., Drechsel, D., Gaber, Z.B.,
Castro, D.S., Robson, P., Lu, Q.R., Crawford, G.E., Flicek, P., et al. (2015).
Characterization of the neural stem cell gene regulatory network identiﬁes
OLIG2 as a multifunctional regulator of self-renewal. Genome Res. 25, 41–56.
Merkenschlager, M., and Odom, D.T. (2013). CTCF and cohesin: linking gene
regulatory elements with their targets. Cell 152, 1285–1297.
Mumbach, M.R., Rubin, A.J., Flynn, R.A., Dai, C., Khavari, P.A., Greenleaf,
W.J., and Chang, H.Y. (2016). HiChIP: efﬁcient and sensitive analysis of pro-
tein-directed genome architecture. Nat. Methods 13, 919–922.
Nord, A.S., Pattabiraman, K., Visel, A., and Rubenstein, J.L.R. (2015). Genomic
perspectives of transcriptional regulation in forebrain development. Neuron
85, 27–47.
Okuda, Y., Ogura, E., Kondoh, H., and Kamachi, Y. (2010). B1 SOX coordinate
cell speciﬁcation with patterning and morphogenesis in the early zebraﬁsh
embryo. PLoS Genet. 6, e1000936.
Paulsen, J., Rodland, E.A., Holden, L., Holden, M., and Hovig, E. (2014). ).
A statistical model of ChIA-PET data for accurate detection of chromatin 3D
interactions. Nucleic Acids Res. 42, e143.
Phillips-Cremins, J.E., Sauria, M.E., Sanyal, A., Gerasimova, T.I., Lajoie, B.R.,
Bell, J.S., Ong, C.T., Hookway, T.A., Guo, C., Sun, Y., et al. (2013).
Architectural protein subclasses shape 3D organization of genomes during
lineage commitment. Cell 153, 1281–1295.
Ragge, N.K., Lorenz, B., Schneider, A., Bushby, K., de Sanctis, L., de Sanctis,
U., Salt, A., Collin, J.R., Vivian, A.J., Free, S.L., et al. (2005). SOX2 anophthal-
mia syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. A. 135, 1–7, discussion 8.
Rao,S.S.P.,Huang,S.C.,GlennStHilaire,B.,Engreitz,J.M.,Perez,E.M.,Kieffer-
Kwon, K.R., Sanborn, A.L., Johnstone, S.E., Bascom, G.D., Bochkov, I.D., et al.
(2017). Cohesin Loss Eliminates All Loop Domains. Cell 171, 305–320.
Rivera, C.M., and Ren, B. (2013). Mapping human epigenomes. Cell
155, 39–55.
Sanyal, A., Lajoie, B.R., Jain, G., and Dekker, J. (2012). The long-range inter-
action landscape of gene promoters. Nature 489, 109–113.
Schwarzer, W., Abdennur, N., Goloborodko, A., Pekowska, A., Fudenberg, G.,
Loe-Mie, Y., Fonseca, N.A., Huber, W., H Haering, C., Mirny, L., and Spitz, F.
(2017). Two independent modes of chromatin organization revealed by cohe-
sin removal. Nature 551, 51–56.
Sisodiya, S.M., Ragge, N.K., Cavalleri, G.L., Hever, A., Lorenz, B., Schneider,
A., Williamson, K.A., Stevens, J.M., Free, S.L., Thompson, P.J., et al. (2006).
Role of SOX2 mutations in human hippocampal malformations and epilepsy.
Epilepsia 47, 534–542.
Takahashi, K., and Yamanaka, S. (2006). Induction of pluripotent stem cells
from mouse embryonic and adult ﬁbroblast cultures by deﬁned factors. Cell
126, 663–676.
Tarazona, S., Furio´ -Tarı´, P., Turra` , D., Pietro, A.D., Nueda, M.J., Ferrer, A., and
Conesa, A. (2015). Data quality aware analysis of differential expression in
RNA-seq with NOISeq R/Bioc package. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, e140.
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476, March 7, 2019
475

Vermunt, M.W., Tan, S.C., Castelijns, B., Geeven, G., Reinink, P., de Bruijn, E.,
Kondova, I., Persengiev, S., Bontrop, R., Cuppen, E., et al.; Netherlands Brain
Bank (2016). Epigenomic annotation of gene regulatory alterations during evo-
lution of the primate brain. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 494–503.
Visel, A., Blow, M.J., Li, Z., Zhang, T., Akiyama, J.A., Holt, A., Plajzer-Frick, I.,
Shoukry, M., Wright, C., Chen, F., et al. (2009). ChIP-seq accurately predicts
tissue-speciﬁc activity of enhancers. Nature 457, 854–858.
Weintraub, A.S., Li, C.H., Zamudio, A.V., Sigova, A.A., Hannett, N.M., Day,
D.S., Abraham, B.J., Cohen, M.A., Nabet, B., Buckley, D.L., et al. (2017). YY1
Is a Structural Regulator of Enhancer-Promoter Loops. Cell 171, 1573–1588.
Yang, T., Zhang, F., Yardımcı, G.G., Song, F., Hardison, R.C., Noble, W.S.,
Yue, F., and Li, Q. (2017). HiCRep: assessing the reproducibility of Hi-C data
using a stratum-adjusted correlation coefﬁcient. Genome Res. 27, 1939–1949.
Zappone, M.V., Galli, R., Catena, R., Meani, N., De Biasi, S., Mattei, E., Tiveron,
C., Vescovi, A.L., Lovell-Badge, R., Ottolenghi, S., and Nicolis, S.K. (2000).
Sox2 regulatory sequences direct expression of a (beta)-geo transgene to
telencephalic neural stem cells and precursors of the mouse embryo, revealing
regionalization of gene expression in CNS stem cells. Development 127,
2367–2382.
Zhang, Y., Liu, T., Meyer, C.A., Eeckhoute, J., Johnson, D.S., Bernstein, B.E.,
Nusbaum, C., Myers, R.M., Brown, M., Li, W., and Liu, X.S. (2008). Model-
based analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome Biol. 9, R137.
Zhang, Y., Wong, C.H., Birnbaum, R.Y., Li, G., Favaro, R., Ngan, C.Y., Lim,
J., Tai, E., Poh, H.M., Wong, E., et al. (2013). Chromatin connectivity maps
reveal dynamic promoter-enhancer long-range associations. Nature 504,
306–310.
Zhu, J., Adli, M., Zou, J.Y., Verstappen, G., Coyne, M., Zhang, X., Durham, T.,
Miri, M., Deshpande, V., De Jager, P.L., et al. (2013). Genome-wide chromatin
state transitions associated with developmental and environmental cues. Cell
152, 642–654.
476
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476, March 7, 2019

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Anti-RNAPII monoclonal antibody (TR1)
Covance
Cat# 8WG16; RRID: AB_10013665
Goat anti-SOX2 antibody
Santa Cruz
Cat# sc-17320; RRID: AB_2286684
Anti-H3K27ac antibody
Abcam
Cat# Ab4729; RRID: AB_2118291
Anti-H3K4me1 antibody
Abcam
Cat# Ab8895; RRID: AB_306847
Anti-RNAPII monoclonal antibody (TR2, TR3)
Biolegend
920102; RRID: AB_2565318
Bacterial and Virus Strains
TWEEN lentiviral vector expressing CMV-SOCS3 and PGK-GFP
Francipane et al., 2009
N/A
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
Protein G
Invitrogen
10004D
Illumina Nextera DNA sample prep kit
Illumina
FC-121-1030
Illumina Nextera indexes
Illumina
FC-121-1011
EGS
Thermo
21565
Triton X-100
Sigma-Aldrich
T8787-100ml
dATPl
NEB
N0440S
Klenow (30-50 EXO-)-1 000
NEB
M0212L
T4 DNA ligase
NEB
M0202L
AluI
NEB
R0137L
BSA
NEB
B9000S
10% SDS
Ambion
AM9822
Formaldehyde
Sigma
F8775
5 3 ligation buffer
NEB
B6058S
Glycine
Sigma
G8898
Critical Commercial Assays
TruSeq ChIP Sample Prep Kit
Illumina
Cat# IP-2020-1012 or 1024
pCR8/GW/TOPO TA Cloning Kit
Thermo Fisher
Cat# K250020
ClonaseTM-assisted, Gateway technology
Invitrogen
Cat# 12535-019, 12535-027
Truseq Stranded mRNA Sample Preparation Kit
Illumina
Cat# RS-122-2101/2/3
Deposited Data
Raw and analyzed data
This paper
GEO: GSE90561
Experimental Models: Cell Lines
Ex-vivo cultured NSCs from P0 mouse forebrains
Favaro et al., 2009
N/A
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Mouse: Sox2ﬂ/ﬂ;nestin-Cre conditional Sox2 mutants
Favaro et al., 2009
EMMA ID (Sox2ﬂox): EM:07995
Oligonucleotides
PCR primers for anchor ampliﬁcation are in Methods
(Methods S1 primers for anchor ampliﬁcation)
N/A
N/A
Sox2-speciﬁc morpholino
Okuda et al., 2010
N/A
Recombinant DNA
Zebraﬁsh Enhancer Detection vector
Bessa et al., 2009
N/A
Software and Algorithms
Bowtie version 0.12.5 (for SOX2 ChIPseq)
Langmead, 2010
http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net
MACS version 2.0.9 (for SOX2 ChIPseq)
Zhang et al., 2008
N/A
Bowtie version 1.1.0 (for H3K27ac/H3K4me1 ChIPseq)
N/A
http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net
MACS2 (for H3K27ac/H3K4me1 ChIPseq)
N/A
N/A
(Continued on next page)
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476.e1–e6, March 7, 2019
e1

CONTACT FOR REAGENTS AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact Silvia K.
Nicolis (silvia.nicolis@unimib.it).
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAIL
Animals
Sox2 conditional mutant mice
Mutant and wild-type mice were sacriﬁced at P0, to obtain forebrains for NSC cultures (sex was indifferent). Sox2 deletion was ob-
tained by breeding Sox2ﬂox mutant mice to nestinCre transgenic mice (as in Favaro et al., 2009). The experiments were approved by
the Italian Ministery of Health as conforming to the relevant regulatory standards.
Zebraﬁsh
AB and tupl wild-type zebraﬁsh strains were maintained and bred according to standard procedures (Fishman et al, 1997). All exper-
iments conform to the guidelines from the European Community Directive and the Spanish legislation for the experimental use of
animals.
Cell lines, primary cultures, microbe strains
Primary ex-vivo neural stem/progenitor cell cultures
P0 brain-derived NSC cultures were obtained from dissected telencephalon of wild-type and Sox2-deleted mice, and grown, as
described in Favaro et al. (2009) and Zhang et al. (2013), see Method Details section below.
Microbe strains
Standard cloning procedures were carried out in E. coli TOP ten and DH5alpha.
Lentivirus packaging cell lines
Packaging of the Socs3-expressing lentivirus was performed in 293T cells.
METHOD DETAILS
Cultures of neural stem/progenitor cells from wild-type and Sox2-deleted mouse P0 forebrain
After forebrain dissection and cell dissociation, we plated cells in 25 mL ﬂasks and cultured them to expand their number in complete
medium (2% (vol/vol) B27 in DMEM F12 with Glutamax), supplemented with 10 ng/ml EGF, 10 ng/ml of basic ﬁbroblast growth factor
(FGF) with 0.2% (vol/vol) heparin. We cultured wild-type and mutant cells in parallel for two initial passages (until sphere formation
was detected, 3-7 days, normally 4 days) (Favaro et al., 2009), followed by sphere dissociation and further expansion in the presence
of EGF, but not bFGF, for 3-5 more passages (4 days), as described in Zhang et al. (2013), for optimal maintenance of mutant NSC
(Favaro et al., 2009). Cell passaging involved 0.25% trypsin treatment for 5 min, followed by block with 1 mg/ml trypsin inhibitor
(Sigma T6522) for 5 min; neurospheres were then mechanically dissociated by pipetting and cells were seeded at 80,000 per ml
in T150 ﬂasks.
After obtaining appropriate numbers of wild-type and mutant cells, we started collecting part of the neurospheres at each passage,
continuing the culture of the remaining cells as long as the growth of mutant cells was comparable to that of wild-type cells. In order
to proceed to ChIA-PET and ChIP-seq experiments, we mechanically dissociated and crosslinked the neurospheres as
described below.
ChIA-PET experiments
ChIA-PET experiments for TR1were performed as described (Zhang et al., 2013), using pooled NSC from four wild-type and six
mutant brains from littermates. Wild-type and mutant cultures were processed in parallel. wTR1 data are from Zhang et al. (2013);
mTR1 data, present paper. Neurospheres were cross-linked by standard formaldehyde treatment and the pellets were then
snap-frozen in nitrogen. The crosslinked cells were lysed to release the chromatin–DNA complexes followed by fragmentation
to an average size of 300 base pairs (bp). The sonicated chromatin–DNA complexes were incubated with the Pol II monoclonal
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
RSEM software package version 1.17
Li and Dewey, 2011
N/A
Noiseq package
Tarazona et al., 2015
N/A
ChIA-PET Tools
https://github.com/
cheehongsg/CPU
N/A
ChiaSigScaled
https://github.com/
cheehongsg/ChiaSigScaled
N/A
e2
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476.e1–e6, March 7, 2019

antibody-coated magnetic Protein G beads (8WG16, Covance). To determine the ChIP quality, a small portion of ChIP DNA was
eluted for quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis. For ChIA-PET library construction, ChIP-enriched chromatin complexes were divided
into two aliquots. To distinguish the intramolecular proximity ligation products from the chimeras resulting from non-speciﬁc inter-
molecular ligations, two different barcoded biotinylated half-linkers (linker A and linker B) were ligated to the ends of polished
bead-bound-DNA fragments and used to join the juxtaposed chromatin regions. The half-linker-ligated chromatin–DNA fragments
were pooled for phosphorylation and proximity-based circularization. MmeI was subsequently used to release the paired-end
tags (PETs). The full-length linkers AA/BB resulting from intra-molecular circularization were considered to be non-chimeric PETs.
Conversely, the chimeric full linkers AB/BA resulting from intermolecular ligation were considered to be ligation noises. The
biotin-labeled PET constructs were ampliﬁed and subjected to sequencing analysis.
For the in situ Pol II ChIA-PET 10 million formaldehyde crosslinked cells for each analysis (wTR2, wTR3 and mTR2, mTR3), (cells
grown from individual brains, as above) were suspended with 100 mL 0.55% SDS and incubated at RT for 10 min, 62C for 10 min and
37C for 10 min to permeabilize nuclei, which was followed by addition of 25 mL 20% Triton X-100, incubation of 30 min at 37C to
quench SDS, followed by addition of 50 mL of blunt-end four-cutter AluI (cat# R0137L, NEB), 50 mL 10 3 CutSmart buffer and 275 mL
H2O and incubation at 37C overnight for in situ digestion. After pelleting and washing once with 1 mL 1 3 CutSmart buffer, the nuclei
were suspended in 500 mL A tailing solution composed of 50 mL 10 3 CutSmart buffer, 10 mL BSA (cat#B9000S, NEB), 10 mL 10 mM
dATP (cat#N0440S, NEB), 10 mL Klenow (30-50 exo-) (cat#M0202L, NEB), and 420 mL H2O and incubated at RT for 1 hr. The in situ
proximity ligation with biotinylated bridge linker was performed by adding 200 mL 5 3 ligation buffer (cat#B6058S, NEB), 6 mL Bridge
linker (200 ng/ul), 10 mL T4 DNA ligase (cat#M0202L, NEB) and 284 mL H2O and incubating at 16C overnight. The nuclei with in situ
proximity ligation were then subjected to sonication and chromatin immunoprecipitation with anti-Pol II antibody (8WG16, cat#
920102, Biolegend, San Diego, CA), Tn5 tagmentation, and biotin selection; PETs were ampliﬁed by PCR and sequenced.
ChIA-PET data analyses
The TR1 sequence data generated from the original ChIA-PET protocol were analyzed using ChIA-PET tool (Li et al., 2010). In brief,
non-redundant PET sequence reads were ﬁrst analyzed for linker barcode composition and non-chimeric PETs were used for further
analysis. Next, the linker sequences were trimmed, and the PET sequences were mapped to the mouse reference genome (mm9)
with 1 mismatch allowed. The PETs with genomic locations from both head and tail tags within 2 bp were merged to further ﬁlter
the redundancy arising from clonal PCR ampliﬁcation. Based on the mapping coordinates, the speciﬁc-ligation PETs were used
for further classiﬁcation as inter-chromosomal, intra-chromosomal and self-ligation PETs. Inter-chromosomal PETs were deﬁned
as both the head and tail of the PETs uniquely mapped onto different chromosomes. To deﬁne highly reliable interaction clusters,
we adopted the false discovery rate (FDR) of the hyper-geometric model. Such model takes into consideration the tag counts
from both anchor regions and the sequencing depth to determine reliable, i.e., signiﬁcant, interactions. A FDR cutoff 0.05 was
used. Finally, we performed a random shufﬂing simulation to evaluate the correlation between noise level and PET cluster counts.
The simulation broke down the pairing relationship of different PET clusters and the tags were randomly paired to generate simulated
PETs. We further compared the interaction numbers between simulations versus our experimental data and determined the noise
level (number of simulated clusters / number of real clusters) for the PET-2+ (PET cluster with 2 counts and above) to be 1.2%. There-
fore, we chose the PET cluster > = 2 to keep the noise level low and singletons (PET = 1) were considered as noise. For TR2 and TR3
generated by the in situ ChIA-PET protocol, ChIA-PET data were processed with ChIA-PET Utilities, a scalable re-implementation of
ChIA-PET tool. Brieﬂy, sequencing adaptors incorporated during the tagmentation reaction in the library construction process were
removed from the paired reads. Tags identiﬁed (> = 18bp) were mapped to mouse genome (mm9) using BWA alignment (Li and Dur-
bin, 2009) and memarXiv:1303.3997 [q-bio.GN], https://arxiv.org/abs/1303.3997 according to their tag length. The duplicated pair-
end tags arising from clonal PCR ampliﬁcation were ﬁltered and the uniquely mapped, non-redundant PETs were classiﬁed as inter-
chromosomal (L tags and R tags mapped onto different chromosomes), intra-chromosomal (L tags and R tags mapped onto the
same chromosome with genomic distance > 8Kb) and self-ligation PETs (L tags and R tags mapped onto the genome % 8Kb).
Multiple intra-chromosomal PETs whose respective ends were found within 1 Kb were then clustered as iPET-2, 3 . We further per-
formed statistical assessment of the PET clusters interaction signiﬁcance using ChiaSigScaled, a scalable re-implementation of
ChiaSig (Paulsen et al., 2014). Interaction clusters with member size 3 and above (iPET 3+) and FDR < 0.05 were classiﬁed as
signiﬁcant interactions (Table 1, line 7). Among these, the interactions with Pol II binding at both anchors were further deﬁned as
Pol II-mediated interactions (Table 1, line 8). Next, the interactions were classiﬁed based on their anchors overlapped with gene
models. Each anchor was annotated with the gene that overlapped at 1bp overlap. To classify each anchor, priority was given to
promoter (P) region (deﬁned as ± 2.5kb of TSS) followed by gene region (G). Anchors that do not overlap with any gene or promoter
region were classiﬁed as intergenic (I). The interaction classiﬁcation is just the combination of its anchors classiﬁcation. To determine
the reproducibility between TR2 and TR3, we adopted the method used in the Hi-C data (Yang et al., 2017) to determine the SCC,
Stratum-adjusted Correlation Coefﬁcient. To compute the SCC, ChIA-PET loops for each library were aggregated into 10-kb bin
matrix. SCC score is computed with HiCrep method (hicrep library in R).
For each chromosome, the smoothing parameter was used as recommended (h = 3), with maximum distance 1 Mb. Because the
methods used to fragment chromatins and generate tags for sequencing were different in TR1, TR1 was not included in the SCC
analysis. As TR1 used sonication shearing and MmeI digestion while TR2 and TR3 used AluI digestion and Tn5 transposon-based
tagmentation, the exact anchor locations deﬁned by these two methods cannot be directly compared.
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476.e1–e6, March 7, 2019
e3

ChIP-seq ANALYSES
SOX2 ChIPseq
NSC from 6 wild-type forebrains, at P0 (Favaro et al., 2009), were independently grown, and analyzed by ChIPseq in duplicate.
Individual cultures were pooled together, at a stage when neurospheres were still relatively small, and then divided into two aliquots:
neurospheres were directly ﬁxed for the ﬁrst ChIP (‘‘spheres’’ ChIPseq), whereas single cells (resulting from dissociation of the same
neurospheres) were used for the second ChIP (‘‘singles’’ ChIPseq) (see GEO).
Cells were ﬁxed sequentially with di(N-succimidyl) glutarate and 1% formaldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline and then lysed,
sonicated and immunoprecipitated as described previously (Mateo et al., 2015 and references therein). SOX2 was immunoprecip-
itated with 3mg of goat anti-SOX2 (Santa Cruz sc-17320).
DNA libraries were prepared from 10ng of immunoprecipitated DNA and 10ng of input DNA control, according to the standard
Illumina ChIP-seq protocol. Libraries were sequenced with the Genome Analyzer IIx (Illumina). The raw reads were mapped to the
mouse genome (mm9 including random chromosomes) with Bowtie (Langmead, 2010) version 0.12.5. We used MACS (Zhang
et al., 2008) version 2.0.9 to deﬁne SOX2-bound regions (peaks). As this tool is very sensitive to the unbalanced number of reads
in the real and the input set, we decided to reduce the larger input dataset to match the number of mapped reads in the smaller
IP dataset by randomly downsampling reads, as described previously (Mateo et al., 2015).
By using default signiﬁcance thresholds, this resulted in 18,359 SOX2-bound peak regions for the ﬁrst (‘‘spheres’’) ChIPseq. Since
ﬁxation of whole neurospheres might not, in theory, be equally efﬁcient for internal relative to external cells, we also performed
another ChIP experiment (‘‘singles’’ ChIPseq). Read mapping and peak calling were performed with the same parameters used in
the ﬁrst experiment, producing 43,070 bound regions at the same signiﬁcance thresholds. Of the ﬁrst dataset (‘‘spheres’’ ChIPseq),
the vast majority (15,985 peaks, 87%) were contained in the latter (‘‘singles’’ ChIPseq) peak list. Since also the 13% non-overlapping
peaks for the ﬁrst experiment showed enrichment in the corresponding loci in the second ChIPseq, even if below the ‘‘peak detection
threshold,’’ we kept for all the subsequent analyses presented in the paper all the peaks returned by the ﬁrst experiment (‘‘spheres’’).
The difference between ‘‘spheres’’ and ‘‘singles’’ ChIPseq appears to be due mainly to the presence in ‘‘singles’’ of numerous addi-
tional small peaks that have no (signiﬁcant) corresponding peaks in the ‘‘spheres’’ sample, and may represent more marginal binding
sites. Indeed, comparison of proﬁles between ‘‘spheres’’ and ‘‘singles’’ showed little differences between them, indicating that the
main binding sites are very similar (data not shown).
Finally, over 50% of the ca. 18400 peaks observed in our forebrain NSC ‘‘spheres’’ are found also within the ca. 24800 peaks
detected in a ChIPseq analysis of the NS-5 cell line (Mateo et al., 2015), an ES-derived NSC line that shows a general (nonfore-
brain-speciﬁc) neural phenotype. For these reasons, we used for subsequent analyses the data from ‘‘spheres.’’
H3K27Ac and H3K4me1 ChIPseq
NSC were derived from six forebrains of wild-type and 6 forebrains of Sox2-deleted mice, at P0 (Favaro et al., 2009). NSC were initially
cultured individually, then pooled according to wild-type or mutant genotype to generate two independent pools. Each independent
pool was divided in two parts, and used for ChIP-sequencing on H3K27ac or H3K4me1, as described previously (Vermunt et al.,
2016). Neurospheres were dissociated and 4 million single cells were crosslinked with 1% formaldehyde for 10 minutes at room
temperature. Reaction was quenched with 0.125 M Glycine, cells were washed with cold PBS and lysed according to Vermunt
et al. (2016). Nuclei pellets were resuspended in 160 mL sonication buffer and divided over two microtubes for shearing in the Covaris
S series with the following settings for 12 cycles of 60 s: intensity 3, duty cycle 20%, 200 cycles/bursts. Chromatin immunoprecip-
itation steps after sonication were performed as described previously (Vermunt et al., 2016) using 50 mL DynaI protein G beads that
were preincubated with 5 mg Ab4729 (Abcam) for H3K27ac or 5 mg Ab8894 (Abcam) for H3K4me1. Whole cell extract of 4 million cells
was split onto both antibodies, resulting in the use of 2 million cells per ChIP. Libraries were made using the Illumina Truseq DNA
library protocol and sequencing was done at the MIT BioMicro Center (https://openwetware.org/wiki/BioMicroCenter). Obtained se-
quences were aligned onto the mm9 mouse genome assembly using Bowtie 1.1.0 (http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net) excluding
reads that had more than 1 mismatch or that could map to multiple genomic locations. MACS2 was used for peak calling (p value
threshold = 105, extsize = 400, local lambda = 100,000) and narrowpeaks were extended to a minimum of 2000 basepairs (bps)
to match peak resolution. Overlapping enriched regions were merged and were considered promoters when located within
1000 bps from annotated mm9 transcriptional start sites (TSSs) and considered putative distal enhancers when located more
than 1000 bps away from TSSs.
Analysis of histone modiﬁcations colocalization by ChromHMM
Co-localization of histone modiﬁcations was performed with ChromHMM version 1.4. (Ernst and Kellis, 2012). Brieﬂy, the software
partitions the genome into non overlapping segments of 200 bps. Then, given a set of histone modiﬁcation ChIP-Seq experiments,
associates to each segment each of the histone modiﬁcations if the number of reads mapping in the segment can be considered to be
enriched according to a random background Poisson distribution. Then, given a number of states as input, it evaluates the co-occur-
rence of histone modiﬁcations in the genome segments, building a model in which each of the states is characterized by a given com-
bination of modiﬁcations.
The program was run setting a different number of states, and by processing either wild-type (WT) samples alone and mutant
(MUT) samples alone, and on both WT and MUT samples combined. In every setting, the model recovered consistently four main
e4
Cell Stem Cell 24, 462–476.e1–e6, March 7, 2019

===== Besharat2018_SciRep+Foxm1_NSC =====
1
Scientific Reports |  (2018) 8:3523  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21876-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Foxm1 controls a pro-stemness 
microRNA network in neural stem 
cells
Zein Mersini Besharat   1, Luana Abballe1, Francesco Cicconardi2, Arjun Bhutkar3,  
Luigi Grassi4,5, Loredana Le Pera   6, Marta Moretti7, Mauro Chinappi8, Daniel D’Andrea9, 
Angela Mastronuzzi10, Alessandra Ianari3, Alessandra Vacca1, Enrico De Smaele   1,  
Franco Locatelli10, Agnese Po7, Evelina Miele   6,10 & Elisabetta Ferretti1,11
Cerebellar neural stem cells (NSCs) require Hedgehog-Gli (Hh-Gli) signalling for their maintenance 
and Nanog expression for their self-renewal. To identify novel molecular features of this regulatory 
pathway, we used next-generation sequencing technology to profile mRNA and microRNA expression 
in cerebellar NSCs, before and after induced differentiation (Diff-NSCs). Genes with higher transcript 
levels in NSCs (vs. Diff-NSCs) included Foxm1, which proved to be directly regulated by Gli and Nanog. 
Foxm1 in turn regulated several microRNAs that were overexpressed in NSCs: miR-130b, miR-301a, 
and members of the miR-15~16 and miR-17~92 clusters and whose knockdown significantly impaired 
the neurosphere formation ability. Our results reveal a novel Hh-Gli-Nanog-driven Foxm1-microRNA 
network that controls the self-renewal capacity of NSCs.
Neural stem cells (NSCs) are a major focus of research owing to their capacity for self-renewal and their multipo-
tency, both of which are determined by the expression of transcription factors and epigenetic regulations1. NSC 
biology is the result of a dynamic balance between the expansion and/or maintenance of an uncommitted stem 
cell pool and the processes of lineage restriction and differentiation2,3. Since the discovery of NSCs, researchers 
have been attempting to identify mechanisms underlying their maintenance, which might one day be exploited 
to repair tissue damage or improve the regenerative power of cells affected by neurodegenerative diseases (e.g., 
Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, multiple sclerosis) or spinal cord injury. A better understanding of the 
signalling cascades responsible for inducing proliferating NSCs to differentiate could therefore expand the poten-
tial uses of NSCs as therapeutic agents4,5.
The Hedgehog (Hh) signalling pathway plays fundamental roles in the maintenance of stem cells, including 
the NSCs of the cerebellum3,6. By the late stages of embryogenesis, Hh glycoproteins are being secreted by differ-
entiated Purkinje neurons in the cerebellum7. These proteins bind to and inactivate the transmembrane recep-
tor Patched on nearby target cells, abrogating its repression of a second transmembrane receptor, Smoothened. 
The complex downstream signalling triggered by these events culminates in the expression of glioma-associated 
oncogene (Gli)-family transcription factors (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3), whose targets comprise genes promoting both 
the proliferation and survival of NSCs in the embryonic and adult brains8. Our previous studies showed that Gli1 
and Gli2 in cerebellar NSCs directly regulate the pluripotency transcription factor Nanog3. In subsequent studies, 
1Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, 00161, Italy. 2Institute of Ecology, University of 
Innsbruck, Technikerstrasse 25, Innsbruck, a-6020, Austria. 3David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 02139, United States. 4Department of Haematology, University 
of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Long Road, Cambridge, CB2 0PT, UK. 5National Health Service Blood 
and Transplant, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Long Road, Cambridge, CB2 0PT, UK. 6Center for Life NanoScience@
Sapienza, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Rome, 00161, Italy. 7Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University, 
Rome, 00161, Italy. 8Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via del Politecnico 1, Rome, 
00133, Italy. 9Centre for Cell Signalling and Inflammation, Imperial College, London, SW72AZ, UK. 10Department of 
Pediatric Hematology-Oncology and Department of Neuroscience, Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, Rome, 00165, 
Italy. 11Neuromed Institute, Pozzilli, 86077, Italy. Zein Mersini Besharat, Luana Abballe, Evelina Miele and Elisabetta 
Ferretti contributed equally to this work. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.P. (email: 
agnese.po@uniroma1.it) or E.F. (email: elisabetta.ferretti@uniroma1.it)
Received: 13 November 2017
Accepted: 12 February 2018
Published: xx xx xxxx
OPEN

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific Reports |  (2018) 8:3523  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21876-y
Figure 1.  Foxm1 levels upon modulation of the Hedgehog pathway. (A) Hierarchical clustering of the 988 
transcripts differentially expressed (adj. P < 0.05) (Bray-Curtis method with average linkage). (B) RT-qPCR data 
showing Gli1 and Foxm1 levels in mouse NSCs before and after 48 h of cyclopamine-KAAD (KAAD) treatment. 
P values vs. CTRL (DMSO as control) (*P < 0.05: 0.0412, **P < 0.01: 0.0044). (Mann–Whitney U test). (C) 
RT-qPCR data showing GLI1 and FOXM1 levels in normal human neural progenitors (NHNP) before and 
after 48 h of cyclopamine-KAAD (KAAD) treatment. P values vs. CTRL (DMSO as control). (*P < 0.05: 0.02, 
**P < 0.01: 0.0031). (Mann–Whitney U test). Bars in B and C represent the mean (SD) of three independent 
experiments.
Gene Ontology Category
Fold Enrichment
Count
%
Bonferroni-corrected 
P-value
Cell cycle
5.4
37
4
2.50E-15
DNA replication
8.1
15
1.6
1.50E-07
p53 signalling pathway
3.8
14
1.5
9.00E-03
ECM-receptor interaction
3.4
15
1.6
1.70E-02
Table 1.  Gene Ontology categories over-represented in the set of 988 DETs*. *Findings are ranked according to 
Bonferroni-corrected P values.

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific Reports |  (2018) 8:3523  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21876-y
Figure 2.  Upregulated expression of Foxm1 in P4 cerebellar NSCs and its effect on self-renewal. (A) RT-
qPCR data showing differential expression in pre- and post-differentiation NSCs of mRNA for Foxm1 
(*****P < 0.0001: 0.0000089) and the neuronal differentiation gene βIII-tubulin (*P < 0.05: 0.029) (Mann–
Whitney U test). (B) Left: PCR assay of Foxm1 expression using isoform-specific primers. Agarose (2%) gel 
separation of the amplified product yielded two bands corresponding to Foxm1 isoforms 201 (400 bp) and 202 
(300 bp). Full-length gel is presented in Supplementary Figure 8A. Right: Immunoblots showing endogenous 
levels of Foxm1, βIII-tubulin, and Actin (loading control) in three NSC cultures before and after differentiation. 
Full-length immunoblots are presented in Supplementary Figure 8B. (C) Left: Immunoblots showing 
endogenous levels of Foxm1 and Hsp70 (loading control) in NSCs transfected with siRNA against Foxm1 or 
non-targeting siRNA controls (siCtrl). Densitometric values appear below blots. Full-length immunoblots are 
presented in Supplementary Figure 8C. Middle: Representative bright-field images of neurospheres formed 
by NSCs transfected with siCtrl and siFoxm1. Scale bar: 100 μm. Right: RT-qPCR data showing mRNA levels 

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific Reports |  (2018) 8:3523  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21876-y
Hh–Gli-driven expression of Nanog was shown to control a set of microRNAs (miRNAs) whose target genes 
encode proteins that inhibit the proliferation and diminish the self-renewal of these cells9.
In the present study, we used next-generation mRNA- and miRNA-sequencing to further explore this Hh–
Gli-driven molecular network in early post-natal NSCs from the murine cerebellum. Our goal was to expand the 
map of this network by identifying other molecular players involved in the Hh-regulated self-renewal of these 
NSC pools.
Results
High-throughput transcriptome profiling of cerebellar NSCs. 
Cerebellar NSCs from postnatal day 
4 (P4) mice were grown in stem-cell-selective medium, as described elsewhere3. As expected, under these con-
ditions, the cells displayed high-level expression of stemness genes (Nanog, Nestin) and of Gli1 (Supplementary 
Figure 1A). Transfer of these NSCs to differentiation medium3 was followed by significant increases in the 
expression of genes encoding astrocytic, neuronal, Purkinje, and oligodendrocytic cell markers (Supplementary 
Figure 1B).
Paired-end polyA+ RNA-sequencing was used to profile the transcriptomes of NSCs grown in stem cell and 
differentiation media (NSCs and Diff-NSCs, respectively; three replicates of each). A total of 988 genes were dif-
ferentially transcribed by the cells under these two conditions. NSCs and Diff-NSCs were clearly segregated, as 
observed in the hierarchical clustering of the 988 differentially expressed transcripts (DETs) (Fig. 1A).
Functional analysis of the DETs using the DAVID platform (Database for Annotation, Visualization and 
Integrated Discovery) revealed significant enrichment (Bonferroni-corrected P < 0.05) for the four Gene 
Ontology categories reported in Table 1 and detailed in Supplementary Figure 2. The most interesting clue that 
emerged from this analysis was the over-representation of genes involved in p53 signalling. This pathway is a 
well-known negative regulator of NSC self-renewal9,10, whose activity is modulated by signalling through the 
Hh-Gli-Nanog axis3,11.
Hedgehog–Gli pathway components enriched in NSCs. 
To identify other molecular players with 
potential roles in Hh-Gli-driven self-renewal of cerebellar NSCs, we compiled a list of 53 genes known to be regu-
lated by Hh-Gli signalling in settings (physiologic or pathologic) other than NSCs (Supplementary Table 1). Nine 
of these genes were differentially transcribed in NSCs before and after differentiation (Supplementary Table 2, 
Supplementary Figure 3A). Six of the nine genes encode cyclins (Ccnb2, Ccnb1, Ccna2, Ccnd2, Ccne1, Ccnd1) 
known to be involved in the regulation of cell cycle and cell division in NSCs. The seventh, Sema6a, is involved in 
nervous system development, in particular, in axon guidance12, and the eighth gene, Insm1, has been reported to 
be involved in mouse cerebellar development13.
Analysis of this list revealed that Foxm1 was the Hh-Gli-regulated transcription factor most markedly 
expressed in NSCs prior to differentiation. Foxm1 is a transcriptional activator14 whose role as a downstream 
mediator of Hh-Gli signalling has thus far been documented exclusively in human cancer cells15–18. The rela-
tion between Foxm1 and Hh-Gli signalling was also evident in our murine cerebellar NSC model. As shown in 
Supplementary Figure 3B,C, mRNA and protein levels in our NSCs displayed good correlation with Hedgehog 
pathway activation, which is known to peak in these cells on post-natal days 4–67,19. In addition, suppression 
of Hh signalling with a Smoothened inhibitor cyclopamine-KAAD (KAAD) significantly diminished Foxm1 
mRNA levels in P4 cerebellar NSC (Fig. 1B), and similar effects were observed in human neural progenitors 
(NHNP) (Fig. 1C). Consistent with their high-level expression of Gli1 (Supplementary Figure 1A), the NSCs dis-
played strikingly higher levels of Foxm1—at both the transcriptional (Fig. 2A) and protein levels (Supplementary 
Figure 3C)—prior to their differentiation. Review of our mRNA-seq data confirmed this NSC-associated upreg-
ulation for two of the four known protein-coding Foxm1 transcript isoforms (ENSMUST00000073316 [Foxm1-
201] and ENSMUST00000112148 [Foxm1-202]) (Supplementary Table 3). As shown in Fig. 2B, this finding was 
validated by PCR performed with isoform-specific primers and by immunoblot analysis, which revealed clear 
predominance in the NSCs of the 757-amino-acid Foxm1-201 protein isoform.
Foxm1 mediates Hh–Gli-driven self-renewal of the NSCs. 
To explore the functional relevance 
of this upregulation, we transfected NSCs with siRNA directed against Foxm1 (siFoxm1) and evaluated their 
self-renewal capacity, as reflected by their ability to form neurospheres. As shown in Figs. 2C,D, Foxm1 knock-
down was associated with significantly impaired neurosphere formation. Interestingly, when we prevented Hh 
activation with the use of cyclopamine-KAAD (KAAD), (Fig. 2D) the silencing of Foxm1 did not exert any addi-
tional effect. We then investigated whether the knockdown of Foxm1 had an effect on differentiation, prolifera-
tion and apoptosis. As shown in Fig. 2C, the silencing of Foxm1 led to the up-regulation of differentiation markers 
βIII-tubulin and S100b. We did not observe any significant modulations in proliferation and apoptosis markers 
(Supplementary Figure 4). Comparison of the human FOXM1 and murine Foxm1 promoter regions revealed a 
of βIII-tubulin (*P < 0.05: 0.043) and S100b (*P < 0.05: 0.031) in NSCs transfected with siCtrl and siFoxm1. 
P values vs siCtrl. (Mann–Whitney U test). (D) Left: Neurosphere-formation capacity of NSCs transfected 
with siCtrl and siFoxm1 and treated with cyclopamine-KAAD (KAAD) to suppress endogenous Hedgehog 
signalling. Graphs show percentage of seeded cells that formed neurospheres. P values vs siCtrl. (**P < 0.01: 
0.003, NS: Not significant 0.072) (Two-way ANOVA test). Right: Immunoblots showing endogenous levels of 
Foxm1 in NSCs transfected with siCtrl and siFoxm1 and treated with cyclopamine-KAAD (KAAD). Full-length 
immunoblots are presented in Supplementary Figure 9A. Bars in panels A, C, and D represent the mean (SD) of 
three independent experiments.

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific Reports |  (2018) 8:3523  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21876-y
high percentage of identical base pairs (34–46%), which indicated substantial similarity (Supplementary Table 4). 
Consistent with recent findings on its human ortholog17,18, the murine Foxm1 promoter was found to harbour 
eight putative Gli-binding sites (s1–s8) (Fig. 3A and Supplementary Information). We performed quantitative 
PCR-ChIP assays in order to determine whether both transcriptional activators of the Hh-Gli pathway could 
occupy the Foxm1 promoter in these putative binding sites. Experiments were performed in NSCs both before 
and after differentiation to quantitatively assess Gli recruitment and histone H3 acetylation (AcH3, a marker of 
transcriptional activation). Promoter occupancy was reported in all putative Gli binding sites (s1–5) and (s6–8) 
as evidenced by the higher percentage in NSCs when compared to Diff-NSCs. In particular, Gli2 reported a 
significantly higher percentage of occupancy in the Gli (s1–5) binding sites of the Foxm1 promoter in NSCs in 
respect to Diff-NSCs (Fig. 3B). Similarly, Gli1 promoter occupancy in the Gli (s6-8) binding sites of the Foxm1 
promoter was significantly higher in NSsC when compared to Diff-NSCs (Fig. 3C). No binding was observed in 
an unrelated chromatin region (Supplementary Figure 5A). Our data allow us to conclude that Gli-binding sites 
were bound by both transcriptional activators of the Hh-Gli pathway in NSCs.
Luciferase reporter assays showed significant activation of Foxm1-reporter by Gli2 and Gli1 binding both in 
293 T and in the more physiological context of NSCs (Supplementary Figure 5B and Fig. 3D). Collectively, these 
Figure 3.  Foxm1 promoter occupancy by Gli1 and Gli2. (A) Schematic of the Foxm1 promoter showing 
locations of the 8 putative Gli-responsive elements (s1–s8). (B,C) qPCR-ChIP assay of endogenous Gli1 
and Gli2 occupancy of the Foxm1 promoter region in NSCs and Diff-NSCs. Immunoprecipitation with IgG 
was performed as control. Anti-acetyl-H3 antibodies was used to detect Foxm1 transcriptional activation. 
Eluted DNA was qPCR-amplified using primers encompassing putative Gli binding sites [s1–s5 (B) and s6–s8 
(C)]. Results are expressed as fold induction values relative to ChIP input controls. B-actin was utilized as 
unrelated chromatin control and is presented in Supplementary Figure 5 A. Bars represent means (SD) of 
three independent experiments. P values vs. Diff-NSCs (Mann-Whitney U test): (B) *P < 0.05: 0.04797 (s1-
5, Gli2), 0.03271 (s1-5, AcH3); NS (not significant): 0.2514 (s1-5, Gli1). (C) *P < 0.05: 0.0490 (s6-8, AcH3); 
**P < 0.01: 0.001374 (s6-8, Gli1); NS: 0.296763205 (s6-8, Gli2). (D) Luciferase activity induced in the Foxm1 
promoter region in NSCs by Gli1, Gli2, and Mock (negative control, PCDNA). Results are normalized to pRL-
CMV-Renilla luciferase (R-Luciferase). Bars represent means (SD) of at least three independent experiments, 
each performed in triplicate. P values vs. control cells (One-way ANOVA test): *P < 0.05: 0.02 (Gli wt-Gli1); 
**P < 0.01: 0.005 (Gli wt-Gli2), NS: Not significant 0.072 (Mut Gli s1-5-Gli1); 0.066(Mut Gli s1-5-Gli2); 0.083 
(Mut Gli s6-8-Gli1); 0.077(Mut Gli s6-8-Gli2).

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific Reports |  (2018) 8:3523  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21876-y
Figure 4.  Foxm1 controls the transcription in P4 murine cerebellar NSCs of multiple miRNAs and miRNA 
clusters. (A) Heat map and dendrogram depiction of the 80 miRNAs displaying significant differential 
expression in NSCs before and after induction of differentiation. (B,C) qPCR-ChIP assays of NSCs and Diff-
NSCs using anti-Foxm1 antibody and anti-acetyl-H3 antibody. Immunoprecipitation with IgG was performed 
as control. Eluted DNA was PCR-amplified with primers annealing to promoter regions of the miRNA genes 
of interest. Findings for miRNA candidates belonging to a cluster are based on assays of one representative 
cluster member. Results are expressed as fold induction versus input controls. B-actin was utilized as unrelated 
chromatin control and is presented in Supplementary Figure 6B. Bars represent the mean (SD) of three 
independent experiments. P values NSCs vs. Diff-NSCs (Mann–Whitney U test): Statistically significant (B) 
Foxm1: **P < 0.01: 0.002204 (miR-17~92); ***P < 0.001: 0.000 (miR-15b~16-2), 0.0003471 (miR-130b), 
0.00004 (miR-15a~16-1), 0.0003906 (miR-301a). AcH3: *P < 0.05: 0.049416827 (miR-15b~16-2); **P < 0.01: 
0.008868 (miR-130b); ***P < 0.001: 0.0008656 (miR-17~92), 0.00000069 (miR-15a~16-1), 0.00000920 (miR-
301a). (C) Foxm1: *P < 0.05: 0.01467 (miR-335), 0.01021 (miR-106b~25); NS: not significant: 0.07214 (miR-
130a). AcH3: *P < 0.05: 0.02903 (miR-130a); NS: 0.5259 (miR-335), 0.4417 (miR-106b~25).

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific Reports |  (2018) 8:3523  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21876-y
findings strongly support the importance of Foxm1 as a major mediator of Hh–Gli-driven self-renewal of the 
NSC phenotype in the post-natal murine cerebellum.
Foxm1 modulates stemness through the activation of specific miRNAs in NSCs. 
As previously 
noted, the Hh-Gli-regulated stemness marker, Nanog, modulates the proliferation and self-renewal of murine 
cerebellar NSCs via miRNA-mediated suppression of genes promoting cell-cycle arrest and differentiation3,9. We 
wondered whether miRNAs might also play a role in Foxm1’s effects on NSC self-renewal. As shown in Fig. 4A, 
miRNA-sequencing studies identified 80 miRNAs that were differentially expressed in NSCs and Diff-NSCs.
To identify miRNAs likely to be direct targets of Foxm1, we examined the promoter regions of the 40 miRNAs 
that were upregulated in NSCs (Supplementary Table 5) and found putative Foxm1 binding sites in 20. To increase 
our chances of identifying targets with biological relevance to NSC self-renewal, we restricted our subsequent anal-
yses to the 15 miRNAs on this list with the most statistically significant upregulated expression in the NSCs (Table 2, 
Supplementary Figure 6A). (See Supplementary Information file for the promoter regions of the miRNAs.)
Quantitative PCR-ChIP assays were then performed on NSCs before and after differentiation to quantita-
tively assess Foxm1 recruitment and histone H3 acetylation (AcH3) at the promoter region of each miRNA gene 
putatively targeted by Foxm1. The 15 miRNAs were transcribed singly or as part of a cluster (Table 2). In detail, 
in case of a cluster, for further experiments expression levels of one representative cluster member are reported. 
For all miRNAs tested, Foxm1 recruitment was higher in the NSCs that in the Diff-NSCs. We focused our atten-
tion on those miRNAs where promoter occupancy, as evidenced by AcH3, was significantly more intense in the 
NSCs (Fig. 4B,C). No binding was observed in an unrelated chromatin region (Supplementary Figure 6B). Foxm1 
recruitment indeed was statistically significant for miR-130b, miR-301a, and miRNAs belonging to the miR-
15~16 and miR-17~92 clusters (Fig. 4B).
The results of the previous experiments point to miR-130b, miR-301a, and miRNAs of miR-15~16 (n = 4) 
and miR-17~92 clusters (n = 2) as particularly important mediators of Foxm1’s effects in NSCs. Of note, expres-
sion levels of the above mentioned miRNAs were down-modulated after silencing of Foxm1 (Supplementary 
Figure 6C). Our claim was also supported by the effects observed in the cells after locked nucleic acid 
(LNA)-mediated depletion of these miRNAs. As shown in Fig. 5A, the NSCs’ capacity for neurosphere formation 
was not significantly reduced by anti-miR knockdown of any single miRNA or miRNA cluster. However, it was 
significantly impaired by combined depletion of miR-130b, miR-301a, and miR-19a (3 LNA combination), and 
the impairment was not significantly greater when miR-15b was also depleted (4 LNA combination). We investi-
gated whether the knockdown of these miRNAs had an effect on differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis. As 
observed after the silencing of Foxm1 (Fig. 2C), also the knockdown of these downstream miRNAs resulted in 
the upregulation of differentiation markers, but had no effects on proliferation and apoptosis markers (Fig. 5B).
To identify possible mechanisms underlying the stemness-promoting effects of this miRNA network, we 
explored the genes targeted by the ChIP-confirmed miRNAs listed in Table 2. A miRTarBase (http://mirtarbase.
mbc.nctu.edu.tw/) search returned validated murine targets for only three of these miRNAs: miR-15b-5p, miR-
130b-3p, and miR-92a-3p (Supplementary Table 6). We therefore extended our search to the literature on each 
miRNA, focusing specifically on validated or putative target genes (in any species) whose downregulation could 
explain the combined effect of these miRNAs in NSC self-renewal.
The results that emerged reiterated the importance of p53 signalling, whose loss/suppression is essen-
tial for the maintenance of embryonic stem-cell pluripotency20,21. Of particular interest was a report showing 
that miR-130b-3p regulates CD133 + tumour-initiating cells in human hepatocellular carcinoma by targeting 
No.
MicroRNA
log2 fc*
adj. P-value
Member of 
microRNA Cluster
Part of microRNA Family
ChIP-confirmed
1
mmu-miR-15b-3p
2.75
2.33E-07
15b~16-2
15a, 15b, 16-1,16-2, 195a
Yes
2
mmu-miR-92a-1-5p
2.56
3.66E-04
17~92
25, 92a-1, 92a-2, 92b
Yes
3
mmu-miR-130b-5p
1.97
6.72E-04
—
130a, 130b, 301a, 301b
Yes
4
mmu-miR-130a-5p
1.98
1.54E-03
—
130a, 130b, 301a, 301b
No
5
mmu-miR-335-3p
2.66
2.27E-03
—
—
No
6
mmu-miR-25-5p
1.58
2.77E-03
106b~25
25, 92a-1, 92a-2, 92b
No
7
mmu-miR-93-3p
1.49
2.77E-03
106b~25
17, 18a,18b, 20a, 20b, 93, 
106a, 106b
No
8
mmu-miR-15b-5p
1.6
3.88E-03
15b~16-2
15a, 15b, 16-1,16-2, 195a
Yes
9
mmu-miR-16-2-3p
1.71
7.46E-03
15b~16-2
15a, 15b, 16-1,16-2, 195a
Yes
10
mmu-miR-301a-5p
1.95
1.08E-02
—
130a, 130b, 301a, 301b
Yes
11
mmu-miR-130b-3p
1.69
1.14E-02
—
130a, 130b, 301a, 301b
Yes
12
mmu-miR-106b-5p
1.82
1.19E-02
106b~25
17, 18a,18b, 20a, 20b, 93, 
106a, 106b
No
13
mmu-miR-16-1-3p
1.96
1.76E-02
15a~16-1
15a, 15b, 16-1,16-2, 195a
Yes
14
mmu-miR-15a-3p
1.48
1.89E-02
15a~16-1
15a, 15b, 16-1,16-2, 195a
Yes
15
mmu-miR-19a-3p
1.82
3.91E-02
17~92
17, 18a,18b, 20a, 20b, 93, 
106a, 106b
Yes
Table 2.  The miRNAs with putative Foxm1 binding sites that are most markedly upregulated in NSCs. *NSC 
vs. Diff-NSC.

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific Reports |  (2018) 8:3523  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21876-y
TP53INP122, which encodes a downstream component of the p53 signalling pathway. Our previous work showed 
that Trp53inp1 expression in murine cerebellar NSCs is also suppressed by microRNAs of the miR-17~92 cluster, 
and the upregulated expression of these miRNAs was attributed to signalling through the Hh-Gli-Nanog axis9. 
In light of our current findings, p53 signalling in these cells also appears to be under the control of a second 
miRNA network, this one regulated by Foxm1. In support of this hypothesis, mirSVR prediction scores provided 
by microRNA.org (http://www.microrna.org/microrna/home.do) indicate that murine Tp53inp1 is a likely tar-
get of miR-130b (mirSVR score: −0.0029). The same applies to miR-301a, another Foxm1-regulated microRNA 
belonging to the miR-130b family (mirSVR score: −0.0030). The Foxm1-regulated miRNA network that mod-
ulates p53 signalling might also comprise miR-92a-3p, whose validated targets include Trp63, another member 
of the p53 family of transcription factors. Because of the high-level sequence homology that characterizes these 
transcription factors, p63 and p73 are capable of transactivating p53-responsive genes, thereby causing cell cycle 
arrest and apoptosis23.
We cannot exclude of course other possible mechanisms of action for the Foxm1-mediated miRNAs. There 
are many ways in which these miRNAs can exert their function and an example is the report of high expression of 
miR-15a in MeCP2-deficient neural progenitors24, indicating its possible role in maintaining the undifferentiated 
state.
A role for Nanog in Foxm1 regulation. 
Interestingly, members of the miR-17~92 cluster are compo-
nents of both the Nanog-regulated9 and Foxm1-regulated miRNA networks, but this was the only commonality 
observed. This evidence indicates that Nanog and Foxm1 activate largely non-overlapping cohorts of miRNAs to 
ensure suppression of p53 signalling in cerebellar NSCs. How these two networks interact to achieve this goal is 
unclear. Interestingly, Nanog has been identified as a target of Foxm114,25,26. To determine whether this relation 
might be reciprocal, we re-examined the Foxm1 promoter region for evidence of Nanog binding sites. As shown 
in Fig. 6A, four putative binding sites for Nanog were found −3790 to −3277 bp upstream from the Foxm1 TSS. 
(For details, see Supplementary Information).
ChIP experiments (Fig. 6B) demonstrated endogenous Nanog at these four sites in both NSCs and Diff-NSCs. 
However, pre- and post-differentiation occupancy rates were significantly different only at s2–s3, where the 
higher Nanog occupancy in NSCs was associated with greater activation of Foxm1. No binding was observed in 
an unrelated chromatin region (Supplementary Figure 7A). To further elucidate the relation between these two 
transcription factors, we performed dual luciferase reporter assays in NSCs transfected with Foxm1 wild-type 
promoter or an s2- or s3-defective mutant promoter (Fig. 6C). Ectopic expression of Nanog in these cells resulted 
Figure 5.  Foxm1-mediated miRNAs and miRNA clusters affect NSC neurosphere formation. (A) Neurosphere-
formation capacity of NSCs transfected with LNA anti-miR-130b, -miR-301a, miR-19a (to inhibit miR-17-
92 cluster members) and miR-15b (to inhibit miR-15–16 cluster members) that were used separately and 
combined. [3 LNA combination: anti- miR-130b, -miR-301a, and miR-19a; 4 LNA combination: anti-miR-130b, 
-miR-301a, miR-19a, and miR-15b]. P values vs. scrambled LNA control (One-way ANOVA test): *P < 0.05: 3 
LNA combination: 0.0424; 4 LNA combination: 0.0500). (B) RT-qPCR data showing βIII-tubulin, S100b, Pcna 
and Casp3 mRNA levels after 4 LNA combination. P values vs. scrambled LNA control (Two-way ANOVA test): 
*P < 0.05: 0.047 (βIII-tubulin), ***P < 0.001: 0.00086 (S100b), NS: Not Significant (Pcna, Casp3). Bars in A and 
B panels represent means (SD) of at least three independent experiments.

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific Reports |  (2018) 8:3523  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21876-y
in substantial activation of the Foxm1 wild-type promoter, whereas this induction was significantly reduced by 
deletion of critical nucleotides of s2 and s3, suggesting that these sites are required for Nanog binding onto the 
Foxm1 promoter. Interestingly, Foxm1 promoter luciferase reporter was significantly activated by Nanog also in 
293 T cells (Supplementary Figure 7B).
Taken together, these results indicate that the Hh-Gli-driven miRNA networks regulated by Nanog and Foxm1 
are characterized by bidirectional crosstalk, which might conceivably allow more finely tuned, combinatorial reg-
ulation of cerebellar NSC self-renewal.
Discussion
The main goal of our study was to identify new molecular mechanisms involved in the Hh-Gli driven regulation 
of cerebellar NSC functions. As shown in Fig. 7, our findings indicate that Hh-Gli signalling controls self-renewal 
of murine NSCs in the P4 cerebellum via p53-pathway targeting miRNAs (i.e., those of the miR-17-92 cluster, that 
are also crucial for the expansion of cortical NSCs in vivo27), which are regulated not only by Nanog, as previously 
reported9, but also by a second transcriptional activator, Foxm1.
In human epidermal stem cells, Foxm1 has been shown to sustain the balance between self-renewal and com-
mitment to terminal differentiation28. It also upregulates the expression of the neural stemness marker Nestin1 in 
NSCs from the embryonic cerebral cortices of mouse and is deemed critical for their self-renewal14. The results 
of experiments conducted with loss-of-function Foxm1 mutants suggest that in the murine cerebellum, this 
Figure 6.  Foxm1 promoter occupancy by Nanog. (A) Schematic of the Foxm1 promoter showing putative 
Nanog-responsive elements (s1; s2 - s3 and s4). (B) qPCR-ChIP assay of endogenous Nanog occupancy of the 
Foxm1 promoter region in NSCs and Diff-NSCs. Immunoprecipitation with IgG was performed as control. 
Anti-acetyl-H3 antibodies was used to identify Foxm1 transcriptional activation. Eluted DNA was PCR-
amplified with primers for Nanog binding sites s1, s2-s3, s4. Results are expressed as fold induction values 
relative to input controls. B-actin was utilized as unrelated chromatin control and is presented in Supplementary 
Figure 7A. Bars represent means (SD) of three independent experiments. P values vs. Diff-NSCs (Mann-
Whitney U test): **P < 0.01: 0.002572 (s2-3, AcH3); ****P < 0.0001: 0.00000718 (s2-3, Nanog), 0.0001051 (s1, 
AcH3), 0.00004356 (s4, AcH3); NS: 0.4531 (s1, Nanog), 0.7118 (s4, Nanog). (C) Luciferase activity induced by 
ectopic expression of Nanog and Mock (negative control, PCDNA) in NSCs transfected with luciferase vector 
carrying the wild-type Foxm1 promoter (wt) and its mutant lacking the Nanog binding sites s2 and s3 (mutants 
s2, s3). Bars represent means (SD) of at least three independent experiments, each performed in triplicate.  
P values vs. indicated controls (Mann–Whitney U test). ***P < 0.001: 0. 000937 (Nanog wt); NS: 0.097 (Mut 
Nanog s2), 0.18 (Mut Nanog s3).

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific Reports |  (2018) 8:3523  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21876-y
transcription factor regulates cell cycling, mainly by adjusting the G2/M transition9,29, but no information has 
been published on Foxm1’s regulation or functions in cerebellar NSCs.
Our findings show that Foxm1 expression in these cells is controlled by Gli1 and Gli2, directly but also indi-
rectly via their modulation of the expression of Nanog, which was shown to transcriptionally activate Foxm1. 
This dual mechanism of control is rendered even more complex by the fact that has been reported that Nanog is 
also a target of Foxm114,25,26. As for the functions of Foxm1 in cerebellar NSCs, we also provide intriguing pre-
liminary evidence suggesting that, aside from its above-mentioned co-regulation with Nanog of the miR-17-92 
cluster, Foxm1 also controls other miRNAs (miR-130b and miR-301a) in these cells that putatively target the 
p53-signaling pathway. We used mRNA- and miRNA-sequencing to identify Foxm1-regulated miRNAs (other 
than those of the miR-17-92 cluster) with high-level expression in NSCs that drops significantly after these cells 
undergo differentiation. Knockdown of these miRNAs significantly impairs cerebellar NSC neurosphere forma-
tion by NSCs, suggesting these cells’ capacity for self-renewal is sustained by a Foxm1-regulated miRNA network.
Signals transmitted through the Hh-Gli-Foxm1 and Hh-Gli-Nanog axes clearly converge on miR-17~92 
cluster members to suppress the expression of Trp53inp1. However, Trp53inp1 is also a putative target of two 
of the microRNAs regulated by Foxm1 alone, miR-130b22, which has already been associated with mainte-
nance of embryonic NSCs30, and miR-301a. This observation suggests the possibility of combinatorial and 
partially redundant control of the p53 signalling cascade, which underlines the importance of this pathway 
in NSCs. Combinatorial repression of Trp53inp1, and consequently of p53, by both the Hh-Gli-Foxm1- and 
Hh-Gli-Nanog-driven miRNA networks, might be part of a hypothetical “bypass axis” that serves to maintain 
control of NSC self-renewal even in the presence of gene mutations affecting key components of the regulatory 
network. It is important to stress that the ability of miR-130b and miR-301a to downregulate Trp53inp1 expres-
sion requires verification in future studies. Nonetheless, self-renewal of the cerebellar NSCs was significantly 
reduced by combined knockdown of all four Foxm1-regulated miRNAs.
In conclusion, the regulatory network here proposed highlights the importance of Hh-Gli signaling and its 
downstream effector Foxm1 in cerebellar NSC maintenance and provides further insight into the complex mech-
anisms involved in the fine-tuning of stemness and differentiation cues in these cells.
Methods
Unless otherwise specified, all commercial products were used in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol.
Cell models. 
Murine cerebellar NSC cultures.  Cerebellar NSCs were isolated from P4 wild type black 6 /C56 
(C57BL/6) mice (n = 8 per group) and cultured, as previously described3. In brief, freshly dissected cerebella were 
placed in HBSS supplemented with 0.5% glucose and penicillin-streptomycin and dissociated, mechanically and 
enzymatically. The cells were maintained as mycoplasma-free neurosphere cultures in selective stem-cell medium 
consisting of serum-free DMEM-F12 supplemented with 0.6% glucose, insulin 25 mg/ml, N-acetyl-L-cysteine 
60 mg/ml, heparin 2 mg/ml, B27 supplement without vitamin A, EGF 20 ng/ml, and bFGF 20 ng/ml. To induce 
differentiation, NSCs were mechanically disaggregated and plated on poly-lysine coated support 48 h in differen-
tiation medium consisting of the medium described above, prepared without the EGF/bFGF and supplemented 
with platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF; 10 ng/ml) (Sigma, P3076)3. Mycoplasma contamination was excluded 
by routine screening with the PCR Mycoplasma Detection Kit (ABM, Cat. No. G238). Animal experiments were 
performed according to the European Community Council Directive 2010/63/EU and were approved by the local 
Ethical Committee for Animal Experiments of the Sapienza University of Rome.
Figure 7.  Regulation of cerebellar NSC self-renewal by the Hh-Foxm1-miRNA axis. Increased Hh-Gli 
signalling promotes NSC self-renewal by inhibiting p53 and upregulating Nanog expression. The tumour-
suppressor p53 checks NSC self-renewal directly, by activating Trp53inp1, and by inhibiting Gli and Nanog. 
Our data show (bold-face type) that Hh-Gli signalling also upregulates the expression of Foxm1 (directly and 
indirectly via Nanog). The targets of these two transcription factors include a number of miRNAs that regulate 
the expression of important genes, including Trp53inp1. Repression of Trp53inp1 disrupts a feedback loop 
that maintains high p53 levels, thereby diminishing the tumour suppressor’s ability to repress Gli and Nanog 
expression.

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
Scientific Reports |  (2018) 8:3523  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21876-y
Normal Human Neural Progenitors (NHNP) (PT-2599) were obtained from ATCC (Milan, Italy) and cul-
tured in selective stem-cell medium.
Treatments.  NSCs and NHNPs were treated with a Smoothened antagonist for 48 h, cyclopamine-KAAD, 
(Calbiochem) at the concentration of 1 μM, DMSO was used as control.
Experimental and analysis design. 
Please see Supplementary Information - Section 1. Supplementary 
Methods for a detailed description.
mRNA- sequencing. 
Please see Supplementary Information - Section 1. Supplementary Methods for a 
detailed description of Library preparation and RNA sequencing.
miRNA-sequencing. 
Please see Supplementary Information - Section 1. Supplementary Methods for a 
detailed description of MiRNA library preparation and sequencing.
Bioinformatics analysis. 
All details regarding the mRNA-seq and miRNA-seq bioinformatics analysis 
can be found in Supplementary Information - Section 1. Supplementary Methods (Mapping of RNA-seq reads, 
mRNA differential expression analysis, functional analysis, clustering analysis, Mapping of miRNA-seq reads and 
miRNA differential expression analysis).
Neurosphere-forming assay. 
Neurospheres grown in the stem-cell-selective medium were dissociated to 
single cell through dissociation solution non-enzymatic buffer (Cod: C5789, Sigma-Aldrich). Viable cells were 
counted after Trypan-blue exclusion and re-plated at clonal density (1-2 cells/mm²) in 96-well plates containing 
stem-cell selective medium. Results were expressed as the percentage of cells that gave rise to neurospheres.
Immunofluorescence. 
Immunofluorescence experiments were performed using poly-lysine coated 
Labtek chamber slides as support: NSCs were allowed to adhere for three hours, while for differentiation stud-
ies, NSCs were dissociated and cultured as described in “Murine cerebellar NSC cultures”. Cells were fixed with 
4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min at room temperature and incubated in blocking solution (5% normal goat 
serum (NGS), 1% BSA, 0.1% Triton X-100). Cells were incubated overnight with primary antibodies diluted in 
blocking solution and for 2 h with secondary antibodies. Primary antibodies were rabbit anti-Nanog polyclonal 
(Abcam ab80892); mouse anti-Nestin (Abcamab 11306); mouse anti-Gli1, #2643 (Cell Signaling Technology 
Inc); mouse anti-parvalbumin P3088 (Sigma); rabbit anti-S100 S2644 (Sigma); mouse anti-βIII-tubulin (βII-
Itub) MAB1637 (Millipore); rabbit anti-Foxm1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-502). Secondary antibodies 
(488-conjugated anti-mouse and anti-rabbit) were purchased from Molecular Probes (Invitrogen). Nuclei were 
Hoechst-counterstained and cover slips were mounted with fluorescence mounting medium (S3023) (Dako). 
Images were acquired with a Carl Zeiss microscope (Axio Observer Z1) using Apotome technology and 
AxioVision Digital Image Processing Software.
Immunoblotting assay. 
Cells were lysed in Tris–HCl pH 7.6, 50 mM, deoxycholic acid sodium salt 0.5%, 
NaCl 140 mM, NP40 1%, EDTA 5 mM, NaF 100 mM, Na pyrophosphate 2 mM, and protease inhibitors. Lysates 
were separated on an 8% acrylamide gel and immunoblotted using standard procedures. Membranes were 
blocked for 1 h at room temperature in 5% nonfat dry milk and incubated overnight at 4 °C with the following 
antibodies: rabbit anti-Foxm1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-502), rabbit anti-Hsp70, (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, 
sc-33575), mouse anti- βIIItub (MAB 1637 Millipore), goat anti-actin I-19 (sc-1616; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), 
anti-Nanog (PA1–41577, Thermo Fisher), anti-α-Tubulin Antibody (T9026 SIGMA). HRP-conjugated secondary 
antisera (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were applied and binding visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL 
Amersham).
RNA isolation and quantitative RT-PCR. 
RNA was isolated from cells, as previously described31. The 
High Capacity cDNA reverse transcription kit (Applied Biosystems Life Technologies, ThermoFisher) was used 
to synthesize cDNA, as previously described32.
Quantitative reverse transcription (RT–PCR) analysis was performed using a High Capacity cDNA Reverse 
Transcription kit. mRNA expression was analysed on cDNAs using the ViiA™ 7 Real-Time PCR System, 
SensiFAST™ Probe Lo-ROX (Bioline), TaqMan gene expression assay according to the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions (Applied Biosystems). Each amplification reaction was performed in triplicate, and the average of the three 
threshold cycles was used to calculate the amount of transcripts in the sample (SDS software, AB). mRNA quanti-
fication was expressed, in arbitrary units, as the ratio of the sample quantity to the calibrator or to the mean values 
of control samples. All values were normalized to three endogenous controls: ß-2-microglobulin, Hprt and Gusb.
mRNA expression was evaluated through TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays, using the following assays: 
Foxm1 (Mm00514924_m1), S100b (Mm00485897_m1), βIIItub (Mm00727586_s1), Pcna (Mm00448100_g1), 
Casp3 (Mm01195085_m1), ß-2-Microglobulin (Mm00437762_m1), Hprt (Mm03024075_m1) and Gusb 
(Mm01197698_m1).
mRNA of human samples was assessed using SensiFAST™ Sybr Lo-ROX (Bioline), with the following primers:
Forward primer 5′-CTGCTTGCCAGAGTCCTTT-3′
Reverse primer 5′-CTCCACCTGAGTTCTCGTCA-3′

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
12
Scientific Reports |  (2018) 8:3523  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21876-y
MiRNA expression was assessed with Taqman probes, as previously described33, using the following miRNAs: 
miR-15b-3p (Code: 002173), miR-92a-1-5p (Code: 464504_mat), miR-130b-5p (Code: 002460), miR-130a-5p 
(Code: 462691_mat), miR-335-3p (Code: Mm03307393_pri), miR-25-5p (Code: PM12401), miR-93-3p (Code: 
PM12787), miR-15b-5p (Code: 000390), miR-16-2-3p (Code: 462713_mat), miR-301a-5p (Code: 006346_mat), 
miR-130b-3p (Code: 000456), miR-106b-5p (000442), miR-16-1-3p (Code: 002489), miR-15a-3p (Code: 002488), 
miR-19a-3p (Code: 000395).
PCR for Foxm1 isoforms. 
cDNA from NSCs was used to discriminate Foxm1 isoforms. PCR was per-
formed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (GoTaq® DNA Polymerase, Promega), using the following 
isoform-specific primers:
Forward primer 5′-CAAGCCAGGCTGGAAGAACTC-3′
Reverse primer 5′-GTTCACTGGGAACTGGATGGG-3′
PCR products were separated on 2% agarose gel.
In vivo experiments. 
Cerebellum tissues were collected for analysis from CD1 wild-type mice at the age 
of 1, 4, 10, 15 and 22 days postnatal. Samples were evaluated for immunoblotting assays and RT-PCR analyses.
Statistical analysis of in vitro experiments. 
Unless otherwise indicated, statistical analyses were per-
formed with StatView 4.1 software (Abacus Concepts). The Mann–Whitney U test for unpaired data was used 
to analyse differences in gene expression between NSCs and Diff-NSCs and the unpaired T-test, paired T-test, 
one-way ANOVA and two-way ANOVA were used where appropriate. Results are expressed as means (S.D.) from 
at least three experiments.
Identification and characterization of binding sites in Foxm1 and miRNA promoter 
regions. 
Please see Supplementary Information - Section 1. Supplementary Methods.
Luciferase-reporter assays. 
293 T cells purchased from ATCC (Milan, Italy) and NSCs were used for 
luciferase-reporter assays. 293 T cells were seeded into 24-well plates and transfected 24 h later with mouse 
Foxm1 promoter luciferase vector (1457 bp) (Genecoepia, Catalogue No.: MPRM26630-PG02, Gene Accession: 
NM_008021) with Lipofectamine® 2000 Reagent (Invitrogen). NSCs were transfected with mouse Foxm1 pro-
moter luciferase vector in 24-well plates with Fugene6 Transfection Reagent (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). For both 
cell models, the transfection included 80 ng of the Foxm1 promoter luciferase vector, 400 ng of inductor (Nanog, 
Gli1, Gli2, or (as a negative control, Mock) PCDNA), and 2 ng of CMV-Renilla Luciferase control vector. Cells 
were harvested 24 h post-transfection and tested with the dual-luciferase assay (Promega). Results were expressed 
as firefly/Renilla luciferase activity ratios (F-luc/R-luc) and represent means (SD) of at least three experiments, 
each performed in triplicate. Foxm1 promoter luciferase vector was used to generate, by site-directed mutagene-
sis, the mutant derivatives lacking Nanog-binding sites.
Site-directed mutagenesis. 
The QuickChange Multi Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Agilent Technologies) 
was used to mutagenize Foxm1 promoter construct by deleting critical nucleotides in the putative identified bind-
ing sites. In detail, for Nanog-binding sites s2 and s3 and for Gli-binding sites s1-5 and s6-8. The reaction was 
carried out with the following primers:
NBS2 Fw: CGGCTTTACTGTCCTAAGTCAAGAAAATAAACAAAGTTATCACAGGAG
NBS3 Fw: GGTTTCCCTCTCTTCTGTTAACAGATCTTACACCGC
GBS1 Fw: GTCGGCACTGCCGAGGGGGTGTTGGG
GBS2 Fw: CGGCCTGTGAGGTGACGGCCGGG
GBS3 Fw: CCCGCCCCGGGCTGGCCGTCC
GBS4 Fw: GCCCGGGCTCCGCCCCGGGC
GBS5 Fw: GCTGCGGGACCCGGGCTCCCCC
GBS6 Fw: GCCAGAAACCCAAGCGCGTGGACTGAGC
GBS7 Fw: CCGCCTCCTCCGCCCCCGAGGT
GBS8 Fw: GCGGGAGGGCGAGCGAAGGCGGAAAC.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (qPCR-ChIP assay). 
ChIP was performed using the MAGnify™ 
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation System (Invitrogen). Briefly, for each ChIP reactions 300000 cells were used, 
the cells were cross-linked 10 min with 1% formaldehyde and the reaction was stopped with 0.125 M glycine for 
10 min at room temperature. Cells were washed and harvested, and membranes were lysed with Lysis Buffer and 
Protease Inhibitors (200×) for 5 min on ice. Chromatin was fragmented to obtain chromatin fragments of about 
400–600 nucleotides. After sonication, the samples were spun at 10000 rpm at 4 °C for 10 minutes to pellet the cell 
debris. The primary antibody was coupled for 1 h to the protein A/G Dynabead, at the same time the lysate sam-
ples were diluted in Dilution Buffer/Protease Inhibitor (200×). After 1 h the lysates were added to their respective 
antibody/beads for 2 h. After which the lysates were washed three times with IP Buffer 1 and twice with IP Buffer 
2. After the final washing, the cross-linking was reversed with Reverse Crosslinking Buffer and proteinase K 
at 55 °C for 15 minutes and then the DNA was purified and precipitated. Eluted DNA was PCR amplified with 
primers encompassing the Gli- and Nanog- responsive sites of murine Foxm1 promoter. The following antibodies 
were used: IgG rabbit (Invitrogen), rabbit polyclonal anti-Foxm1 C-20 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, code: sc-502), 
rabbit polyclonal anti-Gli1 2553 (Cell Signaling), rabbit monoclonal anti-Nanog (Cell Signaling, code: 8600), 

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
13
Scientific Reports |  (2018) 8:3523  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21876-y
rabbit polyclonal anti-Gli2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, code: sc-271786×), rabbit polyclonal anti-acetyl-histone 
3 (Millipore, code: 06599). Eluted DNA has been analysed with Q-PCR and the B-actin gene was used as control. 
Primers were designed with Primer-Blast designing tool (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/tools/primer-blast/)34 and 
Primers tool (Genomatix Genome Analyzer, GGA, v3.30126, https://www.genomatix.de/) and are reported in 
Supplementary Table 7.
Knockdown studies. 
Small-interfering-RNA knockdown of Foxm1 was performed in NSCs with 
ON-TARGETplus SMARTpool (L-057933-01-0005), control ON-TARGETplus Non-targeting siRNA knockdown 
(D-001810-02-05) (Dharmacon). Hiperfect reagent (Qiagen) was used for transfections. Cells were harvested for 
assay 72 h post-transfection. Transfection efficiency was > 80%, monitored using the fluorescent control SiGLO 
(Dharmacon) and calculated as the percentage of fluorescent cells. All experiments were performed using the 
using the best knockdown efficiency without off-target effects, controlled using three different housekeeping 
genes (ß−2-microglobulin, Hprt and Gusb) for RNA studies and using Actin or Hsp70 for immunoblots.
Knockdown of miRNA expression was done with miRCURY LNA™ miRNA inhibitor (Exiqon, miR-
130b-5p: code 4101000-011; miR-301a-5p: code 4101560-011, miR-15b-3p: code 4101249-011, miR-19a-3p: 
code 4101300-101), individually or in combination, and a scrambled control, referred to as LNA ctrl (Exiqon 
mirCURY knockdown probe control A: code 199002-08) (Exiqon). Hiperfect reagent (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) 
was used to transfect the siRNA constructs into NSCs. The final concentrations were 10 nM (for single trans-
fection) and 50 nM (for combination transfections). miRCURY LNA™ miRNA inhibitors are conjugated with 
fluorescent labels for monitoring of transfection efficiency and efficiency rate was 90%.
Validated targets of miRNAs. 
The validated miRNA targets reported in Supplementary Table 6 were iden-
tified with miRTarBase (http://mirtarbase.mbc.nctu.edu.tw/)35, where each Foxm1-regulated miRNA was used 
as input.
Putative miRNA target genes. 
MicroRNA.org (http://www.microrna.org/microrna/home.do) database 
was queried for putative miRNA target genes, where miRNA-target interactions were predicted with miRanda 
3.3a and scores were calculated with mirSVR (good mirSVR score less than or equal to −0.1).
Data availability. 
All data generated or analysed during this study are included in this published article (and 
its’ Supplementary Information files).
References
	 1.	 Montalbán-Loro, R., Domingo-Muelas, A., Bizy, A. & Ferrón, S. Epigenetic regulation of stemness maintenance in the neurogenic 
niches. World journal of stem cells 7, 700 (2015).
	 2.	 Davis, A. A. & Temple, S. A self-renewing multipotential stem cell in embryonic rat cerebral cortex. Nature 372, 263–266 (1994).
	 3.	 Po, A. et al. Hedgehog controls neural stem cells through p53-independent regulation of Nanog. EMBO J 29, 2646–2658, https://doi.
org/10.1038/emboj.2010.131 (2010).
	 4.	 Gage, F. H. Mammalian neural stem cells. Science 287, 1433–1438 (2000).
	 5.	 Harris, L., Zalucki, O., Piper, M. & Heng, J. I.-T. Insights into the Biology and Therapeutic Applications of Neural Stem Cells. Stem 
cells international 2016 (2016).
	 6.	 Lee, R. T. H., Zhao, Z. & Ingham, P. W. Hedgehog signalling. Development 143, 367–372 (2016).
	 7.	 Altaba, A. R., Palma, V. & Dahmane, N. Hedgehog–Gli signaling and the growth of the brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 3, 24–33 
(2002). i.
	 8.	 Galvin, K. E., Ye, H., Erstad, D. J., Feddersen, R. & Wetmore, C. Gli1 induces G2/M arrest and apoptosis in hippocampal but not 
tumor‐derived neural stem cells. Stem Cells 26, 1027–1036 (2008).
	 9.	 Garg, N. et al. microRNA-17-92 cluster is a direct Nanog target and controls neural stem cell through Trp53inp1. EMBO J 32, 
2819–2832, https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2013.214 (2013).
	10.	 Solozobova, V. & Blattner, C. p53 in stem cells. World journal of biological chemistry 2, 202 (2011).
	11.	 Lin, T. et al. p53 induces differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells by suppressing Nanog expression. Nature cell biology 7, 165-
171 (2005).
	12.	 Rivron, N. C. et al. Sonic Hedgehog-activated engineered blood vessels enhance bone tissue formation. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 109, 4413–4418 (2012).
	13.	 De Smaele, E. et al. An integrated approach identifies Nhlh1 and Insm1 as Sonic Hedgehog-regulated genes in developing 
cerebellum and medulloblastoma. Neoplasia 10, 89IN35–98IN36 (2008).
	14.	 Wierstra, I. The transcription factor FOXM1 (Forkhead box M1): proliferation-specific expression, transcription factor function, 
target genes, mouse models, and normal biological roles. Advances in cancer research 118, 97–398 (2013).
	15.	 Katoh, Y. & Katoh, M. Hedgehog signaling pathway and gastrointestinal stem cell signaling network (review). International journal 
of molecular medicine 18, 1019–1024 (2006).
	16.	 Teh, M.-T. et al. FOXM1 is a downstream target of Gli1 in basal cell carcinomas. Cancer research 62, 4773–4780 (2002).
	17.	 Wang, D. et al. Aberrant activation of hedgehog signaling promotes cell proliferation via the transcriptional activation of forkhead 
Box M1 in colorectal cancer cells. Journal of Experimental & Clinical Cancer Research 36, 23 (2017).
	18.	 Shi, C. et al. Aberrantly activated Gli2-KIF20A axis is crucial for growth of hepatocellular carcinoma and predicts poor prognosis. 
Oncotarget 7, 26206 (2016).
	19.	 Argenti, B. et al. Hedgehog antagonist RENKCTD11 regulates proliferation and apoptosis of developing granule cell progenitors. The 
Journal of neuroscience 25, 8338–8346 (2005).
	20.	 Kawamura, T. et al. Linking the p53 tumour suppressor pathway to somatic cell reprogramming. Nature 460, 1140-1144 (2009).
	21.	 Hong, H. et al. Suppression of induced pluripotent stem cell generation by the p53–p21 pathway. Nature 460, 1132-1135 (2009).
	22.	 Ma, S. et al. miR-130b promotes CD133 + liver tumor-initiating cell growth and self-renewal via tumor protein 53-induced nuclear 
protein 1. Cell stem cell 7, 694–707 (2010).
	23.	 NCBI. National Center for Biotechnology Information, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/22061.
	24.	 Gao, Y. et al. Inhibition of miR‐15a Promotes BDNF Expression and Rescues Dendritic Maturation Deficits in MeCP2‐Deficient 
Neurons. Stem Cells 33, 1618–1629 (2015).
	25.	 Wang, Z. et al. FoxM1 in tumorigenicity of the neuroblastoma cells and renewal of the neural progenitors. Cancer research 71, 
4292–4302 (2011).

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
14
Scientific Reports |  (2018) 8:3523  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21876-y
	26.	 Xie, Z. et al. Foxm1 transcription factor is required for maintenance of pluripotency of P19 embryonal carcinoma cells. Nucleic acids 
research 38, 8027–8038 (2010).
	27.	 Bian, S. et al. MicroRNA cluster miR-17-92 regulates neural stem cell expansion and transition to intermediate progenitors in the 
developing mouse neocortex. Cell reports 3, 1398–1406 (2013).
	28.	 Gemenetzidis, E. et al. Induction of human epithelial stem/progenitor expansion by FOXM1. Cancer research 70, 9515–9526 (2010).
	29.	 Schüller, U. et al. Forkhead transcription factor FoxM1 regulates mitotic entry and prevents spindle defects in cerebellar granule 
neuron precursors. Molecular and cellular biology 27, 8259–8270 (2007).
	30.	 Gong, X. et al. MicroRNA-130b targets Fmr1 and regulates embryonic neural progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation. 
Biochemical and biophysical research communications 439, 493–500 (2013).
	31.	 Ferretti, E. et al. Alternative splicing of the ErbB-4 cytoplasmic domain and its regulation by hedgehog signaling identify distinct 
medulloblastoma subsets. Oncogene 25, 7267–7273, https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1209716 (2006).
	32.	 Ferretti, E. et al. MicroRNA profiling in human medulloblastoma. International Journal of Cancer 124, 568–577, https://doi.
org/10.1002/ijc.23948 (2009).
	33.	 Ferretti, E. et al. Concerted microRNA control of Hedgehog signalling in cerebellar neuronal progenitor and tumour cells. The 
EMBO journal 27, 2616–2627, https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2008.172 (2008).
	34.	 Ye, J. et al. Primer-BLAST: a tool to design target-specific primers for polymerase chain reaction. BMC bioinformatics 13, 134 (2012).
	35.	 Chou, C.-H. et al. miRTarBase 2016: updates to the experimentally validated miRNA-target interactions database. Nucleic acids 
research 44, D239–D247 (2015).
Acknowledgements
The work was partially supported by Italian Ministry for Instruction, University and Research, Sapienza 
University Research Grants, Agenzia Spaziale Italiana (ASI), and Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT). Writing 
support was provided by Marian Everett Kent.
Author Contributions
A.P., E.M. and E.F. conceived and designed research; Z.M.B., L.A., F.C., L.G., A.B., performed research; Z.M.B., 
L.A., A.I., M.C., D.D.A. and L.L.P. acquired and analysed data; Z.M.B., L.A., A.P. and E.M. drafted the manuscript; 
M.M., E.D.S., A.V., A.M., F.L., E.F. revised the manuscript; all co-authors contributed to the final version of the 
manuscript.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-21876-y.
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2018

