===== He2022_FrontCellDevBiol_TendonDevelopment+Healing =====

Comparison of Tendon Development
Versus Tendon Healing and
Regeneration
Peiwen He 1,2,3,4†, Dengfeng Ruan 1,2,3†, Zizhan Huang 1,2,3, Canlong Wang 1,2,3, Yiwen Xu 1,2,3,
Honglu Cai 1,2,3, Hengzhi Liu 1,2,3, Yang Fei 1,2,3, Boon Chin Heng 5, Weishan Chen 1,2,3* and
Weiliang Shen 1,2,3,4,6,7*
1Department of Orthopedic Surgery, The Second Afﬁliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China,
2Orthopedics Research Institute of Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, 3Institute of Sports Medicine, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, 4Key Laboratory of Motor System Disease Research and Precision Therapy of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou,
China, 5Central Laboratory, Peking University School of Stomatology, Bejing, China, 6Dr. Li Dak Sum and Yip Yio Chin Center for
Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, 7China Orthopaedic Regenerative Medicine
(CORMed), Hangzhou, China
Tendon is a vital connective tissue in human skeletal muscle system, and tendon injury is very
common and intractable in clinic. Tendon development and repair are two closely related but
still not fully understood processes. Tendon development involves multiple germ layer, as
well as the regulation of diversity transcription factors (Scx et al.), proteins (Tnmd et al.) and
signaling pathways (TGFβ et al.). The nature process of tendon repair is roughly divided in
three stages, which are dominated by various cells and cell factors. This review will describe
the whole process of tendon development and compare it with the process of tendon repair,
focusing on the understanding and recent advances in the regulation of tendon development
and repair. The study and comparison of tendon development and repair process can thus
provide references and guidelines for treatment of tendon injuries.
Keywords: tendon, development, healing, regeneration, regulation, comparison
1 INTRODUCTION
Tendons are the dense connective tissue that connects muscle to bone and primarily serve to transmit
muscle contraction and anchor muscle (Benjamin and Ralphs, 1997). Mature tendons consist of
tightly arranged collagen ﬁbers of different diameters. Tenocytes distribute among the ﬁbrils and
synthesize a large count of extracellular matrix (ECM) that is composed mainly of collagens and
proteoglycans, which serves to lubricate and assemble collagen ﬁbers (Asahara et al., 2017).
Current research on the development of musculoskeletal system is relatively comprehensive,
except connective tissue like ligaments and tendons. The master genes regulating the bone, skeletal
muscle, and cartilage lineages have been proved as the Runt-related transcription factor Runx2 and
the transcription factor Dlx5 (bone) (Komori et al., 1997; Otto et al., 1997), the bHLH transcription
factors MyoD, Myf5, and Mrf4 (muscle) (Weintraub, 1993; Delﬁni and Duprez, 2004; Kassar-
Duchossoy et al., 2004), the SRY-box transcription factor Sox9 (cartilage) (Akiyama et al., 2002;
Takimoto et al., 2012). However, identiﬁcation of master genes regulating tendon lineage is still
ongoing. Although it has been demonstrated that SCX, TNMD, MKX and other transcription factors
or relative speciﬁc proteins profoundly inﬂuence tendon development, their tissue speciﬁcity in
tendon has not been fully demonstrated. For example, Scx is also known to take effect in the cells of
heart valves, lungs and other ECM-rich tissues (Levay et al., 2008; Ramírez-Aragón et al., 2020).
Edited by:
Jesus Chimal-Monroy,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Mexico
Reviewed by:
Juan Antonio Montero,
University of Cantabria, Spain
Ana Gonçalves,
University of Minho, Portugal
Guak Kim Tan,
Shriners Hospitals for Children,
United States
*Correspondence:
Weishan Chen
chenweishan@zju.edu.cn
Weiliang Shen
wlshen@zju.edu.cn
†These authors share ﬁrst authorship
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Evolutionary Developmental Biology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental
Biology
Received: 24 November 2021
Accepted: 07 January 2022
Published: 24 January 2022
Citation:
He P, Ruan D, Huang Z, Wang C, Xu Y,
Cai H, Liu H, Fei Y, Heng BC, Chen W
and Shen W (2022) Comparison of
Tendon Development Versus Tendon
Healing and Regeneration.
Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 10:821667.
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.821667
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
1
REVIEW
published: 24 January 2022
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.821667
Many studies point to the hypothesis that tenocytes and
chondrocytes have very similar origins (Soeda et al., 2010; Lee
et al., 2020). This is understandable, because tendons and
cartilage are both relatively high ductility and low rigidity
tissues. Thus, it may be the balance between different factors
what makes the different in progenitors and it is of great
signiﬁcance to explore the signals that regulate these factors.
The incidence of tendon injuries and tendinopathy has been
increasing substantially in recent decades. Tendon or ligament
injuries constitute almost half part of sports and physical activity-
related injuries, with 30–50 million new incidents occurring
annually worldwide (Ljungqvist et al., 2008). Hence, the
healing of tendon injury has gradually become a research
hotspot. To date, the majority of studies for repair of tendon
injury are focused on scar-associated healing models, since adult
tendon does not normally regenerate (Katzel et al., 2011; Dyment
et al., 2014; Ackerman et al., 2019b). Experimental results showed
that adult tendon healing was characterized by continuous
inﬁltration of aSMA+ cells, loss of tendon cell proliferation or
recruitment, abnormal differentiation of chondrocytes, and loss
of tendon functional (Kaji et al., 2020). There are research studies
showing that the Young’s moduli in healed rabbit Achilles
tendons is nearly 80% of its uninjured value (Nagasawa et al.,
2008), while the stiffness and load of healed mouse patellar
tendons can reach to only 48 and 63% of the original values
respectively (Dyment et al., 2012). While a few research groups
have successfully achieved tendon regeneration in model systems
such as MRL/MpJ mice, gene editing has a lot challenge and risk
in these systems, so it is still a long way from being feasible in
humans (Paredes et al., 2018; Paredes et al., 2021). However,
embryonic and neonatal tendons have full regenerative capacity,
which are driven by tenocyte proliferation, recruitment, and
differentiation,
leading
to
complete
functional
restoration
(Howell et al., 2017). Such pattern of tendon regeneration has
more in common with the process of tendon development, and
many existing studies (Liu et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2018) have
proven that tendon-related transcription factors and signaling
pathways, such as Scx and TGFβ pathways, play key roles in the
process of tendon repair and regeneration, the mechanism of
which needs further study. Therefore, a better understanding of
tenogenesis can clarify the mechanisms of tendon disease, injury
and healing, regeneration.
This review focuses on the process of tendon development,
including the differentiation process from mesenchymal stem
cells in gastrula stage to the formation of tendon progenitors and
the ﬁnal differentiation of mature tendon cells which dominate
assembly of complete tendons, as well as the expression and
regulation of known important tendon genes, and the role of the
signaling pathways involved. Given that although the regulatory
network of repair and regeneration has some similarities with
development, there are also many differences. We will also cover
the process of tendon repair and healing, including the
recognized process of adult tendon repair and the process of
regeneration of embryonic or neonatal tendon, as well as discuss
the similarities and differences between tendon development and
repair, in order to develop strategies for optimizing tendon repair.
The latest studies on the role of transcription factors in the
process of tendon development and repair are collated and
summarized here, so as to facilitate a better understanding of
the latest research progress and to inspire further investigations.
2 FORMATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF
TENDONS
During embryonic development of vertebrates, the embryo goes
through a phase of development called gastrulation. During this
phase, the embryo differentiates into three germ layers: ectoderm,
mesoderm and endoderm. Tendon is mainly originated from the
neural crest cells of the ectoderm, the paraxial mesoderm and the
lateral plate mesoderm. Tendons at the craniofacial region are
derived from the neural crest (Chen and Galloway, 2014). The
axial tendons are derived from the syndetome, one of the four
compartments of somites (Schweitzer et al., 2001; Brent et al.,
2003). In the limb bud, tendon progenitor cells are induced
directly from the mesenchyme below the ectoderm and grow
along the limb bud proximal to distal (Schweitzer et al., 2001)
(Figure 1).
2.1 Classiﬁcation of Tendons
Based on function, tendon can be classiﬁed into three distinct
types: force-transmitting tendons, intermuscular tendons, and
anchor tendons. The most visible force-transmitting tendons are
the long chord-like tendons of the limbs and tail, which transmits
muscle power to move the bone. To perform their biomechanical
functions, the extracellular tissue of these force-transmitting
tendons is very complex and organized in the form of tightly
parallel collagen ﬁbers (Benjamin et al., 2000). Intermuscular
tendons are tendinous tissues interconnecting two muscle
segments, including the rectus abdominis tendon and the
diaphragm tendon (Murchison et al., 2007). Anchor tendons
are the starting tendons near the extremities. Their main function
is to anchor the muscle to the starting point of the bone. An
example of an anchoring tendon is the tendon that connects the
intercostal muscle to the ribs (Murchison et al., 2007).
Based on the location of the attached muscle, tendons can also
be classiﬁed into three types: craniofacial tendons, axial tendons
and limb tendons. Due to different functions, the force-
transmitting tendons are mainly distributed in the limbs,
craniofacial
tendons
as
well
as
tail
tendons,
while
the
anchoring tendons are distributed in all three locations, and
the intermuscular tendons are distributed within the trunk.
These three types of tendons tissues are derived from different
origins, with the relevant information described above.
2.2 The Development of Tendons in Animal
Models
2.2.1 Limb Tendons
2.2.1.1 The Origin of Limb Tendons: The Lateral Plate
Mesoderm
The tendons in limbs are originated in the lateral plate mesoderm
(LPM). LPM condenses into bilateral cell sheets at the lateral edge
of the immature vertebrate embryo, which is so-called lateral
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
2
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
plate. Previously, the LPM was also described as leading-edge,
ventral, lateral, ventrolateral or visceral mesoderm (Prummel
et al., 2020).
The lateral plate mesoderm is located at the most
lateral region of the mesoderm. After the formation of the
gastrula, LPM exhibits its characteristic structure: bilateral
plates
of
LPM
progenitor
cells
form
laterally
in
the
embryo and are subsequently segmented into specialized
cell fate domains along the A-P and medial-lateral axes
(McDole et al., 2018; Prummel et al., 2019). During the
process of segmentation, the LPM further divided into
anterior (ALPM) and posterior (PLPM) regions, while
cell regions on both sides gradually differentiate into
progeny cell fates and show different patterns of gene
expression. Throughout this process, BMP and Nodal
signaling pathways play an important role in lateral plate
mesoderm formation, while FGF, Wnt and retinoic acid (RA)
signaling also affect the formation of LPM (Arnold and
Robertson, 2009).
Forelimb and hindlimb buds develop along the A-P axis at
different locations. RA signaling pathway and Hox gene are
participated in the correct localization of the progenitor ﬁeld
(Moreau et al., 2019). LPM expressing Tbx5 and Tbx4
interacts
closely
with
epidermal
FGF
ligand
secretion,
among other factors, promoting limb formation in ALPM
and PLPM, respectively (Nishimoto and Logan, 2016). These
limb buds consist of an ectodermal membrane that contains
the proliferating mesenchyme with differentiation potential
and become the source of further differentiation into the
origin of limb connective tissue-tendon progenitor cells
(Zeller et al., 2009).
2.2.1.2 The Formation of Limb Tendons
After the condensation of tendon progenitor cells, three pairs of
tendon primordia are formed: proximal tendon primordia,
intermediate primordia and distal primordia. These primordia
are subdivided into single tendons related with each joint. In the
hind limbs, proximal, intermediate, and distal tendon primordia
generate thigh, shank and foot muscles respectively (Kardon,
1998).
Schweitzer et al. (2001) were the ﬁrst to discover the
expression of Scx in tendon cell lineages. In chicken embryos,
Scx transcripts are found in all muscle-to-bone attachment
sites in stage 21 embryos, which is the ﬁrst phase. Notably,
Scx expression is present in all limb tendons, both distal
and proximal. In the second phase, stage 25–27, the Scx
expressing cells merge to form complex and dynamic
patterns that differ from the wing and leg buds and
from dorsal and ventral mesenchyme. The third phase of
Scx expression, starting at stage 28, is the phase of the ﬁrst
tendon
ﬁbers
formation.
At
these
stages
of
limbs
development, the autopod enlarges in limbs and cartilage
condensations of the digits begin to form. With the initial
formation of the digit tendon, Scx is expressed in the broad
interstitial streaks formed on the dorsal and ventral side of
the digit and just below the ectoderm. Finally, at stages 31
and later, Scx is expressed by all limb tendons. In mice
embryos, Scx is expressed in early limb buds. By E9.5-E10,
expression
of
Scx
has
reached
a
slightly
higher
level. Meanwhile, this is the stage of tendon progenitor cell
pool formation. Till E14.5, the expression of Scx reaches
the distal limb and this expression is further achieved to the
maximum at E19, as a good marker for tendon pattern
FIGURE 1 | Tendons at different locations have different embryonic origins. Tendons at the cranial region are originated from the neural crest. Some of the nerve
crest cells from the ectoderm migrate to the cranial area and differentiate into tendon progenitors. The axial tendons are derived in the syndetome, a dorsolateral stripe of
the sclerotome at the junction between adjacent myotomes. At a cross section of embryo, the LPM is formed on either side of the central axis and is subdivided into
anterior and posterior parts, corresponding to four limb buds. In limb buds, tendon progenitors are derived from the mesenchyme directly under the ectoderm, in
locations that follow the proximal-to-distal outgrowth of the limb bud.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
3
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
reﬁnement and tendon speciﬁc insertion into the respective
skeleton elements (Schweitzer et al., 2001).
Subsequent research found that Scx+ tendon progenitors are
composed of two distinguishing populations according to the
expression of Sox9 or not: Scx+/Sox9+ tendon progenitors and
Scx+/Sox9−tendon progenitors. These can both eventually
differentiate into tendon cells (Soeda et al., 2010; Sugimoto
et al., 2013). Moreover, the section of tendon near cartilage or
bone contains more Sox9+ tendon cells. Thus, Scx+/Sox9+
progenitors is the main origin of tendons in the surrounding
of the vertebrae and ribs, whereas tendons in abdomen are
generated from the Scx+/Sox9−cell lineage (Sugimoto et al.,
2013). In fact, this part of the tendon that is differentiated
from Sox9+ cells is better known as the tendon-bone interface
(enthesis). This will be discussed in detail in the latter sections.
As mentioned above, the force-transmitting tendons are
mainly distributed in the limbs as well as in the tail, having a
unique way of developing and lengthening compared with
anchoring tendons. Research studies have shown that in
mouse embryos, long tail and long limb tendons develop via
producing of a short anchoring tendon anlage and then tendon
lengthen. During this process, new progenitor cells are recruited
and differentiated to form tendon tissues, where Scx is
indispensable (Huang et al., 2019).
The importance of Scx in tendon development is obvious, Scx
deﬁcient mice were the ﬁrst observed model of Scx gene inﬂuence
on tendon development. The other functions and roles of Scx will
be discussed later. The differentiation and speciﬁcation of
tendons are also inﬂuenced and induced by various signaling
pathways. Up to date, FGF, TGFβ, Wnt, and mTORC1 signals are
known to be participated in limb tendon development. Among
these signaling pathways, FGF, TGFβ, and Wnt exert effects on
the induction and expression of tendon Scx gene, which are the
upstream
signaling
pathways
that
directly
regulate
the
differentiation
of
mesenchymal
stem
cells
into
tendon
progenitor cells, while mTORC1 is the downstream signal for
the regulation of extracellular matrix of tendon (Liu et al., 2014;
Nakamichi and Asahara, 2021).
2.2.2 Axial Tendons
2.2.2.1 The Origin of Axial Tendons: The Paraxial Mesoderm
Initially, the migration and thickening of the posterior mesoderm
cells of the embryo form the primitive streak (PS)/blastopore.
Along with the concentration of cells forming the primary streak,
a depression appears in the middle of the primary strip, which
become the primary sulcus. At the front end of the primary node,
the central section of the chimney shapes concave, known as the
primary pit. Cells entering the blastocoel through the primary pit
migrate anteriorly to form the foregut, head mesoderm and
notochord, and cells entering the blastocoel through primary
sulcus on either side to form most of the endoderm and
mesoderm tissue. The paraxial mesoderm (PM) consists of
two tissue strips on either side of notochord. The nascent PM
constitutes the presomitic mesoderm at the posterior tip of the
embryo, which is a transient tissue that can be further subdivided
into an immature posterior and a committed anterior region. The
segments of this anterior region are supposed to form the somites.
Nodal and BMP4 and other signaling factors promote the
formation of the PS and activation of the early mesoderm
marker
brachyury
(T)
and
Wnt3
signaling
in
the
PM
(Beddington and Robertson, 1999; Tam and Loebel, 2007;
Ramkumar and Anderson, 2011). The posterior PS and lateral
tissues can secrete BMP4, while the axial structures of the embryo
produce BMP antagonists, along with the opposite gradients of
noggin, antagonizing the action of BMP4 (Winnier et al., 1995;
Reshef et al., 1998). Thus, a BMP signaling gradient that controls
the mediolateral fates of mesoderm is established. The formation
of the paraxial mesoderm is quite sensitive to changes in BMP
signaling. Progressively higher levels of BMP signaling is required
for
all
mesodermal
types,
from
the
notochord
to
the
extraembryonic mesoderm, for speciﬁcation (Kishigami and
Mishina, 2005).
Next comes the formation of somites. This involves a
molecular oscillator which is called the segmentation clock.
The principle of segmentation clock is to generate a serious of
pulses of Notch, Wnt and FGF signaling to control the periodic
generation of somites (Hubaud and Pourquié, 2014). After the
formation, somites are divided along the dorsoventral axis into
dermomyotome in a dorsal epithelial domain and sclerotome in a
ventral mesenchymal domain.
Initially, it was proved that the somites generate to the skeletal
muscle, axial skeleton of vertebrate and dorsal dermis. In
response to signals secreted from the surrounding tissues, the
ventral somite region goes through an epithelio-mesenchymal
transition, dividing the somite into two compartments: the
dermomyotome
and
the
sclerotome,
which
are
dorsal
epithelial layer and ventral mesenchyme respectively. At a
slightly later phase, a third compartment forms when cells
from the dorsomedial and ventrolateral lips (DML, VLL) of
the dermomyotome delaminate from the epithelial sheet,
migrate underneath, and re-epithelialize to form the myotome.
The remaining myotome gives rise to the skeletal muscle, and the
epithelial sheet or dermotome to the dorsal dermis (Borycki and
Emerson, 2000; Brand-Saberi and Christ, 2000; Monsoro-Burq
and Le Douarin, 2000). However, this process lacks development
of connective tissue like tendons. In a later study, a previously
undiscovered
fourth
compartment
of
somitic
which
accommodate axial tendon progenitors can be detected, and
this fourth compartment is named as “syndetome” (Brent
et al., 2003). The discovery of syndetome opened a new stage
of human research on the development of somitic tendon.
2.2.2.2 The Formation of Axial Tendons
Syndetome’s developmental origin is later than that of the other
three compartments. It was discovered that Scx was faintly
expressed at about the 16th stage of chick embryos, while
other somitic compartments markers were expressed at the
7th to 9th stage, indicating that the tendon progenitors in
syndetome are generated later than other somitic lineages.
And it is located between adjacent myotomes sagittal, both
ventrolateral and dorsomedial to the sclerotome, which was
consistent with observations in mouse and chicken embryos.
After induction, Scx is seen at the anterior and posterior somitic
borders. By stage 22, expression was remarkably enhanced and
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
4
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
continued to extend dorsolateral, and by stage 24, a complete
dorsolateral to ventral measurement of body length was Scx
positive. In stage 26 embryos, the ventral lateral expression
region of Scx is consistent with the formation of early ribs and
intercostal muscles (Brent et al., 2003).
Further studies have shown that the syndetome emerges from
the sclerotome. Some of the cells in the sclerotome become Scx-
expressing cells, and from the ventrolateral region of the somite
gradually cover to the ventrolateral region, ﬁnally forming the
ﬁxed area adjacent to myotomes and sclerotomes (Brent et al.,
2003). Besides, another study (Ma et al., 2018) on zebraﬁsh
proved that the axial tendons of zebraﬁsh are also developed
from the sclerotome. Although the fourth compartment is
described in chicken and mouse embryos, this is not clearly
observed in zebraﬁsh embryos. The sclerotome of zebraﬁsh
embryos is found to be different from those in chicken and
mouse embryos. In chick and mouse embryos, the sclerotome is
deﬁned as an individual region located in the ventromedial
somite. By
contrast,
the zebraﬁsh
sclerotome is
initially
divided into two separate regions: a ventral region in higher
vertebrates and a novel dorsal region. We might speculate that
this dorsal region is the region that evolve into the syndetome of
higher vertebrates.
2.2.3 Cranial Tendons
2.2.3.1 The Origin of Cranial Tendons: Neural Crest Cells
Neural crest cells (NCCs) are generated within the dorsal-most
part of the neuroepithelium at the connection with the surface
ectoderm, an area known as the “neural plate border” (Selleck and
Bronner-Fraser, 1995). And nascent NCCs detached from the
developing neural tube, presenting a mesenchymal feature and
migrating to distal parts in the developing embryo. In the cranial
area, they generate to a various type of cells and tissues.
The NCCs can be divided into four different populations,
referred to as cranial, trunk, cardiac, and vagal NCC. Each
subpopulation corresponds to a unique part of a particular cell
and tissue type. Cranial neural crest cells (CNCCs) can be further
subdivided into front, mid, hind subpopulations, which give rise
to most cranial tendons (Yoshida et al., 2008; Parada and Chai,
2015). Lineage tracing of NCCs in zebraﬁsh has demonstrated a
stable relevance between the time of cell migration and the
ultimate fate of individuals cell (Schilling and Kimmel, 1994).
NCCs that migrate early mainly form the skeletal and connective
tissues of the cranial region, whereas cells migrate late primarily
undergo a neural fate (Calloni et al., 2009).
Initially, BMP, FGF, and Wnt signaling have each been
identiﬁed as crucial signaling regulators of NCCs formation in
various animals such as ﬁsh, avian, and amphibians (Crane and
Trainor, 2006). Next, more signaling pathways including the
above were further proven to be important to the speciﬁcation
of cell-type differentiation within the mammalian NCC lineage.
For example, FGF signaling is known to play an important role in
facilitating the fate of NCCs towards a skeletogenic type. Previous
studies showed that FGF2 increased proliferation and promoted
skeletal fate of CNNCs in vivo as well as in vitro in mouse and
avian models (Sarkar et al., 2001; Abzhanov et al., 2003; Li et al.,
2010). And TGFβ signaling is revealed as a fate switch controller
for SoxE family members that is in control of differentiation fates
of cranial NCC. Cranial and trunk NCCs regulated by
TGFβ1 low-express Sox10 and differentiate into mesenchymal
fates in mouse embryo. In contrast, overexpression of Sox10 in
mouse NCCs can maintain its neurogenic potential (Kim et al.,
2003; John et al., 2011). Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is a morphogen
with multiple roles in various kinds of organogenesis. It has also
been discovered to play an important role in the fate speciﬁcation
of NCC. The results of excision experiments in mice and poultry
indicate that the endodermal Shh signal can inﬂuence the fate of
cartilage differentiation from the inner and outer mesenchymal of
pharynx bone (Couly et al., 2002; Aoto et al., 2009), as well as in
chick, mouse, and zebraﬁsh development studies (Piotrowski and
Nüsslein-Volhard, 2000; Brito et al., 2008). Besides, there are
other regulatory signals that have been studied and have been
reviewed in more detail (Bhatt et al., 2013).
2.2.3.2 The Formation of Cranial Tendons
One study focused in detail on the development of facial
tendons in zebraﬁsh. Zebraﬁsh have two Scleraxis genes,
scleraxisa (scxa) and scleraxisb (scxb). Scxa expression is
detected earlier than Scxb during zebraﬁsh development, so
Scxa serves as the main Scleraxis gene in zebraﬁsh. The ﬁrst
Scxa transcripts in zebraﬁsh are detectable by 36 hpf (hours
post-fertlilization) between the myotomal boundaries along
the anterior-posterior axis, which is the period when tendon
progenitor cells form. This process requires FGF and TGFβ
signaling, similar to the developmental process of limb
tendons and axial tendons, as described earlier. In addition,
it
was
discovered
that
patterning
of
cranial
tendon
progenitors
requires
cyp26b1,
with
the
evidence
that
tenoblasts
are
disturbed
in
cyp26b1
mutant
embryos
(McGurk
et
al.,
2017).
After
tendon
progenitors
are
formed, the development of tendons moves on to the next
stage at about 60 hpf. At this stage, the tendon progenitor cells
gradually differentiate into tenocytes, and then secrete
tendon-speciﬁc
extracellular
matrix,
the
most
basic
of
which is type Ⅰcollagen, which begins to be produced and
arranged at this stage to form the inherent form of the tendon.
During this process, tenocytes migrate into the speciﬁc area
consistently until being localized at a suitable position. For
example, tendon elements of the mandibulohyoid and
hyohyal junctions, and the formation of the sternohyoideus
tendons. At 60–80 hpf, the scxa and tnmd transcripts are
coexisted in the cranial area (Chen and Galloway, 2014).
Muscle
and
cartilage
play
an
important
role
in
the
maintainance of Scxa. It was discovered that once the genes
involved in cartilage or muscle were knocked out, the expression
of Scxa appear abnormal at 72 hpf, indicating that the
development
of
tendons
is
affected.
The
aforementioned
cyp26b1 also plays a role in this process, speciﬁcally indicating
that the loss of cyp26b1 inhibited the formation of tenocytes
condensation and their connection, thereby affecting the tendons’
completeness (McGurk et al., 2017).
Current research on cranial tendon development has focused
on zebraﬁsh, and it is uncertain whether the data can be
extrapolated
to
mammals.
Additionally,
whether
cranial
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
5
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
tendons are regulated by more speciﬁc signaling pathways is
unknown and needs further study to verify.
2.3 Regulation of Tendon Development
2.3.1 Biological Signals
2.3.1.1 Key Transcription Factors and Relative Speciﬁc
Proteins
Tendon, ligament and other connective tissues express a famous
speciﬁc marker Scx, which is highly expressed in tendon
progenitors and persists throughout the process of tendon
development (Schweitzer et al., 2001). Scx belongs to the
proteins widely expressed class I basic helix-loop-helix and is a
heterodimer with E12 or E47 proteins by binding to the E-box
consensus sequence, serving as a transcription factor during the
process of cell differentiation (Cserjesi et al., 1995; Furumatsu
et al., 2010). In normal mouse embryos, the presence of Scx allows
tendon progenitor cells to condense normally to form tendon
primordia, secreting enough extracellular matrix to maintain the
correct alignment of tendon cells. In Scx−/−embryos, both the
intermuscular as well as force-transmitting type of tendons are
affected. Force-transmitting tendons are more serious, whereas
the anchor tendon was not affected (Huang et al., 2019). The
speciﬁc mechanism is mentioned above. In addition, due to the
absence of Scx, tendon progenitor cells cannot aggregate when
they need to condense to form tendon primordia, and remain as
loosely arranged mesenchymal cells, thus affecting subsequent
tendon development. For example, it was found that in the
section of proximal metacarpals in E13.5 mutant mouse
models, the distinct condensed layers, divided by ventral
progenitors, which will give rise to the ﬂexor digitorium
profundus (FDP) and the palmar metacarpal ligament, were
not successfully formed and remained confusedly arranged
progenitors in mesenchyme as early mesoderm. Besides, the
ﬁrmest tendon in Scx-null mutant mouse, the distal part of the
FDP, presents with various extracellular matrix production
disorders, including a reduction in tendon collagen quantity
and
confusion
in
alignment
(Murchison
et
al.,
2007).
According to recent research on tendon transcription factors,
during the early phase of tenogenic, Scx directly activate 32 target
genes, including Fmod, Tnmd, Htra3, Zfp185, and Ssc5d, and
there are 17 genes inhibited by Scx (Liu et al., 2021). Thus, it can
be speculated that among all transcription factors involved in
tendon development, Scx is a more upstream gene which
regulates the functioning of other transcription factors. And it
has been shown that Scx is present and important in both the
cranial, trunk and limb tendons (Liu et al., 2014). Meanwhile, Scx
is also regulated by other signaling pathways. FGFs and TGFβ
signaling pathway induce Scx expression, while BMP antagonizes
Scx expression in limb tendons and SHH antagonizes Scx
expression in axial tendons. The details of the signaling
pathway will be described below.
Mohawk (Mkx) is a member of the Three Amino acid Loop
Extension superclass of atypical homeobox genes. It is also called
Iroquois homeobox-like 1 (Irxl), and is expressed in developing
tendons (Anderson et al., 2006). A small amount of Mkx mRNA
expression is observed in the tendon-related region in mouse
embryo at E12.5, and Mkx mRNA expression become robust after
the emergence of Scx at about E13.5 or E14.5, which is the stage
that tendon progenitors begin to condensate and differentiate. By
E16.5, Scx expression is gradually decreased in the extremities
and tail tendons (Liu et al., 2014) (Figure 2). The tail in Mkx-null
mutant mouse model takes on a wavy shape, and most tendons in
Mkx-null mutant mouse model are smaller, paler, less vibrant and
more hypoplastic than that in wild mouse throughout whole body
(Ito et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2010; Kimura et al., 2011). It was also
observed smaller collagen ﬁbril size and lower level of type I
collagen expression in Mkx-null tendons. In addition, down-
regulation
of
molecules
such
as
lumican,
decorin,
and
ﬁbromodulin that attach to the collagen I ﬁbrils and regulate
the growth of collagen ﬁbers, was also observed in Mkx-null
mouse model (Ito et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2010). Therefore, this
suggests that Mkx is essential for regulating the expression of type
I collagen and related matrix in tenocytes. Due to reduction
tendon mass and decreased diameter of tendon, the mechanical
properties of the Achilles tendon are affected in Mkx-null mouse
model, thus suggesting functional depression.
Early growth response 1 and Early growth response 2 (Egr1
and Egr2) are two transcription factors from the same family,
both involved in tendon development process (Lejard et al., 2011;
Guerquin et al., 2013). Their sequence is homologous with a gene
regulating tendon development in Drosophila (Becker et al.,
1997). Egr1/2 show distinct expression patterns during tendon
development. Egr1 is ﬁrst expressed at E12.5 in the region of Scx
marked and Egr2 is in E14.5 limb tendons. But at E16.5 in the
mouse embryo, their expression covered all limb regions
(Figure 2). Interestingly, no abnormal tendon phenotype is
detected in both Egr1-null and Egr2-null mouse model (Lejard
et al., 2011), demonstrating less prominent effects for Egr
compared to Scx and Mkx. However, mutant mouse model of
Egr1 or Egr2 deﬁciency appears decrease expression of Col1a1
and reduced number of collagen ﬁbrils within developing
tendons,
indicating
that
they
participate
in
tendon
differentiation by regulating other transcription factors and
collagen-related genes (Lejard et al., 2011). Additionally, it is
established that the Egr gene has the capacity to promote the
expression of tenogenic marker Scx, the main collagen in tendon
Col1a1, and other tendon-related collagens Col3a1, Col5a1,
Col12a1, and Col14a1. The gene expression research of Egr1
function inhibition in mouse model has discovered abundant
target genes of Egr1 in connective tissues. An interesting
discovery is that the target genes positively associated with
Egr1 are generally related to tendon ECM, while those
markers for other tissue differentiation are negatively regulated
by Egr1 (Gaut et al., 2016; Havis and Duprez, 2020). Moreover, it
was also demonstrated that the function of Egr1 to promote
tenogenic was consistent in rabbit tendon stem cells (Tao et al.,
2015). There is increasing evidence that Egr1 is also mechanically-
sensitive. Egr1 is activated when mechanical stimulation is
applied to 3D-engineered tendons induced in mouse, equine,
and human tendons (Yang et al., 2019; Herchenhan et al., 2020).
Transmembrane
glycoprotein
tenomodulin
(Tnmd)
is
considered as a terminal tendon-related marker and highly
expressed at E14.5 in mouse limb tendon cells (Brandau et al.,
2001; Shukunami et al., 2001; Jelinsky et al., 2010; Havis et al.,
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
6
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
2014). Tnmd is a number of type II transmembrane glycoproteins
family. It plays a necessary but not indispensable role in later
proliferation and maturation of tenocytes (Figure 2). Although
Tnmd-null mouse doesn’t appear severe abnormal tendon
phenotype, the decreased density and proliferation of tendon
cell could be observed in vivo (Docheva et al., 2005). Furthermore,
it has been discovered that the size of collagen ﬁbril was
pathologically increased in Tnmd-null Achilles tendons by
ultrastructural analyses, taking on the status of impaired
collagen ﬁbrilogenesis and premature matrix aging (Docheva
et al., 2005). Moreover, self-renewal assays validated that
Tnmd-null
tendon
stem/progenitor
cells
(TSPCs)
exhibit
signiﬁcantly decreased proliferative potential in vitro (Alberton
et al., 2015). And it was found out that cellular senescence was one
of
the
most
obvious
differences,
beginning
earlier
and
manifesting more in Tnmd-null model contrasted with wild
mouse. Additionally, deﬁcient of Tnmd in TSPC results in an
abnormal gene expression proﬁle (Alberton et al., 2015). Tnmd-
null TSPCs appear signiﬁcant down-regulation of multiple genes,
such as collagen-related genes like Col1a1, Col3a1, and Col6a1
and the ECM-related genes like Prg4, Thbs4, and Comp. On the
contrary, deﬁcient of Tnmd signiﬁcantly down-regulates of the
collagen cross-linking genes like Dcn, Fmod, Lum, and Lox (Yin
et al., 2019). The above is the study of Tnmd in traditional TSPCs.
In recent years, researchers have discovered that Tnmd-positive
subpopulation of human adipose tissue-derived stem cells
(hASCs) exhibit phenotypical features of tendon progenitor
cells and can be biochemically induced towards tenogenic
lineage (Gonçalves et al., 2018). Meanwhile, as the source of
regeneration cells, Tnmd-positive hASCs is applied in tissue-
engineered magnetic cell sheet patches for tendon regeneration
(Gonçalves et al., 2017). In summary, Tnmd serves as a
downstream
transcription
factor
which
regulates
tendon
collagen and other ECM, and may also have a feedback effect
on upstream signals.
Thrombospondins (TSPs, Thbs) are deposited in the ECM and
are provided with multiple functions to affect vascular, tendon
and other types of cells and tissues. A large expression of TSP-4 of
FIGURE 2 | Expression of tendon markers in tenocytes during tendon development. (A) Mesenchymal cells differentiate into Scx-expressing tendon progenitor
cells, which also partially express Sox9. Scx+Sox9+ progenitor cells differentiate into the tenocytes which are located near the bone in the enthesis. Other progenitor cells
gradually express normal tendon markers during maturation. The classic enthesis is composed of four layers. From tendon to bone end are tendon layer, ﬁbrocartilage
layer, mineralized ﬁbrocartilage layer and bone layer respectively. The mature tendon is composed by collagen fascicles which are assembled collagen ﬁbrils, with
some tenocytes attached around. (B) In mouse limbs, Scx expression begin to increase at E9.5 and continue to increase until tenocyte maturation. Slight Mkx expression
is detectable in tendon at E12.5, after the emergence of Scx and robust Mkx mRNA expression at E13.5 and E14.5, stages at which the tendon progenitors undergo
condensation and differentiation. Egr1 transcripts are ﬁrst expressed at E12.5 in Scx domains forming tendon, and they are expressed in long tendons at E16.5. Egr2 is
ﬁrst detectable in E14.5 limb tendons and is generally expressed in all limb tendons by E16.5. Tnmd is highly expressed in E14.5 and is considered a late tendon marker.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
7
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
the 5 TSP family can be detected in tendons and muscles
(Subramanian et al., 2007). A study has experimented the
appearance of tendon ECM, particular collagen, and skeletal
muscle function and morphology in TSP-4 deﬁciency mouse
(Frolova et al., 2014). In Thbs4-null mice, the diameter of collagen
ﬁbrils is signiﬁcantly wider than that in wild mouse, but the
organization of collagen is abnormal and the function of tendons
is affected (Frolova et al., 2014). Besides, it has been found that
TSP-4 is indispensable for muscle connection and ECM
organization in vertebrates. TSP-4b deﬁciency in zebraﬁsh
model
causes
muscle
detachment
during
the process
of
contraction because of the deﬁciency in laminin gathering and
inhibition of Itg signaling (Subramanian and Schilling, 2014).
Thus, TSP-4 is necessary for the regular ﬁbril organization and
the interaction with other ECMs. It also contributes to the
maintenance of correct ECM composition in tendon, and
functions as an ECM scaffold, serving as an important factor
in the late stage of tendon development.
In conclusion, as the markers of tendon tissue, these genes are
speciﬁcally expressed in different stages of tendon development
and function as regulatory factors in the process of tendon
development. (Figure 2). In the meantime, our understanding
of these genes is still in its infancy, and much remains to be
discovered.
2.3.1.2 Signaling Pathway
TGF-β Signaling. Bioinformatics analysis of the transcriptome of
tenocytes show TGFβ signaling pathway is one of the most
activated
pathways
in
tenocytes
during
limb
tendon
development
in
mice
(Havis
et
al.,
2014).
Despite
the
activation
of
TGFβ
signaling
induces
Scx
and
other
transcription factors expression (Pryce et al., 2009), the early
effect of TGFβ signaling in tenogenic differentiation of mouse is
not determined completely, because in vivo studies have shown
that at E11.5, the mutant embryos (Tgfb2−/−;Tgfb3−/−embryos)
also display normal tendon phenotypes (Pryce et al., 2009). And,
Scx was already expressed normally in tendon progenitor cells at
this time, indicating that the early stage of tendon differentiation
had been successfully induced. This indicated that TGFβ
induction of tendons did not occur at an early stage or there
are other ligands involved in this process. In subsequent tendon
development, TGFβ plays an essential role. It can promote further
differentiation of tendon progenitor and increased tendon
speciﬁc genes expression in the cells via canonical TGFβ
intracellular signaling pathway, SMAD2/3, and end up with
mature tenocyte (Havis et al., 2014). The expression of Scx
also decreases in zebraﬁsh embryos by blocking canonical
TGF-β intracellular signaling pathway (Chen and Galloway,
2014). And whether TGFβ or Smad2/3 signaling pathway are
blocked in explant mouse limb models, tendon-related genes
including Scx, Col1a1, and Col1a2, are observed down-regulated
(Havis et al., 2014). Smad3-null mice showed a tendon
orientation defective phenotype (Berthet et al., 2013); however,
the defective phenotype of the Tgfb2/Tgfb3 double knockout
mutant mouse model is more severe than that of Smad3
knockout
mice,
suggesting
that
Smad3
is
not
the
only
downstream molecule of TGFβ signaling pathway involved in
tenogenic process (Murchison et al., 2007). In addition, TGFβ
also contributes to maintain the fate of tendon cells. Recently, it
has been found that when TGFβ signal is inactivated after mouse
tendons mature, the differentiated tenocytes will lose tendon-
speciﬁc markers and dedifferentiate into primitive tendon stem/
progenitor cells (Kaji et al., 2020).
Even though all of the above studies have demonstrated
positive effects of TGFβ on tendon development, there are still
some studies showing TGFβ also promotes chondrogenesis,
which is the opposite to the tenogenic process (Roark and
Greer, 1994; Gañan et al., 1996). Research has shown that
TGF-interacting factor Tgif1 and SKI-like oncogene SnoN as
potential candidates for modulating this process. Tgif1 has been
identiﬁed to involved down-regulation of Sox9 and Agn and up-
regulation of Scx, and Tnmd through the Smad pathway, thus
leading to tenogenesis (Lorda-Diez et al., 2009). Beyond that,
more
explanations
for
the
phenomenon
are
still
being
investigated.
Other than the classical TGFβ pathway, GDF-5, -6, -7 and-8
(also known as myostatin), which are ligands of TGFβ
superfamily, also contributes to proper tendon formation. In
GDF-5, -6 and -7 deﬁcient animal models, the collagen
structure and biomechanical capacity have been altered in
tendons.
Whereas,
tendon
cells
with
additional
GDF5
activation showed greater capacity of collagen secretion (Dines
et al., 2011), while MSC in the same state promoted the
expression of tenogenic genes and inhibited the expression of
chondrogenic genes (Tan et al., 2012; Qu et al., 2018). In Gdf-7
deﬁcient mice, it is observed normal tendon phenotype and
upregulated expression of GDF-5, indicating that GDF-5 levels
may replace the role of GDF-7 to maintain the regular
development of tendon in the situation of GDF-7 deﬁcient. In
another study, GDF-7 promotes the mesenchymal stem cells to
differentiate towards tendon progenitors of spindle shaped, and
these cells express increased level of Scx an Col1a1 via TGFβ
signaling pathway (Wang et al., 2005; Mikic et al., 2008).
Myostatin is known to be expressed normally in muscle cells
during embryo development process, and functions to negatively
regulate muscle production (McPherron et al., 1997). But in
tendons, myostatin activation in mouse limb tendon-derived
ﬁbroblasts can induce the expression of tenogenic genes like
Scx and Tnmd (Edom-Vovard et al., 2002; Mendias et al., 2008),
demonstrating its opposite effect on tendons as it does in muscles.
FGF Signaling. FGF signaling has also been demonstrated to
contribute to early Scx expression in tendon progenitors, but its
effects on chicken embryos and mouse embryos appear to be
opposite (Havis et al., 2016). In chicken embryos, FGF plays a
positive role in Scx expression (Brent et al., 2003; Brent et al.,
2005). FGF is proved to activate ERK MAPK intracellular
pathway to take effect on tendon progenitors in syndetome of
somitic, of which the effector Pea3 and the modulator Sprouty2
are both discovered in areas that tendon progenitors distributed
(Smith et al., 2005). On the contrary, in mouse models, the
function of FGF signaling pathway is weakened during the
development stage of tenocytes, and inhibition of ERK MAPK
signaling pathway could induce the expression of Scx, Col1a1,
and Col1a2 in mouse limb tendon progenitors (Havis et al., 2014).
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
8
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
In humans, as in mammals, the role of FGF signaling in tendon
development is still not completely understood, but tends to be
consistent with that in mice.
Wnt Signaling. It has been proven that tendon formation is
disrupted after ectodermal removal (Schweitzer et al., 2001;
Edom-Vovard and Duprez, 2004). And it is widely believed
WNT signaling pathway contribute to his ectodermal inﬂuence
on connective tissue differentiation. However, WNT/ß-catenin
signal
is
present
both
in
the
ectoderm
and
mesoderm
mesenchyme, and investigations via the Wls gene, which
regulates the secretion and distribution of various Wnts
ligands, reveals that the function of ectodermal Wnts is to
keep
the
multipotency
ability
of
distal
mesenchyme
progenitors.
By
contrast,
the
elimination
of
mesoderm
mesenchymal Wls intends to prevent distal mesenchyme from
differentiating (Zhu et al., 2012). In other words, Wnts signals
from ectodermal and mesoderm mesenchymal play an opposite
role in mesenchymal progenitors. The function of WNT/ß-
catenin signaling is to coordinate the cell fate of connective
tissue formation and maintain a pool of progenitors with sub-
ectodermal mesenchymal cells. The mesenchymal cells progress
to tendon cell differentiation program when the levels of the
WNT/ß-catenin signaling are reduced. It is indispensable and
sufﬁcient to suppress WNT/ß-catenin signaling for the induction
of tenogenic gene Scx (ten Berge et al., 2008; Garcia-Lee et al.,
2021). This indicates that the WNT signaling pathway may be the
key to induction of the tendon differentiation process. There are
other studies that showed Wnt/β-catenin signaling suppress the
expression of Scx in tendon-derived stem cells via eliminating the
TGFβ-associated regulation of Scx expression by antagonize the
activation of TGF-β, as well as down-regulate the expression of
Mkx and Tnmd (Kishimoto et al., 2017). Moreover, Wnt3a, one of
the ligands of Wnt signaling pathway, is proved to upregulate the
expression of Six2 in autopod developing tendons of chick
embryos
(Yamamoto-Shiraishi
and
Kuroiwa,
2013).
In
conclusion, the role of Wnt signaling extends throughout the
process of tendon development and there is still a lot to discover.
mTOR Signaling. mTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin) is
a threonine/serine protein kinase, and is a part of mTOR complex
1, which serving as a bridge to connect metabolic processes and
nutrient signals that are essential for cell development and widely
regulating
biological
activities
including
cell
proliferation,
differentiation, and metabolism (Ben-Sahra and Manning,
2017). During tendon development, the persistent activation of
mTORC1 in tenocytes is vital for the ECM production and
maintain. In various studies, it was found that mouse models
that loss its mTORC1 function speciﬁcally in tenocytes showed
reduced tendon thickness and down-regulated expression of
Mkx, Tnmd, SLRPs, Dcn, Col1a1, and Fmod. On the other
hand, mouse model in which the function of mTORC1 was
speciﬁcally enhanced exhibited positive tendon phenotype
including angiogenesis in tendons and hyperproliferation of
cells (Lim et al., 2017; Cong et al., 2018). Another study
demonstrated that mTOR contributed to the synthesis and
remodeling
of
collagen
in
tendons
under
mechanical
stimulation (Mousavizadeh et al., 2020). Moreover, it can
also block non-tenocyte differentiation which is caused by
over-activated mechanical stimulation in some pathologic
conditions to prevent tendons from tendinopathy. In vitro it
was demonstrated that mechanical loading activated mTOR
signal in rat patellar TSPCs in a stretching manner, and
consequently,
the
cell
proliferation
and
non-tenogenic
differentiation
of
TSPCs
was
decreased
signiﬁcantly,
as
indicated by the low expression of chondrogenic makers and
osteogenesis markers (Nie et al., 2021).
Retinoic Acid Signaling. Retinoic acid (RA) signaling was
researched early in chick embryos, and it was discovered that
tenocytes in chick embryo contained cellular retinoic acid
binding
protein
(CRABP)
and
that
retinoids
modulated
collagen synthesis in tendon and osseous tissue (Oikarinen
et al., 1986). A later study observed that retinoic acid receptor
agonists could be selected as effective inducers of nuclear Scx in
small molecular sieves, indicating that RA signaling participates
in the speciﬁcation of tendon cells (Webb et al., 2016). Recent
research explains this in more detail. It was demonstrated that RA
initially contribute to the regulation of tendon progenitors, with
mESCs undergoing neural differentiation when RA signaling is
activated, while differentiating into tendon progenitors of
paraxial mesoderm when RA signaling is inhibited (Kaji et al.,
2021).
RA
further
regulates
tendon
progenitor
cells,
differentiating into the tenogenic lineage when RA signaling is
activated, with reverse differentiation into ﬁbrocartilage (Kaji
et al., 2021). Besides, it was found that the variations of
retinoids concentration in endogenous local region promoted
the formation of tendon condensations and attachment sites
within the extraocular area (Comai et al., 2020). However, RA
inhibition
experiments
leads
to
defects
in
muscle
belly
segmentation and myotendinous junction formation of avian
limb (Rodriguez-Guzman et al., 2007).
2.3.2 Mechanical Stimulation
The complex mechanical/physical environment that embryonic
tendon cells experience will affect their later tissues stiffness and
dynamic load. These physical signals also positively contribute to
the tenogenic process in embryo. Initially, studies demonstrated a
phenotype of reduction in tendon size and degeneration of
tendon matrix in a motionless condition of paralysis chick
embryo,
as
well
as
decreased
expression
of
tenascin-C
(Germiller et al., 1998; Mikic et al., 2000). With the deﬁciency
of skeletal muscle, early tenogenic induction and progenitor
differentiation are not affected in chicks, but the subsequent
process of tendon development will not take place (Kieny and
Chevallier, 1979; Kardon, 1998). These results indicate that the
presence of muscles may serve as the inducer of mechanical
stimulation, or secretor of soluble factors, or both. Subsequently,
some studies in vitro and in vivo have shown that developed
tendons can exhibit better phenotypes when subjected to certain
mechanical stimuli, including up-regulated tenogenic genes (e.g.,
scleraxis, Tnmd, tenascin-C, collagen types I and III) (Kuo and
Tuan, 2008; Xu et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2012; Zhang and Wang,
2013) and increased matrix production or increased collagen
ﬁbril size and physical properties (Kalson et al., 2011). These
stimuli can be quasi-static variable, coded loading, or shear
strains. Notably, Scx is mainly upregulated by tension rather
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
9
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
than compression force among various kinds of mechanical
stimulations (Takimoto et al., 2015).
This phenomenon of tendon sensitivity to mechanical
stimulation is also closely related to TGF-β/Smad2/3 and FGF/
ERK MAPK signaling pathways, which are currently considered
to be downstream signals of mechanical stimulation. It has been
shown that mechanical stimulations activate the TGF-β/SMAD2/
3 pathway to regulate Scx expression in vitro (Maeda et al., 2011).
While FGF4 functions to counteract the decreased Scx in chick
limbs that lack mechanical stimulation during development.
Recent
research
has
further
supported
this
view,
in
immobilised chick limbs, FGF4 activates Scx expression, while
TGFβ2 maintains Scx, Tnmd and Thbs2 expression (Havis et al.,
2016). Egr1 may be an intermediate-mediated factor. It has been
established that Egr1 is able to be activated by shear stress, and
subsequent studies have proven the effects of Egr1 on tendon
development as mentioned above. More direct evidence has been
discovered in some 3D-engineered tendons models that Egr1 as
the downstream of mechanical signals to control tendon gene
expression (Yang et al., 2019; Herchenhan et al., 2020). Because
the down-regulation of Egr1 is concomitant with the down-
regulation of Tgfb2 genes (Gaut et al., 2016) and Egr1 is
directly bound to Tgfb2 promoter regions (Guerquin et al.,
2013), researchers came up with the opinion that Egr1 can
activate Tgfb2 as a downstream signal of physical mechanical
stimulations, and in turn regulate tenogenic genes later (Havis
and Duprez, 2020).
Mechanosensing and mechanotransduction mechanisms
in embryonic tenocytes emerges through direct cell-to-cell
connections (Banes et al., 1999; Richardson et al., 2007) (e.g.,
cadherins and gap junctions) or cell-to- ECM adhesion
molecules
(Schwartz,
2010)
(e.g.,
integrins).
Cell
cytoskeletal
components
in
the
downstream
(e.g.,
nonmuscle myosin II (NMMII) heavy chain proteins and
actin) may also take effect in the mechanical environment
(Clark et al., 2007).
In
summary,
several
known
signaling
pathways
and
transcription factors work together to regulate various stages
of tendon development. Even though the relationships and
functions of these transcription factors are unclear and they
cannot be connected into a complete pathway at present, the
upstream and downstream relationships among some factors are
relatively clear (Figure 3). Research in this area is still ongoing.
3 THE FORMATION AND DEVELOPMENT
OF TENDON-BONE INTERFACE
The multilayered structure of the enthesis originate at the ends of
the tendon and bone during the tenogenic process, composed of
tendon, ﬁbrocartilage, calciﬁed ﬁbrocartilage and bone. Under
the regulation of TGFβ signaling, the ﬁbrocartilage primordium
forms after tendon tissue and before the bone tissue and a
contiguous area of progenitors expressing both Scx and Sox9
(Scx+/Sox9+) are induced with an unknown mechanism (Blitz
et al., 2013). As embryo develops, these progenitors which are
closed to the tendon differentiate into Scx+ tenocytes, whereas
those closed to the end of bone eliminate the Scx expression and
become only Sox9 positive chondrocytes, and the middle region
consists of cells that express Scx or express Sox9 in a regular order
(Akiyama et al., 2005; Soeda et al., 2010; Sugimoto et al., 2013).
During this process, Bmp4, which derived from Scx+ cells,
promotes the progenitors to differentiate towards chondrocytes
(Blitz et al., 2009). Those chondrocytes originated from Scx+/
Sox9+ progenitor partly go through endochondral ossiﬁcation
process to form the bone tissue layer of mature enthesis. In
terminal embryo, Gli1 positive cells are present at the immature
tendon-bone interface to produce connective matrix and
FIGURE 3 | Regulation of tendon development in embryogenesis. Scleraxis (Scx) is the ﬁrst signaling molecule implicated in tendon progenitor cell initiation,
whereas Mohawk (Mkx) and early growth response 1 and 2 (Egr1, Erg2) are secondary signals for tendon differentiation and maturation. Thrombospondins (Thbs) and
tenomodulin (Tnmd) are upstream factors which regulate collagen and matrix. FGF, TGFβ and Wnt signaling pathways regulate the induction of Scx. GDF5,6,7,8,
mTORC1 and Wnta3 regulate the upstream transcription factors. Mechanical stimulation is involved in regulation via the TGFβ and FGF signaling pathway. Notably,
the effects of FGF on chicken embryo and mouse embryo appear to be opposite. Mesenchymal progenitors are maintained by ectodermal Wnts and repressed by
mesenchymal Wnts.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
10
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
structure, thus promoting the development of enthesis (Dyment
et al., 2015; Schwartz et al., 2015; Felsenthal et al., 2018). In the
area of craniofacial complex, it was also demonstrated that the
Scx+/Sox9+ progenitors and consequently differentiated cells
function together to the forming of tendon-bone interface sites
and was associated with FGF signal. Elimination of Fgfr2
expression in NCCs-derived progenitors of mandible changes
induction of Scx+/Sox9+ progenitors and intercept Notch-Dll1
signaling
to
induce
their
mistakenly
differentiation
into
chondrocytes (Roberts et al., 2019) (Figure 2).
4 TENDON DEVELOPMENT GUIDANCE
FOR TENDON REPAIR
Up to now, the clinical therapy for tendon injuries generally
includes surgical treatment and conservative treatment, the
former contains sutures, autologous transplantation, artiﬁcial
transplantation,
tendon
to
bone
ﬁxation
and
the
latter
contains physiotherapy, drug injection systemic treatment.
Despite
remarkable
progress
achieved
in
operative
and
rehabilitation treatments, functional recovery remain limited in
dealing with the problems of gap formation, adhesions, and
rupture (Shen et al., 2018), and there is a lack in the intrinsic
regenerative ability to completely recover to the state before
injury (Walia and Huang, 2019). Scientists and clinicians are
working to make tendon repair more optimal and achieve
complete regeneration.
4.1 Tendon Repair Process
As previous research studies have demonstrated, the process of
tendon repair is different in adults and embryos. When a tendon
is damaged at the embryonic stage, it can regenerate in the same
way that tendons develop. However, the scar-associated healing
process occurs in adults (Voleti et al., 2012).
The response to adult tendon injury is composed of three blurred-
deﬁned stages (Hope and Saxby, 2007). The ﬁrst stage, deﬁned as
inﬂammatory stage, spans a couple of days typically. The injured area
is inﬁltrated with erythrocyte, leukocytes, and platelets secreting key
growth factors and endothelial chemoattractants (TGFβ, IGF-I, and
PDGF) (Molloy et al., 2003). Fibrin clots are assembled to guarantee
transitional stiffness, at the same time macrophages phagocytose
necrotic segments, TSPCs migrate to the injured region and are
induced to proliferate, particularly in the endotenon and epitenon
(Gelberman et al., 1991; Molloy et al., 2003). During the next stage,
also appeared as the repair or proliferative stage and starting about
2 days after injury, the character of repair process is abundant of
synthesis activity directed by tenocytes as well as macrophages.
Macrophages synthesize and release growth factors, and induce
cells to recruit towards injury region, and change their role from
phagocytosis to reparation with a couple of days (Leadbetter, 1992).
In the meantime, tenocytes secrete a serious of matrixes consist
mainly of collagen III. But it’s temporary and mechanically inferior
than normal matrix in tendons. At this time, bFGF expressed from
recruited cells like tenocytes, ﬁbroblasts and inﬂammatory cells
reaches
a
peak,
thus
promoting
cellular
proliferation
and
angiogenesis (Chang et al., 1998; Molloy et al., 2003; Bedi et al.,
2012). VEGF is highly expressed as well, synergistically inducing
angiogenesis to offer nutrients, recruited cells, and additional cell
factors to the injured region (Bidder et al., 2000). In the ﬁnal stage,
main activity that happens is a process of remodeling. A great amount
of collagen I begins to be synthesized, and the ECMs deposited
among the injured area become more organized. However, the cell
density and synthetic activity in repaired region are not able to
recover to normal conditions. This stage appears roughly one or
2 months after the injury and persistent for more than 1 year. The
repaired tendon shows scarring phenotype and can never entirely
recover to the natural biomechanical properties before injury
(Leadbetter, 1992) (Figure 4).
4.2 Methods of Improving Tendon Healing
With current established treatment modalities, the natural repair
of tendons is only manifested as imperfect scar repair. Therefore,
researchers have tried to improve tendon repair for decades.
Theoretically there are two ways in which we can alter the
imperfect postnatal healing of tendon. One is to change the
entire process of tendon repair from scratch, so that it is not
scar-associated repair as it is known today in adults, but rather
tendon regeneration at the embryonic stage. This approach is
arguably the most perfect, fundamental solution to the problem,
but it is also the most challenging, and has so far only been
achieved
in
animal
models
through
complex
genetic
manipulation (Paredes et al., 2018). Hence, this approach is a
long way from being applied clinically. Therefore, while carrying
out research on the ﬁrst approach, the second approach to
intervene in the repair process is also the focus of current
research. Therapeutic approaches to improve tendon healing
include biomechanics stimulation, growth factors, biologics
and stem cells (tissue engineering) (Leong et al., 2020).
Biomechanics stimulation involves a battery of conservative
intervene that can be used to promote tendon repair. These
methods include ultrasound, cryotherapy, physical therapy,
and magnetic ﬁelds (Xu et al., 2014; Lu et al., 2016). Many
researchers attempted to enhance tendon healing through
various growth factors that contribute to tendon healing and
development (Liu et al., 2011). The most popular and typical
biologic is platelet-rich plasma (PRP), an autologous blood
product that is obtained by drawing peripheral venous blood
containing concentrated platelets and plasma but removing
erythrocyte (Filardo et al., 2018). MSCs used for restoration of
tissues in vivo had been put forward and carried out since the
early 1990s. Similar methods to promote tendon repair had been
researched since 1993. It is also the one with the best prospects at
the moment (Fu et al., 2019). These four methods are not
exclusive to each other, and a growing number of studies
showed that combining two or more of these can result in
better effects.
4.3 Regulation of Tendon Repair
4.3.1 The Role of Tendon Stem Progenitor Cells in
Tendon Healing
The discovery of TSPCs in tendon tissues that possess tenogenic
differentiation potential and regenerative abilities brings about
brand-new possibility for tendon repair.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
11
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
The initial study to investigate TSPCs suggest that their niche
locate among the tendon collagen fascicles and ECM such as
ﬁbromodulin and biglycan offer a proper environment for them,
which is distinct from other identiﬁed stem cell niches, such as
perivascular niche for neural stem cells, bulge niche for skin stem
cells, and osteoblast niche for hematopoietic stem cells. Besides
conventional markers associated with typical stem cells, TSPCs
express tenogenic markers such as Scx, and express tendon-
related markers Col1a1 and Tnmd, demonstrating a newly
identiﬁed subpopulation of resident tendon cells (Bi et al.,
2007). Later, studies of impaired or overloaded tendon models
revealed that the epitenon serves as another origination of TSPCs
(Dyment et al., 2013; Dyment et al., 2014; Howell et al., 2017).
During mouse development, epitenon cells are observed to
surround tendons after distinct tendons are formed and
express the marker Tppp3 (Staverosky et al., 2009). After birth,
the epitenon can be distinguished from normally differentiated
tenocytes by detection of laminin, platelet derived growth factor
receptor α (PDGFRα), and α-smooth-muscle-actin (αSMA),
which are only expressed in former (Dyment et al., 2013).
Meanwhile, it has been observed that progenitor cells of Prg4
lineage and αSMA lineage are recruited to participate the process
of tendon healing, and that paratenon cells, which is not Scx-
lineage cell under homeostasis, also act to the damage by
expressing tenogenic genes Scx and depositing ECM to ﬁll up
the defect area (Dyment et al., 2013; Dyment et al., 2014). TSPCs
derived from both areas of tendon form tendon-related structures
in vitro and show pluripotency, indicating that tendon tissue
contains two distinct origination of stem cells (Mienaltowski
et al., 2013), corresponding to TSPCs subpopulations derived
from tendon fascicle and epitenon. Latest researches indicated
that perivascular or pericytes cells derived from the surrounding
vascular system might be the third origination of TSPCs. And
they might be the direct origination of TSPCs derived from
epitenon. TSPCs derived from paratenon express high levels of
pericyte and vascular markers like Musashi1 (Msi1), Cd133, and
Endomucin (Emcn) than that in TSPCs derived from tendon
fascicles (Mienaltowski et al., 2013). It has been conﬁrmed that
Scx, Msi1, αSMA, Cd133, and Nes is present in perivascular
TSPCs by immunostaining of the perivascular TSPCs isolated
from human tendon microvessels (Tempfer et al., 2009). A
former study discovered some assertive evidence that TSPCs
can also be explanted from adjoining tissues (Huang et al.,
2021). Besides, a study based on the zebraﬁsh models revealed
that
totally
ablating
tendons
could
be
well-restored
by
progenitors derived from neighboring tissues. Thus, there
exists a group of progenitors serves to coordinate tendon
regeneration at the surrounding cartilage or muscle adhering
area (Niu et al., 2020). This study corroborates evidence that
surrounding tissues might contain the respective progenitor or
stem cell subpopulations of adjacent tissues. In summary, these
results indicates that there might be three or more different
subpopulations of TSPCs.
One study showed that TSPC accounts for about 4% of the
total number of tenocytes (Bi et al., 2007). Normally, TSPCs from
both the epitenon and tendon fascicles are involved in the healing
of tendon, corresponding to the extrinsic and intrinsic response
to tendon injury respectively (Bi et al., 2007). Intrinsic
recruitment of Scx-lineage cells are crucial for regeneration of
tendon, but it only occurs in embryonic and early postnatal
tendons (Howell et al., 2017). While in adult tendons, Scx-
lineage cells undergo abnormal differentiation towards the
chondrogenic lineage rather than directed recruited to injured
area (Howell et al., 2017). During the process of adult tendon
repair, TSPCs from epitenon play a major role. In response for
injury, Tppp3+Pdgfra+ cells will be recruited to the damaged area,
FIGURE 4 | The tendon repair process. The response to adult tendon injury is composed of three blurred-deﬁned stages. The ﬁrst stage, deﬁned as inﬂammatory
stage, spans a couple of days typically. The injured area is inﬁltrated with erythrocyte, leukocytes, and platelets secreting key growth factors and endothelial
chemoattractants. During the next stage, macrophages synthesize and release growth factors, and induce cells to recruit towards injury region, and change their role
from phagocytosis to reparation with a couple of days. In the meantime, tenocytes secrete a serious of matrixes consist mainly of collagen III. At this time, bFGF and
VEGF expressed from recruited cells like tenocytes, ﬁbroblasts and inﬂammatory cells reaches a peak, thus promoting cellular proliferation and angiogenesis. In the ﬁnal
stage, main activity that happens is a process of remodeling. A great amount of collagen I begins to be synthesized, and the ECMs deposited among the injured area
become more organized. However, the cell density and synthetic activity in repaired region are not able to recover to normal conditions. This stage appears roughly one
or two months after the injury and persistent for more than 1 year.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
12
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
in which they differentiate into tenocytes and lose their
pluripotency, to repair and ﬁll up it (Harvey et al., 2019).
Also, ﬁbrosis in the process of tendon healing might occur
due to this subpopulation (Harvey et al., 2019). Inﬂammation
reaction is an important section of the tendon healing and may
ultimately affect repair outcomes. The effects of HIF-2α,
Prostaglandin E2 and IL-1β on TSPCs, promote enhanced
expression of tenogenic genes (Huang et al., 2021). After
inﬂammatory
stimulation,
both
embryonic
and
postnatal
tendon cells exhibit similar tenogenic commitment, but the
latter also expressed up-regulated catabolic enzymes and
inﬂammatory mediators (Li et al., 2019). In summary, TSPCs
serve as the vital cells to migrate to the area of injury, proliferate
and
then
express
tendon-related,
pericyte-related,
and
pluripotent markers to regulate the process of tendon healing
and remodeling (Huang et al., 2021). TSPCs from the tendon
proper participate in healing of embryonic and early postnatal
tendons, contributing to the complete regeneration of embryonic
and early postnatal tendons. While TSPCs from epitenon
contribute to ﬁbrosis during healing of adult tendons.
4.3.2 Signaling Pathways
4.3.2.1 Factors Implicated in Both Development and Repair
In addition to playing a key role in tendon development and tenocyte
differentiation, TGFβ is also a known inducer of ﬁbrotic scar
formation various tissues, containing adult tendons (Katzel et al.,
2011; Thomopoulos et al., 2015). It is well established that TGFβ drive
the myoﬁbroblast differentiation and exceeding TGFβ ligand released
after injury can also induce the apoptosis of tenocyte (Maeda et al.,
2011). Given these conﬂicting effects of TGFβ signaling in tendon
development and scarring, the direct role of TGFβ signaling during
tendon regeneration is remain unknown. There has been a lot of
research trying to resolve this ambiguity (Kaji et al., 2020). For
example, Kaji et al. (2020) studied TGFβ-dependent and TGFβ-
independent processes involved in neonatal tendon regeneration
respectively. It was found that early proliferation of Scx+-lineage
tenocytes and activation of aSMA+ cells do not depend on TGFβ
signaling.
However,
proliferation
of
Scx−-lineage
cells,
and
subsequent tenogenic cells recruitment (composed of both Scx+-
lineage and Scx−-lineage cell sources), as well as functional recovery
depended on TGFβ signaling (Kaji et al., 2020). Additionally, it was
also indicated that the application of TGF-b3 to tendon cells up-
regulated the expression of Smad7and down-regulated the expression
of Smad3, consequently minimized extrinsic scarring and decreased
tendon adhesion to improve tendon repair (Jiang et al., 2016), which
was consistent with another study that showed inhibition of Smad3
improved the healing process in a rotator cuff injury model (Wang
et al., 2021).
FGF is also the signal that participates in both tendon
development and repair. It has been reported that FGF-2 and
platelet-derived
growth
factors
(PDGF-BB)
combined
application tocanine ﬂexor tendon ﬁbroblasts can signiﬁcantly
promote the process of collagen production and cell proliferation
and (Thomopoulos et al., 2005). Low concentration of FGF-2
induces a continuous response process of human BMSCs, during
which cell proliferation was signiﬁcantly activated in the early
phase and cell differentiation was stimulated in the late phase
(Hankemeier et al., 2005). The differentiation towards tendon
lineage cells of MSCs is also promoted by the delivery of FGF-2
through various scaffolds (Sahoo et al., 2010; Ker et al., 2011).
During the healing of rat rotator cuff, the models treated by FGF-
2 demonstrated remarkably heightened histological appearance
and biomechanical strength. In addition, FGF-2 contribute to
healing of enthesis via promote tendon stem/progenitor cells
proliferation, thus bringing about a better recovery of the healing
rotator cuff (Tokunaga et al., 2015).
In summary, these signals contribute to both tendon
development and repair, although the speciﬁc effect is not
completely the same. These differences may be caused by
differences in ligand, environment, cell type and other factors,
which need further research.
4.3.2.2 Factors Involved Only in Repair
Besides the above two growth factor signaling pathways, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), insulin-like growth factor-1
(IGF1), connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), and platelet-
derived growth factor (PDGF) are also crucial factors in tendon
repair. In several conditions, these growth factors also regulate the
expression of tendon-related gene in vitro, although these effect
for tendon biology are not completely proved in vivo. The
application of CTGF can recruit a TSPC subpopulation with
CD146 positive and stimulate both proliferation and tenogenic
differentiation (Lee et al., 2015). IGF-1 serves to induce ECM
production and recruit ﬁbroblasts to the wound region, while
PDGF strengthens translation and transcription processes,
thereby up-regulating expression of other involved growth
factors. High expression of VEGF stimulates angiogenesis to
provide nutrients, extrinsic cells, and additional growth factors
to the injury region (Molloy et al., 2003; Leong et al., 2020). In
summary, these factors mainly mediate the initial inﬂammatory
response and cell chemokines of the early stage of injury, and
work synergistically to initiate the healing process.
4.3.3 Transcription Factors and Relative Speciﬁc
Proteins
As one of the most important transcription factors in tendon
development,
Scx
also
contribute
to
tendon
repair
and
regeneration. Expression of Scx in progenitors is initially
induced by TGF-β signaling. In the case of normal injury,
progenitor cells from the paratenon or other region migrate to
the site of injury in order to respond to repair. However, in Scx-
deﬁcient mouse, it was indicated that progenitors migrated to the
wound area but failed to bridge the defect because of the destroyed
ECM assembly. Mechanistically, Scx-deﬁcient progenitors show
much more chondrogenic potential with up-regulation of Sox9
coactivator
PPAR-γ
coactivator-1α
(PGC-1α)
than
normal
progenitors, and analysis based on knock-in models reveals that
the Sox9 is remarkably suppressed by forced expression of full-
length Scx. Accordingly, Scx-deﬁcient mouse models form
cartilage-like tissues that develop ectopic ossiﬁcation in wound
area (Sakabe et al., 2018). In another study, Scx shows crucial
effects in adult tendon response for mechanical loading. It is
demonstrated that after supraphysiological overload of the
plantaris tendons, the cross-sectional area of neotendons in Scx-
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
13
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
null mice was smaller than that in control mice. And it was also
demonstrated that the ability of CD146+ pericytes to differentiate
into tenocytes was reduced in Scx-null mice (Gumucio et al., 2020).
In addition, there are studies that have reported mesenchymal stem
cells genetically modiﬁed with Scx could express more tendon-
related genes and less osteo- and adipose-related genes (Alberton
et al., 2012), which improved regeneration in an animal model of
rotator cuff injury (Gulotta et al., 2011).
It had been indicated that S100 calcium-binding protein A4
(S100a4) marks a subset of tendon cells and is a inducer of
tendon scarring. Besides, adult Scx−lineage cells reside in the area
that will become scar tissue and are assembled into a cellular bridge
during tendon healing. In addition, it has been demonstrated that
S100a4 and Scx are expressed by different populations of tendon
tissue during the condition of healing and homeostasis, with Scx
being expressed in the organized bridging tissue but S100a4 located
throughout the whole scar area (Best and Loiselle, 2019).
Mechanistically, S100a4 drives ﬁbrotic tendon healing primarily
through
a
cellular
dependent
process,
with
S100a4
haploinsufﬁciency
decreasing
myoﬁbroblast
and
macrophage
numbers at the site of injury, thus promoting regenerative tendon
healing (Ackerman et al., 2019a).
The role of Egr1 in tendon regeneration was ﬁrst investigated in a
stem cell study (C3H10T1/2 stem cells) in which forced Egr1
expression resulted in the commitment of MSCs to tendon
differentiation via activated expression of Scx, Col1a1, Col1a2 and
other collagens and molecules that make up ECMs of tendon tissue.
As Scx, the activation of Egr1 suppresses the differentiation of MSCs
towards the osteogenic or adipogenic lineages (Guerquin et al., 2013).
Biglycan (Bgn) has been identiﬁed as one of the critical constituent
parts of the TSPCs niche and might have relation to tendon
development. At a proper concentration, Bgn promotes the
expression of the tendon-related markers Thbs-4 and Tnmd
through both the transcription and translation process. At the
meantime,
it
inhibits
the
expression
of
osteogenic
and
chondrogenic markers Acn, Runx2, and Sox9. These are achieved
through the BMP7/Smad1/5/8 pathway pathways (Zhang et al., 2019).
Tnmd is crucial for prevention of ﬁbrovascular scar formation and
adipocyte accumulation during early stage of tendon repair. A study
showed that scar tissue in Tnmd-null tendon contained ﬁbronectin,
cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (Comp), and augmented matrix
sedimentation of biglycan, with altered proﬁle of macrophage and
reduced amount of CD146-positive cells. Additionally, Tnmd-null
TSPCs exhibits excessive adipogenic differentiation accompanied
with signiﬁcantly increased transcription level of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (Pparγ) and lipoprotein
lipase (Lpl) (Lin et al., 2017).
In summary, many factors involved in tendon development
are increasingly being indicated to participate in tendon repair
and regeneration, although they take effect at different stages.
5 CONCLUSION
To date, research studies on tendons have been more and more
comprehensive and rigorous. We have a general idea of how tendons
develop in animal models. The relationships and differences between
tendon repair and development have also been recognized. We are
always convinced that the understanding of tendon development will
provide us a basis for the development of more effective and scientiﬁc
treatments of tendon injury. Thus, more speciﬁc aspects of tendon
development still require exploration. From the earliest discovery of
SCX as a marker gene of connective tissue such as tendon, to the
discovery of syndetome, the source of trunk tendon, we still cannot
plot a complete signaling network, even though we have elucidated a
variety of signaling pathways and factors that regulate the
development
of
tendon
tissue.
Because
the
upstream
and
downstream relationships of some transcription factors have not
yet been identiﬁed, it is uncertain whether there are still signaling
molecules involved in tenogenesis that have not yet discovered. For
example, EGR1 is regarded as the downstream gene of SCX. However,
when the effect of Egr1 is inhibited, the expression of Scx is also
affected. The current explanation is that Egr1 affects Scx expression by
regulating the ligand of TGFβ, but other possibilities may exist. In
addition, certain signals exert opposite effects in different animal
models. For example, as mentioned earlier, the FGF signaling pathway
play distinct roles in limb tendon development within the mouse and
chick models. More research studies are needed to carried out to
understand the role of the FGF/ERK pathway in tendon development.
Understanding the process of tendon repair and regeneration is
just as important as understanding the process of tendon
development. At present, the problem is that the repair of adult
tendons can only achieve scar-associated repair with limited
functional recovery, but not optimal repair like that of embryonic
tendons. Although some animal models have exhibited self-
regeneration of adult tendon, the process and technology are
complex and challenging. Therefore, the focus of current research
is still how to intervene during the repair process of tendon to achieve
the possibility of tendon regeneration. Through the comparison of
tendon development and repair mentioned above, we can ﬁnd that
there are many similarities and some obvious differences between
these two processes. Thus, at a macro level these are really two similar
physiological processes, but the difference in the key factors leads to
the difference in their outcomes. On the one hand, it is vital to
discover these regulatory factors, because only in this way can the
fundamental regulation guide the development of tendon repair to a
more perfect direction. Researchers have made some progress in this
area. On the other hand, how to efﬁciently operate these regulatory
factors is also a problem that needs to be faced in the future. Ethic,
cost and practicability must be considered when applying these
results to humans. With advances in stem cell and tissue
engineering technology, coupled with studies of regulatory signals
from tendon development, this goal is gradually being achieved
(Ekwueme et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2016; Veronesi et al., 2017).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
PH and DR are responsible for writing and revising review,
including the idea and content of the whole review. ZH, CW,
YF, HC, YX, and HL are responsible for the collation and collection
of data. WC and WS are responsible for reviewing and checking
review and responding to queries. BCH is responsible for the
modiﬁcation of grammar and the drafting of the work.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
14
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
REFERENCES
Abzhanov, A., Tzahor, E., Lassar, A. B., and Tabin, C. J. (2003). Dissimilar
Regulation of Cell Differentiation in Mesencephalic (Cranial)and Sacral
(Trunk) Neural Crest Cells In Vitro. Development 130 (19), 4567–4579.
doi:10.1242/dev.00673
Ackerman, J. E., Nichols, A. E., Studentsova, V., Best, K. T., Knapp, E., and Loiselle,
A. E. (2019a). Cell Non-autonomous Functions of S100a4 Drive Fibrotic
Tendon Healing. Elife 8, e45342. doi:10.7554/eLife.45342
Ackerman, J. E., Studentsova, V., Myers, M., Buckley, M. R., Richards, M. S., and
Loiselle, A. E. (2019b). Non-Invasive Ultrasound Quantiﬁcation of Scar Tissue
Volume Identiﬁes Early Functional Changes during Tendon Healing. J. Orthop.
Res. 37 (11), 2476–2485. doi:10.1002/jor.24397
Akiyama, H., Chaboissier, M.-C., Martin, J. F., Schedl, A., and de
Crombrugghe, B. (2002). The Transcription Factor Sox9 Has Essential
Roles in Successive Steps of the Chondrocyte Differentiation Pathway and
Is Required for Expression of Sox5 and Sox6. Genes Dev. 16 (21),
2813–2828. doi:10.1101/gad.1017802
Akiyama , H., Kim , J.-E., Nakashima, K., Balmes, G., Iwai, N., Deng, J. M., et al.
(2005). Osteo-chondroprogenitor Cells Are Derived from Sox9 Expressing
Precursors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 102 (41), 14665–14670. doi:10.1073/pnas.
0504750102
Alberton, P., Dex, S., Popov, C., Shukunami, C., Schieker, M., and Docheva, D.
(2015). Loss of Tenomodulin Results in Reduced Self-Renewal and Augmented
Senescence of Tendon Stem/progenitor Cells. Stem Cell Development 24 (5),
597–609. doi:10.1089/scd.2014.0314
Alberton, P., Popov, C., Prägert, M., Kohler, J., Shukunami, C., Schieker, M., et al.
(2012). Conversion of Human Bone Marrow-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells
into Tendon Progenitor Cells by Ectopic Expression of Scleraxis. Stem Cell
Development 21 (6), 846–858. doi:10.1089/scd.2011.0150
Anderson, D. M., Arredondo, J., Hahn, K., Valente, G., Martin, J. F., Wilson-Rawls,
J., et al. (2006). Mohawkis a Novel Homeobox Gene Expressed in the
Developing Mouse Embryo. Dev. Dyn. 235 (3), 792–801. doi:10.1002/dvdy.
20671
Aoto, K., Shikata, Y., Imai, H., Matsumaru, D., Tokunaga, T., Shioda, S., et al.
(2009). Mouse Shh Is Required for Prechordal Plate Maintenance during Brain
and Craniofacial Morphogenesis. Developmental Biol. 327 (1), 106–120. doi:10.
1016/j.ydbio.2008.11.022
Arnold, S. J., and Robertson, E. J. (2009). Making a Commitment: Cell Lineage
Allocation and axis Patterning in the Early Mouse Embryo. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cel
Biol 10 (2), 91–103. doi:10.1038/nrm2618
Asahara, H., Inui, M., and Lotz, M. K. (2017). Tendons and Ligaments: Connecting
Developmental Biology to Musculoskeletal Disease Pathogenesis. J. Bone Miner
Res. 32 (9), 1773–1782. doi:10.1002/jbmr.3199
Banes, A. J., Weinhold, P., Yang, X., Tsuzaki, M., Bynum, D., Bottlang, M., et al.
(1999). Gap Junctions Regulate Responses of Tendon Cells Ex Vivo to
Mechanical
Loading.
Clin.
Orthopaedics
Relat.
Res.
367
(Suppl.
l),
S356–S370. doi:10.1097/00003086-199910001-00034
Becker, S., Pasca, G., Strumpf, D., Min, L., and Volk, T. (1997). Reciprocal Signaling
between
Drosophila
Epidermal
Muscle
Attachment
Cells
and
Their
Corresponding Muscles. Development 124 (13), 2615–2622. doi:10.1242/dev.
124.13.2615
Beddington, R. S. P., and Robertson, E. J. (1999). Axis Development and Early
Asymmetry in Mammals. Cell 96 (2), 195–209. doi:10.1016/s0092-8674(00)
80560-7
Bedi, A., Maak, T., Walsh, C., Rodeo, S. A., Grande, D., Dines, D. M., et al. (2012).
Cytokines in Rotator Cuff Degeneration and Repair. J. Shoulder Elbow Surg. 21
(2), 218–227. doi:10.1016/j.jse.2011.09.020
Ben-Sahra, I., and Manning, B. D. (2017). mTORC1 Signaling and the Metabolic
Control of Cell Growth. Curr. Opin. Cel Biol. 45, 72–82. doi:10.1016/j.ceb.2017.
02.012
Benjamin, M., and Ralphs, J. R. (1997). Tendons and Ligaments-Aan Overview.
Histol. Histopathol 12 (4), 1135–1144.
Benjamin, M., Rufai, A., and Ralphs, J. R. (2000). The Mechanism of Formation of
Bony Spurs (Enthesophytes) in the Achilles Tendon. Arthritis Rheum. 43 (3),
576–583. doi:10.1002/1529-0131(200003)43:3<576::aid-anr14>3.0.co;2-a
Berthet, E., Chen, C., Butcher, K., Schneider, R. A., Alliston, T., and Amirtharajah,
M. (2013). Smad3 Binds Scleraxis and Mohawk and Regulates Tendon Matrix
Organization. J. Orthop. Res. 31 (9), 1475–1483. doi:10.1002/jor.22382
Best, K. T., and Loiselle, A. E. (2019). Scleraxis Lineage Cells Contribute to
Organized
Bridging
Tissue
during
Tendon
Healing
and
Identify
a
Subpopulation of Resident Tendon Cells. FASEB j. 33 (7), 8578–8587.
doi:10.1096/fj.201900130RR
Bhatt, S., Diaz, R., and Trainor, P. A. (2013). Signals and Switches in Mammalian
Neural Crest Cell Differentiation. Cold Spring Harbor Perspect. Biol. 5 (2),
a008326. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a008326
Bi, Y., Ehirchiou, D., Kilts, T. M., Inkson, C. A., Embree, M. C., Sonoyama, W., et al.
(2007). Identiﬁcation of Tendon Stem/progenitor Cells and the Role of the
Extracellular Matrix in Their Niche. Nat. Med. 13 (10), 1219–1227. doi:10.1038/
nm1630
Bidder, M., Towler, D. A., Gelberman, R. H., and Boyer, M. I. (2000). Expression of
mRNA for Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor at the Repair Site of Healing
Canine Flexor Tendon. J. Orthop. Res. 18 (2), 247–252. doi:10.1002/jor.
1100180212
Blitz, E., Sharir, A., Akiyama, H., and Zelzer, E. (2013). Tendon-bone Attachment
Unit Is Formed Modularly by a Distinct Pool of Scx- and Sox9-Positive
Progenitors. Development 140 (13), 2680–2690. doi:10.1242/dev.093906
Blitz, E., Viukov, S., Sharir, A., Shwartz, Y., Galloway, J. L., Pryce, B. A., et al. (2009).
Bone ridge Patterning during Musculoskeletal Assembly Is Mediated through
SCX Regulation of Bmp4 at the Tendon-Skeleton junction. Developmental Cel
17 (6), 861–873. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2009.10.010
Borycki, A. G., and Emerson, C. P., Jr. (2000). Multiple Tissue Interactions and
Signal Transduction Pathways Control Somite Myogenesis. Curr. Top. Dev.
Biol. 48, 165–224. doi:10.1016/s0070-2153(08)60757-7
Brand-Saberi, B., and Christ, B. (2000). Evolution and Development of Distinct
Cell Lineages Derived from Somites. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 48, 1–42. doi:10.1016/
s0070-2153(08)60753-x
Brandau, O., Meindl, A., Fässler, R., and Aszódi, A. (2001). A Novel Gene,tendin, Is
Strongly Expressed in Tendons and Ligaments and Shows High Homology with
Chondromodulin-I. Dev. Dyn. 221 (1), 72–80. doi:10.1002/dvdy.1126
Brent, A. E., Braun, T., and Tabin, C. J. (2005). Genetic Analysis of Interactions
between the Somitic Muscle, Cartilage and Tendon Cell Lineages during Mouse
Development. Development 132 (3), 515–528. doi:10.1242/dev.01605
Brent, A. E., Schweitzer, R., and Tabin, C. J. (2003). A Somitic Compartment of
Tendon Progenitors. Cell 113 (2), 235–248. doi:10.1016/s0092-8674(03)
00268-x
Brito, J. M., Teillet, M.-A., and Le Douarin, N. M. (2008). Induction of Mirror-
Image Supernumerary Jaws in Chicken Mandibular Mesenchyme by Sonic
Hedgehog-Producing Cells. Development 135 (13), 2311–2319. doi:10.1242/
dev.019125
Calloni, G. W., Le Douarin, N. M., and Dupin, E. (2009). High Frequency of
Cephalic Neural Crest Cells Shows Coexistence of Neurogenic, Melanogenic,
and Osteogenic Differentiation Capacities. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 106 (22),
8947–8952. doi:10.1073/pnas.0903780106
Chang, J., Most, D., Thunder, R., Mehrara, B., Longaker, M. T., and Lineaweaver,
W. C. (1998). Molecular Studies in Flexor Tendon Wound Healing: the Role of
Basic Fibroblast Growth Factor Gene Expression. J. Hand Surg. 23 (6),
1052–1058. doi:10.1016/s0363-5023(98)80015-4
Chen, J. W., and Galloway, J. L. (2014). The Development of Zebraﬁsh Tendon and
Ligament Progenitors. Development 141 (10), 2035–2045. doi:10.1242/dev.
104067
Clark, K., Langeslag, M., Figdor, C. G., and van Leeuwen, F. N. (2007). Myosin II
and Mechanotransduction: a Balancing Act. Trends Cel Biol. 17 (4), 178–186.
doi:10.1016/j.tcb.2007.02.002
Comai, G. E., Tesařová, M., Dupé, V., Rhinn, M., Vallecillo-García, P., da Silva, F.,
et al. (2020). Local Retinoic Acid Signaling Directs Emergence of the
Extraocular Muscle Functional Unit. Plos Biol. 18 (11), e3000902. doi:10.
1371/journal.pbio.3000902
Cong, X. X., Rao, X. S., Lin, J. X., Liu, X. C., Zhang, G. A., Gao, X. K., et al. (2018).
Activation of AKT-mTOR Signaling Directs Tenogenesis of Mesenchymal
Stem Cells. Stem Cells 36 (4), 527–539. doi:10.1002/stem.2765
Couly, G., Creuzet, S., Bennaceur, S., Vincent, C., and Le Douarin, N. M. (2002).
Interactions between Hox-Negative Cephalic Neural Crest Cells and the
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
15
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
Foregut Endoderm in Patterning the Facial Skeleton in the Vertebrate Head.
Development 129 (4), 1061–1073. doi:10.1242/dev.129.4.1061
Crane, J. F., and Trainor, P. A. (2006). Neural Crest Stem and Progenitor Cells.
Annu. Rev. Cel Dev. Biol. 22, 267–286. doi:10.1146/annurev.cellbio.22.010305.
103814
Cserjesi, P., Brown, D., Ligon, K. L., Lyons, G. E., Copeland, N. G., Gilbert, D. J.,
et al. (1995). Scleraxis: a Basic helix-loop-helix Protein that Preﬁgures Skeletal
Formation during Mouse Embryogenesis. Development 121 (4), 1099–1110.
doi:10.1242/dev.121.4.1099
Delﬁni, M.-C., and Duprez, D. (2004). Ectopic Myf5 or MyoD Prevents the
Neuronal Differentiation Program in Addition to Inducing Skeletal Muscle
Differentiation, in the Chick Neural Tube. Development 131 (4), 713–723.
doi:10.1242/dev.00967
Dines, J. S., Cross, M. B., Dines, D., Pantazopoulos, C., Kim, H. J., Razzano, P., et al.
(2011). In Vitroanalysis of an rhGDF-5 Suture Coating Process and the Effects
of rhGDF-5 on Rat Tendon Fibroblasts. Growth Factors 29 (1), 1–7. doi:10.
3109/08977194.2010.526605
Docheva, D., Hunziker, E. B., Fa€ssler, R., and Brandau, O. (2005). Tenomodulin Is
Necessary for Tenocyte Proliferation and Tendon Maturation. Mol. Cel Biol 25
(2), 699–705. doi:10.1128/mcb.25.2.699-705.2005
Dyment, N. A., Breidenbach, A. P., Schwartz, A. G., Russell, R. P.,
Aschbacher-Smith, L., Liu, H., et al. (2015). Gdf5 Progenitors Give Rise
to Fibrocartilage Cells that Mineralize via Hedgehog Signaling to Form the
Zonal Enthesis. Developmental Biol. 405 (1), 96–107. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.
2015.06.020
Dyment, N. A., Hagiwara, Y., Matthews, B. G., Li, Y., Kalajzic, I., and Rowe, D. W.
(2014). Lineage Tracing of Resident Tendon Progenitor Cells during Growth
and Natural Healing. PLoS One 9 (4), e96113. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0096113
Dyment, N. A., Kazemi, N., Aschbacher-Smith, L. E., Barthelery, N. J., Kenter, K.,
Gooch, C., et al. (2012). The Relationships Among Spatiotemporal Collagen
Gene Expression, Histology, and Biomechanics Following Full-Length Injury in
the Murine Patellar Tendon. J. Orthop. Res. 30 (1), 28–36. doi:10.1002/jor.21484
Dyment, N. A., Liu, C.-F., Kazemi, N., Aschbacher-Smith, L. E., Kenter, K.,
Breidenbach, A. P., et al. (2013). The Paratenon Contributes to Scleraxis-
Expressing Cells during Patellar Tendon Healing. PLoS One 8 (3), e59944.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0059944
Edom-Vovard, F. d. r., and Duprez, D. (2004). Signals Regulating Tendon
Formation during Chick Embryonic Development. Dev. Dyn. 229 (3),
449–457. doi:10.1002/dvdy.10481
Edom-Vovard, F., Schuler, B., Bonnin, M.-A., Teillet, M.-A., and Duprez, D.
(2002). Fgf4 Positively Regulates Scleraxis and Tenascin Expression in Chick
Limb Tendons. Developmental Biol. 247 (2), 351–366. doi:10.1006/dbio.2002.
0707
Ekwueme, E. C., Shah, J. V., Mohiuddin, M., Ghebes, C. A., Crispim, J. F., Saris, D.
B. F., et al. (2016). Cross-Talk between Human Tenocytes and Bone Marrow
Stromal Cells Potentiates Extracellular Matrix Remodeling In Vitro. J. Cel.
Biochem. 117 (3), 684–693. doi:10.1002/jcb.25353
Felsenthal, N., Rubin, S., Stern, T., Krief, S., Pal, D., Pryce, B. A., et al. (2018).
Development of Migrating Tendon-Bone Attachments Involves Replacement
of Progenitor Populations. Development 145 (24), dev165381. doi:10.1242/dev.
165381
Filardo, G., Di Matteo, B., Kon, E., Merli, G., and Marcacci, M. (2018). Platelet-rich
Plasma in Tendon-Related Disorders: Results and Indications. Knee Surg.
Sports Traumatol. Arthrosc. 26 (7), 1984–1999. doi:10.1007/s00167-016-
4261-4
Frolova, E. G., Drazba, J., Krukovets, I., Kostenko, V., Blech, L., Harry, C., et al.
(2014). Control of Organization and Function of Muscle and Tendon by
Thrombospondin-4. Matrix Biol. 37, 35–48. doi:10.1016/j.matbio.2014.02.003
Fu, X., Liu, G., Halim, A., Ju, Y., Luo, Q., and Song, A. G. (2019). Mesenchymal
Stem Cell Migration and Tissue Repair. Cells 8 (8), 784. doi:10.3390/
cells8080784
Furumatsu, T., Shukunami, C., Amemiya-Kudo, M., Shimano, H., and Ozaki, T.
(2010). Scleraxis and E47 Cooperatively Regulate the Sox9-dependent
Transcription. Int. J. Biochem. Cel Biol. 42 (1), 148–156. doi:10.1016/j.biocel.
2009.10.003
Gañan, Y., Macias, D., Duterque-Coquillaud, M., Ros, M. A., and Hurle, J. M.
(1996). Role of TGF Beta S and BMPs as Signals Controlling the Position of the
Digits and the Areas of Interdigital Cell Death in the Developing Chick Limb
Autopod. Development 122 (8), 2349–2357. doi:10.1242/dev.122.8.2349
Garcia-Lee, V., Díaz-Hernandez, M. E., and Chimal-Monroy, J. (2021). Inhibition
of WNT/β-catenin Is Necessary and Sufﬁcient to Induce Scx Expression in
Developing Tendons of Chicken Limb. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 65 (4-5-6), 395–401.
doi:10.1387/ijdb.200166jc
Gaut, L., Robert, N., Delalande, A., Bonnin, M.-A., Pichon, C., and Duprez, D.
(2016). EGR1 Regulates Transcription Downstream of Mechanical Signals
during Tendon Formation and Healing. PLoS One 11 (11), e0166237.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0166237
Gelberman, R. H., Steinberg, D., Amiel, D., and Akeson, W. (1991). Fibroblast
Chemotaxis after Tendon Repair. J. Hand Surg. 16 (4), 686–693. doi:10.1016/
0363-5023(91)90195-h
Germiller, J. A., Lerner, A. L., Paciﬁco, R. J., Loder, R. T., and Hensinger, R. N.
(1998). Muscle and Tendon Size Relationships in a Paralyzed Chick Embryo
Model of Clubfoot. J. Pediatr. Orthopaedics 18 (3), 314–318. doi:10.1097/
01241398-199805000-00008
Gonçalves, A. I., Gershovich, P. M., Rodrigues, M. T., Reis, R. L., and Gomes, M. E.
(2018). Human Adipose Tissue-derived Tenomodulin Positive Subpopulation
of Stem Cells: A Promising Source of Tendon Progenitor Cells. J. Tissue Eng.
Regen. Med. 12 (3), 762–774. doi:10.1002/term.2495
Gonçalves, A. I., Rodrigues, M. T., and Gomes, M. E. (2017). Tissue-engineered
Magnetic Cell Sheet Patches for Advanced Strategies in Tendon Regeneration.
Acta Biomater. 63, 110–122. doi:10.1016/j.actbio.2017.09.014
Guerquin, M.-J., Charvet, B., Nourissat, G., Havis, E., Ronsin, O., Bonnin, M.-A.,
et al. (2013). Transcription Factor EGR1 Directs Tendon Differentiation and
Promotes Tendon Repair. J. Clin. Invest. 123 (8), 3564–3576. doi:10.1172/
jci67521
Gulotta, L. V., Kovacevic, D., Packer, J. D., Deng, X. H., and Rodeo, S. A. (2011).
Bone Marrow-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells Transduced with Scleraxis
Improve Rotator Cuff Healing in a Rat Model. Am. J. Sports Med. 39 (6),
1282–1289. doi:10.1177/0363546510395485
Gumucio, J. P., Schonk, M. M., Kharaz, Y. A., Comerford, E., and Mendias, C. L.
(2020). Scleraxis Is Required for the Growth of Adult Tendons in Response to
Mechanical Loading. JCI Insight 5 (13), e138295. doi:10.1172/jci.insight.138295
Hankemeier, S., Keus, M., Zeichen, J., Jagodzinski, M., Barkhausen, T., Bosch, U.,
et al. (2005). Modulation of Proliferation and Differentiation of Human Bone
Marrow Stromal Cells by Fibroblast Growth Factor 2: Potential Implications for
Tissue Engineering of Tendons and Ligaments. Tissue Eng. 11 (1-2), 41–49.
doi:10.1089/ten.2005.11.41
Harvey, T., Flamenco, S., and Fan, C.-M. (2019). A Tppp3+Pdgfra+ Tendon Stem
Cell Population Contributes to Regeneration and Reveals a Shared Role for
PDGF Signalling in Regeneration and Fibrosis. Nat. Cel Biol 21 (12),
1490–1503. doi:10.1038/s41556-019-0417-z
Havis, E., Bonnin, M.-A., de Lima, J. E., Charvet, B., Milet, C., and Duprez, D.
(2016). TGFβ and FGF Promote Tendon Progenitor Fate and Act Downstream
of Muscle Contraction to Regulate Tendon Differentiation during Chick Limb
Development. Development 143 (20), 3839–3851. doi:10.1242/dev.136242
Havis, E., Bonnin, M.-A., Olivera-Martinez, I., Nazaret, N., Ruggiu, M., Weibel, J.,
et al. (2014). Transcriptomic Analysis of Mouse Limb Tendon Cells during
Development. Development 141 (19), 3683–3696. doi:10.1242/dev.108654
Havis, E., and Duprez, D. (2020). EGR1 Transcription Factor Is a Multifaceted
Regulator of Matrix Production in Tendons and Other Connective Tissues. Ijms
21 (5), 1664. doi:10.3390/ijms21051664
Herchenhan, A., Dietrich-Zagonel, F., Schjerling, P., Kjær, M., and Eliasson, P.
(2020). Early Growth Response Genes Increases Rapidly after Mechanical
Overloading and Unloading in Tendon Constructs. J. Orthop. Res. 38 (1),
173–181. doi:10.1002/jor.24513
Hope, M., and Saxby, T. S. (2007). Tendon Healing. Foot Ankle Clin. 12 (4),
553–567. doi:10.1016/j.fcl.2007.07.003
Howell, K., Chien, C., Bell, R., Laudier, D., Tufa, S. F., Keene, D. R., et al. (2017).
Novel Model of Tendon Regeneration Reveals Distinct Cell Mechanisms
Underlying Regenerative and Fibrotic Tendon Healing. Sci. Rep. 7, 45238.
doi:10.1038/srep45238
Huang, A. H., Watson, S. S., Wang, L., Baker, B., Akiyama, H., Brigande, J. V., et al.
(2019). Requirement for Scleraxis in the Recruitment of Mesenchymal
Progenitors during Embryonic Tendon Elongation. Development 146 (20),
dev182782. doi:10.1242/dev.182782
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
16
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
Huang, Z., Yin, Z., Xu, J., Fei, Y., Heng, B. C., Jiang, X., et al. (2021). Tendon Stem/
Progenitor Cell Subpopulations and Their Implications in Tendon Biology.
Front. Cel Dev. Biol. 9, 631272. doi:10.3389/fcell.2021.631272
Hubaud, A., and Pourquié, O. (2014). Signalling Dynamics in Vertebrate
Segmentation. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cel Biol 15 (11), 709–721. doi:10.1038/nrm3891
Ito, Y., Toriuchi, N., Yoshitaka, T., Ueno-Kudoh, H., Sato, T., Yokoyama, S., et al. (2010).
The Mohawk Homeobox Gene Is a Critical Regulator of Tendon Differentiation.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107 (23), 10538–10542. doi:10.1073/pnas.1000525107
Jelinsky, S. A., Archambault, J., Li, L., and Seeherman, H. (2010). Tendon-selective
Genes Identiﬁed from Rat and Human Musculoskeletal Tissues. J. Orthop. Res.
28 (3), 289–297. doi:10.1002/jor.20999
Jiang, K., Chun, G., Wang, Z., Du, Q., Wang, A., and Xiong, Y. (2016). Effect of
Transforming Growth Factor-B3 on the Expression of Smad3 and Smad7 in
Tenocytes. Mol. Med. Rep. 13 (4), 3567–3573. doi:10.3892/mmr.2016.4944
John, N., Cinelli, P., Wegner, M., and Sommer, L. (2011). Transforming Growth
Factor β-Mediated Sox10 Suppression Controls Mesenchymal Progenitor
Generation in Neural Crest Stem Cells. Stem Cells 29 (4), 689–699. doi:10.
1002/stem.607
Kaji, D. A., Howell, K. L., Balic, Z., Hubmacher, D., and Huang, A. H. (2020). Tgfβ
Signaling Is Required for Tenocyte Recruitment and Functional Neonatal
Tendon Regeneration. Elife 9, e51779. doi:10.7554/eLife.51779
Kaji, D. A., Montero, A. M., Patel, R., and Huang, A. H. (2021). Transcriptional
Proﬁling of mESC-Derived Tendon and Fibrocartilage Cell Fate Switch. Nat.
Commun. 12 (1), 4208. doi:10.1038/s41467-021-24535-5
Kalson, N. S., Holmes, D. F., Herchenhan, A., Lu, Y., Starborg, T., and Kadler, K. E.
(2011). Slow Stretching that Mimics Embryonic Growth Rate Stimulates
Structural and Mechanical Development of Tendon-like Tissue In Vitro.
Dev. Dyn. 240 (11), 2520–2528. doi:10.1002/dvdy.22760
Kardon, G. (1998). Muscle and Tendon Morphogenesis in the Avian Hind Limb.
Development 125 (20), 4019–4032. doi:10.1242/dev.125.20.4019
Kassar-Duchossoy,
L.,
Gayraud-Morel,
B.,
Gomès,
D.,
Rocancourt,
D.,
Buckingham, M., Shinin, V., et al. (2004). Mrf4 Determines Skeletal Muscle
Identity in Myf5:Myod Double-Mutant Mice. Nature 431 (7007), 466–471.
doi:10.1038/nature02876
Katzel, E. B., Wolenski, M., Loiselle, A. E., Basile, P., Flick, L. M., Langstein, H. N.,
et al. (2011). Impact of Smad3 Loss of Function on Scarring and Adhesion
Formation during Tendon Healing. J. Orthop. Res. 29 (5), 684–693. doi:10.1002/
jor.21235
Ker, E. D. F., Nain, A. S., Weiss, L. E., Wang, J., Suhan, J., Amon, C. H., et al. (2011).
Bioprinting of Growth Factors onto Aligned Sub-micron Fibrous Scaffolds for
Simultaneous Control of Cell Differentiation and Alignment. Biomaterials 32
(32), 8097–8107. doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.07.025
Kieny, M., and Chevallier, A. (1979). Autonomy of Tendon Development in the
Embryonic Chick wing. J. Embryol. Exp. Morphol. 49, 153–165. doi:10.1242/
dev.49.1.153
Kim, J., Lo, L., Dormand, E., and Anderson, D. J. (2003). SOX10 Maintains
Multipotency and Inhibits Neuronal Differentiation of Neural Crest Stem Cells.
Neuron 38 (1), 17–31. doi:10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00163-6
Kimura, W., Machii, M., Xue, X., Sultana, N., Hikosaka, K., Sharkar, M. T. K., et al.
(2011). Irxl1 Mutant Mice Show Reduced Tendon Differentiation and No
Patterning Defects in Musculoskeletal System Development. Genesis 49 (1),
2–9. doi:10.1002/dvg.20688
Kishigami, S., and Mishina, Y. (2005). BMP Signaling and Early Embryonic
Patterning. Cytokine Growth Factor. Rev. 16 (3), 265–278. doi:10.1016/j.
cytogfr.2005.04.002
Kishimoto, Y., Ohkawara, B., Sakai, T., Ito, M., Masuda, A., Ishiguro, N., et al.
(2017). Wnt/β-catenin Signaling Suppresses Expressions of Scx, Mkx, and
Tnmd in Tendon-Derived Cells. PLoS One 12 (7), e0182051. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0182051
Komori, T., Yagi, H., Nomura, S., Yamaguchi, A., Sasaki, K., Deguchi, K., et al.
(1997). Targeted Disruption of Cbfa1 Results in a Complete Lack of Bone
Formation Owing to Maturational Arrest of Osteoblasts. Cell 89 (5), 755–764.
doi:10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80258-5
Kuo, C. K., and Tuan, R. S. (2008). Mechanoactive Tenogenic Differentiation of
Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells. Tissue Eng. A 14 (10), 1615–1627. doi:10.
1089/ten.tea.2006.0415
Leadbetter, W. B. (1992). Cell-matrix Response in Tendon Injury. Clin. Sports Med.
11 (3), 533–578. doi:10.1016/s0278-5919(20)30507-x
Lee, C. H., Lee, F. Y., Tarafder, S., Kao, K., Jun, Y., Yang, G., et al. (2015).
Harnessing Endogenous Stem/progenitor Cells for Tendon Regeneration.
J. Clin. Invest. 125 (7), 2690–2701. doi:10.1172/jci81589
Lee, J. K., Jo, S., Lee, Y. L., Park, H., Song, J.-S., Sung, I.-H., et al. (2020). Anterior
Cruciate Ligament Remnant Cells Have Different Potentials for Cell
Differentiation Based on Their Location. Sci. Rep. 10 (1), 3097. doi:10.1038/
s41598-020-60047-w
Lejard, V., Blais, F., Guerquin, M.-J., Bonnet, A., Bonnin, M.-A., Havis, E., et al.
(2011). EGR1 and EGR2 Involvement in Vertebrate Tendon Differentiation.
J. Biol. Chem. 286 (7), 5855–5867. doi:10.1074/jbc.M110.153106
Leong, N. L., Kator, J. L., Clemens, T. L., James, A., Enamoto-Iwamoto, M., and
Jiang, J. (2020). Tendon and Ligament Healing and Current Approaches to
Tendon and Ligament Regeneration. J. Orthop. Res. 38 (1), 7–12. doi:10.1002/
jor.24475
Levay, A. K., Peacock, J. D., Lu, Y., Koch, M., Hinton, R. B., Jr., Kadler, K. E., et al.
(2008). Scleraxis Is Required for Cell Lineage Differentiation and Extracellular
Matrix Remodeling during Murine Heart Valve Formation In Vivo. Circ. Res.
103 (9), 948–956. doi:10.1161/circresaha.108.177238
Li, J., Stoppato, M., Schiele, N. R., Graybeal, K. L., Nguyen, P. K., and Kuo, C. K.
(2019). Embryonic and Postnatal Tendon Cells Respond Differently to
Interleukin-1β. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1442 (1), 118–127. doi:10.1111/nyas.14013
Li, S., Quarto, N., and Longaker, M. T. (2010). Activation of FGF Signaling
Mediates Proliferative and Osteogenic Differences between Neural Crest
Derived Frontal and Mesoderm Parietal Derived Bone. PLoS One 5 (11),
e14033. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0014033
Lim, J., Munivez, E., Jiang, M.-M., Song, I.-W., Gannon, F., Keene, D. R., et al.
(2017). mTORC1 Signaling Is a Critical Regulator of Postnatal Tendon
Development. Sci. Rep. 7 (1), 17175. doi:10.1038/s41598-017-17384-0
Lin, D., Alberton, P., Caceres, M. D., Volkmer, E., Schieker, M., and Docheva, D.
(2017). Tenomodulin Is Essential for Prevention of Adipocyte Accumulation
and Fibrovascular Scar Formation during Early Tendon Healing. Cell Death Dis
8 (10), e3116. doi:10.1038/cddis.2017.510
Liu, C.-F., Aschbacher-Smith, L., Barthelery, N. J., Dyment, N., Butler, D., and
Wylie, C. (2011). What We Should Know before Using Tissue Engineering
Techniques to Repair Injured Tendons: a Developmental Biology Perspective.
Tissue Eng. B: Rev. 17 (3), 165–176. doi:10.1089/ten.TEB.2010.0662
Liu, H., Xu, J., Lan, Y., Lim, H.-W., and Jiang, R. (2021). The Scleraxis
Transcription Factor Directly Regulates Multiple Distinct Molecular and
Cellular Processes during Early Tendon Cell Differentiation. Front. Cel Dev.
Biol. 9, 654397. doi:10.3389/fcell.2021.654397
Liu, H., Zhu, S., Zhang, C., Lu, P., Hu, J., Yin, Z., et al. (2014). Crucial Transcription
Factors in Tendon Development and Differentiation: Their Potential for
Tendon Regeneration. Cell Tissue Res 356 (2), 287–298. doi:10.1007/s00441-
014-1834-8
Liu, W., Watson, S. S., Lan, Y., Keene, D. R., Ovitt, C. E., Liu, H., et al. (2010). The
Atypical Homeodomain Transcription Factor Mohawk Controls Tendon
Morphogenesis. Mol. Cel Biol 30 (20), 4797–4807. doi:10.1128/mcb.00207-10
Ljungqvist, A., Schwellnus, M. P., Bachl, N., Collins, M., Cook, J., Khan, K. M., et al.
(2008). International Olympic Committee Consensus Statement: Molecular
Basis of Connective Tissue and Muscle Injuries in Sport. Clin. Sports Med. 27
(1), 231–239. doi:10.1016/j.csm.2007.10.007
Lorda-Diez, C. I., Montero, J. A., Martinez-Cue, C., Garcia-Porrero, J. A., and
Hurle, J. M. (2009). Transforming Growth Factors β Coordinate Cartilage and
Tendon Differentiation in the Developing Limb Mesenchyme. J. Biol. Chem.
284 (43), 29988–29996. doi:10.1074/jbc.M109.014811
Lu, H., Chen, C., Qu, J., Chen, H., Chen, Y., Zheng, C., et al. (2016). Initiation
Timing of Low-Intensity Pulsed Ultrasound Stimulation for Tendon-Bone
Healing in a Rabbit Model. Am. J. Sports Med. 44 (10), 2706–2715. doi:10.
1177/0363546516651863
Ma, R. C., Jacobs, C. T., Sharma, P., Kocha, K. M., and Huang, P. (2018).
Stereotypic Generation
of Axial
Tenocytes from Bipartite
Sclerotome
Domains in Zebraﬁsh. Plos Genet. 14 (11), e1007775. doi:10.1371/journal.
pgen.1007775
Maeda, T., Sakabe, T., Sunaga, A., Sakai, K., Rivera, A. L., Keene, D. R., et al. (2011).
Conversion of Mechanical Force into TGF-β-Mediated Biochemical Signals.
Curr. Biol. 21 (11), 933–941. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2011.04.007
McDole, K., Guignard, L., Amat, F., Berger, A., Malandain, G., Royer, L. A., et al.
(2018). In Toto Imaging and Reconstruction of Post-Implantation Mouse
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
17
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
Development at the Single-Cell Level. Cell 175 (3), 859–876. doi:10.1016/j.cell.
2018.09.031
McGurk, P. D., Swartz, M. E., Chen, J. W., Galloway, J. L., and Eberhart, J. K.
(2017). In Vivo zebraﬁsh Morphogenesis Shows Cyp26b1 Promotes Tendon
Condensation and Musculoskeletal Patterning in the Embryonic Jaw. Plos
Genet. 13 (12), e1007112. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1007112
McPherron, A. C., Lawler, A. M., and Lee, S.-J. (1997). Regulation of Skeletal
Muscle Mass in Mice by a New TGF-P Superfamily Member. Nature 387
(6628), 83–90. doi:10.1038/387083a0
Mendias, C. L., Bakhurin, K. I., and Faulkner, J. A. (2008). Tendons of Myostatin-
Deﬁcient Mice Are Small, Brittle, and Hypocellular. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 105
(1), 388–393. doi:10.1073/pnas.0707069105
Mienaltowski, M. J., Adams, S. M., and Birk, D. E. (2013). Regional Differences in
Stem Cell/progenitor Cell Populations from the Mouse Achilles Tendon. Tissue
Eng. Part A 19 (1-2), 199–210. doi:10.1089/ten.TEA.2012.0182
Mikic, B., Entwistle, R., Rossmeier, K., and Bierwert, L. (2008). Effect of GDF-7
Deﬁciency on Tail Tendon Phenotype in Mice. J. Orthop. Res. 26 (6), 834–839.
doi:10.1002/jor.20581
Mikic, B., Wong, M., Chiquet, M., and Hunziker, E. B. (2000). Mechanical
Modulation of Tenascin-C and Collagen-XII Expression during Avian
Synovial Joint Formation. J. Orthop. Res. 18 (3), 406–415. doi:10.1002/jor.
1100180312
Molloy, T., Wang, Y., and Murrell, G. A. C. (2003). The Roles of Growth Factors in
Tendon and Ligament Healing. Sports Med. 33 (5), 381–394. doi:10.2165/
00007256-200333050-00004
Monsoro-Burq, A. H., and Le Douarin, N. (2000). Duality of Molecular Signaling
Involved in Vertebral Chondrogenesis. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 48, 43–75. doi:10.
1016/s0070-2153(08)60754-1
Moreau, C., Caldarelli, P., Rocancourt, D., Roussel, J., Denans, N., Pourquie, O.,
et al. (2019). Timed Collinear Activation of Hox Genes during Gastrulation
Controls the Avian Forelimb Position. Curr. Biol. 29 (1), 35–50. doi:10.1016/j.
cub.2018.11.009
Mousavizadeh, R., Hojabrpour, P., Eltit, F., McDonald, P. C., Dedhar, S.,
McCormack, R. G., et al. (2020). β1 Integrin, ILK and mTOR Regulate
Collagen Synthesis in Mechanically Loaded Tendon Cells. Sci. Rep. 10 (1),
12644. doi:10.1038/s41598-020-69267-6
Murchison, N. D., Price, B. A., Conner, D. A., Keene, D. R., Olson, E. N., Tabin, C.
J., et al. (2007). Regulation of Tendon Differentiation by Scleraxis Distinguishes
Force-Transmitting Tendons from Muscle-Anchoring Tendons. Development
134 (14), 2697–2708. doi:10.1242/dev.001933
Nagasawa, K., Noguchi, M., Ikoma, K., and Kubo, T. (2008). Static and Dynamic
Biomechanical Properties of the Regenerating Rabbit Achilles Tendon. Clin.
Biomech. 23 (6), 832–838. doi:10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2008.02.002
Nakamichi, R., and Asahara, H. (2021). Regulation of Tendon and Ligament
Differentiation. Bone 143, 115609. doi:10.1016/j.bone.2020.115609
Nie, D., Zhou, Y., Wang, W., Zhang, J., and Wang, J. H.-C. (2021). Mechanical
Overloading Induced-Activation of mTOR Signaling in Tendon Stem/
Progenitor Cells Contributes to Tendinopathy Development. Front. Cel Dev.
Biol. 9, 687856. doi:10.3389/fcell.2021.687856
Nishimoto, S., and Logan, M. P. O. (2016). Subdivision of the Lateral Plate
Mesoderm and Speciﬁcation of the Forelimb and Hindlimb Forming
Domains. Semin. Cel Developmental Biol. 49, 102–108. doi:10.1016/j.semcdb.
2015.11.011
Niu, X., Subramanian, A., Hwang, T. H., Schilling, T. F., and Galloway, J. L. (2020).
Tendon
Cell
Regeneration
Is
Mediated
by
Attachment
Site-Resident
Progenitors and BMP Signaling. Curr. Biol. 30 (17), 3277–3292. doi:10.1016/
j.cub.2020.06.016
Oikarinen, A. I., Oikarinen, H., and Uitto, J. (1986). Demonstration of Cellular
Retinoic Acid Binding Protein (CRABP) in Chick Embryo Tendon Cells and
Effects of Retinoids on Collagen Synthesis in Tendon and sterna. Biochem.
Pharmacol. 35 (19), 3393–3400. doi:10.1016/0006-2952(86)90441-7
Otto, F., Thornell, A. P., Crompton, T., Denzel, A., Gilmour, K. C., Rosewell, I. R.,
et al. (1997). Cbfa1, a Candidate Gene for Cleidocranial Dysplasia Syndrome, Is
Essential for Osteoblast Differentiation and Bone Development. Cell 89 (5),
765–771. doi:10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80259-7
Parada, C., and Chai, Y. (2015). Mandible and Tongue Development. Curr. Top.
Dev. Biol. 115, 31–58. doi:10.1016/bs.ctdb.2015.07.023
Paredes, J., Pekmezian, A., and Andarawis-Puri, N. (2021). MRL/MpJ Tendon
Matrix-derived Therapeutic Promotes Improved Healing Outcomes in Scar-
mediated Canonical Tendon Healing. J. Orthop. Res. 39 (7), 1548–1560. doi:10.
1002/jor.24754
Paredes, J., Shiovitz, D. A., and Andarawis-Puri, N. (2018). Uncorrelated Healing
Response of Tendon and Ear Injuries in MRL Highlight a Role for the Local
Tendon Environment in Driving Scarless Healing. Connect. Tissue Res. 59 (5),
472–482. doi:10.1080/03008207.2018.1485665
Piotrowski, T., and Nüsslein-Volhard, C. (2000). The Endoderm Plays an
Important
Role
in
Patterning
the
Segmented
Pharyngeal
Region
in
Zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio). Developmental Biol. 225 (2), 339–356. doi:10.1006/
dbio.2000.9842
Prummel, K. D., Hess, C., Nieuwenhuize, S., Parker, H. J., Rogers, K. W.,
Kozmikova, I., et al. (2019). A Conserved Regulatory Program Initiates
Lateral Plate Mesoderm Emergence across Chordates. Nat. Commun. 10 (1),
3857. doi:10.1038/s41467-019-11561-7
Prummel, K. D., Nieuwenhuize, S., and Mosimann, C. (2020). The Lateral Plate
Mesoderm. Development 1471 (12). doi:10.1242/dev.175059
Pryce, B. A., Watson, S. S., Murchison, N. D., Staverosky, J. A., Du€nker, N., and
Schweitzer, R. (2009). Recruitment and Maintenance of Tendon Progenitors by
TGFβ Signaling Are Essential for Tendon Formation. Development 136 (8),
1351–1361. doi:10.1242/dev.027342
Qu, Y., Zhou, L., Lv, B., Wang, C., and Li, P. (2018). Growth Differentiation
Factor-5 I-nduces T-enomodulin E-xpression via P-hosphorylation of P-38
and P-romotes V-iability of M-urine M-esenchymal S-tem C-ells from
C-ompact B-one. Mol. Med. Rep. 17 (3), 3640–3646. doi:10.3892/mmr.
2017.8325
Ramírez-Aragón, M., Hernández-Sánchez, F., Rodríguez-Reyna, T. S., Buendía-
Roldán, I., Güitrón-Castillo, G., Núñez-Alvarez, C. A., et al. (2020). The
Transcription Factor SCX Is a Potential Serum Biomarker of Fibrotic
Diseases. Ijms 21 (14), 5012. doi:10.3390/ijms21145012
Ramkumar, N., and Anderson, K. V. (2011). SnapShot: Mouse Primitive Streak.
Cell 146 (3), 488. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2011.07.028
Reshef, R., Maroto, M., and Lassar, A. B. (1998). Regulation of Dorsal Somitic Cell
Fates: BMPs and Noggin Control the Timing and Pattern of Myogenic
Regulator Expression. Genes Development 12 (3), 290–303. doi:10.1101/gad.
12.3.290
Richardson, S. H., Starborg, T., Lu, Y., Humphries, S. M., Meadows, R. S., and
Kadler, K. E. (2007). Tendon Development Requires Regulation of Cell
Condensation and Cell Shape via Cadherin-11-Mediated Cell-Cell Junctions.
Mol. Cel Biol 27 (17), 6218–6228. doi:10.1128/mcb.00261-07
Roark, E. F., and Greer, K. (1994). Transforming Growth Factor-β and Bone
Morphogenetic Protein-2 Act by Distinct Mechanisms to Promote Chick Limb
Cartilage Differentiation In Vitro. Dev. Dyn. 200 (2), 103–116. doi:10.1002/aja.
1002000203
Roberts, R. R., Bobzin, L., Teng, C. S., Pal, D., Tuzon, C. T., Schweitzer, R., et al.
(2019). FGF Signaling Patterns Cell Fate at the Interface between Tendon and
Bone. Development 146 (15), dev170241. doi:10.1242/dev.170241
Rodriguez-Guzman, M., Montero, J. A., Santesteban, E., Gañan, Y., Macias, D., and
Hurle, J. M. (2007). Tendon-muscle Crosstalk Controls Muscle Bellies
Morphogenesis, Which Is Mediated by Cell Death and Retinoic Acid
Signaling. Developmental Biol. 302 (1), 267–280. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.
09.034
Sahoo, S., Ang, L.-T., Cho-Hong Goh, J., and Toh, S.-L. (2010). Bioactive
Nanoﬁbers for Fibroblastic Differentiation of Mesenchymal Precursor Cells
for Ligament/tendon Tissue Engineering Applications. Differentiation 79 (2),
102–110. doi:10.1016/j.diff.2009.11.001
Sakabe, T., Sakai, K., Maeda, T., Sunaga, A., Furuta, N., Schweitzer, R., et al. (2018).
Transcription Factor Scleraxis Vitally Contributes to Progenitor Lineage
Direction in Wound Healing of Adult Tendon in Mice. J. Biol. Chem. 293
(16), 5766–5780. doi:10.1074/jbc.RA118.001987
Sarkar, S., Petiot, A., Copp, A., Ferretti, P., and Thorogood, P. (2001). FGF2
Promotes
Skeletogenic
Differentiation
of
Cranial
Neural
Crest
Cells.
Development 128 (11), 2143–2152. doi:10.1242/dev.128.11.2143
Schilling, T. F., and Kimmel, C. B. (1994). Segment and Cell Type Lineage
Restrictions during Pharyngeal Arch Development in the Zebraﬁsh Embryo.
Development 120 (3), 483–494. doi:10.1242/dev.120.3.483
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
18
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
Schwartz, A. G., Long, F., and Thomopoulos, S. (2015). Enthesis Fibrocartilage Cells
Originate from a Population of Hedgehog-Responsive Cells Modulated by the
Loading Environment. Development 142 (1), 196–206. doi:10.1242/dev.112714
Schwartz,
M.
A.
(2010).
Integrins
and
Extracellular
Matrix
in
Mechanotransduction. Cold Spring Harbor Perspect. Biol. 2 (12), a005066.
doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a005066
Schweitzer, R., Chyung, J. H., Murtaugh, L. C., Brent, A. E., Rosen, V., Olson, E. N.,
et al. (2001). Analysis of the Tendon Cell Fate Using Scleraxis, a Speciﬁc Marker
for Tendons and Ligaments. Development 128 (19), 3855–3866. doi:10.1242/
dev.128.19.3855
Selleck, M. A., and Bronner-Fraser, M. (1995). Origins of the Avian Neural Crest:
the Role of Neural Plate-Epidermal Interactions. Development 121 (2), 525–538.
doi:10.1242/dev.121.2.525
Shen, H., Jayaram, R., Yoneda, S., Linderman, S. W., Sakiyama-Elbert, S. E., Xia, Y.,
et al. (2018). The Effect of Adipose-Derived Stem Cell Sheets and CTGF on
Early Flexor Tendon Healing in a Canine Model. Sci. Rep. 8 (1), 11078. doi:10.
1038/s41598-018-29474-8
Shukunami, C., Oshima, Y., and Hiraki, Y. (2001). Molecular Cloning of
Tenomodulin,
a
Novel
Chondromodulin-I
Related
Gene.
Biochem.
Biophysical Res. Commun. 280 (5), 1323–1327. doi:10.1006/bbrc.2001.4271
Smith, T. G., Sweetman, D., Patterson, M., Keyse, S. M., and Mu€nsterberg, A.
(2005). Feedback Interactions between MKP3 and ERK MAP Kinase Control
Scleraxis Expression and the Speciﬁcation of Rib Progenitors in the
Developing Chick Somite. Development 132 (6), 1305–1314. doi:10.1242/
dev.01699
Soeda, T., Deng, J. M., de Crombrugghe, B., Behringer, R. R., Nakamura, T., and
Akiyama, H. (2010). Sox9-expressing Precursors Are the Cellular Origin of the
Cruciate Ligament of the Knee Joint and the Limb Tendons. Genesis 48 (11),
635–644. doi:10.1002/dvg.20667
Staverosky, J. A., Pryce, B. A., Watson, S. S., and Schweitzer, R. (2009). Tubulin
Polymerization-Promoting Protein Family Member 3, Tppp3, Is a Speciﬁc
Marker of the Differentiating Tendon Sheath and Synovial Joints. Dev. Dyn. 238
(3), 685–692. doi:10.1002/dvdy.21865
Subramanian, A., and Schilling, T. F. (2014). Thrombospondin-4 Controls Matrix
Assembly during Development and Repair of Myotendinous Junctions. Elife 3,
e02372. doi:10.7554/eLife.02372
Subramanian, A., Wayburn, B., Bunch, T., and Volk, T. (2007). Thrombospondin-
mediated Adhesion Is Essential for the Formation of the Myotendinous junction in
Drosophila. Development 134 (7), 1269–1278. doi:10.1242/dev.000406
Sugimoto, Y., Takimoto, A., Akiyama, H., Kist, R., Scherer, G., Nakamura, T., et al.
(2013). Scx+/Sox9+ Progenitors Contribute to the Establishment of the
junction between Cartilage and Tendon/ligament. Development 140 (11),
2280–2288. doi:10.1242/dev.096354
Takimoto, A., Kawatsu, M., Yoshimoto, Y., Kawamoto, T., Seiryu, M., Takano-
Yamamoto, T., et al. (2015). Scleraxis and Osterix Antagonistically Regulate
Tensile Force-Responsive Remodeling of the Periodontal Ligament and
Alveolar Bone. Development 142 (4), 787–796. doi:10.1242/dev.116228
Takimoto, A., Oro, M., Hiraki, Y., and Shukunami, C. (2012). Direct Conversion of
Tenocytes into Chondrocytes by Sox9. Exp. Cel Res. 318 (13), 1492–1507.
doi:10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.04.002
Tam, P. P. L., and Loebel, D. A. F. (2007). Gene Function in Mouse
Embryogenesis: Get Set for Gastrulation. Nat. Rev. Genet. 8 (5), 368–381.
doi:10.1038/nrg2084
Tan, S.-L., Ahmad, R. E., Ahmad, T. S., Merican, A. M., Abbas, A. A., Ng, W. M.,
et al. (2012). Effect of Growth Differentiation Factor 5 on the Proliferation and
Tenogenic Differentiation Potential of Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells In
Vitro. Cells Tissues Organs 196 (4), 325–338. doi:10.1159/000335693
Tao, X., Liu, J., Chen, L., Zhou, Y., and Tang, K. (2015). EGR1 Induces Tenogenic
Differentiation of Tendon Stem Cells and Promotes Rabbit Rotator Cuff Repair.
Cell Physiol Biochem 35 (2), 699–709. doi:10.1159/000369730
Tempfer, H., Wagner, A., Gehwolf, R., Lehner, C., Tauber, M., Resch, H., et al.
(2009). Perivascular Cells of the Supraspinatus Tendon Express Both Tendon-
and Stem Cell-Related Markers. Histochem. Cel Biol 131 (6), 733–741. doi:10.
1007/s00418-009-0581-5
ten Berge, D., Brugmann, S. A., Helms, J. A., and Nusse, R. (2008). Wnt and FGF
Signals Interact to Coordinate Growth with Cell Fate Speciﬁcation during
Limb Development. Development 135 (19), 3247–3257. doi:10.1242/dev.
023176
Thomopoulos, S., Harwood, F. L., Silva, M. J., Amiel, D., and Gelberman, R. H.
(2005). Effect of Several Growth Factors on Canine Flexor Tendon Fibroblast
Proliferation and Collagen Synthesis In Vitro. J. Hand Surg. 30 (3), 441–447.
doi:10.1016/j.jhsa.2004.12.006
Thomopoulos, S., Parks, W. C., Rifkin, D. B., and Derwin, K. A. (2015).
Mechanisms of Tendon Injury and Repair. J. Orthop. Res. 33 (6), 832–839.
doi:10.1002/jor.22806
Tokunaga, T., Shukunami, C., Okamoto, N., Taniwaki, T., Oka, K., Sakamoto, H.,
et al. (2015). FGF-2 Stimulates the Growth of Tenogenic Progenitor Cells to
Facilitate the Generation of Tenomodulin-Positive Tenocytes in a Rat Rotator
Cuff Healing Model. Am. J. Sports Med. 43 (10), 2411–2422. doi:10.1177/
0363546515597488
Veronesi, F., Salamanna, F., Tschon, M., Maglio, M., Nicoli Aldini, N., and Fini, M.
(2017). Mesenchymal Stem Cells for Tendon Healing: what Is on the Horizon?
J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 11 (11), 3202–3219. doi:10.1002/term.2209
Voleti, P. B., Buckley, M. R., and Soslowsky, L. J. (2012). Tendon Healing: Repair
and Regeneration. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 14, 47–71. doi:10.1146/annurev-
bioeng-071811-150122
Walia, B., and Huang, A. H. (2019). Tendon Stem Progenitor Cells: Understanding
the Biology to Inform Therapeutic Strategies for Tendon Repair. J. Orthop. Res.
37 (6), 1270–1280. doi:10.1002/jor.24156
Wang, Q.-W., Chen, Z.-L., and Piao, Y.-J. (2005). Mesenchymal Stem Cells
Differentiate into Tenocytes by Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) 12
Gene Transfer. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 100 (4), 418–422. doi:10.1263/jbb.100.418
Wang, Y., Zhou, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, Z., and Kang, Y. (2021). Inhibition of Smad3
Promotes the Healing of Rotator Cuff Injury in a Rat Model. J. Orthop. Res. 39
(1), 204–218. doi:10.1002/jor.24768
Webb, S., Gabrelow, C., Pierce, J., Gibb, E., and Elliott, J. (2016). Retinoic Acid
Receptor Signaling Preserves Tendon Stem Cell Characteristics and Prevents
Spontaneous Differentiation In Vitro. Stem Cel Res Ther 7, 45. doi:10.1186/
s13287-016-0306-3
Weintraub, H. (1993). The MyoD Family and Myogenesis: Redundancy, Networks,
and Thresholds. Cell 75 (7), 1241–1244. doi:10.1016/0092-8674(93)90610-3
Winnier, G., Blessing, M., Labosky, P. A., and Hogan, B. L. (1995). Bone
Morphogenetic
Protein-4
Is
Required
for
Mesoderm
Formation
and
Patterning in the Mouse. Genes Dev. 9 (17), 2105–2116. doi:10.1101/gad.9.
17.2105
Wu, T., Liu, Y., Wang, B., Sun, Y., Xu, J., Yuk-Wai, L. W., et al. (2016). The Use of
Cocultured Mesenchymal Stem Cells with Tendon-Derived Stem Cells as a
Better Cell Source for Tendon Repair. Tissue Eng. Part A 22 (19-20), 1229–1240.
doi:10.1089/ten.TEA.2016.0248
Xu, B., Song, G., and Ju, Y. (2011). Effect of Focal Adhesion Kinase on the
Regulation
of
Realignment
and
Tenogenic
Differentiation
of
Human
Mesenchymal Stem Cells by Mechanical Stretch. Connect. Tissue Res. 52 (5),
373–379. doi:10.3109/03008207.2010.541961
Xu, B., Song, G., Ju, Y., Li, X., Song, Y., and Watanabe, S. (2012). RhoA/ROCK,
Cytoskeletal Dynamics, and Focal Adhesion Kinase Are Required for
Mechanical
Stretch-Induced
Tenogenic
Differentiation
of
Human
Mesenchymal Stem Cells. J. Cel. Physiol. 227 (6), 2722–2729. doi:10.1002/
jcp.23016
Xu, D., Zhang, T., Qu, J., Hu, J., and Lu, H. (2014). Enhanced Patella-Patellar
Tendon Healing Using Combined Magnetic ﬁelds in a Rabbit Model. Am.
J. Sports Med. 42 (10), 2495–2501. doi:10.1177/0363546514541539
Yamamoto-Shiraishi, Y.-i., and Kuroiwa, A. (2013). Wnt and BMP Signaling
Cooperate with Hox in the Control of Six2 Expression in Limb Tendon
Precursor. Developmental Biol. 377 (2), 363–374. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.
02.023
Yang, F., Zhang, A., and Richardson, D. W. (2019). Regulation of the Tenogenic
Gene Expression in Equine Tenocyte-Derived Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
by Mechanical Loading and Mohawk. Stem Cel Res. 39, 101489. doi:10.1016/j.
scr.2019.101489
Yin, H., Caceres, M. D., Yan, Z., Schieker, M., Nerlich, M., and Docheva, D. (2019).
Tenomodulin Regulates Matrix Remodeling of Mouse Tendon Stem/progenitor
Cells in an Ex Vivo Collagen I Gel Model. Biochem. Biophysical Res. Commun.
512 (4), 691–697. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.03.063
Yoshida, T., Vivatbutsiri, P., Morriss-Kay, G., Saga, Y., and Iseki, S. (2008). Cell
Lineage in Mammalian Craniofacial Mesenchyme. Mech. Development 125 (9-
10), 797–808. doi:10.1016/j.mod.2008.06.007
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
19
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing
Zeller, R., López-Ríos, J., and Zuniga, A. (2009). Vertebrate Limb Bud
Development: Moving towards Integrative Analysis of Organogenesis. Nat.
Rev. Genet. 10 (12), 845–858. doi:10.1038/nrg2681
Zhang, J., and Wang, J. H.-C. (2013). The Effects of Mechanical Loading on
Tendons - an In Vivo and In Vitro Model Study. PLoS One 8 (8), e71740. doi:10.
1371/journal.pone.0071740
Zhang, Y.-J., Chen, X., Li, G., Chan, K.-M., Heng, B. C., Yin, Z., et al. (2018).
Concise Review: Stem Cell Fate Guided by Bioactive Molecules for Tendon
Regeneration. Stem Cell Transl Med 7 (5), 404–414. doi:10.1002/sctm.17-
0206
Zhang, Y. J., Qing, Q., Zhang, Y. J., Ning, L. J., Cui, J., Yao, X., et al. (2019).
Enhancement of Tenogenic Differentiation of Rat Tendon-derived Stem
Cells by Biglycan. J. Cel Physiol 234, 15898–15910. doi:10.1002/jcp.28247
Zhu, X., Zhu, H., Zhang, L., Huang, S., Cao, J., Ma, G., et al. (2012). Wls-
mediated Wnts Differentially Regulate Distal Limb Patterning and Tissue
Morphogenesis. Developmental Biol. 365 (2), 328–338. doi:10.1016/j.
ydbio.2012.02.019
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their afﬁliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 He, Ruan, Huang, Wang, Xu, Cai, Liu, Fei, Heng, Chen and Shen.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is
permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www.frontiersin.org
January 2022 | Volume 10 | Article 821667
20
He et al.
Tendon Development Versus Tendon Healing

===== Lui2020_FrontGenet_TendonStemCell+Aging =====

Biology of Tendon Stem Cells and
Tendon in Aging
Pauline Po Yee Lui 1* and Chi Ming Wong 2
1 Headquarter, Hospital Authority, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 2 Department of Health Technology and Informatics, The Hong
Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Both tendon injuries and tendinopathies, particularly rotator cuff tears, increase with
tendon aging. Tendon stem cells play important roles in promoting tendon growth,
maintenance, and repair. Aged tendons show a decline in regenerative potential
coupled with a loss of stem cell function. Recent studies draw attention to aging
primarily a disorder of stem cells. The micro-environment (“niche”) where stem cells
resided in vivo provides signals that direct them to metabolize, self-renew, differentiate, or
remain quiescent. These signals include receptors and secreted soluble factors for cell-
cell communication, extracellular matrix, oxidative stress, and vascularity. Both intrinsic
cellular deﬁcits and aged niche, coupled with age-associated systemic changes of
hormonal and metabolic signals can inhibit or alter the functions of tendon stem cells,
resulting in reduced ﬁtness of these primitive cells and hence more frequent injuries and
poor outcomes of tendon repair. This review aims to summarize the biological changes of
aged tendons. The biological changes of tendon stem cells in aging are reviewed after a
systematic search of the PubMed. Relevant factors of stem cell aging including cell-
intrinsic factors, changes of microenvironment, and age-associated systemic changes of
hormonal and metabolic signals are examined, with ﬁndings related to tendon stem cells
highlighted when literature is available. Future research directions on the aging
mechanisms of tendon stem cells are discussed. Better understanding of the molecular
mechanisms underlying the functional decline of aged tendon stem cells would provide
insight for the rational design of rejuvenating therapies.
Keywords: tendon-derived stem cells, tendon stem cells, stem cell niche, tendon aging, stem cell aging
INTRODUCTION - BIOLOGICAL CHANGES OF AGED TENDONS
Aging is known to reduce the regenerative capacity and increase the susceptibility of tissues and
organs, including tendons, to injuries. Both tendon injuries and tendinopathies, particularly rotator
cuff tears, increase with tendon aging (Teunis et al., 2014; Albers et al., 2016). In a systematic review
including 30 studies with 6,112 shoulders, the prevalence of rotator cuff abnormalities increased
with age, from 9.7% in patients aged 20 years and younger to 62% in patients aged 80 years and
above (Teunis et al., 2014). Lower extremity tendinopathy was also reported to be more prevalent
among older patients (Albers et al., 2016).
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1338
1
Edited by:
Erdal Karaoz,
Istinye University, Turkey
Reviewed by:
Atsushi Asakura,
University of Minnesota Twin Cities,
United States
Hakan Darici,
Istinye University, Turkey
*Correspondence:
Pauline Po Yee Lui
paulinelui00@gmaiil.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Stem Cell Research,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Genetics
Received: 01 March 2019
Accepted: 09 December 2019
Published: 16 January 2020
Citation:
Lui PPY and Wong CM (2020) Biology
of Tendon Stem Cells
and Tendon in Aging.
Front. Genet. 10:1338.
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01338
REVIEW
published: 16 January 2020
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01338
Structural Changes
Aged tendons exhibited structural, compositional and
biomechanical changes. Aged tendons appeared yellowish
(mucoid degeneration) (Zhang et al., 2016). Collagen ﬁbers were
less organized in aged mouse patellar tendons (Dunkman et al.,
2013). Ultrastructural analysis of distribution of ﬁbril diameters
indicated an increase of a subpopulation of large ﬁbrils in aged
mouse patellar tendons (Dunkman et al., 2013) and Achilles
tendons (Gehwolf et al., 2016). There were inconsistent ﬁndings
regardingthechangeofvascularityandbloodﬂowintendonduring
aging, depending on the species, tendon types, and deﬁnition of
aging. While there was no age-associated change in vascularity in
equine superﬁcial digital ﬂexor tendons (aged 2 to 23 years) (Gillis
etal.,1997),agedratpatellartendons(20-month-old)werereported
to be highly vascular (Zhang et al., 2016). An early human study
reported a reduction of vascularity in the supraspinatus tendons
with age (aged 20–70 years) (Brewer, 1979). While there was no
change in the rate of blood ﬂow in the ﬂexor tendons with age in a
rabbit study (Landi et al., 1983), there was a signiﬁcant decrease in
blood ﬂow in the intratendinous region of rotator cuff of elderly
subjects compared with younger subjects (Funakoshi et al., 2010).
Rudzki et al. (2008) reported a signiﬁcant decrease in blood ﬂow in
intactsupraspinatustendoninasymptomaticsubjectsolderthan40
years compared with younger subjects after exercise. Non-
tendinous tissues such as fatty and cartilaginous tissues as well as
calciﬁcation were reported in aged tendons in both animal models
and human (Iagnocco et al., 2013; Zhang and Wang, 2015; Gehwolf
etal.,2016;WoodandBrooks,2016;Zasecketal.,2016).Thesenon-
tendinous tissues compromise tendon structure and reduce
tendon’s biomechanical properties.
Compositional Changes
Tenocytes are the major cell types in tendons. The cell number
decreased; tenocyte dedifferentiated and senescent; and their
proliferation and metabolic activity reduced with aging
(Ippolito et al., 1980; Josa and Kannus, 1997; Tsai et al., 2011;
Dunkman et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2013).
The expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) genes and ECM
remodeling gene were signiﬁcantly reduced in aged Achilles
tendons (Kostrominova and Brooks, 2013; Yu et al., 2013;
Gehwolf et al., 2016; Wood and Brooks, 2016). The mRNA
expression of collagen types I, III, and V, elastin and proteoglycan
4 (lubricin) in rat tendons decreased with age though
immunostaining showed no apparent differences in protein levels
ofcollagentypeIandtypeV(KostrominovaandBrooks,2013).The
mRNAexpressionofcollagentypeIwasreportedtobesimilarinrat
Achilles tenocytes in young (2 months) and aged (24 months)
groupsbutthemRNAexpressionandenzymaticactivitiesofMMP-
2 and MMP-9 was signiﬁcantly higher while the mRNA expression
of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) and TIMP-2
were signiﬁcantly lower in the aged group compared to the young
group in vitro (Yu et al., 2013). The expressions of collagen type I
and type III genes were reduced in aged mouse Achilles tendons
(Gehwolf et al., 2016). The collagen content of aged mouse Achilles
tendonwassimilartotheiryoungcounterpart(Gehwolfetal.,2016)
but the level decreased in canine patellar tendon with aging (Haut
et al., 1992). In a small clinical study involving 7 old men and 10
young men, the collagen concentration in the patellar tendon
biopsies was lower in the old men compared to that in the young
men with a similar physical activity level, supporting the reduction
in collagen during the aging process (Couppe et al., 2009).
Proteoglycans are important for regulating collagen ﬁbril
assembly, ﬁber size, and ﬁber sliding as well as cellular functions.
The age-associated changes of proteoglycans were inconclusive.
Thorpe et al. (2016) reported no change in the mRNA expression
of collagens and proteoglycans as well as protein and mRNA levels of
matrix remodeling enzymes in equine superﬁcial digital ﬂexor
tendons with age (3.3 ± 0.6 years versus 19.0 ± 1.7 years). There
was also no difference in the mRNA expression of biglycan, decorin,
ﬁbromodulin, and lumican in the patellar tendons of aged mice
(Dunkman et al., 2013). While there was no change in the levels of
major matrix components with age, there was a reduction in protein
levels of several less abundant small leucine-rich proteoglycans
(ﬁbromodulin, mimecan, asporin) in aged equine superﬁcial digital
ﬂexor tendons (Peffers et al., 2014). One study reported signiﬁcant
lower total glycosaminoglycan, chondroitin sulphate, and dermatan
sulphate in healthy human supraspinatus tendons with age, although
there was no change in the relative proportion of different
glycosaminoglycan types (Riley et al., 1994). The concentration of
nonenzymatic cross-links was higher in the patellar tendon biopsies
of aged men compared to that in the young men in a small scale
clinical study (Couppe et al., 2009). The advanced glycation end-
products (AGEs) adduct level in tibialis anterior tendons was also
higher in aged compared to adult mice (Wood and Brooks, 2016).
Biomechanical Changes
The biomechanical properties of aged tendon were reported to be
inferior in animal and human studies. The viscoelastic properties
and mechanical strength of aged equine and mouse tendons were
reported to be lower than those of young tendons (Dudhia et al.,
2007; Dunkman et al., 2013; Zaseck et al., 2016). The mechanical
properties (maximum stress and modulus) of aged rat Achilles
tendon decreased with increasing age (Pardes et al., 2017). While
aging did not alter tendon mechanical properties during
homeostasis, it impaired tendon healing and hence
biomechanical properties of ﬂexor tendon in mice (Ackerman
et al., 2017). Aged ﬂexor tendons showed similar mechanical
strength (maximum load to failure and ultimate tensile stress)
but was signiﬁcantly stiffer (higher Young’s modulus and
stiffness) compared to young tendons (Gehwolf et al., 2016).
Aged human Achilles tendons were also stiffer compared to
young tendons as shown by sonoelastography (Turan et al.,
2015). Aged human patellar tendons had signiﬁcantly lower
elastic modulus and shear wave velocity compared to young
tendons as indicated by shear wave elastography (Hsiao et al.,
2015). In a systematic review of age-related changes of
biomechanical properties of healthy Achilles tendon, its
stiffness, and elastic modulus decreased in older compared to
younger adults (Delabastita et al., 2018). The responses of human
Achilles and patellar tendons to transverse strain was reduced by
2.5% for every 10 years of life (Dudhia et al., 2007). Table 1
summarizes the biological changes of aging tendons.
Lui and Wong
Tendon Stem Cells and Tendon Aging
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1338
2
Consequently, the structure, composition, and biomechanical
properties of aged tendons are compromised and aged tendons are
prone to higher risk of tendon injuries, re-injuries, and
tendinopathy as well as treatment failure (de Jonge et al., 2011;
Teunisetal.,2014;Salinietal., 2015; Albersetal.,2016).The oddsof
a rotator cuff tear increased by 2.69-fold for every 10 years of age
(Fehringer et al., 2008). After injury, aged tendons require very long
time for rehabilitation. The current treatment modalities fail to
completely restore tendon function. A summary of biological
changes of aging tendons is showed in Table 1.
Tendon Aging as a Problem of Aging of
Tendon Stem Cells and Their Niche
Recent studies draw attention to aging being primarily a disorder
of stem cells with a decrease in the number and functional ﬁtness
of tissue-speciﬁc adult stem cells (Sharpless and DePinho, 2007;
Fukada et al., 2014). Tendon stem cells have been recently
identiﬁed in tendons of various species (Bi et al., 2007; Rui et al.,
2010). Stem/progenitor cells isolated from tendon mid-substances
of various species, called tendon-derived stem cells (TDSCs),
showed standard mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) characteristics,
with expression of typical MSC surface antigens, self-renewal,
colony-forming, and tri-lineage differentiation potential (Rui
et al., 2010; Lui and Chan, 2011; Lui, 2015). In addition, they are
able to form tendon- and enthesis- like tissues when implanted in
vivo. TDSC expressed higher Oct4 level, showed higher
clonogenicity and proliferative, and differentiation capacity
compared to BMSC (Tan et al., 2012). TDSCs expressed
embryonic stem cell markers and are different from tenocytes
which are terminally differentiated cells (Zhang and Wang,
2010a). Recent studies showed that the functions of TDSCs
declined or skewed with age in vitro. An in-depth understanding
of the molecular mechanisms controlling tendon stem cell aging is
essential to inform the development of stem cell-based therapeutics
that can slow, or even forestall age-associated degenerative changes
as well as enhance repair of aged tendons.
Niche is a specialized dynamic micro-environment which
regulates stem cells’ functions and fate. Aging of cellular and
acellular components of the niche can alter stem cell functions.
Numerous studies showed that exposure of stem cells to a young
systemic environment restored the regenerative capacity of stem
cells in various tissues in aged mice (Conboy et al., 2005; Ruckh
et al., 2012). Transplantation of aged spermatogonial stem cells
to the testes of young male mice was sufﬁcient to maintain stem
cell functions (Sato et al., 2011). These ﬁndings underscore a
major role of aging of the niche in the functional decline of stem
cells and suggest opportunities of reversing tissue aging by
targeting the niche.
Scope of Review and Search Strategy
This review aims to summarize the biological changes of tendon
stem cells in aging after a systematic search of PubMed. Relevant
factors of stem cell aging including cell-intrinsic factors, changes of
microenvironment, and systemic changes of hormonal and
metabolic signals are reviewed, with ﬁndings on tendon stem cells
highlighted when literature is available. Future research directions
on the aging mechanisms of tendon stem cells are discussed.
In this review, “TDSCs” refer to stem/progenitor cells isolated
from tendon mid-substances in vitro while “tendon stem cells”
refer to stem/progenitor cells residing in situ in tendon mid-
substances. TDSCs are often used as in vitro model to understand
the physiology of tendon stem cells residing in situ in tendon
mid-substances. The properties of tendon stem cells may change
due to cell isolation and in vitro culture conditions. “Tenocytes”
refer to terminally differentiated cells in tendons.
For the studies on aged TDSCs, the PubMed database was
searched with the keywords ((tendon[Title/Abstract]) AND
(ageing[Title/Abstract] OR aging[Title/Abstract] OR age[Title/
Abstract])) AND (stem cells[Title/Abstract] OR progenitor) on
25 Jan 2019 and updated on 22 Sep 2019 with no restriction in
language and year of publication. The studies were selected after
reviewing the titles and abstracts. Original studies investigating
the biological changes of stem cells in tendons, either in vitro or
in situ, in aging were included. A total of 74 articles was
identiﬁed. Of these, 16 studies are eligible. Another two studies
were identiﬁed by hand search. Therefore, a total of 18 studies
were included in this review and all of them are on the biological
changes of TDSCs of aged tendons. There were no studies on
aging of tendon stem cells in situ. Table 2 summaries the studies
on the biological changes of TDSCs in aging.
CHARACTERISTICS OF AGED TDSCS
Phenotypes of Aged TDSCs
Young TDSCs were reported as spindle or cobble-stone shape in
previous studies (Rui et al., 2010; Zhang and Wang, 2015).
However, TDSCs isolated from aged human, mouse and rat
tendons were reported to be heterogeneous, much larger and
show a round and ﬂattened appearance (Wu et al., 2015; Zhang
and Wang, 2015). The stiffness of aged rat TDSCs was higher
than that of young TDSCs (Wu et al., 2015; Kiderlen et al., 2019).
The increase in size and irregular shape of aged TDSCs might be
associated with the dense cytoskeleton organization, which could
lead to an increase in both stiffness and viscosity (Wu et al., 2015;
Kiderlen et al., 2019). Indeed, the actin stress ﬁber content was
higher and the turnover of actin ﬁlaments was slower in TDSCs
isolated from aged/degenerated human Achilles tendon
compared to TDSCs isolated from young/healthy tendons
TABLE 1 | Summary of biological changes of aging tendons.
• Yellowish color
• Enlargement of a subpopulation of collagen ﬁbril size and change of ﬁbril size
distribution
• Disorganized collagen ﬁbers
• Inconclusive ﬁndings on blood ﬂow and vascularity
• Ectopic formation non-tendinous tissues including fat, cartilage and bone tissue
• Decreased cellularity
• Dedifferentiation and senescence of tenocytes
• Reduced proliferation and metabolic activity of tenocyte
• Inconclusive ﬁndings on change of collagen and proteoglycan content and
composition
• Accumulation of advanced glycation end-products (AGEs)
• Inferior biomechanical properties particularly viscoelasticity
Lui and Wong
Tendon Stem Cells and Tendon Aging
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1338
3
TABLE 2 | Summary of biological changes of tendon-derived stem cells (TDSCs) in aging.
Species
Major ﬁndings
References
Mice
Young TDSCs were cobblestone-shaped while the shape of aged TDSCs were heterogeneous. Aged TDSCs proliferated slower and
expressed lower levels of stem cell makers (Oct-4, nucleostemin, Sca1 and SSEA-1). They showed reduced tri-lineage differentiation potential
compared to young TDSCs. Moderate mechanical stretching (4%) increased while 8% stretching decreased the expression of nucleostemin in
aged TDSCs. Moderate mechanical stretching also increased the expression of Nanog and tendon-related markers (Col1 and Tnmd). 8%
stretching increased the expression non-tenocyte-related genes (Lpl, Sox9 and Runx2) while 4% stretching had minimal effects on these
genes. Moderate treadmill running of aged mice increased the proliferation of aged TDSCs in culture, decreased lipid deposition, proteoglycan
accumulation and calciﬁcation, and increased the number of nucleostemin-expressing TDSCs in tendons.
Zhang and
Wang, 2015
Mouse
The expressions of tendon transcription factor (Scx, Mkx), ECM (Col1a1, Col3a1, Dcn, Bgn, Fmod) and ECM-remodeling (Lox, Thbs1, Sparc)
genes were signiﬁcantly reduced in aged tendon tissue and aged TDSCs isolated from the Achilles tendons. There was no signiﬁcant difference
in the fascicle diameters between young and healthy-aged tail tendons. Aged Achilles tendon was thicker but there was no difference in the
fascicle diameters, cell density and total collagen content compared to their young counterparts. Aged Achilles tendon displayed a bimodal
distribution, with a more pronounced separation of large and small diameter ﬁbrils and less interﬁbrillar area, showing no change in ﬁbril number
when compared to young tendons whose ﬁbril size was normally distributed. The average ﬁbril diameter was larger for aged Achilles tendon
compared to young tendons. The ﬁbers were less well-oriented in aged tendon. Aged ﬂexor tendons showed similar mechanical strength
(maximum load to failure and ultimate tensile stress) but was signiﬁcantly stiffer (higher Young’s modulus and stiffness) compared to young
tendons. There was an accumulation of lipid droplets in aged Achilles and tail tendons, with an increased expression of adipogenic markers
(Pparg and Cebpa) and reduced expression of b-catenin (regulator of adipogenesis).
Gehwolf
et al., 2016
Mouse
Aged TDSCs (18-month old) showed lower collagen contractility than cells obtained from younger animals (6-, 9-, and 12- months old).
Yin et al.,
2019
Rat
Both aged and young TDSCs expressed nucleostemin, Oct-4 and SSEA-4. Aged TDSCs showed slower proliferation rate, frequency and cell
cycle progression compared to young TDSCs. The expression of tendon related marker genes (Scx, Tnmd) was reduced while adipocyte
differentiation and adipogenic markers increased in aged TDSCs. Cited2 was downregulated while CD44 was upregulated in aged TDSCs.
Zhou et al.,
2010
Rat
Aged TDSCs showed lower cell proliferation, migration and tendon-related marker expression (Tnc, Tnmd, Scx) than young TDSCs. Medium of
young TDSCs under hypoxic culture condition enhanced the migration, proliferation and mRNA expression of tendon-related markers (Tnc,
Tnmd but not Scx) as well as reduced senescence of aged TDSCs.
Jiang et al.,
2014
Rat
miR-135a, which directly binds to the 3’-untranslated region of ROCK1, was signiﬁcantly downregulated in aged compared with young TDSCs.
Overexpression of miR-135a in young TDSCs suppressed senescence, promoted proliferation, and induced migration and tenogenic
differentiation, whereas suppression of miR-135a in aged TDSCs had the opposite effects. ROCK1 mediated the effects of miR-135a in TDSCs
as shown by gain-of-function and loss-of-function studies.
Chen et al.,
2015b
Rat
Aged TDSCs were large, ﬂat and heterogeneous in morphologies while young TDSCs were uniformly elongated. Aged TDSCs showed higher
stiffness compared to young TDSCs.
Wu et al.,
2015
Rat
Moderate treadmill running accelerated tendon wound healing compared to the cage control. Moderate treadmill running also increased the
number, proliferation, stem cell marker expression (Oct-4, Nanog) and tendon-related marker expression (collagen type I, collagen type III,
tenomoduline) as well as downregulated the expression of non-tenocyte genes (Pparg, Col2 and Runx2) of TDSCs.
Zhang et al.,
2016
Rat
Young decellarized ECM (DECM) preserved stem cell properties of aged TDSCs. DECM from young TDSCs enhanced the proliferation, mRNA
expression of tendon-related marker (Scx, Tnmd), protein expression stem cell marker protein expression (Oct-4, SSEA-1) of aged TDSCs. The
senescence-associated b-galactosidase activity of aged TDSCs was also decreased by young DECM.
Jiang et al.,
2018
Rat
FOXP1 mRNA and protein levels were markedly decreased in the aged TDSCs. Overexpression of FOXP1 attenuates TDSCs aging, as shown
by reduced senescence-associated b-gal staining and expression of senescence marker, p16INK4A. FOXP1 overexpression also restores the
age-associated reduction of self-renewal, migration and differentiation of TDSCs. Conversely, knockdown of FOXP1 promoted senescence in
young TDSCs. In addition, FOXP1 overexpression rescued decreased levels of E2F1, pRb and cyclin D1 in aged TDSCs.
Xu and Liu,
2018
Human
Aged tenocyte-like cells showed lower proliferation rate, colony forming ability, collagen type I secretion and osteogenic differentiation potential
compared to their young counterparts. However, there were no signiﬁcant difference in the surface expression of MSC markers (CD29, CD44,
CD73, CD90 and CD105) as well as mRNA expression of ECM (collagen type I, collagen type III, osteocalcin, decorin), TGF-b1, TGF-b2, TGF-
b3 between aged and young tenocyte-like cells.
Klatte-
Schulz
et al., 2012
Human
Aged/degenerated TDSCs exhibited deﬁcits in self-renewal and colony-forming ability. They showed signiﬁcant decline in proliferative activity
and poor response to FGF2 and TGF-b1. However, their multipotency was retained. Aged/degenerated TDSCs showed earlier cellular
senescence with upregulation of p16INK4a. Microarray and gene ontology analyses revealed that differential expression of genes regulating cell
adhesion, migration and actin cytoskeleton. Aged/degenerated TDSCs showed slower migration, higher actin stress ﬁber content and slower
turnover of actin ﬁlaments. Analyses of microarray candidates revealed dysregulated cell-matrix interactions with lower gene expression of
collagen type I and collagen type I-binding integrins a1, a2 and a11 but higher gene expression of ﬁbronectin and ﬁbronectin-binding integrins
av, b3 and b5. The ROCK1 and ROCK 2 mRNA and protein levels as well as activities increased in aged/degenerated TDSCs. Inhibition of
ROCK1 and ROCK2 activities in aged/degenerated TDSCs with ROCK inhibitor restored the cell area, F-actin content and dynamics as well
as migration.
Kohler et al.,
2013
Human
Aging affected the number of TDSCs isolated and colony-forming ability of TDSCs. However, tri-lineage differentiation potential of TDSCs was
not affected by age.
Ruzzini
et al., 2014
Human
Pin1 mRNA and protein expression levels were signiﬁcantly decreased during prolonged in vitro culture of human TDSCs. Overexpression of
Pin1 delayed the progression of cellular senescence, increased telomerase activity and decreased level of the senescence marker, p16INK4a.
Conversely, Pin1 siRNA transfection promoted senescence in TDSCs.
Chen et al.,
2015a
Human
The expression of ephrin receptors EphA4, EphB2 and B4 and ligands EFNB1 were down regulated in aged TDSCs. Activation of EphA4- or
EphB2-dependent reverse signaling could restore the migratory ability and normalize the actin turnover of aged TDSCs. However, only EphA4-
Fc stimulation improved aged TDSCs’ proliferation to levels comparable to young TDSCs.
Popov et al.,
2016
(Continued)
Lui and Wong
Tendon Stem Cells and Tendon Aging
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1338
4
(Kohler et al., 2013). There was also an increase in focal adhesion
kinase complex protein paxillin and profound rearrangement of
actin cytoskeleton with an increase in actin in aged mouse
Achilles TDSCs (Gehwolf et al., 2016).
Frequency, Proliferative, and Colony-
Forming Ability of Aged TDSCs
Fewer TDSCs were isolated from aged tendons compared to
young tendons (Zhou et al., 2010; Ruzzini et al., 2014). Aged
TDSCs showed delayed cell cycle progression (Zhou et al., 2010),
lower proliferation (Zhou et al., 2010; Klatte-Schulz et al., 2012;
Kohler et al., 2013; Jiang et al., 2014; Zhang and Wang, 2015; Hu
et al., 2017), lower proliferative response to ﬁbroblast growth
factor-2 (FGF-2), and transforming growth factor b 1 (TGF-b1)
(Kohler et al., 2013) as well as lower colony-forming ability
(Klatte-Schulz et al., 2012; Kohler et al., 2013) compared to their
young counterparts.
Stem Cell Markers and ECM Expression
and Migration Ability of Aged TDSCs
Aged TDSCs showed lower expression of stem cell markers (Oct-
4, nucleostemin, Sca-1, and SSEA-1) (Zhang and Wang, 2015)
and tenocyte-related markers (Zhou et al., 2010; Jiang et al.,
2014) as well as lower collagen type I secretion (Klatte-Schulz
et al., 2012; Kohler et al., 2013) and higher ﬁbronectin protein
expression (Kohler et al., 2013) compared to young TDSCs.
However, Klatte-Schulz et al. (2012) reported no signiﬁcant
difference in the surface expression of MSC markers (CD29,
CD44, CD73, CD90, and CD105) as well as mRNA expression of
ECM proteins (collagen type I, collagen type III, osteocalcin,
decorin), TGF-b1, TGF-b2, TGF-b3 between aged and young
human tenocyte-like cells. Zhou et al. (2010) reported no
difference in stem cell markers (nucleostemin, Oct-4, and
SSEA-4) between young and aged rat TDSCs. The aged/
degenerated TDSCs were deﬁcient in cell adhesion, migration
and actin dynamics (Kohler et al., 2013; Jiang et al., 2014). Aged
mouse TDSCs showed lower collagen adhesion and contractility
compared to their younger counterparts (Yin et al., 2019). This is
consistent with change of transcriptome, especially in genes
regulating cell adhesion, migration, and actin cytoskeleton, in
aged human Achilles TDSCs (Kohler et al., 2013).
Differentiation Potential of Aged TDSCs
While two studies reported similar tri-lineage differentiation
potential of young and aged human TDSCs (Kohler et al., 2013;
Ruzzini et al., 2014), one study reported higher adipogenic
differentiation potential of aged rat TDSCs (Zhou et al., 2010) and
another study showed lower osteogenic differentiation of aged
human tenocyte-like cells (Klatte-Schulz et al., 2012). Zhang and
Wang (2015) reported reduced tri-lineage differentiation potential
of aged TDSCs compared to their young counterparts. Han et al.
(2017) showed that the tenogenic differentiation capacity, collagen
type I concentration, and expression of tendon-related markers
(Scx, Tnmd, Dcn, Bgn, Col1, and Col3) of human Achilles TDSCs
decreased with advancing age. Treatment of human TDSCs with
tarzarotene,aretinoic acidreceptor (RAR)agonist,inducednuclear
translation of scleraxis and inhibited spontaneous cell
differentiation via histone methylation but not histone acetylation
in RAR signaling, suggesting that histone methylation plays roles in
the differentiation of tendon stem cells (Webb et al., 2016).
Regulation of methylation status of aged TDSCs may help to
restore the tenogenic differentiation potential of TDSCs and this
requires further research.
INTRINSIC CELLULAR DEFICITS
Cellular Senescence
Cellular senescence is a state in which a cell no longer has the
ability to proliferate (Collado et al., 2007; Hoare et al., 2010).
Senescent cells are irreversibly arrested at the G1 phase of the cell
cycle and do not respond to various external stimuli, but they
remain metabolically active (Collado et al., 2007; Hoare et al., 2010).
Cellular senescence can be triggered by a number of cellular stresses,
including oxidative stress, telomere dysfunction, non-telomeric
DNA damage, epigenetic derepression of the INK4a/ARF locus,
and oncogenic activation (Collado et al., 2007). Senescent cells are
characterized by shortened telomeres, increased activity of
senescence-associated b-galactosidase (SA-b-gal), increased
expression of p16INK4a, p53, p15INK4B, and p21WAF1/Cip1, and
histological changes (Collado et al., 2007; Hoare et al., 2010).
Cellular senescence is a potent tumor suppression mechanism. It
is seen in aged or damaged tissues, and is associated with reduced
regenerative capacity with age. Similar to other tissue-speciﬁc stem
TABLE 2 | Continued
Species
Major ﬁndings
References
Human
CITED2 mRNA and protein expression levels were signiﬁcantly higher in young TDSCs than in old TDSCs. Old TDSCs displayed lower cell
proliferation and higher senescence compared with young TDSCs. High level of CITED2 protein expression in young TDSCs correlated with
the downregulation of SP1 and p21 and upregulation of MYC, suggesting the mechanism by which CITED2 upregulates TDSC proliferation.
TGFb2 downregulated the expression of CITED2 gene and knockdown of CITED2 abolished the effect of TGFb2 on TDSC proliferation
and senescence.
Hu et al.,
2017
Human
Tenogenic differentiation capacity of TDSCs decreased signiﬁcantly with advancing age. Aged TDSCs showed higher b-galactosidase activity
and p16 and concurrently lower collagen type I concentration and expression of tendon-related markers (Scx, Tnmd, Bgn, Dcn, Col1, and
Col3). Overexpression of p16 signiﬁcantly inhibited tendon-related marker expression in young TDSCs and the inhibitory effect was mediated
by miRNA-217 and Egr1.
Han et al.,
2017
Human
The cell stiffness and size of aged TDSCs were higher than young TDSCs. The aged TDSCs also showed a denser, well-structured actin
cytoskeleton which correlated with the augmented cell stiffness. Treating aged TDSCs with ROCK-inhibitor, reversed these age-related
changes, and has rejuvenating effect on cell morphology and stiffness.
Kiderlen
et al., 2019
Lui and Wong
Tendon Stem Cells and Tendon Aging
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1338
5
cells, aged TDSCs displayed cellular senescence (Kohler et al., 2013;
Jiang et al., 2014; Han et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2017). The expression of
p21WAF1/Cip1 (Hu et al., 2017) and p16INK4a (Han et al., 2017) was
higher in human aged/degenerated Achilles TDSCs. In another
study, upregulation of p16INK4a gene and protein expression was
observed, but the gene expression of p14, p21, and p53 were
unchanged in age/degenerated human Achilles TDSCs (Kohler
et al., 2013). Further studies are required to conﬁrm this ﬁnding.
p16INK4a is a critical effector of cellular senescence. Many studies
showed that the increase in the expression of p16INK4a with aging
was linked to the impairment of the number and/or function of
adult stem cells (Janzen et al., 2006; Molofsky et al., 2006; Sousa-
Victor et al., 2014) while abolishing p16INK4a function enhanced the
regenerative potential of stem cells (Shibata et al., 2007; Sousa-
Victor et al., 2014). Indeed, overexpression of p16INK4a inhibited
tenogenic differentiation of young TDSCs (Han et al., 2017).
Analysis of the mechanism revealed that the effect was mediated
by miR-217 and its target EGR1 (Han et al., 2017). Silencing p16 in
aged satellite cells restored their quiescence and regenerative
potential (Sousa-Victor et al., 2014). miRNA are epigenetic
regulators of multiple biological activities including stem cell
differentiation. Microarray analysis suggested that dysregulation of
the Rho-associated protein kinase (ROCK) pathway might be a key
player in TDSC aging (Kohler et al., 2013). The ROCK1 and ROCK
2 mRNA and protein levels as well as activities increased in aged/
degenerated TDSCs (Kohler et al., 2013). Inhibition of ROCK1 and
ROCK2 activities in aged/degenerated human TDSCs with ROCK
inhibitor restored the cell area, F-actin content, and dynamics as
well as migration (Kohler et al., 2013). This is consistent with the
ﬁndings of another study which treatment with ROCK inhibitor
restored the morphology and stiffness of aged human TDSCs
(Kiderlen et al., 2019). miR-135a which targets ROCK1, was
signiﬁcantly downregulated in aged compared to young TDSCs
(Chen et al., 2015b). Inhibition of miR-135a was reported to
increase senescence of TDSCs (Chen et al., 2015b).
Overexpression of miR-135a in young TDSCs suppressed
senescence, promoted proliferation, and induced migration and
tenogenic differentiation in vitro (Chen et al., 2015b), suggesting
that miR-135a is a key regulator of ROCK1-induced cellular
senescence. The reduced expression of Tnmd in aged TDSCs
(Zhou et al., 2010; Han et al., 2017) may affect cellular senescence
of TDSCs as knockdown of Tnmd in mouse tail TDSC augmented
cellular senescence, reduced the gene expression of cyclin D1, and
increased the gene expression of p53 but has no effects on the gene
expression of p16 and p21 (Alberton et al., 2015). However, it is
important to note that the complete knockout of Tnmd was
artiﬁcially created in the animal model which might be different
from the reduced expression of Tnmd in aged TDSCs. miR124
suppressed collagen formation during tenogenic differentiation of
human TDSCs via suppressing EGR1 expression while anti-miR124
promoted it, suggesting that miR124 might be a promising
therapeutic target for TDSC and tendon aging (Wang et al., 2016).
Pin1 (peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase), an enzyme which
regulates conformational changes of phosphoproteins, is an
important enzyme necessary for healthy aging and prevention
of age-related diseases. Deﬁciency of Pin1 in mice caused an
early-aging phenotype (Driver and Lu, 2010). Overexpression of
Pin1 was reported to delay the progression of cellular senescence,
increase telomerase activity and decrease expression of p16INK4A
while Pin1 knockdown promoted senescence of TDSCs in vitro,
conﬁrming that Pin1 is also an important regulator of tendon
stem cell aging (Chen et al., 2015a). The Pin1-mediated anti-
aging signaling mechanism might offer an attractive therapeutic
target for protection against tendon aging.
Forkhead box P1 (FOXP1) plays a crucial role in tendon stem
cell aging. FOXP1 directly repressed transcription of p16INK4A
in BMSCs (Li et al., 2017). It controlled MSC fate and senescence
during skeletal aging (Li et al., 2017). A recent study showed that
the expression of FOXP1 mRNA and protein levels decreased
markedly in aged TDSCs. Overexpression of FOXP1 attenuated
TDSC aging with a decrease in SA-b-gal staining and p16INK4A
expression (Xu and Liu, 2018). It also rescued decreased levels of
E2F1, pRb, and cyclin D1 and restored self-renewal, migration
and differentiation in aged TDSCs (Xu and Liu, 2018).
Conversely, depletion of FOXP1 by siRNA promoted
senescence of young TDSCs.
CITED2 is a transcription factor implicated in the control of
cell proliferation and cellular senescence. Aged human Achilles
TDSCs were shown to display lower mRNA and protein
expression of CITED2 as well as lower proliferation and higher
cellular senescence compared to young TDSCs (Zhou et al., 2010;
Hu et al., 2017). Moreover, TGF-b2 was reported to
downregulate the expression of CITED2 gene and knockdown
of CITED2 abolished the effect of TGF-b2–mediated TDSC
senescence (Hu et al., 2017). The effects of TGF-b2 inhibitors
and CITED2 activators in reversing the senescence of aged
TDSCs and tendon aging await further studies.
Accumulation of Damaged DNA
and Proteins
Aging is one of the major risk factors for DNA damage, protein
mis-folding and accumulation. Age-dependent deﬁcits of the
autophagy-lysosomal and ubiquitin-proteasome systems, which
remove the damaged proteins, were reported in recent studies
(Rubinsztein et al., 2011; Tomaru et al., 2012). However, other
studies argued that it was the increase in damage caused by
metabolic stress, not the decrease in autophagy potential and
proteasome activity, which overwhelmed the protective capacity
of proteolytic systems in aged cells (Warr et al., 2013). Inhibition
of autophagy has been shown to inhibit self-renewal and
differentiation of stem cells, including TDSCs (Cheng et al.,
2015; Chen et al., 2016; Sbrana et al., 2016). Tendon aging is
dependent at least in part on the actions of mechanistic target of
rapamycin (mTOR). Long-term dietary administration of
rapamycin, an inhibitor of mTOR, was reported to attenuate
aged-associated increase in stiffness; decrease in elastiscity,
cellularity, and progression of spontaneous tendon calciﬁcation;
as well as enhance collagen turnover in aged mouse tendons
(Wilkinson et al., 2012; Zaseck et al., 2016). Autophagy plays an
important role in regulating the self-renewal capacity and stemness
of human TDSCs through suppressing reactive oxygen species
(ROS) production. Treatment of human TDSCs isolated from
Lui and Wong
Tendon Stem Cells and Tendon Aging
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1338
6
supraspinatus tendon of adult donors (26–34 years old) with
starvation or rapamycin prevented H2O2-induced loss of self-
renewal capacity and stemness (Chen et al., 2016). The effects
were mediated by increasing autophagy activity and suppressing
ROS production in TDSCs (Chen et al., 2016). On the other hand,
inhibition of autophagy reduced the protective effects of starvation
and rapamycin on H2O2-treated cells (Chen et al., 2016).
AGED NICHE
Cell-Cell Communication
Stem cells interact with each other or niche cells via direct
interaction of membrane proteins or secretion of soluble factors.
The changes of membrane proteins or secretome of stem cells or
niche cells during aging therefore could impact stem cell fate and
functions. Ephrin are receptor tyrosine kinases for mediatingshort-
distance cell-cell communication. Speciﬁcally, ephrins were
reported to regulate the attachment, spreading, migration,
differentiation, and age-associated senescence of stem cells
(Arthur et al., 2011; Goichberg et al., 2013; Li and Johnson, 2013).
Dysregulated cell-cell communication and hence proliferation,
motility, and actin turnover of aged TDSCs were reported to be
mediated by down-regulation of ephrin receptors EphA4, EphB2,
and EphB4 and ligands EFNB1 (Popov et al., 2016). Interestingly,
activationofEphA4-orEphB2-dependentreversesignalinginaged
TDSCs restored migratory ability and normalized actin turnover
while activation of EphA4 reverse signaling increased proliferation
of aged TDSCs (Popov et al., 2016).
Extracellular Matrix
The ECM of tendon consists primarily of collagens (mainly
collagen type I), proteoglycans, and glycoproteins. ECM
functions to provide mechanical strength to tendon. In
addition, it also functions to retain resident cells in place,
localize and create gradients of instructive signals that guide
stem cells in their processes of self-renewal and differentiation.
The alterations in the composition, topography and
organization of ECM of aged tendons therefore can contribute
to the loss of functions of tendon stem cells. While tendon-
derived decellularized matrix promoted tendinous phenotype
and inhibited osteogenesis of TDSCs in the presence of
osteogenic induction conditions, bone-derived decellularized
matrix induced osteogenic differentiation of TDSCs (Yin et al.,
2013). The accumulation of AGEs with age likely plays a
signiﬁcant role in stem cell dysfunction during tendon aging.
AGEs are proteins or lipids that become nonenzymatically
glycated and oxidized after exposure to carbohydrates. Proteins
are usually glycated through the lysine resides. Collagen, which is
rich in lysine, is frequently glycated. Non-enzymatic glycation of
collagen type I diminished collagen-proteoglycan binding and
weakened cell adhesion and migration (Reigle et al., 2008). The
formation of AGEs also resulted in the denaturation and cross-
linking of collagen and the AGEs were nearly irreversible once
formed. The mechanical and biological functions of long-lived
proteins like collagen are therefore affected in the aging process.
AGEs also increased the activity of transglutaminase, a cross-
linking enzyme of ECM proteins, in tenocytes in vitro, further
promoting collagen cross-linking (Rosenthal et al., 2009). The
collagen cross-links limited ﬁber sliding, reduced viscoelasticity
of tendon, and hence increased its stiffness and brittleness (Reddy,
2004; Gautieri et al., 2017), consistent with the increase in tendon
stiffness with age (Andreassen et al., 1981; Haut et al., 1992). Matrix
stiffness isknowntoregulateproliferation and lineage commitment
of MSCs (Engler et al., 2006; Nam et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2014;
Navaro et al., 2015). Matrix with lower stiffness promoted
chondrogenic differentiation, whereas matrix with high stiffness
promoted osteogenic differentiation of stem cells (Nam et al., 2011;
Navaro et al., 2015). The increase in matrix stiffness as a result of
age-induced collagen cross-links might underlie higher non-
tenogenic differentiation potential of aged TDSCs. Bone
morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) stimulated non-tenogenic
differentiation and promote proteoglycan deposition of TDSCs in
vitro (Rui et al., 2013). A recent study showed that AGEs increased
BMP-2 expression and accelerated progression of atherosclerotic
calciﬁcation in diabetes (Wang et al., 2012). AGEs were also
reported to increase the mRNA expression of BMP2, BMP4, and
osteogenic markers of human yellow ligament cells isolated from
cervical spine (Yokosuka et al., 2007). There has been no study
about the effects of AGEs on TDSCs and is an area worthy
of investigation.
The ECM composition can affect tendon stem cell fate. A
deﬁciency in proteoglycans (biglycan and ﬁbromodulin) resulted
in altered differentiation of TDSCs towards the osteogenic linage
via modulating the BMP signaling (Bi et al., 2007). Secreted
protein acidic and rich in cysteine (Sparc), also known as
osteonectin, is a collagen-binding matricellular glycoprotein
involved in collagen ﬁbril assembly and procollagen
processing. It regulates cell-ECM interactions impacting upon
cell signaling, adhesion, proliferation, migration, and survival.
Sparc also regulates adipogenesis by modulating cell
adhesiveness and cytoarchitecture. A recent study reported that
the expression of Sparc decreased in aged mouse Achilles tendons
(Gehwolf et al., 2016). The decrease in Sparc expression led to a
more contracted phenotype, an altered actin cytoskeleton, and an
elevated expression of the adipogenic marker genes Pparg and
Cebpa with a concomitant increase in lipid deposits in both aged
andSparc-/-mousetendons,aphenomenonthatiscommonlyseen
in elderly (Gehwolf et al., 2016).
The cytoskeleton of a cell and cell-matrix interactions affect
stem cell migration, proliferation, and differentiation. Cell
migration is strongly dependent on ﬁbronectin, actin
cytoskeletal organization, and turnover rate of actin ﬁlament.
Integrins bind stem cells to different ECM components and
regulate downstream signaling which are important for stem cell
self-renewal and proliferation (Piwko-Czuchra et al., 2009; Ellis
and Tanentzapf, 2010). Aged/degenerated TDSCs showed lower
actin turnover, gene expression of collagen type I, and collagen
type I-binding integrins a1, a2, and a11 but higher gene
expression of ﬁbronectin, ﬁbronectin-binding integrins av, b3,
and b5 compared to young/healthy TDSCs (Kohler et al., 2013).
The changes therefore might cause poor cell adhesion, migration,
Lui and Wong
Tendon Stem Cells and Tendon Aging
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1338
7
and actin dynamics of aged/degenerated TDSCs (Kohler et al.,
2013). Integrin receptors and their ECM ligands function
upstream of RhoA/ROCK signaling. Both the expression and
activities of ROCK1 and ROCK2, which mediate RhoA-induced
actin stress ﬁber formation via phosphorylation of myosin light
chain (Schmitz et al., 2000), increased in aged/degenerated
TDSCs (Kohler et al., 2013). Inhibition of ROCK1 and ROCK2
activities in aged/degenerated TDSCs with ROCK inhibitor Y-
27632 restored the cell area, F-actin content and dynamics as
well as migration ability, with results comparable to young/
healthy TDSCs (Kohler et al., 2013).
CD44 is a cell-surface glycoprotein involved in cell adhesion
and migration. As the expression of CD44 is implicated in poor
tendon healing (Favata et al., 2006; Ansorge et al.,2009), the
increased expression of CD44 in aged rat TDSCs might
contribute to reduced tendon repair capacity with age (Zhou
et al., 2010). Overexpression and knockdown experiments of
CD44 in aged TDSCs would shed light on the aging mechanisms.
Collagen ﬁbers are poorly organized in aged tendons
(Gehwolf et al., 2016). This is partly due to chronic-
inﬂammation and alteration in the production and activities of
MMPs in aged tendons (Yu et al., 2013). The change of
organization of collagen ﬁbers from an intact, tightly-packed
parallel orientationtoa more randomarrangement inagedtendons
could affect the fate of resident tendon stem cells. Human fetal
TDSCs seeded onto randomly-oriented ﬁbrous scaffold underwent
osteogenesis with lower levels of integrin a1, a5, and b1 subunits
compared to cells seeded onto aligned ﬁbers (Yin et al., 2010).
Locally Produced Biological Signals
Aging causes changes in the local production of biological signals
at the stem cell niche which can profoundly impact tissue stem
cell functions. Growth factors such as FGF, insulin growth
factor-1 (IGF-1), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
TGF-b1, platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and BMPs, as
well as proteins in the Wnt/b-catenin, notch, and angiopoietin-1
signaling pathways are important modulators of stem cell
functions. The Wnt/b-catenin and BMP signaling pathways
enhanced non-tenogenic differentiation of TDSCs in vitro (Lui
et al., 2013; Rui et al., 2013). Dysregulation of Wnt/b-catenin
signaling pathway was observed in different aged stem cell and
animal models (Brack et al., 2007; Liu et al., 2007; Gehwolf et al.,
2016). However, there was no differences in mRNA expression of
connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), TGF-b1, or stromal
cell-derived factor 1 in tendons of old and young rats
(Kostrominova and Brooks, 2013). The mRNA and protein
expression of TGF-b1 also did not change with age in rat Achilles
tenocytes(Yuetal.,2013).Therewasdisruptionofcircadiancontrol
in aged mouse tendon (Yeung et al., 2014). One of the circadian
genes, Gremlin-2 (Grem2) oscillated antiphase to BMP signaling
and inhibited BMP-2 induced osteogenic differentiation of human
tenocytes (Yeung et al., 2014). The study reported reduced Grem2
expression, dysregulated BMP signaling, and spontaneous
calciﬁcation in aged mouse tendon, suggesting that inhibition of
Grem2 might be involved in the calciﬁcation of aged tendons
(Yeung et al., 2014). The growth factor proﬁle of aged tendons
and their effects on functions of tendon stem cells should be
examined. Modulation of these growth factor signaling pathways
might shed light on strategies to prevent tendon aging and promote
healing of aged tendons after injury.
Inﬂamm-Aging
Aging is associated with reduced ability of the body to modulate
inﬂammation, resulting in chronic low-grade inﬂammation
termed “inﬂamm-aging” (Franceschi et al., 2000). Aged mice
were reported to show higher serum levels of inﬂammatory
cytokines such as interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis
factor a (TNF-a) compared to young mice (Wahl et al., 2010).
There were greater inﬂammatory changes with higher IL-1band
IL-6 levels in ﬂexor digitorum tendons of aged rats performing
high repetition low force handle-pulling task (HRLF) compared
to tendons in young rats performing HRLF and aged rats not
performing HRLF (Kietrys et al., 2012). More macrophages and
CTGF-immunoreactive ﬁbroblasts were observed in the
peritendon of supraspinatus tendons in aged rats after HRLF
(Kietrys et al., 2012). The greater chronic inﬂammation in aged
rat tendons after upper extremity overuse was associated with a
decrease in forelimb agility and lack of improvement of success
in reaching task (Kietrys et al., 2012). Dakin et al. (2012)
measured the level of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) in injured
equine ﬂexor tendons and found that the level of PGE2
increased while the level of formyl peptide receptor 2 (FRP2)/
ALX, a receptor responsible for suppressing inﬂammatory
response, decreased during injury with increasing age of the
horses. Uninjured tendon explants isolated from younger (<10
years) but not older horses (≥10 years) treated with IL-1b
responded by increasing FRP2/ALX receptor (Dakin et al.,
2012), suggesting that aged tendons have lower capacity to
resolve inﬂammation. de Gonzalo-Calvo et al. (2010) measured
the oxidative stress and inﬂammatory cytokines of three
volunteer groups, consisting of normoxic middle-aged people,
normoxic aged people older than 75 years, and hypoxic aged
people older than 75 years. The results showed that the
antioxidant defenses of older people with hypoxia was lower.
Serum TNF-a was signiﬁcantly increased in the aged population
while IL-6 was highly elevated in the hypoxic elderly population
(de Gonzalo-Calvo et al., 2010). Another recent clinical study on
831 subjects showed that circulating mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) increased with age and signiﬁcantly contributed to
the maintenance of chronic, low-grade inﬂammation observed in
the elderly subjects with an increase in serum TNF- a, IL-6,
RANTES, and IL-1ra (Pinti et al., 2014). Moreover, mtDNA
values of siblings were directly correlated, suggesting a role for
familiar/genetic background in controlling the levels of circulating
mtDNA (Pinti et al., 2014). In vitro stimulation of monocytes with
mtDNA resulted in an increased production of TNF-a, supporting
that mtDNA could modulate the production of proinﬂammatory
cytokines (Pinti et al., 2014). These ﬁndings supported that aged
individuals exhibited reduced capacity to resolve inﬂammation and
aging might scramble tendon stem cell functions and promote the
development of chronic tendinopathy through these pathways.
Indeed, high concentration of PGE2 was reported to reduce the
proliferation and enhance non-tenocyte differentiation of TDSCs
(Zhang and Wang, 2014). IL-1b irreversibly inhibited tenogenic and
Lui and Wong
Tendon Stem Cells and Tendon Aging
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1338
8
adipogenic differentiation as well as reversibly inhibited
chondrogenic and osteogenic differentiation of TDSCs isolated
from injured mouse Achilles tendons (Zhang et al., 2015). IL-6
was reported to stimulate rat Achilles TDSCs’ proliferation and
entry into cell cycle but inhibited the expression of tendon-related
markers (Chen et al., 2018). Recent studies showed that senescent
cells exhibited a robust increase in mRNA expression and secreted
numerous bioactive factors, including degradative enzymes,
inﬂammatory cytokines, and growth factors, which might drive
stem cell dysfunction in aged stem cells through paracrine signaling
(Coppe et al., 2010; Campisi et al., 2011). Whether this mechanism
also accounts for age-related degenerative disorders of tendons and
the factors secreted by senescent cells during tendon aging needs
further research. The damage of DNA of stem cells and niche cells
were hypothesized to be major contributors to inﬂamm-aging and
the effect was propagated and ampliﬁed by macrophages (Bonafe
et al., 2012). More researches are needed to verify this hypothesis in
aged tendon stem cells.
SYSTEMIC CHANGES OF HORMONAL
AND METABOLIC SIGNALS
Given the remarkable ability of stem cells to sense and respond to
the external stimuli, it is not surprising that the age-related
systemic changes t can also impact stem cells and their niches.
Chronic conditions such as hormone deﬁciency, diabetes
mellitus (DM) and hypertension are common in elderly. The
systemic changes of hormonal and metabolic signals as well as
drug used in the treatment of these chronic conditions can alter
niche through circulation, causing stem cells to lose or deviate
from their original functions.
DM has been reported to increase the prevalence/incidence of
tendinopathy (Ranger et al., 2016; Lui, 2017). A recent meta-
analysis of clinical studies provide strong evidence that diabetes
is associated with higher risk of tendinopathy (Ranger et al.,
2016), despite that there were inconsistent ﬁndings regarding the
effects of DM on structural and biomechanical properties of
tendon in animal models (Lui, 2017). Potential mechanisms of
DM in causing and exacerbating tendinopathy by modifying
stem cell functions via AGE formation, hyperglycemia, insulin
deﬁciency/resistance, and adipokine dysregulation have been
discussed in another review and will not be repeated (Lui, 2017).
In women, estrogen can enhance tendon collagen synthesis.
Estrogen deﬁciency was reported to negatively affect tendon
metabolism and healing. Tenocytes isolated from
ovariectomised rats were reported to show lower proliferation
rate, collagen type I, aggrecan, elastin, ﬁbronectin content in the
supernatant, and migration rate but higher apoptosis, VEGF and
MMP-13 compared to young tenocytes (Aydin et al., 2013;
Torricelli et al., 2013). Collagen content was lower in Achilles
tendons after ovariectomy compared to control rats (Ramos
et al., 2012). The Achilles tendons from ovariectomised rabbits
also showed lower gene expressions of proteoglycans aggrecan,
biglycan, decorin, and versican compared to tendons from intact
normal rabbits (Huisman et al., 2014). However, there was no
changes in the biomechanical properties of patellar tendon of
monkeys after ovariectomy (Wentorf et al., 2006). Age-
associated estrogen deﬁciency therefore can alter matrix
composition of tendons and may inﬂuence the functions of
tendon stem cells. Whether TDSCs are sensitive to estrogen is
a ﬁrst step to understand the inﬂuence of estrogen deﬁciency in
age-associated loss or dysfunction of tendon stem cells.
POTENTIAL FUTURE RESEARCH
DIRECTIONS
Research on Treatments to Reverse the
Intrinsic Cellular Deﬁcits and Aged Niche
of Tendon Stem Cells
As a new cell type identiﬁed in tendon, more studies are needed
to ﬁll the gaps of the aging mechanisms of tendon stem cells.
Interventions that can combat protein and DNA damages,
cellular senescence, oxidative stress, chronic inﬂammation; and
inhibit AGE formation or promote its removal may rejuvenate
aged tendon stem cells. These are attractive anti-aging options to
explore. The growth factor and cytokine proﬁle of aged tendons
and their effects on functions of tendon stem cells should be
examined. Notably, medium of young TDSCs under hypoxic
culture condition was reported to enhance the migration,
proliferation and mRNA expression of tendon-related markers
as well as reduced senescence of aged TDSCs (Jiang et al., 2014).
Exposure of aged rat patellar tendon TDSCs to young
decellularized tendon ECM enhanced their proliferation,
tendon-related marker expression (Scx, Tnmd), and stem cell
marker expression (Oct-4, SSEA-1) as well as reduced SA-b-gal
activity (Jiang et al., 2018).
Research on the Effects and Mechanisms
of Common Aging Conditions on Tendon
Stem Cells and Tendon
The effects of common aging conditions particularly diabetes,
hypertension and hormonal deﬁciency and the drugs used on the
functions of tendon stem cells and tendonshould beexamined. The
sensitivity of TDSCs to estrogen has not been explored and should
be examined. Similarly, studies on the effects of hyperglycemia,
AGE, insulin deﬁciency/resistance, and adipokine dysregulation in
diabetes on functions of tendon stem cells are needed.
Research on the Effects and Mechanisms
of Exercise on Tendon Stem Cells and
Tendon
TDSCs are sensitive to mechanical load. High uniaxial cyclic
tensile loading (8%) induced osteogenic differentiation of TDSCs
while low uniaxial cyclic tensile loading (4%) promoted
tenogenic differentiation of TDSCs (Zhang and Wang, 2010b;
Rui et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2018). Modulating the mechanical
load experienced by tendon stem cells therefore may counteract
the effect of aging on tendon. In this regard, moderate
mechanical stretching (4%) of aged TDSCs in vitro
signiﬁcantly increased the protein expression of nucleostemin
and mRNA expression of Nanog. It also increased the expression
of tenocyte-related genes (Col1 and Tnmd) without increasing
Lui and Wong
Tendon Stem Cells and Tendon Aging
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1338
9
the expression of non-tenocyte-related genes (Lpl, Sox9 and
Runx2) of aged TDSCs (Zhang and Wang, 2015).
In an in vivo study, moderate treadmill running of aged mice
increased the proliferation rate of aged TDSCs in culture, decreased
lipid deposition, proteoglycan accumulation and calciﬁcation, and
increased the expression of nucleostemin-expressing TDSCs in the
patellar tendons (Zhang and Wang, 2015). Moderate exercises can
also mitigate the deleterious effects of aging on the niche of tendon
stem cells by improving tendon microcirculation, matrix
composition, and organization as well as reducing AGE level and
matrixstiffness(Couppeetal.,2014;WoodandBrooks,2016).With
training, Col1a1 and Mmp8 expression in aged mouse Achilles
tendons were restored to levels similar to adult controls (Wood and
Brooks, 2016). Moderate treadmill running prior to an injury
augmented tendon wound healing in an aged rat model with
reduced vascularity, lipid-like structures, and senescent cells as
well as increased production of more collagen ﬁbrils and better
ﬁbril organization (Zhang et al., 2016). The effect was likely
mediated by the improvement of metabolism and functional
ﬁtness of aged tendon stem cells because aged TDSCs isolated
from exercised rats showed higher stem cell marker expression,
proliferation, colony-forming ability, and tenocyte-related gene
expression as well as lower non-tenocyte-related gene expression
compared to aged cells isolated from cage control rats (Zhang et al.,
2016).Thebeneﬁcialeffectofexerciseonagedtendonscouldalsobe
due to systemic effects in addition to direct loading as tail tendons
from aged and exercised rats assumed the elastic characteristics of
their younger counterparts after exercise (Lacroix etal.,2013).Stem
cells expressed different channels that could sense membrane
tension (Soria et al., 2013). One study showed that the stretch-
mediated activation channel, cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (CFTR), was up-regulated in TDSCs
during tenogenic differentiation under mechanical stretching (Liu
etal.,2017).Furtherstudiestoconﬁrmthebeneﬁcialeffects,optimal
loading protocol, and mechanosensing mechanisms of excise on
aged tendon stem cells and tendon should be done.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE
PERSPECTIVES
In summary, the composition, structure, and mechanical
properties of tendons deteriorate with aging and are driven
at least in part by an age-associated decline in the metabolism
and functional ﬁtness of tendon stem cells. Unlike their
young and healthy counterparts, aged TDSCs were shown to
be larger and ﬂatten. The number and stemness of TDSCs
isolated from aged tendons were lower. They exhibited altered
multi-lineage differentiation potential, deﬁciency in cell adhesion,
and migration as well as early cellular senescence. The intrinsic
cellular deﬁcits, aged niche, and systemic hormonal and
metabolic changes associated with aging can drive the aging
process of stem cells, some of which have been demonstrated in
TDSCs recently. There is no evidence about the factor(s)
FIGURE 1 | Diagram summarizing the key biological characteristics of aged tendon, and potential factors inﬂuencing the fate and functions of TDSCs during tendon
aging. Current evidences on aging of other adult stem cells and limited data on tendon-derived stem cells (TDSCs) suggested that aging of tendon stem cell likely
occurs via intrinsic cellular deﬁcits, aging of stem cell niche, and age-associated systemic hormonal and metabolic changes. These factors interact with each other to
affect stem cell function at multiple levels.
Lui and Wong
Tendon Stem Cells and Tendon Aging
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1338
10
triggering the aging of tendon stem cells. The authors speculate
that they may work together in inducing functional deﬁcits of
tendon stem cells as aging is a continued process. Figure 1
summarizes the key biological characteristics of aged tendon, and
potential factors inﬂuencing the fate and functions of TDSCs
during tendon aging. Uncovering the mechanisms underpinning
the regenerative decline of metabolism and functions of aged
tendon stem cells would have profound implications for the
development of stem cell-based therapeutics to reset the aging
clock of tendons.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
PL conceived the idea, wrote, and proof-read the manuscript.
CW wrote and proof-read the manuscript.
FUNDING
This study was supported by the one-line budget of The Hong
Kong Polytechnic University (SF1920-CM).
REFERENCES
Ackerman, J. E., Bah, I., Jonason, J. H., Buckley, M. R., and Loiselle, A. E. (2017).
Aging does not alter tendon mechanical properties during homeostasis, but
does impair ﬂexor tendon healing. J. Orthop. Res. 35 (12), 2716–2724. doi:
10.1002/jor.23580
Albers, I. S., Zwerver, J., Diercks, R. L., Dekker, J. H., and Van den Akker-Scheek, I.
(2016). Incidence and prevalence of lower extremity tendinopathy in a Dutch
general practice population: a cross-sectional study. BMC Musculoskelet
Disord. 17, 16. doi: 10.1186/s12891-016-0885-2
Alberton, P., Dex, S., Popov, C., Shukunami, C., Schieker, M., and Docheva, D.
(2015). Loss of tenomodulin results in reduced self-renewal and augmented
senescence of tendon stem/progenitor cells. Stem Cells Dev. 24 (5), 597–609.
doi: 10.1089/scd.20140314
Andreassen, T. T., Seyerhansen, K., and Bailey, A. J. (1981). Thermal-stability,
mechanical-properties and reducible cross-links of rat tail tendon in
experimental diabetes. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 677 (2), 313–317. doi:
10.1016/0304-4165(81)90101-X
Ansorge, H. L., Beredjiklian, P. K., and Soslowsky, L. J. (2009). CD44 deﬁciency
improves healing tendon mechanics and increases matrix and cytokine
expression in a mouse patellar tendon injury model. J. Orthop. Res. 27 (10),
1386–1391. doi: 10.1002/jor.20891
Arthur, A., Zannettino, A., Panagopoulos, R., Koblar, S. A., Sims, N. A., Stylianou, C.,
et al. (2011). EphB/ephrin-B interactions mediate human MSC attachment,
migration and osteochondral differentiation. Bone 48 (3), 533–542. doi:
10.1016/j.bone.2010.10.180
Aydin, A., Kenar, H., Atmaca, H., Alici, T., Gacar, G., Muezzinoglu, U. S., et al.
(2013). The short- and long- term effects of estrogen deﬁciency on apoptosis in
musculoskeletal tissues: an experimental animal model study. Arch. Iran Med.
16 (5), 271–276. doi: 013165/AIM.006
Bi, Y., Ehirchiou, D., Kilts, T. M., Inkson, C. A., Embree, M. C., Sonoyama, W.,
et al. (2007). Identiﬁcation of tendon stem/progenitor cells and the role of the
extracellular matrix in their niche. Nat. Med. 13 (10), 1219–1227. doi: 10.1038/
nm1630
Bonafe, M., Storci, G., and Franceschi, C. (2012). Inﬂamm-aging of the stem cell
niche: breast cancer as a paradigmatic example: breakdown of the multi-shell
cytokine network fuels cancer in aged people. Bioessays 34 (1), 40–49. doi:
10.1002/bies.201100104
Brack, A. S., Conboy, M. J., Roy, S., Lee, M., Kuo, C. J., Keller, C., et al. (2007).
Increased Wnt signaling during aging alters muscle stem cell fate and increases
ﬁbrosis. Science 317 (5839), 807–810. doi: 10.1126/science.1144090
Brewer, B. J. (1979). Aging of the rotator cuff. Am. J. Sports Med. 7 (2), 102–110.
doi: 10.1177/036354657900700206
Campisi, J., Andersen, J. K., Kapahi, P., and Melov, S. (2011). Cellular senescence:
a link between cancer and age-related degenerative disease? Seminar Cancer
Biol. 21 (6), 354–359. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2011.09.001
Chen, L., Liu, J., Tao, Z., Wang, G., Wang, Q., and Liu, X. (2015a). The role of Pin1
protein in aging of human tendon stem/progenitor cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 464 (2), 487–492. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.06.163
Chen, L., Wang, G. D., Liu, J. P., Wang, H. S., Liu, X. M., Wang, Q., et al. (2015b).
miR-135a modulates tendon stem/progenitor cell senescence via suppressing
ROCK1. Bone 71, 210–216. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2014.11.001
Chen, H., Ge, H. A., Wu, G. B., Cheng, B., Lu, Y., and Jiang, C. (2016). Autophagy
prevents oxidative stress-induced loss of self-renewal capacity and stemness in
human tendon stem cells by reducing ROS accumulation. Cell Physiol.
Biochem. 39 (6), 2227–2238. doi: 10.1159/000447916
Chen, S., Deng, G., Li, K., Zheng, H., Wang, G., Yu, B., et al. (2018). Interleukin-6
promotes proliferation but inhibits tenogenic differentiation via the Janus
Kinase/Signal transducers and activators of transcription 3 (JAK/STAT3)
pathway in tendon-derived stem cells. Med. Sci. Monit. 24, 1567–1573. doi:
10.12659/MSM.908802
Cheng, Y., Wang, B., Zhou, H., Dang, S., Jin, M., Shi, Y., et al. (2015). Autophagy is
required for the maintenance of liver progenitor cell functionality. Cell Physiol.
Biochem. 36 (3), 1163–1174. doi: 10.1159/000430287
Collado, M., Blasco, M. A., and Serrano, M. (2007). Cellular senescence in cancer
and aging. Cell 130 (2), 223–233. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.07.003
Conboy, I. M., Conboy, M. J., Wagers, A. J., Girma, E. R., Weissman, I. L., and Rando,
T.A.(2005). Rejuvenationofagedprogenitorcellsbyexposuretoayoungsystemic
environment. Nature 433 (7027), 760–764. doi: 10.1038/nature03260
Coppe, J. P., Desprez, P. Y., Krtolica, A., and Campisi, J. (2010). The senescence-
associated secretory phenotype: the dark side of tumor suppression. Annu. Rev.
Pathol. 5, 99–118. doi: 10.1146/annurev-pathol-121808-102144
Couppe, C., Hansen, P., Kongsgaard, M., Kovanen, V., Suetta, C., Aagaard, P., et al.
(2009). Mechanical properties and collagen cross-linking of the patellar tendon
in old and young men. J. Appl. Physiol. (1985), 880–886. doi: 10.1152/
japplphysiol.002912009
Couppe, C., Svensson, R. B., Grosset, J. F., Kovanen, V., Nielsen, R. H., Olsen, M. R.,
et al. (2014). Life-long endurance running is associated with reduced glycation
and mechanical stress in connective tissue. Age (Dordr) 36 (4), 9665. doi: 10.1007/
s11357-014-9665-9
Dakin, S. G., Dudhia, J., Werling, N. J., Werling, D., Abayasekara, D. R., and Smith,
R. K. (2012). Inﬂamm-aging and arachidonic acid metabolite difference with
stage of tendon disease. PloS One 7 (11), e48978. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0048978
de Gonzalo-Calvo, D., Neitzert, K., Fernandez, M., Vega-Naredo, I., Caballero, B.,
Garcia-Macia, M., et al. (2010). Differential inﬂammatory responses in aging
and disease: TNF-alpha and IL-6 as possible biomarkers. Free Radic. Biol. Med.
49 (5), 733–737. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.05.019
de Jonge, S., van den Berg, C., de Vos, R. J., van der Heide, H. J., Weir, A., Verhaar,
J. A., et al. (2011). Incidence of midportion Achilles tendinopathy in the
general population. Br. J. Sports Med. 45 (13), 1026–1028. doi: 10.1136/
bjsports-2011-090342
Delabastita, T., Bogaerts, S., and Vanwanseele, B. (2018). Age-related changes in
Achillestendonstiffnessandimpactoffunctionalactivities:asystematicreviewand
meta-analysis. J. Aging Phys. Act. 27 (1), 116–127. doi: 10.1123/japa.2017-0359
Driver, J. A., and Lu, K. P. (2010). Pin1: a new genetic link between Alzheimer’s
disease, cancer and aging. Curr. Aging Sci. 3 (3), 158–165. doi: 10.2174/
1874609811003030158
Dudhia, J., Scott, C. M., Draper, E. R., Heinegard, D., Pitsillides, A. A., and Smith,
R. K. (2007). Aging enhances a mechanically-induced reduction in tendon
strength by an active process involving matrix metalloproteinase activity. Aging
Cell. 6 (4), 547–556. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2007.00307.x
Dunkman, A. A., Buckley, M. R., Mienaltowski, M. J., Adams, S. M., Thomas, S. J.,
Satchell, L., et al. (2013). Decorin expression is important for age-related
Lui and Wong
Tendon Stem Cells and Tendon Aging
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1338
11
changes in tendon structure and mechanical properties. Matrix Biol. 32 (1), 3–
13. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2012.11.005
Ellis, S. J., and Tanentzapf, G. (2010). Integrin-mediated adhesion and stem-cell-
niche interactions. Cell Tissue Res. 339 (1), 121–130. doi: 10.1007/s00441-009-
0828-4
Engler, A. J., Sen, S., Sweeney, H. L., and Sischer, D. E. (2006). Matrix elasticity
directs stem cell lineage speciﬁcation. Cell 126 (4), 677–689. doi: 10.1016/
j.cell.2006.06.044
Favata, M., Beredjiklian, P. K., Zgonis, M. H., Beason, D. P., Crombleholme, T. M.,
Jawad, A. F., et al. (2006). Regenerative properties of fetal sheep tendon are not
adversely affected by transplantation into an adult environment. J. Orthop. Res.
24 (11), 2124–2132. doi: 10.1002/jor.20271
Fehringer, E. V., Sun, J., VanOeveren, L. S., Keller, B. K., and Matsen, F. A. (2008).
Full-thickness rotator cuff tear prevalence and correlation with function and
co-morbidities in patients sixty-ﬁve years and older. J. Shoulder Elbow Surg. 17
(6), 881–885. doi: 10.1016/j.jse.2008.05.039
Franceschi, C., Bonafè, M., Valensin, S., Olivieri, F., De Luca, M., Ottaviani, E.,
et al. (2000). Inﬂamm-aging: an evolutionary perspective on
immunosenescence. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 908, 244–254. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-
6632.2000.tb06651.x
Fukada, S., Ma, Y., and Uezumi, A. (2014). Adult stem cell and mesenchymal
progenitor theories of aging. Front. Cell. Dev. Biol. 2, 10. doi: 10.3389/
fcell.2014.00010
Funakoshi, T., Iwasaki, N., Kamishima, T., Nishida, M., Ito, Y., Kondo, M., et al.
(2010). In vivo visualization of vascular patterns of rotator cuff tears using
contrast-enhanced ultrasound. Am. J. Sports Med. 38 (12), 2464–2471. doi:
10.1177/0363546510375536
Gautieri, A., Passini, F. S., Silvan, U., Guizar-Sicairos, M., Carimati, G., Volpi, P., et al.
(2017). Advanced glycation end-products: mechanics of aged collagen from
molecule to tissue. Matrix Biol. 59, 95–108. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2016.09.001
Gehwolf, R., Wagner, A., Lehner, C., Bradshaw, A. D., Scharler, C., Niestrawska, J. A.,
et al. (2016). Pleiotropic roles of the matricellular protein Sparc in tendon
maturation and ageing. Sci. Rep. 6, 32635. doi: 10.1038/srep32635
Gillis, C., Pool, R. R., Meagher, D. M., Stover, S. M., Reiser, K., and Willits, N.
(1997). Effect of maturation and aging on the histomorphometric and
biochemical characteristics of equine superﬁcial digital ﬂexor tendon. Am. J.
Vet. Res. 58 (4), 425–430.
Goichberg, P., Kannappan, R., Cimini, M., Bai, Y., Sanada, F., Sorrentino, A., et al.
(2013). Age-associated defects in EphA2 signaling impair the migration of
human cardiac progenitor cells. Circulation 128 (20), 2211–2223. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.113.004698
Han, W., Wang, B., Liu, J., and Chen, L. (2017). The p16/miR-217/EGR1 pathway
modulates age-related tenogenic differentiation in tendon stem/progenitor
cells. Acta Biochim. Biophys. Sin. (Shanghai). 49 (11), 1015–1021. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmx104
Haut, R. C., Lancaster, R. L., and DeCamp, C. E. (1992). Mechanical properties of
the canine patellar tendon: some correlations with age and the content of
collagen. J. Biomech. 25 (2), 163–173. doi: 10.1016/0021-9290(92)90273-4
Hoare, M., Das, T., and Alexander, G. (2010). Ageing, telomeres, senescence, and
liver injury. J. Hepatol. 53 (5), 950–961. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.06.009
Hsiao, M. Y., Chen, Y. C., Lin, C. Y., Chen, W. S., and Wang, T. G. (2015). Reduced
patellar tendon elasticity with aging: In vivo assessment by shear wave
elastography. Ultrasound Med. Biol. 41 (11), 2899–2905. doi: 10.1016/
j.ultrasmedbio.2015.07.008
Hu, C., Zhang, Y., Tang, K., Luo, Y., Liu, Y., and Chen, W. (2017). Downregulation
of CITED2 contributes to TGFb-mediated senescence of tendon-derived stem
cells. Cell Tissue Res. 368 (1), 93–104. doi: 10.1007/s00441-016-2552-1
Huisman, E. S., Andersson, G., Scott, A., Reno, C. R., Hart, D. A., and Thomton, G. M.
(2014). Regional molecular and cellular differences in the female rabbit Achilles
tendon complex: potential implications for understanding responses to loading. J.
Anat. 224 (5), 528–547. doi: 10.1111/joa.12169
Iagnocco, A., Filippucci, E., Sakellariou, G., Ceccarelli, F., Di Geso, L., Carili, L.,
et al. (2013). Ultrasound imaging for the rheumatologist XLIV. Ultrasound of
the shoulder in healthy individuals. Clin. Exp. Rheumatol. 31 (2), 165–171.
Ippolito, E., Natali, P. G., Postacchini, F., Accinni, L., and De Martino, C. (1980).
Morphological, immunochemical and biochemical study of rabbit Achilles
tendon at various ages. JBJS 62 (4), 583–598.
Janzen, V., Forkert, R., Fleming, H. E., Saito, Y., Waring, M. T., Dombkowski, D. M.,
et al. (2006). Stem-cell ageing modiﬁed by the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p16INK4a. Nature 443 (7110), 421–426. doi: 10.1038/nature05159
Jiang, D., Jiang, Z., Zhang, Y., Wang, S., Yang, S., Xu, B., et al. (2014). Effect of
young extrinsic environment stimulated by hypoxia on the function of aged
tendon stem cell. Cell Biochem. Biophys. 70 (2), 967–973. doi: 10.1007/s12013-
014-0004-7
Jiang, D., Xu, B., and Gao, P. (2018). Effects of young extracellular matrix on the
biological characteristics of aged tendon stem cells. Adv. Clin. Exp. Med. 27
(12), 625–1630. doi: 10.17219/acem/75503
Josa, L. G., and Kannus, P. (1997). Human Tendons: Anatomy, Physiology and
Pathology (Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics Publishers).
Kiderlen, S., Polzer, C., Radler, J. O., Docheva, D., Clausen-Schaumann, H., and
Sudhop, S. (2019). Age related changes in cell stiffness of tendon stem/
progenitor cells an rejuvenating effect of ROCK-inhibition. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 509 (3), 839–844. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.01.027
Kietrys, D. M., Barr-Gillespie, A. E., Amin, M., Wade, C. K., Popoff, S. N., and
Barbe, M. F. (2012). Aging contributes to inﬂammation in upper extremity
tendons and declines in forelimb agility in a rat model of upper extremity
overuse. PloS One 7 (10), e46954. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046954
Klatte-Schulz, F., Pauly, S., Scheibel, M., Greiner, S., Gerhardt, C., Schmidmaier, G.,
et al. (2012). Inﬂuence of age on the cell biological characteristics and the
stimulation potential of male human tenocyte-like cells. Eur. Cell Mater 24, 74–
89. doi: 10.22203/eCM.v024a06
Kohler, J., Popov, C., Klotz, B., Alberton, P., Prall, W. C., Haasters, F., et al. (2013).
Uncovering the cellular and molecular changes in tendon stem/progenitor cells
attributed to tendon aging and degeneration. Aging Cell 12 (6), 988–999. doi:
10.1111/acel.12124
Kostrominova, T., and Brooks, S. (2013). Age related changes in structure and
extracellular matrix protein expression levels in rat tendons. Age 35 (6), 2203–
2214. doi: 10.1007/s11357-013-9514-2
Lacroix, A. S., Duenwald-Kuehl, S. E., Brickson, S., Akins, T. L., Diffee, G., Aiken, J.,
et al. (2013). Effect of age and exercise on the viscoelastic properties of rat tail
tendon. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 41 (6), 1120–1128. doi: 10.1007/s10439-013-0796-4
Landi, A., Elves, M., and Piaggi, W. (1983). The blood ﬂow of rabbits’ tendons.
Acta Orthop. Scand. 54 (6), 832–835. doi: 10.3109/17453678308992917
Lee, J., Abdeen, A. A., Huang, T. H., and Kilian, K. A. (2014). Controlling cell
geometry on substrates of variables stiffness can tune the degree of osteogenesis
in human mesenchymal stem cells. J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 38, 209–
218. doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2014.01.009
Li, J., and Johnson, S. E. (2013). Ephrin-A5 promotes bovine muscle progenitor
cell migration before mitotic activation. J. Anim. Sci. 91 (3), 1086–1093. doi:
10.2527/jas.2012-5728
Li, H., Liu, P., Xu, S., Li, Y., Dekker, J. D., Li, B., et al. (2017). FOXP1 controls
mesenchymal stem cell commitment and senescence during skeletal aging.
J. Clin. Invest. 127 (4), 1241–1253. doi: 10.1172/JCI89511
Liu, H., Fergusson, M. M., Castilho, R. M., Liu, J., Cao, L., Chen, J., et al. (2007).
Augmented Wnt signaling in a mammalian model of accelerated aging. Science
317 (5839), 803–806. doi: 10.1126/science.1143578
Liu, Y., Xu, J., Xu, L., Wu, T., Sun, Y., Lee, Y. W., et al. (2017). Cystic ﬁbrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator mediates tenogenic differentiation of
tendon-derived stem cells and tendon repair: accelerating tendon injury
healing by intervening in its downstream signaling. FASEB J. 31 (9), 3800–
3815. doi: 10.1096/fj.201601181R
Lui, P. P., and Chan, K. M. (2011). Tendon-derived stem cells (TDSC): from basic
science to potential roles in tendon pathology and tissue engineering
applications. Stem Cell Rev. 7 (4), 883–897. doi: 10.1007/s12015-011-9276-0
Lui, P. P., Lee, Y. W., Wong, Y. M., Zhang, X., Dai, K., and Rolf, C. G. (2013).
Expression of Wnt pathway mediators in metaplasic tissue in animal model
and clinical samples of tendinopathy. Rheumatol. (Oxford) 52 (9), 1609–1618.
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ket214
Lui, P. P. (2015). Markers for the identiﬁcation of tendon-derived stem cells in
vitro and tendon stem cells in situ – update and future development. Stem Cell
Res. Ther. 6, 106. doi: 10.1186/s13287-015-0097-y
Lui, P. P. (2017). Tendinopathy in diabetes patients – epidemiology, pathogenesis
and management. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 27 (8), 776–787. doi: 10.1111/
sms.12824
Lui and Wong
Tendon Stem Cells and Tendon Aging
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1338
12
Molofsky, A. V., Slutsky, S. G., Joseph, N. M., He, S., Pardal, R., Krishnamurthy, J.,
et al. (2006). Increasing p16INK4a expression decreases forebrain progenitors
and neurogenesis during ageing. Nature 443 (7110), 448–452. doi: 10.1038/
nature05091
Nam, J., Johnson, J., Lannutti, J. J., and Agarwal, S. (2011). Modulation of
embryonic mesenchymal progenitor cell differentiation via control over pure
mechanical modulus in electrospun nanoﬁbers. Acta Biomater. 7 (4), 1516–
1524. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2010.11.022
Navaro, Y., Bleich-Kimelman, N., Hazanov, L., Mironi-Harpaz, I., Shachaf, Y.,
Garty, S., et al. (2015). Matrix stiffness determines the fate of nucleus pulposus-
derived stem cells. Biomaterials 49, 68–76. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.
2015.01.021
Pardes, A. M., Beach, Z. M., Raja, H., Rodriguez, A. B., Freedman, B. R., and
Soslowsky, L. J. (2017). Aging leads to inferior Achilles tendon mechanics and
altered ankle function in rodents. J. Biomech. 60, 30–38. doi: 10.1016/
j.jbiomech.2017.06.008
Peffers, M. J., Thorpe, C. T., Collins, J. A., Eong, R., Wei, T. K. J., Screen, H. R. C.,
et al. (2014). Proteomic analysis reveals age-related changes in tendon matrix
composition, with age- and injury- speciﬁc matrix fragmentation. J. Biol.
Chem. 289 (37), 25867–25878. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.566554
Pinti, M., Cevenini, E., Nasi, M., De Biasi, S., Salvioli, S., Monti, D., et al. (2014).
Circulating mitochondrial DNA increases with age and is a familiar trait:
Implications for inﬂamm-aging. Eur. J. Immunol. 44 (5), 1552–1562. doi:
10.1002/eji.201343921
Piwko-Czuchra, A., Koegel, H., Meyer, H., Bauer, M., Werner, S., Brakebusch, C.,
et al. (2009). B1 integrin-mediated adhesion signaling is essential for epidermal
progenitor cell expansion. PloS One 4 (5), e5488. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0005488
Popov, C., Kohler, J., and Docheva, D. (2016). Activation of EphA4 and EphB2
reverse signaling restores the age-associated reduction of self-renewal,
migration, and actin turnover in human tendon stem/progenitor cells. Front.
Aging Neurosci. 7, 246. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2015.00246
Ramos, J. E., Al-Nakkash, L., Peterson, A., Gump, B. S., Janjulia, T., Moore, M. S.,
et al. (2012). The soy isoﬂavone genistein inhibits the reduction in Achilles
tendon collagen content induced by ovariectomy in rats. Scand. J. Med. Sci.
Sports 22 (5), e108–e114. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0838.2012.01516.x
Ranger, T. A., Wong, A. M., Cook, J. L., and Gaida, J. E. (2016). Is there an
association between tendinopathy and diabetes mellitus? systematic Rev. meta-
analysis. Br. J. Sports Med. 50 (16), 982–989. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2015-
094735
Reddy, G. K. (2004). Cross-linking in collagen by nonenzymatic glycation
increases the matrix stiffness in rabbit achilles tendon. Exp. Diabetes Res. 5
(2), 143–153. doi: 10.1080/15438600490277860
Reigle, K. L., Di Lullo, G., Turner, K. R., Last, J. A., Chervoneva, I., Birk, D. E., et al.
(2008). Non-enzymatic glycation of type I collagen diminishes collagen-
proteoglycan binding and weakens cell adhesion. J. Cell Biochem. 104 (5),
1684–1698. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21735
Riley, G. P., Harrall, R. L., Constnt, C. R., Chard, M. D., Cawston, T. E., and
Hazleman, B. L. (1994). Glycosaminoglycans of human rotator cuff tendons:
changes with age and in chronic rotator cuff tendinitis. Ann. Rheumatol. Dis.
53 (6), 367–376. doi: 10.1136/ard.53.6.367
Rosenthal, A. K., Gohr, C. M., Mitton, E., Monnier, V., and Burner, T. (2009).
Advanced glycation end products increase transglutaminase activity in primary
porcine tenocytes. J. Investig. Med. 57 (2), 460–466. doi: 10.2310/
JIM.0b013e3181954ac6
Rubinsztein, D. C., Marino, G., and Kroemer, G. (2011). Autophagy and aging.
Cell 146 (5), 682–695. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.07.030
Ruckh, J. M., Zhao, J. W., Shadrach, J. L., van Wijngaarden, P., Rao, T. N., Wagers,
A. J., et al. (2012). Rejuvenation of regeneration in the aging central nervous
system. Cell Stem Cell. 10 (1), 96–103. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2011.11.019
Rudzki, J. R., Adler, R. S., Warren, R. F., Kadrmas, W. R., Verma, N., Pearle, A. D.,
et al. (2008). Contrast-enhanced ultrasound characterization of the vascularity
of the rotator cuff tendon: age- and activity-related changes in the intact
asymptomatic rotator cuff. J. Shoulder Elbow Surg. 17 (1 suppl), 96S–100S. doi:
10.1016/j.jse.2007.07.004
Rui, Y. F., Lui, P. P., Li, G., Fu, S. C., Lee, Y. W., and Chan, K. M. (2010). Isolation
and characterization of multipotent rat tendon-derived stem cells. Tissue Eng.
Part A. 16 (5), 1549–1558. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.20090529
Rui, Y. F., Lui, P. P., Ni, M., Chan, L. S., Lee, Y. W., and Chan, K. M. (2011).
Mechanical loading increased BMP-2 expression which promoted osteogenic
differentiation of tendon-derived stem cells. J. Orthop. Res. 29 (3), 390–396.
doi: 10.1002/jor.21218
Rui, Y. F., Lui, P. P., Wong, Y. M., Tan, Q., and Chan, K. M. (2013). BMP-2
stimulated non-tenogenic differentiation and promoted proteoglycan
deposition of tendon-derived stem cells (TDSCs) in vitro. J. Orthop. Res. 31
(5), 746–753. doi: 10.1002/jor.22290
Ruzzini, L., Abbruzzese, F., Rainer, A., Longo, U., Trombetta, M., Maffulli, N., et al.
(2014). Characterization of age-related changes of tendon stem cells from adult
human tendons. Knee Surg. Sports Traumatol. Arthrosc. 22 (11), 2856–2866.
doi: 10.1007/s00167-013-2457-4
Salini, V., Vanni, D., Pantalone, A., and Abate, M. (2015). Platelet rich plasma
therapy in non-insertional achilles tendinopathy: the efﬁcacy is reduced in 60-
years old people compared to young and middle-age individuals. Front. Aging
Neurosci. 7, 228. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2015.00228
Sato, T., Katagiri, K., Yokonishi, T., Kubota, Y., Inoue, K., Ogonuki, N., et al.
(2011). In vitro production of fertile sperm from murine spermatogonial stem
cell lines. Nat. Commun. 2, 472. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1478
Sbrana, F. V., Cortini, M., Avnet, S., Perut, F., Columbaro, M., De Milito, A., et al.
(2016). The role of autophagy in the maintenance of stemness and
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. Stem Cell Rev. 12 (6), 621–633.
doi: 10.1007/s12015-016-9690-4
Schmitz, A. A., Govek, E. E., Bottner, B., and Van Aelst, L. (2000). Rho GTPases:
signaling, migration, and invasion. Exp. Cell Res. 261 (1), 1–12. doi: 10.1006/
excr.20005049
Sharpless, N. E., and DePinho, R. A. (2007). How stem cells age and why this
makes us grow old. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 8 (9), 703–713. doi: 10.1038/
nrm2241
Shibata, K. R., Aoyama, T., Shima, Y., Fukiage, K., Otsuka, S., Furu, M., et al.
(2007). Expression of the p16INK4A gene is associated closely with senescence
of human mesenchymal stem cells and is potentially silenced by DNA
methylation during in vitro expansion. Stem Cells 25 (9), 2371–2382. doi:
10.1634/stemcells.2007-0225
Soria, B., Navas, S., Hmadcha, A., and Hamill, O. P. (2013). Single
mechanosensitive and Ca2+- sensitive channel currents recorded from
mouse and human embryonic stem cells. J. Membr. Biol. 246 (3), 215–230.
doi: 10.1007/s00232-012-9523-6
Sousa-Victor, P., Gutarra, S., Garcia-Prat, L., Rodriguez-Ubreva, J., Ortet, L., Ruiz-
Bonilla, V., et al. (2014). Geriatric muscle stem cells switch reversible quiescence
into senescence. Nature 506 (7488), 316–321. doi: 10.1038/nature13013
Tan, Q., Lui, P. P., Rui, Y. F., and Wong, Y. M. (2012). Comparison of potentials of
stem cells isolated from tendon and bone marrow for musculoskeletal tissue
engineering. Tissue Eng. Part A. 18 (7-8), 840–851. doi: 10.1089/
ten.TEA.2011.0362
Teunis, T., Lubberts, B., Reilly, B. T., and Rin, D. (2014). A systematic review and
pooled analysis of the prevalence of rotator cuff disease with increasing age.
J. Shoulder Elbow Surg. 23 (12), 1913–1921. doi: 10.1016/j.jse.2014.08.001
Thorpe, C. T., McDermott, B. T., Goodship, A. E., Clegg, P. D., and Birch, H. L.
(2016). Ageing does not result in a decline in cell synthetic activity in an injury
prone tendon. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports. 26 (6), 684–693. doi: 10.1111/
sms.12500
Tomaru, U., Takahashi, S., Ishizu, A., Miyatake, Y., Gohda, A., Suzuki, S., et al.
(2012). Decreased proteasomal activity causes age-related phenotypes and
promotes the development of metabolic abnormalities. Am. J. Pathol. 180 (3),
963–972. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.11.012
Torricelli, P., Veronesi, F., Pagani, S., Maffulli, N., Masiero, S., Frizziero, A., et al.
(2013). In vitro tenocyte metabolism in aging and oestrogen deﬁciency. Age
(Dordr) 35 (6), 2125–2136. doi: 10.1007/s11357-012-9500-0
Tsai, W. C., Chang, H. N., Yu, T. Y., Chien, C. H., Fu, L. F., Liang, F. C., et al.
(2011). Decreased proliferation of aging tenocytes is associated with down-
regulation of cellular senescence-inhibited gene and up-regulation of p27.
J. Orthop. Res. 29 (10), 1598–1603. doi: 10.1002/jor.21418
Turan, A., Teber, M. A., Yakut, Z. I., Unlu, H. A., and Hekimoglu, B. (2015).
Sonoelastographic assessment of the age-related changes of the Achilles
tendon. Med. Ultrason. 17 (1), 58–61. doi: 10.11152/mu.2013.2066.171.ayt
Wahl, E. C., Aronson, J., Liu, L., Fowlkes, J. L., Thrailkill, K. M., Bunn, R. C., et al.
(2010). Restoration of regenerative osteoblastogenesis in aged mice:
Lui and Wong
Tendon Stem Cells and Tendon Aging
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1338
13
modulation of TNF. J. Bone Miner. Res. 5 (1), 114–123. doi: 10.1359/
jbmr.090708
Wang, Z., Jiang, Y., Liu, N., Ren, L., Zhu, Y., An, Y., et al. (2012). Advanced
glycation end-product Nϵ-carboxymethyl-Lysine accelerates progression of
artherosclerotic calciﬁcation in diabetes. Atherosclerosis 221 (2), 387–396.
doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2012.01.019
Wang, B., Guo, J., Feng, L., Suen, C. W., Fu, W. M., Zhang, J. F., et al. (2016).
miR124 suppresses collagen formation of human tendon derived stem cells
through targeting egr1. Exp. Cell Res. 347 (2), 360–366. doi: 10.1016/
j.yexcr.2016.08.018
Wang, T., Thien, C., Wang, C., Ni, M., Gao, J., Wang, A., et al. (2018). 3D uniaxial
mechanical stimulation induces tenogenic differentiation of tendon-derived
stem cells through a PI3K/AKT signaling pathway. FASEB J. 32 (9), 4804–4814.
doi: 10.1096/fj.201701384R
Warr, M. R., Binnewies, M., Flach, J., Reynaud, D., Garg, T., Malhotra, R., et al.
(2013). FOXO3A directs a protective autophagy program in haematopoietic
stem cells. Nature 494 (7437), 323–327. doi: 10.1038/nature11895
Webb, S., Gabrelow, C., Pierce, J., Gibb, E., and Elliott, J. (2016). Retinoic acid
receptor signaling preserves tendon stem cell characteristics and prevents
spontaneous differentiation in vitro. Stem Cell Res Ther 7, 45. doi: 10.1186/
s13287-016-0306-3
Wentorf, F. A., Sudoh, K., Moses, C., Arendt, E. A., and Carlson, C. S. (2006). The
effects of estrogen on material and mechanical properties of the intra- and
extra- articular knee structures. Am. J. Sports Med. 34 (12), 1948–1952. doi:
10.1177/0363546506290060
Wilkinson, J. E., Burmeister, L., Brooks, S. V., Chan, C. C., Friedline, S., Harrison,
D. E., et al. (2012). Rapamycin slows aging in mice. Aging Cell 11 (4), 675–682.
doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2012.00832.x
Wood, L. K., and Brooks, S. V. (2016). Ten weeks of treadmill running decreases
stiffness and increases collagen turnover in tendons of old mice. J. Orthop. Res.
34 (2), 346–353. doi: 10.1002/jor.22824
Wu, H., Zhao, G., Zu, H., Wang, J. H., and Wang, Q. M. (2015). Aging-related
viscoelasticity variation of tendon stem cells (TSCs) characterized by quartz
thickness shear mode (TSM) resonators. Sens. Actuators (Warrendale Pa). 210,
369–380. doi: 10.1016%2Fj.snb.2014.12.117
Xu, H., and Liu, F. (2018). Downregulation of FOXP1 correlates with tendon stem/
progenitor cells aging. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 504 (1), 96–102. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.08.136
Yeung, C. Y., Gossan, N., Lu, Y., Hughes, A., Hensman, J. J., Bayer, M. L., et al.
(2014). Gremlin-2 is a BMP antagonist that is regulated by the circadian clock.
Sci. Rep. 4, 5183. doi: 10.1038/srep05183
Yin, Z., Chen, X., Chen, J. L., Shen, W. L., Hieu Nguyen, T. M., Gao, L., et al. (2010).
The regulation of tendon stem cell differentiation by the alignment of nanoﬁbers.
Biomaterials 31 (8), 2163–2175. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.11.083
Yin, Z., Chen, X., Zhu, T., Hu, J. J., Song, H. X., Shen, W. L., et al. (2013). The effect
of decellularized matrices on human tendon stem/progenitor cell
differentiation and tendon repair. Acta Biomater. 9 (12), 9317–9329. doi:
10.1016/j.actbio.2013.07.022
Yin, H., Caceres, M. D., Yan, Z., Schieker, M., Nerlich, M., and Docheva, D. (2019).
Tenomodulin regulates matrix remodeling of mouse tendon stem/progenitor
cells in an ex vivo collagen I gel model. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 512
(4), 691–697. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.03.063
Yokosuka, K., Park, J. S., Jimbo, K., Yoshida, T., Yamada, K., Sato, K., et al. (2007).
Immunohistochemical demonstration of advanced glycation end products and
the effects of advanced glycation end products in ossiﬁed ligament tissues in
vitro. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 32 (11), E337–E339. doi: 10.1097/01.brs.0000
263417.17526.35
Yu, T. Y., Pang, J. H., Wu, K. P., Chen, M. J., Chen, C. H., and Tsai, W. C. (2013).
Aging is associated with increased activities of matrix metalloproteinase-2 and
-9 in tenocytes. BMC Musculoskelet. Disord. 14, 2. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-14-2
Zaseck, L. W., Miller, R. A., and Brooks, S. V. (2016). Rapamycin attenuates age-
associated changes in tibialis anterior tendon viscoelastic properties.
J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 71 (7), 858–865. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glv307
Zhang, J., and Wang, J. H. (2010a). Characterization of differential properties of
rabbit tendon stem cells and tenocytes. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 11, 10. doi:
10.1186/1471-2474-11-10
Zhang, J., and Wang, J. H. (2010b). Mechanobiological response of tendon stem
cells: implications of tendon homeostasis and pathogenesis of tendinopathy.
J. Orthop. Res. 28 (5), 639–643. doi: 10.1002/jor.21046
Zhang, J., and Wang, J. H. (2014). Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) exerts biphasic effects
on human tendon stem cells. PloS One 9 (2), e87706. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0087706
Zhang, J., and Wang, J. H. (2015). Moderate exercise mitigates the detrimental
effects of aging on tendon stem cells. PloS One 10 (6), e0130454. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0130454
Zhang, K., Asai, S., and Yu, B. (2015). Enomoto-Iwamoto M. IL-1 b irreversibly
inhibits tenogenic differentiation and alters metabolism in injured tendon-
derived progenitor cells in vitro. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 463 (4),
667–672. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.05.122
Zhang, J., Yuan, T., and Wang, J. H. (2016). Moderate treadmill running exercise
prior to tendon injury enhances wound healing in aging rats. Oncotarget 7 (8),
8498–8512. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget7381
Zhou, Z., Akinbiyi, T., Xu, L., Ramcharan, M., Leong, D. J., Ros, S. J., et al. (2010).
Tendon-derived stem/progenitor cell aging: defective self-renewal and altered
fate. Aging Cell 9 (5), 911–915. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2010.00598.x
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Lui and Wong. This is an open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or repro-
duction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Lui and Wong
Tendon Stem Cells and Tendon Aging
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1338
14

===== Hu2021_CMBL_BurnHeterotopicOssification =====

Burn‑induced heterotopic ossification 
from incidence to therapy: key signaling 
pathways underlying ectopic bone formation
Xianglin Hu1,2†  , Zhengwang Sun1,2†, Fengfeng Li3†, Chaoyin Jiang4*, Wangjun Yan1,2* and Yangbai Sun1,2,5* 
Introduction
Burn injury refers to tissue damage caused by various heat factors. These include ther-
mal sources (fire, hot liquid and metal, and superheated steam), chemical substances 
(acids and alkalis), high voltages, and radiation [1–3]. The burn depth and area are the 
most important determining factors of burn severity [4]. Burn injuries generally occur 
to the skin and mucous membranes, although subcutaneous and submucosal tissues, 
muscles, bones, and even internal organs can be injured in severe cases [5–7]. Because 
the normal skin barrier function is impaired, severe burns often cause extensive tissue 
Abstract 
Burn injury is one of the potential causes of heterotopic ossification (HO), which is a 
rare but debilitating condition. The incidence ranges from 3.5 to 5.6 depending on 
body area. Burns that cover a larger percentage of the total body surface area (TBSA), 
require skin graft surgeries, or necessitate pulmonary intensive care are well-researched 
risk factors for HO. Since burns initiate such complex pathophysiological processes 
with a variety of molecular signal changes, it is essential to focus on HO in the specific 
context of burn injury to define best practices for its treatment. There are numerous 
key players in the pathways of burn-induced HO, including neutrophils, monocytes, 
transforming growth factor-β1-expressing macrophages and the adaptive immune 
system. The increased inflammation associated with burn injuries is also associated 
with pathway activation. Neurological and calcium-related contributions are also 
known. Endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and vascularization are known to 
play key roles in burn-induced HO, with hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) and vas-
cular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) as potential initiators. Currently, non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and radiotherapy are effective prophylaxes for HO. 
Limited joint motion, ankylosis and intolerable pain caused by burn-induced HO can 
be effectively tackled via surgery. Effective biomarkers for monitoring burn-induced 
HO occurrence and bio-prophylactic and bio-therapeutic strategies should be actively 
developed in the future.
Keywords:  Burn injury, Heterotopic ossification, Incidence, Risk factor, Signaling 
pathway, Mechanism
Open Access
© The Author(s), 2021. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits 
use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original 
author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third 
party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the mate-
rial. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or 
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​
creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
REVIEW LETTER
Hu et al. Cell Mol Biol Lett           (2021) 26:34  
https://doi.org/10.1186/s11658-021-00277-6
Cellular & Molecular
Biology Letters
*Correspondence:   
hunball2@163.com; 
yanwj@fudan.edu.cn; 
drsunyb@fudan.edu.cn 
†Xianglin Hu, Zhengwang 
Sun and Fengfeng Li 
contributed equally to this 
work
1 Department 
of Musculoskeletal 
Surgery, Fudan University 
Shanghai Cancer Center, 
Shanghai 200032, China4 
Department of Orthopedic 
Surgery, Shanghai Sixth 
People’s Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiaotong University, 
Shanghai 200233, China
Full list of author information 
is available at the end of the 
article
Page 2 of 13
Hu et al. Cell Mol Biol Lett           (2021) 26:34 
necrosis and fluid exudation, accompanied by shock, infection, sepsis, multiple organ 
dysfunction syndrome (MODS) and even death [8–10].
The pathophysiology of burns is complex, with substantial inflammatory, immune and 
metabolic reactions throughout their course. Patients with severe burns may experience 
stages of fluid exudation, acute infection, wound healing and rehabilitation [11]. Based 
on the latest expert opinions, wound healing is only a medium-term goal: complete 
recovery must address long-term complications as well as improving patient mental 
health and quality of life [12]. The sequelae of severe burn injury include local scarring, 
contracture deformity, and hypofunction of vital organs such as the heart, brain and kid-
neys [13–16].
Heterotopic ossification (HO) is a rare but debilitating pathological condition in which 
true bone tissue occurs and matures in soft tissues [17]. Unlike calcification lesions, HO 
leads to a complete bone microenvironment with bone tissue cells, microcirculation and 
neuroendocrine function [18, 19]. HO patients can experience pain and limited range of 
motion (ROM), which seriously impairs their daily life [20]. Burn injury is a significant 
source of acquired HO [21]. Burn-induced HO has been characterized in many clini-
cal and preclinical studies and the related molecular mechanisms are gradually being 
elucidated.
In this review, we summarize the clinical characteristics and potential mechanisms of 
burn-induced HO. We also indicate the current challenges and future directions in the 
research and treatment of burn-induced HO.
Clinical characteristics of burn‑induced HO
Incidence and risk factors
HO incidence after burn injury is influenced by a number of factors. Levi et al. [21] col-
lected data on 2797 patients with burn injury from six burn centers in America and 
found that 98 patients  developed HO (an incidence of 3.5%). Dependent risk factors 
included arm burns requiring skin grafts (OR = 96.4, 95% CI 1.19–7806); burns cover-
ing more than 30% of the total body surface area (TBSA; OR = 11.5, 95% CI 6.0–21.9); 
multiple trips to the operating room (OR = 1.32, 95% CI 1.18–1.40); and the number of 
days on a ventilator (OR = 1.034, 95% CI 1.03–1.04) [21]. Similarly, Schneider et al. [22] 
identified that percentage TBSA and need for skin grafts on the arm, head, neck and 
trunk are the remarkable predictors for HO. Thefenne et al. [23] enrolled 805 patients at 
a burn center in France and found that 32 patients later developed HO (an incidence of 
4.0%). The use of a fluidized bed (OR = 39.6, 95% CI 10.4–150.5), curare use (OR = 24.1, 
95% CI 8.3–70.5), pulmonary infection (OR = 21.5, 95% CI 6.0–77.4), cutaneous infec-
tion (OR = 7.5, 95% CI 3.0–18.6), the length of stay in the intensive care unit (OR = 1.1, 
95% CI 1.1–1.2), the mean total burn area (OR = 1.1, 95% CI 1.1–1.2), mean depth of the 
burns (OR = 1.1, 95% CI 1.1–1.2) were found to be independent risk factors for HO [23]. 
Orchard et al. [24] enrolled 337 patients at a burn center in Australia and found that 19 
patients later developed HO (an incidence of 5.6%). A greater percentage TBSA, inhala-
tion injury, mechanical ventilation, the number of surgical treatments, sepsis, and longer 
time to active movement were found to be associated with HO in that study [24].
Based on the three large burn center reports mentioned [21, 23, 24], we summa-
rized that the incidence of HO in burn injury is about 3.5–5.6% (Table 1). Patients with 
Page 3 of 13
Hu et al. Cell Mol Biol Lett           (2021) 26:34 
	
Table 1  Incidence and risk factors for burn-induced HO (BIHO) reported in large scale burn centers within the past decade
Reference
Dataset of the 
study
Total simple 
size
Number of 
patients with 
BIHO
Incidence 
of BIHO 
(%)
Age of patients 
with BIHO 
(years)
Male (%) of 
patients with 
BIHO
Burn %TBSA
Location with 
frequency of 
BIHO
Time to 
incidence of 
BIHO
Factors 
associated with 
BIHO
Levi et al. [21]
Six burn centers 
in America
2797
98
3.5
41.25 
81 (83.0)
47
NA
NA
1. Arm burns 
requiring 
skin grafts 
(OR = 96.4a)
2. Burn greater 
than 30% TBSA 
(OR = 11.5a)
3. Number 
of trips to 
operating room 
(OR = 1.32a)
4. Number of days 
on ventilator 
(OR = 1.034a)
Thefenne et al. 
[23]
Single burn 
center in 
France
805
32
4.0
47 
20 (62.5)
48.5
Elbow (50%)
Shoulder 
(20.3%)Hip 
(17.6%) Knee 
(10.8%) Wrist 
(1.3%)
NA
1. Use of fluidized 
bed (OR = 39.6a)
2. Curare use 
(OR = 24.1a)
3. Pulmonary 
infection 
(OR = 21.5a)
4. Cutaneous 
infection 
(OR = 7.5a)
5. Length of stay 
in the burns ICU 
(OR = 1.1a)
6. Mean total burn 
area (OR = 1.1a)
7. Mean depth of 
burns (OR = 1.1a)
Page 4 of 13
Hu et al. Cell Mol Biol Lett           (2021) 26:34 
Age (years) of patients with BIHO was shown by median; burn % TBSA was shown by mean or median
NA not available
a Independent risk factors for BIHO that are statistically significant in multivariate analysis
Table 1  (continued)
Reference
Dataset of the 
study
Total simple 
size
Number of 
patients with 
BIHO
Incidence 
of BIHO 
(%)
Age of patients 
with BIHO 
(years)
Male (%) of 
patients with 
BIHO
Burn %TBSA
Location with 
frequency of 
BIHO
Time to 
incidence of 
BIHO
Factors 
associated with 
BIHO
Orchard et al. 
[24]
Single burn 
center in 
Australia
337
19
5.6
43 
16 (84.2)
46
Elbow (89%) 
Knee and 
shoulder (less 
common).
Clinical: 37 
(30–40) days 
Radiological: 
49 (38–118) 
days
1. A greater % 
TBSA
2. Inhalation injury
3. Use of mechani-
cal ventilation
4. Number of sur-
gical procedures
5. Sepsis
6. Longer time 
to active 
movement 
(OR = 1.48a)
Page 5 of 13
Hu et al. Cell Mol Biol Lett           (2021) 26:34 
	
burn-induced HO are mainly middle-aged people and males. The mean or median burn 
percentage TBSA associated with HO incidence is about 46–48.5%. The elbow is the 
most common site of burn-induced HO [21, 23, 24]. Larger percentage TBSA affected, 
burns requiring skin grafts, and burns necessitating pulmonary intensive care are the 
currently well-recognized risk factors for burn-induced HO. In addition, Klein et  al. 
[25] found that a longer time to wound closure significantly increases the risk of burn-
induced HO in the elbow.
Presentation and diagnosis of burn‑induced HO
Patient-reported movement restrictions and intractable pain are early signs of burn-
induced HO. Patients can feel that their joints are locked or fused, with less ROM and 
sharp stabbing pains (nerve compression) [26]. A study from the Burn Model System 
National Database found that the presence of HO significantly increases the absolute 
loss of elbow flexion (adjusted median of 23.5°), which causes more serious elbow con-
tracture [27]. Moreover, burn-induced HO not only causes physical limitations but also 
psychological burdens, such as worry and distress [26]. In turn, HO can induce recur-
rent non-healing ulcers in the old burn scar [28].
Given their history of burns and these early manifestations, patients with HO can eas-
ily be diagnosed through imaging examinations, such as X-ray, computer tomography 
(CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [29]. X-ray is a common examination for 
HO but only applies to mature HO lesions as it rarely identifies early-stage HO lesions. 
CT scans can identify tiny HO lesions early and clearly display their shape and structure 
[30]. MRI displays the surrounding soft tissues and can better reveal HO when used in 
combination with CT [31]. Although positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) and 
radionuclide bone scanning can diagnose HO with high sensitivity and specificity [32], 
their high costs and requirement for radioactive substances limit their use. They are not 
routinely recommended for HO in clinical practice. Representative imaging materials of 
a patient with burn-induced HO are shown in Fig. 1.
Signaling pathways and mediators underlying burn‑induced HO
Normal soft tissues do not have the three basic conditions required for osteogenesis, 
namely osteogenic precursor cells, osteogenic signal induction factors and the appropri-
ate local microenvironment [33, 34]. It is important to investigate which cells seed in soft 
tissues and develop into pre-osteoblasts. The main reported potential osteogenic precur-
sor cells (seeds) for HO are endothelial cells, muscle satellite cells, mesenchymal stem 
cells (MSCs), adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs), fibroblasts, tendon cells and progenitor 
cells [35–40]. Herein, we discuss the signaling pathways involved in burn-induced HO 
based on the current evidence (Fig. 2; Table 2).
Vessel‑ and endothelial cell‑based pathways in burn‑induced HO
Burn injury can cause local tissue edema and hypoxia, with a significant impact on the 
microvascular system. Capillary basement membrane and endothelial cells are gener-
ally impaired during a burn injury [41, 42]. In the mouse model established by Peter-
son et al. [43], burn injury was found to increase early vascularization and subsequent 
Page 6 of 13
Hu et al. Cell Mol Biol Lett           (2021) 26:34 
HO. It also increases tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) secretion and the vasculariza-
tion of ossicles [43]. Tissue hypoxia following burn injury plays a key role in the initia-
tion of vascularization of ossicles. Hypoxia begins 48 h after the burn injury and peaks 
on day 3 (within the burn-healing margin), with significant expression of hypoxia-
inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) [44, 45]. 
VEGF has a potent bone regeneration ability [46, 47]. Behr et  al. [48] found that 
VEGF-A not only increases osteogenic differentiation of ASCs in vitro and in vivo, 
but also enhances angiogenesis of ASCs. On the other hand, using a mouse model 
of tenotomy with dorsal burn injury-induced HO, Agarwal et al. [49] found that VE-
Cadherin-cre (a marker of endothelial cells) is positive in HO. This indicates that local 
and circulating endothelial cells may transform into potential osteogenic precursor 
cells via endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Bone morphogenetic protein 
Fig. 1  Representative imaging of burn-induced HO in the elbow. A 40-year old male patient suffered 
extensive thermal burn injury (80% TBSA). He complained of limitation in the range of movement of his 
bilateral elbow joints 3 months after the burn injury. He was diagnosed with burn-induced HO of both 
elbows via imaging examinations. A X-ray of the right elbow. B 3D reconstruction of CT on the right elbow. C, 
D X-rays of the left elbow. The red arrows indicate the HO lesions
Page 7 of 13
Hu et al. Cell Mol Biol Lett           (2021) 26:34 
	
2 (BMP-2), BMP-4 and transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) are considered to be 
the key players in EMT in HO [50].
Immune cell‑based pathways in burn‑induced HO
Hyper-inflammatory levels (inflammatory cells and cytokines) and immunosuppression 
status are known in burn injury. The levels of serum TNF-α, interleukin 6 (IL-6), IL-1β, 
neutrophils and monocytes significantly increase while lymphocyte levels decrease 
following burn injury [51]. In a burn/tenotomy-induced HO mouse model, the site of 
injury shows a high local increase in the levels of monocytes and neutrophil-associated 
chemokines and cytokines, including CXCL1, CXCL2, monocyte chemotactic protein 
1 (MCP-1), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), granulocyte-macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) [52]. 
The authors used single-cell RNA sequencing to show that the recruited monocytes 
and macrophages are the main culprits. They further revealed the TGF-β1-expressing 
Fig. 2  Schematic diagram showing the signaling pathways and mediators involved in burn-induced HO. 
Current evidence for mechanisms directly involved in burn-induced HO suggests four main pathways: 
vessel- and endothelial cell-based pathways; immune cell-based pathways; muscle satellite cell-based 
pathways; and other factors
Table 2  Key signaling pathways and potential mediators underlying burn-induced HO
Signaling pathway
Potential mediator
References
Vessel- and endothelial cell-based pathways
HIF-1, VEGF, ASCs/MSCs
BMP2, BMP4, TGF-β, EMT
[43–50]
Immune cell-based pathways
TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β, neutrophils and mono-
cytes
CXCL1, CXCL2, MCP-1, G-CSF, GM-CSF and 
TGF-β, macrophages
T cells and B cells
[51–54]
Muscle satellite cell-based pathways
NF-κB, neutrophils, Rho signaling
[55–59]
Other factors (age, gender etc.)
Smad, NF-κB, IGF-1, testosterone
[60–62]
Page 8 of 13
Hu et al. Cell Mol Biol Lett           (2021) 26:34 
macrophages drive HO formation in the burn/tenotomy model in the early stages of 
inflammation. Besides the predominant role of macrophages, the adaptive immune sys-
tem also participates in burn-induced HO. The osteogenic capacity of MSCs decreases 
and HO development is attenuated without mature B- and T-lymphocytes [53]. The dys-
regulation of immune checkpoints on T cells and B cells might be involved in HO devel-
opment [54].
Muscle satellite cell‑based pathways in burn‑induced HO
Even if a cutaneous burn affects tissues isolated from skeletal muscles, it can cause 
myophagism, which is activity in the muscle due to neutrophils releasing nuclear factor 
kappa light chain enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB). Muscle progenitor cells thus 
respond to cutaneous thermal injury [55]. Skeletal muscle satellite cells are a type of flat 
cell that is attached to the surface of muscle fibers. They have the properties of stem 
cells: they can proliferate and differentiate to repair muscle cells when muscle fibers are 
injured [56]. Human muscle satellite cells have the ability to be osteoprogenitor cells, 
with Rho signaling acting as the switch between myogenesis and osteogenesis [57]. Wu 
et al. [58] indicated that skeletal muscle satellite cells are activated after cutaneous burns 
in rats. They can attain significant osteogenic potential after cutaneous burns, suggest-
ing a role in burn-induced HO [59].
Other factors associated with the mechanisms of burn‑induced HO
Peterson et  al. [60] found that burn injury in young mice is associated with a more 
marked increase in HO development, NF-κB activation, and osteoclast activity than is 
seen in old mice. MSCs of young mice show more osteogenesis in vitro and higher acti-
vations of Smad and NF-κB signaling after burn injury than that found in old mice. This 
might answer why patients with burn-induced HO are generally young to middle-aged 
people with a median age of 46–48.5, as we showed above rather than old people.
Since burn-induced HO is more common in male patients (62.5–84.2%, as we showed 
above), a gender difference in the mechanisms of burn-induced HO was investigated 
[61]. In a tenotomy/burn model, MSCs from male mice showed more osteogenic gene 
and protein expression than those from female mice. Male mice developed 35% more 
HO, which was related to increased p-Smad and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) 
signaling at the HO lesion [61]. Testosterone might play a role in the gender difference 
of burn-induced HO. Thorpe et al. [62] found that acutely burned patients who received 
a testosterone analog treatment presented a higher incidence of elbow HO than patients 
without testosterone analog treatment. In a mouse model following burn/tenotomy, 
testosterone analog treatment conferred a trend of developing a larger volume of HO 
lesions [62].
Potential neurological and calcium‑related contributions to HO following burn injury
Thermal nerve injury is characteristic of severe burn injuries [63, 64]. Substance P and 
calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) released by the injured axon can mediate a 
neurogenic inflammatory reaction by recruiting neutrophils, macrophages and inflam-
matory cytokines [65, 66]. Substance P with crosstalk of CGRP can promote the differ-
entiation of MSCs into osteoblasts and facilitate HO development [67, 68]. Endoneurial 
Page 9 of 13
Hu et al. Cell Mol Biol Lett           (2021) 26:34 
	
progenitor cells can flow via endometrial vessels to the site of HO and become an impor-
tant source of osteoblasts [69].
The dysregulation of calcium metabolism following severe burn injury might also par-
ticipate in HO development. Burn-induced bone resorption can release calcium into the 
blood [70]. Calcium and ionized calcium levels could then increase to their normal lim-
its during the late phase of burn injury [71]. Excessive calcium may deposit and facilitate 
the HO lesion via the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like receptor protein 
3 (NLRP3) inflammasome-IL-1β pathway in macrophages [72].
Prophylaxis and treatments of burn‑induced HO
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and radiotherapy are currently the 
main prophylactic strategies for HO. Surgery remains the mainstream treatment for the 
limited joint motion and intolerable pain caused by burn-induced HO.
NSAIDs
As mentioned above, increased inflammatory levels play a key role in HO development. 
NSAIDs are cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors that can reduce the production of inflam-
matory mediator prostaglandin (PG) and bradykinin, thus exerting anti-inflammatory, 
analgesic and antipyretic effects [73]. NSAIDs may block chondrogenic differentiation 
of MSCs to inhibit bone formation [74]. A large-scale meta-analysis including 29 studies 
showed that both non-selective and selective NSAIDs can effectively prevent HO after 
total hip arthroplasty. The non-selective NSAID indomethacin and the selective NSAID 
celecoxib are commonly prescribed [75]. A subsequent updated Bayesian network meta-
analysis also confirmed the effective role of celecoxib as a prophylaxis of HO [76]. How-
ever, it is worth noting that NSAIDs may delay bone healing [77, 78]. Thus, the dose 
and course of NSAID treatment should be individualized. To date, there is still no direct 
study exploring NSAID use in prophylaxis for burn-induced HO.
Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy with a medium biologically effective dose from 20 to 24 Gy has proven to 
be an effective prophylaxis for HO after total hip arthroplasty. Preoperative and post-
operative radiotherapy have similar prophylactic efficacy while multiple fractions might 
be more effective than single-fraction radiotherapy [79]. An in vitro experiment showed 
that radiotherapy can suppress the BMP2 signaling pathway in MSCs, thus interfering 
with BMP2-mediated osteoblastic differentiation [80]. However, it needs to be noted 
that radiotherapy used prophylactically for HO can be accompanied by toxic responses 
and an increased risk of secondary malignancy [81, 82]. The requirement for radiother-
apy devices and high associated costs also limit its wide application in clinical practice. 
Although radiotherapy has been used in the prophylaxis of trauma-induced HO, there is 
still no direct evidence for its efficacy.
Surgery of burn‑induced HO
Surgery of burn-induced HO can rapidly relieve the issues of limited joint motion and 
pain, allowing patients to regain ability. The mean ROM significantly increased from 
31° preoperatively to 99° postoperatively [83]. Passive ROM exercise and continuous 
Page 10 of 13
Hu et al. Cell Mol Biol Lett           (2021) 26:34 
physical therapy (rehabilitation) are suggested to begin on day 1 after surgery [84]. It 
is worth noting that HO might recur even after surgery. The re-emergence of MSCs in 
excision sites marked by platelet-derived growth factor receptor-α (PDGFRα) expression 
might be the reason for this recurrence [85]. Maender et al. [86] recommend periopera-
tive radiotherapy to decrease HO recurrence.
Conclusion and prospects
There are fewer direct preclinical and clinical studies of burn-induced HO than of 
trauma- and nerve-related HO. Here, we looked at burn-induced HO from bedside to 
bench and back. Since burns involve such complex pathophysiological processes with 
numerous molecular signals, it is urgent to elucidate the mechanisms of HO in the spe-
cific context of burn injury. How do the signaling pathways and mediators interact in 
burn-induced HO? What is the signaling network for burn-induced HO? Which media-
tors are ultimately responsible for HO following burn injury? Answering these questions 
will facilitate our current understanding of burn-induced HO.
In addition to clinical risk factors, effective serum biomarkers for prediction of HO 
occurrence after burn injury should be established. Moreover, the bio-prophylactic and 
bio-therapeutic strategies based on the discussed molecules and signaling pathways 
should be actively developed for burn-induced HO.
Abbreviations
MODS: Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome; HO: Heterotopic ossification; ROM: Range(s) of motion; TBSA: Total body 
surface area; CT: Computed tomography; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging; PET-CT: Positron emission tomography-CT; 
MSCs: Mesenchymal stem cells; ASCs: Adipose-derived stem cells; TNF-α: Tumor necrosis factor-α; HIF-1: Hypoxia-induc-
ible factor-1; VEGF: Vascular endothelial growth factor; BMP: Bone morphogenetic protein; TGF-β: Transforming growth 
factor-β; EMT: Endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition; IL: Interleukin; CXCL1: Chemokine ligand 1; CXCL2: Chemokine 
ligand 2; MCP-1: Monocyte chemotactic protein 1; NF-κB: Nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells; 
IGF-1: Insulin-like growth factor 1; CGRP: Calcitonin gene-related peptide; NLRP3: Nucleotide-binding oligomerization 
domain-like receptor protein 3; NSAIDs: Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; PG: Prostaglandin; COX: Cyclooxygenase; 
PDGFRα: Platelet-derived growth factor receptor-α; BIHO: Burn-induced HO (used in tables only).
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the patient who offered the medical imaging materials in this study.
Authors’ contributions
YS, WY and CJ contributed to the concept of the review and case report. XH, ZS, FL contributed to the literature research 
and graphics. XH drafted the manuscript. YS, WY, CJ, ZS and FL revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the 
final manuscript.
Funding
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (81701937, 81672851, and 81872179) 
and the General Scientific Research of Health and Family Planning Commission of Hainan Province (Haikou) in China 
(20A200388).
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Author details
1 Department of Musculoskeletal Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai 200032, China. 2 Depart-
ment of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. 3 Department of Orthopedic 
Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510260, China. 4 Department 
of Orthopedic Surgery, Shanghai Sixth People’s Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200233, China. 
Page 11 of 13
Hu et al. Cell Mol Biol Lett           (2021) 26:34 
	
5 Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People’s Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200011, China. 
Received: 15 April 2021   Accepted: 20 July 2021
References
	1.	
Martin NA, Falder S. A review of the evidence for threshold of burn injury. Burns. 2017;43(8):1624–39.
	2.	
Akelma H, Karahan ZA. Rare chemical burns: review of the literature. Int Wound J. 2019;16(6):1330–8.
	3.	
Coruh A. High voltage electric burn repair of the forehead by reverse flow temporalis muscle flap. J Burn Care Res. 
2019;40(3):373–6.
	4.	
Greenhalgh DG. Management of burns. N Engl J Med. 2019;380(24):2349–59.
	5.	
Nguyen JQ, Marks HL, Everett T, et al. Early visualization of skin burn severity using a topically applied dye-loaded 
liquid bandage. Sci Rep. 2020;10(1):9314.
	6.	
Ye H, De S. Thermal injury of skin and subcutaneous tissues: a review of experimental approaches and numerical 
models. Burns. 2017;43(5):909–32.
	7.	
Klein GL. Disruption of bone and skeletal muscle in severe burns. Bone Res. 2015;3:15002.
	8.	
Rech MA, Mosier MJ, McConkey K, et al. Outcomes in burn-injured patients who develop sepsis. J Burn Care Res. 
2019;40(3):269–73.
	9.	
Forbinake NA, Ohandza CS, Fai KN, et al. Mortality analysis of burns in a developing country: a CAMEROONIAN 
experience. BMC Public Health. 2020;20(1):1269.
	10.	 Mariano F, Hollo’ Z, Depetris N, et al. Coupled-plasma filtration and adsorption for severe burn patients with septic 
shock and acute kidney injury treated with renal replacement therapy. Burns. 2020;46(1):190–8.
	11.	 Roshangar L, Soleimani Rad J, Kheirjou R, et al. Skin burns: review of molecular mechanisms and therapeutic 
approaches. Wounds. 2019;31(12):308–15.
	12.	 Jeschke MG, van Baar ME, Choudhry MA, et al. Burn injury. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2020;6(1):11.
	13.	 Oryan A, Alemzadeh E, Moshiri A. Burn wound healing: present concepts, treatment strategies and future directions. 
J Wound Care. 2017;26(1):5–19.
	14.	 Hall C, Hardin C, Corkins CJ, et al. Pathophysiologic mechanisms and current treatments for cutaneous sequelae of 
burn wounds. Compr Physiol. 2017;8(1):371–405.
	15.	 Wen JJ, Cummins CB, Szczesny B, et al. Cardiac dysfunction after burn injury: role of the AMPK-SIRT1-PGC1α-NFE2L2-
ARE pathway. J Am Coll Surg. 2020;230(4):562–71.
	16.	 Randolph AC, Fukuda S, Ihara K, et al. Blood-brain barrier dysfunction after smoke inhalation injury, with and with-
out skin burn. Shock. 2019;51(5):634–49.
	17.	 Dey D, Wheatley BM, Cholok D, et al. The traumatic bone: trauma-induced heterotopic ossification. Transl Res. 
2017;186:95–111.
	18.	 Ware AD, Brewer N, Meyers C, et al. Differential vascularity in genetic and nonhereditary heterotopic ossification. Int 
J Surg Pathol. 2019;27(8):859–67.
	19.	 Gugala Z, Olmsted-Davis EA, Xiong Y, et al. Trauma-induced heterotopic ossification regulates the blood-nerve bar-
rier. Front Neurol. 2018;9:408.
	20.	 Herman ZJ, Edelman DG, Ilyas AM. Heterotopic ossification after elbow fractures. Orthopedics. 2021;44(1):10–6.
	21.	 Levi B, Jayakumar P, Giladi A, et al. Risk factors for the development of heterotopic ossification in seriously burned 
adults: a National Institute on Disability, Independent Living and Rehabilitation Research burn model system data-
base analysis. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;79(5):870–6.
	22.	 Schneider JC, Simko LC, Goldstein R, et al. Predicting heterotopic ossification early after burn injuries: a risk scoring 
system. Ann Surg. 2017;266(1):179–84.
	23.	 Thefenne L, de Brier G, Leclerc T, et al. Two new risk factors for heterotopic ossification development after severe 
burns. PLoS ONE. 2017;12(8):e0182303.
	24.	 Orchard GR, Paratz JD, Blot S, et al. Risk factors in hospitalized patients with burn injuries for developing heterotopic 
ossification–a retrospective analysis. J Burn Care Res. 2015;36(4):465–70.
	25.	 Klein MB, Logsetty S, Costa B, et al. Extended time to wound closure is associated with increased risk of heterotopic 
ossification of the elbow. J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(3):447–50.
	26.	 Foster N, Kornhaber R, McGarry S, et al. Heterotopic ossification in adults following a burn: a phenomenological 
analysis. Burns. 2017;43(6):1250–62.
	27.	 Yelvington ML, Godleski M, Lee AF, et al. A comparison of contracture severity at acute discharge in patients 
with and without heterotopic ossification: a burn model system national database study. J Burn Care Res. 
2019;40(3):349–54.
	28.	 Mohammadi AA, Foroutan A, Karvar M, et al. Recurrent nonhealing wound in old burn scar may be due to hetero-
topic ossification. Burns. 2017;43(7):1599–601.
	29.	 Łęgosz P, Otworowski M, Sibilska A, et al. Heterotopic ossification: a challenging complication of total hip arthro-
plasty: risk factors, diagnosis, prophylaxis, and treatment. Biomed Res Int. 2019;2019:3860142.
	30.	 Mourad WF, Packianathan S, Ma JK, et al. Computerized tomography-based radiotherapy improves heterotopic 
ossification outcomes. Bone. 2013;57(1):132–6.
	31.	 Zagarella A, Impellizzeri E, Maiolino R, et al. Pelvic heterotopic ossification: when CT comes to the aid of MR imaging. 
Insights Imaging. 2013;4(5):595–603.
	32.	 Seraj SM, Al-Zaghal A, Østergaard B, et al. Identification of heterotopic ossification using 18F-NaF PET/CT. Clin Nucl 
Med. 2019;44(4):319–20.
Page 12 of 13
Hu et al. Cell Mol Biol Lett           (2021) 26:34 
	33.	 Chalmers J, Gray DH, Rush J. Observations on the induction of bone in soft tissues. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 
1975;57(1):36–45.
	34.	 Yin N, Zhu L, Ding L, et al. MiR-135-5p promotes osteoblast differentiation by targeting HIF1AN in MC3T3-E1 cells. 
Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2019;24:51.
	35.	 Nelson ER, Wong VW, Krebsbach PH, et al. Heterotopic ossification following burn injury: the role of stem cells. J 
Burn Care Res. 2012;33(4):463–70.
	36.	 Zhang WH, Li XL, Guo Y, et al. Proliferation and osteogenic activity of fibroblasts induced with fibronectin. Braz J Med 
Biol Res. 2017;50(10):e6272.
	37.	 Lees-Shepard JB, Goldhamer DJ. Stem cells and heterotopic ossification: lessons from animal models. Bone. 
2018;109:178–86.
	38.	 Feng H, Xing W, Han Y, et al. Tendon-derived cathepsin K-expressing progenitor cells activate Hedgehog signaling to 
drive heterotopic ossification. J Clin Invest. 2020;130(12):6354–65.
	39.	 Yu X, Wan Q, Ye X, et al. Cellular hypoxia promotes osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells and bone 
defect healing via STAT3 signaling. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2019;24:64.
	40.	 Zhou X, Xu W, Wang Y, et al. LncRNA DNM3OS regulates GREM2 via miR-127-5p to suppress early chondrogenic 
differentiation of rat mesenchymal stem cells under hypoxic conditions. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2021;26(1):22.
	41.	 Zhuravleva K, Goertz O, Wölkart G, et al. The tight junction protein cingulin regulates the vascular response to burn 
injury in a mouse model. Microvasc Res. 2020;132:104067.
	42.	 Cromer WE, Zawieja SD, Doersch KM, et al. Burn injury-associated MHCII + immune cell accumulation around 
lymphatic vessels of the mesentery and increased lymphatic endothelial permeability are blocked by doxycycline 
treatment. Lymphat Res Biol. 2018;16(1):56–64.
	43.	 Peterson JR, De La Rosa S, Sun H, et al. Burn injury enhances bone formation in heterotopic ossification model. Ann 
Surg. 2014;259(5):993–8.
	44.	 Xing D, Liu L, Marti GP, et al. Hypoxia and hypoxia-inducible factor in the burn wound. Wound Repair Regen. 
2011;19(2):205–13.
	45.	 Miyanaga T, Ueda Y, Miyanaga A, et al. Angiogenesis after administration of basic fibroblast growth factor induces 
proliferation and differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells in elastic perichondrium in an in vivo model: mini 
review of three sequential republication-abridged reports. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2018;23:49.
	46.	 Hwang C, Marini S, Huber AK, et al. Mesenchymal VEGFA induces aberrant differentiation in heterotopic ossification. 
Bone Res. 2019;7:36.
	47.	 Behr B, Sorkin M, Lehnhardt M, et al. A comparative analysis of the osteogenic effects of BMP-2, FGF-2, and VEGFA in 
a calvarial defect model. Tissue Eng Part A. 2012;18(9–10):1079–86.
	48.	 Behr B, Tang C, Germann G, et al. Locally applied vascular endothelial growth factor A increases the osteogenic heal-
ing capacity of human adipose-derived stem cells by promoting osteogenic and endothelial differentiation. Stem 
Cells. 2011;29(2):286–96.
	49.	 Agarwal S, Loder S, Cholok D, et al. Local and circulating endothelial cells undergo endothelial to mesenchymal 
transition (EMT) in response to musculoskeletal injury. Sci Rep. 2016;6:32514.
	50.	 Medici D, Olsen BR. The role of endothelial-mesenchymal transition in heterotopic ossification. J Bone Miner Res. 
2012;27(8):1619–22.
	51.	 Zhang F, Qiu XC, Wang JJ, et al. Burn-related dysregulation of inflammation and immunity in experimental and clini-
cal studies. J Burn Care Res. 2017;38(6):e892-9.
	52.	 Sorkin M, Huber AK, Hwang C, et al. Regulation of heterotopic ossification by monocytes in a mouse model of aber-
rant wound healing. Nat Commun. 2020;11(1):722.
	53.	 Ranganathan K, Agarwal S, Cholok D, et al. The role of the adaptive immune system in burn-induced heterotopic 
ossification and mesenchymal cell osteogenic differentiation. J Surg Res. 2016;206(1):53–61.
	54.	 Kan C, Yang J, Na D, et al. Inhibition of immune checkpoints prevents injury-induced heterotopic ossification. Bone 
Res. 2019;7:33.
	55.	 Yousuf Y, Jeschke MG, Shah A, et al. The response of muscle progenitor cells to cutaneous thermal injury. Stem Cell 
Res Ther. 2017;8(1):234.
	56.	 Karlsen A, Soendenbroe C, Malmgaard-Clausen NM, et al. Preserved capacity for satellite cell proliferation, regenera-
tion, and hypertrophy in the skeletal muscle of healthy elderly men. FASEB J. 2020;34(5):6418–36.
	57.	 Hashimoto N, Kiyono T, Wada MR, et al. Osteogenic properties of human myogenic progenitor cells. Mech Dev. 
2008;125(3–4):257–69.
	58.	 Wu X, Walters TJ, Rathbone CR. Skeletal muscle satellite cell activation following cutaneous burn in rats. Burns. 
2013;39(4):736–44.
	59.	 Wu X, Rathbone CR. Satellite cell functional alterations following cutaneous burn in rats include an increase in their 
osteogenic potential. J Surg Res. 2013;184(2):e9–16.
	60.	 Peterson JR, Eboda ON, Brownley RC, et al. Effects of aging on osteogenic response and heterotopic ossification 
following burn injury in mice. Stem Cells Dev. 2015;24(2):205–13.
	61.	 Ranganathan K, Peterson J, Agarwal S, et al. Role of gender in burn-induced heterotopic ossification and mesenchy-
mal cell osteogenic differentiation. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2015;135(6):1631–41.
	62.	 Thorpe CR, Ucer Ozgurel S, Simko LC, et al. Investigation into possible association of oxandrolone and heterotopic 
ossification following burn injury. J Burn Care Res. 2019;40(4):398–405.
	63.	 Klifto KM, Dellon AL, Hultman CS. Risk factors associated with the progression from acute to chronic neuropathic 
pain after burn-related injuries. Ann Plast Surg. 2020;84(6S Suppl 5):382–5.
	64.	 Strong AL, Agarwal S, Cederna PS, et al. Peripheral neuropathy and nerve compression syndromes in burns. Clin 
Plast Surg. 2017;44(4):793–803.
	65.	 Choi JE, Di Nardo A. Skin neurogenic inflammation. Semin Immunopathol. 2018;40(3):249–59.
	66.	 Rogoz K, Andersen HH, Kullander K, et al. Glutamate, substance P, and calcitonin gene-related peptide cooperate in 
inflammation-induced heat hyperalgesia. Mol Pharmacol. 2014;85(2):322–34.
Page 13 of 13
Hu et al. Cell Mol Biol Lett           (2021) 26:34 
	
•
 
fast, convenient online submission
 
•
  
thorough peer review by experienced researchers in your ﬁeld
• 
 
rapid publication on acceptance
• 
 
support for research data, including large and complex data types
•
  
gold Open Access which fosters wider collaboration and increased citations 
 
maximum visibility for your research: over 100M website views per year 
•
  
At BMC, research is always in progress.
Learn more biomedcentral.com/submissions
Ready to submit your research
Ready to submit your research ?  Choose BMC and benefit from: 
?  Choose BMC and benefit from: 
	67.	 Niedermair T, Schirner S, Seebröker R, et al. Substance P modulates bone remodeling properties of murine osteo-
blasts and osteoclasts. Sci Rep. 2018;8(1):9199.
	68.	 Tuzmen C, Verdelis K, Weiss L, et al. Crosstalk between substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide during 
heterotopic ossification in murine Achilles tendon. J Orthop Res. 2018;36(5):1444–55.
	69.	 Lazard ZW, Olmsted-Davis EA, Salisbury EA, et al. Osteoblasts have a neural origin in heterotopic ossification. Clin 
Orthop Relat Res. 2015;473(9):2790–806.
	70.	 Klein GL. The role of calcium in inflammation-associated bone resorption. Biomolecules. 2018;8(3):69.
	71.	 Muschitz GK, Schwabegger E, Kocijan R, et al. Early and sustained changes in bone metabolism after severe burn 
injury. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016;101(4):1506–15.
	72.	 Rada B, Park JJ, Sil P, et al. NLRP3 inflammasome activation and interleukin-1β release in macrophages require 
calcium but are independent of calcium-activated NADPH oxidases. Inflamm Res. 2014;63(10):821–30.
	73.	 Altman R, Bosch B, Brune K, et al. Advances in NSAID development: evolution of diclofenac products using pharma-
ceutical technology. Drugs. 2015;75(8):859–77.
	74.	 Pountos I, Giannoudis PV, Jones E, et al. NSAIDS inhibit in vitro MSC chondrogenesis but not osteogenesis: implica-
tions for mechanism of bone formation inhibition in man. J Cell Mol Med. 2011;15(3):525–34.
	75.	 Joice M, Vasileiadis GI, Amanatullah DF. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for heterotopic ossification prophy-
laxis after total hip arthroplasty: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Bone Joint J. 2018;100-B(7):915–22.
	76.	 Migliorini F, Trivellas A, Eschweiler J, et al. NSAIDs for prophylaxis for heterotopic ossification after total hip arthro-
plasty: a bayesian network meta-analysis. Calcif Tissue Int. 2021;108(2):196–206.
	77.	 Lisowska B, Kosson D, Domaracka K. Positives and negatives of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in bone heal-
ing: the effects of these drugs on bone repair. Drug Des Dev Ther. 2018;12:1809–14.
	78.	 Wheatley BM, Nappo KE, Christensen DL, et al. Effect of NSAIDs on bone healing rates: a meta–analysis. J Am Acad 
Orthop Surg. 2019;27(7):e330-6.
	79.	 Hu ZH, Chen W, Sun JN, et al. Radiotherapy for the prophylaxis of heterotopic ossification after total hip arthroplasty: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trails. Med Dosim. 2021;46(1):65–73.
	80.	 Pohl F, Hassel S, Nohe A, et al. Radiation-induced suppression of the Bmp2 signal transduction pathway in the pluri-
potent mesenchymal cell line C2C12: an in vitro model for prevention of heterotopic ossification by radiotherapy. 
Radiat Res. 2003;159(3):345–50.
	81.	 Honore T, Bonan I, Salga M, et al. Effectiveness of radiotherapy to prevent recurrence of heterotopic ossification in 
patients with spinal cord injury and traumatic head injury: a retrospective case-controlled study. J Rehabil Med. 
2020;52(5):jrm00066.
	82.	 Rosenberg DM, Onderdonk B, Majeed NK, et al. Radiation-induced sarcoma after heterotopic ossification prophy-
laxis: a case report. JBJS Case Connect. 2019;9(4):e0146.
	83.	 Chen HC, Yang JY, Chuang SS, et al. Heterotopic ossification in burns: our experience and literature reviews. Burns. 
2009;35(6):857–62.
	84.	 Chen JY, Fu CW, Ho HY, et al. Surgical treatment of postburn heterotopic ossification around the elbow: three case 
reports. Medicine. 2019;98(6):e14403.
	85.	 Agarwal S, Loder S, Cholok D, et al. Surgical excision of heterotopic ossification leads to re-emergence of mesenchy-
mal stem cell populations responsible for recurrence. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2017;6(3):799–806.
	86.	 Maender C, Sahajpal D, Wright TW. Treatment of heterotopic ossification of the elbow following burn injury: recom-
mendations for surgical excision and perioperative prophylaxis using radiation therapy. J Shoulder Elbow Surg. 
2010;19(8):1269–75.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
