# Extracted PDF text — 2026-07-16 — part 6/9
# papers Marks1970_Science_CockroachLegRegeneration .. Prater2023_NatAging+microglia_AD
# anchor per paper: ===== <note-stem> =====

===== Marks1970_Science_CockroachLegRegeneration =====
Cockroach Leg Regeneration: Effects of Ecdysterone in vitro
Abstract.
Regenerating epithelial tissue
froln
the cockroach leg forms
two
cuticular coverings. The first 0/ these consists of a protein-carbohydrate com-
plex that is replaced before molting. The second covering represents the cuticle
containing chitin. The deposition of the cuticle can be induced in vitro by adding
ecdysterone to the culture mediuln.
Although the appearance of cuticle-
like deposits on cultures of insect epi-
dermal tissues have been reported (1-6),
there has been considerable confusion
over the nature of the materials being
deposited (2-6), their relation with the
epithelial cells (3, 6), and the condi-
tions under which they are deposited
(1, 4). The chemical nature of the de-
posits (1-5) and the hormonal require-
nlents of explants (2, 3, 6) remain largely
undefined. To elucidate some of these
problems, we have made a series of
parallel studies in
vivo
and
in vitro
using regenerating leg tissues fronl the
cockroach Leucophaea maderae.
The mesothoracic legs of late instar
nymphs were removed at the trochan-
tero-femoral articulation 24 hours after
ecdysis. At specific times, 8 to 42 days
after
removal' of the
leg,
the coxae
containing the regenerating legs were
removed from the insects and the re-
generates were dissected. Some of these
regenerates were fixed, sectioned, and
subjected to histochemical examination,
while others were placed in Rose multi-
purpose tissue chambers under dialysis
strips and cultured in M-18 (7) nutri-
ent medium. The histochemical proce-
dures
for
investigating
the
cuticular
sheaths included the triple stain tech-
nique for denl0nstration of protein and
carbohydrate (8), the thiazine red di-
. chroic
nlethod
for
determination
of
birefringence
(9),
and the fluorescent
chitinase test for chitin
(10). In con-
junction with the triple stain technique,
several prior treatments were used to
verify the specificity of the staining re-
action. These included acetylation, de-
acetylation, and pepsin digestion (11).
When dissected 25 days after leg re-
moval,
the
regenerates
were
covered
with
a
thin
gelatinous
sheath
that
showed a po.sitive PAS (periodic acid-
Schiff) reaction (Figs. 1 and 2). Acety-
lation prevented this reaction while de-
acetylation restored it, confirming that
the PAS-positive reaction was the re-
sult of the presence of 1,2-glycols con-
tained
in
carbohydrate
substances.
Prior treatment with pepsin also pre-
vented the PAS reaction. These results
indicate
that
the
sheath
consists
of
carbohydrate complexes conjugated with
Fig. 1. Sheath (a) deposited by epithelial cells (b) after 25 days in vitro.
Fig. 2. PAS-positive sheath (a) formed by epithelial
cells (b) of 30-day-old leg regenerate in vivo. Basement membrane (f) also yielded a PAS-positive reaction (triple stain).
Fig.
3. Surface of leg regenerate (44 days in vivo) just before molting shows sheath (a) and chitinous cuticle with setae (c) and rugose
surface (e).
Fig. 4. Fluorescent chitinase test indicates presence-of chitin in both the cuticle (d) and seta (c) in leg regenerate
just before molting.
Fig. 5. Cuticular deposit (d) appears in vitro between sheath (a) and epithelial cells (b) in leg regenerate
treated with ,a-ecdysone. Figure 1 shows paired control treated with water.
Fig. 6. Seta (c), cuticular deposits (d), and: rugose
surface (e) formed in vitro are evident 27 days after treatment with ,a-ecdysone. Cuticle is pigmented. [Scale, 50 ,u]
2 JANUARY 1970
61
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on November 28, 2023

protein, possibly
a glyco- or mucopro-
tein which dissociates upon pepsin hy-
drolysis. The sheath displayed neither
dichroic birefringence nor
affinity
for
the fluorescent-chitinase
conjugate,
an
indication that chitin was not present.
When the regenerates were allowed
to develop
for 40
to 42 days before
dissection, they were found, upon
re-
moval, to be covered with a wrinkled
membrane
becaring
spines
and
small
setae
(Fig.
3) that had developed
be-
tween the original sheath and epithelial
cells. This membrane was PAS-negative,
displayed
dichroic
hirefringence,
and
showed
affinity
for
the
fluorescent-
chitinase conjugate (Fig. 4). This layer.
which had replaced the initial sheath,
thus represented the early stage of the
developing chitinous cuticle.
When 25-day-old leg regenerates were
placed in culture, epithelial cells quickly
migrated over the injured areas and
a
new sheath was deposited over the suIr-
face
(2).
Sonic
of the
epithelial
cells
developed
hairlike
processes
that
ex-
tended out into the gelatinous sheath,
but in no case did a recognizable cuti-
cle develop. These activities contintued
for as long as 30 days.
To investigate the hormonal indLuc-
tion of cuticle formation in vitro, Rose
chambers were set up in pairs so that
each member of the pair contained
a
leg from opposite
sides of the
insect.
One chamber of the pair was treated
with ecdysterone
(12), while the other
was treated either with water or with
another
isomer
of
ecdysone,
22-iso-
ecdysone, which has been reported to
be inactive in the Calliphora assay sys-
teni
(13,
14).
When
such
chambers
were treated 4 days after explantation
with
water
solutions
of
ecdysterone
(2.5 to 12 jtg per milliliter of medium),
evidence of deposition
of cuticle was
apparent by the end of 7 days. A thin
refractile
layer appeared between
the
epithelial cells and the gelatinous sheath-
the epithelial
cells began to round out
and became filled with a granular ma-
terial: and, in a few days the refractile
layer thickened and became wrinkled
(Fig. 5). At the same time, the hairlike
epithelial cells began to thicken, and at
the base a socket began to form. By
day 14 after treatment, the cuticle that
showed
affinity
for
the
fluorescent-
chitinase
conjugate
began
to
darken,
forming a rtugose covering over the ex-
plant (Fig. 6 and Table 1).
All the
14 regenerates treated with
ecdysterone developed
a
recognizable
cuticle
within
14 days,
and
8
devel-
62
T;ablc
1. The effect of ecdysone analogs on
the deposition of cuticle
in vitro in 25-day-
old cockroach leg regenerates.
Treat-
ment
Water
22-Isocedysone
Ecdysterone
Ecdysterone
Ecdysterone
Dose
(Ag/
ml)
1'
11l
Number of
regenerates
Devel- Dee
Treat-
oping
oping-
ed
cuti-
oping
cle
stae
:;
4
0
0
2
10
0
0
2
4
4
..
5
6
6
2
2.5
4
4
3
In
microliters.
oped
setae.
Doses
as
low
as
2.5
jtg
per milliliter of medium were 100 per-
cent effective. None of the 14 control
regenerates produced
cuticle
or
setae,
and there was no apparent difference
between those treated with water and
those treated with 22-isoecdysone.
At
the end
of
the
14-day
period,
all control chambers were washed out,
filled with fresh medium, and treated
with ecdysterone. After eight more days,
all the original water control explants
showed recognizable cuticle. Those that
had been treated with 22-isoecdysone
also developed cuticle but required two
to five more days to do so.
The chemical composition and func-
tion of the gelatinous sheath are only
partially
known.
We
found
similar
sheaths in cultures of epidermal tissues
from
embryos
of
the
tobacco
horn-
worm Manduica sexta (Johannson) and
the differential grasshopper Melanoplu.s
diflerentialis
(Thomas).
Because
these
deposits occur only on the outer sur-
face
of
epidermal
tissues,
they
may
serve to protect the delicate epithelium
and developing setae, while the under-
lying cuticle is secreted.
The appearance of the chitinous CLIti-
cle was unmistakable because the setac
and
surface
sculpturing
were
similar
to that found at the time of ecdysis on
regenerates that develop
in vivo. The
cuticle formed
in
vitro,
however,
re-
mained thin and only partially devel-
oped. The heavy layer of endocuticle
that
is formed in vivo at the time of
ecdysis was largely absent,
a situation
similar to that reported by Miciarelli
et al. (4).
With the possible exception of Sen-
gel
and Mandaron
(5),
none
of
the
earlier workers succeeded in inducing
the deposition
of
cuticle by explants
of epidermal tissue in vitro. Sengel and
Mandaron obtained what seemed to he
cuticular deposits on leg imaginal disks
of late instar Drosophila larvae by treat-
ing them with ecdysone. Unfortunately,
both brain and ring gland tissues were
present
in these cultures, and the re-
sults obtained were such that the source
of stimulation and the nature of the
cuticular
deposits
remain
uncertain.
Miciarelli et al. (4) and Demal (1) used
cxplants of epidermal tissues from im-
mature
insects
late
in
their develop-.
niental
cycle,
and
cuticle
deposition
was spontaneous. Larsen (3) and Ritter
aInd Bray
(6) used long-term
cultures
of tissues of mesodernial origin. Larsen
obtained
spontaneous
deposits
of un-
known
composition,
and
Ritter
and
Bray foLund "chitin"-containing crystals
that were spontaneously deposited on
the glass surface
in cultures of blood
clots.
In ouLr study, the secretory activities
of
the
epidermal
cells
have
been
changed from the deposition of sheath
material
to
that of
chitinous
cuticle.
This change, which can be induced by
ecdysterone
in low
doses,
is
not
in-
duced by much larger doses of an in-
active
ecdysone
analog.
This
system,
in which the epidermal cells are avail-
able
for
microscopic
examination
throughout
both
secretory
processes,
provides an excellent means of study-
ing
the
effects
of hormones
on
the
process
of cuticle
deposition.
E. P. MARKS
R. A. LEOPOLD
Metaholism anid Radiationi
Researchi Laboratory,
State University Station,
Fargo. North Dakota 58102
References
and
Notes
1.
.1. Demal, Anin. Sci. Natuir. Zool. Biol. Antim.
18,
155
(1956).
2. E.
P.
Marks
and
J.
P.
Reinecke,
Science
142,
961
(1964).
xW. Larsen,
J. Insect Physiol.
13, 613 (1966).
4. A. Miciarelli, G. Sbrenna, G. Colombo, Ex-
perienztia
23,
64
(1967).
5. P.
Sengel
and
P.
Mandaron,
C.
R.
Hebd.
Seances Acad. Sci. Paris 268, 405 (1969).
6. H. Ritter and M. Bray, J. Itsect Physiol. 14,
361
(1968).
7. Available from Grand Island Biological Co.,
Grand
Island, N.Y.
14072.
8. M. 1limes
and
L.
Moriber,
Stain
Technol.
31,
67
(1956).
9. H. Fuller, Zool. Anz. 174,
125 (1965).
10. M.
A.
Benjaminson,
Stain
Technol.
44,
27
(1969).
11. A. G. E. Pearse, in Histochemnistry: Theoreti-
cal anid Applied
(Little, Brown,
Boston,
ed.
2,
1961), p. 998.
12. Available
from Mann Research
Laboratory,
New York
10006.
13. A. Furlenmeier, A. Furst, A. Langemann, G.
Waldvogel, P. Hocks, V. Kerb, R. Weichert.
Hels. Chim. Acta 50, 2387 (1967).
14. Provided by Dr. John Siddall, Zoecon Corp.,
Palo
Alto,
Calif.
94304.
15. Supported in part by a grant from the Kales
Foundation.
15 September 1969; revised 27 October 1969
SCIENCE. VOL. 167
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on November 28, 2023

Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science (ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue NW,
Washington, DC 20005. The title Science is a registered trademark of AAAS. 
Cockroach Leg Regeneration: Effects of Ecdysterone in vitro
E. P. Marks and R. A. Leopold
Science 167 (3914), .  DOI: 10.1126/science.167.3914.61
View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.167.3914.61
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on November 28, 2023

===== Marques2019_Development_RegenerationModel-Zebrafish =====
PRIMER
Model systems for regeneration: zebrafish
Ines J. Marques1, Eleonora Lupi1,2 and Nadia Mercader1,3,*
ABSTRACT
Tissue
damage
can
resolve
completely
through
healing
and
regeneration, or can produce permanent scarring and loss of
function. The response to tissue damage varies across tissues and
between species. Determining the natural mechanisms behind
regeneration in model organisms that regenerate well can help us
develop strategies for tissue recovery in species with poor regenerative
capacity (such as humans). The zebrafish (Danio rerio) is one of the
most accessible vertebrate models to study regeneration. In this Primer,
we highlight the tools available to study regeneration in the zebrafish,
provide an overview of the mechanisms underlying regeneration in this
system and discuss future perspectives for the field.
KEY WORDS: Regeneration, Zebrafish, Cell progenitors, Injury
methods, Genetic tools
Introduction
Most vertebrate tissues undergo continuous cell turnover to
maintain tissue homeostasis, and cells that no longer exert their
function correctly are eliminated and replaced by new ones. This
continuous cellular turnover is not homogenous in all tissues:
whereas gut enterocytes and skin keratinocytes show a high turnover
(Young and Heath, 2000), cardiomyocytes (Bergmann et al., 2009;
Senyo et al., 2013) and neurons are rarely replaced throughout adult
life. In the case of neurons, proliferation is limited to specific
regions in the brain (Ernst et al., 2014; Lim and Alvarez-Buylla,
2016). Beyond homeostatic tissue maintenance, some tissues and
organs are capable of reacting to an injury by replacing the lesioned
region. In this scenario, responses can either involve tissue repair,
where a fibrotic scar replaces the injury, or regeneration, where new
cells proliferate and/or differentiate into the same cell type as the one
that was damaged, thus reconstituting the tissue so that it can recover
its functional activity. As a general outline, during injury response
the damaged area (Fig. 1A,B) is initially infiltrated by immune cells
(Fig. 1C), which clean the dead tissue and prevent infections. This is
followed by the deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) (Fig. 1D),
which provides support and structure to the injured area. ECM
deposition results in the development of a, sometimes permanent,
fibrotic scar. Alternatively, the lesioned region can be replaced
by new tissue (Fig. 1E) in a multi-step regenerative process that
can involve dedifferentiation, proliferation and re-differentiation
of existing cells (as discussed further below). In some cases, the
regenerative phase occurs concomitant with the regression of the
transient fibrotic tissue. Overall, the resulting regenerated tissue
has the same morphological and physiological properties as the
lost tissue, and is hence fully functional (Fig. 1F) (Hardy, 1989).
Vertebrates vary widely in their regenerative capacity. Whereas
mammals usually have a more limited regenerative capacity –
restricted to few tissues or organs (e.g. skin and liver) or a short time
window after birth [e.g. the heart (Porrello et al., 2011)] – other
vertebrates possess a higher degree of regenerative capacity: e.g.
axolotls are capable of regenerating several organs, including the
heart (Cano-Martinez et al., 2010) and the limbs (Simon and Tanaka,
2013).
Among
the
vertebrate
animal
models
available
for
regeneration studies, the zebrafish (Danio rerio) – a 2-5 cm long
freshwater teleost – is one of the most widely used. Following their
establishment as a genetically and experimentally accessible model
system for studying development (Haffter et al., 1996; Streisinger
et al., 1981), early regeneration studies showed that zebrafish, like
many other fish, are able to fully regenerate many tissues and organs
(Bernhardt et al., 1996; Johnson and Weston, 1995; Poss et al., 2002;
Raya et al., 2003; Rowlerson et al., 1997; White et al., 1994). This
pioneering research convinced the scientific community to consider
this model organism for studying organ regeneration as well as
development. Some of the tissues and organs most typically used in
regeneration studies include the spinal cord (Becker et al., 1998),
brain and cerebellum (Kroehne et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2004), retina
(Vihtelic and Hyde, 2000), hair cells (Harris et al., 2003), heart (Poss
et al., 2002; Raya et al., 2003), caudal fin (Nechiporuk and Keating,
2002; White et al., 1994), kidney (Reimschuessel, 2001), and liver
(Burkhardt-Holm et al., 1999).
Regeneration studies have been greatly facilitated by the ever-
increasing power of genetic tools, including transgenesis and
genome editing to generate loss-of-function mutations. (Hwang
et al., 2013; Kawakami, 2007; Moore et al., 2012; Stuart et al.,
1988). In comparison with other highly regenerative animal models
such as the axolotl, these were developed much earlier in zebrafish,
Model systems for regeneration
This article is part of a series entitled ‘Model systems for regeneration’.
This series of articles aims to highlight key model systems and species
that are currently being used to study tissue and organ regeneration.
Each article provides background information about the phylogenetic
position of the species, its life-cycle and habitat, the different organs and
tissues that regenerate, and the experimental tools and techniques that
are available for studying these organisms in a regenerative context.
Importantly, these articles also give examples of how the study of these
models has increased our understanding of regenerative mechanisms
more broadly, and how some of the open questions in the field of
regeneration may be answered using these organisms. To see the full
collection as it grows, please visit: https://dev.biologists.org/collection/
regeneration_models
Received 13 February 2019; Accepted 19 August 2019
1Institute of Anatomy, University of Bern, Bern 3012, Switzerland. 2Acquifer, Ditabis,
Digital Biomedical Imaging Systems, Pforzheim, Germany. 3Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Cardiovasculares CNIC, Madrid 2029, Spain.
*Author for correspondence (nadia.mercader@ana.unibe.ch)
I.J.M., 0000-0003-1254-9394; E.L., 0000-0003-0509-3616; N.M., 0000-0002-
0905-6399
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed.
1
© 2019. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Development (2019) 146, dev167692. doi:10.1242/dev.167692
DEVELOPMENT

further stimulating its use for regeneration studies. Moreover,
excellent
platforms
for
sharing
resources
and
knowledge
(summarized in Table 1) are contributing to a steady growth of
the research community working with this model organism, also in
the context of regeneration. In this Primer, we provide a broad
overview of the available tools for regeneration research in the
zebrafish, and focus on the challenges and opportunities presented
by this model organism.
Tools for studying regeneration in zebrafish
Many of the attributes that make zebrafish an appealing model for
developmental biologists also give it significant advantages for
regeneration researchers – with the genetic and genomic tools, and
accessibility for live imaging and drug screening being particularly
important. We discuss these topics further below, but focus first on
the range of injury models available to researchers.
Tissue injury models
Several injury models have been established to study regeneration in
zebrafish, including physical injury models such as resection,
stabbing or cryoinjury, or, alternatively, genetic procedures to ablate
a specific cell type (Table 2 and Fig. 2). Although most studies are
performed in adult zebrafish, in some instances larvae are also used
to study organ regeneration. Choosing the appropriate injury model,
and developmental stage, is an important decision. First, one should
take into account the type of injury intended to be mimicked –
particularly if the primary aim is to provide a model for a human
condition. However, it is not always possible to mimic a mammalian
injury process. For example, myocardial infarction is caused by an
ischemic event, often due to the occlusion of coronary vessels by
an atherosclerotic plaque. This type of injury can be mimicked in
mice, but is very challenging to recapitulate in the zebrafish, owing
to its small size. Second, the choice of the injury method also
depends on the biological question to be answered. To study global
processes of regeneration, one probably needs to use a method that
lesions the whole tissue, such as surgically induced injuries. If the
aim is to understand the regenerative capacity of a specific cell type,
then genetic ablation might be a better choice. As a further
consideration, different types of injury can lead to changes in the
efficiency of cell replacement or speed of regeneration, as
Table 1. Online resources for the zebrafish community
Resource
Description
URL and references
Zebrafish Information Network
(ZFIN)
Database of multiple resources available for zebrafish studies,
including protocols and available lines
http://www.zfin.org (Howe et al., 2013)
International Zebrafish Society
(IZFS)
Promotion of zebrafish research, organization of conferences,
travel fellowships and awards
https://www.izfs.org/
EUFishBiomed
Promotes exchange of information within the fish community,
support of conferences and travel fellowships
https://www.eufishbiomed.kit.edu/ (Strahle et al., 2012)
Zebrafish International
Resource Center (ZIRC)
Zebrafish stock center (USA) collecting existing zebrafish
resources
https://zebrafish.org/
Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology (KIT)
Zebrafish stock center (Europe) collecting existing zebrafish
resources and providing training
https://www.ezrc.kit.edu/ (Geisler et al., 2016)
China Zebrafish Resource
Center (CZRC)
China Zebrafish Resource Center collecting existing zebrafish
resources, developing new lines and technology
http://en.zfish.cn/
Tissue cell
Fibroblast
Immune cell
Platelet
ECM
Blood vessel
A
B
C
D
E
F
Injured cells
Proliferating cell
Key
Fig. 1. Phases of tissue regeneration. (A) Uninjured tissue. (B) Injury: injured area is shaded in gray, representing damaged and dead cells. The blood
vessel in direct contact with the lesion is also damaged and is marked in a lighter red color than the healthy vessels. (C) Wound closure and immune response:
the injured area is infiltrated by platelets to stop the bleeding resulting from injury to the blood vessels in the damaged area. At the same time, the lesion
is also infiltrated by immune cells. (D) Clearing of debris and deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM): the immune cells start to clean the dead tissue and
other debris resulting from the injury. Fibroblasts proliferate and produce ECM fibers that fill the cleared injury area to prevent the injury from collapsing.
The formation of new blood vessels takes place (thinner red lines). (E) Resorption of ECM and cell proliferation: the ECM starts to be eliminated as the injury is
repopulated by new cells through proliferation. (F) Regeneration: the injured area has been completely repopulated and the tissue reconstituted to its
homeostatic condition. Cells undergo cell cycle arrest and very few proliferating cells can be seen.
2
PRIMER
Development (2019) 146, dev167692. doi:10.1242/dev.167692
DEVELOPMENT

exemplified for the spinal cord (Ohnmacht et al., 2016) and the heart
(Gonzalez-Rosa et al., 2011).
Surgical injuries
One of the most common surgical methods is resection (amputation) of
the tissue. This technique is commonly used for fin and heart.
Following fin amputation, the first step towards regeneration involves
thedevelopment ofan epidermalcapthatclosestheinjury.Underneath,
a blastema comprising undifferentiated cells is formed (discussed
further below). After initial proliferation, these cells redifferentiate,
culminating in the formation of new fin tissue (reviewed by Pfefferli
and Jaźwińska, 2015). In the heart, the first step towards regeneration
after ventricular resection is the formation of a blood clot, later replaced
by a fibrin clot, followed by de novo growth to replace the lost tissue,
until the damaged myocardium becomes almost indistinguishable from
the surrounding tissue (reviewed by Gonzalez-Rosa et al., 2017).
Another popular surgically induced lesion method is cryoinjury,
which is frequently used for the heart (Chablais et al., 2011;
Gonzalez-Rosa et al., 2011; Schnabel et al., 2011) and has also been
described in fin (Chassot et al., 2016). In this method, the tissue is
exposed to a super-cooled metal, which effectively kills the cells it
touches. In the fin, after the dead tissue falls off, regeneration
proceeds as in the amputation model (Chassot et al., 2016). By
contrast, the regenerative process in the heart is a little different:
it begins with the replacement of the necrotic tissue with
ECM-depositing fibroblasts. Subsequently, the transient scar
tissue regresses and is replaced by new cardiac tissue (Gonzalez-
Rosa et al., 2012). As well as low temperatures, cell death can be
induced by exposure to high temperatures, either using a heated
metal rod (Raymond et al., 2006) or by applying a light source in a
determined region (Conedera et al., 2017; Vihtelic and Hyde, 2000).
Finally, another method is stabbing, commonly used to damage
the central nervous system, including the spinal cord (Becker et al.,
1998). In this case, accumulation and proliferation of glial cells in
the damaged area is followed by the proliferation of progenitors that
ultimately differentiate into new nervous tissue (März et al., 2011).
Chemically induced cell damage
Besides physical stimuli, organ injuries can be induced by chemical
compounds, which can either be directly administered to each
individual fish by intraperitoneal injection, perorally or by dissolving
in the fish water followed by ingestion. The toxicity of gentamicin is
used to produce kidney or lateral line injuries (Kamei et al., 2015) and
acetaminophen is used to induce liver injuries (Cox et al., 2014). After
an initial phase of cell death, proliferation and cell migration lead to the
repopulation of the damaged area, as has been demonstrated in studies
on zebrafish kidney (Reimschuessel and Williams, 1995), lateral line
hair cell (Harris et al., 2003) and liver (Burkhardt-Holm et al., 1999)
regeneration. This method, however, presents some disadvantages,
such as off-target effects, as well as a less uniform injuries caused by
unequal drug distribution (Strahle and Grabher, 2010).
Genetic ablation
This approach allows tissue- or cell type-specific death and can also
provide temporal control ofcell ablation. In several transgenic zebrafish
lines, cell death can be specifically induced in targeted cells. Methods
include the regulated expression of diphtheria toxin A chain (Wang
et al., 2011) and overexpression of a cytotoxic fluorescent protein,
KillerRed – which has been used to ablate specific cell types through
photoxicity upon intense light illumination (Del Bene et al., 2010).
Perhaps the most widely used system is based on the ability of the
Table 2. Injury models for zebrafish organ regeneration
Organ
Injury method
References
Fin
Resection
Geraudie et al. (1993); Pfefferli and Jaźwińska (2015)
Cryoinjury
Chassot et al. (2016)
Heart
Resection
Poss et al. (2002)
Cryoinjury
Chablais et al. (2011); Gonzalez-Rosa et al. (2011); Schnabel et al. (2011)
Genetic ablation
Wang et al. (2011)
Central nervous system (brain, spinal cord and eye)
Nerve crushing
Becker and Becker (2008); Bernhardt et al. (1996)
Stabbing
März et al. (2011)
Transection
Becker and Becker (2008); Becker et al. (1998)
Visible light
Vihtelic and Hyde (2000)
Heat
Raymond et al. (2006)
Chemical
Fimbel et al. (2007)
Pancreas
Genetic ablation
Pisharath et al. (2007)
Liver
Resection
Sadler et al. (2007)
Chemical
Cox et al. (2014)
Kidney
Chemical
Reimschuessel (2001)
Sensory hair cells
Chemical
Harris et al. (2003)
Skin
Laser
Richardson et al. (2013)
Heart
Liver
Pancreas
Retina
Fin
Brain
Spinal cord
Skin
Kidney
Light/heat
Resection
Cryoinjury
Genetic ablation
Resection
Cryoinjury
Light/heat
Chemical
Resection
Chemical
Genetic ablation
Chemical
Stabbing/
transection
Stabbing/transection
Fig. 2. Organ regeneration in the zebrafish. Summary of some of the
organs and tissues used for regeneration studies in zebrafish. Preferred
injury models are annotated for each organ.
3
PRIMER
Development (2019) 146, dev167692. doi:10.1242/dev.167692
DEVELOPMENT

bacterial enzyme nitroreductase to convert the prodrug metronidazol
into a cytotoxin, leading to the death of nitroreductase-expressing cells.
This technique was first described in studies on pancreatic β-cell
regeneration in zebrafish (Curado et al., 2007; Pisharath et al., 2007).
Recently, a more potent prodrug, nifurpirinol, has been identified as a
more efficient and specific compound (Bergemann et al., 2018). In all
cases, genetically targeted cells undergo apoptosis. However, in
contrast to the cryoinjury model, ECM deposition is limited (Wang
et al., 2011). Following cell death, cells from the surrounding healthy
tissue begin proliferating to replace the lost tissue.
Genetic tools
As in other fields of zebrafish research, the use of genetic tools is
essential to understand the role played by different genes during
regeneration. In Table 3 we summarize most of the genetic
modification approaches discussed in the ensuing section and
include the main advantages and disadvantages of each of them.
Transgenesis
There is a wide range of tools available for the generation of
transgenic lines. The most commonly used include the use of Tol2
transposons (Kawakami et al., 2000) and I-SceI meganuclease
(Thermes et al., 2002), which facilitate the integration of foreign
DNA into the fish genome. Alternatively, BAC recombineering
(Bussmann and Schulte-Merker, 2011; Suster et al., 2011) allows
the insertion of larger fragments of DNA that often better
recapitulate endogenous gene expression patterns. Of note,
insertion into the genome is non-directed in these approaches.
The lack of a ROSA26-like landing site has been a caveat; the use of
Phi31 Integrase transgenesis (Mosimann et al., 2013) has been
reported as a potential way to address this, and the problem will
hopefully be solved using CRISPR/Cas9 approaches. Transgenic
fluorescent reporter lines used to tag/track a particular cell type or
report a gene expression pattern have proven to be essential for
investigating regeneration.
Inducible gene expression and genetic fate mapping
Different techniques have been established that allow the use of
genetic tools in a spatially and/or temporally controlled manner
during regeneration.
Heat shock
Inducible gene expression can be achieved by using a heat-shock
driven system (Ádám et al., 2000). The heat-shock promoter hsp70
is used to drive expression of the gene of interest. By maintaining
fish at 35-39°C instead of 28°C, gene expression can be activated.
Gal4/UAS
One
of
the
most
widely
used
systems
is the
Gal4/UAS
transactivation system, which was adapted from Drosophila to the
Table 3. Genetic tools for zebrafish regeneration studies
Method
Application
Pros
Cons
Fluorescent reporter
lines
Cell/tissue imaging
Allow evaluation of gene expression pattern by
promoter/enhancer-driven fluorescent
reporter expression
Detection limited to promoter activity, not suited for
fate mapping
Regulatory region might not fully recapitulate
endogenous gene expression pattern
Fluorescent protein expression might be more stable
than the endogenous gene
Photoconvertible
proteins (e.g. KAEDE)
Lineage tracing
Activated by light
Produces a faster response than chemically
induced systems
Difficult to apply in non-superficial adult tissues
Transient labelling
Leakiness
CreERT2/loxP
Lineage tracing
Gene overexpression
Temporal and spatial conditional
gene expression
Often used for lineage tracing studies
Cannot be turned off
Requires chemical treatment
Can be leaky (Cre activity even without tamoxifen
induction)
Dre/rox
Lineage tracing
Gene overexpression
Conditional gene expression
If combined with CreERT2/loxP, it allows
binary recombination studies
Dre can be linked to estrogen or progesterone
receptor to make it inducible (as with Cre)
Cannot be turned off
Not well established in the zebrafish
Fewer lines available than for Cre/Lox
TetOn/TetOff
Gene overexpression
Specific gene visualization and/or
overexpression in a spatio-temporally
controlled manner
System can be turned on and off as needed
Few available lines
Doxycyclin toxicity not well assessed
Heat-shock promoter
Gene overexpression
Temperature-dependent inducible expression
Does not require chemical treatment
Gene expression levels are temperature dependent:
precise temperature settings are critical for the
method to work
Promotor not equally efficient in all cell types
Gal4/UAS
Gene overexpression
Cell/tissue imaging
Spatially controlled gene expression
Transcriptional silencing when Gal4 is expressed
from very active promotors: mostly limits its use to
developmental stages
TALEN
Genome editing and
generation of
mutant lines
Highly specific and efficient
More versatile for sequence recognition
than CRISPR
Time consuming
Has not been applied to knock-in approaches
CRISPR/Cas9
Genome editing and
generation of
mutant lines
sgRNA easier to produce than TALEN
Targeting of various genomic regions with
one injection
Off-target effect possible
Use for site-directed insertions still not fully
established
4
PRIMER
Development (2019) 146, dev167692. doi:10.1242/dev.167692
DEVELOPMENT

zebrafish. The system requires the combination of two separate
transgenic lines – one expressing the Gal4 protein in a specific cell
type and the other containing a construct in which a reporter (e.g.
fluorescent protein) or a gene of interest is placed downstream of the
UAS sequence, to which the Gal4 protein binds. When these lines
are crossed, offspring are generated in which the UAS-driven gene
is expressed in those cells expressing Gal4 (reviewed in greater
detail by Halpern et al., 2008). The Gal4 system can also be used in
an inducible manner, by fusing Gal4 to an ERT2 domain, so that
Gal4 is expressed upon the administration of tamoxifen. This
approach has been useful to study hair cell regeneration (Pinto-
Teixeira et al., 2015). However, the Gal4/UAS system in zebrafish is
prone to transcriptional silencing and accumulation of methylation
(Akitake et al., 2011) over time, thus precluding its use in most cases
to study regeneration in adults.
Cre/Lox
A further genetic tool for spatially controlled gene expression is the
Cre/Lox recombination system (Felker and Mosimann, 2016; Hans
et al., 2009; Langenau et al., 2005). It can also be used for lineage
tracing, to assess the origin and fate of cell types during organ
regeneration (Kikuchi et al., 2010). A number of systems allow
temporal control – most commonly, through fusion of Cre to ERT2
(Feil et al., 1997) or by placing Cre under the control of the hsp70
promoter for heat-shock control (Hesselson et al., 2009). This
system has been used for temporal gene expression control during
the analysis of adult heart regeneration (González-Rosa et al., 2018).
It is also possible to use Cre-based approaches to achieve both
spatial and temporal control (Kirchgeorg et al., 2018).
TetOn/TetOff
This system allows temporally defined tissue-specific
gene
expression (Wehner et al., 2015). Its main advantage is that gene
expression can be turned on and off by administration or removal of
doxycycline – i.e. highly controlled transient expression is possible.
It has been used to study Wnt signaling during fin and spinal cord
regeneration (Wehner et al., 2014, 2017).
Photoconvertible fluorescent proteins
Finally, photoconvertible Kaede lines have proven useful when the
aim is to trace a specific cell or cluster of cells during regeneration.
This fluorescent protein undergoes conversion, from green to red
light emission, when irradiated under a specific wave-length (Ando
et al., 2002). This method has been used for in vivo tracing studies of
cardiomyocytes during regeneration (Itou et al., 2012). Other
photoconvertible proteins are also available.
Gene knock-down/knockout tools
For many decades, the analysis of gene function in the zebrafish relied
on non-directed mutagenesis approaches followed by mapping of the
mutation. This was followed by the use of transgenic gain-of-function
studies or the use of dominant-negative forms or morpholino-based
knockdown approaches. Morpholinos are traditionally injected at the
1-cell stage and so cannot easily be used to study regeneration.
However, vivo-Morpholinos have been developed (by GeneTools)
that can be injected into the blood stream or electroporated into a
specific tissue and pass through cell membranes. However, there are
only few reports on their use and even fewer in the context of
regeneration (Bednarek et al., 2015; Hyde et al., 2012; Kizil and
Brand, 2011; Thummel et al., 2006). A better approach to understand
the effect of the downregulation of a specific gene relies on the use of
precise targeted gene editing tools such as TALENs and CRISPR/
Cas9. A better approach to understanding the effect of the
downregulation of a specific gene relies on the use of precise
targeted gene editing tools such as TALENs and CRISPR/Cas9.
These have proven useful for generating null mutants in zebrafish
(Hwang et al., 2013; Jao et al., 2013) and for assessing gene function
during regeneration (Dupret et al., 2017; Dong et al., 2019; Nauroy
et al., 2019; Unal Eroglu et al., 2018). The generation of conditional
knockouts has also recently been achieved by the directed insertion of
loxP sites using CRISPR/Cas9 (Burg et al., 2018). This new approach
will be extremely valuable to address gene function during
regeneration. Several publications compare the use of all these
genetic engineering methods and can provide researchers with the
necessary support to choose the best method for their studies
(Chatterjee and Lufkin, 2011; Rafferty and Quinn, 2018). Although
not yet well established, the possibility of using modified Cas9
versions for transcriptional modulation or induction of epigenetic
modifications is also being explored in the zebrafish (e.g. Liu et al.,
2019; Long et al., 2015).
Importantly, several screening studies, such as those from the
Kawakami (Kawakami et al., 2010) and Brand (Jungke et al., 2013)
labs, have led to the generation of large databases with numerous
fish lines expressing Gal4 or Cre under specific promoters, which
are available to the whole community. These approaches have been
recently reviewed (Albadri et al., 2017; Carney and Mosimann,
2018). Similarly, large open source repositories for zebrafish
mutants are available (Table 1).
Omics approaches
The different ‘omics tools’ that have become available in recent years
are an important asset for helping researchers gain a deeper knowledge
into the mechanisms regulating regeneration. Regarding genomic
tools, ChIPseq (Kang et al., 2016; Xiao et al., 2016), Tomo-Seq (Wu
et al., 2016), single cell RNAseq (Honkoop et al., 2018 preprint) and
histone profiling (Goldman et al., 2017)have been successfullyapplied
to study regeneration in the zebrafish. RNAseq data have provided
information, for example, on genes involved in axonal regrowth
following spinal cord injury (Mokalled et al., 2016). Complementing
these approaches, proteomics (Saxena et al., 2012) and metabolomics
(Rabinowitz et al., 2017) are now being used in the context of zebrafish
organ regeneration. The possibility of sequencing-based fate mapping
will significantly contribute to the study of organ regeneration
(Spanjaard et al., 2018). Among the current limitations are the
amount of tissue that can be selected for these approaches, annotations
of the zebrafish genome and bioinformatics analysis platforms mainly
oriented to mammalian models.
Live imaging
One of the main advantages of the zebrafish is the possibility of
imaging morphogenetic processes. During embryogenesis, the use
of fluorescent reporter lines facilitates imaging of tissues and organs
at the cellular and subcellular level. Microscopic techniques such as
light sheet microscopy allow for prolonged imaging with minimal
interference of physiological processes that occur during either
regeneration or development (Ding et al., 2018; Power and Huisken,
2017). The zebrafish larva is also sufficiently transparent that live
imaging can be used to follow regenerative processes in organs and
tissues in up to 5-day-old larvae or beyond, depending on the organ.
The preferred injury model during these stages is genetic ablation,
being particularly well suited given the small size of the animals at
this age. Automated systems for larval imaging are being developed
that facilitate the acquisition and analysis of data, and allow high-
throughput screening assays (Early et al., 2018; Pandey et al., 2019).
5
PRIMER
Development (2019) 146, dev167692. doi:10.1242/dev.167692
DEVELOPMENT

In the case of adult zebrafish, in vivo imaging of regenerating
internal organs can prove more difficult. Nevertheless, short- and
long-term imaging of regeneration of external structures have been
achieved using fluorescent light microscopy, as described for caudal
fin neoangiogenesis (Xu et al., 2015), regeneration of the skin
epidermis (Chen et al., 2016) or scale regeneration (Cox et al.,
2018). Although more challenging, even internal structures can
be imaged and followed through time, as has been shown for
adult neural stem cells in homeostasis and during regeneration
(Barbosa et al., 2015; Dray et al., 2015). New fish transgenic
lines have been developed in the hope of improving in vivo
imaging of regenerative processes in the adult. Luciferase-based
transgenic lines have proven useful for regeneration studies,
particularly when looking at internal regenerating structures, as
luciferase bioluminescence can be detected even in deep tissues
(Chen et al., 2013).
Ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging have also been used
for studying functional recovery after lesion-induced damage
(Goessling et al., 2007; González-Rosa et al., 2014; Hein et al.,
2015; Koth et al., 2017).
Small molecules and drug screening
Zebrafish are also particularly appropriate for small-molecule and
drug-screening studies (Mathew et al., 2007; Matsuda et al., 2018).
In this regard, approaches using genetic ablation injuries in larvae
are most valuable, as a large number of animals can be screened
simultaneously. By using injured zebrafish larvae, multiple
compounds can be tested at the same time and used to identify
those with a pro-regenerative effect and those that would work to
impair regeneration. Screens have identified small molecules with
the potential to induce β-cell proliferation and insulin production
(Matsuda et al., 2018; Tsuji et al., 2014), and have led to the
identification of vitamin D as a potent inducer of cardiomyocyte
proliferation in the context of heart regeneration (Han et al., 2019).
The use of reporter lines to visualize cell cycle, such as the FUCCI
lines (Sugiyama et al., 2009), has proven to be very useful in this
regard as it allows one to assess cell proliferation by fluorescent
protein expression (Han et al., 2019). The establishment of
luciferase promotor lines might also be interesting for screening,
in particular for internal structures (Chen et al., 2013).
Cellular and molecular mechanisms of organ regeneration in
the zebrafish
So, what has been learned about organ regeneration in the zebrafish
using all these tools? The following section aims to provide an
overview of different sources of progenitor cells that contribute to
rebuild a tissue or organ in this species, and describe some of the
common regulatory mechanisms triggering this process.
Cellular origin
Depending on the tissue, and the degree or nature of damage
involved, newly generated cells can originate from a number of
potential sources (Fig. 3).
Proliferation of existing cell types
In some cases, cells not damaged by the injury can regenerate lost
tissue through proliferation – this may involve a partial de-
differentiation such that the cells enter a proliferative state,
followed by re-differentiation down the same lineage. This is
thought to apply to heart
regeneration,
where pre-existing
cardiomyocytes de-differentiate and proliferate (Jopling et al.,
2010; Kikuchi et al., 2010) (Fig. 3Ai). Indeed, genetic lineage
tracing using a cardiomyocyte-specific promotor showed that all
newly formed cardiomyocytes at the site of injury are derived from
pre-existent
myocardium.
Regeneration
can
also
proceed
by
proliferation
of
pre-existing
cells,
without
the
need
for
a
dedifferentiation step before the proliferation phase. This has been
described for liver regeneration – at least when the damage is not too
severe and appears similar to the situation in mammals (Michalopoulos,
2007), where regeneration proceeds via proliferation of pre-existing
hepatocytes (Sadler et al., 2007) (Fig. 3Aii).
Blastema formation
The replacement of a large area of tissue can occur through the
formation of a blastema comprising undifferentiated cells, followed by
cell proliferation and differentiation. A good illustration of this process
is the regeneration of the zebrafish caudal fin. Upon amputation, an
epidermal cap forms that covers the injury. Next, cells from the
amputation plane dedifferentiate forming a blastema under the apical
epidermal cap. During fin regeneration, the dedifferentiated cells
proliferate and undergo re-differentiation to regenerate the various
different cell types that make up the fin (reviewed by Pfefferli and
Jaźwińska, 2015). The dedifferentiation and proliferation of osteoblasts
close to the amputated area make up the new rays (Stewart and
Stankunas, 2012) (Fig. 3B). However, it has also been shown that fin
regeneration remains viable in the absence of osteoblasts. In this case,
new bone cells can originate from a reserve population of osteoblast
precursor cells (Ando et al., 2017; Singh et al., 2012).
Transdifferentiation
In some cases, regeneration proceeds via dedifferentiation and
proliferation followed by re-differentiation into a different mature
cell type from the starting population. One example of this is the
process following severe hepatocyte loss in the liver. Under these
circumstances, regeneration proceeds initially via the proliferation
of biliary epithelial cells (Fig. 3C), which differentiate into
hepatocytes (Choi et al., 2014). Transdifferentiation has also been
observed in zebrafish pancreatic regeneration. A study searching for
genes that would promote β-cell regeneration identified a protein,
Igfbp1, that potentiated β-cell regeneration by stimulating α- to β-cell
transdifferentiation (Lu et al., 2016).
Differentiation of tissue-resident stem cells/progenitors
Not all organs regenerate through dedifferentiation and proliferation
of mature cells. Injuries to kidney, skeletal muscle or neural tissues
resolve by the proliferation and differentiation of stem cells. For
example, kidney regeneration following chemical damage proceeds
via the proliferation of adult nephron progenitor cells (Diep et al.,
2011). As described in mammals (Wosczyna and Rando, 2018;
Young and John, 2000), skeletal muscle regeneration in zebrafish
requires the proliferation of satellite cells, a population of adult
Pax7+ muscle stem cells that, after an injury to the muscle,
proliferate and fuse with adjacent muscle fibers (Berberoglu et al.,
2017). Regeneration of neurons also has been shown to depend on a
specific progenitor cell population. In the injured zebrafish
telencephalon, new neurons are derived from a subpopulation of
radial glial cells (Kroehne et al., 2011) that have been demonstrated
to function as a stem cells population in uninjured brain tissue
(Rothenaigner et al., 2011) (Fig. 3D).
Environmental cues driving regeneration
Initial wound closure is followed by an inflammatory response
mediated by neutrophils and macrophages, which are attracted by
6
PRIMER
Development (2019) 146, dev167692. doi:10.1242/dev.167692
DEVELOPMENT

signals generated from the dying cells and surrounding tissue, and
home to the site of damage. Indeed, inflammation is essential for organ
regeneration (Mescher, 2017). An inflammatory response precedes
zebrafish brain regeneration (Kyritsis et al., 2012) and has been
suggested to be important for heart regeneration (Lai et al., 2017).
Furthermore, T lymphocytes are involved in the regeneration of several
D
C
i)
ii)
B
A
Fig. 3. Cellular origin of the de novo formed tissue during organ regeneration in the zebrafish. (A) Dedifferentiation, proliferation and re-differentiation.
(Ai) In the heart, cardiomyocytes in close proximity to the injury revert to a less differentiated stage, re-enter the cell cycle and redifferentiate into mature
cardiomyocytes. (Aii) During regeneration of minor liver damage, hepatocyte regeneration occurs with no signs of dedifferentiation prior to cell cycle entry and
proliferation. (B) Blastema formation as an intermediate step during regeneration. After fin amputation, cells of various lineages – including osteoblasts –
dedifferentiate and accumulate under an apical epidermal cap. They then proliferate and redifferentiate to rebuild the missing fin structures. (C) Phenotypic switch
or transdifferentiation during regeneration. Example: after extensive liver damage, biliary ductal cells (green) can transdifferentiate into hepatocytes (green
hexagonal cells) that then differentiate into mature proliferating hepatocytes. (D) Stem cells as progenitor cells. Neural stem cells/progenitor cells proliferate and
differentiate into new neurons during regeneration of the central nervous system. While neuronal regeneration has been well described, less information is
available on robust axon regrowth. Yellow, differentiated cells; orange, dedifferentiated cells; purple, non-osteoblast cells within the fin; green hexagonal cells,
cells undergoing transdifferentiation; blue, stem cells/progenitor cells. Damaged area is shown in gray.
7
PRIMER
Development (2019) 146, dev167692. doi:10.1242/dev.167692
DEVELOPMENT

organs, such as spinal cord, heart and retina (Hui et al., 2017).
Supporting these findings, genetic or chemical ablation of phagocytic
macrophages during regeneration results in impaired fin (Li et al.,
2012; Petrie et al., 2014), lateral line (Carrillo et al., 2016), heart
(Lai et al., 2017) and spinal cord (Tsarouchas et al., 2018) regeneration.
The ECM and the stromal environment also influence regeneration.
Not only do they provide structural support for progenitor cells, but
they also have an impact on their proliferation and differentiation.
Indeed, fibrosis and regeneration are tightly linked processes. For
example, the pro-fibrotic molecule TGFβ induces not only fibrosis but
also cardiomyocyte proliferation (Chablais and Jazwinska, 2012).
Moreover, ablation of collagen-producing cells impairs cardiomyocyte
proliferation after heart injury (Sánchez-Iranzo et al., 2018), and ECM
proteins are required for spinal cord regeneration (Mokalled et al.,
2016; Wehner et al., 2017).
The nervous system is also key for adequate regeneration. This
has been demonstrated both in the fin, where denervation following
amputation results in impaired regeneration (Simões et al., 2014),
and in the heart, where regeneration is also impaired following
inhibition of peripheral nervous system activity (Mahmoud et al.,
2015). Future work is needed to further unravel the role of the
nervous system during organ regeneration, which can range from
secretion of molecules to establishment of synaptic connections.
Finally, revascularization is also essential for proper regeneration.
When this process is impaired during cardiac injury, regeneration is
blocked. Studies conducted on this subject suggest that revascularization
of the injured area is essential to stimulate cardiomyocyte
proliferation (Harrison et al., 2015; Marín-Juez et al., 2016). The
exact mechanisms through which revascularization contributes to
regeneration remain to be discovered.
Molecular pathways promoting regeneration
The key signaling pathways involved in embryonic development are
often also involved in organ regeneration. To study their function,
researchers have used transgenic lines for temporal and tissue-
specific overexpression of a core gene of a particular pathway and
studied the effect on organ regeneration. In addition, analysis of
organ regeneration in mutants of a gene involved in the pathway
of interest has been informative. Here, we provide a few examples of
how such pathways contribute to regenerative processes in
zebrafish; we refer the reader to the papers cited for further
details. One example of a pathway important for regeneration is the
retinoic acid (RA) pathway. RA regulates FGF, Wnt/β-catenin and
Igf signaling during blastema formation in the regenerating caudal
fin (Blum and Begemann, 2012), and stimulates cardiomyocyte
proliferation, likely in a paracrine manner (Kikuchi et al., 2011).
The fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP) pathways, which are essential for organ growth and
differentiation (Kan et al., 2009; Smith et al., 2006), are also
involved in regeneration. BMP signaling has been implicated in the
regeneration of several organs, including the liver, the heart and the
fin (Kan et al., 2009; Sehring et al., 2016). Similarly, FGF is
involved in multiple processes of regeneration, including the control
of blastema proliferation during fin regeneration (Lee et al., 2005;
Poss et al., 2000) or heart regeneration (Lepilina et al., 2006). One of
the
most
universally
used
pathways
in
tissue regeneration
throughout the animal kingdom is the Wnt signaling pathway
(Slack, 2017). In the zebrafish, it regulates blastema proliferation in
amputated caudal fin among many other processes (Stoick-Cooper
et al., 2007; Wehner et al., 2017). Juxtacrine signaling pathways,
such as the Notch pathway are also associated with proliferation
control both in fin (Münch et al., 2013) and heart (Zhao et al., 2014).
Other pathways involved in the control of cell cycle include the
Hippo-Yap/TAZ pathway (Flinn et al., 2018; Mateus et al., 2015),
which has recently received considerable attention in the field of
regeneration because it links the effect of a changing environment
and mechanical forces in response to injury with the regenerative
response in the surrounding cells. In all cases, specificity and temporal
control of these pathways is crucial for promoting regeneration. In
addition, depending on the combination of active pathways, different
cellular responses are elicited, ranging from cell differentiation or
proliferation to migration to epithelial-to mesenchymal transition, all
of which are crucial for organ regeneration.
In sum, during zebrafish regeneration, cells that repopulate
injured areas can have different origins, depending not only on the
lesioned organ, but also on the extent and the type of injury.
Furthermore, for regeneration to succeed there must be a balance
between the signals that induce cell proliferation and those that halt
cell division and determine cell fate.
Extent and limits of the regenerative capacity in zebrafish
Without doubt, the zebrafish is an organism with an amazing
capacity for regeneration. Here, we discuss some of the mechanisms
that might underlie this capacity, but also highlight some possible
limitations of organ regeneration in this animal.
Possible explanations for the high regenerative capacity
The regenerative capacity in the zebrafish might rely on its capacity to
activate specific gene regulatory networks in response to injury that
are repressed in other animal models (Yang and Kang, 2018). Indeed,
epigenetic modifications are necessary to trigger regeneration. One of
the earliest findings in this field reported that, in the fin, histone
modifications precede initiation of regeneration (Stewart et al., 2009),
and histone methyltransferases are necessary for this process (Dupret
et al., 2017). The use of ChIPseq and transgenesis has provided much
insight into the landscape of active enhancers during organ
regeneration, identifying enhancer elements that are activated in
response to injury consistently in different organs and even in different
organisms (Kang et al., 2016; Pfefferli and Jaźwińska, 2017).
One important characteristic of zebrafish is its capacity to grow
throughout its lifespan, meaning that most of the zebrafish cells, e.g.
cardiomyocytes, retain their proliferative capacity (Wills et al.,
2008). For heart regeneration, cardiomyocyte ploidy has been
shown to be a limiting step. Zebrafish cardiomyocytes are
mononuclear and diploid, whereas in adult humans they are
mostly polyploid. Indeed, induction of polyploidy in zebrafish
cardiomyocytes abrogates heart regeneration (González-Rosa et al.,
2018; Patterson et al., 2017).
The immune system might play a key role in defining the
regenerative capacity of an organism. As an example, differences in
immune response to cardiac injury in two teleost models (medaka
and zebrafish) correlate with reduced regenerative capacity of
medaka (Lai et al., 2017). Finally, regenerative capacities might also
be attributed to differences in the environment that species inhabit –
exemplified by the differences in heart regeneration in surface
versus cave morphs of the cavefish Astyanax mexicanus (Stockdale
et al., 2018). Thus, using other fish models with different tissue
recovery capacities for regeneration studies (see Table 4) may
contribute to a better understanding of the different mechanisms
underlying this process.
Unlimited regeneration in the zebrafish?
Regeneration in the zebrafish seems to be nearly unlimited:
regeneration of the caudal fin and barbell occurs even after
8
PRIMER
Development (2019) 146, dev167692. doi:10.1242/dev.167692
DEVELOPMENT

repetitive amputations (Azevedo et al., 2011; LeClair and
Topczewski, 2010), although subtle changes to the newly formed
organ, such as variation in the pigmentation patterning of the fin or
the position of the bony ray bifurcations, have been observed
(Azevedo et al., 2012). Moreover, age does not seem to limit
regenerative capacity, at least for the heart (Itou et al., 2012).
Nevertheless, there is evidence that organ regeneration can be
partially incomplete. For example, although heart morphology is
restored after lesion and no scar is visible, the ventricular wall
motion of the regenerated area remains partially affected and
contracts asynchronously with the remainder of the heart, even after
complete
tissue
regeneration
(González-Rosa
et
al.,
2014).
Furthermore,
following
resorption
of
extracellular
fibrotic
components during heart healing, accumulated fibroblasts are not
fully eliminated after complete regeneration but become inactivated
(Sánchez-Iranzo et al., 2018). It is thus important to distinguish
between
morphological
and
functional
regeneration
and
to
recognize that – even in a system such as zebrafish – regeneration
may not be functionally ‘perfect’.
Conclusions and perspectives
In conclusion, using the zebrafish as an animal model in regeneration
studies has undoubtedly contributed to the development of the field
but, as with any other model, there are advantages and disadvantages
to consider (Table 5). Despite the contributions made, there are still
unanswered questions. For example, there is little information on how
metabolism is linked to regenerative capacity. Furthermore, the
interplay between fibrosis and regeneration, as well as the
mechanisms of fibrotic tissue regression, are still not fully
understood. Why is a scar formed under some circumstances or in
some organs while in other cases regeneration occurs? To what extent
does regeneration rely on a transient fibrotic scar? It is also important
to understand how mechanical forces influence regeneration – studies
in the zebrafish might help to explain how, for example, stiffness or
shear stress regulates organ regeneration. In addition, it is intriguing
that regenerating tissues stop growing at the appropriate size; this is
poorly understood. Indeed, there is still a dearth of knowledge
regarding which cell populations become active during regeneration
and whether all the cells have the same regenerative potential. To
answer many of these questions, some of the molecular tools such as
conditional genome editing will need to be improved and widely
established for regeneration studies. Advances in intra vital imaging
for adult zebrafish will also help to expand our toolbox. With these
new technological advances in hand, important discoveries on the
mechanisms of organ regeneration using the zebrafish model will
certainly be achieved. A deep knowledge on the mechanisms of
organ regeneration in species such as the zebrafish with innate
regenerative capacity might serve as inspiration for the development
of therapeutic strategies in mammals.
Acknowledgements
We thank Andres Sanz for critical reading of the manuscript and the reviewers for
their suggestions. We also acknowledge all those authors whose work could not be
cited here due to space limitations. Their research keeps providing us with invaluable
knowledge in the field of zebrafish regeneration.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Funding
N.M. is supported by a European Research Council starting grant (2013 zebraHeart-
337703), E.L. is supported by the European Commission (H2020-MSCA-ITN-2016
European Industrial Doctorate 4DHeart 722427).
References
Ádám, A., Bártfai, R., Lele, Z., Krone, P. H. and Orbán, L. (2000). Heat-inducible
expression of a reporter gene detected by transient assay in zebrafish. Exp. Cell
Res. 256, 282-290. doi:10.1006/excr.2000.4805
Akitake, C. M., Macurak, M., Halpern, M. E. and Goll, M. G. (2011).
Transgenerational analysis of transcriptional silencing in zebrafish. Dev. Biol.
352, 191-201. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.01.002
Albadri, S., Del Bene, F. and Revenu, C. (2017). Genome editing using CRISPR/
Cas9-based knock-in approaches in zebrafish. Methods 121-122, 77-85. doi:10.
1016/j.ymeth.2017.03.005
Ando, R., Hama, H., Yamamoto-Hino, M., Mizuno, H. and Miyawaki, A. (2002).
An optical marker based on the UV-induced green-to-red photoconversion of a
fluorescent protein. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 12651. doi:10.1073/pnas.
202320599
Ando, K., Shibata, E., Hans, S., Brand, M. and Kawakami, A. (2017). Osteoblast
production by reserved progenitor cells in zebrafish bone regeneration and
maintenance. Dev. Cell 43, 643-650.e643. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2017.10.015
Azevedo, A. S., Grotek, B., Jacinto, A., Weidinger, G. and Saúde, L. (2011). The
regenerative capacity of the zebrafish caudal fin is not affected by repeated
amputations. PLoS ONE 6, e22820. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0022820
Azevedo, A. S., Sousa, S., Jacinto, A. and Saúde, L. (2012). An amputation resets
positional information to a proximal identity in the regenerating zebrafish caudal
fin. BMC Dev. Biol. 12, 24. doi:10.1186/1471-213X-12-24
Barbosa, J. S., Sanchez-Gonzalez, R., Di Giaimo, R., Baumgart, E. V., Theis,
F. J., Gotz, M. and Ninkovic, J. (2015). Neurodevelopment. Live imaging of adult
neural stem cell behavior in the intact and injured zebrafish brain. Science 348,
789-793. doi:10.1126/science.aaa2729
Becker, C. G. and Becker, T. (2008). Adult zebrafish as a model for successful
central nervous system regeneration. Restor. Neurol. Neurosci. 26, 71-80.
Becker, T., Wullimann Mario, F., Becker Catherina, G., Bernhardt, R. R. and
Schachner, M. (1998). Axonal regrowth after spinal cord transection in adult
zebrafish.
J.
Comp.
Neurol.
377,
577-595.
doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-
9861(19970127)377:4<577::AID-CNE8>3.0.CO;2-#
Bednarek, D., González-Rosa, J. M., Guzmán-Martı́nez, G., Gutiérrez-Gutiérrez,
Ó., Aguado, T., Sánchez-Ferrer, C., Marques, I. J., Galardi-Castilla, M., de
Diego, I., Gómez, M. J. et al. (2015). Telomerase is essential for zebrafish heart
regeneration. Cell Reports 12, 1691-1703. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2015.07.064
Berberoglu, M. A., Gallagher, T. L., Morrow, Z. T., Talbot, J. C., Hromowyk, K. J.,
Tenente, I. M., Langenau, D. M. and Amacher, S. L. (2017). Satellite-like cells
Table 5. Advantages and disadvantages of the zebrafish as a
regeneration model
Advantages
Disadvantages
High regenerative capacity
Vertebrate model
Established husbandry
protocols
Low-cost maintenance
External development
Possibility of working with large
numbers
Ease of in vivo imaging during
development
Genetic engineering, annotated
genome
Physiological similarities with
humans (e.g. heart rate)
Non-mammalian model
Partial genome duplication
Dearth of antibodies for protein studies
Difficulty in performing in vivo imaging
in adult stages
Difficulty in using some molecular
tools (e.g. knock-ins)
Anatomical and physiological differences
to humans (e.g. two-chambered heart)
Table 4. Other teleost fish models of regeneration
Fish model
Organs in which regeneration has been
studied
Astyanax mexicanus (Mexican
cave fish)
Heart (Stockdale et al., 2018)
Carassius auratus (Goldfish)
Spinal cord (Bernstein and Gelderd,
1970)
Eye (Parrilla et al., 2012)
Fin (Caskey and O’Brien, 1948)
Heart (Grivas et al., 2014)
Oryzias latipes (Medaka)
Kidney (Watanabe et al., 2009)
Fin (Nemoto et al., 2007)
Pancreatic β-cells (Otsuka and Takeda,
2017)
9
PRIMER
Development (2019) 146, dev167692. doi:10.1242/dev.167692
DEVELOPMENT

contribute to pax7-dependent skeletal muscle repair in adult zebrafish. Dev. Biol.
424, 162-180. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2017.03.004
Bergemann, D., Massoz, L., Bourdouxhe, J., Carril Pardo, C. A., Voz, M. L.,
Peers, B. and Manfroid, I. (2018). Nifurpirinol: a more potent and reliable
substrate compared to metronidazole for nitroreductase-mediated cell ablations.
Wound Repair. Regen. 26, 238-244. doi:10.1111/wrr.12633
Bergmann, O., Bhardwaj, R. D., Bernard, S., Zdunek, S., Barnabe-Heider, F.,
Walsh, S., Zupicich, J., Alkass, K., Buchholz, B. A., Druid, H. et al. (2009).
Evidence for cardiomyocyte renewal in humans. Science 324, 98-102. doi:10.
1126/science.1164680
Bernhardt, R. R., Tongiorgi, E., Anzini, P. and Schachner, M. (1996). Increased
expression of specific recognition molecules by retinal ganglion cells and by
optic pathway glia accompanies the successful regeneration of retinal axons in
adult zebrafish. J. Comp. Neurol. 376, 253-264. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-9861
(19961209)376:2<253::AID-CNE7>3.0.CO;2-2
Bernstein, J. J. and Gelderd, J. B. (1970). Regeneration of the long spinal tracts in
the goldfish. Brain Res. 20, 33-38. doi:10.1016/0006-8993(70)90151-4
Blum, N. and Begemann, G. (2012). Retinoic acid signaling controls the formation,
proliferation and survival of the blastema during adult zebrafish fin regeneration.
Development 139, 107-116. doi:10.1242/dev.065391
Burg, L., Palmer, N., Kikhi, K., Miroshnik, E. S., Rueckert, H., Gaddy, E.,
MacPherson Cunningham, C., Mattonet, K., Lai, S. L., Marı́n-Juez, R. et al.
(2018). Conditional mutagenesis by oligonucleotide-mediated integration of loxP
sites in zebrafish. PLoS Genet. 14, e1007754. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1007754
Burkhardt-Holm, P., Oulmi, Y., Schroeder, A., Storch, V. and Braunbeck, T.
(1999). Toxicity of 4-chloroaniline in early life stages of zebrafish (Danio rerio): II.
Cytopathology and regeneration of liver and gills after prolonged exposure to
waterborne 4-chloroaniline. Arch. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 37, 85-102. doi:10.
1007/s002449900493
Bussmann, J. and Schulte-Merker, S. (2011). Rapid BAC selection for tol2-
mediated transgenesis in zebrafish. Development 138, 4327-4332. doi:10.1242/
dev.068080
Cano-Martinez, A., Vargas-Gonzalez, A., Guarner-Lans, V., Prado-Zayago, E.,
Leon-Oleda,
M.
and
Nieto-Lima,
B.
(2010).
Functional
and
structural
regeneration
in
the
axolotl
heart
(Ambystoma
mexicanum)
after
partial
ventricular amputation. Arch. Cardiol. Mex. 80, 79-86.
Carney, T. J. and Mosimann, C. (2018). Switch and trace: recombinase genetics in
zebrafish. Trends Genet. 34, 362-378. doi:10.1016/j.tig.2018.01.004
Carrillo, S. A., Anguita-Salinas, C., Peña, O. A., Morales, R. A., Muñoz-Sánchez,
S., Muñoz-Montecinos, C., Paredes-Zúñiga, S., Tapia, K. and Allende, M. L.
(2016). Macrophage Recruitment contributes to regeneration of mechanosensory
hair cells in the zebrafish lateral line. J. Cell. Biochem. 117, 1880-1889. doi:10.
1002/jcb.25487
Caskey, J. M. and O’Brien, J. P. (1948). The cellular basis of regeneration of the
caudal fin of the goldfish. Anat. Rec. 101, 710.
Chablais, F. and Jazwinska, A. (2012). The regenerative capacity of the zebrafish
heart is dependent on TGFbeta signaling. Development 139, 1921-1930. doi:10.
1242/dev.078543
Chablais, F., Veit, J., Rainer, G., Rainer, G. and Jaźwińska, A. (2011). The
zebrafish heart regenerates after cryoinjury-induced myocardial infarction. BMC
Dev. Biol. 11, 21. doi:10.1186/1471-213X-11-21
Chassot, B., Pury, D. and Jaźwińska, A. (2016). Zebrafish fin regeneration after
cryoinjury-induced tissue damage. Biol. Open 5, 819-828. doi:10.1242/bio.
016865
Chatterjee, S. and Lufkin, T. (2011). Fishing for function: zebrafish BAC
transgenics for functional genomics. Mol. Biosyst. 7, 2345-2351. doi:10.1039/
c1mb05116d
Chen, C.-H., Durand, E., Wang, J., Zon, L. I. and Poss, K. D. (2013). zebraflash
transgenic lines for in vivo bioluminescence imaging of stem cells and
regeneration in adult zebrafish. Development 140, 4988-4997. doi:10.1242/dev.
102053
Chen, C.-H., Puliafito, A., Cox, B. D., Primo, L., Fang, Y., Di Talia, S. and Poss,
K. D. (2016). Multicolor cell barcoding technology for long-term surveillance of
epithelial regeneration in zebrafish. Dev. Cell 36, 668-680. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.
2016.02.017
Choi, T.-Y., Ninov, N., Stainier, D. Y. R. and Shin, D. (2014). Extensive conversion
of hepatic biliary epithelial cells to hepatocytes after near total loss of hepatocytes
in zebrafish. Gastroenterology 146, 776-788. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2013.10.019
Conedera, F. M., Arendt, P., Trepp, C., Tschopp, M., Enzmann, V. (2017). Muller
glia cell activation in a laser-induced retinal degeneration and regeneration model
in zebrafish. J. Vis. Exp. 128, e56249. doi:10.3791/56249
Cox, A. G., Saunders, D. C., Kelsey, P. B., Jr, Conway, A. A., Tesmenitsky, Y.,
Marchini, J. F., Brown, K. K., Stamler, J. S., Colagiovanni, D. B., Rosenthal,
G. J. et al. (2014). S-nitrosothiol signaling regulates liver development and
improves outcome following toxic liver injury. Cell Reports 6, 56-69. doi:10.1016/j.
celrep.2013.12.007
Cox, B. D., De Simone, A., Tornini, V. A., Singh, S. P., Di Talia, S. and Poss, K. D.
(2018). In toto imaging of dynamic osteoblast behaviors in regenerating skeletal
bone. Curr. Biol. 28, 3937-3947.e3934. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2018.10.052
Curado, S., Anderson, R. M., Jungblut, B., Mumm, J., Schroeter, E. and
Stainier, D. Y. (2007). Conditional targeted cell ablation in zebrafish: a new tool for
regeneration studies. Dev. Dyn. 236, 1025-1035. doi:10.1002/dvdy.21100
Del Bene, F., Wyart, C., Robles, E., Tran, A., Looger, L., Scott, E. K., Isacoff, E. Y.
and Baier, H. (2010). Filtering of visual information in the tectum by an identified
neural circuit. Science 330, 669-673. doi:10.1126/science.1192949
Diep, C. Q., Ma, D., Deo, R. C., Holm, T. M., Naylor, R. W., Arora, N., Wingert,
R. A., Bollig, F., Djordjevic, G., Lichman, B. et al. (2011). Identification of adult
nephron progenitors capable of kidney regeneration in zebrafish. Nature 470, 95.
doi:10.1038/nature09669
Ding, Y., Lee, J., Hsu, J. J., Chang, C.-C., Baek, K. I., Ranjbarvaziri, S., Ardehali,
R., Packard, R. R. S. and Hsiai, T. K. (2018). Light-sheet imaging to elucidate
cardiovascular injury and repair. Curr. Cardiol. Rep. 20, 35. doi:10.1007/s11886-
018-0979-6
Dong, Z., Wu, S., Zhu, C., Wang, X., Li, Y., Chen, X., Liu, D., Qiang, L., Baas, P. W.
and Liu, M. (2019). Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
(CRISPR)/Cas9-mediated kif15 mutations accelerate axonal outgrowth during
neuronal development and regeneration in zebrafish. Traffic 20, 71-81. doi:10.
1111/tra.12621
Dray, N., Bedu, S., Vuillemin, N., Alunni, A., Coolen, M., Krecsmarik, M.,
Supatto, W., Beaurepaire, E. and Bally-Cuif, L. (2015). Large-scale live imaging
of adult neural stem cells in their endogenous niche. Development 142,
3592-3600. doi:10.1242/dev.123018
Dupret, B., Volkel, P., Vennin, C., Toillon, R. A., Le Bourhis, X. and Angrand,
P. O. (2017). The histone lysine methyltransferase Ezh2 is required for
maintenance of the intestine integrity and for caudal fin regeneration in
zebrafish. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. Gene Regul. Mech. 1860, 1079-1093.
doi:10.1016/j.bbagrm.2017.08.011
Early, J. J., Cole, K. L. H., Williamson, J. M., Swire, M., Kamadurai, H.,
Muskavitch, M. and Lyons, D. A. (2018). An automated high-resolution in vivo
screen in zebrafish to identify chemical regulators of myelination. eLife 7, e35136.
doi:10.7554/eLife.35136
Ernst, A., Alkass, K., Bernard, S., Salehpour, M., Perl, S., Tisdale, J., Possnert,
G., Druid, H. and Frisén, J. (2014). Neurogenesis in the striatum of the adult
human brain. Cell 156, 1072-1083. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2014.01.044
Feil, R., Wagner, J., Metzger, D. and Chambon, P. (1997). Regulation of Cre
recombinase activity by mutated estrogen receptor ligand-binding domains.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 237, 752-757. doi:10.1006/bbrc.1997.7124
Felker, A. and Mosimann, C. (2016). Contemporary zebrafish transgenesis with
Tol2 and application for Cre/lox recombination experiments. Methods Cell Biol.
135, 219-244. doi:10.1016/bs.mcb.2016.01.009
Fimbel, S. M., Montgomery, J. E., Burket, C. T., Burket, C. T., Hyde, D. R. and
Hyde, D. R. (2007). Regeneration of inner retinal neurons after intravitreal
injection of ouabain in zebrafish. J. Neurosci. 27, 1712-1724 doi:10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.5317-06.2007
Flinn, M. A., Jeffery, B. E., O’Meara, C. C. and Link, B. A. (2018). Yap is required
for scar formation but not myocyte proliferation during heart regeneration in
zebrafish. Cardiovasc. Res. 115, 570-577. doi:10.1093/cvr/cvy243
Geisler, R., Borel, N., Ferg, M., Maier, J. V. and Strahle, U. (2016). Maintenance of
zebrafish lines at the european zebrafish resource center. Zebrafish 13 Suppl. 1,
S19-S23. doi:10.1089/zeb.2015.1205
Geraudie, J., Monnot, M. J., Ridet, A., Thorogood, P. and Ferretti, P. (1993). Is
exogenous retinoic acid necessary to alter positional information during
regeneration of the fin in zebrafish? Prog. Clin. Biol. Res. 383B, 803-814.
Goessling, W., North, T. E. and Zon, L. I. (2007). Ultrasound biomicroscopy
permits in vivo characterization of zebrafish liver tumors. Nat. Methods 4, 551-553.
doi:10.1038/nmeth1059
Goldman, J. A., Kuzu, G., Lee, N., Karasik, J., Gemberling, M., Foglia, M. J.,
Karra, R., Dickson, A. L., Sun, F., Tolstorukov, M. Y. et al. (2017). Resolving
heart regeneration by replacement histone profiling. Dev. Cell 40, 392-404.e395.
doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2017.01.013
Gonzalez-Rosa, J. M., Martin, V., Peralta, M., Torres, M. and Mercader, N. (2011).
Extensive scar formation and regression during heart regeneration after cryoinjury
in zebrafish. Development 138, 1663-1674. doi:10.1242/dev.060897
Gonzalez-Rosa, J. M., Peralta, M. and Mercader, N. (2012). Pan-epicardial
lineage tracing reveals that epicardium derived cells give rise to myofibroblasts
and perivascular cells during zebrafish heart regeneration. Dev. Biol. 370,
173-186. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.07.007
González-Rosa, J. M., Guzmán-Martı́nez, G., Marques, I. J., Sánchez-Iranzo, H.,
Jiménez-Borreguero, L. J. and Mercader, N. (2014). Use of echocardiography
reveals reestablishment of ventricular pumping efficiency and partial ventricular
wall motion recovery upon ventricular cryoinjury in the zebrafish. PLoS ONE 9,
e115604. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0115604
Gonzalez-Rosa, J. M., Burns, C. E. and Burns, C. G. (2017). Zebrafish heart
regeneration: 15 years of discoveries. Regeneration 4, 105-123. doi:10.1002/
reg2.83
González-Rosa, J. M., Sharpe, M., Field, D., Soonpaa, M. H., Field, L. J., Burns,
C. E. and Burns, C. G. (2018). Myocardial polyploidization creates a barrier to
heart regeneration in zebrafish. Dev. Cell 44, 433-446.e7. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.
2018.01.021
10
PRIMER
Development (2019) 146, dev167692. doi:10.1242/dev.167692
DEVELOPMENT

Grivas, J., Haag, M., Johnson, A., Manalo, T., Roell, J., Das, T. L., Brown, E.,
Burns, A. R. and Lafontant, P. J. (2014). Cardiac repair and regenerative
potential in the goldfish (Carassius auratus) heart. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. C
Toxicol. Pharmacol. 163, 14-23. doi:10.1016/j.cbpc.2014.02.002
Haffter, P., Granato, M., Brand, M., Mullins, M. C., Hammerschmidt, M., Kane,
D. A., Odenthal, J., van Eeden, F. J., Jiang, Y. J., Heisenberg, C. P. et al.
(1996). The identification of genes with unique and essential functions in the
development of the zebrafish, Danio rerio. Development 123, 1-36. doi:10.1016/
0736-5748(96)80313-3
Halpern, M. E., Rhee, J., Goll, M. G., Akitake, C. M., Parsons, M. and Leach, S. D.
(2008). Gal4/UAS transgenic tools and their application to zebrafish. Zebrafish 5,
97-110. doi:10.1089/zeb.2008.0530
Han, Y., Chen, A., Umansky, K. B., Oonk, K. A., Choi, W. Y., Dickson, A. L., Ou,
J., Cigliola, V., Yifa, O., Cao, J. et al. (2019). Vitamin D stimulates cardiomyocyte
proliferation and controls organ size and regeneration in zebrafish. Dev. Cell 48,
853-863.e855. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2019.01.001
Hans, S., Kaslin, J., Freudenreich, D. and Brand, M. (2009). Temporally-
controlled site-specific recombination in zebrafish. PLoS ONE 4, e4640-e4640.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0004640
Hardy, M. A. (1989). The biology of scar formation. Phys. Ther. 69, 1014-1024.
doi:10.1093/ptj/69.12.1014
Harris, J. A., Cheng, A. G., Cunningham, L. L., MacDonald, G., Raible, D. W. and
Rubel, E. W. (2003). Neomycin-induced hair cell death and rapid regeneration in
the lateral line of zebrafish (Danio rerio). J. Assoc. Res. Otolaryngol. 4, 219-234
doi:10.1007/s10162-002-3022-x
Harrison, M. R., Bussmann, J., Huang, Y., Zhao, L., Osorio, A., Burns, C. G.,
Burns, C. E., Sucov, H. M., Siekmann, A. F. and Lien, C. L. (2015). Chemokine-
guided angiogenesis directs coronary vasculature formation in zebrafish. Dev.
Cell 33, 442-454. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2015.04.001
Hein, S. J., Lehmann, L. H., Kossack, M., Juergensen, L., Fuchs, D., Katus, H. A.
and Hassel, D. (2015). Advanced echocardiography in adult zebrafish reveals
delayed recovery of heart function after myocardial cryoinjury. PLoS ONE 10,
e0122665. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0122665
Hesselson, D., Anderson, R. M., Beinat, M. and Stainier, D. Y. R. (2009). Distinct
populations of quiescent and proliferative pancreatic beta-cells identified by
HOTcre mediated labeling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 14896-14901. doi:10.
1073/pnas.0906348106
Honkoop, H., de Bakker, D., Aharonov, A., Kruse, F., Shakked, A., Nguyen, P.,
de Heus, C., Garric, L., Muraro, M., Shoffner, A. et al. (2018). A metabolic
switch from OXPHOS to glycolysis is essential for cardiomyocyte proliferation in
the regenerating heart. bioRxiv 498899. doi:10.1101/498899
Howe, D. G., Bradford, Y. M., Conlin, T., Eagle, A. E., Fashena, D., Frazer, K.,
Knight, J., Mani, P., Martin, R., Moxon, S. A. et al. (2013). ZFIN, the zebrafish
model organism database: increased support for mutants and transgenics.
Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D854-D860. doi:10.1093/nar/gks938
Hui, S. P., Sheng, D. Z., Sugimoto, K., Gonzalez-Rajal, A., Nakagawa, S.,
Hesselson, D. and Kikuchi, K. (2017). Zebrafish regulatory T cells mediate
organ-specific regenerative programs. Dev. Cell 43, 659-672.e655. doi:10.1016/j.
devcel.2017.11.010
Hwang, W. Y., Fu, Y., Reyon, D., Maeder, M. L., Tsai, S. Q., Sander, J. D.,
Peterson, R. T., Yeh, J. R. and Joung, J. K. (2013). Efficient genome editing in
zebrafish using a CRISPR-Cas system. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 227-229. doi:10.
1038/nbt.2501
Hyde, D. R., Godwin, A. R., Thummel, R. (2012). In vivo electroporation of
morpholinos into the regenerating adult zebrafish tail fin. J. Vis. Exp. 61, 3632.
doi:10.3791/3632
Itou, J., Oishi, I., Kawakami, H., Glass, T. J., Richter, J., Johnson, A., Lund, T. C.
and Kawakami, Y. (2012). Migration of cardiomyocytes is essential for heart
regeneration in zebrafish. Development 139, 4133. doi:10.1242/dev.079756
Jao, L.-E., Wente, S. R. and Chen, W. (2013). Efficient multiplex biallelic zebrafish
genome editing using a CRISPR nuclease system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
110, 13904-13909. doi:10.1073/pnas.1308335110
Johnson, S. L. and Weston, J. A. (1995). Temperature-sensitive mutations that
cause stage-specific defects in Zebrafish fin regeneration. Genetics 141,
1583-1595.
Jopling, C., Sleep, E., Raya, M., Martı́, M., Raya, A. and Belmonte, J. C. I. (2010).
Zebrafish heart regeneration occurs by cardiomyocyte dedifferentiation and
proliferation. Nature 464, 606. doi:10.1038/nature08899
Jungke, P., Hans, S. and Brand, M. (2013). The zebrafish CreZoo: an easy-to-
handle database for novel CreER(T2)-driver lines. Zebrafish 10, 259-263. doi:10.
1089/zeb.2012.0834
Kamei, C. N., Liu, Y. and Drummond, I. A. (2015). Kidney regeneration in adult
zebrafish by gentamicin induced injury. J. Vis. Exp. 102, e51912. doi:10.3791/
51912
Kan, N. G., Junghans, D. and Izpisua Belmonte, J. C. (2009). Compensatory
growth mechanisms regulated by BMP and FGF signaling mediate liver
regeneration in zebrafish after partial hepatectomy. FASEB J. 23, 3516-3525.
doi:10.1096/fj.09-131730
Kang, J., Hu, J., Karra, R., Dickson, A. L., Tornini, V. A., Nachtrab, G.,
Gemberling, M., Goldman, J. A., Black, B. L. and Poss, K. D. (2016).
Modulation of tissue repair by regeneration enhancer elements. Nature 532,
201-206. doi:10.1038/nature17644
Kawakami, K. (2007). Tol2: a versatile gene transfer vector in vertebrates. Genome
Biol. 8, S7-S7. doi:10.1186/gb-2007-8-s1-s7
Kawakami, K., Shima, A. and Kawakami, N. (2000). Identification of a functional
transposase of the Tol2 element, an Ac-like element from the Japanese medaka
fish, and its transposition in the zebrafish germ lineage. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
97, 11403-11408. doi:10.1073/pnas.97.21.11403
Kawakami, K., Abe, G., Asada, T., Asakawa, K., Fukuda, R., Ito, A., Lal, P.,
Mouri, N., Muto, A., Suster, M. L. et al. (2010). zTrap: zebrafish gene trap and
enhancer trap database. BMC Dev. Biol. 10, 105. doi:10.1186/1471-213X-10-105
Kikuchi, K., Holdway, J. E., Werdich, A. A., Anderson, R. M., Fang, Y.,
Egnaczyk, G. F., Evans, T., MacRae, C. A., Stainier, D. Y. R. and Poss, K. D.
(2010). Primary contribution to zebrafish heart regeneration by gata4(+)
cardiomyocytes. Nature 464, 601-605. doi:10.1038/nature08804
Kikuchi, K., Holdway, J. E., Major, R. J., Blum, N., Dahn, R. D., Begemann, G.
and Poss, K. D. (2011). Retinoic acid production by endocardium and epicardium
is an injury response essential for zebrafish heart regeneration. Dev. Cell 20,
397-404. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2011.01.010
Kirchgeorg, L., Felker, A., van Oostrom, M., Chiavacci, E. and Mosimann, C.
(2018). Cre/lox-controlled spatiotemporal perturbation of FGF signaling in
zebrafish. Dev. Dyn. 247, 1146-1159. doi:10.1002/dvdy.24668
Kizil, C. and Brand, M. (2011). Cerebroventricular microinjection (CVMI) into adult
zebrafish brain is an efficient misexpression method for forebrain ventricular cells.
PLoS ONE 6, e27395. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0027395
Koth, J., Maguire, M. L., McClymont, D., Diffley, L., Thornton, V. L., Beech, J.,
Patient, R. K., Riley, P. R. and Schneider, J. E. (2017). High-resolution magnetic
resonance imaging of the regenerating adult zebrafish heart. Sci. Rep. 7, 2917.
doi:10.1038/s41598-017-03050-y
Kroehne, V., Freudenreich, D., Hans, S., Kaslin, J. and Brand, M. (2011).
Regeneration of the adult zebrafish brain from neurogenic radial glia-type
progenitors. Development 138, 4831. doi:10.1242/dev.072587
Kyritsis, N., Kizil, C., Zocher, S., Kroehne, V., Kaslin, J., Freudenreich, D.,
Iltzsche, A. and Brand, M. (2012). Acute inflammation initiates the regenerative
response in the adult zebrafish brain. Science 338, 1353. doi:10.1126/science.
1228773
Lai, S.-L., Marı́n-Juez, R., Moura, P. L., Kuenne, C., Lai, J. K. H., Tsedeke, A. T.,
Guenther, S., Looso, M. and Stainier, D. Y. R. (2017). Reciprocal analyses in
zebrafish and medaka reveal that harnessing the immune response promotes
cardiac regeneration. eLife 6, e25605. doi:10.7554/eLife.25605
Langenau, D. M., Feng, H., Berghmans, S., Kanki, J. P., Kutok, J. L. and Look,
A. T. (2005). Cre/lox-regulated transgenic zebrafish model with conditional myc-
induced T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102,
6068-6073. doi:10.1073/pnas.0408708102
LeClair, E. E. and Topczewski, J. (2010). Development and regeneration of the
zebrafish maxillary barbel: a novel study system for vertebrate tissue growth and
repair. PLoS ONE 5, e8737. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0008737
Lee, Y., Grill, S., Sanchez, A., Murphy-Ryan, M. and Poss, K. D. (2005). Fgf
signaling
instructs
position-dependent
growth
rate
during
zebrafish
fin
regeneration. Development 132, 5173. doi:10.1242/dev.02101
Lepilina, A., Coon, A. N., Kikuchi, K., Holdway, J. E., Roberts, R. W., Burns,
C. G. and Poss, K. D. (2006). A dynamic epicardial injury response supports
progenitor cell activity during zebrafish heart regeneration. Cell 127, 607-619.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.052
Li, L., Yan, B., Shi, Y. Q., Zhang, W. Q. and Wen, Z. L. (2012). Live imaging reveals
differing roles of macrophages and neutrophils during zebrafish tail fin
regeneration. J. Biol. Chem. 287, 25353-25360. doi:10.1074/jbc.M112.349126
Lim, D. A. and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2016). The adult ventricular-subventricular zone
(V-SVZ) and olfactory bulb (OB) neurogenesis. Cold Spring Harbor Perspect. Biol.
8, a018820. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a018820
Liu, K., Petree, C., Requena, T., Varshney, P. and Varshney, G. K. (2019).
Expanding the CRISPR toolbox in zebrafish for studying development and
disease. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 7, 13. doi:10.3389/fcell.2019.00013
Liu, Q., Azodi, E., Kerstetter, A. E. and Wilson, A. L. (2004). Cadherin-2 and
cadherin-4 in developing, adult and regenerating zebrafish cerebellum. Brain Res.
Dev. Brain Res. 150, 63-71. doi:10.1016/j.devbrainres.2004.03.002
Long, L., Guo, H., Yao, D., Xiong, K., Li, Y., Liu, P., Zhu, Z. and Liu, D. (2015).
Regulation of transcriptionally active genes via the catalytically inactive Cas9 in
C. elegans and D. rerio. Cell Res. 25, 638-641. doi:10.1038/cr.2015.35
Lu, J., Liu, K.-C., Schulz, N., Karampelias, C., Charbord, J., Hilding, A., Rautio,
L., Bertolino, P., Ö stenson, C.-G., Brismar, K. et al. (2016). IGFBP1 increases
beta-cell regeneration by promoting alpha- to beta-cell transdifferentiation. EMBO
J. 35, 2026-2044. doi:10.15252/embj.201592903
Mahmoud, A. I., O’Meara, C. C., Gemberling, M., Zhao, L., Bryant, D. M., Zheng,
R., Gannon, J. B., Cai, L., Choi, W. Y., Egnaczyk, G. F. et al. (2015). Nerves
regulate cardiomyocyte proliferation and heart regeneration. Dev. Cell 34,
387-399. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2015.06.017
Marı́n-Juez, R., Marass, M., Gauvrit, S., Rossi, A., Lai, S.-L., Materna, S. C.,
Black, B. L. and Stainier, D. Y. R. (2016). Fast revascularization of the injured
11
PRIMER
Development (2019) 146, dev167692. doi:10.1242/dev.167692
DEVELOPMENT

area is essential to support zebrafish heart regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 113, 11237-11242. doi:10.1073/pnas.1605431113
Mä rz, M., Schmidt, R., Rastegar, S. and Strä hle, U. (2011). Regenerative
response following stab injury in the adult zebrafish telencephalon. Dev. Dyn. 240,
2221-2231. doi:10.1002/dvdy.22710
Mateus, R., Lourenco, R., Fang, Y., Brito, G., Farinho, A., Valerio, F. and Jacinto,
A. (2015). Control of tissue growth by Yap relies on cell density and F-actin in
zebrafish fin regeneration. Development 142, 2752-2763. doi:10.1242/dev.
119701
Mathew, L. K., Sengupta, S., Kawakami, A., Andreasen, E. A., Lö hr, C. V.,
Loynes, C. A., Renshaw, S. A., Peterson, R. T. and Tanguay, R. L. (2007).
Unraveling tissue regeneration pathways using chemical genetics. J. Biol. Chem.
282, 35202-35210. doi:10.1074/jbc.M706640200
Matsuda, H., Mullapudi, S. T., Carol Yang, Y. H., Masaki, H., Hesselson, D. and
Stainier, D. Y. R. (2018). Whole organism chemical screening identifies modulators
of pancreatic beta cell function. Diabetes 67, 2268-2279. doi:10.2337/db17-1223
Mescher, A. L. (2017). Macrophages and fibroblasts during inflammation and tissue
repair in models of organ regeneration. Regeneration 4, 39-53. doi:10.1002/reg2.77
Michalopoulos, G. K. (2007). Liver regeneration. J. Cell. Physiol. 213, 286-300.
doi:10.1002/jcp.21172
Mokalled, M. H., Patra, C., Dickson, A. L., Endo, T., Stainier, D. Y. R. and Poss,
K. D. (2016). Injury-induced ctgfa directs glial bridging and spinal cord
regeneration in zebrafish. Science 354, 630-634. doi:10.1126/science.aaf2679
Moore, F. E., Reyon, D., Sander, J. D., Martinez, S. A., Blackburn, J. S., Khayter,
C., Ramirez, C. L., Joung, J. K. and Langenau, D. M. (2012). Improved somatic
mutagenesis in zebrafish using transcription activator-like effector nucleases
(TALENs). PLoS ONE 7, e37877. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0037877
Mosimann, C., Puller, A. C., Lawson, K. L., Tschopp, P., Amsterdam, A. and
Zon, L. I. (2013). Site-directed zebrafish transgenesis into single landing sites with
the phiC31 integrase system. Dev. Dyn. 242, 949-963. doi:10.1002/dvdy.23989
Mü nch, J., González-Rajal, A. and de la Pompa, J. L. (2013). Notch regulates
blastema proliferation and prevents differentiation during adult zebrafish fin
regeneration. Development 140, 1402. doi:10.1242/dev.087346
Nauroy, P., Guiraud, A., Chlasta, J., Malbouyres, M., Gillet, B., Hughes, S.,
Lambert, E. and Ruggiero, F. (2019). Gene profile of zebrafish fin regeneration
offers clues to kinetics, organization and biomechanics of basement membrane.
Matrix Biol. 75-76, 82-101. doi:10.1016/j.matbio.2018.07.005
Nechiporuk, A. and Keating, M. T. (2002). A proliferation gradient between
proximal and msxb-expressing distal blastema directs zebrafish fin regeneration.
Development 129, 2607.
Nemoto, Y., Higuchi, K., Baba, O., Kudo, A. and Takano, Y. (2007). Multinucleate
osteoclasts in medaka as evidence of active bone remodeling. Bone 40, 399-408.
doi:10.1016/j.bone.2006.08.019
Ohnmacht, J., Yang, Y., Maurer, G. W., Barreiro-Iglesias, A., Tsarouchas, T. M.,
Wehner, D., Sieger, D., Becker, C. G. and Becker, T. (2016). Spinal motor
neurons are regenerated after mechanical lesion and genetic ablation in larval
zebrafish. Development 143, 1464. doi:10.1242/dev.129155
Otsuka, T. and Takeda, H. (2017). Targeted ablation of pancreatic beta cells in
medaka. Zoolog. Sci. 34, 179-184. doi:10.2108/zs170004
Pandey, G., Westhoff, J. H., Schaefer, F. and Gehrig, J. (2019). A smart imaging
workflow for organ-specific screening in a cystic kidney zebrafish disease model.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20, E1290. doi:10.3390/ijms20061290
Parrilla, M., Lillo, C., Herrero-Turrión, M. J., Arévalo, R., Aijón, J., Lara, J. M. and
Velasco, A. (2012). Characterization of Pax2 expression in the goldfish optic
nerve head during retina regeneration. PLoS ONE 7, e32348. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0032348
Patterson, M., Barske, L., Van Handel, B., Rau, C. D., Gan, P., Sharma, A.,
Parikh, S., Denholtz, M., Huang, Y., Yamaguchi, Y. et al. (2017). Frequency of
mononuclear
diploid
cardiomyocytes
underlies
natural
variation
in
heart
regeneration. Nat. Genet. 49, 1346-1353. doi:10.1038/ng.3929
Petrie, T. A., Strand, N. S., Tsung-Yang, C., Rabinowitz, J. S. and Moon, R. T.
(2014). Macrophages modulate adult zebrafish tail fin regeneration. Development
141, 2581-2591. doi:10.1242/dev.098459
Pfefferli, C. and Jaźwińska, A. (2015). The art of fin regeneration in zebrafish.
Regeneration 2, 72-83. doi:10.1002/reg2.33
Pfefferli, C. and Jaźwińska, A. (2017). The careg element reveals a common
regulation of regeneration in the zebrafish myocardium and fin. Nat. Commun. 8,
15151. doi:10.1038/ncomms15151
Pinto-Teixeira, F., Viader-Llargues, O., Torres-Mejia, E., Turan, M., Gonzalez-
Gualda, E., Pola-Morell, L. and Lopez-Schier, H. (2015). Inexhaustible hair-cell
regeneration in young and aged zebrafish. Biol. Open 4, 903-909. doi:10.1242/
bio.012112
Pisharath, H., Rhee, J. M., Swanson, M. A., Leach, S. D. and Parsons, M. J.
(2007). Targeted ablation of beta cells in the embryonic zebrafish pancreas using
E. coli nitroreductase. Mech. Dev. 124, 218-229. doi:10.1016/j.mod.2006.11.005
Porrello, E. R., Mahmoud, A. I., Simpson, E., Hill, J. A., Richardson, J. A., Olson,
E. N. and Sadek, H. A. (2011). Transient regenerative potential of the neonatal
mouse heart. Science 331, 1078. doi:10.1126/science.1200708
Poss, K. D., Shen, J., Nechiporuk, A., McMahon, G., Thisse, B., Thisse, C. and
Keating, M. T. (2000). Roles for Fgf signaling during zebrafish fin regeneration.
Dev. Biol. 222, 347-358. doi:10.1006/dbio.2000.9722
Poss, K. D., Wilson, L. G. and Keating, M. T. (2002). Heart regeneration in
zebrafish. Science 298, 2188. doi:10.1126/science.1077857
Power, R. M. and Huisken, J. (2017). A guide to light-sheet fluorescence
microscopy for multiscale imaging. Nat. Methods 14, 360-373. doi:10.1038/
nmeth.4224
Rabinowitz, J. S., Robitaille, A. M., Wang, Y., Ray, C. A., Thummel, R., Gu, H.,
Djukovic, D., Raftery, D., Berndt, J. D. and Moon, R. T. (2017). Transcriptomic,
proteomic, and metabolomic landscape of positional memory in the caudal fin of
zebrafish. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, E717. doi:10.1073/pnas.1620755114
Rafferty, S. A. and Quinn, T. A. (2018). A beginner’s guide to understanding and
implementing the genetic modification of zebrafish. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 138,
3-19. doi:10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2018.07.005
Raya, A., Koth, C. M., Buscher, D., Kawakami, Y., Itoh, T., Raya, R. M., Sternik,
G., Tsai, H.-J., Rodriguez-Esteban, C. and Izpisua-Belmonte, J. C. (2003).
Activation of Notch signaling pathway precedes heart regeneration in zebrafish.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100 Suppl. 1, 11889-11895. doi:10.1073/pnas.
1834204100
Raymond, P. A., Barthel, L. K., Bernardos, R. L. and Perkowski, J. J. (2006).
Molecular characterization of retinal stem cells and their niches in adult zebrafish.
BMC Dev. Biol. 6, 36. doi:10.1186/1471-213X-6-36
Reimschuessel, R. (2001). A fish model of renal regeneration and development.
ILAR J. 42, 285-291. doi:10.1093/ilar.42.4.285
Reimschuessel, R. and Williams, D. (1995). Development of new nephrons in
adult kidneys following gentamicin-induced nephrotoxicity. Ren. Fail. 17, 101-106.
doi:10.3109/08860229509026246
Richardson, R., Slanchev, K., Kraus, C., Knyphausen, P., Eming, S. and
Hammerschmidt, M. (2013). Adult zebrafish as a model system for cutaneous
wound-healing research. J. Invest. Dermatol. 133, 1655-1665. doi:10.1038/jid.
2013.16
Rothenaigner, I., Krecsmarik, M., Hayes, J. A., Bahn, B., Lepier, A., Fortin, G.,
Gö tz, M., Jagasia, R. and Bally-Cuif, L. (2011). Clonal analysis by distinct viral
vectors identifies bona fide neural stem cells in the adult zebrafish telencephalon
and characterizes their division properties and fate. Development 138, 1459.
doi:10.1242/dev.058156
Rowlerson, A., Radaelli, G., Mascarello, F. and Veggetti, A. (1997). Regeneration
of skeletal muscle in two teleost fish: Sparus aurata and Brachydanio rerio. Cell
Tissue Res. 289, 311-322. doi:10.1007/s004410050878
Sadler, K. C., Krahn, K. N., Gaur, N. A. and Ukomadu, C. (2007). Liver growth in
the embryo and during liver regeneration in zebrafish requires the cell cycle
regulator, uhrf1. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 1570-1575. doi:10.1073/pnas.
0610774104
Sánchez-Iranzo, H., Galardi-Castilla, M., Sanz-Morejón, A., González-Rosa,
J. M., Costa, R., Ernst, A., Sainz de Aja, J., Langa, X. and Mercader, N. (2018).
Transient fibrosis resolves via fibroblast inactivation in the regenerating zebrafish
heart. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, 4188. doi:10.1073/pnas.1716713115
Saxena, S., Singh, S. K., Lakshmi, M. G. M., Meghah, V., Bhatti, B., Swamy,
C. V. B., Sundaram, C. S. and Idris, M. M. (2012). Proteomic analysis of zebrafish
caudal fin regeneration. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 11, M111.014118. doi:10.1074/
mcp.M111.014118
Schnabel, K., Wu, C.-C., Kurth, T. and Weidinger, G. (2011). Regeneration of
cryoinjury induced necrotic heart lesions in zebrafish is associated with epicardial
activation and cardiomyocyte proliferation. PLoS ONE 6, e18503. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0018503
Sehring, I. M., Jahn, C. and Weidinger, G. (2016). Zebrafish fin and heart: what’s
special about regeneration? Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 40, 48-56. doi:10.1016/j.gde.
2016.05.011
Senyo, S. E., Steinhauser, M. L., Pizzimenti, C. L., Yang, V. K., Cai, L., Wang, M.,
Wu, T.-D., Guerquin-Kern, J.-L., Lechene, C. P. and Lee, R. T. (2013).
Mammalian heart renewal by pre-existing cardiomyocytes. Nature 493, 433-436.
doi:10.1038/nature11682
Simões, M. G., Bensimon-Brito, A., Fonseca, M., Farinho, A., Valério, F., Sousa,
S., Afonso, N., Kumar, A. and Jacinto, A. (2014). Denervation impairs
regeneration of amputated zebrafish fins. BMC Dev. Biol. 14, 49. doi:10.1186/
s12861-014-0049-2
Simon, A. and Tanaka, E. M. (2013). Limb regeneration. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.
Dev. Biol. 2, 291-300. doi:10.1002/wdev.73
Singh, S. P., Holdway, J. E. and Poss, K. D. (2012). Regeneration of amputated
zebrafish fin rays from de novo osteoblasts. Dev. Cell 22, 879-886. doi:10.1016/j.
devcel.2012.03.006
Slack, J. M. W. (2017). Animal regeneration: ancestral character or evolutionary
novelty? EMBO Rep. 18, 1497-1508. doi:10.15252/embr.201643795
Smith, A., Avaron, F., Guay, D., Padhi, B. K. and Akimenko, M. A. (2006).
Inhibition of BMP signaling during zebrafish fin regeneration disrupts fin growth
and scleroblast differentiation and function. Dev. Biol. 299, 438-454. doi:10.1016/
j.ydbio.2006.08.016
Spanjaard, B., Hu, B., Mitic, N., Olivares-Chauvet, P., Janjuha, S., Ninov, N. and
Junker, J. P. (2018). Simultaneous lineage tracing and cell-type identification
12
PRIMER
Development (2019) 146, dev167692. doi:10.1242/dev.167692
DEVELOPMENT

using CRISPR-Cas9-induced genetic scars. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 469-473. doi:10.
1038/nbt.4124
Stewart, S. and Stankunas, K. (2012). Limited dedifferentiation provides
replacement tissue during zebrafish fin regeneration. Dev. Biol. 365, 339-349.
doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.02.031
Stewart, S., Tsun, Z.-Y. and Izpisua Belmonte, J. C. I. (2009). A histone
demethylase is necessary for regeneration in zebrafish. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 106, 19889-19894. doi:10.1073/pnas.0904132106
Stockdale, W. T., Lemieux, M. E., Killen, A. C., Zhao, J., Hu, Z., Riepsaame, J.,
Hamilton, N., Kudoh, T., Riley, P. R., van Aerle, R. et al. (2018). Heart
regeneration in the mexican cavefish. Cell Rep. 25, 1997-2007.e1997. doi:10.
1016/j.celrep.2018.10.072
Stoick-Cooper, C. L., Weidinger, G., Riehle, K. J., Hubbert, C., Major, M. B.,
Fausto, N. and Moon, R. T. (2007). Distinct Wnt signaling pathways have
opposing roles in appendage regeneration. Development 134, 479-489. doi:10.
1242/dev.001123
Strahle, U. and Grabher, C. (2010). The zebrafish embryo as a model for assessing
off-target drug effects. Dis. Model. Mech. 3, 689-692. doi:10.1242/dmm.006312
Strahle, U., Bally-Cuif, L., Kelsh, R., Beis, D., Mione, M., Panula, P., Figueras, A.,
Gothilf, Y., Brö samle, C., Geisler, R. et al. (2012). EuFishBioMed (COST Action
BM0804): a European network to promote the use of small fishes in biomedical
research. Zebrafish 9, 90-93. doi:10.1089/zeb.2012.0742
Streisinger, G., Walker, C., Dower, N., Knauber, D. and Singer, F. (1981).
Production of clones of homozygous diploid zebra fish (Brachydanio rerio). Nature
291, 293-296. doi:10.1038/291293a0
Stuart, G. W., McMurray, J. V. and Westerfield, M. (1988). Replication, integration
and stable germ-line transmission of foreign sequences injected into early
zebrafish embryos. Development 103, 403-412.
Sugiyama, M., Sakaue-Sawano, A., Iimura, T., Fukami, K., Kitaguchi, T.,
Kawakami, K., Okamoto, H., Higashijima, S. and Miyawaki, A. (2009).
Illuminating cell-cycle progression in the developing zebrafish embryo. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 20812-20817. doi:10.1073/pnas.0906464106
Suster, M. L., Abe, G., Schouw, A. and Kawakami, K. (2011). Transposon-
mediated BAC transgenesis in zebrafish. Nat. Protoc. 6, 1998-2021. doi:10.1038/
nprot.2011.416
Thermes, V., Grabher, C., Ristoratore, F., Bourrat, F., Choulika, A., Wittbrodt, J.
and
Joly,
J.-S.
(2002).
I-SceI
meganuclease
mediates
highly
efficient
transgenesis in fish. Mech. Dev. 118, 91-98. doi:10.1016/S0925-4773(02)
00218-6
Thummel, R., Bai, S., Sarras, M. P., Jr, Song, P., McDermott, J., Brewer, J.,
Perry, M., Zhang, X., Hyde, D. R. and Godwin, A. R. (2006). Inhibition of
zebrafish fin regeneration using in vivo electroporation of morpholinos against
fgfr1 and msxb. Dev. Dyn. 235, 336-346. doi:10.1002/dvdy.20630
Tsarouchas, T. M., Wehner, D., Cavone, L., Munir, T., Keatinge, M., Lambertus,
M., Underhill, A., Barrett, T., Kassapis, E., Ogryzko, N. et al. (2018). Dynamic
control of proinflammatory cytokines Il-1beta and Tnf-alpha by macrophages in
zebrafish spinal cord regeneration. Nat. Commun. 9, 4670. doi:10.1038/s41467-
018-07036-w
Tsuji, N., Ninov, N., Delawary, M., Osman, S., Roh, A. S., Gut, P. and Stainier,
D. Y. R. (2014). Whole organism high content screening identifies stimulators of
pancreatic beta-cell proliferation. PLoS ONE 9, e104112. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0104112
Unal Eroglu, A., Mulligan, T. S., Zhang, L., White, D. T., Sengupta, S., Nie, C., Lu,
N. Y., Qian, J., Xu, L., Pei, W. et al. (2018). Multiplexed CRISPR/Cas9 targeting of
genes implicated in retinal regeneration and degeneration. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 6,
88. doi:10.3389/fcell.2018.00088
Vihtelic, T. S. and Hyde, D. R. (2000). Light-induced rod and cone cell death and
regeneration in the adult albino zebrafish (Danio rerio) retina. J. Neurobiol. 44,
289-307. doi:10.1002/1097-4695(20000905)44:3<289::AID-NEU1>3.0.CO;2-H
Wang, J., Panáková, D., Kikuchi, K., Holdway, J. E., Gemberling, M., Burris,
J. S., Singh, S. P., Dickson, A. L., Lin, Y.-F., Sabeh, M. K. et al. (2011). The
regenerative capacity of zebrafish reverses cardiac failure caused by genetic
cardiomyocyte depletion. Development 138, 3421. doi:10.1242/dev.068601
Watanabe, N., Kato, M., Suzuki, N., Inoue, C., Fedorova, S., Hashimoto, H.,
Maruyama, S., Matsuo, S. and Wakamatsu, Y. (2009). Kidney regeneration
through nephron neogenesis in medaka. Dev. Growth Differ. 51, 135-143. doi:10.
1111/j.1440-169X.2009.01090.x
Wehner, D., Cizelsky, W., Vasudevaro, M. D., Ö zhan, G., Haase, C., Kagermeier-
Schenk, B., Rö der, A., Dorsky, R. I., Moro, E., Argenton, F. et al. (2014). Wnt/
beta-catenin signaling defines organizing centers that orchestrate growth and
differentiation of the regenerating zebrafish caudal fin. Cell Rep. 6, 467-481.
doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2013.12.036
Wehner, D., Jahn, C. and Weidinger, G. (2015). Use of the TetON system to study
molecular mechanisms of zebrafish regeneration. J. Vis. Exp. 100, e52756.
doi:10.3791/52756
Wehner, D., Tsarouchas, T. M., Michael, A., Haase, C., Weidinger, G., Reimer,
M. M., Becker, T. and Becker, C. G. (2017). Wnt signaling controls pro-
regenerative Collagen XII in functional spinal cord regeneration in zebrafish. Nat.
Commun. 8, 126. doi:10.1038/s41467-017-00143-0
White, J. A., Boffa, M. B., Jones, B. and Petkovich, M. (1994). A zebrafish retinoic
acid receptor expressed in the regenerating caudal fin. Development 120, 1861.
Wills, A. A., Holdway, J. E., Major, R. J. and Poss, K. D. (2008). Regulated
addition of new myocardial and epicardial cells fosters homeostatic cardiac growth
and maintenance in adult zebrafish. Development 135, 183-192. doi:10.1242/dev.
010363
Wosczyna, M. N. and Rando, T. A. (2018). A muscle stem cell support group:
coordinated cellular responses in muscle regeneration. Dev. Cell 46, 135-143.
doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2018.06.018
Wu, C.-C., Kruse, F., Vasudevarao, M. D., Junker, J. P., Zebrowski, D. C.,
Fischer, K., Noë l, E. S., Grü n, D., Berezikov, E., Engel, F. B. et al. (2016).
Spatially resolved genome-wide transcriptional profiling identifies BMP signaling
as essential regulator of zebrafish cardiomyocyte regeneration. Dev. Cell 36,
36-49. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2015.12.010
Xiao, C., Gao, L., Hou, Y., Xu, C., Chang, N., Wang, F., Hu, K., He, A., Luo, Y.,
Wang, J. et al. (2016). Chromatin-remodelling factor Brg1 regulates myocardial
proliferation and regeneration in zebrafish. Nat. Commun. 7, 13787. doi:10.1038/
ncomms13787
Xu, C., Volkery, S. and Siekmann, A. F. (2015). Intubation-based anesthesia for
long-term time-lapse imaging of adult zebrafish. Nat. Protoc. 10, 2064-2073.
doi:10.1038/nprot.2015.130
Yang, K. and Kang, J. (2018). Tissue regeneration enhancer elements: a way to
unlock endogenous healing power. Dev. Dyn. 248, 34-42. doi:10.1002/dvdy.
24676
Young, B. H. and Heath, J. W. (2000). Wheater’s Functional Histology: A Text and
Colour Atlas, 4th edn. Churchill Livingstone.
Zhao, L., Borikova, A. L., Ben-Yair, R., Guner-Ataman, B., MacRae, C. A., Lee,
R. T., Burns, C. G. and Burns, C. E. (2014). Notch signaling regulates
cardiomyocyte proliferation during zebrafish heart regeneration. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 111, 1403. doi:10.1073/pnas.1311705111
13
PRIMER
Development (2019) 146, dev167692. doi:10.1242/dev.167692
DEVELOPMENT

===== Mathew2021_Development_RegenerationModel-Arabidopsis =====
PRIMER
Model systems for regeneration: Arabidopsis
Mabel Maria Mathew and Kalika Prasad*
ABSTRACT
Plants encompass unparalleled multi-scale regenerative potential.
Despite lacking specialized cells that are recruited to injured sites,
and despite their cells being encased in rigid cell walls, plants exhibit
a variety of regenerative responses ranging from the regeneration of
specific cell types, tissues and organs, to the rebuilding of an entire
organism. Over the years, extensive studies on embryo, shoot and
root development in the model plant species Arabidopsis thaliana
have provided insights into the mechanisms underlying plant
regeneration. These studies highlight how Arabidopsis, with its wide
array of refined molecular, genetic and cell biological tools, provides a
perfect model to interrogate the cellular and molecular mechanisms
of reprogramming during regeneration.
KEY WORDS: Arabidopsis, Auxin, Regeneration, Root, Shoot
Introduction
All living organisms share an inherent ability irrespective of their
evolutionary origin, i.e. the ability to grow. In animals, growth is
broadly characterised as the enlargement of a body plan that is
established during embryogenesis. However, plants make a very
limited set of structures during embryogenesis, and most of the plant
organs that we see (e.g. the shoot and root) are made and grown
post-embryonically. This growth is driven by groups of highly
dividing cells, termed meristematic cells, located at the oppositely
placed poles of the plant body axis: the shoot apical meristem
(SAM; see Glossary, Box 1) and the root apical meristem (RAM;
see Glossary, Box 1). The two meristems harbour a region called the
stem cell niche (SCN) in which stem cells are confined. These stem
cells act as self-perpetuating reservoirs of cells for making various
organs during post-embryonic development. Plant growth and
survival are compromised when these post-embryonic structures
encounter frequent injuries, be it biotic or abiotic. To surpass the
damaging effects of these injuries, plants elicit prompt regenerative
responses.
Unlike most animals, in which regenerative responses are
restricted to specific cell lineages, plants exhibit responses that are
quite ubiquitous. As such, plants are distinct by virtue of their ability
to regenerate specific cell types, tissues and organs, or even an entire
organism. In addition, plants have the remarkable ability to rejoin
two different body parts from two individual plants of different
origin via grafting to form a ‘chimera’ (see Glossary, Box 1) that
displays the phenotype of both plants. Most importantly, plants
display unparalleled plasticity despite the lack of cell migration,
which is often key to regeneration in animals. Thus, the extreme
fantasies of regeneration paraded by many mythical and comic
characters are brought to life by one single life form: the plant.
Regeneration has been studied in a variety of plant species,
revealing varying degrees of regenerative capacities and modes of
regeneration (see Box 2). Here, we provide an overview of how an
array of regenerative responses are being studied using the model
plant species Arabidopsis thaliana, and how rapidly growing
genetic, cellular and genomic tools have begun to unravel the
mechanisms underlying these regenerative responses. We also
introduce how a combination of experimental and computational
approaches can allow us to gain deeper insights into broader
questions in the area of plant regeneration.
Arabidopsis as a model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana (Fig. 1), by virtue of its small genome size,
ease of cultivation, short life-span and prolific seed production, has
long served as a model in plant molecular and genetic studies. In
recent years, the use of Arabidopsis has been substantiated by
extensive physical and genetic maps of its chromosomes, high-
resolution expression maps in space and time, and spatio-temporal
studies of various molecular interactions (e.g. protein-protein
interactions and protein-DNA interactions) at cellular resolution in
its shoot and root (Brady et al., 2007; Busch et al., 2012; Cui et al.,
2007; Kulkarni et al., 2018; Weigel and Mott, 2009). In addition to a
vast repository of mutant lines, full length cDNAs and miRNA
collections, inducible knockdowns and knockouts of desired genes
using RNAi and CRISPR-Cas9 have been created and made
available (Mao et al., 2019; Schwab et al., 2006). A recently
developed technology, termed Inducible Genome Editing (IGE),
which knocks out target genes in specific cell types at any
developmental
age,
has
further
advanced
the
strengths
of
Arabidopsis as a model plant (Wang et al., 2020a).
The genome-wide binding of a variety of key regulators and
their direct downstream targets has also been made available in
Arabidopsis using DAP-seq, a high-throughput transcription
factor (TF) binding site discovery method (O’Malley et al.,
2016). In addition, highly sensitive sensors that can measure
fluctuations
in
hormone
levels
in Arabidopsis
have been
developed (Brunoud et al., 2012; Kang et al., 2012; Liao et al.,
Model systems for regeneration
This article is part of a series entitled ‘Model systems for regeneration’.
This series of articles aims to highlight key model systems and species
that are currently being used to study tissue and organ regeneration.
Each article provides background information about the phylogenetic
position of the species, its life-cycle and habitat, the different organs and
tissues that regenerate, and the experimental tools and techniques that
are available for studying these organisms in a regenerative context.
Importantly, these articles also give examples of how the study of these
models has increased our understanding of regenerative mechanisms
more broadly, and how some of the open questions in the field of
regeneration may be answered using these organisms. To see the full
collection as it grows, please visit: https://dev.biologists.org/collection/
regeneration_models.
School of Biology, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research,
Thiruvananthapuram, 695551, India.
*Author for correspondence (kalika@iisertvm.ac.in)
K.P., 0000-0001-8666-856X
1
© 2021. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Development (2021) 148, dev195347. doi:10.1242/dev.195347
DEVELOPMENT

2015). The readily available molecular, genetic and cell biological
tools, together with computational models and the wealth of
knowledge of embryonic shoot and root development, has made
Arabidopsis the perfect choice for studying the mechanisms of
cellular reprogramming during normal development as well as
during regeneration (Cruz-Ramírez et al., 2012; Grieneisen et al.,
2007; Mündermann et al., 2005; Sampathkumar et al., 2014; Smith
et al., 2006).
Types of regenerative modes in Arabidopsis
Arabidopsis shows a repertoire of regenerative responses that can be
as elaborate as regenerating an entire plant from a small tissue or
regenerating a lost organ, or as simple as inducing a wound healing
response following mechanical injury. These modes of regeneration
fall into two broad categories, as highlighted below.
Tissue culture-induced regeneration
Plants can regenerate themselves from various explants of different
developmental origins. An explant is a piece of tissue or organ that
can be cultured in vitro to regenerate organs or an organism de novo.
This property of explants to produce entire organisms can be
exploited for large-scale seedling production. Here, an entire plant is
regenerated through the sequential regeneration of shoots and roots.
Formation of such organs from explants in vitro is called de novo
organogenesis, and can further be classified into de novo shoot
regeneration (i.e. shoot formation) and de novo root regeneration
(i.e. root formation). De novo organogenesis can occur via two
different pathways, namely direct and indirect regeneration. During
indirect regeneration, the explants produce a shoot/root via an
intermediary stage called a callus (see Glossary, Box 1; Fig. 2). In
direct regeneration, by contrast, the explants can bypass this callus
stage to produce a shoot/root. For example, shoot regeneration can
occur from lateral root primordia (LRP) (Fig. 3A,B).
In addition to shoots and roots, explants can regenerate embryos
and thereby the entire plant system. Here, somatic cells from
explants can be induced and cultured in vitro to generate somatic
embryos via the process of somatic embryogenesis (see Glossary,
Box 1). Similar to de novo organogenesis, somatic embryogenesis
can also occur indirectly via a callus or directly from the explant
(Fig. 3C) (Mordhorst et al., 1998; Pillon et al., 1996).
Mechanical injury-induced regeneration
Plants are constantly subjected to mechanical injuries by biotic
factors such as herbivores, insects and nematodes, as well as abiotic
factors such as strong winds and heavy rains. Mechanical injury-
induced regeneration can be exhibited by an organ in two scenarios:
(1) when the damaged organ is still attached to the parent plant;
(2) when the organ is detached from the parent plant. The most
common scenario involves the functional restoration of a damaged
organ that is attached to the growing plant. Both aerial and
underground organs are capable of combating these injuries.
Injuries to aerial organs include vascular disruption inflicted by
sap-feeding insects, breakage of stems by strong winds, or even
surface abrasion due to friction. Friction-induced surface abrasion
usually does not pose a major threat and is healed by local cell
proliferation. However, injury to the plant vasculature impedes the
transport of water and nutrients along the plant body axis, and prompt
re-establishment of vascular continuity is therefore imperative.
Injuries to the root are often caused by soil-dwelling nematodes.
The injuries range from damage of individual cells by the proboscis
of insects to even the loss of an entire root tip. As roots mediate the
Box 1. Glossary of terms
Callus. A pluripotent mass of cells, derived from adult stem cells, which
can give rise to an entire plant de novo upon application of the
appropriate growth hormones.
Chimera. An organism in which cells of two different genotypes exist and
grow side by side. Such a plant, which is generated by grafting together
two plants of different origins, displays properties of both its donors.
Dedifferentiation. The process by which a differentiated cell loses its
identity and exists in an unspecified state.
Pluripotent. Harbouring the ability to give rise to any cell types of the
shoot and/or root system.
Quiescent centre (QC). A small group of inert cells in the root apical
meristem that occasionally divides to maintain the stem cell pool.
Root apical meristem (RAM). Part of the root tip (primary or lateral root)
comprising highly dividing cells called meristematic cells and a confined
stem cell niche (SCN).
Shoot apical meristem (SAM). Part of the shoot tip comprising highly
dividing cells called meristematic cells and a confined SCN.
Somatic embryogenesis. The development of adventitious or ectopic
embryos that arise from somatic cells and have the potential to develop
into new plants.
Suspensor. A zygotic structure that provides physical support, nutrition
and growth regulators to the embryo, and pushes the embryo into the
nutrient-rich endosperm.
Trans-differentiation. The direct fate conversion of cells of one lineage
to another without passing through an intermediary dedifferentiated
stage.
Box 2. Regeneration in other plant species
The phenomenon of regeneration, often observed in multicellular
organisms, extends across the plant kingdom and to unicellular plants.
For example, Bryopis plumosa – a unicellular marine green alga –
extrudes its protoplast when damaged underwater; the naked protoplast
later develops a cell wall and becomes a whole organism (Kim et al.,
2001). In basal plants such as Physcomitrella patens (a moss), the
excised distal half of a gametophore leaf develops a protonema from its
cut end (Ishikawa et al., 2011). The protonema is a juvenile filamentous
structure that later develops adult gametophores. Similarly, several
higher plants exhibit shoot/root regeneration from the cut ends of
detached
leaves
(reviewed
by
Ikeuchi
et
al.,
2016).
The
fate
respecification in these cases is analogous to the cell fate changes
occurring at the cut ends of a detached Arabidopsis leaf.
Regeneration studies in angiosperms have gained popularity with the
advent of tissue culture. Nearly all Arabidopsis explants can be induced
to
form
a
pluripotent
callus
and,
subsequently,
to
elicit
shoot
regeneration. However, in monocots like rice (Oryza sativa), a callus is
initiated only from certain explants, such as the base of young leaves,
root tips and lateral root-forming regions (Hu et al., 2017). Such
differences in cellular plasticity are attributed to species-specific
intrinsic perturbations in molecular mechanisms. Nevertheless, the
activation of root stem cell regulators that confer callus pluripotency is
common to Arabidopsis and the tree species, Poplar, suggesting that the
mechanism of pluripotency acquisition is conserved (Liu et al., 2018). In
addition, genome-wide gene expression profiling has revealed that the
tissue culture-derived callus of Agave salmiana expresses orthologues
of various Arabidopsis callus-inducing genes (Cervantes-Pérez et al.,
2018). Regeneration of xylem around severed vasculature, as seen in
Arabidopsis, has also been observed in Coleus internodes and in pea
seedlings, and can be explained by the ‘auxin canalization hypothesis’,
whereby auxin flux feeds back on the polar localization of its own
transporter (Jacobs, 1952; Sachs, 1969, 1981, 1991). A similar
mechanism
operates
to
reinstate
vascular
continuity
in
injured
Arabidopsis stems and leaves. Together, these findings highlight that
some aspects of regeneration are conserved in plants, although many
species-specific variations are likely to exist.
2
PRIMER
Development (2021) 148, dev195347. doi:10.1242/dev.195347
DEVELOPMENT

absorption of water and nutrients, plants initiate immediate defence
and regenerative responses to repair this damage.
In contrast to an attached organ, a detached organ exhibits entirely
different regeneration responses. Instead of repair and functional
restoration of the existing tissue, a detached organ has the ability to
regenerate a new organ with an entirely different identity from its cut
end. For example, de novo root regeneration can occur from the cut
ends of detached Arabidopsis leaves. Interestingly, a detached organ
from one plant can be attached to another plant via the process of
grafting
to
generate
a
single
fully
functional
plant
with
characteristics from both the combining plants.
Tissue culture-induced regeneration
De novo shoot regeneration via callus formation
An entire plant can be regenerated from explants of different
developmental origin (Glazebrook and Weigel, 2002). These
explants,
when incubated with
synthetic
auxin,
produce
a
pluripotent (see Glossary, Box 1) callus from xylem pole
CZ
OC
PZ
PZ
RZ
LP
LP
FP
FP
PZ
PZ
CZ
RZ
FM
Floral
organ
primordia
SAM
Inflorescence meristem
Immature heart-shaped embryo
Hypophysis
Suspensor
Cross section of stem
Leaf
Petiole
Mid-vein
Lateral vein
Key
Shoot system
Root system
A
B
C
D
E
Cortex
Endodermis
Pericycle
Vascular system
Quiescent centre
Columella
Lateral root cap
Epidermis
Emerging lateral root primordia
F
Root tip
G
Stem cell
niche
Fig. 1. Arabidopsis plant architecture.
(A) Representative image of a whole plant.
(B) Upon transition from the vegetative
phase to the reproductive phase, the
shoot apical meristem (SAM), which
produces a leaf at its flank, becomes an
inflorescence meristem and produces a
flower at its flank. The organizing centre
(OC) and the central zone (CZ) within
the SAM constitute the stem cell niche
(SCN). (C) Inset depicts an immature
heart-shaped embryo within the silique
(fruit). (D) Inset displays a cross-section of
the inflorescence stem showing different
tissues. (E) Inset shows the leaf with mid
vein, lateral vein and petiole. (F) Inset
depicts lateral root emergence. (G) Inset
depicts the root tip showing different
tissues. The quiescent centre and its
surrounding cells form the SCN within the
root apical meristem. FM, floral meristem;
FP, floral primordia; LP, leaf primordia; PZ,
peripheral zone; RZ, rib zone.
3
PRIMER
Development (2021) 148, dev195347. doi:10.1242/dev.195347
DEVELOPMENT

pericycle (XPP) cells that, during normal development, give rise to
lateral roots (LRs) (Atta et al., 2009; Malamy and Benfey, 1997;
Sugimoto et al., 2010). The molecular nature of this callus has been
studied extensively to reveal the regulators controlling the formation
of a callus and its acquisition of pluripotency.
During callus formation, one of the regulators of LR formation,
ABERRANT LATERAL ROOT FORMATION 4 (ALF4), plays a
crucial role (DiDonato et al., 2004). ALF4 modulates auxin signalling
and is essential for LR initiation (Bagchi et al., 2018); it is this
involvement in the auxin response that possibly makes ALF4 crucial
for callus formation. Interestingly, the callus predominantly expresses
root-specific genes (Sugimoto et al., 2010). Although callus
formation necessitates activation of ALF4, pluripotency acquisition
by the callus requires the recruitment of root stem cell regulators such
Root inductive cues
(high auxin)
Regeneration of root
Formation of
de novo roots
Number of days on hormone-rich media
A
B
C
Root inductive
cues (high auxin)
Shoot-/root-derived
explants
Relative abundance of root stem 
cell regulators/shoot fate 
determinants
Callus inductive
cues (high auxin)
Shoot inductive cues
(high cytokinin)
Activation of root 
stem cell regulators
Cell polarization and 
activation of shoot 
stem cell regulators
CIM
SIM
Pluripotent callus
Formation of de novo
shoots
Regeneration of 
shoot progenitors
De novo assembly of 
shoot promoting
factors
7
22
0
Activation of 
root fate 
determinants
(5th day 
on CIM)
External
inductive
cues
Establishment 
of pluripotent 
state (5th day
on CIM)
Activation of shoot 
fate determinants 
(early progenitor- 
specific genes and 
stem cell regulators
- 2nd day
on SIM)
Activation 
of shoot- 
promoting 
factors 
(6-7th day
on SIM) 
Completion of 
de novo shoot 
regeneration 
(8-10th day
on SIM)
Fig. 2. Indirect tissue culture-induced regeneration. (A) Summary of the events that occur during tissue culture-mediated root (top) and shoot (bottom)
regeneration. Explants of different developmental origins first form a pluripotent callus. They then undergo self-organization and, if cultured in the presence of
shoot inductive cues, form shoot progenitor cells, ultimately culminating in the formation of a shoot (bottom). Note that not all shoot progenitors convert into shoots;
if explants are cultured in root inductive cues, root formation occurs (top). (B) Graph depicting the relative abundance of root stem cell regulators and shoot
fate determinants (y-axis) against the days (x-axis) of explant culture on callus induction medium (CIM) or shoot induction medium (SIM). Root stem cell regulators
(blue) are transiently upregulated throughout the callus while it is incubated on CIM, ensuring acquisition of pluripotency, and are downregulated following transfer
of the callus onto SIM. In response to shoot inductive cues, shoot fate determinants (red) get activated. Their expression peaks by the time the callus undergoes
shoot progenitor regeneration and self-assembly (denoted by broad red dots), leading to the formation of an entire shoot de novo. (C) Regulatory module
highlighting the sequential events occurring during regeneration of a shoot system de novo.
4
PRIMER
Development (2021) 148, dev195347. doi:10.1242/dev.195347
DEVELOPMENT

Lateral root founder cells
Initiation of LRP
Regeneration competent LRP
Activation of shoot stem cell 
regulators and deactivation of
root stem cell regulators
Converting LRP
Pericycle/pericycle-derived cells
Root stem cell regulators
Shoot stem cell regulators
Regeneration of shoot from LRP
Primary root
Shoot apex-derived somatic embryogenesis (side view)
Leaf primordia 
for second
pair of leaves
First pair of leaves
SAM
Cotyledon
Shoot apex-derived somatic embryogenesis (top view)
Somatic embryo
Leaf primordia
(SE forming region)
SAM
A
B
C
Auxin
BBM
LEC1
D
Chromatin
remodelling
LEC2
WOX2 WOX3
Embryonic developmental
pathway
Primary root segment
420
24
48
72
120
Prime LR formation
(activation of root stem cell regulators
including PLT1)
Shoot stem cell regulators turned on
(including WUS)
Root stem cell regulators turned off 
Transdifferentiation of LRP to shoot
Regeneration competent LR
Shoot promeristem
Shoot meristem
Auxin
Cytokinin
Stages of LRP to shoot conversion
Key
Key
First pair of leaves
0
Fig. 3. Direct tissue culture-induced
regeneration. (A) The stages involved in
shoot regeneration via direct conversion of
lateral root primordia (LRP). The primary
root is primed to produce regeneration-
competent LRP, which, when induced with
shoot inductive cues, develop into a shoot.
Note that the LRP arises from cells of the
pericycle. By the time shoot stem cell
regulators such as WUSCHEL (WUS) are
activated, root stem cell regulators such as
PLT1 are rapidly deactivated and become
undetectable in the converting LRP.
(B) Timeline of the events occurring during
conversion (trans-differentiation) of an LRP
to a shoot. During the first stage (0-42 h;
green) the primary root is incubated on
auxin-rich medium, after which stage
(0-120 h; yellow) the auxin-primed root is
incubated on cytokinin-rich medium.
(C) Direct regeneration of somatic embryos
from leaf primordia. The developing young
leaf primordia of the second pair of leaves
can be induced to form a somatic embryo.
(D) Regulatory module controlling the
activation of embryonic developmental
pathways during somatic embryogenesis.
5
PRIMER
Development (2021) 148, dev195347. doi:10.1242/dev.195347
DEVELOPMENT

as
PLETHORA
(PLT)1,
PLT2,
SCARECROW
(SCR)
and
WUSCHEL RELATED HOMEOBOX 5 (WOX5) (see Box 3 and
Fig. 2B) (Kareem et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2018; Sugimoto et al.,
2010). The onset of the expression of root stem cell regulators is under
the control of several genetic and epigenetic regulators (Kareem et al.,
2015; Kim et al., 2018).
Once a pluripotent callus has formed, its further fate in
regeneration is decided by two major plant hormones: auxin and
cytokinin. When supplemented with a higher auxin:cytokinin ratio
the callus initiates root regeneration, whereas when supplemented
with higher cytokinin:auxin it initiates shoot regeneration (Fig. 2A)
(Skoog and Miller, 1957). Shoot regeneration is fine-tuned by two
groups of regulators of cytokinin signalling, namely Type A
Arabidopsis response regulators (ARRs), which are negative
regulators, and Type B ARRs, which are positive regulators (for a
review see To and Kieber, 2008). Shoot regeneration necessitates the
activation of Type B ARRs and the removal of epigenetic repression
marks from shoot stem cell regulators (Meng et al., 2017; Zhang
et al., 2017). The resulting cytokinin signalling response activates
shoot stem cell regulators and several shoot-promoting factors,
thereby facilitating de novo shoot regeneration (Fig. 2B) (Atta et al.,
2009; Iwase et al., 2017; Kareem et al., 2015). In the process, shoot
initials called progenitors are formed before the formation of a
functional shoot meristem. Although all cells of the callus are
theoretically pluripotent, shoot progenitors do not initiate from all
cells but rather arise stochastically from a few cells of the callus. They
can be identified using fluorescent-labelled markers that mark the
polar auxin transporter PINFORMED (PIN1) and the shoot stem cell
regulator WUSCHEL (WUS) (see Box 3) (Gordon et al., 2007;
Zhang et al., 2017). Further, not all the shoot progenitors can make it
to completion of shoot regeneration, indicating that the callus is a
highly heterogeneous mass of cells (Gordon et al., 2007; Lardon
et al., 2020; Motte et al., 2014; Radhakrishnan et al., 2018).
In response to shoot inductive cues, root-specific genes that are
instrumental in generating a pluripotent landscape get downregulated,
with a concomitant increase in shoot-promoting factors, thereby
facilitating the onset of shoot regeneration. The journey from
acquisition of pluripotency to completion of shoot regeneration
involves an interesting two-step molecular mechanism comprising
three redundantly acting PLT genes, namely, PLT3, PLT5 and PLT7.
These PLT genes control lateral organ positioning during normal root
and shoot development (Hofhuis et al., 2013; Prasad et al., 2011). In
the first step, the PLT genes activate root stem cell regulators, making
the callus competent to regenerate shoot progenitors. In the second
step, which is dependent on the first step, shoot-promoting factors
such as CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON 2 (CUC2) are activated by the
PLT genes to accomplish regeneration of the complete shoot system
(Kareem et al., 2015) (see Box 3; Fig. 2C). Acquisition of competency
for shoot regeneration is thus uncoupled from the completion of shoot
regeneration from a callus. This two-step mechanism operates in all
explants irrespective of their developmental origin.
Tracking a battery of cell-fate determinants in response to shoot
inductive cues in real-time has provided evidence that the initial
assembly of the SAM de novo follows a path distinct from that used for
SAM development during embryogenesis (Gordon et al., 2007;
Kareem et al., 2015; Sugimoto et al., 2010). In the absence of
embryonic positional cues, shoot regeneration is likely guided by an
inherent property of regenerating cells to self-organize into a shoot
(Gordon et al., 2007; Radhakrishnan et al., 2018). This self-
organization is predominantly determined by two factors: acquired
positional cues and the co-ordinated cellular and molecular interactions
among regenerating progenitors. However, the molecular nature of
callus heterogeneity and self-organization remains to be fully explored.
De novo shoot regeneration via trans-differentiation
Regeneration of a complete shoot system can also be achieved
without an intermediary callus, whereby an LRP within a root
explant is reprogrammed to generate a shoot directly, providing a
classical example of trans-differentiation (see Glossary, Box 1) (Atta
et al., 2009; Chatfield et al., 2013; Kareem et al., 2016; Rosspopoff
et al., 2017). The transient expression of root stem cell regulators and
an abundance of cytokinin are key determinants for shoot
regeneration via trans-differentiation. Mutants such as plt3/5/7,
which do not express root stem cell regulators, fail to undergo LRP
trans-differentiation even in the presence of abundant external
cytokinin (Kareem et al., 2015). Thus, the necessity of root stem
cell regulators appears to be common for both callus-mediated shoot
regeneration and trans-differentiation-based regeneration.
The cells within the quiescent centre (QC; see Glossary, Box 1)
of LRP are receptive to both auxin and cytokinin during a narrow
developmental window, and they assume distinct fates depending
on the abundance of a particular hormone (Kareem et al., 2015,
2016; Rosspopoff et al., 2017) (Fig. 3A,B). Although auxin
Box 3. Key gene families involved in plant regeneration
PLETHORA (PLT) genes. PLTs belong to the AP2/ERF domain-
containing family of plant-specific transcription factors (TFs). Root-
expressed PLTs control root growth and LR emergence, whereas shoot-
expressed PLTs regulate shoot apical meristem and lateral organ
emergence. PLTs are also involved in numerous regenerative responses.
PLT2 along with other redundant PLTs mediates root tip regeneration,
whereas PLT3, PLT5 and PLT7 are essential for callus-mediated de novo
shoot regeneration and trans-differentiation of a lateral root primordia into a
shoot (Durgaprasad et al., 2019; Kareem et al., 2015). PLT3, PLT5 and
PLT7 control shoot regeneration via a two-step mechanism, wherein they
first activate the root stem cell regulators PLT1 and PLT2 to establish
pluripotency and then activate the shoot-promoting factor CUC2 to
accomplish shoot regeneration. The same PLTs promote vascular
regeneration in growing aerial organs by activating CUC2, and not through
root stem cell regulators.
WUSCHEL RELATED HOMEOBOX (WOX) genes. WOX proteins
belong to a family of plant-specific homeodomain TFs. They mark region-
specific cell fate decisions during early embryogenesis in Arabidopsis by
virtue of their expression dynamics (Haecker et al., 2004). Besides their
role in embryonic patterning, WOX genes such as WOX11, WOX12,
WOX5 and WOX7 mediate adventitious root regeneration during de novo
root regeneration (DNRR) (Liu et al., 2014).
LATERALORGAN BOUNDARY DOMAIN (LBD) genes. LBDs belongs
to a family of plant-specific TFs with roles in shaping plant architecture.
During normal Arabidopsis development, LBDs mediate auxin-induced
lateral root formation. During regeneration, LBD16 and LBD29 are
upregulated by WOX11 and WOX12 to mediate DNRR from the leaf (Hu
and Xu, 2016; Liu et al., 2014). In addition, LBD16, LBD17, LBD18 and
LBD29 are induced by auxin to promote callus formation in Arabidopsis
(Fan et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2018).
WOUND INDUCED DEDIFFERENTIATION 1 (WIND1) gene. WIND1
belongs to the AP2/ERF family of TFs. Although its role during normal
development in Arabidopsis remains unknown, it promotes callus
formation
in
response
to
injury
and
promotes
de
novo
shoot
regeneration by activating ENHANCER OF SHOOT REGENERATION
(ESR1) (Iwase et al., 2011, 2017).
ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR (ERF115) gene. ERF115 belongs to
the Ethylene Response family of plant TFs. During normal development,
it mediates root stem cell niche maintenance by acting as a rate-limiting
factor for quiescent centre division (Heyman et al., 2013). Upon injury, it
regulates root tip regeneration as well as cell type-specific regeneration
(Zhou et al., 2019).
6
PRIMER
Development (2021) 148, dev195347. doi:10.1242/dev.195347
DEVELOPMENT

treatment induces LRs, cytokinin treatment of the root explants
precisely during
this
developmental
window ensures trans-
differentiation to a shoot. This trans-differentiation is achieved by
rapidly downregulating root stem cell regulators and turning on
shoot stem cell regulators in QC cells (Fig. 3B) (Rosspopoff et al.,
2017). Thus, the QC cells in LRP are highly plastic during this
narrow window. This plasticity can be exploited by repeatedly
switching the explants between cytokinin and auxin treatments,
thereby switching between shoot and root fates, respectively
(Rosspopoff et al., 2017). The multiple-rounds of cell fate
switches are most likely attributed to a transient mixed-cell fate
identity during the brief period of LRP development.
Regeneration of complete plant system via somatic embryogenesis
In addition to generating shoots and roots, explants can give rise to
an entire embryo via the process of somatic embryogenesis. In this
process, the somatic cells of either zygotic tissue or young plant
tissue can be induced (often with external synthetic auxin higher
than that required for de novo shoot regeneration) to form somatic
embryos.
Immature
zygotic
tissues
such
as
the
suspensor
(see Glossary, Box 1) can be cultured in vitro to generate somatic
embryos (Gaj, 2001; Radoeva et al., 2020 preprint; Wu et al., 1992).
Similarly, somatic embryos can be induced from adult somatic
tissues such as leaf protoplasts, floral buds and the shoot apex.
A well-thought notion was that the meristem from the shoot apex
was the source for somatic embryos (Luo and Koop, 1997; Ikeda-
Iwai et al., 2003). However, careful analysis through RNA-seq and
live-imaging of numerous fate determinant markers revealed that
somatic embryos are induced directly from the base of young leaf
primordia of the shoot apex and not the SAM (Fig. 3C) (Kadokura
et al., 2018). Here, the leaf primordia cells are competent to produce
somatic embryos only during a narrow developmental window,
and leaf primordia cells outside this developmental stage die or
resort to callusing (Kadokura et al., 2018). Upon somatic embryo
induction, the young leaf primordia cells start expressing
embryogenic root as well as SAM identity genes and thus
acquire a mixed cell-fate identity. Such a molecular environment
in the leaf primordia cells is likely to facilitate the switch to an
embryonic fate (Kadokura et al., 2018).
A closer examination at the chromatin level has revealed that
somatic embryogenesis involves highly organized chromatin
remodelling. Using a combination of assays for transposase-
accessible chromatin sequencing (ATAC-seq), RNA-seq and
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-seq, it was found that
auxin modulates the chromatin accessibility and thereby the
dynamics of global gene expression in a developmental stage-
specific manner during somatic embryogenesis (Fig. 3D) (Wang
et al., 2020b). Numerous TFs controlling somatic embryogenesis
have also been identified (Horstman et al., 2017). For example,
ectopic overexpression of a member of the AP2/ERF family of TFs,
BABY BOOM (BBM; also known as PLETHORA4), which acts as
a root stem cell regulator during normal development, induces
somatic embryos (Galinha et al., 2007; Boutilier et al., 2002). BBM
has been shown to activate early embryogenic genes such as WOX2
and WOX3 via the TFs LEAFY COTYLEDON 1/2 (LEC1/2),
wherein BBM binds to the promoter of LEC1 and LEC2 to
transcriptionally upregulate their expression (Fig. 3D) (Horstman
et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2020b). In addition to genetic control, these
genes are epigenetically regulated. Concurrently, it was shown that
removal of epigenetic repression marks on LEC2 favours somatic
embryogenesis from root hairs (Ikeuchi et al., 2015). Thus, SAM
formation during somatic embryogenesis is likely to be pre-
determined by embryonic positional cues, unlike the callus-
mediated shoot regeneration that occurs in the absence of such
positional cues.
Mechanical injury-induced regeneration
Wound repair and regeneration in underground organs
Plants exhibit numerous mechanical injury-induced regenerative
responses throughout their body parts during normal growth.
Growing roots, for instance are prone to injury by biotic and abiotic
factors, often leading to loss of root cells or even the root tip. Laser
ablation, cytotoxic drug treatment, the resection of Arabidopsis root
tips, as well as simulations mimicking ablation and resection have
been used to study the mechanisms underlying wound-induced
regeneration (Fulcher and Sablowski, 2009; Grieneisen et al., 2007;
Hong et al., 2017; Sena et al., 2009; van den Berg et al., 1995, 1997;
Zhang et al., 2016).
The root meristem undergoes small-scale local regeneration
responses in the form of restoration of individual damaged cells,
including the QC (Fig. 4). The targeted laser ablation of QC cells
disrupts auxin flow and rapidly upregulates the auxin response a few
cell layers above the damaged QC. This proximal shift in auxin
responses allow vascular cells present 1-2 cell layers above the
ablated QC to acquire a stem cell fate and get respecified into new
QC cells, whereas cell layers between the ablated and regenerated
QC get respecified into columella cells (van den Berg et al., 1995;
Xu et al., 2006) (Fig. 4E). Laser ablation of a root meristem cell
other than a QC cell stimulates its inner adjacent cell to acquire a
stem cell fate and undergo periclinal division. Fate respecification of
the resulting daughter cell assures restoration of the lost cell; this
phenomenon stays true to all major root meristem cell types
(Marhava et al., 2019; van den Berg et al., 1995) (Fig. 4E).
Positional cues have been implicated in the replacement of lost cells,
and turgor pressure shock from dead cells has been suggested to
influence the expansion of neighbouring cells (Hoermayer et al.,
2020; Marhava et al., 2019; van den Berg et al., 1995). However,
why division and respecification is exclusive to the cell inner to
damaged ones remains elusive. It is known that growing roots
experience intrinsic axial and radial growth pressure, the effect of
which presumably differs between inner and outer cell files (Clark
et al., 2003). This differential growth pressure possibly renders the
inner cell to compensate for loss of its outer cell.
Besides small-scale regenerative responses, the root meristem
exhibits comparatively large-scale regeneration, for example the
restoration of excised root tips. A combination of lineage tracing,
single-cell RNA-seq and live imaging has unveiled that Arabidopsis
root tip restoration upon resection follows an embryonic pathway
(Efroni et al., 2016). Here, proliferating cells at the cut end
experience a brief overlap in auxin and cytokinin expression
domains akin to that observed in the embryo. This similarity in
hormonal dynamics triggers the expression of early embryonic
genes such as MONOPTEROS and guides the subsequent activation
of root stem cells, which leads to complete root tip restoration
(Efroni et al., 2016) (Fig. 4A). Interestingly, root tip excisions close
to the distal end of the root meristem allow root tip restoration,
whereas proximal excisions within the root meristem fail to do so.
Thus, there exists a boundary in the root meristem beyond which
root tip fails to regenerate. The dosage of the root stem cell regulator
PLT2 (see Box 3), which is expressed in a gradient along the root
meristem, instructs this boundary (Fig. 4C). The mitotic dilution
and
cell-to-cell
movement
of
PLT2
facilitates
its
graded
distribution from the distal to the proximal end of the root
meristem; high levels of PLT2 activate stem cells, low levels
7
PRIMER
Development (2021) 148, dev195347. doi:10.1242/dev.195347
DEVELOPMENT

Excised root tip
Uncut root tip
Restored root tip
Cells at cut end undergoing 
embryonic pathway activation
PLT 2
Competence zone
Non competence
 zone
Meristem
boundary
Me
bou
tem
dary
Cut beyond 
competence zone
Cut within
 competence zone
High
Low
Root tip
 restoration
No root tip restoration,
only residual proliferation
Primary root tip
Ablated endodermal
cell
Periclinal division of 
pericycle cell
Cell fate respecification  
and restoration 
Ablation of QC
Regeneration of new QC
New QC
Wounding
Jasmonate
Local auxin 
accumulation
RBR-SCR-SHR (stem cell activation)
Root tip restoration after excision
ERF115
CYCD6;1
Cortex
Endodermis
Pericycle
Vascular system
Quiescent centre
Columella
Lateral root cap
Epidermis
A
B
C
D
E
PLT2
Regeneration
Growth
Pulse of transient PLT2
overexpression
PLT2
Regeneration
Growth
Sustained PLT2
overexpression
Key
Fig. 4. Regeneration of the root tip and its cells. (A) Upon root tip excision, uninjured endodermal/stelar cells at the cut end proliferate and undergo transient
activation of embryonic signalling pathways to restore the missing root tip. (B) Regulatory module showing how wound-induced jasmonic acid (JA) and
auxin accumulate to trigger stem cell activation (i.e. the RBR-SCR-SHR protein network) via the ethylene response gene, ERF115, and a regulator of cell
cycle progression, CYCLIN D6 (CYCD6;1). This ultimately enables root tip restoration following excision and stem cell niche regeneration after quiescent
centre (QC) ablation. (C) The concentration of PLETHORA 2 (PLT2), a transcription factor that is expressed in a gradient along the root meristem, instructs
the boundary for root tip restoration. The root tip is restored when excision is within the region of meristem expressing high levels of PLT2 (top) but
restoration fails when the tip is excised in a region expressing low PLT2 levels (bottom). (D) Schematic depicting the importance of the PLT2-autoregulatory
loop in regeneration and how it distinguishes growth of the root meristem from its regeneration potential. (E) Upon ablation of an endodermal cell (top inset),
a pericycle cell from the inner cell file undergoes periclinal division and the resulting daughter cell respecifies its fate to replace the lost endodermal
cell. Targeted laser ablation of the QC (bottom inset) results in its regeneration two cell layers above the initial QC, while the cell layers below the new QC
become specified into columella cells.
8
PRIMER
Development (2021) 148, dev195347. doi:10.1242/dev.195347
DEVELOPMENT

promote cell division and even lower levels are required for
differentiation (Mähönen et al., 2014). PLT2, together with other
redundant PLT genes, is essential for root tip regeneration and acts
in a positive auto-regulatory loop to grant regeneration potential
(Fig. 4D). This auto-regulatory loop collapses upon sustained
overexpression of PLT2. In such conditions, the root meristem of
uninjured roots grows longer than normal, but its root tip
restoration ability ceases and gets substituted with mere residual
cell proliferation (Fig. 4D). Thus, the threshold-sensitive auto-
regulatory loop distinguishes the growth of the organ from its
regeneration potential (Durgaprasad et al., 2019).
Auxin biosynthesis and its polar transport are pivotal for organ
formation during normal development as well as for root tip
regeneration (reviewed by Shanmukhan et al., 2020b). The extent of
injury, i.e. large-scale or small-scale, acts as the decisive factor for
the magnitude of auxin required for cell or organ regeneration. In the
case of minor injuries to the root meristem, such as targeted cell
damage, ongoing auxin production and its accumulation due to
impeded transport is sufficient to stimulate small-scale regeneration
(Canher et al., 2020). However, large-scale regeneration such as root
tip restoration necessitates further upregulated auxin production
(Matosevich et al., 2020). Several root fate determinants and
regulators of root stem cell maintenance have been implicated in
regeneration, although how these regulators function in conjunction
with auxin needs to be studied (Durgaprasad et al., 2019; Efroni
et al., 2016; Marhava et al., 2019; Matosevich et al., 2020; Xu et al.,
2006). An interesting possibility is that the fate determinants and
auxin act in a regulatory loop to control the regeneration of specific
cell types or organs.
Auxin, along with another plant hormone jasmonic acid (JA),
triggers a common signalling network to accomplish regeneration
following root tip excision as well as ablation. The two hormones
accumulate locally upon injury and act synergistically to trigger
expression of the stress response protein ETHYLENE RESPONSE
FACTOR 115 (ERF115) and a cell cycle regulator CYCLIND6;1
(CYCD6;1), which in turn activates the RETINOBLASTOMA-
RELATED (RBR)-SCR-SHORTROOT (SHR) protein network
(Zhou et al., 2019) (Fig. 4B). Root tip restoration necessitates
reactivation of the SCN, which in turn is regulated by the RBR-
SCR-SHR protein network (Zhou et al., 2019). The variety of
regenerative
responses
in
the
Arabidopsis
root
meristem
discussed here relies on regulators that are required not only
for regeneration, but also for root meristem development, thereby
providing a nice example of the interplay between regenerative
mechanisms and those governing development (Cruz-Ramírez
et al., 2012, 2013; Durgaprasad et al., 2019; Efroni et al., 2016;
Galinha et al., 2007; Hardtke and Berleth, 1998; Mähönen et al.,
2014; Zhou et al., 2019).
Auxin also plays a role in root regeneration following abiotic
stress, for example following exposure to cold temperatures. Here,
cells of the SCN – including QC cells – are protected by sacrificing
columella stem cell daughters (CSCDs). Similar to the anatomical
block in auxin transport by ablated QC cells, which leads to
regeneration of new QC, the dead CSCD cells block auxin transport
resulting in elevated auxin levels in the QC, which in turn prolongs
the existing QC instead of regenerating a new one (Hong et al.,
2017). Other multi-functional plant growth hormones such as
ethylene, mostly known for its role in fruit ripening and senescence,
are also implicated in the regenerative response to stress. For
example, biotic stress such as a nematode attack in the root meristem
(which can be considered analogous to laser ablation) stimulates
ethylene signalling in addition to JA signalling. Whereas ethylene
elicits a local defence response against the nematode, JA encourages
its reproductive success besides promoting root regeneration (Zhou
et al., 2019). These two pathways, which are seemingly antagonistic
to each other, are likely to promote plant vitality through defence
and regeneration. Studies addressing the fundamental mechanisms
of
root
regeneration
and
their
physiological
relevance
in
Arabidopsis therefore open up the possibility of carrying out
similar such studies in other plant species. This will also allow
parallels between parasite-induced responses and mechanical-injury
induced responses to be drawn.
Wound repair and vascular regeneration in aerial organs
Much like underground parts, aerial parts of the plant are injured
frequently and elicit varying regenerative responses. Injuries
mimicking natural mechanical damages to growing Arabidopsis
aerial organs, such as vascular injury and surface abrasion, have
allowed the molecular mechanisms underlying their regeneration to
be probed. Both surface abrasion and deep incisions in the stem that
slice through the vasculature trigger cell proliferation; however,
subsequent vascular regeneration and reunion is exclusive to the
latter (Fig. 5A) (Asahina et al., 2011; Flaishman et al., 2003;
Radhakrishnan et al., 2020a). During vascular reconnection, the
regenerating vasculature bypasses the wound and this phenomenon
is observed following stem as well as leaf mid-vein incisions
(Fig. 5A,B) (Flaishman et al., 2003; Radhakrishnan et al., 2020a).
The presumption that ground tissue can be induced to form vascular
cells during vascular regeneration in the presence of sufficient auxin
flux led to the auxin canalization hypothesis (Sachs, 1969, 1981,
1991). Auxin canalisation is promoted by polar localization of
phosphorylated PIN1 (an auxin efflux carrier) on the plasma
membrane during vascular regeneration in the Arabidopsis stem
(Hajný et al., 2020). PIN1 fails to polarise in the absence of a TF-
based regulatory axis (discussed below) leading to failure of
vascular regeneration in growing leaves and further substantiating
the canalization model for vascular regeneration (Radhakrishnan
et al., 2020a).
Vascular regeneration in growing Arabidopsis aerial organs
requires the activity of PLT3/5/7 and AINTEGUMENTA genes.
However, in this context, PLT3/5/7 do not activate root stem cell
regulators like they do in tissue culture-mediated regeneration, in
which their activation is indispensable. Instead, PLT genes directly
bind to the promoter of another TF gene, CUC2, in response to
injury. The PLT-CUC2 regulatory axis acts in a coherent feed-
forward loop to upregulate local auxin production, which in turn is
essential for vascular regeneration and for guiding the newly
formed vein along a polarized path for reunion with its parental
strands (Fig. 5C) (Radhakrishnan et al., 2020a). Here, the high
auxin signalling is likely to serve as a cue for ground tissue cells to
undergo vascular cell activation that appears to steer the path of the
regenerating vein. The likely termination of this feed-forward loop
could thus be causal for the cessation of vein regeneration upon
complete reconnection between parental strands. Nevertheless,
how the regenerating vein follows a path and recognizes its
parental strands hitherto remains unknown. Tracking the path of
this injury-induced newly formed vein offers an excellent system
to study the recognition, communication and reunion between
physically disconnected tissues. In addition, vein regeneration
efficiency declines progressively with increasing seedling age,
with the increase in wound size, and as the position of injury shifts
farther from the leaf-base (Radhakrishnan et al., 2020a,b preprint).
Although the exact mechanism underlying the age- and position-
dependent efficiency of this regeneration is unknown, it could
9
PRIMER
Development (2021) 148, dev195347. doi:10.1242/dev.195347
DEVELOPMENT

likely be attributed to modulation of the PLT-CUC2 regulatory
axis. Strikingly, vein development and patterning in plt or cuc2
mutants remain unaffected during normal growth (Radhakrishnan
et al., 2020a). The injury-induced PLT-CUC2 regulatory axis
therefore distinguishes vein regeneration from its formation during
normal development.
Regenerative responses at the cut ends of detached organs: insights
into plasticity and ageing
A feature unique to plant regeneration is the ability of cells at the
cut end of a detached organ to adopt an identity different
from their pre-existing one. For example, when cultured on
hormone-free medium, an excised Arabidopsis leaf elicits one of
the two following regenerative responses from its cut end:
the formation of a new organ, i.e. de novo root regeneration
(DNRR), or local healing in the form of callus formation
(Fig. 5D) (Chen et al., 2014; reviewed by Ikeuchi et al., 2016;
Iwase et al., 2011, 2017).
During DNRR, the rapid yet transient accumulation of wound-
induced JA, in conjunction with pre-deposited methylation on JA
responsive genes, upregulates auxin production at the site of injury,
which in turn facilitates DNRR (Fig. 5E) (Zhang et al., 2019). The
auxin maxima precedes vascular cell proliferation and the induction
of WOX genes, namely WOX11 and WOX12 near the cut end of the
leaf, eventually resulting in the formation of a small mass of cells
with rooting competence (Bustillo-Avendaño et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2019). Such cells undergo a two-step cell fate transition to
initiate the formation of a root primordia: WOX11/12 along with
LBD genes (see Box 3) regulates the transition of rooting competent
cells into root founder cells, marking the first step, whereas WOX5/7
regulate the transition of root founder cells into a root primordium,
marking the second step (Hu and Xu, 2016; Liu et al., 2014). The
Physically
disconnected 
vascular strands
in incised leaf
Regeneration of
vascular strands
in incised leaf
Wound healing
in response
 to local abrasion
Regenerating vascular strand in
incised inflorescence stem
Local abrasion
Regenerated vascular
strands
Wound- induced 
cell proliferation
Mechanical injury
PLT
(PLT3,PLT5,PLT7)
CUC2
Optimal hormonal
environment
A
C
D
Pre-deposited methylation of gene
in auxin production pathway
Local auxin 
biosynthesis
Local auxin 
accumulation
Wounding
JA
De novo root
regeneration
from cut end of leaf
E
Upregulation of gene 
for auxin production
C
No leaf tip
regeneration
B
YUC4
(Local auxin biosynthesis)
Key
Wound-induced proliferation 
at cut end
Wound-induced rooting 
at cut end
Wound-induced proliferation
at cut end
Re-establishment of polarised
cell growth leading to
vascular regeneration
Fig. 5. Regenerative responses in Arabidopsis aerial organs. (A) Incision of the inflorescence stem (top inset) disrupts vascular tissue continuity and induces
cell proliferation to seal the gap between the disconnected tissues. Subsequently, vascular continuity is reinstated by the vascular stands regenerating around
the wounded area. By contrast, surface abrasion of the inflorescence stem (bottom inset) induces only local cell proliferation to heal the injury. (B) Excision
of the distal end of a growing leaf (left inset) does not initiate regeneration to replace the lost part. By contrast, incision of the leaf mid vein (right inset) disrupts
vascular continuity. The regenerating vasculature circumvents the wounded area to re-establish vascular continuity in the growing leaf. (C) Schematic depicting
the PLT-CUC2 regulatory module involved in vascular regeneration in aerial organs. (D) A regenerative response occurs (in the form of wound-induced callus
formation) from the cut end of a detached leaf when the cut end does not touch the media (top left). However, when the cut end of the detached leaf is in
contact with the nutrient-rich media, wound-induced rooting occurs (top right). Wound-induced callusing also occurs at the cut end of detached hypocotyls when
placed onto nutrient-rich media (bottom). (E) Regulatory module showing the mechanism of de novo root regeneration from the cut end of a detached leaf.
10
PRIMER
Development (2021) 148, dev195347. doi:10.1242/dev.195347
DEVELOPMENT

subsequent formation and maintenance of the root primordium by
root stem cell regulators results in activation of the root meristem
and, ultimately, root regeneration (Bustillo-Avendaño et al., 2018).
In addition to these TFs, PLT proteins are essential for DNRR
(Shanmukhan et al., 2020a preprint). Moreover, a decline in this
form of root regeneration has been observed from aged leaf
explants. Although the implications of ageing on many aspects of
development have been well documented in both plants and
animals, this area remains less explored with respect to regeneration.
At least in DNRR, the diminished regeneration potential of older
Arabidopsis leaf explants is partly attributed to the age-induced
accumulation of ethylene, which inhibits WOX genes and,
consequently, DNRR (Li et al., 2020).
Aside from DNRR, the cut end of detached leaf exhibits a
distinct wound-induced callusing response. Here, the activation of
an
early
wound
response
gene,
WOUND
INDUCED
DEDIFFERENTIATION 1 (WIND1; see Box 3), causes cells at
the cut end to undergo dedifferentiation (see Glossary, Box 1) and
subsequent cell proliferation to form a callus (Fig. 5E) (Iwase
et al., 2011). Unlike the hormone-induced callus that arises in
tissue culture, the wound-induced callus does not predominantly
express root fate determinants (Iwase et al., 2011). In addition, the
hormone-induced callus arises from XPP cells and spreads
throughout the explant, whereas the injury-induced callus forms
from and is confined to the site of injury (Atta et al., 2009). This is
because the regeneration machinery distinguishes the uninjured
tissues from the injured ones by tight transcriptional control of
respecification genes. Such control is mediated partly by
epigenetic mechanisms, whereby modifications to histone N-
terminal tails regulate transcription of the associated genes. For
example, the majority of genes that are rapidly induced by
wounding, including WIND1, are marked by histone acetylation
immediately before/after wounding, thereby allowing them to
promote callus formation only at the site of injury. A correlation
between the expression of wound responsive genes and their
epigenetic modifications has recently been revealed using ChIP-
seq and RNA-seq (Rymen et al., 2019).
The deciding factor for either of the two responses – DNRR or
callus formation – at the cut end of a detached leaf remains unclear.
DNRR results when the cut end touches the media, as opposed to
callus formation, which occurs when the cut end fails to touch the
media (Fig. 5D) (Iwase et al., 2017; Shanmukhan et al., 2020a
preprint). As an increase in local auxin production is essential for
both these responses, what distinguishes DNRR from callus
formation is likely a touch-dependent mechanical cue (Iwase
et al., 2017; Shanmukhan et al., 2020a preprint; Zhang et al., 2019).
Among the several possible mechanical cues, osmotic stress has
been implicated in the regeneration of root meristem cells upon
targeted cell ablation (Hoermayer et al., 2020). However, the
mechanisms
underlying
touch-driven
mechano-sensing
in
regeneration remain largely unknown. Presumably, in DNRR at
least, contact of the cut end with media activates touch-dependent
mechano-sensors,
and
the
resulting
signal
transduction
in
conjunction with local auxin accumulation likely promotes the
production of rooting-competent cells (Shanmukhan et al., 2020
preprint).
Grafting: fusion between two body parts
The age-old agricultural technique by which two different body
parts originating from two plants of the same or different species are
joined to give rise to a chimera is called grafting. The parts that form
the prospective shoot and root systems in a graft are called the scion
and rootstock, respectively. Initially grafting was practised to
combine aesthetically and agronomically desirable characteristics
from two plants, such as disease resistance, increased productivity
and early flowering (Goldschmidt, 2014). However, grafting in
Arabidopsis has now become more relevant for addressing
fundamental questions concerning the long-range transport of
proteins, hormones, RNAs and secondary metabolites. Importantly,
although it is a type of mechanical injury-induced regeneration,
grafting by itself is a distinctive phenomenon and, as such, can
provide insights into the molecular mechanisms involved in
regeneration. Refined techniques have allowed micrografting of
hypocotyls, leaves, and cotyledons in Arabidopsis (Bartusch et al.,
2020; Huang and Yu, 2015; Nisar et al., 2012; Yoo et al., 2013).
Such studies have unveiled the sequential events involved in
grafting, from recognition of disrupted tissue continuity to
successful graft formation.
Micrografting of Arabidopsis hypocotyls has revealed that,
after cutting, auxin and starch accumulate above the cut and
their asymmetric distribution on either side of the cut indicates a
disruption in tissue continuity (Melnyk et al., 2018). In order to
re-establish tissue continuity, recognition and adhesion between the
two opposing body parts is imperative. Adhesion during grafting is
facilitated by a cell wall remodelling enzyme, which often functions
when the opposing parts are recognized as compatible (Notaguchi
et al., 2020 preprint). The cues that trigger the recognition
phenomenon are less known. However, there is evidence to
suggest that the two opposing tissues have been recognized by
each other. For example, the activation of HIGH CAMBIAL
ACTIVITY 2 (HCA2), an auxin response gene that is required for
phloem reconnection, exclusively in the grafted bottom suggests
that recognition has occurred. Neither the unattached bottom nor the
intact hypocotyls express HCA2, suggesting that it is uniquely
activated by grafting and highlighting that phloem reconnection is
crucial to initiate the re-establishment of tissue continuity
(Matsuoka et al., 2016; Melnyk et al., 2015, 2018). Another
regulator of phloem reconnection is the lateral root formation gene
ALF4, activity of which is required below the graft junction
(DiDonato et al., 2004; Melnyk et al., 2015; Sugimoto et al., 2010).
Sealing of the wound gap and subsequent vascular regeneration are
common events in both partially incised stems of the same plant as
well as in grafting between two plants, but what distinguishes
grafting is the recognition upon tissue attachment (Fig. 6A,B)
(Melnyk et al., 2018; Radhakrishnan et al., 2020a).
Refined techniques have been developed over the last decade to
detect, monitor and quantify the movement of molecules across the
graft junction. For example, the application of carboxyfluorescein
diacetate (a membrane permeable fluorescent dye) to the scion and
rootstock can be used to assay phloem and xylem connectivity,
respectively (Melnyk et al., 2015). In addition, live imaging using
confocal microscopy, qRT-PCR and RNA-seq of transgenics and
mutants has yielded reliable data regarding long-range transport of
mobile molecules in Arabidopsis (Melnyk et al., 2015, 2018;
Turnbull, 2010). Although challenging, understanding the role of
these long-range mobile molecules for plant regeneration will
contribute significantly to future studies in the field.
Conclusions and perspectives
The advances in tools and resources available for Arabidopsis
research have begun to provide deeper insights into the journey of
plant regeneration and offer a promising direction for future studies
in the area of cellular reprogramming and developmental plasticity.
Auxin plays a crucial part in several cellular processes including cell
11
PRIMER
Development (2021) 148, dev195347. doi:10.1242/dev.195347
DEVELOPMENT

fate transitions during both development and regeneration, acting
via
global
genetic
regulation
and
epigenetic
modifications,
including chromatin remodelling. It functions in a concentration-
dependent manner to yield a particular developmental outcome. As
such, each regenerative response may depend on a specific auxin
level. How a specific level of auxin is assigned to, and controls, a
particular regenerative response as well as normal development can
likely be attributed to: (1) context-dependent factors; (2) the
magnitude of auxin production; (3) the source of auxin production;
(4) its diffusion; (5) its polar auxin transport which generate a flux.
The
generation
of
specific
auxin
levels
during
normal
development has been explained in silico using two key models:
the reaction-diffusion (RD) model and the flux-based model (Cruz-
Ramírez et al., 2012; Grieneisen et al., 2007; Mündermann et al.,
2005; Sampathkumar et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2006). The flux-
based auxin canalization model elegantly explains gradient-driven
self-organizing patterning (Bennett et al., 2014; Sachs, 1969, 1981,
1991). However, the model fails to sustain itself after a temporal
perturbation
and
a
major
limitation
is to
test
the
model
experimentally, particularly to measure flux (van Berkel et al.,
2013). As such both the RD and flux models are likely required to
explain the complex cell-cell interactions, and thereby the
emergence of pattern, during regeneration. The expanse of data
derived from experimental studies in Arabidopsis can now be used
to examine the possibility of a switch between the two models, and
how such a switch occurs during different regenerative responses.
Plants must be equipped to ensure the correct replacement of an
organ or tissue lost in injury. As an immediate response to injury,
cells at the wound vicinity experience degrees of variation with
respect to noise in gene expression, cell polarity and cell
division state, the cumulative effect of which is harnessed for the
emergence of a particular pattern. However, not all such variations
will be reflected in cellular behaviour. Thus, it will be challenging to
tease out only the meaningful variations to interpret cellular
heterogeneity. Although it will be daunting, finding the meaningful
variations and precisely quantifying them will be key to gaining
deeper insights into cellular reprogramming and fate transitions
during regeneration. Moreover, when plants encounter injuries in
varying conditions of nutrient availability and environmental stimuli,
such as electrical stimuli, nitric oxide and physical contact, they are
likely to tweak their innate wound repair mechanism in response to
these conditions (Cervantes-Pérez et al., 2020; Kral et al., 2016;
Shanmukhan et al., 2020a preprint). The challenge will be to test how
fluctuating environmental conditions modulate regeneration-specific
regulatory frameworks, and to understand their physiological
relevance. Such a study already carried out in the Arabidopsis root
tip (Marhavý et al., 2019) offers encouragement to conduct the same
study in other plant parts and in other species in order to better
understand how plants sense and respond to injury.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dhanya Radhakrishnan and Anju P.S. for all their help and useful
discussions during the preparation of the article. We thank Dr Ari Pekka Mä hö nen
and Dr Keiko Sugimoto for critically reading the manuscript and for their comments.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Funding
In the K.P. lab, research on regeneration is funded by the Department of
Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology, India (BT/PR12394/AGIII/103/
891/2014) and Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science and
Plant A
Plant B
Scion of
Plant A
Rootstock of
Plant B
Scion
(grafted
top)
Rootstock
(grafted
bottom)
Graft
junction
L.S. of graft junction
Tissue fusion
Attached
plant
of
Regenerated vascular
strand
Vascular strand
Wound-induced 
cell proliferation
A
B
Key
6 hag
Upregulation of genes 
involved in defence,
immunity and wound
response in grafted top
and bottom compared
with intact plant.
48 hag
Upregulation of genes
expressed exclusively by 
grafted bottom.
Asymmetrical expression
of DEGs between grafted
top and bottom.
Upregulation of DEGs in 
both grafted top and 
bottom.
Symmetrical expression
of DEGs between grafted
top and bottom.
120 hag
Fig. 6. Grafting between two plant parts. (A) The scion from plant A and the rootstock from plant B are attached together, resulting in wound-induced cell
proliferation in the form of a callus (see inset). This seals the gap at the attachment plane and forms a graft junction (indicated by dashed lines). Subsequently,
cells from both opposing parts interdigitate, ultimately leading to tissue fusion and re-establishment of vascular continuity. Note that the epidermal cells of a grafted
top and bottom expand at the graft junction. (B) Timeline over which differentially expressed genes (DEGs) shift from being asymmetrically to symmetrically
distributed between the grafted top and bottom. Note that DEGs are genes that are differentially expressed in grafted seedlings compared with intact seedlings.
hag, hours after grafting; L.S., longitudinal section.
12
PRIMER
Development (2021) 148, dev195347. doi:10.1242/dev.195347
DEVELOPMENT

Technology, India-Science and Engineering Research Board (EMR/2017/002503/
PS). K.P. also acknowledges the Indian Institute of Science Education and
Research, Thiruvananthapuram for financial support and infrastructure facility.
M.M.M. is a recipient of University Grants Commission fellowship and also
acknowledges Prime Minister’s Research Fellowship (Ministry of Human Resource
Development).
References
Asahina, M., Azuma, K., Pitaksaringkarn, W., Yamazaki, T., Mitsuda, N., Ohme-
Takagi, M., Yamaguchi, S., Kamiya, Y., Okada, K., Nishimura, T. et al. (2011).
Spatially selective hormonal control of RAP2.6L and ANAC071 transcription
factors involved in tissue reunion in Arabidopsis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108,
16128-16132. doi:10.1073/pnas.1110443108
Atta, R., Laurens, L., Boucheron-Dubuisson, E., Guivarc’h, A., Carnero, E.,
Giraudat-Pautot, V., Rech, P. and Chriqui, D. (2009). Pluripotency of
Arabidopsis xylem pericycle underlies shoot regeneration from root and
hypocotyl explants grown in vitro. Plant J. 57, 626-644. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
313X.2008.03715.x
Bagchi, R., Melnyk, C. W., Christ, G., Winkler, M., Kirchsteiner, K., Salehin, M.,
Mergner, J., Niemeyer, M., Schwechheimer, C., Calderón Villalobos, L. I. A.
et al. (2018). The Arabidopsis ALF4 protein is a regulator of SCF E3 ligases.
EMBO J. 37, 255-268. doi:10.15252/embj.201797159
Bartusch, K., Trenner, J., Melnyk, C. W. and Quint, M. (2020). Cut and paste:
temperature-enhanced
cotyledon
micrografting
for
Arabidopsis
thaliana
seedlings. Plant Methods 16, 12. doi:10.1186/s13007-020-0562-1
Bennett, T., Hines, G. and Leyser, O. (2014). Canalization: what the flux? Trends
Genet. 30, 41-48. doi:10.1016/j.tig.2013.11.001
Boutilier, K., Offringa, R., Sharma, V. K., Kieft, H., Ouellet, T., Zhang, L., Hattori,
J., Liu, C.-M., Van Lammeren, A. A. M., Miki, B. L. A. et al. (2002). Ectopic
expression of BABY BOOM triggers a conversion from vegetative to embryonic
growth. Plant Cell 14, 1737-1749. doi:10.1105/tpc.001941
Brady, S. M., Orlando, D. A., Lee, J.-Y., Wang, J. Y., Koch, J., Dinneny, J. R.,
Mace, D., Ohler, U. and Benfey, P. N. (2007). A high-resolution root
spatiotemporal map reveals dominant expression patterns. Science 318,
801-806. doi:10.1126/science.1146265
Brunoud, G., Wells, D. M., Oliva, M., Larrieu, A., Mirabet, V., Burrow, A. H.,
Beeckman, T., Kepinski, S., Traas, J., Bennett, M. J. et al. (2012). A novel
sensor to map auxin response and distribution at high spatio-temporal resolution.
Nature 482, 103-106. doi:10.1038/nature10791
Busch, W., Moore, B. T., Martsberger, B., MacE, D. L., Twigg, R. W., Jung, J.,
Pruteanu-Malinici, I., Kennedy, S. J., Fricke, G. K., Clark, R. L. et al. (2012). A
microfluidic device and computational platform for high-throughput live imaging of
gene expression. Nat. Methods 9, 1101-1106. doi:10.1038/nmeth.2185
Bustillo-Avendaño, E., Ibáñez, S., Sanz, O., Sousa Barros, J. A., Gude, I.,
Perianez-Rodriguez, J., Micol, J. L., del Pozo, J. C., Moreno-Risueno, M. A.
and
Pérez-Pérez,
J.
M.
(2018).
Regulation
of
hormonal
control,
cell
reprogramming, and patterning during de novo root organogenesis. Plant
Physiol. 176, 1709-1727. doi:10.1104/pp.17.00980
Canher, B., Heyman, J., Savina, M., Devendran, A., Eekhout, T., Vercauteren, I.,
Prinsen, E., Matosevich, R., Xu, J., Mironova, V. et al. (2020). Rocks in the
auxin stream: wound-induced auxin accumulation and ERF115 expression
synergistically drive stem cell regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117,
16667-16677. doi:10.1073/pnas.2006620117
Cervantes-Pérez, S. A., Espinal-Centeno, A., Oropeza-Aburto, A., Caballero-
Pérez, J., Falcon, F., Aragón-Raygoza, A., Sánchez-Segura, L., Herrera-
Estrella, L., Cruz-Hernández, A. and Cruz-Ramı́rez, A. (2018). Transcriptional
profiling of the CAM plant Agave salmiana reveals conservation of a genetic
program for regeneration. Dev. Biol. 442, 28-39. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2018.04.018
Cervantes-Pérez, D., Ortega-Garcı́a, A., Medina-Andrés, R., Batista-Garcı́a,
R. A. and Lira-Ruan, V. (2020). Exogenous nitric oxide delays plant regeneration
from protoplast and protonema development in physcomitrella patens. Plants 9,
1380. doi:10.3390/plants9101380
Chatfield, S. P., Capron, R., Severino, A., Penttila, P.-A., Alfred, S., Nahal, H. and
Provart, N. J. (2013). Incipient stem cell niche conversion in tissue culture: using
a systems approach to probe early events in WUSCHEL-dependent conversion of
lateral root primordia into shoot meristems. Plant J. 73, 798-813. doi:10.1111/tpj.
12085
Chen, X., Qu, Y., Sheng, L., Liu, J., Huang, H. and Xu, L. (2014). A simple method
suitable to study de novo root organogenesis. Front. Plant Sci. 5, 208. doi:10.
3389/fpls.2014.00208
Clark, L. J., Whalley, W. R. and Barraclough, P. B. (2003). How do roots penetrate
strong soil? In Roots: The Dynamic Interface Between Plants and the Earth
(ed. J. Abe), pp. 93-104. Springer.
Cruz-Ramı́rez, A., Dı́az-Triviño, S., Blilou, I., Grieneisen, V. A., Sozzani, R.,
Zamioudis, C., Miskolczi, P., Nieuwland, J., Benjamins, R., Dhonukshe, P.
et al. (2012). A bistable circuit involving SCARECROW-RETINOBLASTOMA
integrates cues to inform asymmetric stem cell division. Cell 150, 1002-1015.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2012.07.017
Cruz-Ramı́rez, A., Dı́az-Triviño, S., Wachsman, G., Du, Y., Arteága-Vázquez, M.,
Zhang, H., Benjamins, R., Blilou, I., Neef, A. B., Chandler, V. et al. (2013).
A
SCARECROW-RETINOBLASTOMA
protein
network
controls
protective
quiescence in the Arabidopsis root stem cell organizer. PLoS Biol. 11,
e1001724. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001724
Cui, J., Li, P., Li, G., Xu, F., Zhao, C., Li, Y., Yang, Z., Wang, G., Yu, Q. and Li, Y.
et al. (2007). AtPID: Arabidopsis thaliana protein interactome database—an
integrative
platform
for
plant
systems
biology.
Nucleic
Acids
Res.
36,
D999-D1008. doi:10.1093/nar/gkm844
DiDonato, R. J., Arbuckle, E., Buker, S., Sheets, J., Tobar, J., Totong, R.,
Grisafi, P., Fink, G. R. and Celenza, J. L. (2004). Arabidopsis ALF4 encodes a
nuclear-localized protein required for lateral root formation. Plant J. 37, 340-353.
doi:10.1046/j.1365-313X.2003.01964.x
Durgaprasad, K., Roy, M. V., Venugopal, M. A., Kareem, A., Raj, K., Willemsen,
V., Mä hö nen, A. P., Scheres, B. and Prasad, K. (2019). Gradient expression of
transcription factor imposes a boundary on organ regeneration potential in plants.
Cell Rep. 29, 453-463.e3. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2019.08.099
Efroni, I., Mello, A., Nawy, T., Ip, P.-L., Rahni, R., Delrose, N., Powers, A., Satija,
R. and Birnbaum, K. D. (2016). Root regeneration triggers an embryo-like
sequence guided by hormonal interactions. Cell 165, 1721-1733. doi:10.1016/j.
cell.2016.04.046
Fan, M., Xu, C., Xu, K. and Hu, Y. (2012). LATERAL ORGAN BOUNDARIES
DOMAIN transcription factors direct callus formation in Arabidopsis regeneration.
Cell Res. 22, 1169-1180. doi:10.1038/cr.2012.63
Flaishman, M. A., Loginovsky, K. and Lev-Yadun, S. (2003). Regenerative Xylem
in inflorescence stems of Arabidopsis thaliana. J. Plant Growth Regul. 22,
253-258. doi:10.1007/s00344-003-0030-y
Fulcher, N. and Sablowski, R. (2009). Hypersensitivity to DNA damage in plant
stem cell niches. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 20984-20988. doi:10.1073/
pnas.0909218106
Gaj, M. D. (2001). Direct somatic embryogenesis as a rapid and efficient system for
in vitro regeneration of Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell. Tissue Organ Cult. 64,
39-46. doi:10.1023/A:1010679614721
Galinha, C., Hofhuis, H., Luijten, M., Willemsen, V., Blilou, I., Heidstra, R. and
Scheres, B. (2007). PLETHORA proteins as dose-dependent master regulators
of
Arabidopsis
root
development.
Nature
449,
1053-1057.
doi:10.1038/
nature06206
Glazebrook, J. and Weigel, D. (2002). Arabidopsis: A laboratory manual.
New York: Cold Spring Harbo r Lab. Press.
Goldschmidt, E. E. (2014). Plant grafting: new mechanisms, evolutionary
implications. Front. Plant Sci. 5, 727. doi:10.3389/fpls.2014.00727
Gordon, S. P., Heisler, M. G., Reddy, G. V., Ohno, C., Das, P. and Meyerowitz,
E. M. (2007). Pattern formation during de novo assembly of the Arabidopsis shoot
meristem. Development 134, 3539-3548. doi:10.1242/dev.010298
Grieneisen, V. A., Xu, J., Marée, A. F. M., Hogeweg, P. and Scheres, B. (2007).
Auxin transport is sufficient to generate a maximum and gradient guiding root
growth. Nature 449, 1008-1013. doi:10.1038/nature06215
Haecker, A., Groß-Hardt, R., Geiges, B., Sarkar, A., Breuninger, H., Herrmann, M.
and Laux, T. (2004). Expression dynamics of WOX genes mark cell fate decisions
during early embryonic patterning in Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 131,
657-668. doi:10.1242/dev.00963
Hajný, J., Prát, T., Rydza, N., Rodriguez, L., Tan, S., Verstraeten, I., Domjan, D.,
Mazur, E., Smakowska-Luzan, E., Smet, W. et al. (2020). Receptor kinase
module targets PIN-dependent auxin transport during canalization. Science 370,
550-557. doi:10.1126/science.aba3178
Hardtke, C. S. and Berleth, T. (1998). The Arabidopsis gene MONOPTEROS
encodes a transcription factor mediating embryo axis formation and vascular
development. EMBO J. 17, 1405-1411. doi:10.1093/emboj/17.5.1405
Heyman, J., Cools, T., Vandenbussche, F., Heyndrickx, K. S., Van Leene, J.,
Vercauteren, I., Vanderauwera, S., Vandepoele, K., De Jaeger, G., Van Der
Straeten, D. et al. (2013). ERF115 controls root quiescent center cell division and
stem cell replenishment. Science 342, 860-863. doi:10.1126/science.1240667
Hoermayer, L., Montesinos, J. C., Marhava, P., Benková, E., Yoshida, S. and
Friml, J. (2020). Wounding-induced changes in cellular pressure and localized
auxin signalling spatially coordinate restorative divisions in roots. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 117, 15322-15331. doi:10.1073/pnas.2003346117
Hofhuis, H., Laskowski, M., Du, Y., Prasad, K., Grigg, S., Pinon, V. and Scheres,
B. (2013). Phyllotaxis and rhizotaxis in Arabidopsis are modified by three
PLETHORA transcription factors. Curr. Biol. 23, 956-962. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2013.
04.048
Hong, J. H., Savina, M., Du, J., Devendran, A., Kannivadi Ramakanth, K., Tian,
X., Sim, W. S., Mironova, V. V. and Xu, J. (2017). A sacrifice-for-survival
mechanism protects root stem cell niche from chilling stress. Cell 170,
102-113.e14 . doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.002
Horstman, A., Li, M., Heidmann, I., Weemen, M., Chen, B., Muino, J. M.,
Angenent, G. C. and Boutilier, K. (2017). The BABY BOOM transcription factor
activates the LEC1-ABI3-FUS3-LEC2 network to induce somatic embryogenesis.
Plant Physiol. 175, 848-857. doi:10.1104/pp.17.00232
13
PRIMER
Development (2021) 148, dev195347. doi:10.1242/dev.195347
DEVELOPMENT

Hu, X. and Xu, L. (2016). Transcription factors WOX11/12 directly activate WOX5/7
to promote root primordia initiation and organogenesis. Plant Physiol. 172,
2363-2373. doi:10.1104/pp.16.01067
Hu, B., Zhang, G., Liu, W., Shi, J., Wang, H., Qi, M., Li, J., Qin, P., Ruan, Y.,
Huang, H. et al. (2017). Divergent regeneration-competent cells adopt a common
mechanism for callus initiation in angiosperms. Regeneration 4, 132-139. doi:10.
1002/reg2.82
Huang, N.-C. and Yu, T.-S. (2015). A pin-fasten grafting method provides a non-
sterile
and
highly
efficient
method
for
grafting
Arabidopsis
at
diverse
developmental stages. Plant Methods 11, 38. doi:10.1186/s13007-015-0081-7
Ikeda-Iwai, M., Umehara, M., Satoh, S. and Kamada, H. (2003). Stress-induced
somatic embryogenesis in vegetative tissues of Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J. 34,
107-114. doi:10.1046/j.1365-313X.2003.01702.x
Ikeuchi, M., Iwase, A., Rymen, B., Harashima, H., Shibata, M., Ohnuma, M.,
Breuer, C., Morao, A. K., de Lucas, M., De Veylder, L. et al. (2015). PRC2
represses dedifferentiation of mature somatic cells in Arabidopsis. Nat. Plants 1,
15089. doi:10.1038/nplants.2015.89
Ikeuchi, M., Ogawa, Y., Iwase, A. and Sugimoto, K. (2016). Plant regeneration:
cellular origins and molecular mechanisms. Development 143, 1442-1451.
doi:10.1242/dev.134668
Ishikawa, M., Murata, T., Sato, Y., Nishiyama, T., Hiwatashi, Y., Imai, A., Kimura,
M., Sugimoto, N., Akita, A., Oguri, Y. et al. (2011). Physcomitrella cyclin-
dependent kinase A links cell cycle reactivation to other cellular changes during
reprogramming of leaf cells. Plant Cell 23, 2924-2938. doi:10.1105/tpc.111.
088005
Iwase, A., Mitsuda, N., Koyama, T., Hiratsu, K., Kojima, M., Arai, T., Inoue, Y.,
Seki, M., Sakakibara, H., Sugimoto, K. et al. (2011). The AP2/ERF Transcription
factor WIND1 controls cell dedifferentiation in Arabidopsis. Curr. Biol. 21,
508-514. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2011.02.020
Iwase, A., Harashima, H., Ikeuchi, M., Rymen, B., Ohnuma, M., Komaki, S.,
Morohashi, K., Kurata, T., Nakata, M., Ohme-Takagi, M. et al. (2017). WIND1
promotes shoot regeneration through transcriptional activation of ENHANCER OF
SHOOT REGENERATION1 in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 29, 54-69. doi:10.1105/tpc.
16.00623
Jacobs, W. P. (1952). The role of auxin in differentiation of Xylem around a wound.
Am. J. Bot. 39, 301-309. doi:10.1002/j.1537-2197.1952.tb14277.x
Kadokura, S., Sugimoto, K., Tarr, P., Suzuki, T. and Matsunaga, S. (2018).
Characterization of somatic embryogenesis initiated from the Arabidopsis shoot
apex. Dev. Biol. 442, 13-27. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2018.04.023
Kang, N. Y., Cho, C., Kim, N. Y. and Kim, J. (2012). Cytokinin receptor-dependent
and receptor-independent pathways in the dehydration response of Arabidopsis
thaliana. J. Plant Physiol. 169, 1382-1391. doi:10.1016/j.jplph.2012.05.007
Kareem, A., Durgaprasad, K., Sugimoto, K., Du, Y., Pulianmackal, A. J., Trivedi,
Z. B., Abhayadev, P. V., Pinon, V., Meyerowitz, E. M., Scheres, B. et al. (2015).
PLETHORA genes control regeneration by a two-step mechanism. Curr. Biol. 25,
1017-1030. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2015.02.022
Kareem, A., Radhakrishnan, D., Wang, X., Bagavathiappan, S., Trivedi, Z. B.,
Sugimoto, K., Xu, J., Mä hö nen, A. P. and Prasad, K. (2016). Protocol: a method
to study the direct reprogramming of lateral root primordia to fertile shoots. Plant
Methods 12, 27. doi:10.1186/s13007-016-0127-5
Kim, G. H., Klotchkova, T. A. and Kang, Y.-M. (2001). Life without a cell
membrane: regeneration of protoplasts from disintegrated cells of the marine
green alga Bryopsis plumosa. J. Cell Sci. 114, 2009-2014.
Kim, J.-Y., Yang, W., Forner, J., Lohmann, J. U., Noh, B. and Noh, Y.-S. (2018).
Epigenetic reprogramming by histone acetyltransferase HAG1/AtGCN5 is
required for pluripotency acquisition in Arabidopsis. EMBO J. 37, e98726.
doi:10.15252/embj.201798726
Kral, N., Hanna Ougolnikova, A. and Sena, G. (2016). Externally imposed electric
field enhances plant root tip regeneration. Regeneration 3, 156-167. doi:10.1002/
reg2.59
Kulkarni, S. R., Vaneechoutte, D., Van de Velde, J. and Vandepoele, K. (2018).
TF2Network: predicting transcription factor regulators and gene regulatory
networks in Arabidopsis using publicly available binding site information.
Nucleic Acids Res. 46, e31-e31. doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1279
Lardon, R., Wijnker, E., Keurentjes, J. and Geelen, D. (2020). The genetic
framework of shoot regeneration in Arabidopsis comprises master regulators and
conditional fine-tuning factors. Commun. Biol. 3, 549. doi:10.1038/s42003-020-
01274-9
Li, H., Yao, L., Sun, L. and Zhu, Z. (2020). ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE 3 suppresses
plant de novo root regeneration from leaf explants and mediates age-regulated
regeneration decline. Development 147, dev179457. doi:10.1242/dev.179457
Liao, C.-Y., Smet, W., Brunoud, G., Yoshida, S., Vernoux, T. and Weijers, D.
(2015). Reporters for sensitive and quantitative measurement of auxin response.
Nat. Methods 12, 207-210. doi:10.1038/nmeth.3279
Liu, J., Sheng, L., Xu, Y., Li, J., Yang, Z., Huang, H. and Xu, L. (2014). WOX11 and
12 are involved in the first-step cell fate transition during de novo root
organogenesis in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 26, 1081-1093. doi:10.1105/tpc.114.
122887
Liu, B., Zhang, J., Yang, Z., Matsui, A., Seki, M., Li, S., Yan, X., Kohnen, M. V.,
Gu, L., Prasad, K. et al. (2018). PtWOX11 acts as master regulator conducting
the expression of key transcription factors to induce de novo shoot organogenesis
in poplar. Plant Mol. Biol. 98, 389-406. doi:10.1007/s11103-018-0786-x
Luo, Y. and Koop, H.-U. (1997). Somatic embryogenesis in cultured immature
zygotic embryos and leaf protoplasts of Arabidopsis thaliana ecotypes. Planta
202, 387-396. doi:10.1007/s004250050141
Mä hö nen, A. P., Ten Tusscher, K., Siligato, R., Smetana, O., Dı́az-Triviño, S.,
Salojä rvi, J., Wachsman, G., Prasad, K., Heidstra, R. and Scheres, B. (2014).
PLETHORA gradient formation mechanism separates auxin responses. Nature
515, 125-129. doi:10.1038/nature13663
Malamy, J. E. and Benfey, P. N. (1997). Organization and cell differentiation in
lateral roots of Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 124, 33-44.
Mao, Y., Botella, J. R., Liu, Y. and Zhu, J.-K. (2019). Gene editing in plants:
progress and challenges. Natl. Sci. Rev. 6, 421-437. doi:10.1093/nsr/nwz005
Marhava, P., Hoermayer, L., Yoshida, S., Marhavý, P., Benková, E. and Friml, J.
(2019). Re-activation of stem cell pathways for pattern restoration in plant wound
healing. Cell 177, 957-969.e13. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.04.015
Marhavý, P., Kurenda, A., Siddique, S., Dénervaud Tendon, V., Zhou, F.,
Holbein, J., Hasan, M. S., Grundler, F. M., Farmer, E. E. and Geldner, N.
(2019). Single-cell damage elicits regional, nematode-restricting ethylene
responses in roots. EMBO J. 38, e100972. doi:10.15252/embj.2018100972
Matosevich, R., Cohen, I., Gil-Yarom, N., Modrego, A., Friedlander-Shani, L.,
Verna, C., Scarpella, E. and Efroni, I. (2020). Local auxin biosynthesis is
required for root regeneration after wounding. Nat. plants 6, 1020-1030. doi:10.
1038/s41477-020-0737-9
Matsuoka, K., Sugawara, E., Aoki, R., Takuma, K., Terao-Morita, M., Satoh, S.
and Asahina, M. (2016). Differential cellular control by cotyledon-derived
phytohormones involved in graft reunion of Arabidopsis hypocotyls. Plant Cell
Physiol. 57, 2620-2631. doi:10.1093/pcp/pcw177
Melnyk, C. W., Schuster, C., Leyser, O. and Meyerowitz, E. M. (2015). A
developmental framework for graft formation and vascular reconnection in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Curr. Biol. 25, 1306-1318. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2015.03.032
Melnyk, C. W., Gabel, A., Hardcastle, T. J., Robinson, S., Miyashima, S., Grosse,
I. and Meyerowitz, E. M. (2018). Transcriptome dynamics at Arabidopsis graft
junctions reveal an intertissue recognition mechanism that activates vascular
regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, E2447-E2456. doi:10.1073/pnas.
1718263115
Meng, W. J., Cheng, Z. J., Sang, Y. L., Zhang, M. M., Rong, X. F., Wang, Z. W.,
Tang, Y. Y. and Zhang, X. S. (2017). Type-B ARABIDOPSIS RESPONSE
REGULATORs specify the shoot stem cell niche by dual regulation of WUSCHEL.
Plant Cell 29, 1357-1372. doi:10.1105/tpc.16.00640
Mordhorst, A. P., Voerman, K. J., Hartog, M. V., Meijer, E. A., van Went, J.,
Koornneef, M. and de Vries, S. C. (1998). Somatic embryogenesis in
Arabidopsis thaliana is facilitated by mutations in genes repressing meristematic
cell divisions. Genetics 149, 549-563.
Motte, H., Vercauteren, A., Depuydt, S., Landschoot, S., Geelen, D., Werbrouck,
S., Goormachtig, S., Vuylsteke, M. and Vereecke, D. (2014). Combining linkage
and association mapping identifies RECEPTOR-LIKE PROTEIN KINASE1 as an
essential Arabidopsis shoot regeneration gene. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111,
8305-8310. doi:10.1073/pnas.1404978111
Mü ndermann, L., Erasmus, Y., Lane, B., Coen, E. and Prusinkiewicz, P. (2005).
Quantitative modeling of Arabidopsis development. Plant Physiol. 139, 960-968.
doi:10.1104/pp.105.060483
Nisar, N., Verma, S., Pogson, B. J. and Cazzonelli, C. I. (2012). Inflorescence
stem grafting made easy in Arabidopsis. Plant Methods 8, 50. doi:10.1186/1746-
4811-8-50
Notaguchi, M., Kurotani, K., Sato, Y., Tabata, R., Kawakatsu, Y., Okayasu, K.,
Sawai, Y., Okada, R., Asahina, M. and Ichihashi, Y. (2020). Cell-cell adhesion in
plant grafting is facilitated by β-1, 4-glucanases. Science 369, 698-702. doi:10.
1126/science.abc3710
O’Malley, R. C., Huang, S.-S. C., Song, L., Lewsey, M. G., Bartlett, A., Nery, J. R.,
Galli, M., Gallavotti, A. and Ecker, J. R. (2016). Cistrome and epicistrome
features shape the regulatory DNA landscape. Cell 165, 1280-1292. doi:10.1016/
j.cell.2016.04.038
Pillon, E., Terzi, M., Baldan, B., Mariani, P. and Lo Schiavo, F. (1996). A protocol
for obtaining embryogenic cell lines from Arabidopsis. Plant J. 9, 573-577. doi:10.
1046/j.1365-313X.1996.09040573.x
Prasad, K., Grigg, S. P., Barkoulas, M., Yadav, R. K., Sanchez-Perez, G. F.,
Pinon, V., Blilou, I., Hofhuis, H., Dhonukshe, P., Galinha, C. et al. (2011).
Arabidopsis PLETHORA transcription factors control phyllotaxis. Curr. Biol. 21,
1123-1128. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2011.05.009
Radhakrishnan, D., Kareem, A., Durgaprasad, K., Sreeraj, E., Sugimoto, K. and
Prasad, K. (2018). Shoot regeneration: a journey from acquisition of competence
to completion. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 41, 23-31. doi:10.1016/j.pbi.2017.08.001
Radhakrishnan,
D.,
Shanmukhan,
A.
P.,
Kareem,
A.,
Aiyaz,
M.,
Varapparambathu, V., Toms, A., Kerstens, M., Valsakumar, D., Landge,
A. N., Shaji, A. et al. (2020a). A coherent feed-forward loop drives vascular
regeneration in damaged aerial organs of plants growing in a normal
developmental context. Development 147, dev185710. doi:10.1242/dev.185710
Radhakrishnan,
D.,
Shanmukhan,
A.
P., Kareem,
A., Mathew, M. M.,
Varaparambathu, V., Aiyaz, M., Radha, R. K., Mekala, K. R., Shaji, A. and
14
PRIMER
Development (2021) 148, dev195347. doi:10.1242/dev.195347
DEVELOPMENT

Prasad, K. (2020b). Age, wound size and position of injury−dependent vascular
regeneration assay in growing leaves. bioRxiv.
Radoeva, T., Albrecht, C., Piepers, M., De Vries, S. C. and Weijers, D. (2020).
Suspensor-derived somatic embryogenesis in Arabidopsis. Development 147,
dev188912. doi:10.1242/dev.188912
Rosspopoff, O., Chelysheva, L., Saffar, J., Lecorgne, L., Gey, D., Caillieux, E.,
Colot, V., Roudier, F., Hilson, P., Berthomé, R. et al. (2017). Direct conversion
of root primordium into shoot meristem relies on timing of stem cell niche
development. Development 144, 1187-1200. doi:10.1242/dev.142570
Rymen, B., Kawamura, A., Lambolez, A., Inagaki, S., Takebayashi, A., Iwase, A.,
Sakamoto, Y., Sako, K., Favero, D. S. and Ikeuchi, M. (2019). Histone
acetylation orchestrates wound-induced transcriptional activation and cellular
reprogramming in Arabidopsis. Commun. Biol. 2, 404. doi:10.1038/s42003-019-
0646-5
Sachs, T. (1969). Polarity and the induction of organized vascular tissues. Ann. Bot.
33, 263-275. doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.aob.a084281
Sachs, T. (1981). The control of the patterned differentiation of vascular tissues.
Adv. Bot. Res. 9, 151-262. doi:10.1016/S0065-2296(08)60351-1
Sachs, T. (1991). Cell polarity and tissue patterning in plants. Development 113,
83-93.
Sampathkumar, A., Krupinski, P., Wightman, R., Milani, P., Berquand, A.,
Boudaoud, A., Hamant, O., Jö nsson, H. and Meyerowitz, E. M. (2014).
Subcellular and supracellular mechanical stress prescribes cytoskeleton behavior
in Arabidopsis cotyledon pavement cells. eLife 3, e01967. doi:10.7554/eLife.
01967
Schwab, R., Ossowski, S., Riester, M., Warthmann, N. and Weigel, D. (2006).
Highly specific gene silencing by artificial microRNAs in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell
18, 1121-1133. doi:10.1105/tpc.105.039834
Sena, G., Wang, X., Liu, H.-Y., Hofhuis, H. and Birnbaum, K. D. (2009). Organ
regeneration does not require a functional stem cell niche in plants. Nature 457,
1150-1153. doi:10.1038/nature07597
Shanmukhan, A. P., Mathew, M. M., Aiyaz, M., Kareem, A., Radhakrishnan, D.
and Prasad, K. (2020a). Regulation of touch dependent de novo root
regeneration in Arabidopsis. bioRxiv 2020.11.04.367714.
Shanmukhan, A. P., Mathew, M. M., Radhakrishnan, D., Aiyaz, M. and Prasad,
K. (2020b). Regrowing the damaged or lost body parts. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 53,
117-127. doi:10.1016/j.pbi.2019.12.007
Skoog, F. and Miller, C. (1957). Chemical regulation of growth and organ formation
in plant tissues cultured. In Vitro. Symp. Soc. Exp. Biol. 11, 118-130.
Smith, R. S., Guyomarc’h, S., Mandel, T., Reinhardt, D., Kuhlemeier, C. and
Prusinkiewicz, P. (2006). A plausible model of phyllotaxis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 103, 1301-1306. doi:10.1073/pnas.0510457103
Sugimoto, K., Jiao, Y. and Meyerowitz, E. M. (2010). Arabidopsis regeneration
from multiple tissues occurs via a root development pathway. Dev. Cell 18,
463-471. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2010.02.004
To, J. P. C. and Kieber, J. J. (2008). Cytokinin signaling: two-components and
more. Trends Plant Sci. 13, 85-92. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2007.11.005
Turnbull, C. G. N. (2010). Grafting as a research tool. In Plant Developmental
Biology (ed. L. Hennig and C. Kö hler), pp. 11-26. Springer.
van Berkel, K., de Boer, R. J., Scheres, B. and ten Tusscher, K. (2013). Polar
auxin transport: models and mechanisms. Development 140, 2253-2268. doi:10.
1242/dev.079111
van den Berg, C., Willemsen, V., Hage, W., Weisbeek, P. and Scheres, B. (1995).
Cell fate in the Arabidopsis root meristem determined by directional signalling.
Nature 378, 62-65. doi:10.1038/378062a0
van den Berg, C., Willemsen, V., Hendriks, G., Weisbeek, P. and Scheres, B.
(1997). Short-range control of cell differentiation in the Arabidopsis root meristem.
Nature 390, 287-289. doi:10.1038/36856
Wang, X., Ye, L., Lyu, M., Ursache, R., Lö ytynoja, A. and Mä hö nen, A. P.
(2020a). An inducible genome editing system for plants. Nat. Plants 6, 766-772.
doi:10.1038/s41477-020-0695-2
Wang, F.-X., Shang, G.-D., Wu, L.-Y., Xu, Z.-G., Zhao, X.-Y. and Wang, J.-W.
(2020b). Chromatin accessibility dynamics and a hierarchical transcriptional
regulatory network structure for plant somatic embryogenesis. Dev. Cell 54,
742-757.e8. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2020.07.003
Weigel, D. and Mott, R. (2009). The 1001 genomes project for Arabidopsis thaliana.
Genome Biol. 10, 107. doi:10.1186/gb-2009-10-5-107
Wu, Y., Haberland, G., Zhou, C. and Koop, H.-U. (1992). Somatic embryogenesis,
formation of morphogenetic callus and normal development in zygotic embryos of
Arabidopsis thaliana in vitro. Protoplasma 169, 89-96. doi:10.1007/BF01323608
Xu, J., Hofhuis, H., Heidstra, R., Sauer, M., Friml, J. and Scheres, B. (2006). A
molecular framework for plant regeneration. Science 311, 385-388. doi:10.1126/
science.1121790
Xu, C., Cao, H., Zhang, Q., Wang, H., Xin, W., Xu, E., Zhang, S., Yu, R., Yu, D. and
Hu, Y. (2018). Control of auxin-induced callus formation by bZIP59–LBD complex
in Arabidopsis regeneration. Nat. Plants 4, 108-115. doi:10.1038/s41477-017-
0095-4
Yoo, S. J., Hong, S. M., Jung, H. S. and Ahn, J. H. (2013). The cotyledons produce
sufficient FT protein to induce flowering: evidence from cotyledon micrografting in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell Physiol. 54, 119-128. doi:10.1093/pcp/pcs158
Zhang, Y., Zheng, L., Hong, J. H., Gong, X., Zhou, C., Pérez-Pérez, J. M. and
Xu, J. (2016). TOPOISOMERASE1α acts through two distinct mechanisms to
regulate stele and columella stem cell maintenance. Plant Physiol. 171, 483-493.
doi:10.1104/pp.15.01754
Zhang, T.-Q., Lian, H., Zhou, C.-M., Xu, L., Jiao, Y. and Wang, J.-W. (2017). A two-
step model for de novo activation of WUSCHEL during plant shoot regeneration.
Plant Cell 29, 1073-1087. doi:10.1105/tpc.16.00863
Zhang, G., Zhao, F., Chen, L., Pan, Y., Sun, L., Bao, N., Zhang, T., Cui, C.-X., Qiu,
Z., Zhang, Y. et al. (2019). Jasmonate-mediated wound signalling promotes plant
regeneration. Nat. Plants 5, 491-497. doi:10.1038/s41477-019-0408-x
Zhou, W., Lozano-Torres, J. L., Blilou, I., Zhang, X., Zhai, Q., Smant, G., Li, C. and
Scheres, B. (2019). A Jasmonate signaling network activates root stem cells and
promotes regeneration. Cell 177, 942-956.e14. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.03.006
15
PRIMER
Development (2021) 148, dev195347. doi:10.1242/dev.195347
DEVELOPMENT

===== Matson2021_bioRxiv_SCIsparedAtlas =====
1 
A Single Cell Atlas of Spared Tissue Below a Spinal Cord Injury Reveals Cellular Mechanisms of Repair 
1 
Kaya J.E. Matson1, Daniel E. Russ2, Claudia Kathe3,4, Dragan Maric5, Isabelle Hua1, Jonathan Krynitsky6, 
2 
Randall Pursley6, Anupama Sathyamurthy1,7, Jordan W. Squair3,4, Gregoire Courtine3,4, Ariel J. Levine1,*  
3 
 
4 
1Spinal Circuits and Plasticity Unit, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, 
5 
Bethesda, MD, USA  
6 
2 Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, Data Science Research Group, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Rockville, MD, 
7 
USA 
8 
3 Center for Neuroprosthetics and Brain Mind Institute, Faculty of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne 
9 
(EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland 
10 
4  NeuroRestore, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV) and University of Lausanne (UNIL), 
11 
Lausanne, Switzerland  
12 
5 National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, MD, USA 
13 
6 Signal Processing and Instrumentation Section, Center for Information Technology, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
14 
MD, USA 
15 
7 Present address: Centre for Neuroscience, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India 
16 
 
17 
*Corresponding Author: ariel.levine@nih.gov 
18 
 
19 
Abstract: 
20 
After spinal cord injury (SCI), the “spared” tissue below the lesion contains undamaged cells that could 
21 
support or augment recovery, but targeting these cells requires a clearer understanding of their injury 
22 
responses and capacity for repair. Here, we used single nucleus sequencing to profile how each cell type 
23 
in the lumbar spinal cord changes over time after a thoracic injury. We present an atlas of these dynamic 
24 
responses and explore two unexpected findings. Amongst neurons, rare cell types expressed a 
25 
molecular signature of regeneration and amongst microglia, we identified a population of “trauma 
26 
associated microglia” (TAM). These TAM cells were present in the white matter near degenerating axons 
27 
and expressed the trophic factors Igf1 and Spp1(OPN). Viral over-expression of Igf1 and Spp1(OPN) 
28 
expanded the TAM population and promoted the clearance of myelin debris. These findings expose 
29 
endogenous mechanisms of repair in spared neural tissue, uncovering potential candidates for targeted 
30 
therapy. 
31 
 
32 
Introduction: 
33 
 
34 
The brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nervous system are comprised of diverse cell types that operate 
35 
together as local communities to enable normal physiology. Following acute trauma, a complex 
36 
interplay of cellular responses shapes the outcome. Whether the tissue can restrict the damage, 
37 
promote structural remodeling and functional compensation, and ultimately achieve recovery depends 
38 
on myriad dynamic molecular changes amongst neurons, astrocytes, microglia, oligodendrocytes, 
39 
vascular cells, and many other cell types1,2.  
40 
 
41 
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a traumatic event that can cause long-lasting paralysis, pain, autonomic 
42 
dysregulation, and body-wide physiological changes3. Understanding and developing therapeutics that 
43 
target cellular changes within the lesion epicenter is undoubtedly valuable. In addition to the lesion of 
44 
the SCI, there is an emerging focus on the “spared tissue” below a SCI and its inherent potential for 
45 
supporting anatomical reorganization and recovery in people with SCI. For example, epidural electrical 
46 
stimulation of the lumbar spinal cord, combined with rehabilitation training, can promote impressive 
47 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
2 
gains in motor function and autonomic control and provide enhanced quality of life4-6. This therapy 
48 
underscores the importance of understanding the spared tissue below the site of injury to reveal the 
49 
intrinsic potential for spontaneous and rehabilitation-driven recovery. 
50 
 
51 
Here, we sought to uncover the dynamic cell type specific responses of spared lumbar spinal cord 
52 
following SCI with the goal of identifying the molecular and cellular mechanisms that promote or restrict 
53 
recovery. First, we performed severe contusion spinal cord injuries in mice and tracked the progression 
54 
of injury responses from acute to chronic timepoints. To profile the diverse cell types within the lumbar 
55 
spinal cord following thoracic injury, we used single nucleus RNA Sequencing (snRNA-Seq) and created 
56 
an “atlas” of the spared tissue after injury. The size and scope of this dataset allowed us to identify rare 
57 
cellular populations that displayed molecular pathways with the potential to support recovery. We 
58 
identified neuronal populations that induce a transcriptional signature of regeneration, providing a 
59 
template for expanding this potential in the future. Finally, we identified a population of “trauma 
60 
associated microglia” that were localized along white matter tracts of degenerating axons and that used 
61 
autocrine signaling via IGF1 and osteopontin (Spp1/OPN) to promote proliferation. This population could 
62 
be expanded with exogenous IGF1 and Spp1/OPN to degrade, phagocytose, and clear local myelin. 
63 
Together these findings shed light on the limited spontaneous mechanisms of repair in the spared tissue 
64 
below a SCI but also reveal latent potential for targeted neuro-regeneration and tissue remodeling 
65 
therapies. 
66 
 
67 
 
68 
Results: 
69 
 
70 
Creating a Single Cell Atlas of the Spared Lumbar Cord After Spinal Cord Injury 
71 
 
72 
We sought to understand how the spared tissue below a spinal cord contusion responds to the injury. A 
73 
severe contusion was delivered to the thoracic spinal cord of mice, resulting in a near complete loss of 
74 
neurons at the site of injury (Extended Data Fig 1) and immediate paralysis (Fig. 1a). Locomotor function 
75 
was tracked over a range of timepoints that, in mice, corresponded to the acute injury period (1 day 
76 
post injury (dpi)), the sub-acute and intermediate stages that are typically targeted with therapeutic 
77 
interventions (1 week and 3 weeks post-injury (wpi)), and a chronic time at which point recovery 
78 
typically plateaus (6 wpi; Fig. 1a). We then dissected the entire lumbar spinal cords of animals from each 
79 
condition in triplicate and performed single nucleus isolation and RNA sequencing (Fig. 1b)7. After 
80 
integration and the removal of low-quality nuclei and doublets, we obtained a total set of 67,903 nuclei. 
81 
 
82 
To create a single cell atlas of cell type specific responses to injury, we performed clustering of these 
83 
nuclei in multiple hierarchical phases (see Methods). At a coarse level of clustering, the 8 major cell 
84 
classes of the spinal cord are neurons, astrocytes, microglia/hematopoietic cells, oligodendrocyte 
85 
lineage cells, Schwann cells, endothelial cells, pericytes, ependymal cells, and leptomeninges (Fig. 1c, 
86 
Extended Data Fig. 2a). Each of these major classes were identified using well-established markers 
87 
(Extended Data Fig. 2b). Neurons expressed Snhg11, Rbfox1, Rbfox2, Snap25, and were characterized 
88 
either by the excitatory marker Slc17a6, the inhibitory markers Gad1 and Gad2, or the cholinergic 
89 
markers Slc5a7 and Chat. Astrocytes expressed Slc7a10, Agt, Gfap, and Vim. Microglia/hematopoietic 
90 
cells expressed C1qa, Ctss, Gpnmb, Lgals3, Itgax, Ms4a4b, Cd3g and Nkg7. Oligodendrocyte lineage cells 
91 
including oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) expressed Cspg5 and Tnr; committed oligodendrocyte 
92 
progenitor cells (COPs) expressed Fyn and Tcf7l2, whereas myelinating and mature oligodendrocytes 
93 
expressed Plp1, Mag and Mog. Schwann cells expressed Mpz and Pmp22. Vascular cells included 
94 
endothelial cells, which express Bsg and Cldn5 and pericytes, which express Vtn and Pdgfrb. Ependymal 
95 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
3 
cells express Nnat and Dnah12. Leptomeninges express Dcn and Col1a1 (Extended Data Fig. 2b, 
96 
Extended Data Table 1). At a more resolved level, we observed 39 distinct cell types (Fig. 1c, Extended 
97 
Data Fig. 2b). With this approach, we have identified the major classes and specific cell types of healthy 
98 
and injured mouse spinal cord.  
99 
 
100 
 
101 
 
102 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
4 
Figure 1: Single Nucleus RNA Sequencing of the Lumbar Spinal Cord after Thoracic Contusion 
103 
a. Top, an overview of experimental design for injury and tissue collection. Bottom, example chronophotography from 
104 
uninjured, 1 wpi and 6 wpi mice. b. Schematics depicting the experimental design for snRNAseq, showing the injured thoracic 
105 
cord and intact lumbar cord (with dark red representing the lesion) as well as nuclei isolation from the intact lumbar cord 
106 
followed by droplet-based barcoding for single nucleus RNA sequencing. c. Uniform manifold approximation and projection 
107 
(UMAP) visualization of 67,903 nuclei from uninjured and injured lumbar spinal cords, revealing 8 classes and 39 subtypes. d. A 
108 
bubble plot representing proportion of a sample from a given cell type (N = 3). e-g. Multiplex Immunohistochemistry of the 
109 
lumbar spinal cord from uninjured, 1 wpi and 3 wpi. Tissue was stained for NeuN (lime green), MAP2 (seafoam green), Sox9 
110 
(orange), GFAP (yellow), IBA1 (magenta), TMEM119 (peach), OLIG2 (cyan), MBP (blue), Lectin (red), and brightfield was imaged. 
111 
Scale bars are 200 µm and 50 µm, respectively. h. Quantification of the in silico and in tissue percentage of four cell classes. For 
112 
in silico quantification of neurons and astrocytes, the proportion of total neurons was calculated relative to the sample. For 
113 
microglia, the proportion of both activated microglia clusters and three homeostatic microglia clusters were used to calculate 
114 
the proportion. For oligodendrocytes, OPCs, COPs, NFOL and MFOL were used to calculate the proportion (of OLIG2-expressing 
115 
cells). In tissue percentages were calculated using the percent of DAPI+ neurons (NeuN), astrocytes (SOX9), microglia 
116 
(IBA1+TMEM119) or oligodendrocytes (OLIG2). Error bars indicate mean ± SEM (N = 3, in silico; N = 4, in tissue). 
117 
 
118 
Cell Type Compositional Changes in the Lumbar Cord After Injury 
119 
 
120 
We next aimed to characterize how the cellular composition of the lumbar spinal cord changed after 
121 
thoracic injury. To normalize for variable numbers of nuclei from each sample, the proportion of each 
122 
cell type was calculated. In the uninjured tissue, oligodendrocytes represented largest proportion of the 
123 
spinal cord, at 30.8% myelinating and 17.7% mature oligodendrocytes (average of three replicates, ± 0.8 
124 
and 0.8% SEM). Neurons were 27.0% of the uninjured spinal cord, astrocytes were 10.6% and 
125 
microglia/hematopoietic cells were 3.7% (± 4.6, 1.6, 1.3%; Fig. 1d, Extended Data Table 2).  
126 
 
127 
We found that the overall cellular composition stayed relatively stable after injury, with two notable 
128 
exceptions that occurred within the first week following thoracic contusion. The proportion of 
129 
microglia/hematopoietic cells tripled, while the proportion of astrocytes decreased to one third of 
130 
uninjured levels over the same time course (p val < 0.05, Fig. 1d, Extended Data Fig. 6). In addition, there 
131 
were relatively small changes in sub-types of the oligodendrocyte lineage, including a proportional 
132 
decrease in myelinating oligodendrocytes and an expansion of committed oligodendrocyte precursors 
133 
(Fig. 1d, Extended Data Fig. 4). 
134 
 
135 
To determine whether these observations accurately reflect endogenous changes in the spared lumbar 
136 
spinal cord, we performed immunohistochemical staining and in situ hybridization experiments in tissue 
137 
sections from healthy animals or following one or three weeks after thoracic contusion injury. First, a 
138 
highly multiplexed protein and cell stain assay was performed using multiple markers for each major cell 
139 
class.8 This method complements the highly dimensional single cell sequencing approach of cell type 
140 
identification with the richness of spatial information. We stained for neurons (NeuN, MAP2, 
141 
Neurofilament-L, Neurofilament-M and Neurofilament-H), astrocytes (GFAP and SOX9), 
142 
oligodendrocytes (CNPase, MBP, and OLIG2), neuroinflammatory cells (TMEM119, IBA1, CD68, CD11c), 
143 
and vasculature (isolectin B4, tomato lectin, smooth muscle actin). Quantitative analysis of the 
144 
multiplexed immunohistochemistry validated the stable proportions of neurons (20.8% uninjured ±0.6, 
145 
17.7% 1 wpi ±0.7, 18.5% 3 wpi ±0.7, ns) and oligodendrocytes (30.5% uninjured ±0.4, 27.7% 1 wpi ±0.3, 
146 
28.6% 3 wpi ±0.4, ns) as well as the significant increase in the number of microglia within the spared 
147 
lumbar spinal cord (4.7% ±0.3 at uninjured, 8.5% ±0.2 at 1 wpi, respectively; Fig. 1e-h). In addition, the 
148 
numbers of each cell type in tissue were found to be similar to the proportions observed in the 
149 
sequencing analysis, supporting the validity of these independent approaches. 
150 
 
151 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
5 
This in-tissue analysis did not confirm a major decrease in the proportion of astrocytes amongst spinal 
152 
cord cell types following SCI that was observed in the sequencing data. Rather, we observed no 
153 
significant change in SOX9-expressing astrocytes (Fig. 1h). To further characterize the proportion of 
154 
astrocytes using combinatorial RNA expression that would be more similar to the single nucleus 
155 
sequencing data, we performed multiplexed RNA in situ hybridization using Agt, Gja1, and Aqp4 
156 
markers. In this context, a modest decrease was observed from 11.7% in uninjured lumbar cords to 9.5% 
157 
1 wpi (±0.7%, 0.9%, respectively, Extended Data Fig. 3c). This suggests that the proportional change in 
158 
astrocytes that we observed in the single cell atlas did not reflect endogenous cell type changes but is 
159 
likely due to the overall proportional shifts of cell types in the injured spinal cord.  
160 
 
161 
Overall, we found that the cellular composition of the spared lumbar spinal cord does not change 
162 
considerably after SCI. Against this stable background, there was a pronounced increase in microglia, 
163 
though the lumbar cord that we profiled is millimeters away from the injury site. We also emphasize the 
164 
importance of in situ validation for cell proportion changes in single cell data, as it is challenging to 
165 
distinguish relative changes in cell type balance from authentic changes in endogenous cell proportions. 
166 
 
167 
 
168 
Cell Type Specific Changes in Gene Expression in the Lumbar Spinal Cord After Injury 
169 
 
170 
While the overall balance of cell types is relatively stable after injury, we hypothesized that gene 
171 
expression within cell types would change after injury, endowing new cell type properties and functions. 
172 
Our goal was to determine which cell types changed significantly following injury. However, it is 
173 
important to note that statistical differences in gene expression can largely be driven by the size of the 
174 
cluster, with larger clusters having the power to resolve more differentially expressed genes. We 
175 
therefore implemented Augur, a method to rank responsiveness of cell types in single cell data that is 
176 
not biased by cluster size9. We applied Augur to the 39 cell types, including 17 neuronal clusters, 4 
177 
astrocyte clusters, 7 microglial/hematopoietic clusters, 6 oligodendrocyte related clusters, Schwann 
178 
cells, endothelial cells, pericytes, ependymal cells, and leptomeninges. We found that the average cell 
179 
type prioritization score across all cell types decreased with time post-injury, suggesting a return to 
180 
homeostatic conditions (average 0.55 AUC, Fig. 2a). At 1dpi we found that microglia were the most 
181 
perturbation-responsive cell type (0.86 average AUC for Microglia 1, 2, and 3). These results suggest that 
182 
microglia play an important role in the immediate phase after injury, even in spared tissue distant from 
183 
the site of injury. 
184 
 
185 
To understand the cellular processes driving these changes, we examined differentially-expressed genes 
186 
within these cell types after injury and performed gene ontology (GO) and pathway analysis. At 1 dpi, 
187 
glial cells changed the most. Microglia/hematopoietic cells changed dramatically and were characterized 
188 
by a burst of expression of genes related to cell metabolism, which may support the significant 
189 
expansion in microglial cell numbers that we observed above. Both microglia/hematopoietic cells and 
190 
astrocytes displayed signs of activation despite their considerable distance from the lesion site in the 
191 
thoracic cord. Reactive astrocytes emerged 1 dpi, expressing pan-reactive genes such as Lcn2 and 
192 
Serpina3n, as well as markers for pro-inflammatory and neuroprotective astrocytes10 such as Gbp2 and 
193 
Slc10a6 (Extended Data Fig. 3). Other glial cell types such as endothelial cells and meninges altering 
194 
molecules related to structure, cell-cell connections, and extra-cellular matrix (ECM) adhesion. In 
195 
addition, nearly all cell types showed increased expression of Mt1 (metallothionein-1) and Fth1 (Ferritin 
196 
Heavy Chain 1) genes which are both involved in binding heavy metals including iron. This suggests that 
197 
extravascular blood may be an early environmental cue to reach the spared tissue of the lumbar cord 
198 
(Fig. 2b). Overall, the largest changes in gene expression occurred 1 dpi.  
199 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
6 
 
200 
One week post injury, neuronal populations began to change by altering the expression of genes related 
201 
to cell stress including oxidation-reduction processes and the protein folding stress response, as well as 
202 
molecules related to neurotransmission and ion channel activity. Intriguingly, specific populations of 
203 
excitatory neurons in the dorsal horn and inhibitory neurons within the ventral horn displayed changes 
204 
in genes related to synaptic organization and plasticity. This suggests the potential for tailored circuit 
205 
remodeling. At the same time, oligodendrocytes altered their cellular metabolism molecules and genes 
206 
related to cell-cell adhesion. Three weeks after injury, multiple neuronal populations continued to show 
207 
signatures of cell stress and changes in cell-cell contacts, while oligodendrocytes continued to show 
208 
changes related to cell metabolism and cell-cell adhesion. Finally, by 6 wpi, many cell types showed 
209 
modest or no changes in gene expression compared to the uninjured state, mirroring the Augur findings 
210 
above which showed an overall return to baseline expression patterns by this point (Fig. 2b).  
211 
 
212 
Together with the cellular composition analysis above, these data comprise a natural history time course 
213 
of how the lumbar spinal cord responds to injury. Within each time window or epoch, the community of 
214 
cell types responds with diverse molecular signatures and within each cell type, a specific molecular 
215 
trajectory can be observed across time. 
216 
 
217 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
7 
  
218 
Figure 2: Cell Type Specific Changes in Gene Expression after Injury 
219 
a. Cell types ranked based on responsiveness by Augur. AUC score represented from dark blue to yellow. Clusters with 
220 
insufficient number of cells in the uninjured timepoint are plotted in grey. b. Pathway analysis for differentially expressed genes 
221 
between uninjured and injured timepoints. X-axis indicates -log(p value) of GO and KEGG pathway clusters. Red dotted line 
222 
indicates -log(p-value) 1.3 (p value 0.05).  
223 
 
224 
 
225 
 
226 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
8 
Rare Populations of Spinal Neurons Induce a Gene Expression Signature of Regeneration 
227 
 
228 
Neurons in the spared lumbar spinal cord spinal are thought to mediate partial recovery in multiple 
229 
therapeutic contexts, though the molecular mechanisms that mediate this function are mostly 
230 
unknown. We observed broad but modest changes in the expression of genes related to neural 
231 
excitability, plasticity, and circuit structure that could support tissue-wide changes in function (Fig. 2b). 
232 
But we also sought to explore whether, upon this background, there were also specialized adaptations 
233 
to injury within highly refined populations of spinal neurons. Such changes would be challenging to 
234 
observe without the resolution of single nucleus sequencing and thus the dataset that we generated 
235 
held special opportunities for discovery. 
236 
 
237 
We determined the refined identities of neuronal populations in the dataset by comparison with the 
238 
neuronal populations described in a recent meta-analysis of mouse spinal cord cell types11. Label 
239 
transfer was used to annotate neuron identities in an automated manner at the resolution level of 
240 
“families”12. While we observed nearly all of the cell types that we expected, one group of neurons 
241 
remained challenging to categorize (Fig. 3a, Extended Data Fig. 5a). Moreover, independent clustering of 
242 
the neurons in this dataset suggested that this population represented a cluster with an unexpected 
243 
expression profile that included genes associated with axon regeneration (Extended Data Fig. 5b-c). 
244 
 
245 
“Regeneration associated genes” (RAGs) are induced in the peripheral nervous system after nerve 
246 
injury, enabling regeneration of axons13, but most adult central nervous system neurons do not express 
247 
these genes and lack the cell-intrinsic ability to substantially regenerate axons14. In this RAG-expressing 
248 
cluster, we observed Atf3, Sprr1a, Tnfrsf12a (Fn14), Sox11, Bdnf, Adcyap1, and enriched expression of 
249 
Gap43 (Fig. 3c-d). Inspection of the other genes in this cluster suggested a mixed cell type origin. Cells 
250 
with the highest RAG expression largely downregulated their endogenous gene expression, as has been 
251 
previously reported in peripheral nerves that express RAGs, confounding molecular definition of their 
252 
cell type15,16. We noted that this cluster expressed a diverse set of genes associated with ascending 
253 
projection neurons from the lumbar spinal cord to the brain, including Lypd1, Tacr1, Zfhx3, Pou6f2, 
254 
Tac1, Syt4, Fam19a2, Scn9a, Nms, and Pde8b (Fig. 3e)17-21. In particular, the expression of Slc17a6 
255 
(vGlut2), Zfhx3, and Pou6f2 suggested that some of these cells were likely excitatory neurons that 
256 
resided in the lateral part of deep dorsal or ventral horn21-23. Together, these data suggest that a 
257 
heterogeneous but rare set of ascending spinal cord neurons induce a RAG signature after contusion 
258 
injury.  
259 
 
260 
To determine whether spinal cord neurons induced the RAG signature in vivo, we analyzed the 
261 
expression of Sprr1a and Atf3 in the lumbar spinal cord and found rare RAG-expressing neurons starting 
262 
at 1 wpi (Fig. 3f-h) through 6 wpi (Extended Data Fig. 5). A spatial analysis revealed a rostral-caudal 
263 
gradient in the number of RAG-expressing cells, with more Sprr1a-positive cells at rostral lumbar 
264 
segments closer to the lesion (Fig. 3i-j). The cellular distribution within the transverse plane also shifted 
265 
such that RAG-expressing cells were found in the dorsal, mid, and ventral horns at L2 but were restricted 
266 
to the ventral horn in L5. Based on the characteristic locations of these neurons, we hypothesized that 
267 
they reflect post-synaptic dorsal column neurons and deep dorsal horn anterolateral tract neurons at 
268 
L2/L3 and spinocerebellar neurons at L2 through L5. To test whether the ventral RAG-expressing 
269 
neurons are excitatory, putative spinocerebellar neurons, we used a recently identified marker, Shox2, 
270 
as well as the excitatory marker Slc17a624-26. Indeed, we found RAG-expressing ventral neurons are 
271 
nearly all excitatory and many express the Shox2 marker as well (Fig. 3k-m). In addition to serving as a 
272 
marker of spinocerebellar neurons, Shox2 is also found in excitatory, rhythm-generating central pattern 
273 
generator neurons of the ventral horn where they partially overlap with Vsx2 (Chx10). Triple labelling for 
274 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
9 
RAG markers, Shox2, and Vsx2 demonstrated that only Shox2 expressing neurons induce the RAG 
275 
signature, revealing a high degree of specificity of this rare and unexpected pro-regenerative response 
276 
(Fig. 3l-m). 
277 
 
278 
Together, these data revealed that specific populations of spinal cord neurons induce a regeneration 
279 
associated gene expression signature and that these are likely subsets of ascending projection neurons. 
280 
It is possible that the ventral populations of neurons that induced RAG expression who’s axons run past 
281 
the lesion site in the ventral white matter were injured but not axotomized by the contusion injury 
282 
(which is delivered to the dorsal surface of the cord), while dorsal neurons that are more directly 
283 
damaged do not induce a regenerative signature in this injury context. To determine whether complete 
284 
axotomy elicits a distinct response, we performed complete transection injuries of the thoracic spinal 
285 
cord and analyzed RAG expression in the lumbar spinal cord. One- and three-weeks following injury, we 
286 
found a similar spatial pattern of RAG expression as was observed in contused spinal cords (Extended 
287 
Data Fig. 5). Although most central nervous system neurons do not typically have an intrinsic capacity to 
288 
regenerate, this raises the intriguing possibility that particular populations of spinal neurons may 
289 
possess regenerative potential14.  
290 
 
291 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
10 
 
292 
 
293 
Figure 3: Specific Neurons Express Genes Associated with Regeneration 
294 
a. UMAP showing predicted neuronal families. b. Targeted view of RAG-expressing cluster over injury time points. c. 
295 
Featureplots and violin plots showing RAGs expressed in neurons. d. A dotplot showing expression of RAGs within targeted 
296 
RAG-expressing cluster (cluster 23 defined by independent clustering in Extended Data Fig. 5), split by timepoint. e. A dotplot 
297 
showing marker genes for the cluster expressing RAGs f-g. RNAscope in situ expression of Sprr1a and Atf3 in the uninjured cord 
298 
and 1 wpi. h. Quantification of Sprr1a+ cells and Atf3+ cells in the uninjured and 1 wpi injury cord (N = 7, 10). i. Rostral-caudal 
299 
quantification of Sprr1a+ cells in the spinal cord (N = 4, 6). j. A heatmap representation of Sprr1a+ cells (N = 3, 6, 3 animals). k-
300 
m. Visualization and quantification of VGluT2/Slc17a6+, Chx10/Vsx2+, and Shox2+ Sprr1a-expressing cells in the ventral spinal 
301 
cord. Error bars indicate ± SEM (N = 5, 4, 4 animals). 
302 
 
303 
 
304 
A Population of “Trauma Associated Microglia” 
305 
 
306 
The compositional and gene expression data presented here revealed that microglia are the most 
307 
perturbation-responsive cell type in the spared lumbar tissue after SCI (Fig. 1-2). To explore microglia 
308 
and related hematopoietic cell types in greater depth, we independently clustered this class of cells and 
309 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
11 
observed three homeostatic microglia populations, two activated microglia populations, a cluster of 
310 
macrophages and a cluster of natural killer and T cells (Fig. 4a). Homeostatic microglial clusters were 
311 
defined by Cst3, C1qa, Ctss, Hexb, Trem2, P2ry12 and Tmem119. The activated microglia populations 
312 
expressed lower levels of P2ry12 and Tmem119 and induced expression of the phagocytic markers Cd68 
313 
and Lyz2. In addition, “activated microglia A” expressed Gpnmb, Apoe, Lgals3, Igf1, and Spp1, while 
314 
“activated microglia B” expressed genes associated with pro-inflammatory microglia, such as Ccl2, Ccl3, 
315 
Ccl4 and Lpl. Macrophages expressed the genes Mrc1, Cd74, and H2-Ab1 and did not express the 
316 
microglia-specific genes Tmem119 or P2ry12. Natural killer and T cells clustered together and expressed 
317 
the genes Ms4a4b, Cd52, Ptprc, Nkg7, and Cd3g. All microglia/hematopoietic cell types increased in 
318 
proportion relative to other cell types at 1 wpi (Extended Data Fig. 5). Both of the activated microglia 
319 
sub-types were still present at six weeks post injury, suggesting that they may play an ongoing role in 
320 
spared tissue (Extended Data Fig. 5). 
321 
 
322 
Notably, the gene expression profile of “activated microglia A” strongly resembled a signature observed 
323 
recently in postnatal myelin-phagocytosing microglia, in postnatal microglia that can promote SCI repair, 
324 
and in degenerative disease associated microglia in conditions such as Alzheimer’s disease in the brain 
325 
and ALS in the spinal cord27-30. In addition, recent work examining the lesion site of SCI has identified an 
326 
“injury associated microglia” cell type with a similar expression profile31,32. Pathway analysis of the genes 
327 
that characterized “activated microglia A” revealed an enrichment of genes associated with (1) 
328 
phagocytosis (such as Lyz2, Gpnmb, Itgax, and Cd68; GO terms: lysosome, antigen presentation, 
329 
phagosome), (2) lipid metabolism (such as Fabp5, Lgals3, Apoe, Soat1, and Abca1; GO term: 
330 
lipoprotein), and (3) secreted proteins (such as Spp1 (OPN) and Igf1; GO term “extracellular secretion”, 
331 
Fig. 4c). We hypothesized that this population, which we term “Trauma Associated Microglia” (TAM) 
332 
could phagocytose debris in the spared tissue and promote recovery through release of trophic factors. 
333 
 
334 
To determine whether the gene expression pattern that we observed corresponded to an in vivo cell 
335 
type, we performed in situ hybridization in tissue sections of spared lumbar cords, using C1qa (a general 
336 
microglial marker), Spp1 (OPN) (which marked activated microglia as well as some ventral horn neurons, 
337 
and Gpnmb (which marked TAM cells). We found that TAM were observed within the white matter of 
338 
the injured spinal cord. They appeared consistently along the putative rubrospinal tract (RST) and the 
339 
dorsolateral corticospinal tract (CST) in the lateral white matter at 1, 3 and 6 wpi (Fig. 4e-h). 
340 
Interestingly, this region showed loss of longitudinal axons from the descending tracts but also showed 
341 
the presence of residual myelin (Fig. 4i-l). Myelin debris that remains after longitudinal axons die or 
342 
retract is thought to be a major obstacle to neuro-regeneration and recovery after SCI33. 
343 
 
344 
TAM were also found transiently near the putative main CST at 1 wpi and in the ventral white matter 
345 
near the descending reticulospinal, vestibulospinal, and cerebellospinal tracts at 6 wpi (Fig. 4f-h). In the 
346 
cervical spinal cord, rostral to the injury site, TAM were found in a complementary pattern along 
347 
putative ascending tracts (Extended Data Fig. 6). Thus, TAM represented a trauma induced microglial 
348 
population that was associated with white matter tracts of degenerating axons and that expressed a 
349 
gene signature of phagocytosis, myelin clearance and lipid processing, and trophic factors.  
350 
 
351 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
12 
 
352 
Figure 4: Microglia Expansion and after Injury and the Emergence of a “Trauma Associated Microglia” 
353 
a. UMAP of the 7 microglia subtypes. b. Featureplot of two marker genes of the “activated microglia A” population, Spp1 (cyan) 
354 
and Gpnmb (magenta), split by the timepoint (Uninjured, 1 dpi, 1 wpi, 3 wpi, and 6 wpi). c. GO analysis for “activated microglia 
355 
A” marker genes. Red dotted line indicates -log(p-value) 1.3 (p value 0.05). d. Dotplot comparing top 5 marker genes from 
356 
previous studies of postnatal and disease-associated microglia. (Clec7a, not detected in our dataset, was excluded.) e-g. 
357 
RNAscope in situ hybridization showing expression of Spp1 (cyan) and Gpnmb (magenta) and C1qa (yellow) in uninjured, 1 wpi, 
358 
and 6 wpi lumbar spinal cord. Scale bars are 200 µm in top row and 50 µm in middle and bottom rows. h. Number of Gpnmb+ 
359 
microglia (quantified by C1qa, Gpnmb double-positive cells) in each of the following regions in the spinal cord: dorsal funiculus, 
360 
dorsal-lateral funiculus, ventral funiculus and grey matter. Error bars indicate mean ± SEM (N = 4 animals). i-k. 
361 
Immunohistochemistry staining for MBP, IBA1 and Neurofilament light, medium and heavy (LMH). Scale bars are 200 µm in top 
362 
row and 50 µm in bottom row. l. Quantification of fluorescence intensity of neurofilament-LMH and MBP in the region boxed i-
363 
k, in the dorsal-lateral white matter. * = p-val < 0.001. Error bars indicate mean ± SEM (N = 4 animals). 
364 
 
365 
 
366 
Igf1 and Spp1 (OPN) Trophic Factors Drive Expansion of TAM Cells 
367 
 
368 
While the phagocytic and lipid processing gene expression modules can be clearly related to a function 
369 
of TAM, the role and target of the trophic factors Igf1 and Spp1 (OPN) in the injured spinal cord is not 
370 
known. Of note, Igf1 and Spp1 (OPN) often function together, with Spp1 (OPN) sensitizing target cells to 
371 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
13 
Igf1 signaling34. These two secreted proteins are known to be neuroprotective during development35 
372 
and their co-expression can enable axon regrowth after injury34,36. In addition, Igf1 can prevent 
373 
oligodendrocyte cell death in transected nerves37 and during demyelination38,39. Following SCI, we found 
374 
that TAM were the only cells that co-expressed Igf1 and Spp1 (OPN) while many cells, including neurons 
375 
and oligodendrocytes, expressed the Igf1r receptor which would render them responsive to these 
376 
trophic TAM factors (Fig. 5a). 
377 
 
378 
To identify the cellular target of Igf1 and Spp1 (OPN) signaling, we analyzed the distribution of the 
379 
phosphorylated (activated) form of the Igf1 receptor three weeks after thoracic injury, at which point 
380 
the numbers of TAM cells have increased and plateaued in the lumbar cord. Surprisingly, the only cells 
381 
which induced high levels of active Igf1r signaling in response to injury were small clusters of microglia 
382 
that were present in the same white matter spatial distribution as TAM cells, suggesting an autocrine 
383 
signaling loop (Fig. 5b-c). The small clusters of microglia could represent local proliferation and/or 
384 
mature cell migration. We analyzed the distribution of the proliferative marker Ki67 together with the 
385 
microglial marker Iba1 and the TAM protein marker CD11c (Itgax). We found that small clusters of 
386 
microglia in the white matter of the injured spinal cord were indeed proliferating and that some of these 
387 
cells co-expressed CD11c (Fig. 5d-e). Together, these findings support a model in which TAM cells 
388 
secrete Igf1 and Spp1 (OPN) as autocrine trophic factors to self-amplify following SCI. 
389 
 
390 
To test this hypothesis, we used AAVs to deliver an exogenous source of Igf1 and Spp1 (OPN) into the 
391 
lumbar spinal cord of uninjured mice or following thoracic transection injury and we analyzed the effect 
392 
on local TAM cells. Three weeks after AAV-injection into the L2 and L5 segments of the lumbar spinal 
393 
cord, AAV-Igf1/Spp1 (OPN) induced a significant expansion of microglia in both the thoracically-injured 
394 
and uninjured spinal cords (Fig. 5f-j). These cells formed large nodules of compact cells with ameboid 
395 
morphology with many examples of active phagocytosis. These microglia expressed Igf1 and Spp1 
396 
(OPN), as well as the TAM marker Gpnmb. Thus, over-expression of Igf1 and Spp1 (OPN), which were 
397 
normally expressed together endogenously in TAM cells, can dramatically expand TAM phagocytic 
398 
microglia. 
399 
 
400 
Finally, we considered that the ability to increase the TAM population using AAV-Igf1/Spp1 (OPN) may 
401 
be used to amplify the clearance of residual myelin along degenerating axon tracts. We analyzed the 
402 
distribution of myelin and of degraded myelin in the context of AAV-Igf1/Spp1 (OPN) expansion of TAM 
403 
cells and found that, indeed, the region of TAM expansion showed a depletion of myelin (Fig. 5l-n). 
404 
Moreover, a cryptic epitope of myelin that is only exposed upon myelin degradation was significantly 
405 
enhanced in response to AAV-Igf1/Spp1 (OPN) (Fig. 5k). Thus, the exogenous manipulation of TAM 
406 
signaling and population expansion is sufficient to clear myelin debris in spinal cord white matter.  
407 
 
408 
These data demonstrate that SCI induced a small population of TAM in the white matter of the spinal 
409 
cord, cells with the molecular signature that should enable them to phagocytose and clear myelin. While 
410 
these TAM cells signal to each other through Igf1 and Spp1 (OPN) and proliferate, their natural response 
411 
is insufficient for removal of myelin debris. However, the exogenous delivery of Igf1 and Spp1 (OPN) 
412 
greatly amplifies this population to facilitate myelin clearance and may provide a pathway for the re-
413 
growth of axons that connect the brain with the spinal cord. 
414 
 
415 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
14 
 
416 
Figure 5: Expression of Trophic Factors Specific to Trauma Associated Microglia Promote Phagocytosis of Myelin 
417 
a. RNAscope of Igf1 and Gpnmb 3 wpi. b-c. Immunohistochemistry of IBA1 and phosphor-IGF1R in the uninjured (b) and 3 wpi 
418 
(c) cords. Asterisks represent phospho-IGF1R staining around the central canal. Arrows represent phosphor-IGF1R staining near 
419 
the dorsal-lateral funiculus. d. Immunohistochemistry of IBA1, Ki67 and CD11c in the uninjured and 3 wpi lumbar cord. e. 
420 
Quantification of Ki67+ IBA1+ cells in the uninjured, 1 wpi and 3 wpi cord. f-g. Schematic and immunohistochemistry of IBA1 for 
421 
AAV-cherry (f) and AAV-IGF1/SPP1 (g) injected cords. Scale bars are 200 µm. h. RNAscope in situ hybridization of Igf1 (red), 
422 
Spp1 (green), and Gpnmb (cyan) at the site of AAV-IGF1/SPP1(OPN) injection. Scale bar is 200 µm. i. Quantification of IBA1+ 
423 
nodule area. Median and individual replicates are shown due to the presence of outliers. j. Quantification of the number of 
424 
Gpnmb+ nuclei. Median and individual replicates are shown due to the presence of outliers. k. Immunohistochemistry of 
425 
degraded MBP and IBA1. l. Immunohistochemistry of IBA1 and fluoromyelin. Scale bars are 200 µm. m. Quantification of 
426 
fluoromyelin mean fluorescence intensity after AAV-injection. n. Immunohistochemistry of IBA1 and fluoromyelin red, showing 
427 
fluoromyelin localized within IBA1+ cells at the AAV-IGF1/SPP1(OPN)-injection site 3 wpi. Imaged in multiple confocal sections 
428 
with xy, xz and yz dimensions shown. 
429 
 
430 
 
431 
Discussion: 
432 
 
433 
SCI disrupts neuronal connections, eliciting trauma on a wide array of cells within the tissue. While the 
434 
capacity for axonal regeneration and recovery after SCI is limited, 40,41 there are latent mechanisms for 
435 
spontaneous recovery within the spinal cord, particularly when the injury does not sever all connections 
436 
between the brain and the spinal cord and reorganization of circuits below the lesion can restore 
437 
function42-45. We sought to uncover the endogenous mechanisms by which the adult nervous system 
438 
attempts to recover from an acute SCI, with the hope that this knowledge could inform new therapeutic 
439 
strategies in the future. In particular, we examined the “spared” lumbar spinal cord after thoracic injury 
440 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
15 
because this tissue has the potential to support recovery in multiple contexts4-6. This study includes a 
441 
single cell atlas that serves as a resource to understand changes in cellular composition, changes in 
442 
cellular pathways, and specific changes in sub-populations of cells after SCI. From this detailed 
443 
characterization of cell types, we highlight two unexpected findings that suggested intrinsic attempts at 
444 
recovery. The first is a rare population of neurons that express a transcriptional signature associated 
445 
with regeneration, typically seen in regenerating peripheral nerves. Secondly, we identified a population 
446 
of trauma associated microglia (TAM) distributed along the white matter of degenerating axons and 
447 
strongly resembled “disease associated microglia” found in Alzheimer’s disease28,46,47 and ALS. We found 
448 
that TAM use autocrine Igf1/Spp1(OPN) signaling after injury and that exogenous delivery of these 
449 
factors expanded TAM in vivo and promoted local degradation of myelin debris. In summary, we created 
450 
a reference atlas of cell-type specific changes after traumatic injury and then used this resource to 
451 
reveal the small but promising indications of recovery that are present in adult nervous tissue.  
452 
 
453 
This work examined all cell types within the spared tissue below a SCI and complements recent work 
454 
that has probed specific cellular responses to injury in other locations of the nervous system. This 
455 
includes the examination of changes in corticospinal neurons in response to SCI48,49 as well as astrocytes 
456 
or myeloid cells at the primary lesion site31,32,50,51. Additionally, work profiling the peripheral nervous 
457 
system has also given important insight into how the nervous system can successfully recovery from 
458 
injury15,16. In comparison with these studies, we also provide a more comprehensive cellular atlas and 
459 
time course analysis, tracking all cell type changes from 1 dpi through 6 wpi. This broad atlas allowed us 
460 
to observe both the acute responses to injury and the chronic resolution of many of these changes. At 
461 
an acute timepoint (1 dpi) we found the greatest change in gene expression across cell types, with many 
462 
cell types, genes associated with metal binding (Mt1, Fth1) were upregulated 1 dpi, suggesting an 
463 
endogenous protection against the damaging effects of free radicals. In addition, we found pathways 
464 
associated with structural remodeling across many cell types (Fig. 2b), highlighting subtle cellular 
465 
adjustments and responses of distal tissues that may be otherwise classified as “normal.”   
466 
 
467 
We next examined a population of neurons that express RAGs after injury, a potential intrinsic attempt 
468 
at recovery. While CNS neurons have been shown to regenerate after injury48,49, RAGs are not typically 
469 
found in these populations but are rather characteristic of peripheral neuron responses to injury.15,16,52 
470 
Unexpectedly, we observed that restricted populations of spinal cord neurons express the regenerative 
471 
signature after contusion or transection injury. The neurons that expressed RAGs were largely excitatory 
472 
and consisted of several spatially and molecularly distinct populations. Notably, the RAGs are not 
473 
expressed in all directly injured neurons, as this would encompass lamina I projection neurons but we 
474 
did not observe RAG expression in this region. While the expression of this signature is highly suggestive 
475 
of regenerative potential, future work should is required to address the innate possibility for 
476 
regeneration, utilizing the endogenous expression of RAGs after SCI13. 
477 
 
478 
Microglia and hematopoietic cells were the most responsive cell type after injury, beginning in the acute 
479 
injury setting and persisting in an activated state through chronic timepoints. Of the microglia that 
480 
respond after SCI, the TAM cells were notable in that they expressed genes similar to proliferative axon 
481 
tract-associated microglia in postnatal mice30,53, disease-associated microglia28,54, as well as microglia 
482 
from the human spinal cord55. Furthermore, studies profiling cell types at the lesion site after SCI to have 
483 
identified similar microglia31,32. Based on the widespread presence of a TAM-related cells across injury 
484 
and disease states, we characterized these cells further. 
485 
 
486 
TAM-related cells co-express two trophic factors, Igf1 and Spp1 (OPN) that have known roles in 
487 
neuroprotection and myelination46. Although these factors are required during neuronal development35 
488 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
16 
and enable regeneration of axons after injury34,36,56,57, the cellular targets and mechanism by which these 
489 
actions occur is unknown. Here we provide evidence for how Igf1 and Spp1 (OPN) exert their effect on 
490 
neurons and oligodendrocytes indirectly through their autocrine signaling and expansion of this 
491 
activated microglial population. Importantly, we found that manipulating this signaling pathway with 
492 
viral tools allowed TAM to clear the myelin debris that is thought to impede axon regeneration in the 
493 
central nervous system. This observation is similar to the ability of early postnatal Spp1-expressing 
494 
microglia to remove debris following SCI. Interestingly, these postnatal microglia are activated only 
495 
briefly, then return to a homeostatic state within a few days following injury which may be a critical 
496 
feature of their ability to promote wound healing. Relatedly, activated microglia promote OPC 
497 
differentiation58, but it is their subsequent down-regulation or ablation that is important for the 
498 
successful myelination of regenerated axons59. In the future, a temporally regulated delivery of Igf1 and 
499 
Spp1 (OPN) may provide the most effective therapeutic approach to use these factors to remove myelin 
500 
debris, promote axon regrowth, and remyelination. 
501 
 
502 
 There are several limitations to consider in this work. In this study, nuclei were analyzed instead of 
503 
whole cells because it has been shown that profiling nuclei avoids experimentally-induced gene 
504 
expression and selective cell death common in single cell profiling60-62, though the sequencing depth is 
505 
lower than for cells63. More broadly, while single nucleus sequencing is increasingly transforming our 
506 
understanding on the biology of disease and trauma, it is important to note that it provides a particular 
507 
perspective on these complex processes. This approach emphasizes changes observed at the gene 
508 
expression level and does not address post-transcriptional cellular mechanisms. In addition, it is critical 
509 
to use independent methods to evaluate the findings from single cell sequencing, as the discrepancy in 
510 
astrocyte changes between in silico and in-tissue data revealed. Despite these limitations, this work 
511 
provides a powerful reference atlas of cell-type specific changes after traumatic injury and allowed us to 
512 
discover rare cellular mechanisms directed at tissue repair. 
513 
 
514 
Here, we sought to uncover the endogenous mechanisms by which the adult nervous system attempts 
515 
to recover from an acute SCI. The single cell atlas, discovery of RAG-expressing neurons, and TAM cells 
516 
each provide important insight into the natural mechanisms of recovery after SCI. Furthermore, the 
517 
similarity of TAM to recently described populations observed in other injury contexts, Alzheimer’s 
518 
disease, and ALS suggest shared pathways by which the adult central nervous system responds to 
519 
trauma. It is hoped that understanding of these intrinsic mechanisms will provide new therapeutic 
520 
targets to control or even reverse pathological changes across a wide variety of injury and disease. 
521 
 
522 
 
523 
Methods: 
524 
 
525 
Mice 
526 
All procedures and experiments were approved by the Veterinary Office of the Canton of Geneva 
527 
(Switzerland) and the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke Animal Care and Use 
528 
Committee. Mice for RNA sequencing were female C57BL/6 (12-30 weeks of age). For all other 
529 
experiments, balanced samples of male and female C57BL/6 mice (12-30 weeks of age) were used. 
530 
 
531 
Surgical Procedures 
532 
Surgical procedures were performed as previously described64. Briefly, following a mid-thoracic 
533 
laminectomy (T9 vertebra), a spinal cord impactor (IH-0400 Impactor, Precision Systems and 
534 
Instrumentation LLC) was used to induce a contusion injury. The applied force was set to 90 kdyn. Spinal 
535 
transections were performed following a mid-thoracic laminectomy (T9 vertebra), by cutting of the 
536 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
17 
spinal cord with spring scissors, before filling the void with gel-foam. Animal care, including manual 
537 
bladder voiding, was performed twice daily or as needed following injury.  
538 
 
539 
Viruses 
540 
AAV2/1-hSyn mCherry virus was produced at Vigene Biosciences. AAV2/1-IGF134, AAV2/1-OPN57 and 
541 
AAV2/1-PLAP65 viruses were a gift from Zhigang He and produced at Boston Children’s Hospital. Viral 
542 
particles were injected at a titer of 5E12-1E13 genome copies per ml. 
543 
 
544 
Intraspinal Injections 
545 
Intraspinal injections were performed as previously described66. Briefly, mice were anesthetized by 
546 
intraperitoneal injection of a drug cocktail containing fentanyl (0.2 mg.kg), dexmedetomidin (1 mg/kg), 
547 
and midazolam (5 mg/kg) dissolved in saline. For spinal injections, a small incision was made in the skin 
548 
and the underlying musculature and adipose tissue was teased apart to reveal the vertebral column. 
549 
Tissue joining the dorsal processes of consecutive vertebrae was removed and the vertebral surfaces 
550 
were cleaned with fine forceps and gently separated to reveal the dorsal surface of the spinal cord (at 
551 
spinal levels L2 and L5). The dura was punctured by pinching with sharp forceps to facilitate smooth 
552 
entry of the needle. Virus was pressure injected through a pulled glass needle at a depth of 250 μm from 
553 
the dorsal surface and 250 nL of viral particles was released at a rate of 100 nl/min.  
554 
 
555 
Following injections, the overlying muscle was sutured, and the skin incision was closed using wound 
556 
clip. Anesthesia was reversed by intraperitoneal administration of buprenorphine (0.1 mg/kg), 
557 
atipemazole (2.5 mg/kg), and flumenazil (0.2 mg/kg) in saline. Additionally, mice received intradermal 
558 
injection of meloxicam SR for analgesia and were returned to their home cages. 
559 
 
560 
Behavioral assessments 
561 
All procedures have been described in detail previously64. Limb motor movements was evaluated while 
562 
running on a horizontal walkway. Bilateral leg kinematics were captured with the Vicon Motion Systems, 
563 
UK (combining 12 infrared cameras) for tracking with reflective markers on the crest, hip, knee, ankle 
564 
joints and distal toes. The limbs were modelled as an interconnected chain of segments and gait 
565 
parameters were calculated from those.  
566 
 
567 
Analysis of kinematic data 
568 
A total of 78 gait parameters were computed for each limb for each gait cycle. We chose to represent 
569 
the following gait parameters: step height, drag percentage, amp limb, amp speed limb, amp join 1, amp 
570 
joint 2, amp joint 3, and amp speed joint 3. Differences among groups were calculated using two-tailed t 
571 
tests (unpaired) and were considered significant if p < 0.05. Data are represented as mean ± SEM unless 
572 
otherwise indicated. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad prism software. 
573 
 
574 
Animal Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria 
575 
Two days after injury, all mice were evaluated in an open field and all animals exhibiting any hindlimb 
576 
movements were not further studied. A larger cohort of mice were taken through kinematic analysis, 
577 
and 3 mice representative of each timepoint were selected for snRNAseq.  
578 
 
579 
Nuclei Isolation 
580 
Nuclei were isolated from adult mouse lumbar cords with proximal dorsal and ventral roots attached 
581 
using a triton-based protocol adapted from Matson et al. 2018. Briefly, mice were euthanized according 
582 
to IACUC guidelines. The spinal cord was rapidly dissected and frozen on dry ice. Later, fresh frozen 
583 
lumbar cords (spinal segment L2-S1) were placed in a Dounce homogenizer (Kontes Dounce Tissue 
584 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
18 
Grinder) containing 500 μL of lysis buffer (0.32 M sucrose, 10 mM HEPES [pH 8.0], 5 mM CaCl2, 3 mM 
585 
MgAc, 0.1 mM ETDA, 1 mM DTT, 0.1% Triton X-100). The cords were dounced with 5 strokes of pestle A, 
586 
then 5-10 strokes of pestle B. The lysate was diluted in 3 mL of sucrose buffer (0.32 M sucrose, 10 mM 
587 
HEPES [pH 8.0], 5 mM CaCl2, 3 mM MgAc, 0.1 mM ETDA, 1 mM DTT) and passed over a 40 μm strainer. 
588 
The filtered lysate was centrifuged at 3,200 x g for 10 min at 4°C. After centrifugation, the pellet was 
589 
resuspended in sucrose buffer and incubated for 2 min on ice. The sample was transferred to an Oak 
590 
Ridge tube and homogenized for 1 min using an Ultra-Turrax Homogenizer (IKA). Then, 12.5 mL of 
591 
density sucrose buffer (1 M sucrose, 10 mM HEPES [pH 8.0], 3 mM MgAc, 1 mM DTT) was layered below 
592 
the sample. The tube was centrifuged at 3,200 x g for 20 min and the supernatant immediately poured 
593 
off. The nuclei on the side of the tube were resuspended with 100 μL of PBS with 0.04% BSA and 0.2 U/ 
594 
μL RNase inhibitor. Nuclei were inspected for visual appearance and quantified with a hemocytometer 
595 
before being adjusted to a concentration of 1,000 nuclei per μL. 
596 
 
597 
Single Nucleus RNA Sequencing 
598 
Single nucleus RNA sequencing was carried out using Single-cell gene expression 3’ v2 kit on the 
599 
Chromium platform (10X Genomics) according to manufacturer’s instructions with one modification. 
600 
Following reverse-transcription, an additional PCR cycle was added to the number of cycles for cDNA 
601 
amplification to compensate for decreased cDNA abundance in nuclei compared to cells. Approximately 
602 
8,000-9,000 nuclei were loaded in each well and 3,000-7,000 nuclei were recovered per sample. 
603 
 
604 
Libraries were sequenced to a minimum depth of 20,000 reads per nucleus using an Illumina HiSeq 3000 
605 
(PE 26 – 8 – 98 bp). Raw sequencing reads were demultiplexed, aligned, and a count matrix was 
606 
generated using CellRanger. For alignment, introns and exons were included in the reference genome 
607 
(mm10).  
608 
 
609 
Clustering 
610 
Seurat v3.2.2 was used to filter, normalize, anchor, and cluster the dataset12. We filtered nuclei for 
611 
downstream analysis, including those with greater than 200 genes per nucleus and less than 20 percent 
612 
of reads coming from mitochondrial genes. For neurons, the minimum threshold was increased to 500 
613 
genes per nucleus. All genes analyzed were present in greater than three nuclei. We performed 
614 
standard log normalization and used principal component analysis for dimensionality reduction. We 
615 
used the FindIntegrationAnchors and FindTransferAnchors functions to set the uninjured samples as 
616 
reference anchors for coarse clustering. For the re-clustering of microglia/hematopoietic cell, given the 
617 
increase in diversity of cell types and increase in number after injury, FindIntegration and FindTransfer 
618 
were run without using uninjured samples as a reference anchor. Clusters were visualized using Uniform 
619 
Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimension Reduction (UMAP), and cluster markers were 
620 
found using the “auroc” test in Seurat. Clusters with less than 3 significant markers, or that were not 
621 
defined by a cohesive set of genes, were identified as low-quality clusters and discarded from 
622 
downstream analysis. Clusters that contained nuclei that expressed more than 3 genes from two cell 
623 
types were identified as doublets and removed from downstream analysis. Nuclei had on average 1392 
624 
genes per nucleus in neurons and 471 genes per nucleus in non-neuronal cells. Neurons were classified 
625 
using label transfer12 at a “family”-level resolution11. 
626 
 
627 
Pathway and Cell Type Prioritization 
628 
Augur was implemented as previously described.9 For pathway analysis, differential gene expression 
629 
across conditions was generated using FindMarkers using the Wilcox test. GO Analysis was done using 
630 
all differentially expressed genes with p_adj < 0.05, GO BP, CC, MF -> clustering. In cases in which 
631 
multiple clusters had the same genes and similar terms, only the most significant is shown.  
632 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
19 
 
633 
Immunohistochemistry Antibodies 
634 
IBA1 (Cedarlane Labs, 234006(SY)), TMEM 119 (Cedarlane Labs, 400004(SY)), CD11c (GeneTex, 
635 
GTX74935), Myelin-MBP (BioLegend, 808402), NF-L (Cell Signaling, 2835S), NF-M (Cell Signaling, 2838S), 
636 
NF-H (Cell Signaling, 2836S), NeuN (Millipore Sigma, ABN90P), CD68 (Abcam, ab125212), CNPase 
637 
(Millipore Sigma, MAB326), GFAP (Agilent/Dako, Z033429-2), Lectin (Vector Labs, DL-1177-1), DAPI, 
638 
Cleaved Caspase 3 (Cell Signalling Tech, 9661L), Cleaved PARP (Cell Signalling Tech, 94885S), Phospho-
639 
IGF1R (Invitrogen, PA5-104773), Fluoromyelin Red (Invitrogen, F34652), Degraded MBP (Sigma-Aldrich, 
640 
AB5864). 
641 
 
642 
In Situ Hybridization Probes 
643 
Spp1 (435191), Vsx2 (438341), Gap43 (318621), Chat (408731), Itgax (311501), Mdga1 (546411), Sprr1a 
644 
(426871-C2), Vgf (517421-C2), Igf1 (443901-C2), Sprr1a (426871-C2), C1qa (441221-C2), Megf11 
645 
(504281-C2), GFP (409011-C2), Apoe (313271-C3), Tnfrsf12a (429311-C3), Atf3 (426891-C3), Gpr83 
646 
(317431-C3), Pdgfra (480661-C3), Shox2 (554291-C3), Gpnmb (489511-C3). 
 
647 
 
648 
Immunohistochemistry and In Situ Hybridization 
649 
Animals were euthanized with avertin and perfused with PBS and then 4% paraformaldehyde. Spinal 
650 
cords were dissected, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight, washed in PBS for one hour, then 
651 
dehydrated in 30% sucrose an additional night before being embedded in OCT. 
652 
 
653 
Immunohistochemistry was performed as previously described61. Briefly, spinal cords were cut at 50 µm, 
654 
placed in blocking buffer (1% IgG-free BSA, 10% normal donkey serum, 0.1% Triton-X 100 in PBS) for one 
655 
hour, prior to incubation in blocking buffer and primary antibody for 48 hours at 4°C. Primary antibody 
656 
was washed off three times in PBS before a 2-hour incubation in secondary antibody at room 
657 
temperature. Secondary antibody was washed off three times in PBS before adding a coverslip.  
658 
 
659 
Multiplex immunohistochemistry was performed as previously described8.  
660 
 
661 
In situ hybridization was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions for fixed frozen tissue 
662 
RNAscope (ACD Bio).  
663 
 
664 
Imaging 
665 
Images of immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization samples were imaged using a Zeiss 800 LSM 
666 
confocal microscope. For quantification, a tile scan image spanning the section was generated for ≥ 3 
667 
sections from ≥ 3 mice. Brightness and contrast were adjusted in Photoshop (Adobe), standardized 
668 
across images. 
669 
 
670 
Quantification of Cell Counts from Images of Immunohistochemistry  
671 
A custom MATLAB-based image analysis program was developed to assist the cell counting for this work. 
672 
The software automatically identifies and counts cells based on a criterion that constrains size at a user-
673 
selectable intensity threshold. A manual selection tool is also available to identify additional cells that 
674 
are more difficult to detect. A second channel of the same image shows can be used to counts cells that 
675 
are labeled with both stains using the results from the first channel and a second set of user-selectable 
676 
thresholds. 
677 
 
678 
Fluorescence Intensity 
679 
Mean fluorescence intensity was quantified using FIJI (ImageJ). 
680 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

 
20 
 
681 
Histological Quantification and Statistical Testing 
682 
Two-tailed t tests (unpaired) were used for quantification of immunohistochemistry and in situ 
683 
hybridization. Differences among groups were considered significant if p < 0.05. Data are represented as 
684 
mean ± SEM unless otherwise indicated. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad prism 
685 
software. 
686 
 
687 
 
688 
Data Availability: 
689 
A searchable version of this data is available at https://seqseek.ninds.nih.gov/spinalcordinjury. Raw 
690 
sequencing data and count matrices have been deposited to the Gene Expression Omnibus. Custom 
691 
MATLAB-based code for quantification of cell counts is available at 
692 
https://github.com/ArielLevineLabNINDS/CellCounter. 
693 
 
694 
 
695 
Acknowledgements: 
696 
The authors gratefully acknowledge technical support from Li Li, Aaron Bickert and Stefan Stoica, and 
697 
advice and comments from Claire Le Pichon and Michael O’Donovan, as well as the veterinary staff of 
698 
the Porter Research Building, including Heather Narver. We thank Yuanyuan Liu (NIH, NIDCR) and 
699 
Zhigang He (Boston Children’s Hospital) for the AAV-IGF/SPP1(OPN) viruses. This research was 
700 
supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, NINDS, and CIT. A.S., I.H., K.J.E.M., 
701 
and A.J.L. were supported by NIH Intramural Funds through 1ZIA NS003153; and J.C. and R.P. were 
702 
supported by Z99 CT999999. G.C., C.K. and J.W.S. were supported by the European Research Council 
703 
[ERC-2015-CoG HOW2WALKAGAIN 682999] and the Swiss National Science Foundation (subside 
704 
310030_192558). 
705 
 
706 
 
707 
Author Contributions: 
708 
This project was conceptualized by A.J.L. and K.J.E.M with input from C.K., J.W.S. and G.C. Experiments 
709 
were performed by K.J.E.M., D.M. and C.K. Data was analyzed by K.J.E.M., D.E.R., J.W.S., J.C., R.P., I.H., 
710 
and A.S. The manuscript was written by K.J.E.M. and A.J.L with input from all authors. Supervision and 
711 
funding acquisition were by A.J.L. and G.C. 
712 
 
713 
 
714 
Declaration of Interests: 
715 
The authors declare no competing interests. 
716 
 
717 
 
718 
References:  
719 
 
720 
1 
Kigerl, K. A. et al. Identification of two distinct macrophage subsets with divergent effects 
721 
causing either neurotoxicity or regeneration in the injured mouse spinal cord. J Neurosci 29, 
722 
13435-13444, doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3257-09.2009 (2009). 
723 
2 
Sofroniew, M. V. & Vinters, H. V. Astrocytes: biology and pathology. Acta Neuropathol 119, 7-35, 
724 
doi:10.1007/s00401-009-0619-8 (2010). 
725 
3 
McDonald, J. W. & Sadowsky, C. Spinal-cord injury. Lancet 359, 417-425, doi:10.1016/S0140-
726 
6736(02)07603-1 (2002). 
727 
and is also made available for use under a CC0 license. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted April 29, 2021. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441862
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint

===== Matsuda2017_Development_mEpi+Sox2+ChIPseq =====
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
TECHNIQUES AND RESOURCES ARTICLE
ChIP-seq analysis of genomic binding regions of five major
transcription factors highlights a central role for ZIC2 in the
mouse epiblast stem cell gene regulatory network
Kazunari Matsuda1, Tomoyuki Mikami1, Shinya Oki2, Hideaki Iida3, Munazah Andrabi1, Jeremy M. Boss4,
Katsushi Yamaguchi5, Shuji Shigenobu5 and Hisato Kondoh1,3,*
ABSTRACT
To obtain insight into the transcription factor (TF)-dependent
regulation of epiblast stem cells (EpiSCs), we performed ChIP-seq
analysis of the genomic binding regions of five major TFs. Analysis of
in vivo biotinylated ZIC2, OTX2, SOX2, POU5F1 and POU3F1
binding in EpiSCs identified several new features. (1) Megabase-
scale genomic domains rich in ZIC2 peaks and genes alternate with
those rich in POU3F1 but sparse in genes, reflecting the clustering of
regulatory regions that act at short and long-range, which involve
binding of ZIC2 and POU3F1, respectively. (2) The enhancers bound
by ZIC2 and OTX2 prominently regulate TF genes in EpiSCs. (3) The
binding sites for SOX2 and POU5F1 in mouse embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) and EpiSCs are divergent, reflecting the shift in the major
acting TFs from SOX2/POU5F1 in ESCs to OTX2/ZIC2 in EpiSCs.
(4) This shift in the major acting TFs appears to be primed by binding
of ZIC2 in ESCs at relevant genomic positions that later function as
enhancers following the disengagement of SOX2/POU5F1 from
major regulatory functions and subsequent binding by OTX2. These
new insights into EpiSC gene regulatory networks gained from this
study are highly relevant to early stage embryogenesis.
KEY WORDS: ZIC2, POU3F1, OTX2, ESC, EpiSC, Mouse
INTRODUCTION
Mammalian
somatic
cells
originate
from
the
epiblast
in
postimplantation embryos. The success in establishing epiblast
stem cells (EpiSCs) from the epiblasts of egg-cylinder-stage mouse
embryos (Brons et al., 2007; Tesar et al., 2007; Sumi et al., 2013)
created new opportunities for investigating the gene regulatory
networks in the epiblast and for deriving specific somatic cell
lineages (Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2011, 2012; Acampora et al., 2013;
Factor et al., 2014; Kojima et al., 2014; Matsuda and Kondoh, 2014;
Tsakiridis et al., 2014; Henrique et al., 2015; Li et al., 2015; Song
et al., 2016). EpiSCs can be maintained in feeder-free culture
conditions supplemented with activin, which is a Nodal replacement,
and bFGF (FGF2) (Brons et al., 2007; Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2012).
They can also be directed towards development into a variety of
specific somatic lineages by removing activin and/or manipulating
other cell signaling systems (Brons et al., 2007; Tesar et al., 2007;
Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2012; Kojima et al., 2014; Matsuda and Kondoh,
2014; Tsakiridis et al., 2014; Li et al., 2015). For example, simple
removal of activin/Nodal signaling directs EpiSCs to develop into
anterior neural plate (ANP) cells (Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2012).
A promising approach to investigate gene regulatory networks is
to determine the genomic binding sites of various transcription
factors (TFs) using ChIP-seq. In a previous study, we identified
ZIC2, OTX2, SOX2, POU5F1 and POU3F1 as major regulators in
EpiSCs and during the transition to ANP. These TFs change their
anteroposterior localization in the mouse epiblast after embryonic
day (E) 6.5, and their overexpression and/or shRNA-mediated
knockdown strongly impacts the downstream TFs involved in the
derivation of various somatic lineages (Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2012).
OTX2 has also been emphasized as a regulator of early stage
embryogenesis and embryonic stem cells (ESCs) (Acampora et al.,
2013; Buecker et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2014). An additional focus
in this present analysis is to investigate whether SOX2 and POU5F1
share the same genomic targets in mouse and human ESCs, which
also express these TFs. Here, we used ChIP-seq technology to
determine the genomic binding regions for these TFs to gain a
deeper insight into their roles in early stage embryogenesis.
To perform parallel ChIP-seq analysis on a number of TFs with
comparable efficiency, we developed a simplified version of the
ChIP-seq technique that uses biotinylated TFs (de Boer et al., 2003;
Kim et al., 2009). This circumvents the problem caused by
antibody-dependent
variations
in
ChIP-seq
efficiency
and
decreases the technical hurdles inherent in conventional ChIP-seq
procedures that include cell fractionation. In brief, single expression
vectors to achieve in vivo biotinylation of a TF were transfected into
EpiSCs at high efficiency, albeit under conditions that avoid
overdosing cells with exogenous TFs and that maintain the epiblast
state. Cell chromatin was then fixed with formaldehyde and whole-
cell lysates, rather than isolated nuclei, were processed for the
isolation of biotinylated TF-DNA complexes.
The parallel ChIP-seq analysis for five TFs revealed the following
new features about the TF binding events. (1) Throughout the entire
genome, genomic domains rich in ZIC2 binding of megabase (Mb)
scale and those rich in POU3F1 binding alternate, with strong
correlation with gene distribution. This presumably reflects the
loose clustering of two types of regulatory sequences that act at a
short distance and at a long distance from the gene, reflecting the
characters of bound TFs. (2) Mouse ESCs and EpiSCs share their
Received 8 August 2016; Accepted 18 April 2017
1Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, Yamadaoka 1-3, Suita,
Osaka 565-0871, Japan. 2Department of Developmental Biology, Graduate School
of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-
8582, Japan. 3Faculty of Life Sciences, Kyoto Sangyo University, Motoyama,
Kamigamo, Kita-ku, Kyoto 603-8555, Japan. 4Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. 5Functional Genomics
Facility, National Institute for Basic Biology, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8585, Japan.
*Author for correspondence (kondohh@cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp)
T.M., 0000-0003-4335-4418; J.M.B., 0000-0002-2432-1840; S.S., 0000-0003-
4640-2323; H.K., 0000-0002-3609-7014
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed.
1948
© 2017. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Development (2017) 144, 1948-1958 doi:10.1242/dev.143479
DEVELOPMENT

SOX2 and POU5F1 binding sites in limited proportions, reflecting
the shift in the TFs of major regulatory functions from SOX2/
POU5F1 in ESCs to ZIC2/OTX2 in EpiSCs. This shift in the major
acting TFs appears to be primed by binding of ZIC2 at relevant
genomic positions in ESCs. Thus, the ChIP-seq data on the five TFs
in EpiSCs provide new genomic resources that can be utilized in
studies on the regulation of stem cells of early stage embryogenesis.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Fundamentals of the ChIP-seq procedure using in vivo
biotinylated TFs
Expression of in vivo biotinylated TFs
ChIP-seq using a biotinylated TF requires the expression of an
exogenous TF fused to a biotin ligase recognition peptide (BLRP)
that is biotinylated in vivo by co-expressed E. coli-derived biotin
ligase (BirA) (de Boer et al., 2003). Previously reported ChIP-seq
methods using biotinylated TFs employed complex procedures that
included the identification of stable transfectant clones with an
appropriate level of exogenous TF expression (Kim et al., 2009). We
chose transient transfection of an EpiSC population to ascertain that
ChIP-seq analyses for a series of TFs were all performed on
equivalent cell populations, avoiding the risk of isolating cell
variants during cloning. This procedure took advantage of the high
efficiency (75-95%; Fig. S1A) (Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2012) of the
transfection protocol that we developed.
By transfection of the pCAGGS-BLRP-IRES-BirA vector
(Fig. 1A), TFs with BLRP added at their C-terminus were
synthesized
in
EpiSCs,
which
were
∼2 kDa
larger
than
endogenous TFs, as exemplified by POU5F1-BLRP detected in
the western blot (Fig. 1B). Biotinylation of BLRP-tagged POU5F1
was confirmed by supershifting of the electrophoresed protein
position following the addition of streptavidin to the SDS-PAGE
samples (Viens et al., 2004) (Fig. 1B). In a transactivation assay
using the nestin (Nes) enhancer, the BLRP-biotin-tagged SOX2 and
POU5F1 showed full activity (Fig. S1B). As shown in our previous
study, the expression of all five TFs in EpiSCs 24 h after the
transfection of shRNAvectors was strongly downregulated (Iwafuchi-
Doi et al., 2012), indicating rapid turnover of these TFs, which allows
the access of exogenous TFs to their binding sites.
Exogenous TF expression at a physiological level
As shown in Fig. 1B, the exogenous TF expression level was
controlled by the DNA input level; an input of 5 µg vector DNA per
10-cm diameter culture dish was chosen as standard for transfection
to achieve a physiological level of exogenous TF expression.
TF expression levels in individual cell nuclei of POU5F1-BLRP-
transfected cells were assessed by POU5F1 immunofluorescence
intensity (Fig. 1Ca), which were normalized for histone H2
immunofluorescence of the same nuclei. The results are presented
relative to the average fluorescence intensity of untransfected
EpiSCs, which was set to 1 (Fig. 1Cb). A shift in nuclear POU5F1
fluorescence intensity to a higher level was noted in the transfected
population. In addition, some of the transfected cells expressed
higher levels of POU5F1 than observed in untransfected cells
(Fig. 1Ca, arrowheads). However, a large majority (95%) of
transfected cells had less than twice the average amounts of nuclear
POU5F1, with an average increase of 119% in the transfected cells
relative to untransfected cells. A higher level of exogenous TF
apparent in the immunoblot data using whole cells (Fig. 1B) may be
explained by a contribution from cytoplasmic POU5F1.
Analogous data for other TFs generated in parallel experiments
are shown in Fig. S1C. Because the same amounts of biotinylated
TF expression vector DNAwere used for all transfections, the extent
of the shift to higher expression levels would be expected to depend
on the endogenous TF expression levels. ZIC2 appeared to be
expressed at high levels endogenously, and the impact of exogenous
ZIC2 expression was minimal, with only a 10% increase, on
average, in the immunofluorescence of nuclear ZIC2 (plus ZIC3,
which is also recognized by the anti-ZIC2 antibodies). In OTX2-
transfected and SOX2-transfected cells, exogenous TF expression
increased the nuclear TF levels only to 137% and 130%,
respectively,
relative
to
untransfected
cell
populations.
By
contrast, POU3F1 appeared to have a relatively low endogenous
expression level. Even in this case, the average POU3F1 levels in
transfected cell nuclei were estimated to be 252% of normal, and the
majority (68%) of nuclei remained with the POU3F1 level within
the range of 200% of untransfected cell average.
To confirm that exogenous TF expression does not interfere with
the EpiSC state, we analyzed NANOG expression levels in the
transfected populations. Even in untransfected EpiSCs, NANOG
expression showed variation in its levels, which were divided into
brighter and dimmer nuclear populations using a threshold
(Fig. S1Da). These populations did not change significantly after
exogenous expression of the aforementioned TFs (Fig. S1Db).
Analogous analysis of POU5F1 expression in the TF-transfected
Fig. 1. Expression of biotinylated POU5F1 in transfected EpiSCs.
(A) Schematic of the pCAGGS-BLRP-IRES-BirA vector (not to scale). En,
enhancer; Pro, promoter; SmaI, the insertion site for the ORF encoding the
C-terminal fusion of BLRP; NotI, a pair of sites encompassing a stop codon that
form the insertion site for the ORF encoding the N-terminal fusion of BLRP.
(B) Immunoblots using an anti-POU5F1 antibody comparing the expression of
exogenous (BLRP-tagged) and endogenous POU5F1 with increasing
amounts of transfected expression vector. The right half of the panel shows the
results of electrophoresis (EP) with addition of streptavidin (StrAV), which
causes a supershift of biotinylated POU5F1-BLRP. (C) (a) POU5F1 (left) and
histone H2 (right) immunofluorescence in the EpiSC population transfected
with POU5F1-BLRP compared with the untransfected control. Arrowheads
indicate cells expressing high levels of nuclear POU5F1. Scale bar: 50 µm.
(b) Variation of POU5F1 immunofluorescence intensities over 130 nuclei in
representative fields as assessed using ImageJ and normalized using histone
H2 fluorescence. The average immunofluorescence in untransfected nuclei
was set as 1.
1949
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2017) 144, 1948-1958 doi:10.1242/dev.143479
DEVELOPMENT

populations (other than POU5F1 transfection) did not show
transfection-dependent changes (data not shown). These analyses
indicated that transfection with any of the TFs used for the ChIP-seq
analysis did not interfere with the EpiSC state.
High performance of the ChIP-seq procedure using biotinylated TFs
One day after transfection with a biotinylated TF-BLRP expression
vector
for
8 h,
the
culture
was
processed
for
chromatin
fragmentation using whole lysate of formalin-fixed cells, yielding
chromatin fragments with an average DNA length of 150 bp
(Fig. 2A). The TF-BLRP-bound chromatin fragments were
extracted using streptavidin-linked magnetic beads under stringent
wash conditions (Table S1). This step was followed by standard
ChIP-seq procedures. Peak calling using MACS1.4 identified
60,000-120,000 ChIP-seq peaks (Table S2).
Characterization of ChIP-seq peaks
ChIP-seq peak widths
As explained in Fig. 2B, ChIP-seq using a DNA fragment size L
will yield a peak width of 2L for singlet binding sites. Considering
the modal DNA fragment size of 150 bp and 92nd percentile
fragment length of 300 bp used in our ChIP-seq analysis (Fig. 2A),
peak widths of less than 500 bp will indicate the occurrence of
singlet binding sites. The larger peak widths thus indicate the
occurrence of multiple TF binding sites at relatively short genomic
intervals that do not separate into individual peaks.
ChIP-seq peaks on known enhancers
We evaluated the ChIP-seq peaks obtained using our new procedure
by analyzing known TF binding sites: the Sox2 upstream N2
enhancer, which is activated via co-binding by ZIC2, OTX2 and a
POU factor (Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2011); and the Nes30 enhancer in
the second intron of Nes, which is known to bind SOX2 and a POU
factor in ESCs and neural stem cells (Tanaka et al., 2004; Lodato
et al., 2013). These enhancers were indeed bound by the expected
TFs, forming overlapping singlet ChIP-seq peaks (Fig. 2C).
Enriched DNA sequence motifs in ChIP-seq peaks
The sequences of ChIP-seq peaks of 400-1000 bp with a
cumulative length of 30-50 Mb were analyzed using MEME-
ChIP (Machanick and Bailey, 2011) to evaluate the enrichment of
sequence motifs. The results, as summarized in Fig. S2A, indicate
that the ChIP-seq peaks were enriched with sequence motifs
relevant for TF binding: ZIC2 binding sequences characterized by
interruption of G/C stretches by A/T bases (Lim et al., 2010;
Jolma et al., 2013); OTX2 binding sequence approximated by
GGTAAT (Briata et al., 1999; Jolma et al., 2013); SOX2 binding
motifs represented by ACAA[A/T][A/G] (Kamachi and Kondoh,
2013; Kondoh and Kamachi, 2015); and POU class TF binding
motifs of ʻoctamer’ consensus sequence ATGCA[A/T]AT (Jolma
et al., 2013) with allowance of two base deviations (Kamachi and
Kondoh, 2013).
Alternating pattern of Mb-scale genomic domains rich in
ZIC2 and those rich in POU3F1 peaks
We inspected the genomic distribution of the annotated ChIP-seq
peaks over the mouse genome using Integrative Genome Viewer
(IGV) (Robinson et al., 2011) with a scrolling unit of several Mb.
This visual inspection indicated the following features (see Fig. 2D,
for example). Genomic domains of a Mb scale that are rich in ZIC2
peaks and those rich in POU3F1 peaks alternate with one another.
The distribution of ChIP-seq peaks of three other TFs was more
uniform, although OTX2 peaks tended to be associated with ZIC2
peaks, and SOX2 and POU5F1 peaks with POU3F1 peaks. In
addition, ZIC2 peak-rich domains were also rich in genes.
To substantiate these observations, we divided the genomic
sequence of all chromosomes into 2582 segments (chromosomal
segments of 1 Mb) and scored the sum of the peak widths for each
TF per Mb (peak densities) or the number of genes in a segment.
The distribution of the ChIP-seq peak densities for individual TFs
over the genome is summarized as a heat map in Fig. 3 and is
Fig. 2. Relationships of ChIP-seq peak widths with DNA fragment length
in ChIP-seq analysis and reiteration of TF binding sites in a short
genomic span. (A) A representative DNA length profile of sheared (Covaris
S2-treated) chromatin samples transfected with POU5F1-BLRP, showing a
peak at ∼150 bp. (B) Interpretation of ChIP-seq peak widths. If DNA fragments
to be used for ChIP-seq analysis have a length of L (a), then ChIP-seq peaks
representing single TF bindings will have a peak width of 2L (b). However,
reiteration of TF binding in a short genomic span results in wider ChIP-seq
peaks, and the occurrence of clustered TF binding sites over a genomic span
will cause the appearance of peak ranges (c). (C) Examples of ChIP-seq peaks
indicating singlet binding of TFs to the known enhancers Sox2 N2 (a) and
nestin Nes30 (b), as shown using IGV outputs for genomic regions
chr12:34,542,000-34,553,800 and chr12:87,773,000-87,786,300,
respectively. The direction of gene transcription is indicated by arrows. (a) The
N2 enhancer is 5′ of the Sox2 gene (Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2012), with ChIP-seq
peaks formed at the same position (boxed), indicating the co-binding of ZIC2,
OTX2 and POU5F1. The strong Sox2 peak apparent on the Sox2 gene itself
was due to carryover of the Sox2-BLRP vector. (b) SOX2 and POU5F1
ChIP-seq peaks formed on the Nes30 enhancer (Tanaka et al., 2004) (boxed).
(D) IGV outputs of a representative 100 Mb genomic region from chromosome
12 (chr12:74,400,000-84,700,000), showing the TF-dependent arrangements
of ChIP-seq peaks for ZIC2, OTX2, SOX2, POU5F1 and POU3F1. MACS
annotated peaks are indicated below the Bowtie mapped reads. The
approximate boundaries between the regions dominated by clustered ZIC2
(red arrows) and POU3F1 (green arrows) peaks are shown.
1950
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2017) 144, 1948-1958 doi:10.1242/dev.143479
DEVELOPMENT

compared with the distribution of the genes. The heat map data were
consistent with the conclusions derived on the basis of the IGV-
based visual inspection of the ChIP-seq peak distribution (Fig. 2D).
To further confirm our observations, we performed the following
statistical analysis. After normalizing the average peak density to a
value of 1 for all TFs, the ranges of variation in peak density in
individual Mb segments were plotted for the five TFs (Fig. S2B).
The peak density per Mb genomic segment for ZIC2 and POU3F1
showed a very broad distribution from very high (>5) to very low
(<0.1) values, corresponding to peak-rich and peak-sparse genomic
domains. By contrast, the ChIP-seq peak densities for OTX2, SOX2
and POU5F1 had a much narrower distribution.
High clustering tendency of ZIC2 and POU3F1 binding sites
ChIP-seq peaks of ZIC2 and POU3F1 were often clustered more
densely than those of the other three TFs. This was confirmed by the
peak gap size analysis shown in Fig. S2C, gap size being the distance
between the midpoints of two adjacent peaks. The analysis indicated
that for ZIC2 and POU3F1 the peak gap size was distributed more
broadly, with the modal gap size one order of magnitude shorter than
predicted from random occurrence of the peaks. However, this feature
was not apparent for OTX2, SOX2 or POU5F1 peaks.
An additional effect of dense clustering of TF binding sites is that
individual ChIP-seq peaks corresponding to the TF binding sites fail
to separate and instead form a peak range that covers a long genomic
span. The analysis of ChIP-seq peak widths for the TFs (Fig. S2D)
indicated that ZIC2 and POU3F1 binding sites reiterate frequently,
resulting in >2000 bp peak ranges occupying 20% and 29% of
peaks, respectively. By contrast, 60% and 70% of OTX2 and SOX2
binding sites, respectively, were in ChIP-seq peaks <1000 bp,
indicating that they very frequently occur as singlet binding sites.
The distribution of POU5F1 binding sites appears to be intermediate
between these two cases.
TF-dependent proximity of ChIP-seq peaks to transcription start sites
(TSSs)
The distance of ChIP-seq peaks from neighboring genes classified
the TFs into two classes (Fig. S3A). The majority (55%) of ZIC2
and OTX2 peaks were within 50 kb of a TSS. By contrast, more than
80% of the SOX2, POU5F1 and POU3F1 peaks were at least 50 kb
away from a TSS. These observations indicated that ZIC2 and
OTX2 most often function by binding to gene-proximal regulatory
sequences, whereas SOX2 and POU factors primarily function via
gene-remote regulatory sequences.
Fig. 3. Heat map representation of ChIP-seq peak and
gene densities in 1 Mb genomic intervals. The mouse
mm9 genomic sequence of all chromosomes was divided
into segments of 1 Mb and then the segments without any
ChIP-seq peaks were removed. The sum of the peak
widths for each TF per Mb segment (WPeaks) divided by
5000, or the number of RefSeq gene (Pruitt et al., 2014)
TSSs per segment (NGenes), were ranked on a logarithmic
scale using the heat map over individual chromosomes
(shown oriented with centromere sides to the top).
1951
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2017) 144, 1948-1958 doi:10.1242/dev.143479
DEVELOPMENT

The ChIP-seq peaks within 5 kb of a TSS were further
characterized using aggregation plots (Fig. S3B). The local TSS
density per ChIP-seq peak at 5 kb points averaged over the genome
varied depending on the TF. Approaching the ChIP-seq peak
position, strong positive TSS peaks (maximum ∼0.01) occurred
with ZIC2. By contrast, POU3F1 and POU5F1 peaks, starting from
already low TSS densities, further decreased at the peak position,
indicating that the overlap of a POU3F1 or POU5F1 peak with a
TSS is very rare. The aggregation plots using OTX2 and SOX2 had
bumps at ∼1000 bp from the ChIP-seq peaks, but depressions at
these ChIP-seq peak midpoints, indicating that OTX2 or SOX2
ChIP-seq peaks are more enriched at ∼1000 bp from TSSs.
The differences in the positioning of TF binding sites, either in
close proximity to or distant from genes (Fig. S4), and their
tendency for clustering (Fig. S2B,C) appear to form the basis of the
alternating patterns of genomic domains rich in ZIC2 and those rich
in POU3F1 peaks (Fig. 3). Whether this type of patterning is unique
to EpiSCs and whether the patterns vary with stem cell type warrant
future studies.
ChIP-seq peak overlap in EpiSCs indicates two TF groups
Two groups of TFs that show a high frequency of in-group ChIP-seq
peak overlap
The majority of TFs function via interaction with other TFs. We
investigated the overlap of ChIP-seq peaks between two TFs, as
summarized in Fig. 4A. The following features of overlapping ChIP-
seq peaks were noted. (1) The overlap between ZIC2 and POU3F1
peaks was minimal (1.2-1.3%). (2) A significant proportion (15.9-
18.7%) of ZIC2 and OTX2 peaks overlapped, suggesting their
functional interactions. (3) POU5F1 and POU3F1 peaks overlapped
at high frequency (30-53%), as expected from their sharing of similar
in vitro binding sequences (Jolma et al., 2013). However, the
Fig. 4. Statistics on the overlap of ChIP-seq peaks.
(A) The frequency of overlap of MACS annotated peaks.
Overlap rates higher than 10% and lower than 2% are
highlighted in orange and gray, respectively. High-
frequency peak overlaps in ZIC2-OTX2 and SOX2-POU TF
groups are indicated by thick-lined boxes. (B) Aggregation
plots illustrating the fraction of relative midpoint positions of
the ChIP-seq peaks of target TFs (as indicated by color
codes) that overlap with the peaks of the anchor TF shown
at the top. Ordinate shows the fraction of overlap on a
logarithmic scale measured in 100 bp bins. The levels of
the plot assuming random distribution of the TF peaks are
indicated by arrowheads. (C) The fraction of TF ChIP-seq
peaks overlapping with genomic regions harboring specific
histone H3 modification signatures. (D) Comparison of
ChIP-seq peaks of TF binding and the locations of histone
H3 modifications around the genes representative of
specific cell lineages. IGV outputs of the genomic regions
chr5:98,661,300-98,748,500 (a) and chr2:105,475,120-
105,578,450 (b) are shown. The genes and their direction
of transcription are indicated by arrows. (a) Fgf5, expressed
in EpiSCs. Overlap of TF peaks and modified histone H3
peaks is emphasized by boxes. (b) Pax6, representing
anterior neural plate development.
1952
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2017) 144, 1948-1958 doi:10.1242/dev.143479
DEVELOPMENT

remaining ChIP-seq peaks were unique to each POU factor. (4) SOX2
ChIP-seq peaks overlapped most frequently with POU3F1 peaks
(17.5-10.4%) and less so with POU5F1 peaks (7.7-8.3%). These rates
of overlap were much lower than in ESCs, where the majority of
SOX2 and POU5F1 peaks overlap (Chen et al., 2008) (see also
Fig. 6A). (5) ChIP-seq peak overlap was limited between the TF
groups ZIC2 plus OTX2 versus SOX2 plus POUs, except for 12% of
SOX2 peaks that overlapped with OTX2 peaks.
As the expression levels of TFs among the EpiSC population are
not perfectly homogeneous (Fig. 1C, Fig. S1C), we investigated the
possibility that EpiSCs comprise alternative subpopulations of high
ZIC2 expressers and high POU3F1 expressers, or of POU5F1
expressers and POU3F1 expressers, which might account for the
poorly overlapping binding events between ZIC2 and POU3F1, as
well as the occurrence of individually unique binding sites for
POU5F1 and POU3F1 (Fig. 4A). As shown in Fig. S4, the expression
levels of the two sets of TFs were positively correlated (correlation
coefficient, r=∼0.6), indicating that the ChIP-seq peak overlap
patterns shown in Fig. 4A occur in the same cell populations.
We also analyzed the relative positioning of ChIP-seq peak
midpoints between a pair of TFs using aggregation plots that are
independent of peak widths (Fig. 4B). The target TF-dependent
variations of the plots indicated TF pair-dependent association or
dissociation of the ChIP-seq peaks, whereas the random occurrence
of the peaks would result in convergence of the plots to levels
unique to the anchor TFs (indicated by the arrowheads in Fig. 4B).
The occurrence of a deep depression at position zero indicated
mutually exclusive binding sites between ZIC2 and POU3F1, and to
a lesser extent between ZIC2 and POU5F1. Proximal co-occurrence
of the binding sites among POU3F1, POU5F1 and SOX2 was also
indicated. All aggregation plot data in Fig. 4B supported the
conclusions drawn from the ChIP-seq peak overlap data (Fig. 4A).
Correlations between TF binding regions and histone modification
signatures
We investigated whether the ChIP-seq peaks of the above-mentioned
TFs represent regulatory sequences, taking advantage of published
ChIP-seq data on histone H3 modifications in EpiSCs (Factor et al.,
2014). Generally, active enhancers are marked by a combination of
H3K4me1- and H3K27ac-enriched domains, whereas poised enhancers
are marked by H3K4me1- and H3K27me3-enriched domains. The
H3K4me3/K27ac combination marks active promoters and promoter-
proximal enhancers (Ong and Corces, 2012; Calo and Wysocka, 2013).
To evaluate the correlations between TF binding and the
combined histone H3 modification signatures, we analyzed the
frequency of ChIP-seq peak overlaps between the TF peaks and
modified H3 peaks (Factor et al., 2014) (Fig. 4C). Among TFs,
ZIC2 binding was the most frequently associated not only with the
H3K4me1 plus H3K27ac (active enhancer type) modifications, but
also with the H3K4me1 plus H3K27me3 (poised enhancer type)
modifications, indicating that ZIC2 binding is involved in both
activating and repressing gene transcription. Importantly, as much
as 33% of the ZIC2-OTX2 co-bound peaks overlapped with the
H3K4me1 plus H3K27ac peaks, suggesting that the combination of
ZIC2 and OTX2 mainly acts as a transcriptional activator in EpiSC
gene regulatory networks. Aggregation plots showing the distance
relationships of histone modification signatures relative to ChIP-seq
peak positions also supported the these conclusions (Fig. S3C).
Local TF binding and histone H3 modification profiles also
supported the above proposition, as exemplified by the Fgf5 and
Pax6 loci shown in Fig. 4D. Fgf5, a characteristic EpiSC-expressed
gene, is activated by ZIC2, OTX2 and POU3F1 (Iwafuchi-Doi et al.,
2012), and five overlapping ZIC2 and OTX2 ChIP-seq peaks, one of
which was also bound by POU3F1, found near the Fgf5 gene
(Fig. 4Da) were marked by H3K4me1/K27ac modifications, suggesting
that these TF binding sites represent Fgf5 enhancers in EpiSCs. Pax6 is
silent in EpiSCs, but is rapidly activated when ANP development is
initiated (Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2012). The Pax6 locus in EpiSCs showed
several prominent ZIC2 and OTX2 ChIP-seq peaks upstream and in the
gene body (Fig. 4Db), which are covered by dense H3K4me1 plus
H3K27me3 signatures, indicating the poised state of the enhancers.
To confirm the involvement of the ZIC2-OTX2-bound genomic
regions marked by H3K4me1/K27ac in the activation of proximal
genes in EpiSCs, we compared the global gene regulation and the
Fig. 5. Changes in gene expression profiles of
somatic cells as compared with EpiSCs for
genes proximal to ZIC2-OTX2 co-binding
regions marked by histone modification
signatures as active enhancers. Microarray
data for the chondrogenic cell line ATDC5, MEF
(mouse embryonic fibroblasts) and Myo (mouse
embryonic primary myoblasts) were compared
with those of EpiSCs (Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2012).
The dots are colored according to the levels in
EpiSCs. (A) Scatter plots showing the differences
in gene expression profiles between EpiSCs and
the three somatic cell types. Greater than 2-fold
differences compared with EpiSCs were scored
as activation or downregulation, as indicated by
the lines in the plots. (B) The fraction of activated
and downregulated genes for all genes
(column A), genes proximal to ZIC2-OTX2 co-
bound regions marked by H3K4me1/K27Ac (ZO),
and TF genes proximal to ZIC2-OTX2 co-bound
regions marked by H3K4me1/K27Ac (ZOTF).
1953
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2017) 144, 1948-1958 doi:10.1242/dev.143479
DEVELOPMENT

regulation of genes proximal to histone signature-bearing ZIC2-
OTX2 peaks in EpiSCs using published microarray expression data
of various somatic cells. The underlying rationale is that a
significant
fraction
of
ZIC2-OTX2-dependent
enhancers
in
EpiSCs will be discharged from their regulatory function in
somatic cells, and hence genes proximal to such enhancers will be
more
frequently
downregulated
than
unselected
genes.
We
compared the gene expression profile of the chondrogenic cell
line ATDC5 (GEO accession GSM1486495) (Sugita et al., 2015),
mouse embryo fibroblasts (GSM1079106) (Richter et al., 2013) and
mouse embryo primary myoblasts (GSM1541934) with that of
EpiSCs (GSM934422/GSM934427) (Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2012). As
shown in Fig. 5, equivalent numbers of genes were either activated or
downregulated compared with those in EpiSCs using 2-fold
differences as a cut-off for all cell types, among which myoblasts
showed the greatest divergence from EpiSCs (33% of genes
downregulated and 30% of genes activated). However, when 4722
genes with a TSS within 5 kb of histone signature-bearing ZIC2-
OTX2 ChIP-seq peaks were selected, a larger fraction of genes was
downregulated (43% for myoblasts) and a smaller fraction of genes
was activated (21% for myoblasts) (Fig. 5B, ZO). Moreover, when
291 TF genes within 5 kb of the histone signature-bearing ZIC2-
OTX2 ChIP-seq peaks were selected from all TF genes expressed in
EpiSCs (Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2012), a significantly larger fraction of
genes was downregulated in the somatic cells (59% for myoblasts)
(Fig. 5B, ZOTF). The downregulated TF genes in the ZOTF column
included those involved in the regulation of pluripotent stem cells,
e.g. Mycn, Nanog, Otx2, Pou5f1, Sall4 and Sox2. This analysis
confirmed that the ZIC2-OTX2 pair is involved in the activation of
genes in EpiSCs, particularly the TF genes.
Variations in the binding regions of SOX2 and POU5F1 among
stem cells in relation to the ZIC2-OTX2 interaction
It has been shown that the SOX2-POU5F1 TF pair plays major
regulatory roles in ESCs (Chen et al., 2008). Although EpiSCs also
express high levels of SOX2 and POU5F1 (Brons et al., 2007; Tesar
et al., 2007; Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2012), their genomic binding sites
were highly divergent in EpiSCs (Fig. 6A,B). The SOX2 ChIP-seq
peaks in ESCs (Lodato et al., 2013) overlapped extensively (78%)
with POU5F1 peaks (Fig. 6A). In sharp contrast, only ∼8% of
SOX2 and POU5F1 peaks overlapped in EpiSCs (Fig. 4A, Fig. 6A).
However, this low rate of overlap was not unexpected because a
previous report indicated that the POU5F1 binding genomic sites in
human ESCs are highly diversified from mouse ESCs (Fig. 6A)
(Kunarso et al., 2010).
A comparison of the SOX2 and POU5F1 ChIP-seq peaks
between ESCs and EpiSCs indicated that only 5-10% of the peaks
overlapped (Fig. 6B). This analysis was extended to two additional
stem cells, namely human ESCs derived from pre-implantation
blastocysts but maintained under the culture conditions of EpiSCs,
and mouse epiblast-like cells (EpiLCs) that are produced as a
transient state when ESCs are directly placed in EpiSC culture
conditions,
exhibiting
some
EpiSC
characteristics
in
cell
morphology and gene expression, but which only survive for a
short time (Hayashi et al., 2011).
Two sets of SOX2 and POU5F1 ChIP-seq peak data for human
ESCs
(Table
S4)
were
transformed
into
mouse
genome
coordinates (mm9), and the overlap frequencies of the human
ESC ChIP-seq peaks with those of mouse ESCs and EpiSCs were
scored (Tables 1 and 2). The overlap of SOX2 ChIP-seq peaks
was ∼10% between mouse ESCs and human ESCs, as well as
between human ESCs and mouse EpiSCs (Table 1). However, the
overlap of the POU5F1 peaks between mouse and human ESCs
was higher (∼23%), whereas that between human ESCs and
mouse EpiSCs was much lower (∼3%) (Table 2). The POU5F1
ChIP-seq peak data of EpiLCs (Buecker et al., 2014) indicated a
Fig. 6. Variation in SOX2 and POU5F1 ChIP-seq peak overlaps between
ESCs and EpiSCs in relation to ZIC2/OTX2 ChIP-seq peaks in EpiSCs.
(A) Venn diagram comparison of SOX2 and POU5F1 ChIP-seq peak overlaps
among mouse ESCs, human ESCs and mouse EpiSCs. (B) Overlaps of SOX2
peaks and POU5F1 peaks in mouse ESCs and EpiSCs. (C) Overlap of ChIP-
seq peaks for SOX2/POU5F1 in ESCs and for ZIC2/OTX2 EpiSCs (left), and
that of genes proximal (<50 kb for the former and <5 kb for the latter) to
respective ChIP-seq peaks (right).
Table 1. Frequency of overlap between SOX2 and POU5F1 ChIP-seq
peaks among mouse ESCs, human ESCs and mouse EpiSCs
mESC (%)
mEpiSC (%)
SOX2
hESC1
7.1
9.1
hESC3
13.4
13.1
Average
10.3
11.1
POU5F1
hESC2
20.6
3.8
hESC3
24.8
1.7
Average
22.7
2.8
Human (h) ESC1 (Creyghton et al. 2010), hESC2 (Kunarso et al. 2010) and
hESC3 (Tsankov et al. 2015) data (see Table S4) were reanalyzed and ChIP-
seq peak regions were converted onto mouse genome coordinates (mm9)
using the UCSC LiftOver tool with conversion efficiency between 56% and
82%, and the fractions of human peaks overlapping with mouse ESC peaks
(Lodato et al., 2013) and EpiSC peaks (this study) were evaluated.
1954
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2017) 144, 1948-1958 doi:10.1242/dev.143479
DEVELOPMENT

closer relationship to mouse ESCs (Table 2), revealing the
following developmental order: mouse ESCs, EpiLCs, human
ESCs and then EpiSCs.
Despite the diversity of SOX2 and POU5F1 binding patterns
(Fig. 6A,B), the majority of genes expressed in ESCs are nearly
equally expressed in EpiSCs (Factor et al., 2014). Factor et al.
(2014) also reported that a significant fraction of the genomic
positions for enhancer candidates, marked by H3K27ac, differ
between these two cell types. These observations suggest that these
two enhancer systems, one of which is dependent on SOX2-
POU5F1 interaction in ESCs whereas the other is dependent on
ZIC2-OTX2 interaction in EpiSCs, give rise to similar gene
expression profiles.
Overlap of SOX2/POU5F1-co-bound regions in ESCs (18,540)
and ZIC2/OTX2-co-bound regions in EpiSCs (19,465) was limited
to less than 10% (1626) (Fig. 6C). This was also true when histone
H3K4me1/K27ac-marked active enhancer regions were analyzed:
5977
SOX2/POU5F1-co-bound
and
H3K4me1/K27ac-marked
regions were present in ESCs, and 6410 ZIC2/OTX2-co-bound
and H3K4me1/K27ac-marked regions were present in EpiSCs, with
an overlap of only 472 regions. Despite this finding, a much higher
frequency of overlap (1047 genes, 34%) was observed between
genes proximal to the SOX2/POU5F1-co-bound regions with active
enhancer signatures in ESCs, and those proximal to the marked
ZIC2/OTX2-co-bound regions in EpiSCs (Fig. 6C). The expected
overlap of the same numbers of randomly selected RefSeq genes
was 398. These data support the above-mentioned model that
different enhancers that are dependent on different TFs can activate
similar gene sets in ESCs and EpiSCs.
We used published ChIP-seq data to examine ZIC2 and OTX2
binding genomic regions in ESCs and EpiLCs. There were fewer
ChIP-seq peaks reported for these TFs in ESCs than in EpiSCs,
presumably reflecting increase in their binding sites after exit from
ESCs, as previously shown for OTX2 (Yang et al., 2014).
Comparing the ZIC2 ChIP-seq peaks in ESCs (Luo et al., 2015)
with those in EpiSCs, we found that the majority (80%) of ZIC2-
bound regions in ESCs were also bound by ZIC2 in EpiSCs
(Fig. 7A). However, OTX2 ChIP-seq peaks in ESCs, EpiLCs, and
EpiSCs showed more cell type-dependent variations (Fig. 7A),
suggesting that at least a fraction of ZIC2 binding sites are already
established in the ESCs. It is thus possible that ZIC2 acts as a
ʻpioneer factor’ (Zaret and Mango, 2016), contributes to organizing
ʻseed enhancers’ (Factor et al., 2014) or, more generally, primes
enhancer activity. It has been shown that ZIC2 in ESCs interacts
with nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complexes
(Luo et al., 2015) that are involved in the regulation of ʻbivalent’
enhancers in ESCs. These enhancers are generally inactive in most
ESCs but are poised for gene activation upon exit from the ESC state
(Hu and Wade, 2012; Harikumar and Meshorer, 2015). Therefore,
the ZIC2-NuRD interaction might be one mechanism for seeding
enhancers.
Factor et al. (2014) also identified 606 pluripotent cell-specific
genes that are expressed in both ESCs and EpiSCs but are turned off
in various somatic cells. One-quarter of these genes are included in
the above-mentioned gene set that is proximal to both putative active
SOX2/POU5F1-bound enhancers in ESCs and putative enhancers
bound by ZIC2/OTX2 in EpiSCs. As shown in IGV diagrams of the
genomic regions surrounding such genes, as exemplified by Mycn,
Nanog, Nodal and Sall4 (Fig. 7B), ZIC2-OTX2 binding regions in
EpiSCs were, in the majority of cases, bound by ZIC2 and also by
SOX2 plus POU5F1 in ESCs. Very few of these ZIC2-bound
regions are bound by SOX2 or POU5F1 in EpiSCs. Some, but not
all, ZIC2 ChIP-seq peak regions were also bound by OTX2 in ESCs.
On comparing the ESC ChIP-seq data for OTX2 binding (Buecker
et al., 2014), ZIC2 binding, and histone H3 modifications (Luo
et al., 2015), 16% of ZIC2 peaks were estimated to overlap with
OTX2 peaks, among which 75% were marked by H3K4me1/K27ac
modifications for active enhancers. This suggests that, although a
large fraction of ZIC2 binding sites in ESCs might be involved in
NuRD-mediated bivalent enhancer regulation, most of the ZIC2-
OTX2 co-bound enhancers are already active in ESCs. It is thus
possible that early ZIC2 binding, to the same or nearby enhancer
regions, might maintain the activity of those enhancer regions, or
activate ZIC2-bound cryptic enhancers, once SOX2 and POU5F1
are disengaged from their major regulatory functions. In the
EpiLCs, the SOX2/POU5F1-bound regions in ESCs were, in most
cases, bound by OTX2 and POU5F1, as reported (Buecker et al.,
2014). It will be interesting to discover more about ZIC2 and SOX2
binding regions in cells of this intermediate state.
ZIC2 binding-dependent enhancer priming in ESCs for later
enhancer activity appears to apply to a wider range of genes than
those that are pluripotency specific. Even in the EpiSC-specific
Fgf5 gene, all five putative enhancers were bound by ZIC2 and not
by OTX2 in ESCs (Luo et al., 2015), by OTX2 and POU5F1 in
EpiLCs (Buecker et al., 2014), and by ZIC2 and OTX2 in EpiSCs
(Fig. 7B). Luo et al. (2015) reported that whereas ZIC2 function in
ESCs is dispensable, its downregulation in ESCs affects later
developmental processes. These findings strongly support an
enhancer-priming function of ZIC2 in ESCs in the regulation of
genes activated during later developmental stages.
Conclusions
In this study we developed an efficient procedure for ChIP-seq
analysis utilizing in vivo biotinylated TFs. We applied this
procedure to investigate genomic binding regions for TFs ZIC2,
OTX2, SOX2, POU5F1 and POU3F1, which have been shown to be
Table 2. Extent of overlap of POU5F1 ChIP-seq peaks that placed mouse ESCs, mouse EpiLCs, human ESCs and mouse EpiSCs in order in the
developmental process
POU5F1 ChIP-seq peak overlaps
Cells
POU5F1 peaks
mESC2
mESC1
mEpiLC
hESC2
hESC3
mESC2 (Buecker et al., 2014)
65,332
mESC1 (Lodato et al., 2013)
44,218
33,298 (75%)
mEpiLC (Buecker et al., 2014)
50,169
32,061 (64%)
28,620 (65%)
hESC2 (Kunarso et al., 2010)
21,219
13,354 (63%)
5257 (25%)
6337 (30%)
hESC3 (Tsankov et al., 2015)
12,050
4650 (39%)
2489 (21%)
3156 (26%)
5133 (43%)
mEpiSC (this study)
62,457
3284 (5.3%)
2422 (5.5%)
3542 (7.1%)
357 (1.7%)
455 (3.8%)
Peak overlaps between combinatory sets of human (h) and mouse (m) ChIP-seq data on mouse genome coordinates (mm9) were analyzed and expressed as a
percentage of the smaller data set. For details of original data, see Table S4.
1955
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2017) 144, 1948-1958 doi:10.1242/dev.143479
DEVELOPMENT

involved in EpiSC maintenance and somatic cell lineage derivation
(Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2012).
ChIP-seq peak distributions of the Mb order revealed alternating
genomic domains rich in both ZIC2 peaks and genes, and domains
rich in POU3F1 peaks but sparse in genes. This domain organization
presumably reflects the clustering of regulatory regions that have
short- and long-range effects, which are dependent on the binding of
ZIC2 and POU3F1, respectively. It is an intriguing question whether
the regulatory region clustering is associated with higher-order
subgenomic activities.
ChIP-seq peaks of ZIC2 and OTX2 overlapped most extensively,
and their overlapping peaks were strongly associated with histone
modification signatures of active or poised enhancers, suggesting
functional cooperation of these TFs. SOX2 and POU factors formed a
second group of overlapping peaks. The comparison of gene expression
patterns between EpiSCs and somatic cells indicated that enhancers
bound by ZIC2 and OTX2 prominently regulate TF genes in EpiSCs.
Despite the similarity of the overall gene expression profile and the
high expression of SOX2 and POU5F1 in each cell type, the SOX2
and POU5F1 binding regions in EpiSCs were strikingly different
from those in mouse ESCs. Although the major acting TFs appeared
to shift from SOX2/POU5F1 in ESCs to ZIC2/OTX2 in EpiSCs,
similar sets of genes were regulated in both cell types. This shift in the
major acting TFs appears to be primed by binding of ZIC2 at relevant
genomic positions in ESCs that later function as enhancers.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
EpiSC culture and expression of biotinylated TFs
An EpiSC line (Tesar et al., 2007; Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2012; Factor et al.,
2014)
was
maintained
in
feeder-free
conditions
as
described
previously (Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2012). The cells were processed for
immunofluorescence of TFs using the IgGs listed in Table S3, including
non-commercial rabbit anti-ZIC2 (which also recognizes ZIC1 and ZIC3)
(Inoue et al., 2007), and duplicate samples. Expression of all hallmark TFs
of EpiSCs and nuclear DAPI staining (Fig. 1, Figs S1 and S3) confirmed
proper culture conditions. Images were taken using an Axioplan 2
microscope (Zeiss) and DP71 camera (Olympus) and measured for
nuclear fluorescence intensities using ImageJ (Schneider et al., 2012). To
express BLRP-tagged TFs and E. coli-derived biotin ligase (BirA) from the
same plasmid, the BLRP-IRES-BirA module of pREP4-BLRP-TEV-His6
(Lai et al., 2011; Majumder et al., 2014) was transferred to the pCAGGS
vector (Sawicki et al., 1998) to produce pCAGGS-BLRP-BirA (Fig. 1A),
and modified so that the BLRP could be added to either the N-terminus or
C-terminus of the TF depending on the ORF insertion site. In this study,
BLRP was added at the C-terminus of TFs. The entire nucleotide sequence
of pCAGGS-BLRP-BirA is provided in Fig. S5.
ChIP-seq procedure
A suspension of Accutase-dissociated EpiSCs was plated on a 10-cm diameter
dish and immediately transfected, using Lipofectamine 2000 (ThermoFisher),
with 5 µg pCAGGS-BLRP-BirA plasmid to express a BLRP-tagged TF. After
8 h, the culture medium was refreshed to remove the transfection reagents and
50 µg/ml biotin was added. After 24 h, the cultures were fixed with 1% formalin
Fig. 7. Cell type-dependent variation in TF binding at specific
genomic regions. (A) Venn diagram comparison of the ChIP-seq
peak positions for ZIC2 and OTX2 in ESCs and EpiSCs, showing
peak overlaps. For OTX2, data for EpiLCs are included. Data
sources are indicated in Table S4. (B) IGV diagrams showing
genomic regions of the pluripotency-specific genes Mycn
(chr12:12,926,000-12,961,000), Nanog (chr6:122,647,000-
122,667,000), Nodal (chr10:60,865,000-60,890,000) and Sall4
(chr2:168,571,500-168,623,000) and of the EpiSC-specific gene
Fgf5 (chr5:98,658,500-98,747,000). Scale bar indicates 5 kb
genomic span for upper panels and 7.5 kb for lower panels.
Dashed boxes indicate the genomic regions where ZIC2 binding is
indicated by ChIP-seq peaks in ESCs and EpiSCs. These regions
are also bound by other TFs in ESCs, EpiLCs or EpiSCs, but rarely
by SOX2 or POU5F1 in EpiSCs.
1956
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2017) 144, 1948-1958 doi:10.1242/dev.143479
DEVELOPMENT

for 10 min at room temperature, and processed according to the procedure shown
in Table S1. Typically, several nanograms of precipitated DNA were obtained
from five 10-cm diameter dish cultures. The DNA fragments were ligated with
adapters and amplified by ten cycles of PCR using the TruSeq ChIP Sample
Prep Kit (Illumina) to prepare libraries for DNA sequence determination using
an Illumina HiSeq2500 and single-end reads of 100 bp.
Analysis of ChIP-seq data
FASTQ sequences were aligned to the mouse mm9 genome sequence using
Bowtie2 (Langmead and Salzberg, 2012) and converted to SAM and then
BAM files. Then, ChIP-seq peaks were called using MACS1.4 (Zhang et al.,
2008), input DNA without ChIP as reference, and the default settings except
for band width, which was 150 bases. External data (Table S4) were
analyzed using the default settings. The Bowtie-aligned peaks and MACS-
determined peak positions were visualized using IGV (Robinson et al.,
2011) and ChIP-Atlas (http://chip-atlas.org). The above data processing was
performed using the software package SraTailor (Oki et al., 2014). Peak
overlaps were analyzed using Galaxy (Giardine et al., 2005), and the
genomic spans given in BED format were converted to FASTA files using
the UCSC Table Browser (Karolchik et al., 2004) in order to be analyzed for
sequence motif enrichment by MEME-ChIP (Machanick and Bailey, 2011).
To compare human peak data with mouse data, human BED file data were
transferred onto the mouse genome coordinates using the LiftOver tool of
the UCSC genome browser. Association of ChIP-seq peaks with closest
genes was analyzed using GREAT software (McLean et al., 2010), and the
overlaps of gene sets were analyzed using BioVenn (Hulsen et al., 2008).
Microrarray data were analyzed using GeneSpring 14.5 software (Agilent).
The ChIP-seq data reported in this paper were deposited at Gene Expression
Omnibus database with accession number GSE74636 (see Table S4).
Acknowledgements
We thank Paul J. Tesar and Jun Aruga for provision of the EpiSC line and anti-ZIC2
antibodies, respectively, and Carlos S. Moreno for discussions. K.M. was a doctoral
research fellow of Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: K.M., T.M., S.S., H.K.; Methodology: K.M., T.M., J.M.B., K.Y.,
H.K.; Software: S.O., M.A., K.Y., S.S.; Validation: K.M., S.O., J.M.B., S.S., H.K.;
Formal analysis: K.M., S.O., H.I., M.A., K.Y., S.S., H.K.; Investigation: K.M., T.M.,
S.O., H.I., K.Y., S.S., H.K.; Resources: J.M.B.; Data curation: S.O., H.I., S.S., H.K.;
Writing - original draft: H.K.; Writing - review & editing: H.K.; Visualization: S.O., H.I.,
S.S., H.K.; Supervision: S.O., M.A., S.S., H.K.; Project administration: H.K.; Funding
acquisition: S.S., H.K.
Funding
This study was supported by Japan Society for the Promotion of Science Kakenhi
Grants (P231147090, P23657007, P25113713 and P26251024 to H.K.) and
Collaborative Research Grants of National Institute for Basic Biology. Deposited in
PMC for immediate release.
Data availability
The ChIP-seq data reported in this study are available at Gene Expression Omnibus
with accession number GSE74636 (see Table S4).
Supplementary information
Supplementary information available online at
http://dev.biologists.org/lookup/doi/10.1242/dev.143479.supplemental
References
Acampora, D., Di Giovannantonio, L. G. and Simeone, A. (2013). Otx2 is an
intrinsic determinant of the embryonic stem cell state and is required for transition
to a stable epiblast stem cell condition. Development 140, 43-55.
Briata, P., Ilengo, C., Bobola, N. and Corte, G. (1999). Binding properties of the human
homeodomain protein OTX2 to a DNA target sequence. FEBS Lett. 445, 160-164.
Brons, I. G. M., Smithers, L. E., Trotter, M. W. B., Rugg-Gunn, P., Sun, B., Chuva
de Sousa Lopes, S. M., Howlett, S. K., Clarkson, A., Ahrlund-Richter, L.,
Pedersen, R. A. et al. (2007). Derivation of pluripotent epiblast stem cells from
mammalian embryos. Nature 448, 191-195.
Buecker, C., Srinivasan, R., Wu, Z., Calo, E., Acampora, D., Faial, T., Simeone, A.,
Tan, M., Swigut, T. and Wysocka, J. (2014). Reorganization of enhancer patterns
in transition from naive to primed pluripotency. Cell Stem Cell 14, 838-853.
Calo, E. and Wysocka, J. (2013). Modification of enhancer chromatin: what, how,
and why? Mol. Cell 49, 825-837.
Chen, X., Xu, H., Yuan, P., Fang, F., Huss, M., Vega, V. B., Wong, E., Orlov, Y. L.,
Zhang, W., Jiang, J. et al. (2008). Integration of external signaling pathways with
the core transcriptional network in embryonic stem cells. Cell 133, 1106-1117.
Creyghton, M. P., Cheng, A. W., Welstead, G. G., Kooistra, T., Carey, B. W.,
Steine, E. J., Hanna, J., Lodato, M. A., Frampton, G. M., Sharp, P. A. et al.
(2010). Histone H3K27ac separates active from poised enhancers and predicts
developmental state. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 21931-21936.
de Boer, E., Rodriguez, P., Bonte, E., Krijgsveld, J., Katsantoni, E., Heck, A.,
Grosveld, F. and Strouboulis, J. (2003). Efficient biotinylation and single-step
purification of tagged transcription factors in mammalian cells and transgenic
mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 7480-7485.
Factor, D. C., Corradin, O., Zentner, G. E., Saiakhova, A., Song, L., Chenoweth,
J. G., McKay, R. D., Crawford, G. E., Scacheri, P. C. and Tesar, P. J. (2014).
Epigenomic comparison reveals activation of “seed” enhancers during transition
from naive to primed pluripotency. Cell Stem Cell 14, 854-863.
Giardine, B., Riemer, C., Hardison, R. C., Burhans, R., Elnitski, L., Shah, P.,
Zhang, Y., Blankenberg, D., Albert, I., Taylor, J. et al. (2005). Galaxy: a platform
for interactive large-scale genome analysis. Genome Res. 15, 1451-1455.
Harikumar, A. and Meshorer, E. (2015). Chromatin remodeling and bivalent
histone modifications in embryonic stem cells. EMBO Rep. 16, 1609-1619.
Hayashi, K., Ohta, H., Kurimoto, K., Aramaki, S. and Saitou, M. (2011).
Reconstitution of the mouse germ cell specification pathway in culture by
pluripotent stem cells. Cell 146, 519-532.
Henrique,
D.,
Abranches,
E.,
Verrier,
L.
and
Storey,
K.
G.
(2015).
Neuromesodermal progenitors and the making of the spinal cord. Development
142, 2864-2875.
Hu, G. and Wade, P. A. (2012). NuRD and pluripotency: a complex balancing act.
Cell Stem Cell 10, 497-503.
Hulsen, t., de Vlieg, J. and Alkema, W. (2008). BioVenn – a web application for the
comparison and visualization of biological lists using area-proportional Venn
diagrams. BMC Genomics 9, 488-455.
Inoue, T., Ota, M., Ogawa, M., Mikoshiba, K. and Aruga, J. (2007). Zic1 and Zic3
regulate
medial
forebrain
development
through
expansion
of
neuronal
progenitors. J. Neurosci. 27, 5461-5473.
Iwafuchi-Doi, M., Yoshida, Y., Onichtchouk, D., Leichsenring, M., Driever, W.,
Takemoto, T., Uchikawa, M., Kamachi, Y. and Kondoh, H. (2011). The Pou5f1/
Pou3f-dependent but SoxB-independent regulation of conserved enhancer N2
initiates Sox2 expression during epiblast to neural plate stages in vertebrates.
Dev. Biol. 352, 354-366.
Iwafuchi-Doi, M., Matsuda, K., Murakami, K., Niwa, H., Tesar, P. J., Aruga, J.,
Matsuo, I. and Kondoh, H. (2012). Transcriptional regulatory networks in epiblast
cells and during anterior neural plate development as modeled in epiblast stem
cells. Development 139, 3926-3937.
Jolma, A., Yan, J., Whitington, T., Toivonen, J., Nitta, K. R., Rastas, P.,
Morgunova, E., Enge, M., Taipale, M., Wei, G. et al. (2013). DNA-binding
specificities of human transcription factors. Cell 152, 327-339.
Kamachi, Y. and Kondoh, H. (2013). Sox proteins: regulators of cell fate
specification and differentiation. Development 140, 4129-4144.
Karolchik, D., Hinrichs, A. S., Furey, T. S., Roskin, K. M., Sugnet, C. W.,
Haussler, D. and Kent, W. J. (2004). The UCSC Table Browser data retrieval
tool. Nucleic Acids Res. 32, D493-D496.
Kim, J., Cantor, A. B., Orkin, S. H. and Wang, J. (2009). Use of in vivo biotinylation
to study protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions in mouse embryonic stem
cells. Nat. Protoc. 4, 506-517.
Kojima, Y., Kaufman-Francis, K., Studdert, J. B., Steiner, K. A., Power, M. D.,
Loebel, D. A. F., Jones, V., Hor, A., de Alencastro, G., Logan, G. J. et al.
(2014). The transcriptional and functional properties of mouse epiblast stem cells
resemble the anterior primitive streak. Cell Stem Cell 14, 107-120.
Kondoh, H. and Kamachi, Y. (2015). SOX2-partner factor interactions and enhancer
regulation. In Sox2: Biology and Role in Development and Disease (ed. H. Kondoh
and R. Lovell-Badge), pp. 131-142. London: Academic Press/Elsevier.
Kunarso, G., Chia, N.-Y., Jeyakani, J., Hwang, C., Lu, X., Chan, Y.-S., Ng, H.-H.
and Bourque, G. (2010). Transposable elements have rewired the core
regulatory network of human embryonic stem cells. Nat. Genet. 42, 631-634.
Lai, Y.-H., Cheng, J., Cheng, D., Feasel, M. E., Beste, K. D., Peng, J., Nusrat, A.
and Moreno, C. S. (2011). SOX4 interacts with plakoglobin in a Wnt3a-dependent
manner in prostate cancer cells. BMC Cell Biol. 12, 50.
Langmead, B. and Salzberg, S. L. (2012). Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie
2. Nat. Methods 9, 357-359.
Li, L., Song, L., Liu, C., Chen, J., Peng, G., Wang, R., Liu, P., Tang, K., Rossant,
J. and Jing, N. (2015). Ectodermal progenitors derived from epiblast stem cells by
inhibition of Nodal signaling. J. Mol. Cell Biol. 7, 455-465.
Lim, L. S., Hong, F. H., Kunarso, G. and Stanton, L. W. (2010). The pluripotency
regulator Zic3 is a direct activator of the Nanog promoter in ESCs. Stem Cells 28,
1961-1969.
1957
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2017) 144, 1948-1958 doi:10.1242/dev.143479
DEVELOPMENT

Lodato, M. A., Ng, C. W., Wamstad, J. A., Cheng, A. W., Thai, K. K., Fraenkel, E.,
Jaenisch, R. and Boyer, L. A. (2013). SOX2 co-occupies distal enhancer
elements with distinct POU factors in ESCs and NPCs to specify cell state. PLoS
Genet. 9, e1003288.
Luo, Z., Gao, X., Lin, C., Smith, E. R., Marshall, S. A., Swanson, S. K., Florens,
L., Washburn, M. P. and Shilatifard, A. (2015). Zic2 is an enhancer-binding
factor required for embryonic stem cell specification. Mol. Cell 57, 685-694.
Machanick, P. and Bailey, T. L. (2011). MEME-ChIP: motif analysis of large DNA
datasets. Bioinformatics 27, 1696-1697.
Majumder, P., Scharer, C. D., Choi, N. M. and Boss, J. M. (2014). B cell
differentiation is associated with reprogramming the CCCTC binding factor-
dependent chromatin architecture of the murine MHC class II locus. J. Immunol.
192, 3925-3935.
Matsuda, K. and Kondoh, H. (2014). Dkk1-dependent inhibition of Wnt signaling
activates Hesx1 expression through its 5′ enhancer and directs forebrain
precursor development. Genes Cells 19, 374-385.
McLean, C. Y., Bristor, D., Hiller, M., Clarke, S. L., Schaar, B. T., Lowe, C. B.,
Wenger, A. M. and Bejerano, G. (2010). GREAT improves functional
interpretation of cis-regulatory regions. Nat. Biotechnol. 28, 495-501.
Oki, S., Maehara, K., Ohkawa, Y. and Meno, C. (2014). SraTailor: graphical user
interface software for processing and visualizing ChIP-seq data. Genes Cells 19,
919-926.
Ong, C.-T. and Corces, V. G. (2012). Enhancers: emerging roles in cell fate
specification. EMBO Rep. 13, 423-430.
Pruitt, K. D., Brown, G. R., Hiatt, S. M., Thibaud-Nissen, F., Astashyn, A.,
Ermolaeva, O., Farrell, C. M., Hart, J., Landrum, M. J., McGarvey, K. M. et al.
(2014). RefSeq: an update on mammalian reference sequences. Nucleic Acids
Res. 42, D756-D763.
Richter, U., Lahtinen, T., Marttinen, P., Myö hä nen, M., Greco, D., Cannino, G.,
Jacobs, H. T., Lietzén, N., Nyman, T. A. and Battersby, B. J. (2013). A
mitochondrial ribosomal and RNA decay pathway blocks cell proliferation. Curr.
Biol. 23, 535-541.
Robinson, J. T., Thorvaldsdóttir, H., Winckler, W., Guttman, M., Lander, E. S.,
Getz, G. and Mesirov, J. P. (2011). Integrative genomics viewer. Nat. Biotechnol.
29, 24-26.
Sawicki, J. A., Morris, R. J., Monks, B., Sakai, K. and Miyazaki, J. (1998). A
composite CMV-IE enhancer/beta-actin promoter is ubiquitously expressed in
mouse cutaneous epithelium. Exp. Cell Res. 244, 367-369.
Schneider, C. A., Rasband, W. S. and Eliceiri, K. W. (2012). NIH Image to ImageJ:
25 years of image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 671-675.
Song, L., Chen, J., Peng, G., Tang, K. and Jing, N. (2016). Dynamic heterogeneity
of brachyury in mouse epiblast stem cells mediates distinct response to extrinsic
Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 291, 15212-15225.
Sugita, S., Hosaka, Y., Okada, K., Mori, D., Yano, F., Kobayashi, H., Taniguchi,
Y., Mori, Y., Okuma, T., Chang, S. H. et al. (2015). Transcription factor Hes1
modulates osteoarthritis development in cooperation with calcium/calmodulin-
dependent protein kinase 2. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112, 3080-3085.
Sumi, T., Oki, S., Kitajima, K. and Meno, C. (2013). Epiblast ground state is
controlled by canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in the postimplantation mouse
embryo and epiblast stem cells. PLoS ONE 8, e63378.
Tanaka, S., Kamachi, Y., Tanouchi, A., Hamada, H., Jing, N. and Kondoh, H.
(2004). Interplay of SOX and POU factors in regulation of the Nestin gene in neural
primordial cells. Mol. Cell. Biol. 24, 8834-8846.
Tesar, P. J., Chenoweth, J. G., Brook, F. A., Davies, T. J., Evans, E. P., Mack,
D. L., Gardner, R. L. and McKay, R. D. G. (2007). New cell lines from mouse
epiblast share defining features with human embryonic stem cells. Nature 448,
196-199.
Tsakiridis, A., Huang, Y., Blin, G., Skylaki, S., Wymeersch, F., Osorno, R.,
Economou, C., Karagianni, E., Zhao, S., Lowell, S. et al. (2014). Distinct Wnt-
driven primitive streak-like populations reflect in vivo lineage precursors.
Development 141, 1209-1221.
Tsankov, A. M., Gu, H., Akopian, V., Ziller, M. J., Donaghey, J., Amit, I., Gnirke,
A. and Meissner, A. (2015). Transcription factor binding dynamics during human
ES cell differentiation. Nature 518, 344-349.
Viens, A., Mechold, U., Lehrmann, H., Harel-Bellan, A. and Ogryzko, V. (2004).
Use of protein biotinylation in vivo for chromatin immunoprecipitation. Anal.
Biochem. 325, 68-76.
Yang, S.-H., Kalkan, T., Morissroe, C., Marks, H., Stunnenberg, H., Smith, A.
and Sharrocks, A. D. (2014). Otx2 and Oct4 drive early enhancer activation
during embryonic stem cell transition from naive pluripotency. Cell Rep. 7,
1968-1981.
Zaret, K. S. and Mango, S. E. (2016). Pioneer transcription factors, chromatin
dynamics, and cell fate control. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 37, 76-81.
Zhang, Y., Liu, T., Meyer, C. A., Eeckhoute, J., Johnson, D. S., Bernstein, B. E.,
Nussbaum, C., Myers, R. M., Brown, M., Li, W. et al. (2008). Model-based
analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome Biol. 9, R137.
1958
STEM CELLS AND REGENERATION
Development (2017) 144, 1948-1958 doi:10.1242/dev.143479
DEVELOPMENT

Figure  S1
A
EGFP
DAPI
B
0
50
100
150
δ51+S/P5
Nes+S/P5
Nes+BS/BP5
0
1
5
20
Fold activation
Development 144: doi:10.1242/dev.143479: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

0
10
20
30
40
50
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3~5
>5
Anti-ZIC2
Anti-H2
Anti-OTX2
Anti-H2
Anti-SOX2
Anti-H2
Anti-POU3F1 Anti-H2
No TF
No TF
+ ZIC2
C
0
10
20
30
40
50
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3~5
>5
Frequency in 130
Relative nuclear fluorescence intensity
+ SOX2
No TF
0
10
20
30
40
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3~5
>5
+ OTX2
No TF
0
10
20
30
40
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3~5
>5
+ POU3F1
No TF
+ ZIC2
No TF
+OTX2
No TF
+ SOX2
No TF
+ POU3F1
Development 144: doi:10.1242/dev.143479: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

NANOG immunofluorescence
Exogenous 
TF
Bright
Dim
None
86% (524/609)
14% (85/609)
ZIC3
87% (503/575)
13% (72/575)
OTX2
83% (513/614)
17% (101/614)
SOX2
85% (625/738)
15% (113/738)
POU5F1
82% (514/628)
18% (114/628)
POU3F1
84% (412/490)
16% (78/490)
(a)
(b)
No TF
+ POU5F1
D
Figure S1. Transfection of EpiSCs. (A) Assessing transfection efficiency using CAGGS-
EGFP under conditions identical to transfection for ChIP-seq. Comparison of EGFP
fluorescence with 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) nuclear fluorescence indicated
efficiency of 78% in this particular culture. The bar indicates 50 µm. (B) A luciferase
reporter assay demonstrated the full activity of biotinylated SOX2 and POU5F1 in the
activation of the Nestin enhancer. Luciferase reporters with an octamer of the Nestin minimal
enhancer Nes30 (Tanaka et al. 2004) or without the enhancer (d51) were activated with a
combination of 0, 1, 5 or 20 ng each of expression vectors for SOX2 (S) or biotinylated
SOX2 (BS) and for POU5F1 (P) or biotinylated POU5F1 (BP) in 10T1/2 cells plated in a
well of 24-well plate. The mean activation levels for technical duplicate samples were
normalized using cotransfected Renilla luciferase activity, and the fold activation relative to
the basal activity (without exogenous TFs) is shown. The error bars indicate the range of data
points. The basal luciferase expression with Nes30 enhancer was 9.3% of that for d51.
Details on the transfection conditions and assays have been described previously (Tanaka et
al. 2004). (C) Analysis of nuclear TF expression levels after transfection with BLRP-tagged
exogenous TFs, ZIC2, OTX2, SOX2 or POU3F1, as indicated in Fig. 1C. Nuclei with
condensed chromosomes indicating immediately pre/post mitotic stages were excluded from
the analysis. When the fluorescence intensity was found to saturate the photorecord, shorter
exposure images were used for the analysis. (D) Effect of exogenous TF with BLRP tags on
Nanog expression in EpiSCs. (a) Nanog expression was detected in all EpiSC nuclei by
immunofluorescence. The expression level that was exceeded in ~85% of control nuclei was
set as a threshold and marked red. The bar indicates 50 µm. (b) The nuclei expressing higher
level (Bright) or lower level (Dim) was counted, and the fractions of “Bright” and “Dim”
populations after expression of exogenous TFs were compared with the untransfected control.
Development 144: doi:10.1242/dev.143479: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

Development 144: doi:10.1242/dev.143479: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

Figure S2. (A) Power-weight matrix (PMW) representation of MEME-ChIP outputs showing
sequence motifs highly enriched in ChIP-seq peaks of <1000 bases wide for each TF.
Unerased E-values are shown on top of the motifs. (B) Normalized variations of peak
densities over the 2585 genomic segments. (a) After normalizing the average peak density to
1, the peak density in each Mb segment was plotted over the entire genome for the five TFs.
SD, standard deviation. (b) The summary of the distribution and extents of normalized peak
densities represented by histograms. (C) Size distribution of peak gaps, which are distances
between the midpoint of nearest peaks. Observed distributions (top) are compared with the
expected distributions using randomized peak positions (bottom). (D) Statistics on the peak
sizes for all MACS-annotated peaks. The areas representing peaks over 1000 bp (expected to
contain several TF binding sites) and over 2000 bp (expected to contain numerous TF
binding sites) are colored.
Development 144: doi:10.1242/dev.143479: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

A
B
01
01
01
0.1
-5000
0
5000
01
01
01
0.1
-5000
0
5000
Fraction of overlap
10–1
–5
5
0
Distance (kbp) to peak midpoint of
ZIC2, OTX2, SOX2, POU5F1, and POU3F1
Observed
Randomized
–2.5
2.5
–5
5
0
–2.5
2.5
10–2
10–3
10–4
01
01
01
01
0.1
1
-5000
0
5000
01
01
01
01
0.1
1
-5000
0
5000
01
01
01
01
0.1
1
-5000
0
5000
01
01
01
01
0.1
1
-5000
0
5000
01
01
01
01
0.1
1
-5000
0
5000
01
01
01
01
0.1
1
-5000
0
5000
Fraction of overlap
–5
5
1
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
10–5
Distance (kbp) to peak midpoint of
H3K4me1 ∩ H3K27ac (Active enhancers)
H3K4me3 ∩ H3K27ac (Active promoters / enhancers)
H3K4me1 ∩ H3K27me3 (Poised enhancers)
ZIC2
OTX2
SOX2
POU5F1
POU3F1
ZIC2 ∩ OTX2
0
0
0
0
0
0
–5
–5
–5
–5
–5
5
5
5
5
5
C
1
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
10–5
Figure S3
Development 144: doi:10.1242/dev.143479: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

Figure S3. (A) Statistics for the positioning of ChIP-seq summits relative to TSSs of the 
nearest genes, generated using GREAT software. (B) Aggregation plots illustrating the 
fraction of relative midpoint positions of the ChIP-seq peaks of TFs indicated by color codes 
that overlap with TSSs of RefSeq genes. Ordinate, the fraction of overlap in logarithmic 
scale measured in 100 bp bins. (C) Aggregation plots illustrating the fraction of relative 
midpoint positions of modified histone H3 ChIP-seq peaks (data taken from Factor et al.
(2014)) overlapping with the TF ChIP-seq peaks (shown on the top). Ordinate, the fraction of 
overlap in logarithmic scale measured in 100 bp bins. The decrease of the frequency of the 
co-occurrence of H3K4me3 and H3K27ac histone modification signatures at the ChIP-seq 
peak positions of POU3F1 and POU5F1 is accounted for by the low frequencies of 
positioning of these peaks at TSSs shown in (B).
Development 144: doi:10.1242/dev.143479: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
4
r = 0.58
POU3F1
ZIC2
Figure S4
POU3F1
POU5F1
POU3F1
ZIC2
r = 0.65
0
1
2
3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
POU3F1
0 
  1  
 2 
  3    4
POU5F1
A
B
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
Figure S4. Comparison of expression level variations for ZIC2 vs. POU3F1 (A) and 
POU5F1 vs. POU3F1 (B) in individual nuclei of EpiSCs. The cultures were stained with 
respective antibodies, as exemplified by the panels in (a). Anti-ZIC2 also stains ZIC1 and 
ZIC3, but the major ZIC in EpiSCs is ZIC2 (Iwafuchi-Doi et al., 2014). The bars indicate 50 
µm. (b) Measured relative fluorescence intensities over 211 nuclei in (A) or 330 nuclei in (B) 
were compared using scatter plots, which gave correlation coefficients of 0.58 and 0.65, 
respectively.
Development 144: doi:10.1242/dev.143479: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

 
Figure S5. The nucleotide sequence of pCAGGS-BLRP-BirA with annotation of sequences indicated in Figure 1A. 
ATTATTGAAGCATTTATCAGGGTTATTGTCTCATGAGCGGATACATATTTGAATGTATTTAGAAAAATAAACAAATAGGGGTTCCGCGCACATTTCCCCG
AAAAGTGCCACCTGGGTCGACATTGATTATTGACTAGTTATTAATAGTAATCAATTACGGGGTCATTAGTTCATAGCCCATATATGGAGTTCCGCGTTAC
ATAACTTACGGTAAATGGCCCGCCTGGCTGACCGCCCAACGACCCCCGCCCATTGACGTCAATAATGACGTATGTTCCCATAGTAACGCCAATAGGGACT
TTCCATTGACGTCAATGGGTGGAGTATTTACGGTAAACTGCCCACTTGGCAGTACATCAAGTGTATCATATGCCAAGTACGCCCCCTATTGACGTCAATG
ACGGTAAATGGCCCGCCTGGCATTATGCCCAGTACATGACCTTATGGGACTTTCCTACTTGGCAGTACATCTACGTATTAGTCATCGCTATTACCATGGT
CGAGGTGAGCCCCACGTTCTGCTTCACTCTCCCCATCTCCCCCCCCTCCCCACCCCCAATTTTGTATTTATTTATTTTTTAATTATTTTGTGCAGCGATG
GGGGCGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGCGCGCGCCAGGCGGGGCGGGGCGGGGCGAGGGGCGGGGCGGGGCGAGGCGGAGAGGTGCGGCGGCAGCCAATCAGAGCG
GCGCGCTCCGAAAGTTTCCTTTTATGGCGAGGCGGCGGCGGCGGCGGCCCTATAAAAAGCGAAGCGCGCGGCGGGCGGGAGTCGCTGCGCGCTGCCTTCG
CCCCGTGCCCCGCTCCGCCGCCGCCTCGCGCCGCCCGCCCCGGCTCTGACTGACCGCGTTACTCCCACAGGTGAGCGGGCGGGACGGCCCTTCTCCTCCG
GGCTGTAATTAGCGCTTGGTTTAATGACGGCTTGTTTCTTTTCTGTGGCTGCGTGAAAGCCTTGAGGGGCTCCGGGAGGGCCCTTTGTGCGGGGGGAGCG
GCTCGGGGGGTGCGTGCGTGTGTGTGTGCGTGGGGAGCGCCGCGTGCGGCTCCGCGCTGCCCGGCGGCTGTGAGCGCTGCGGGCGCGGCGCGGGGCTTTG
TGCGCTCCGCAGTGTGCGCGAGGGGAGCGCGGCCGGGGGCGGTGCCCCGCGGTGCGGGGGGGGCTGCGAGGGGAACAAAGGCTGCGTGCGGGGTGTGTGC
GTGGGGGGGTGAGCAGGGGGTGTGGGCGCGTCGGTCGGGCTGCAACCCCCCCTGCACCCCCCTCCCCGAGTTGCTGAGCACGGCCCGGCTTCGGGTGCGG
GGCTCCGTACGGGGCGTGGCGCGGGGCTCGCCGTGCCGGGCGGGGGGTGGCGGCAGGTGGGGGTGCCGGGCGGGGCGGGGCCGCCTCGGGCCGGGGAGGG
CTCGGGGGAGGGGCGCGGCGGCCCCCGGAGCGCCGGCGGCTGTCGAGGCGCGGCGAGCCGCAGCCATTGCCTTTTATGGTAATCGTGCGAGAGGGCGCAG
GGACTTCCTTTGTCCCAAATCTGTGCGGAGCCGAAATCTGGGAGGCGCCGCCGCACCCCCTCTAGCGGGCGCGGGGCGAAGCGGTGCGGCGCCGGCAGGA
AGGAAATGGGCGGGGAGGGCCTTCGTGCGTCGCCGCGCCGCCGTCCCCTTCTCCCTCTCCAGCCTCGGGGCTGTCCGCGGGGGGACGGCTGCCTTCGGGG
GGGACGGGGCAGGGCGGGGTTCGGCTTCTGGCGTGTGACCGGCGGCTCTAGAGCCTCTGCTAACCATGTTCATGCCTTCTTCTTTTTCCTACAGCTCCTG
GGCAACGTGCTGGTTATTGTGCTGTCTCATCATTTTGGCAAAGAATTGCACCCCCCGGGATGGCTGGTGGCCTCAACGACATCTTCGAGGCCCAGAAGAT
CGAGTGGCATGAAGATACTGGTGGATCAGAGAATTTGTATTTTCAGCATCATCACCATCACCATGCTAGCGGCCGCTAAGCAGATCTGCGGCCGCTCGAG
GAATTCTCTCCCTCCCCCCCCCCTAACGTTACTGGCCGAAGCCGCTTGGAATAAGGCCGGTGTGCGTTTGTCTATATGTTATTTTCCACCATATTGCCGT
CTTTTGGCAATGTGAGGGCCCGGAAACCTGGCCCTGTCTTCTTGACGAGCATTCCTAGGGGTCTTTCCCCTCTCGCCAAAGGAATGCAAGGTCTGTTGAA
TGTCGTGAAGGAAGCAGTTCCTCTGGAAGCTTCTTGAAGACAAACAACGTCTGTAGCGACCCTTTGCAGGCAGCGGAACCCCCCACCTGGCGACAGGTGC
CTCTGCGGCCAAAAGCCACGTGTATAAGATACACCTGCAAAGGCGGCACAACCCCAGTGCCACGTTGTGAGTTGGATAGTTGTGGAAAGAGTCAAATGGC
TCTCCTCAAGCGTATTCAACAAGGGGCTGAAGGATGCCCAGAAGGTACCCCATTGTATGGGATCTGATCTGGGGCCTCGGTGCACATGCTTTACATGTGT
TTAGTCGAGGTTAAAAAAACGTCTAGGCCCCCCGAACCACGGGGACGTGGTTTTCCTTTGAAAAACACGATGATAATATGGCCACACTCGAGGCCGGCAA
GGCCGGATCCACCatgaaggataacaccgtgccactgaaattgattgccctgttagcgaacggtgaatttcactctggcgagcagttgggtgaaacgctg
ggaatgagccgggcggctattaataaacacattcagacactgcgtgactggggcgttgatgtctttaccgttccgggtaaaggatacagcctgcctgagc
ctatccagttacttaatgctaaacagatattgggtcagctggatggcggtagtgtagccgtgctgccagtgattgactccacgaatcagtaccttcttga
tcgtatcggagagcttaaatcgggcgatgcttgcattgcagaataccagcaggctggccgtggtcgccggggtcggaaatggttttcgccttttggcgca
aacttatatttgtcgatgttctggcgtctggaacaaggcccggcggcggcgattggtttaagtctggttatcggtatcgtgatggcggaagtattacgca
agctgggtgcagataaagttcgtgttaaatggcctaatgacctctatctgcaggatcgcaagctggcaggcattctggtggagctgactggcaaaactgg
cgatgcggcgcaaatagtcattggagccgggatcaacatggcaatgcgccgtgttgaagagagtgtcgttaatcaggggtggatcacgctgcaggaagcg
SmaI 
BLRP 
His6 
IRES 
NotI 
BirA 
STOP 
Development 144: doi:10.1242/dev.143479: Supplementary information
Development • Supplementary information

===== McCarthy2018_JBC_Microglia+IronTransport =====
Inflammation-induced iron transport and metabolism by
brain microglia
Received for publication,January 16, 2018, and in revised form, March 29, 2018 Published, Papers in Press, April 2, 2018, DOI 10.1074/jbc.RA118.001949
Ryan C. McCarthy, Jose Carlo Sosa, Andrew M. Gardeck, Andrew S. Baez, Chih-Hao Lee,
and Marianne Wessling-Resnick1
From the Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases, Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115
Edited by F. Peter Guengerich
Microglia are immune cells of the central nervous system and
are implicated in brain inflammation. However, how brain
microglia modulate transport and metabolism of the essential
metal iron in response to pro- and anti-inflammatory environ-
mental cues is unclear. Here, we characterized uptake of trans-
ferrin (Tf)-bound iron (TBI) and non-Tf–bound iron (NTBI) by
immortalized microglial (IMG) cells. We found that these cells
preferentially take up NTBI in response to the proinflammatory
stimulus lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or -amyloid (A). In con-
trast, the anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin 4 (IL-4) pro-
moted TBI uptake. Concordant with these functional data, lev-
els of the Tf receptor (TfR) in IMG cells were up-regulated in
response to IL-4, whereas divalent metal transporter-1 (DMT1)
and ferritin levels increased in response to LPS or A. Similar
changes in expression were confirmed in isolated primary
adult mouse microglia treated with pro- or anti-inflammatory
inducers. LPS-induced changes in IMG cell iron metabolism
were accompanied by notable metabolic changes, including
increased glycolysis and decreased oxidative respiration. Under
these conditions, the extracellular acidification rate was in-
creased, compatible with changes in the cellular microenviron-
ment that would support the pH-dependent function of DMT1.
Moreover, LPS increased heme oxygenase-1 (HO1) expres-
sion in IMG cells, and iron released because of HO1 ac-
tivity increased the intracellular labile free-iron pool. Together,
this evidence indicates that brain microglia preferentially
acquire iron from Tf or from non-Tf sources, depending on their
polarization state; that NTBI uptake is enhanced by the proin-
flammatory response; and that under these conditions microglia
sequester both extra- and intracellular iron.
The brain is the most metabolically active organ in the body
and has a high demand for iron. Iron serves as a cofactor in
myelination, neurotransmission, oxygen transport, cellular
division, and mitochondrial energy generation (1, 2). Left
unchecked, a disruption in normal iron transport can lead to
toxic side effects via the production of reactive oxygen species
by excess iron. For example, high levels of iron have been asso-
ciated with -amyloid (A)2 plaques that accumulate in Alzhei-
mer’s disease and in microglial cells that are associated with
these areas in brain (3). Microglia are the immune cells of the
central nervous system (CNS), and brain inflammatory status is
thought to be largely determined by their action (4). Microglia
are dynamic cells that respond to changes in the local microen-
vironment by polarizing across a spectrum of pro- or anti-in-
flammatory states in an effort to maintain a stable neural envi-
ronment (5). Polarization results in changes to microglial cell
function, morphology, motility, glycolytic metabolism, and
mitochondrial respiration (6, 7). Stimuli that induce a proin-
flammatory M1 state include the bacterial endotoxin lipopoly-
saccharide (LPS), proinflammatory cytokines like interleukin
1 (IL-1), and the Alzheimer’s disease protein A. Con-
versely, cytokines such as interleukin-4 (IL-4) and interleu-
kin-13 (IL-13) act as anti-inflammatory stimuli in the context of
microglial cell polarization to promote an M2 polarization state
associated with resolution of inflammation and tissue repair (8,
9). A major goal to understand brain iron metabolism and
neuroinflammation is to define the patterns of iron uptake by
microglia when they are exposed to pro- or anti-inflammatory
stimuli.
Many of the proteins involved in iron uptake, storage, and
efflux in peripheral tissues and systemic circulation have been
identified within the brain. Proteins involved in iron metabo-
lism identified in microglia include divalent metal transport-
er-1 (DMT1), transferrin receptor (TfR), ferritin, and ferropor-
tin (Fpn) (10–12). Cellular iron acquisition involves two
distinct pathways, each of which is defined by the iron transport
substrate: 1) the nontransferrin-bound iron uptake (NTBI)
pathway and 2) the canonical transferrin-bound iron (TBI)
uptake pathway. In the NTBI uptake pathway, Fe3 is reduced
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants NIDDK R01
DK064750 (to M. W.-R), NIAID R21 AI131659 (to C.-H. L.), and NIEHS T32
ES016645 (to R. C. M). The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest with the contents of this article. The content is solely the respon-
sibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views
of the National Institutes of Health.
This article contains Fig. S1.
1 Towhomcorrespondenceshouldbeaddressed:Dept.ofGeneticsandCom-
plex Diseases, Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, 665 Huntington
Ave., Boston, MA 02115. Tel.: 617-432-3267; Fax: 617-432-5236; E-mail:
wessling@hsph.harvard.edu.
2 The abbreviations used are: A, -amyloid; DMT1, divalent metal transport-
er-1; FAC, ferric ammonium citrate; Fpn, ferroportin; HO1, heme oxyge-
nase-1; IMG, immortalized microglial; IRE, iron-responsive element; IRP,
iron-responsive protein; LIP, labile iron pool; NTBI, nontransferrin-bound
iron; Tf, transferrin; TBI, transferrin-bound iron; TfR, transferrin receptor;
ROS, reactive oxygen species; ICP, inductively coupled plasma; H-ferri-
tin, heavy ferritin subunit; L-ferritin, light ferritin subunit; qPCR, quan-
titative PCR; FCCP, carbonyl cyanide 4-(trifluoromethoxy)phenylhydra-
zone; ANOVA, analysis of variance.
cro
ARTICLE
J. Biol. Chem. (2018) 293(20) 7853–7863 7853
© 2018 McCarthy et al. Published under exclusive license by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.
This is an Open Access article under the CC BY license.

at the cell surface to Fe2 by an endogenous ferrireductase and
transported through the plasma membrane and into the cytosol
via a divalent cation transporter such as DMT1. In the TBI
uptake pathway, iron is bound to transferrin as Fe3. This com-
plex binds to TfRs and becomes internalized by endocytosis.
Inside the endosome, the acidic environment promotes release
of Fe3 from Tf–TfR. Iron is then reduced to Fe2 and trans-
located into the cytosol by DMT1 or other transporters (13, 14).
Microglia likely interact with NTBI and TBI as both forms of
iron have been identified in cerebral spinal fluid (15). Relative to
systemic levels circulating in plasma (25 M), the amount of Tf
in brain interstitial fluid is thought to be quite low (0.21–0.28
M), whereas NTBI levels are quite high (0.3–1.2 M). Although
Tf moves iron across the blood–brain barrier, there is evidence
that Tf-binding sites are saturated in the brain such that NTBI
accumulates; this idea is supported by the presence of ferrous
iron in cerebral spinal fluid (16). Thus, the actual form(s) of iron
that may be taken up by microglia in the brain remains poorly
characterized. A previous study of primary rat microglia sug-
gested a correlation between microglial polarization, DMT1
expression, and microglial iron uptake (11). To better address
these questions, we utilized an immortalized adult murine
microglial (IMG) cell line (17). First, we demonstrate that IMG
cells can acquire iron provided as either NTBI or TBI. Second,
we show that transcript and protein levels of iron transport
genes are differentially altered in response to pro- and anti-
inflammatory stimuli and confirm that these changes accu-
rately reflect the response of primary mouse microglia under
the same conditions. Finally, we determine that utilization of
NTBI or TBI pathways for IMG cell iron uptake depends upon
microglial cell polarization. In particular, both LPS and the Alz-
heimer’s disease protein A increase uptake of NTBI and
expand the ferritin storage pool. The response to proinflamma-
tory mediators serves to limit oxidative stress and potentially
damaging ROS in the neural environment. Under proinflam-
matory conditions, IMG cells have increased glycolysis and
extracellular acidification, supporting changes in the microen-
vironment favoring NTBI uptake by DMT1. LPS-treated IMG
cells have decreased oxidative respiration, heme oxygenase-1
(HO1) is induced, and intracellular heme levels are reduced.
Our study shows that the labile iron pool (LIP) is also increased
under these conditions, suggesting that microglia sequester
both intracellular iron released by heme catabolism and extra-
cellular iron taken up by DMT1. Based on these data, we pro-
pose a model by which microglia actively modify the iron status
of their environment in response to inflammation.
Results
IMG cell TBI uptake depends upon cellular iron status
TBI has been measured in the brain interstitial fluid albeit at
lower amounts than systemic circulation (15). To examine
whether microglia take up iron from this source, we incubated
IMG cells with 55Fe-Tf at 37 or 4 °C and monitored cell-associ-
ated 55Fe over time. These results demonstrate that IMG
cell 55Fe-Tf uptake is both time- and temperature-dependent
(Fig. 1A).
TfR is required for canonical Tf–TfR endosomal cycling and
import of TBI into the cell. TfR expression is post-transcrip-
tionally regulated by cellular iron status by the binding of iron-
responsive proteins (IRPs) to iron-responsive elements (IREs)
in the 3-untranslated region (UTR) of the receptor transcript.
High intracellular iron diminishes IRP–IRE interactions and
increases nucleolytic turnover of the TfR transcript, resulting in
a subsequent decrease in TfR protein level to diminish the cell’s
ability to acquire iron from Tf (19). To determine whether IMG
cell TfR is regulated by cellular iron content under these con-
ditions, we examined TfR transcript and protein expression in
IMG cells loaded for 18 h with or without ferric ammonium
citrate (FAC). IMG cell iron loading resulted in a significant
decrease in TfR transcript expression, protein expression, and
55Fe-TBI uptake (Fig. 1, B–D). These data indicate that IMG
cells can acquire iron as presented as TBI and that TBI trans-
port is down-regulated when cellular iron status increases.
Characteristics of IMG cell NTBI uptake
Because significant levels of NTBI are found in cerebral spi-
nal fluid and thought to be present in brain interstitial fluid (15),
we examined characteristics of NTBI uptake by IMG cells. To
first determine whether IMG cells could acquire extracellular
NTBI, cells were treated for 18 h with or without 50 M FAC as
described above. The total steady-state intracellular 57Fe con-
tent was then determined by inductively coupled plasma MS
(ICP-MS). IMG cell iron content was more than 2-fold greater
in cells treated with FAC compared with untreated control cells
(Fig. 2A). Increased intracellular iron is typically sequestered in
the iron storage protein ferritin. L- and H-ferritin are post-
transcriptionally regulated by IRP binding to an IRE in the
5-UTR of mRNA. Increased intracellular iron will disrupt this
IRP–IRE interaction to promote protein synthesis (20). West-
ern blot analysis confirmed that L-ferritin levels increase in
FAC-treated IMG cells (Fig. 2B). To study iron flux under these
conditions, IMG cells were incubated with 55Fe-NTBI, and
uptake was determined as described above for 55Fe-Tf trans-
port assays. The results of these experiments show that IMG
cells take up NTBI in a time- and temperature-dependent man-
ner and that similar levels of cellular uptake occur at pH 6.0 and
7.4 (Fig. 2C).
In addition to ferrous iron, several known divalent cation
transporters will also transport manganese and zinc. Therefore,
we examined divalent metal competition for 55Fe-NTBI uptake
by IMG cells. Both manganese and zinc blocked 55Fe-NTBI
uptake by IMG cells, irrespective of the pH of the assay buffer
(Fig. 2D). The observed competition for uptake by these diva-
lent cations suggests that Fe2 is the actual transport substrate
for NTBI uptake. To determine whether an endogenous ferri-
reductase might be limiting for transport, 55Fe-NTBI uptake
assays were performed at pH 6.0 and 7.4 with or without excess
ascorbate present to reduce ferric to ferrous iron. The results of
these experiments indicate that reduction is not rate-limiting
for uptake of 55Fe-NTBI by IMG cells (Fig. 2E). Although IMG
cells appear to have sufficient endogenous ferrireductase activ-
ity to support NTBI uptake, ascorbate was added to all sub-
sequent transport assays to avoid any potentially confound-
ing effects. Taken together, these data indicate that IMG
Microglial iron transport
7854
J. Biol. Chem. (2018) 293(20) 7853–7863

cells can acquire non-Tf–bound iron present in their extra-
cellular environment.
Opposing pro- and anti-inflammatory stimuli dictate iron
transport substrate preference by IMG cells
We have previously demonstrated that LPS and IL-4 polarize
IMG cells to more proinflammatory (M1) or anti-inflammatory
(M2) states, respectively (17). To test the hypothesis that polar-
ization of IMG cells would change the expression levels of
transport-associated factors, cells were incubated for 18 h with
or without LPS (10 ng/ml) or IL-4 (10 ng/ml), and mRNA was
isolated for analysis by quantitative PCR (qPCR). LPS-treated
IMG cells displayed increased DMT1 and H-ferritin transcript
levels, whereas IL-4 treatment increased TfR mRNA abun-
dance (Fig. 3A). Similar experiments confirmed the pattern of
LPS- and IL-4–induced changes in primary adult mouse micro-
glia (Fig. 3B).
To correlate changes in transcript levels with protein, West-
ern blot analysis was carried out using lysates of IMG cells
treated for 18 h with or without LPS or IL-4. Immunoblots were
analyzed for DMT1, TfR, H-ferritin, and Fpn; -tubulin was
used as a loading control (Fig. 3C). Densitometry analysis
revealed significant increases in LPS-treated cells for DMT1
and H-ferritin, whereas IL-4 treatment up-regulated levels of
TfR but none of these other factors. A lower-molecular-weight
DMT1 species that was detected most likely reflects newly syn-
thesized unprocessed protein induced by LPS. We were unable
to detect levels of two other divalent metal transporters, Zip8
and Zip14, in IMG cells (Fig. S1). Control experiments con-
firmed specific detection of Fpn (Fig. S1), but no changes in
levels of the iron exporter were observed in response to LPS or
IL-4.
To examine the functional consequences of LPS- and IL-4–
induced changes in iron transporter expression (DMT1 and
TfR, respectively), cellular NTBI and TBI uptake was measured
after IMG cell polarization to the M1 or M2 state. For these
experiments, IMG cells were first treated with LPS or IL-4 for
18 h prior to 55Fe uptake assays as described above. A signifi-
cant increase in 55Fe uptake was noted in LPS-treated IMG cells
when 55Fe-NTBI was used as a transport substrate, whereas
uptake by IL-4–treated cells was similar to untreated control
cells (Fig. 4A). These results are consistent with LPS-induced
changes in cellular NTBI uptake reported for isolated primary
rat microglia (11). To confirm a role for DMT1 in the LPS-
induced transport pathway, ebselen was used as a pharmaco-
logical inhibitor of this transporter (21). Incubation with
ebselen for 30 min prior to the start of and during the 55Fe-
NTBI uptake assay reduced LPS-stimulated 55Fe-NTBI uptake
by IMG cells (Fig. 4B). Unlike other divalent metal transporters,
including Zip8 and Zip14 (22), DMT1 activity is proton-cou-
pled. Therefore, we also determined the pH dependence of
NTBI uptake by measuring the extent of activity in LPS-treated
IMG cells at pH 6.0 and 7.4 compared with untreated control
Figure 1. Characteristics of TBI uptake by IMG cells. A, IMG cells were incubated with 13 nM 55Fe-Tf at 37 °C or 4 °C. Whole-cell 55Fe content was determined
at various time points as indicated. B, changes in message levels of TfR in IMG cells incubated for 18 h with or without FAC were determined by qPCR. C, the
immunoblot of whole-cell lysates from IMG cells incubated for 18 h with or without 50 M FAC was probed for TfR. -Tubulin was immunoblotted as a loading
control. D, 55Fe-Tf uptake assays were performed with IMG cells incubated for 18 h with or without 50 M FAC. Total cell-associated 55Fe content was
determined. Data are means  S.D. (n  3). Significance was determined using Student’s t tests. *, p  0.05. Error bars represent S.D.
Microglial iron transport
J. Biol. Chem. (2018) 293(20) 7853–7863 7855

cells. Although increased uptake was observed under low-pH
conditions, less 55Fe-NTBI was taken up at pH 7.4 (Fig. 4C).
These combined data support the idea that DMT1 plays a sig-
nificant role in LPS-induced 55Fe uptake by IMG cells, and
under proinflammatory conditions microglial cell NTBI uptake
becomes markedly dependent on pH.
In contrast to the results obtained for NTBI uptake, when
55Fe-Tf was presented as a transport substrate, a significant
increase in 55Fe uptake by IL-4–treated IMG cells was observed
relative to both control or LPS-treated cells (Fig. 4D). To deter-
mine the role of TfR in this response, we used siRNA to knock
down receptor levels induced by IL-4 treatment. TfR knock-
down was confirmed in immunoblots of lysates from IMG cells
transfected with control siRNA or TfR-specific siRNA and then
treated for 18 h with IL-4 (Fig. 4E). Densitometric analyses con-
firmed reduction in TfR expression due to siRNA transfection
by 56%. IMG cells transfected with control or TfR-specific
siRNA and treated for 18 h with IL-4 were subsequently assayed
for 55Fe-TBI uptake. Transfection with TfR-specific siRNA
reversed the effect of IL-4 treatment compared with control
Figure 2. Characteristics of NTBI uptake by IMG cells. A, 57Fe content in IMG cells treated for 18 h with or without FAC (50 M) was determined by ICP-MS.
B, the immunoblot of whole-cell lysates from IMG cells incubated for 18 h with or without 50 M FAC was probed for L-ferritin and loading control -tubulin.
C, IMG cells were incubated with 1 M 55Fe-NTBI in pH 6.0 or 7.4 uptake buffer at both 37 (circles) and 4 °C (triangles). Whole-cell 55Fe content was determined
at the indicated time points. D, whole-cell 55Fe content was determined from IMG cells incubated with 1 M 55Fe at pH 6.0 or 7.4 with or without 100 M
manganeseorzinc.Assaymixtureswereincubatedat37or4 °Casindicated.E,whole-cell 55FecontentwasdeterminedfromIMGcellsincubatedwith1M 55Fe
with or without 50 M ascorbate at pH 6.0 or 7.4. Data are means  S.D. (n  3–5). One-way ANOVA or Student’s t test was used to determine significance. *,
p  0.05; ***, p  0.0001; n.s., not significant. Error bars represent S.D.
Microglial iron transport
7856
J. Biol. Chem. (2018) 293(20) 7853–7863

siRNA–transfected IMG cells (Fig. 4F). These data support the
model that increased levels of TfR are responsible for enhanced
55TBI uptake by IMG cells induced by IL-4. Thus, M1 and M2
polarized IMG cells enlist distinct transport mechanisms with
different substrate preferences for NTBI and TBI, respectively.
A up-regulates DMT1 and ferritin to increase NTBI uptake by
IMG cells
We have previously shown that A induces a proinflamma-
tory response in IMG cells (17). The Alzheimer’s disease pro-
tein appears to play an important role in microglial cell activa-
tion during neurodegeneration (3) and therefore is a relevant
physiological agonist known to induce a proinflammatory
response. To determine whether IMG cells regulate iron trans-
port under these conditions, we compared transcript levels in
cells treated with LPS or A (Fig. 5A). Increased levels of DMT1
transcript were observed along with up-regulation of H-ferritin
message, similar to the pattern observed in IMG cells and pri-
mary microglia treated with LPS (Fig. 3). No change in TfR
transcript levels was observed, consistent with the idea that
NTBI rather than TBI uptake would be enhanced by M1
polarization. To confirm this idea, transport assays were car-
ried out after LPS or A treatment. 55Fe-NTBI uptake by
IMG cells was enhanced under both conditions relative to
control (untreated) cells (Fig. 5B). These observations sup-
port the idea that microglia act to clear extracellular free iron
when recruited to A-containing plaques during the neuro-
inflammatory response to disease.
IMG cell metabolic switch occurs in response to LPS
In many different cell types, the proinflammatory M1
response is associated with changes in cellular metabolism
reflected in increased glycolysis and decreased oxidative
metabolism (8, 9, 24). To examine whether similar metabolic
changes occur in IMG cells treated with LPS, we used Seahorse
XF extracellular flux assays to measure the glycolytic response
and rates of extracellular acidification along with mitochon-
drial stress and oxygen consumption rates. For these experi-
ments, cells were exposed to 10 ng/ml LPS for 4 h prior to flux
measurements performed as described under “Experimental
procedures.” As shown in Fig. 6A, LPS exposure was associated
with enhanced glucose-induced glycolysis and glycolytic cap-
acity. Extracellular acidification due to increased glycolysis
would provide a cellular microenvironment compatible with
increased pH-dependent DMT1 activity (Fig. 4C). Additionally,
mitochondrial stress tests showed that LPS-treated IMG cells
had reduced respiration capacity (Fig. 6C). Reduced mitochon-
drial respiration further supports the idea that IMG cells
undergo metabolic reprogramming concurrent with changes in
iron transport substrate preference in response to proinflam-
matory stimuli. IMG cells do not appear to have significant
levels of spare mitochondrial respiratory capacity, and LPS-
stimulated IMG cells have further reduced oxygen consump-
tion when treated with the uncoupler carbonyl cyanide 4-(trif-
luoromethoxy)phenylhydrazone (FCCP). LPS stimulation is
known to trigger complex II–mediated ROS production. ROS
further contribute to mitochondrial membrane depolarization
and network fragmentation. Dysregulated complex II activities
and/or reduced electron transport function may explain why
LPS-treated IMG cells have lower oxygen consumption rate
(OCR) upon FCCP addition.
M1 polarization induces heme degradation to increase the
intracellular LIP
Mitochondria are responsible not only for oxidative metab-
olism but also for heme synthesis, an important component
of cellular iron metabolism. Given the metabolic changes
observed with LPS stimulation, we further examined cellular
levels of heme and the heme-degrading enzyme HO1. LPS
induced both protein and transcript levels of HO1 (Fig. 7, A and
B). These changes were associated with a corresponding
decrease in cellular heme content in LPS-treated cells (Fig. 7C).
To determine whether iron released by HO1 heme degradation
entered the “free” LIP, the iron-binding dye calcein-AM was
used to determine changes elicited in response to LPS. These
measurements revealed that LIP was increased in LPS-treated
IMG cells and show that under proinflammatory conditions
levels of cellular free iron become elevated. This response
appears to be caused by iron released due to heme degradation
because zinc protoporphyrin, an inhibitor of HO1, blocks this
response.
Figure 3. Expression of iron-related factors in both primary microglia
and IMG cells treated with LPS or IL-4. Quantitative PCR was used to deter-
mine levels of iron-related transcripts in IMG cells (A; n  9) or primary micro-
glia (B; n  9) treated for 18 h with 10 ng/ml LPS or 10 ng/ml IL-4.The line
indicates control Ct set to 1. C, immunoblots of whole-cell lysates from IMG
cells treated for 18 h with or without LPS (10 ng/ml) or IL-4 (10 ng/ml) were
probed for the indicated proteins and the loading control -tubulin. Shown
are representative blots with band densities relative to control determined
for at least three biological replicates. For DMT1, changes in the upper band
density were determined (arrow). Data are means  S.D. One-way ANOVA or
a Student’s two-tailed t test was used to determine significance of LPS- and
IL-4–treated cells relative to control (untreated cells). *, p  0.05; **, p  0.01;
***, p  0.005; %, p  0.0005; #, p  0.0001. Error bars represent S.D.
Microglial iron transport
J. Biol. Chem. (2018) 293(20) 7853–7863 7857

Discussion
Our investigation focused on identifying the major proteins
and pathways involved in iron acquisition by microglia and how
iron uptake and metabolism might be modulated under pro- or
anti-inflammatory conditions. To address this question, we
analyzed transcript expression, protein levels, and iron trans-
port function in IMG cells treated with LPS and IL-4. Previous
studies from our group demonstrated that IMG cells recapitu-
late the major functions of brain microglia and polarize to both
proinflammatory (M1) and anti-inflammatory (M2) activation
states (17). The results of this study show that, under resting
conditions, IMG cells can take up iron presented as either the
TBI or NTBI form. Transport of both substrates was time- and
temperature-dependent. Iron loading induced by exposure
to FAC reduced Tf-mediated transport, corresponding to
decreased TfR. Our 55Fe-TBI uptake studies reflect the known
attributes of the canonical Tf–TfR pathway. Although TBI is a
constituent of brain interstitial fluid, levels of NTBI are much
higher, suggesting that it is also available to act as a substrate for
iron transport by microglia (15). Using both ICP-MS analysis of
steady-state iron levels and an isotopic tracer (55Fe) to monitor
transport flux, our study shows that IMG cells can acquire and
store NTBI. Thus, microglia take up extracellular iron from
their environment from either Tf-bound or non-Tf–bound
sources.
Polarization of brain microglia occurs in response to environ-
mental cues from the local microenvironment. Such responses
can be elicited from invading pathogens, protein aggregates
Figure 4. DMT1- and TfR-mediated iron uptake by IMG cells is enhanced by LPS and IL-4, respectively. A, IMG cells were treated with LPS or IL-4 for 18 h
and then subsequently incubated with 1 M 55Fe-NTBI in pH 6 uptake buffer for 20 min at 37 °C to determine uptake. B, to test inhibition of NTBI uptake by
ebselen, IMG cells were treated overnight with LPS and then incubated with 50 M inhibitor for 30 min prior to the start of the 55Fe uptake assay. Total
cell-associated 55Fe content was determined. C, IMG cells were treated with or without LPS for 18 h, and then NTBI uptake was determined at pH 6.0 or 7.4
as indicated in the panel. D, IMG cells were treated with LPS or IL-4 for 18 h and subsequently incubated with 0.5 M 55Fe-Tf in serum-free medium for
1 h at 37 °C. Total cell-associated 55Fe content was determined. E, the immunoblot of whole-cell lysates from IMG cells transfected with control or TfR
siRNA and then treated for 18 h with IL-4 prior to lysis. The blot was probed for TfR and loading control -tubulin (-tub). F, IMG cells were transfected
for 48 h with control siRNA or TfR siRNA as indicated. Transfected IMG cells were then treated for 18 h with IL-4, and 55Fe-Tf uptake assays were
performed. Data are means  S.D. (n  3). One-way ANOVA or Student’s t test was used to determine significance. *, p  0.05; **, p  0.005, ***, p 
0.0001. Error bars represent S.D.
Figure 5. A stimulates NTBI uptake and increases DMT1 and ferritin
levels. IMG cells were incubated for 18 h with or without LPS (10 ng/ml) or A
(1 M). A, RNA was isolated from IMG cells after treatments, and qPCR was
performed (n  6). B, 55Fe-NTBI uptake assays were performed in triplicate
using 1 M 55Fe, 175 M citrate, and 50 M ascorbate in pH 6.75 uptake buffer.
Total cell-associated 55Fe content was determined. Data are means  S.D.
One-way ANOVA or Student’s t test was used to determine significance of
LPS-treated cells and A-treated cells relative to control (untreated cells). **,
p  0.0005, ***, p  0.0001. Error bars represent S.D.
Microglial iron transport
7858
J. Biol. Chem. (2018) 293(20) 7853–7863

such as those formed from A peptides, extracellular cytokines,
and other cell-signaling responses. In response to bacterial
invasion in the periphery, systemic macrophages of the reticu-
loendothelial system will sequester iron from the blood in an
effort to deplete the bacterium of the essential element and
limit infection (25, 26). In contrast, bacterial pathogens have
very limited access to the brain due to the blood–brain barrier.
However, microglia are known to respond under conditions
that break down the blood–brain barrier, for example pneumo-
coccal meningitis as a result of encephalitis (27). We have
shown previously that IMG cells respond to LPS by increasing
their production of inducible NOS, an upstream component of
the antimicrobial nitric oxide (NO) burst (6, 17). Here, we
extend those findings to show that LPS induces changes in
microglial cell iron uptake. Notably, LPS increased transcript
and protein expression of DMT1 and ferritin in IMG cells;
similar changes were confirmed in isolated primary mouse
microglia. Correspondingly, NTBI uptake function was en-
hanced by LPS. This substrate selectivity induced by inflamma-
tion would limit extracellular iron to restrict pathogen growth.
Entry of NTBI into IMG cells was associated with induction of
the storage protein ferritin, which would safely sequester iron
to limit its availability and to prevent oxidative damage. This
neuroinflammatory response contrasts with the systemic
inflammatory response of macrophages that lowers extracellu-
lar iron by down-regulation of iron export by Fpn in response to
the regulatory hormone hepcidin (28). We have not observed
induction of hepcidin mRNA, any transcriptional or post-tran-
scriptional changes in Fpn expression, or significant iron export
function by IMG cells (results not shown). The lack of hepcidin
expression and regulation of Fpn function are consistent with
in situ hybridization studies that have defined a rather limited
expression of the hormone within the endothelium of blood
vessels and the choroid plexus (29). These features suggest that,
unlike macrophages of systemic iron metabolism, brain micro-
glia exert metabolic influence over the distribution of pools
of iron by uptake and sequestration rather than through reg-
ulation of cellular export. Because our data indicate that the
Alzheimer’s disease protein A induces similar inflamma-
tory responses in IMG cell iron uptake and storage, it will be
important to determine how microglial activity influences
neurodegeneration.
Figure 6. LPS modifies IMG cell glycolytic function and mitochondrial respiration. A, ECAR measurements determined glycolysis induced by addition of
glucose (10 mM) and glycolytic capacity in the presence of oligomycin (2 M). IMG cells were plated at 85,000 cells/well into XF24 cell culture plates 24 h prior
totheassay.IMGcellincubationwithLPS(10ng/ml)was4hpriortothemetabolicfluxmeasurementsover3–4h;6–7wellsperconditionwereusedwiththree
independent measurements taken after each addition for a total of 18–21 technical replicates. Mean values S.D. from one representative experiment are
shown with similar results obtained in three independent experiments. B, OCR of control and LPS-treated IMG cells treated with oligomycin (OM; 2 M), FCCP
(0.5 M), and rotenone (Rot; 1 M)  antimycin A (Ant A; 1 M). C, maximal mitochondrial respiration was determined as the difference between OCR in the
presence of FCCP and nonmitochondrial respiration measured in the presence of rotenone/antimycin A; 6–7 wells per condition were used with three
independent measurements taken after each addition for a total of 18–21 technical replicates. Mean values S.D. from one representative experiment are
shown with similar results obtained in three independent experiments. Student’s t test was used to determine significance. **, p  0.001; ***, p  0.0001. Error
bars represent S.D.
Figure 7. LPS induces redistribution of heme iron. A, immunoblots of
whole-celllysatesfromIMGcellstreatedfor18hwithorwithout10ng/mlLPS
were probed for HO-1 with -tubulin (-tub) as a loading control. Band den-
sities relative to control are shown from three biological replicates. Ctrl, con-
trol. B, quantitative PCR was used to determine HO-1 mRNA abundance in
IMG cells treated for 18 h with or without LPS (n  9). C, cellular heme levels
were measured after treatment for 18 h with or without LPS and normalized
to protein (n  3). D, calcein-AM fluorescence was determined in IMG cells
treatedfor18hwithorwithoutLPS(10ng/ml)inthepresenceandabsenceof
10 M zinc protoporphyrin (ZnPPIX) (n  3). Student’s t test was used to deter-
minesignificance.*,p0.05;**,p0.01;***,p0.001.Dataarerepresented
as means  S.D. Reduced fluorescence intensity reflects quenching due to
freeironbindingtocalcein.ErrorbarsrepresentS.D.RFU,relativefluorescence
units.
Microglial iron transport
J. Biol. Chem. (2018) 293(20) 7853–7863 7859

The up-regulation of pH-dependent DMT1 function is con-
sistent with metabolic changes induced by LPS treatment of
IMG cells, which include increased glycolysis and extracellular
acidification. NTBI uptake in LPS-treated IMG cells appears to
be limited under neutral pH and can be blocked by the DMT1
inhibitor ebselen, implicating the role of this transporter.
Although we cannot rule out contributions of other divalent
metal transporters like Zip8 and Zip14 to NTBI uptake by IMG
cells, changes detected in transcript levels were minimal, and
neither of these proteins were detected by Western blot analy-
sis. These transporters are not proton-dependent and might
contribute to NTBI transport, but we propose the model that
uptake of iron is primarily mediated by DMT1 under proin-
flammatory conditions. Our results show that, under these con-
ditions, NTBI uptake becomes strongly dependent on pH
as cells condition their medium to become acidic. We also
observed that oxidative metabolism is diminished in IMG
cells treated with LPS. Correspondingly, HO1 is up-regulated,
and cellular heme levels decrease. The degradation of heme
and release of free iron appear to be reflected by increased cel-
lular LIP. Thus, under proinflammatory conditions, microglia
sequester both extra- and intracellular iron. We do not know
how much of the labile cellular iron pool is ultimately targeted
to be stored in ferritin, but our results show that LPS and A
both increase levels of the storage protein in IMG cells. It is
interesting that the iron chaperone poly(C)-binding protein 1/2
has been shown to deliver iron to ferritin (30) and more recently
has been implicated in iron transfer from DMT1 (31) and HO1
(32). Further studies to explore the function of iron chaperones
and iron trafficking during inflammation are warranted.
IL-4 induces an alternative (M2) anti-inflammatory state in
microglia to enhance resolution and repair, tissue remodeling,
etc. Anti-inflammatory stimuli are known to limit microglial
production of NO by increasing the expression of arginase-1, an
enzyme that converts L-arginine to L-ornithine and urea. Argi-
nine is an essential component for the production of NO by
nitric-oxide synthase (33). We have reported that anti-inflam-
matory cytokines will induce IMG cells to polarize to an anti-
inflammatory (M2-like) state associated with up-regulation of
arginase-1 (17). The present study shows that IMG cells pref-
erentially enhance acquisition of TBI when polarized by IL-4.
Increased uptake by this pathway is associated with up-regula-
tion of TfR transcript and protein levels. These changes may
help to accommodate metabolic shifts to support mitochon-
drial respiration and limit the glycolytic response. In reticulo-
cytes, it has been shown that the canonical TfR-mediated iron
uptake pathways deliver iron directly to mitochondria (23). We
do not yet know whether substrate utilization might direct
transport substrate or whether changes in metabolism reflect
altered cellular pools, but experiments are underway to deter-
mine how microglial cell iron transport and metabolism help to
accommodate the anti-inflammatory response.
Our results demonstrate that microglial cell iron transport
substrate preference depends upon cues from the environment.
We hypothesize that, under pro- and anti-inflammatory condi-
tions, polarized IMG cells have different metabolic stresses and
requirements for iron that reflect a necessary dependence on
NTBI versus TBI uptake. It is possible that iron may traffic to
different cellular compartments via different chaperones deter-
mined by entry from either the NTBI or TBI pathway. We fur-
ther speculate that microglia coordinate the iron uptake path-
way to accommodate changes in energy metabolism elicited by
M1/M2 polarization.
Experimental procedures
Cell culture and reagents
IMG cells were characterized previously, and the generation
and characteristics of this cell line have been described in detail
(17). IMG cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s
medium (DMEM) with high glucose (4.5 g/liter), 10% (v/v) fetal
bovine serum (FBS), and 100 units/ml penicillin/streptomycin.
LPS was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. IL-4 was purchased
from Peprotech (Rocky Hill, NJ). Amyloid-(1–42) was from
rPeptide (Watkinsville, GA).
Tf-bound 55Fe uptake assays
The loading of 55Fe onto Tf was performed as described pre-
viously (18). Briefly, 55FeCl (PerkinElmer Life Sciences) was
incubated with Tf loading buffer (0.1 M HEPES, pH 7.5, 0.15 M
NaCl) containing 20 mM NaHCO3 and 88 M nitrilotriacetic
acid for 5 min at room temperature after which 20 M apo-Tf
was added and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Non-
Tf–bound 55Fe was removed from the 55Fe-Tf solution by
buffer exchange using a Nanosep 10,000-molecular-weight-
cutoff Omega spin column (PALL Corp., Port Washington, NY)
3 	 10 min at 5,500 rpm. This procedure yielded a 55Fe-Tf
purity of 
95%. IMG cells were incubated with or without LPS
(10 ng/ml) or IL-4 (10 ng/ml) as indicated. Cells were washed
three times with prewarmed phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)
containing 0.5 mM MgCl2 and 1 mM CaCl2 (PBS) and
counted, and 2 	 106 IMG cells were used per replicate. IMG
cells were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C with serum-free growth
medium containing 55Fe-Tf, 1 mg/ml BSA, and 175 M citrate.
Cells were chilled on ice and washed twice with ice-cold
PBS. Cells were incubated with serum-free medium con-
taining 1 M mouse holo-Tf for 1 h at 4 °C. Cells were washed
twice with PBS and lysed with 600 l of solubilization buffer
(0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 0.1% (w/v) NaOH) overnight at 37 °C.
Whole-cell lysates were incubated at 85 °C for 10 min, and then
400 l of this lysate was assayed for 55Fe using a HIDEX 300SL
 counter (LabLogic, Brandon, FL). Remaining lysate was used
for quantification of protein content. Counts were converted to
pmol of 55Fe using a 55Fe standard curve and normalized for
protein content.
Non-Tf–bound 55Fe uptake assays
IMG cells grown to semiconfluence in 6-well poly-D-lysine–
coated tissue culture plates were used for 55Fe uptake assays.
Cells were washed twice with prewarmed (37 °C) or prechilled
(4 °C) PBS followed by incubation with 1 M 55Fe and 175
M citrate with or without 50 M ascorbate in pH 6.0 or 7.4
uptake buffer (25 mM Tris, 25 mM MES, 140 mM NaCl, 5.4 mM
KCl, 1.8 mM CaCl2, 0.8 mM MgSO4, 5 mM glucose) for 20 min at
37 or 4 °C as indicated. Cells were chilled on ice for 5 min, then
washed three times with ice-cold quench buffer (37.5 mM suc-
Microglial iron transport
7860
J. Biol. Chem. (2018) 293(20) 7853–7863

cinic acid, 62.5 mM Tris, 12.8 mM EDTA, pH 6.0), and lysed with
600 l of solubilization buffer for 1 h at 37 °C. Whole-cell
lysates were incubated at 85 °C for 10 min, and then 400 l of
this lysate was assayed for 55Fe content. Remaining lysate was
used for quantification of protein content. The amount of 55Fe
taken up was normalized to protein content.
ICP-MS
IMG cells grown on 100-mm tissue culture dishes were used
for ICP-MS analysis of 57Fe content. Cells were incubated for
18 h with or without FAC (50 M) at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Cells were
washed three times with ice-cold PBS  1 mM EDTA to chelate
cell surface–bound iron. Cells were removed from the dish into
a 15-ml conical centrifuge tube, pelleted, and weighed. Cell pel-
lets were digested for 24 h at room temperature with nitric acid
(2 ml/g of cells) followed by an additional 24-h incubation at
room temperature with H2O2 (1 ml/g of cells). Samples were
analyzed at the Harvard School of Public Health Trace Metals
Laboratory using a PerkinElmer Life Sciences 6100 ICP-MS
with a dynamic reaction cell.
Immunoblotting
IMG cells were incubated for 18 h with LPS (10 ng/ml) or
IL-4 (10 ng/ml). IMG cells were lysed with radioimmune pre-
cipitation assay buffer plus protease inhibitors (Calbiochem,
catalog number 539134; 1:100 dilution) for 60 min on ice. Pro-
tein concentration was determined, and 20–30 g of protein/
sample was heated for 10 min at 75 °C, cooled on ice, and then
resolved by 10% (w/v) SDS-PAGE (HO-1) or 4–15% (w/v) SDS-
PAGE (TfR, Fpn, and ferritin). The protein was transferred
onto a nitrocellulose membrane (0.2 m) using a Trans-Blot
Turbo transfer system (Bio-Rad). The resulting membrane was
blocked for 1 h at room temperature in TBST (TBS plus 0.05%
(v/v) Tween 20) plus 5% (w/v) milk. After three washes with
TBST, membranes were incubated with antibodies to detect
DMT1 (1:1000 dilution; a gift from Dr. Jerry Kaplan, University
of Utah), TfR (1:1000 dilution; Thermo Scientific, anti-CD71
H68.4), L-ferritin (1:1000 dilution; Abcam, catalog number
ab69090, lot number GR274597-1), Fpn (1:1000 dilution;
Novus Biologicals, catalog number NBP1-21502, lot number
D-3), -tubulin (1:1000 dilution; Abcam, catalog number
ab6046, lot number GR293313-2), or H-ferritin (1:1000 dilu-
tion; Cell Signaling Technology, catalog number 4393S, lot
number 1) in TBST plus 1% (w/v) milk overnight at 4 °C or for
1 h at room temperature. The membranes were washed three
times with TBST and then incubated for 1 h at room tempera-
ture with IRDye 800CW donkey anti-rabbit or anti-mouse IgG
(1:5000 dilution; LI-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, catalog
number 926-32212/3, lot number C60322-02/4) or IRDye
680RD donkey anti-rabbit IgG (1:5000 dilution; LI-COR Biosci-
ences, catalog number 926-68073, lot number C60217-06) in
TBST plus 3% milk. The membrane was washed three times
with TBST and imaged using LI-COR Odyssey 2.1 IR detection
technology.
Quantitative RT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted from IMG cells using TRIzol re-
agent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. RNA was purified and on-column DNase-treated using
the Direct-zol RNA Miniprep kit from Zymo Research (Irvine,
CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Purified
RNA was then reverse transcribed using the SuperScript III
First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen) with oligo(dT)20
primers and random hexamers. Quantitative PCR was per-
formed using iTaq Universal SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad)
and the StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR System (Life Technolo-
gies). In all cases, 36B4 was used as an internal control. Primers
used for qPCR are listed in Table 1.
Seahorse XF extracellular flux assays
IMG cells were plated at 85,000 cells/well into XF 24 cell
culture microplates in regular growth medium with 10% FBS
and grown overnight at 37 °C in 5% CO2. The next morning,
control vehicle or LPS (10 ng/ml) was added to the appropriate
wells and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C in 5% CO2. For glycolytic
stress test experiments, wells were washed and incubated with
pH 7.4 DMEM (Corning Cellgro, catalog number 90-113-PB)
plus 1 mM glutamine (Gibco, catalog number 25030-081) for 1 h
at 37 °C minus CO2. The ECAR was measured at baseline and
after sequential additions of D-glucose (10 mM; Sigma, G615),
oligomycin (2 M; Abcam, ab141829), and 2-deoxy-D-glucose
(50 mM; Sigma, D8375). After each run, cells were lysed, and
protein content was determined. Nonglycolytic acidification
determined in the absence of glucose and in the presence of
2-dexoy-D-glucose was subtracted to determine glucose-in-
duced glycolysis; glycolytic capacity was determined in the
presence of oligomycin. For mitochondrial stress test experi-
ments, wells were washed and incubated with pH 7.4 DMEM
plus 1 mM D-glucose and 1 mM pyruvate (Gibco, catalog number
11360070) for 1 h at 37 °C minus CO2. The OCR was measured
after sequential additions of oligomycin (2 M), FCCP (5 M;
Sigma, C2920), and antimycin A (1 M; Alfa Aesar, J63522) and
rotenone (1 M; Sigma, R8875). After each run, cells were lysed,
and protein content was determined. Maximal respiration was
calculated as the difference in OCR measured in the presence of
FCCP and in the presence of antimycin A/rotenone.
Table 1
Primer list for qPCR
Transcript
Forward primer
Reverse primer
Mouse 36B4
TCATCCAGCAGGTGTTTGAC
TACCCGATCTGCAGACACAC
Mouse DMT1
GGCGGAGCCGAATCCTATT
TGCTGTAGGCAGGGTTGATG
Mouse Zip8
CTCGCCTTCAGTGAGGATGT
GCTTTGCGTTGTGCTTTCTT
Mouse Zip14
CTGGATCACATGATTCCTCAG
GAGTAGCGGACACCTTTGAG
Mouse TfR
GGAACCAGACCGTTATGTTGT
CTTCGCCGCAACACCAG
Mouse L-ferritin
AATCAGGCCCTCTTGGATC
GATAGTGGCTTTCCAGGAAGTC
Mouse H-ferritin
GCCTCCTACGTCTATCTGTCTATGTC
TGGTGGAGAAAGTATTTGGC
Mouse Fpn
TCGGTTCCTCTCACTCCTGT
GTGGAGAGAGAGTGGCCAAG
Microglial iron transport
J. Biol. Chem. (2018) 293(20) 7853–7863 7861

Cellular heme measurements
IMG cells were grown on 10-cm plates and incubated over-
night with or without LPS (10 ng/ml). The next day, cells were
washed three times with ice-cold PBS and lysed on ice with
1% Nonidet P-40, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.5, 150 mM NaCl (500
l/dish) for 5 min. Cell debris was pelleted at 14,000 	 g for 10
min, and 50 l of each supernatant was mixed with 450 l of 2
M oxalic acid. Serial dilutions of hemin were used to develop a
standard curve. Standards and samples were heated at 100 °C
for 30 min; controls were incubated with oxalic acid but not
heated. Samples and controls were transferred to a black walled
96-well plate, and fluorescence was measured (excitation, 400
nm; emission, 662 nm). Heme content was normalized to cel-
lular protein content.
Calcein-AM assays for LIP
IMG cells were grown in a black walled 96-well plate and
incubated overnight with or without LPS (10 ng/ml). Medium
was removed, and cells were washed three times with PBS and
then incubated with serum-free medium plus 5 M calcein-AM
(Life Technologies) for 40 min at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Cell-associ-
ated fluorescence was measured (excitation, 495 nm; emission,
515 nm). Reduced fluorescence intensity reflects quenching
due to free iron binding to calcein.
Statistical analyses
All statistical analyses were performed using Prism Graph-
Pad version 7.01 for Windows (GraphPad Software, La Jolla,
CA). One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple com-
parison test was used where indicated. Student’s t test statis-
tical analysis was used where indicated. Results shown are
means  S.D.
Author contributions—R. C. M., C.-H. L., and M. W.-R. conceptual-
ization; R. C. M., J. C. S., A. M. G., C.-H. L., and M. W.-R. formal
analysis; R. C. M., J. C. S., A. M. G., A. S. B., C.-H. L., and M. W.-R.
investigation; R. C. M. and M. W.-R. writing-original draft; R. C. M.,
C.-H. L., and M. W.-R. project administration; J. C. S., A. M. G., and
M. W.-R. methodology; J. C. S., A. M. G., C.-H. L., and M. W.-R.
writing-review and editing; C.-H. L. and M. W.-R. funding acquisi-
tion; M. W.-R. resources.
Acknowledgment—We thank Alexander Hyde for technical help in
culturing primary microglial cells.
References
1. Salvador, G. A. (2010) Iron in neuronal function and dysfunction. Bio-
Factors 36, 103–110 CrossRef Medline
2. Madsen, E., and Gitlin, J. D. (2007) Copper and iron disorders of the brain.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 30, 317–337 CrossRef Medline
3. Zeineh, M. M., Chen, Y., Kitzler, H. H., Hammond, R., Vogel, H., and Rutt,
B. K. (2015) Activated iron-containing microglia in the human hippocam-
pus identified by magnetic resonance imaging in Alzheimer disease. Neu-
robiol. Aging 36, 2483–2500 CrossRef Medline
4. Heppner, F. L., Ransohoff, R. M., and Becher, B. (2015) Immune attack: the
role of inflammation in Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 16,
358–372 CrossRef Medline
5. Ransohoff, R. M. (2016) A polarizing question: do M1 and M2 microglia
exist? Nat. Neurosci. 19, 987–991 CrossRef Medline
6. Orihuela, R., McPherson, C. A., and Harry, G. J. (2016) Microglial M1/M2
polarization and metabolic states. Br. J. Pharmacol. 173, 649–665
CrossRef Medline
7. Fan, Y., Xie, L., and Chung, C. Y. (2017) Signaling pathways controlling
microglia chemotaxis. Mol. Cells 40, 163–168 CrossRef Medline
8. Cherry, J. D., Olschowka, J. A., and O’Banion, M. K. (2014) Neuroinflam-
mation and M2 microglia: the good, the bad, and the inflamed. J. Neuro-
inflammation 11, 98 CrossRef Medline
9. Greter, M., and Merad, M. (2013) Regulation of microglia development
and homeostasis. Glia 61, 121–127 CrossRef Medline
10. Kaur, C., and Ling, E. A. (1999) Increased expression of transferrin recep-
tors and iron in amoeboid microglial cells in postnatal rats following an
exposure to hypoxia. Neurosci. Lett. 262, 183–186 CrossRef Medline
11. Urrutia, P., Aguirre, P., Esparza, A., Tapia, V., Mena, N. P., Arredondo, M.,
González-Billault, C., and Núñez, M. T. (2013) Inflammation alters the
expression of DMT1, FPN1 and hepcidin, and it causes iron accumulation
in central nervous system cells. J. Neurochem. 126, 541–549 CrossRef
Medline
12. Thomsen, M. S., Andersen, M. V., Christoffersen, P. R., Jensen, M. D.,
Lichota, J., and Moos, T. (2015) Neurodegeneration with inflammation is
accompanied by accumulation of iron and ferritin in microglia and neu-
rons. Neurobiol. Dis. 81, 108–118 CrossRef Medline
13. Rouault, T. A., and Cooperman, S. (2006) Brain iron metabolism. Semin.
Pediatr. Neurol. 13, 142–148 CrossRef Medline
14. McCarthy, R. C., and Kosman, D. J. (2015) Iron transport across the
blood–brain barrier: development, neurovascular regulation and cerebral
amyloid angiopathy. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 72, 709–727 CrossRef Medline
15. Gaasch, J. A., Lockman, P. R., Geldenhuys, W. J., Allen, D. D., and Van der
Schyf, C. J. (2007) Brain iron toxicity: differential responses of astrocytes,
neurons, and endothelial cells. Neurochem. Res. 32, 1196–1208 CrossRef
Medline
16. Gutteridge, J. M. (1992) Ferrous ions detected in cerebrospinal fluid by
using bleomycin and DNA damage. Clin. Sci. 82, 315–320 CrossRef
Medline
17. McCarthy, R. C., Lu, D.-Y., Alkhateeb, A., Gardeck, A. M., Lee, C.-H., and
Wessling-Resnick, M. (2016) Characterization of a novel adult murine
immortalized microglial cell line and its activation by amyloid-. J. Neu-
roinflammation 13, 21 CrossRef Medline
18. McCarthy, R. C., and Kosman, D. J. (2012) Mechanistic analysis of iron
accumulation by endothelial cells of the BBB. Biometals 25, 665–675
CrossRef Medline
19. Erlitzki, R., Long, J. C., and Theil, E. C. (2002) Multiple, conserved iron-
responsive elements in the 3-untranslated region of transferrin receptor
mRNA enhance binding of iron regulatory protein 2. J. Biol. Chem. 277,
42579–42587 CrossRef Medline
20. Casey, J. L., Hentze, M. W., Koeller, D. M., Caughman, S. W., Rouault,
T. A., Klausner, R. D., and Harford, J. B. (1988) Iron-responsive elements:
regulatory RNA sequences that control mRNA levels and translation. Sci-
ence 240, 924–928 CrossRef Medline
21. Wetli, H. A., Buckett, P. D., and Wessling-Resnick, M. (2006) Small-mol-
ecule screening identifies the selanazal drug ebselen as a potent inhibitor
of DMT1-mediated iron uptake. Chem. Biol. 13, 965–972 CrossRef
Medline
22. Jenkitkasemwong, S., Wang, C. Y., Mackenzie, B., and Knutson, M. D.
(2012) Physiologic implications of metal-ion transport by ZIP14 and ZIP8.
Biometals 25, 643–655 CrossRef Medline
23. Richardson, D. R., Lane, D. J., Becker, E. M., Huang, M. L., Whitnall, M.,
Suryo Rahmanto, Y., Sheftel, A. D., and Ponka, P. (2010) Mitochondrial
iron trafficking and the integration of iron metabolism between the mito-
chondrion and cytosol. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 10775–10782
CrossRef Medline
24. Hu, X., Leak, R. K., Shi, Y., Suenaga, J., Gao, Y., Zheng, P., and Chen, J.
(2015) Microglial and macrophage polarization—new prospects for brain
repair. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 11, 56–64 CrossRef Medline
25. Wessling-Resnick, M. (2015) Nramp1 and other transporters involved in
metal withholding during infection. J. Biol. Chem. 290, 18984–18990
CrossRef Medline
Microglial iron transport
7862
J. Biol. Chem. (2018) 293(20) 7853–7863

26. Wessling-Resnick, M. (2010) Iron homeostasis and the inflammatory re-
sponse. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 30, 105–122 CrossRef Medline
27. Barichello, T., Pereira, J. S., Savi, G. D., Generoso, J. S., Cipriano, A. L.,
Silvestre, C., Petronilho, F., Dal-Pizzol, F., Vilela, M. C., and Teixeira, A. L.
(2011) A kinetic study of the cytokine/chemokines levels and disruption of
blood-brain barrier in infant rats after pneumococcal meningitis. J. Neu-
roimmunol. 233, 12–17 CrossRef Medline
28. Stefanova, D., Raychev, A., Arezes, J., Ruchala, P., Gabayan, V., Skurnik, M.,
Dillon, B. J., Horwitz, M. A., Ganz, T., Bulut, Y., and Nemeth, E. (2017) En-
dogenoushepcidinanditsagonistmediateresistancetoselectedinfectionsby
clearing non-transferrin-bound iron. Blood 130, 245–257 CrossRef Medline
29. Zechel, S., Huber-Wittmer, K., and von Bohlen und Halbach, O. (2006)
Distribution of the iron-regulating protein hepcidin in the murine central
nervous system. J. Neurosci. Res. 84, 790–800 CrossRef Medline
30. Shi, H., Bencze, K. Z., Stemmler, T. L., and Philpott, C. C. (2008) A cyto-
solic iron chaperone that delivers iron to ferritin. Science 320, 1207–1210
CrossRef Medline
31. Yanatori, I., Yasui, Y., Tabuchi, M., and Kishi, F. (2014) Chaperone protein
involved in transmembrane transport of iron. Biochem. J. 462, 25–37
CrossRef Medline
32. Yanatori, I., Richardson, D. R., Toyokuni, S., and Kishi, F. (2017) The
iron chaperone poly(rC)-binding protein 2 forms a metabolon with the
heme oxygenase 1/cytochrome P450 reductase complex for heme ca-
tabolism and iron transfer. J. Biol. Chem. 292, 13205–13229 CrossRef
Medline
33. Alderton, W. K., Cooper, C. E., and Knowles, R. G. (2001) Nitric oxide
synthases: structure, function and inhibition. Biochem. J. 357, 593–615
Medline
Microglial iron transport
J. Biol. Chem. (2018) 293(20) 7853–7863 7863

===== Mchedlishvili2012_PNAS_SalamanderTailRegeneration =====
Reconstitution of the central and peripheral nervous
system during salamander tail regeneration
Levan Mchedlishvilia,b,1,2, Vladimir Mazurova,1, Kathrin S. Grassmea,3, Kerstin Goehlera,b, Bernhard Robla,b,
Akira Tazakia,b, Kathleen Roenscha,b, Annett Duemmlera,b, and Elly M. Tanakaa,b,4
aMax Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, 01307 Dresden, Germany; and bDeutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft Center for Regenerative
Therapies Dresden, Cluster of Excellence, University of Technology Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany
Edited by Anders Bjorklund, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, and approved July 6, 2012 (received for review October 12, 2011)
We show that after tail amputation in Ambystoma mexicanum
(Axolotl) the correct number and spacing of dorsal root ganglia
are regenerated. By transplantation of spinal cord tissue and non-
clonal neurospheres, we show that the central spinal cord repre-
sents a source of peripheral nervous system cells. Interestingly,
melanophores migrate from preexisting precursors in the skin.
Finally, we demonstrate that implantation of a clonally derived
spinal cord neurosphere can result in reconstitution of all exam-
ined cell types in the regenerating central spinal cord, suggesting
derivation of a cell with spinal cord stem cell properties.
neural stem cell | segmentation | Hox
R
egeneration of the central body axis occurs after tail ampu-
tation in salamander amphibians. During this process the
spinal cord regrows, and the correct number of segmented ver-
tebrae and myotomes are formed (1). Additionally, neural crest
derivatives, such as melanophores, and the peripheral nervous
system (PNS), including dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and Schwann
cells, are regenerated (2–4).
An important challenge is to deﬁne and study the stem cells
that are responsible for regenerating the CNS and PNS. Pre-
viously, we used electroporation of GFP expression plasmids into
the spinal cord to identify and track the radial glial cells that
contribute to regenerating the spinal cord in the salamander
Ambystoma mexicanum (axolotl) (5, 6). Live cell tracking showed
that single cells could give rise to clones populating multiple
molecular domains of the regenerating spinal cord (6). These
results indicated that multipotent progenitors exist during spinal
cord regeneration. Because of the transient expression of the
plasmids, the long-term fate of the stem cells could not be
tracked, so the origin of the PNS was not addressed.
The source of neural crest derivatives in the regenerated tail
has been an open question since 1885 (7). During early de-
velopment the neural crest arises in the dorsal region of the
neural tube, from which cells emigrate to the surroundings to
form neurons and glia of PNS, smooth muscles, head skeletal
elements, enteric neurons, and melanophores (8). It is not yet
known conclusively, however, whether during regeneration newly
regenerated neural crest structures derive from a population of
neural crest-like cells that migrate out of the regenerating spinal
cord or arise directly from cells in the periphery. Immunohisto-
chemical studies using markers such as HNK1 suggested that
there may be a population of cells in the lateral walls of the
spinal cord with neural crest properties (4). Furthermore, mor-
phological studies suggested that cells may migrate via the
forming ventral roots to populate the spinal ganglia outside the
spinal cord. Such ﬁndings could be consistent with recent ﬁnd-
ings in mouse that boundary cap cells can act as a neural crest
source (9). To track the origin of neural crest structures during
newt tail regeneration, Benraiss et al. (3) attempted to label
spinal cord cells via biolistic transfection of a human alkaline
phosphatase (AP) expression vector. In such studies, they later
observed AP expression in melanophores and Schwann cells of
the periphery but not in DRG. However, because the AP gene
was driven by the ubiquitous SV40 promoter, it was impossible to
exclude the possibility that transfection of the cells outside the
spinal cord had occurred also.
Here we examine the regeneration of CNS and PNS during
axolotl tail regeneration. By transgenic labeling of tissues we
show that DRG and Schwann cells derive from cell pools asso-
ciated with the central regenerating spinal cord. In support of
a central source of PNS regeneration, we describe generation
of neurosphere cultures from the axolotl spinal cord that,
when engrafted back into the animal, integrate and undergo
extensive self-renewal before forming signiﬁcant portions of the
regenerated spinal cord and PNS. Clonal GFP+ neurospheres
engrafted and contributed to all regions of the central spinal
cord, indicating the ability to derive a spinal cord neural stem cell
in clonal culture.
Results
Normal Number and Spacing of DRG Are Reconstituted During Axolotl
Tail Regeneration. In axolotls, the regenerating tail ultimately
achieves overall dimensions comparable to control, unamputated
tails. Previous literature established that DRG were regenerated,
but there was no demonstration that the correct number and
spacing of DRG were reestablished after tail amputation. To
assess whether the correct complement of DRG was regen-
erated, we used whole-mount staining with NeuN and βIII-tu-
bulin immunoﬂuorescence to visualize the tail DRG. DRG were
identiﬁable as bright clusters next to the spinal cord (Fig. 1,
arrowheads), as conﬁrmed by cross-sectioning the whole-mount
samples. Tails were amputated at the 15th myotome, and the
number and spacing of regenerated DRG were determined at 35
d postamputation (dpa), when the regenerated tails ﬁrst ach-
ieved an overall length comparable to uncut controls, and at 49
dpa (Fig. S1 and Table S1). At 35 dpa, we observed that the
number of regenerated DRG was comparable to control samples
(Fig. 1E). However, the spacing between the DRG at myotome
level 22–28 was signiﬁcantly smaller in the regenerating samples
than in controls (P < 0.0001). By 49 dpa the inter-DRG spacing
in the regenerated samples was similar to that in controls (Fig.
Author contributions: L.M., V.M., and E.M.T. designed research; L.M., V.M., K.S.G., K.G.,
B.R., and K.R. performed research; A.T., K.R., and A.D. contributed new reagents/analytic
tools; L.M., V.M., K.S.G., and E.M.T. analyzed data; and L.M. and E.M.T. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1L.M. and V.M. contributed equally to this work.
2Present address: Department of Physiological Genomics, Institute of Physiology, Ludwig
Maximilian University of Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany.
3Present address: University of Muenster, Angiogenesis Laboratory, Röntgenstr. 20, 48149
Muenster, Germany.
4To whom correspondence should be addressed: E-mail: elly.tanaka@crt-dresden.de.
See Author Summary on page 13477 (volume 109, number 34).
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1116738109/-/DCSupplemental.
E2258–E2266
|
PNAS
|
Published online July 24, 2012
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1116738109
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 175.122.76.13 on September 2, 2022 from IP address 175.122.76.13.

1F) (P = 0.39 for difference, Student’s t test). At 35 dpa a DRG-
free zone still remains in the posterior tip of the tail. Between 35
and 49 dpa, the myotome size in the posterior half of the tail
increases, and the DRG-free regions shrink, resulting in com-
parable inter-DRG spacing in regenerated and control tails.
These data show that during axolotl tail regeneration, a normal
complement and spacing of DRG are reconstituted but that the
number of regenerated DRG is restored before the ﬁnal spacing
is achieved.
Spinal Cord Transplantations Suggest That Newly Formed DRG Can
Derive from the Spinal Cord Region. The newly formed DRG could
derive from several likely sources. First, it is possible that the
regenerating spinal cord harbors a neural crest-like population
or boundary cap cells that, as in embryonic development, emi-
grate from the tube to generate neural crest structures (8–10).
The expression of neural crest-associated transcription factors
such as MSX1 and PAX7 in the dorsal region of the regenerating
spinal cord suggests that neural crest may be reformed during
spinal cord regeneration (6, 11). Second, it is possible that neural
crest precursors residing outside the spinal cord migrate poste-
riorly to generate the new DRG. To determine whether the
regenerating spinal cord represents a potential source of cells for
the new neural crest-derived structures, we labeled the spinal
cord by transplanting a 2- to 4-mm segment of spinal cord
encompassing the 16th myotome level from GFP-expressing
transgenic animals (6, 12) into white host animals (n = 8) and
10 d after healing amputated the tail at myotome 15, leaving 2 mm
of GFP+ spinal cord (Fig. 2). The tails were allowed to re-
generate for 15 wk before analysis (Fig. 2 A–C). Three regen-
erated tails were cryosectioned and stained for the marker βIII-
tubulin, which highlights the DRG. The proportion of GFP+
DRG cells was analyzed starting from myotome 22 to ensure that
the DRG being analyzed represent regenerated DRG (Fig. 2 D–
F, arrows). In the ﬁrst tail, 21 DRG (11 left, 10 right) were found,
of which 14 were 100% GFP+. In the rostral portion three DRG
were completely GFP−, and four were mosaically GFP+/−. In tail
two, 20 DRG (11 left, 9 right) were regenerated, of which 16
Fig. 1.
DRG number is restored by 35 d, but the correct inter-DRG distance is restored by 49 d of regeneration. Axolotl tail tissue was immunostained si-
multaneously using mouse anti–βIII-tubulin and mouse anti-NeuN antibody and then was detected in a single channel using a Cy5-coupled anti-mouse an-
tibody. (A) Merged DIC/ﬂuorescence image The arrow shows the amputation plane. (Scale bar: 1 mm.) (B–D) Bright cell clusters adjacent to the spinal cord can
be observed at DRG 11–13 (B, B′, arrowheads) and 17–19 (C, C′, arrowheads). Postcloaca DRG 24–26 in the posterior tail region can identiﬁed by the axonal
route emerging from the spinal cord region (D, D′, arrowheads). (Scale bars: B′–D′ and B′′–D′′, 0.7 mm.) (E) Inter-DRG distance was measured in all DRG
posterior to the cut plane in amputated animals and compared with comparable DRG in control animals at 35 dpa. The inter-DRG distance is smaller in
regenerated tails than in controls when assessed by the Student’s t test (P < 0.0001). (F) At 49 dpa the inter-DRG distances are comparable in regenerated tails
and control animals (P = 0.39 for difference, Student’s t test).
Mchedlishvili et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 24, 2012
|
E2259
DEVELOPMENTAL
BIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 175.122.76.13 on September 2, 2022 from IP address 175.122.76.13.

were completely GFP+, two were GFP−, and two were GFP+/−at
myotomes 22–24. In the third tail, 17 regenerating DRG were
found (5 right and 12 left), of which 16 were GFP+ and one
was GFP−.
In previous work examining the origin of the central spinal
cord, spinal cord transplantation indicated that a 500-μm zone
represented the source zone for spinal cord regeneration (6). We
also attempted to analyze spinal cord transplantations in which
a 500-μm GFP+ zone remained after tail amputation for DRG.
Such transplantations result in regenerates in which, although
there are GFP+ cells all along the regenerating spinal cord, the
spinal cord in some cases is a mosaic of GFP+ and GFP−cells
because the junction of cell healing between host and donor is
irregular. Therefore, the percentage of GFP+ DRG was highly
variable. In tail one, 13 DRG were found next to the GFP+
spinal cord (six left and seven right), four of which were mosaic
GFP+/−, and nine of which were GFP−. In tail two, 18 DRG were
found (11 left and 7 right), of which the two most rostral DRG
were GFP−, the six following caudal DRG were GFP+/−, and the
10 most caudal DRG were GFP+. In the third tail, 15 DRG were
found (eight left and seven right), all of which were GFP−. In this
tail the spinal cord was constructed mosaically (GFP+/−); ap-
proximately one-fourth of the spinal cord cells in the cross-sec-
tion were GFP−. Taken together, however, these results indicate
that a population of cells associated with the central spinal cord
can be a signiﬁcant source of cells for the DRG and PNS.
Melanophores Can Derive from Peripheral Structures. It was shown
recently that, during development, melanocytes, another neural
crest derivative, arise from precursors residing in peripheral nerve
ﬁbers (13). Furthermore, in Xenopus, studies of neural crest-ab-
lated tadpoles showed that the melanophores regenerate from
preexisting unpigmented melanophore precursors in the skin ad-
jacent to the amputation site (14). This mechanism is similar to
that described for the zebraﬁsh ﬁn regeneration, in which mela-
noblasts in the skin generate the new melanophores in the
regenerated ﬁn (15). To test whether precursors in axolotl skin
contribute pigmented cells to axolotl tail regeneration, we trans-
planted skin from wild-type animals into the white mutant hosts
that have no mature melanophores in the skin because the mela-
nophore precursors do not migrate from the neural crest region
during development (16). After healing for 4 d, the tails were
amputated through the graft. After 26 d of regeneration, cells from
the wild-type skin patch had clearly formed melanophores that
populated the regenerated tail. (Fig. S2). This result indicates that
a signiﬁcant portion of the melanophores in the regenerated ax-
olotl tail probably arise from peripherally located precursor cells.
Because of the technical difﬁculty of detecting GFP in pigmented
melanophores, wecould not address whether the spinal cord also is
a source of melanophores in regenerated tail.
Generation and Characterization of Axolotl Neurospheres as a Trans-
plantable Cell Source for CNS and PNS Regeneration. To reﬁne our
analysis further, we endeavored to isolate and implant GFP+
spinal cord stem cells into the spinal cord to track the source
of PNS. We used culture conditions previously described for
mammalian neurospheres to derive cultures from the GFP+
axolotl spinal cords (17). Within 2 wk, cell clusters resembling
mammalian neurospheres emerged in culture (Fig. 3 A–C). To
promote the formation of primary neurospheres, we tested dif-
Fig. 2.
Transplanted GFP+ spinal cord participated in regeneration of spinal cord and DRG. A 2- to 4-mm gap in the spinal cord was made in the axolotl tail
and was replaced with a comparable length of spinal cord from the germline GFP+ transgenic animal. (A) Image immediately after the transplanted tail was
amputated. (B) At 29 dpa the tail has regenerated much of its length, and the regenerated spinal cord is largely GFP+. (C) GFP+ spinal cord regenerates 105
dpa. Cross-sections from spinal cord-transplanted animal immunostained for βIII-tubulin. (D–F) Three examples of DRG adjacent to transplanted, regenerated
GFP+ spinal cord. (D) An example in which the whole DRG was GFP−. (E) An example of a DRG with a mixture of GFP+ and GFP−cells. (F) An example in which
the whole DRG was GFP+. In D–F, GFP is shown as green, βIII-tubulin as red, and Hoechst staining as blue. (Scale bars: A–C, 1 mm; D, F, 100 μm; E 50 μm.)
E2260
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1116738109
Mchedlishvili et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 175.122.76.13 on September 2, 2022 from IP address 175.122.76.13.

ferent peptide growth factors reported to support mouse primi-
tive, embryonic, or adult neural stem cells and found that the
addition of 20 ng/mL FGF produced the highest yield of neu-
rospheres, with an average of 215 neurospheres per 50,000
seeded cells (Fig. 3D) (17–19).
We characterized the cultured neurospheres for marker ex-
pression, their ability to form differentiated neural cells in cul-
ture, and their ability to reconstitute neural cell types upon
implantation into the spinal cord. We ﬁrst determined whether
the axolotl neurospheres contained cells expressing progenitor
cell markers and/or differentiated cell markers. We found that
the majority of cells in the neurosphere were positive for Sox2,
which marks the neural progenitor cell pools in the vertebrate
CNS (Fig. 3 E and I). Consistent with a stem/progenitor cell
identity of neurosphere cells, Musashi-1 (20), which stains the
ependymoglial cells of the axolotl spinal cord, was found in the
majority of neurosphere cells (Fig. 3 F and J). The neurospheres
also stained strongly for GFAP, a marker for radial glial cells and
astrocytes (Fig. 3 G and K). Because the mature and regener-
ating axolotl spinal cord consists largely of radial glial-like cells,
we interpret the GFAP+ cells in the neurospheres to be radial
glia with neurogenic capacity. Finally, staining with the neuronal
marker βIII-tubulin showed the presence of differentiated neu-
rons in the periphery of the neurospheres (Fig. 3 H and L).
To test the in vitro differentiation potential, the nonclonal
neurospheres were plated onto poly-L-lysine/laminin–coated
surfaces under growth factor-poor conditions, where they dis-
played robust outgrowth of βIII-tubulin+ axons but no myelin
basic protein-positive (MBP+) oligodendrocytes (Fig. 3 M and O,
Inset). Under these conditions GFAP staining was visible but
attenuated compared with ﬂoating spheres (Fig. 3N). In contrast,
when the cells were exposed to 50 ng/mL Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
agonist and 25 ng/mL PDGF, we observed strong staining for the
glial marker MBP (Fig. 3O).
Implanted GFP+ Neurospheres Integrate into the Spinal Cord and
Regenerate Substantial Regions of the Spinal Cord and DRG in Vivo.
We wanted to test the competence of the primary, nonclonal
neurospheres to integrate and regenerate the spinal cord and PNS.
To achieve integration of the cultured neurospheres into spinal
cord tissue, we removed a 1- to 3-mm section of the spinal cord in
the tail and placed one or several GFP neurospheres into the gap
(Fig. 4A). The animals were allowed to heal (Fig. 4B). To examine
if the implanted neurosphere cells had integrated into the injured
spinal cord, we took cross-sections of the tail through the engrafted
Fig. 3.
Spinal cord neurospheres can be derived in FGF-2 and express neural stem cell markers. (A) Overview of procedure. Spinal cord tissue was isolated
from GFP+ axolotl tail tissue, dissociated in papain, and expanded in serum-free medium containing growth factors and supplements (B27). (B) Low-mag-
niﬁcation view of neurosphere culture after 2 wk. (Scale bar: 200 μm.) (C) Higher-magniﬁcation view of neurosphere. (Scale bar: 100 μm.). (D) Growth-factor
dependence of neurosphere derivation. After dissociation, axolotl spinal cord cells were counted and expanded in serum-free medium in the presence of
various growth factors; 50,000 cells were plated for each condition. Among the different factors and combinations of factors [e.g., FGF-2, EGF, FGF-2/EGF,
PDGF, and leukemia-inhibitory factor (LIF)], FGF-2 yielded the highest number of neurospheres. The y-axis represents the yield of neurospheres per 50,000
plated cells. n = 3. (E) Confocal imaging of anti-Sox2 of a cross-section of an immunostained axolotl spinal cord shows neural progenitor cells. (F) Anti–
Musashi-1 immunostaining of a spinal cord cross-section corroborates luminal location of neural progenitor cells. (G) Anti-GFAP immunostaining of a spinal
cord cross-section reveals the presence of radial glia in the axolotl spinal cord. (H) Anti–βIII-tubulin immunostaining of a spinal cord cross-section shows
neuronal cells in the axolotl spinal cord. (I) Confocal imaging of an anti-Sox2–immunostained neurosphere cross-section shows that the majority of cells are
neural progenitors. (J) Anti–Musashi-1 immunostaining of a neurosphere cross-section shows that many cells are neural progenitors. (K) Anti-GFAP immu-
nostaining of a neurosphere cross-section indicates that the majority of cells are apparently GFAP+. (L) Anti–βIII-tubulin immunostaining of a neurosphere
indicates that some cells are or have differentiated into neuronal cells. Red indicates the antigen-speciﬁc immunostaining signal; blue indicates Hoechst
staining. (Scale bars: E–L, 20 μm.) (M–O) To induce neuron outgrowth, neurospheres were plated onto poly-L-lysine/laminin–coated Petri dishes. After 7 d in
culture, neurosphere-derived cells were positive for βIII-tubulin immunostaining (M) and were faintly positive for GFAP (N) but were negative for MBP
immunostaining (O, Inset). Data shown in M, N, and O Inset are representative of three independent experiments. (O) In the presence of Shh agonist (50 ng/
mL) and PDGF (25 ng/mL), neurosphere cells differentiated into MBP+ glia. Data shown are the results of two independent experiments. Inset shows MBP
staining of a neurosphere grown in the absence of Shh agonist and PDGF. (Scale bars: M, 50 μm; N and O, 100 μm; O Inset, 50 μm.)
Mchedlishvili et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 24, 2012
|
E2261
DEVELOPMENTAL
BIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 175.122.76.13 on September 2, 2022 from IP address 175.122.76.13.

neurospheres at different time points (4, 7, 14, and 21d after im-
plantation) and immunostained the sections for GFAP (Fig. S3).
At day 4 the engrafted neurosphere cells made a continuous mass
with the endogenous radial glial cell layer but formed an ectopic
protrusion from the spinal cord tube (Fig. S3A). At day 7 the ep-
ithelial cell contact between the grafted neurosphere and the
spinal cord was more pronounced (Fig. S3B). Again, GFAP
immunostaining seemed reduced in most of the GFP+ cells. By
14 d postimplantation, the cells had integrated into the struc-
ture of the host spinal cord (Fig. S3C). By day 21, and later, cells
could be seen clearly in the neuronal layers, and GFP axonal
projections also could be seen (Fig. S3D).
To examine whether neurosphere cells participate in regen-
eration, the tail was cut adjacent to the implanted cells, and
the distribution of the GFP+ cells was followed in vivo (Fig. S4).
In 7 of 12 implantations GFP cells were distributed along the
whole spinal cord. The example in Fig. S4 was reamputated three
times in succession. Each time the GFP cells were found all
along the length of the spinal cord, demonstrating the ability of
the implanted cells to expand extensively. Cross-sections of the
regenerating spinal cord showed that the GFP cells had solidly
populated large regions of the spinal cord, as in the half of the
spinal cord shown in Fig. S4 G–I. Colocalization of GFP with cell
type-speciﬁc markers indicated that the integrated cells formed
GFAP+ radial glia (Fig. S4G), MAP2+ neurites (Fig. S4J), and
NeuN+ neurons (Fig. S4M).
To examine if the GFP+ neuronal cells form motor neurons
with connections to muscle, we retrogradely labeled motor
neurons by injecting tail muscles with rhodamine dextran and
ﬁxed the tails 24 h later. Cryosectioned samples show that a cell
body in the neural layer of the ventral spinal cord was labeled
consistent with a motor neuron identity (Fig. S5 A–D, arrows).
The labeled cells expressed the neural-speciﬁc marker NeuN
(Fig. S5 A–D, arrows), indicating that primary neurospheres
elaborate neurons that make connections with the periphery.
Finally we examined whether the implanted neurospheres
acquired markers of positional identity upon implantation. Be-
cause tail cutting requires cells to form more posterior struc-
tures, we examined the expression status of posterior Hox
proteins A9 and A13 during spinal cord regeneration using
polyclonal antibodies (Materials and Methods). In mature por-
tions of the spinal cord we observed HoxA9 expression in
a subset of cells in the outer, neuron-containing layer of the
spinal cord, but cells close to the lumen were negative (Fig. S6 G
and H). We observed no HoxA13 expression in the mature part
of the spinal cord (Fig. S6 Q and R). Both HoxA9 and HoxA13
expression was observed in the 6-d regenerating spinal cord, with
uniform, nuclear expression found toward the caudal regions of
the regenerate (Fig. S6 A, B, D, E, K, L, N, and O). Before
implantation, the axolotl neurospheres expressed nuclear HoxA9
protein in some peripheral cells of the neurosphere. In contrast,
HoxA13 showed diffuse cytoplasmic expression. After implan-
tation of GFP+ neurospheres, examination of 6-d regenerates by
confocal microscopy showed that the implanted GFP+ neuro-
sphere cells expressed HoxA9 and HoxA13 in a manner similar
to their endogenous neighbors, at different levels along the
rostral to caudal axis (Fig. S6 A–F and K–P). These results
suggest that the implanted neurosphere cells acquire appropriate
rostral/caudal identity proﬁles in the regenerate.
DRG and Schwann Cells Are Formed from Implanted Neurosphere
Cells. We next asked whether the implanted cells populate neural
crest lineages. Following the procedure described above, we
implanted primary and passaged (P2) GFP+ neurospheres into
spinal cord lesions made in the middle of the tail (Fig. 4A). After
7 d of healing, we amputated the tail close to the GFP+ cells and
allowed regeneration for 6 wk (Fig. 4 B and C). When we examined
Fig. 4.
GFP+ cells derived from a passaged neurosphere implant contribute to peripheral nerves and DRG. (A) After the removal of an ∼1-mm section of
spinal cord, the neurospheres were implanted in the lesion. (B) After 1–2 wk of wound healing, the implanted neurospheres were integrated in the spinal
cord tissue. The tail was amputated close to the integrated GFP+ cells, maintaining them within the 500-μm zone. (C) The integrated GFP+ cells contribute to
spinal cord regeneration upon amputation. (D) MBP immunostaining of a tail cross-section containing regenerated EGFP+ spinal cord derived from the
passaged neurosphere implant. An MBP+/EGFP+ nerve is shown in the box. (E) Confocal image of peripheral nerve showing GFP+ nuclei and MBP+/GFP+ myelin.
(F) An anti-MBP–stained nerve myelin sheet. (G) GFP channel view of the nerve indicates EGFP+ cell nuclei and myelin cytoplasm. Green indicates EGFP+ cells,
red indicates MBP immunostaining, and blue indicates Hoechst staining. (H) βIII-Tubulin immunostaining of the same cross-section. A DRG containing βIII-
tubulin+/GFP+ cells is shown in the box. (I–K) Confocal image of DRG showing βIII-tubulin+/GFP+ cell and nerves. Green indicates EGFP+ cell bodies and nerves;
red indicates βIII-tubulin immunostaining; blue indicates Hoechst staining. (Scale bars: D and H, 50 μm; E, F, and I–K, 10 μm.)
E2262
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1116738109
Mchedlishvili et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 175.122.76.13 on September 2, 2022 from IP address 175.122.76.13.

sections containing peripheral nerve, we observed cells with clear
nuclear GFP in MBP+ peripheral nerve (Fig. 4 D–G), indicating
that Schwann cells can derive from the implanted neurospheres.
We often observed DRG that were a mixture of GFP+ and GFP−
cells (Fig. 4 H–K), presumably because the GFP+ cells constitute
part of the regenerated spinal cord so that both unlabeled and
labeled spinal cord cells contribute to the DRG.
Evidence That Clonally Derived Neurospheres Regenerate All Spinal
Cord Cell Types. Because neurospheres are widely considered
a means to identify and isolate neural stem cells, we wanted to
know whether any cells in our neurospheres had the property of
a true multipotent neural stem cell, i.e., the ability to self-renew
and to generate all neural cell types of the spinal cord. To ad-
dress this issue, we developed a clonal neurosphere formation
assay for axolotl cells followed after implantation into host tissue
(Fig. 5). Because salamander cells do not grow well in isolation,
GFP+ cells were cultured together with nontransgenic carrier
cells at a ratio of approximately ﬁve carrier cells to one GFP+
cell in AggreWell 400 plates (Fig. 5A). The microwells were
imaged to record the position of the microwells harboring single
GFP+ cells. About 10,000 single GFP+ cells were imaged in
different sets of experiments. The vast majority of the cells either
died or did not divide during the culturing process. Sixty-seven
cells gave rise to neurospheres harboring signiﬁcant numbers of
GFP+ cells. Interestingly, the frequency of successful neuro-
sphere formation corresponds with the frequency of neurosphere
formation found under nonclonal conditions (Fig. 3). Neuro-
spheres that were predominantly of GFP+ origin and >60 μm in
size (n = 28) were selected for implantation into white hosts with
one neurosphere per animal. After 1 wk of healing the tails were
amputated close to the GFP+ implant. Three of the 28 clonal
neurosphere implants contributed efﬁciently to the spinal cord
regeneration process (Fig. 5 A–F and Figs. S7 and S8).
To determine whether GFP+ cells had formed all spinal cord
cell types, the caudal part of the regenerate harboring GFP+ spinal
cord was amputated and ﬁxed for histological analysis. Cross-
sections of the tail showed that the entire lateral half of the spinal
cord regenerate was repopulated by GFP+ cells (Fig. 5 G–J).
Colocalization of GFP with cell type-speciﬁc markers indicated
that the integrated cells efﬁciently formed GFAP+ radial glia (Fig.
5G), βIII-tubulin+ neurons (Fig. 5 H and O–R), and MBP+ cells
(Fig. 5 O–R, Inset in O and arrowheads). The integrated GFP+
cells also faithfully expressed region-speciﬁc transcription factors
that specify progenitor cell subtypes such as PAX6 and PAX7 (Fig.
5 I and J). Because in some locations along the anterior/posterior
axis, all cells in one lateral half of the spinal cord were GFP+ (Fig.
5G), we determined whether the GFP+ cells deriving from the
clone were positive for the ventral-most and dorsal-most cell types.
This information indicated that the clonal GFP+ neurosphere
cells had contributed daughters to all possible spinal cord cell
types. Shh+ and Msx1+ GFP+ ﬂoor and roof plate cells, re-
spectively, were found in daughter cells of the implanted GFP+
clonal neurosphere (Fig. 5 K–N, arrows). These results suggested
that all spinal cord cell types were produced by the implanted
GFP+ clonal neurosphere cells.
The tail of the second animal with the integrated, clonally
derived neurosphere (Fig. S7) was ﬁxed and analyzed in more
depth for the formed neurons and radial glia. As in example one,
in some cross-sections the majority of the lateral half of spinal
cord was reconstituted from GFP+ cells (Fig. S7G). Cell-speciﬁc
staining revealed formation of GFP+/NeuN+ neurons (Fig. S7 H
and I) and GFP+/GFAP+ radial glia (Fig. S7J). In the third
animal (Fig. S8), the implanted neurosphere contributed to Shh+
ﬂoor plate cells (Fig. S8 D and G), Pax6+ progenitors (Fig. S8 E
and H), and NeuN+ neurons (Fig. S8 F and I) in the spinal cord.
In the clonal implantation experiments we did not observe la-
beled DRG. In sum, our clonal analysis suggests that the di-
versity of the central spinal cord cells can be reconstituted from
a single cell during regeneration, suggesting multipotency of the
cultured axolotl neural stem cells.
Discussion
Here we have shown that during axolotl tail regeneration,
a faithful complement and periodicity of PNS structures is
regenerated. The completeness of PNS regeneration seems to be
a unique feature of the axolotl system. Similar tail amputation
experiments carried out in Xenopus tadpoles revealed the lack of
deﬁned DRG regeneration (14), perhaps because of deﬁcient
expression of various embryonic signaling factors in the frog
compared with the axolotl (21).
Furthermore, through implantation of spinal cord tissue and
cultured neurospheres, we show that a substantial proportion of
the DRG and the Schwann cells can arise from cells associated
with the regenerating spinal cord. Previous immunocytochemical
and electron microscopy analysis pointed to lateral exit routes
for migratory cells during spinal cord regeneration (2, 4). This
feature resembles the late phase of neural crest migration that
has been described in the chick (22). In the future, more reﬁned
cell tracing of spinal cord subpopulations using genetically
marked cells via the cre/lox system in axolotls will allow us to
determine the molecular identity, timing, and source of neural
crest derivatives in the spinal cord.
In contrast, our skin transplantation experiments suggest that
preexisting precursors in the periphery contribute signiﬁcantly to
the melanophores in the regenerate. This observation would be
consistent with recent lineage-tracing experiments in bird and
mouse suggesting that melanocytes derive from precursors in
peripheral nerve (13). These observations also would unify the
melanophore regeneration mechanisms with zebraﬁsh and Xen-
opus (14, 23). Because we could not track the spinal cord GFP+
cells into melanophores for technical reasons, we cannot exclude
the possibility that spinal cord-derived melanophores might
contribute as well. Indeed, the original biolistic transfection-la-
beling experiments in Pleurodeles waltl suggested that such events
may take place, although it was difﬁcult to exclude the possibility
that peripheral melanocyte precursors lying close to the spinal
cord had been labeled in those experiments (3).
As part of our analysis, we have derived a neurosphere-like
culture from the axolotl spinal cord that is capable of regener-
ating substantial parts of the spinal cord and the PNS including
the DRG and Schwann cells. The neurospheres are grown under
culture conditions similar to those used for mammalian coun-
terparts and differentiate into neuronal and glial cell types
under similar induction conditions, supporting the notion that
these neuronal and glial cells represent a cognate cell type. We
observed generation of motor neurons and sensory neurons from
the implanted cells. Furthermore, repeated amputation of the
nonclonal neurosphere-implanted tails resulted in at least 106-
fold expansion of the implanted cells, proving their extensive
expansion capacity in vivo.
Our clonal neurosphere experiments also suggest the existence
in our neurosphere cultures of a cell with the properties of
a spinal cord neural stem cell, because we observed engraftment
of clonally derived GFP+ cells in all dorsal/ventral cell domains,
as analyzed with molecular markers. The term “neural stem cell”
often is used in mammalian neurosphere experiments to indicate
the ability to give rise to neurons, astrocytes, and oligoden-
drocytes. Our work demonstrates that clonally derived cells can
reconstitute extensively all spinal cord cell types that we could
examine in vivo.
Although we observed robust contribution to the DRG from
nonclonal neurospheres in vivo, we did not observe contribution
of the clonally derived neurospheres to DRG in this study. It
presently is unresolved whether a neural stem cell that can form
both the CNS and PNS exists and simply was not found in the
Mchedlishvili et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 24, 2012
|
E2263
DEVELOPMENTAL
BIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 175.122.76.13 on September 2, 2022 from IP address 175.122.76.13.

clonal studies because of technical limitations or whether a sep-
arate pool of stem cells associated with the spinal cord region
exists for the CNS and PNS. In the nonclonal neurosphere
implants, the number of labeled, implanted cells was much greater
than in the clonal implants, leading to a greater chance that (i)
a rare CNS/PNS stem cell was implanted in those studies, and (ii)
the implanted CNS/PNS stem cell descendents survived and
populated the neural crest-generating zone of the regenerating
Fig. 5.
Clonally derived neurosphere efﬁciently contributes to spinal cord regeneration and reconstitutes the whole complement of spinal cord cell types. (A)
GFP+ cells cultured in microwells of an AggreWell 400 plate at clonal density with GFP−white feeder cells. Arrow indicates a single EGFP+ cell in the microwell,
imaged on the ﬁrst day of the culturing procedure. (B) Clonal neurosphere that arose from the single EGFP+ cell indicated by the arrow in A after 34 d of culturing.
(C) A clonal GFP+ neurosphere was engrafted into the injured spinal cord of the nontransgenic host. After 1 wk of healing the tail was amputated close to the
implant, maintaining GFP+ cells within the 500-μm zone behind the amputation plane. (D–F) Outgrowth of the GFP+ spinal cord from the implanted clonal
neurosphere monitored at 7, 24, and 54 dpa. (G–J) Cross-sections of the regenerated spinal cord from F at a caudal level. In this portion of the regenerate the full
lateral half of the spinal cord was reconstituted from GFP+ cells. Cross-sections were analyzed by immunoﬂuorescence for expression of cell type-speciﬁc markers.
(G) Anti-GFAP staining shows GFP+ cells have formed GFAP+ radial glia. (H) Anti–βIII-tubulin staining shows GFP+/βIII-tubulin+ neuronal cells. (I) Cross-section
immunostained for Pax6 shows that implanted GFP+ cells express Pax6 in the normal, lateral spinal cord domain. (J) Cross-section immunostained for Pax7 shows
that implanted GFP+ cells in the dorsal domain express Pax7. (K and L) Shh in situ hybridization shows clonally derived Shh+/GFP+ ﬂoor plate cells (arrows). (M and
N) Msx1 in situ hybridization shows Msx1+/GFP+ roof plate cell indicated by arrow. (O) βIII-Tubulin/MBP double-immunostaining of the cross-section. βIII-Tubulin
was labeled with Cy5 secondary antibody and is shown in yellow. (P–R) Enlarged views of boxed area in O, which shows the axonal layer of the spinal cord
containing MBP+/GFP+ myelin (arrowheads). In G–J, green indicates GFP+ cells; red indicates cell type-speciﬁc immunostaining; blue indicates Hoechst staining. In
K–M, green indicates GFP, and blue indicates Hoechst staining. In O–R, yellow indicates βIII-tubulin; red indicates MBP; green indicates GFP; and blue indicates
Hoechst staining. (Scale bars: A and B, 50 μm; C–F, 1 mm; G–J, 25 μm; K–N, 50 μm; O, 20 μm; P–R, 5 μm.)
E2264
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1116738109
Mchedlishvili et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 175.122.76.13 on September 2, 2022 from IP address 175.122.76.13.

spinal cord. Extensive studies of the hematopoietic stem cell
system have shown that the hematopoietic system consists of hi-
erarchies of stem cells, with only a very small fraction having ul-
timate, long-term ability to reconstitute the entire hematopoietic
system (24, 25). Importantly, in irradiated animals stem cells
without long-term reconstituting ability can act in a supportive
role, allowing short-term survival so that rare cells can provide
long-term reconstitution (25). Similarly, the spinal cord may have
several types of stem cells, including a rare CNS/PNS stem cell.
The nonclonal cultures, by providing a diversity of stem cells
with different potencies, may robustly allow reconstitution of the
DRG both via the presence of short-term reconstituting cells
and the rare CNS/PNS stem cells, whereas the clonal cultures
are not robust enough to allow efﬁcient engraftment of the rare
CNS/PNS stem cell. On the other hand, it also is possible that in
the nonclonal neurosphere experiments a separate PNS-speciﬁc
precursor that is closely associated with the spinal cord tissue
(such as boundary cap cells) was included in the culture.
The extensive reconstructive and neurogenic behavior of the
axolotl system contrasts with mammalian neurosphere trans-
plantation experiments that often led to astrocyte formation and
limited neurogenesis (26–31). A future goal will be to determine
whether these differences represent intrinsic differences in the
stem cell populations or in the extrinsic cues present at the injury
site. Histological characterization of the axolotl samples soon
after implantation indicates that the cells integrate relatively
rapidly with the endogenous radial glial cells to form a continu-
ous cell layer. How this wound healing is achieved is an in-
teresting question for future investigation.
Materials and Methods
Measurement of DRG Regeneration. Animal work was approved by the Saxony
State Commission on Animal Welfare. To examine the regenerative potential
of DRG during tail regeneration, axolotl larvae of 37.2 ± 0.7-mm length
were used. Ten animals were anesthetized in a solution with 0.01% (wt/wt)
ethyl-p-aminobenzoate (E-1501; Sigma), and the tails were amputated after
the 15th myotome using a sterile scalpel. We measured tail length in the
animals at different time points and compared them with an unamputated
control cohort (n = 10 for each). The regenerated tails reached a normal tail
length, comparable to unamputated controls, by 35 dpa (Table S1).
To determine whether the normal number of DRG was regenerated, the
number and spacing of DRG were compared in regenerating animals that had
been amputated at the 16th myotome posterior to the cloaca (n = 10) and in
uninjured control animals (n = 10). We analyzed the number of DRG at two
time points after amputation, 35 dpa (n = 5), and 49 dpa (n = 5), to de-
termine whether any further changes in DRG could be observed after the
tail had grown to normal length.
Tails were ﬁxed with freshly prepared 4% (wt/wt) paraformaldehyde (PFA)
before whole-mount immunostaining. All samples were ﬁxed for 12 h at
4 °C. After ﬁxation samples were washed three times for 20 min with PBS.
Immunolabeling of Whole-Mount Tails. To analyze the distances between DRG
in the regenerated tails and control tails, whole-mount tails were immu-
nostained with NeuN and βIII-tubulin antibodies. Before antibody staining
the skin was peeled away from the tails in a Petri dish ﬁlled with PBS using
scalpel and forceps under a stereo microscope (SZX12-RFA; Olympus). The
antibody reaction was done overnight at 4 °C. A Cy5-labeled Fab-fragment
goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (Dianova) was used. After staining, the
tails were taped onto a coverslip and imaged with in epiﬂuorescence and
differential interference contrast (DIC) using a BX61 microscope (Olympus).
All images were processed and combined for ﬁgures using MetaView, Axi-
ovision 4.6, and Photoshop CS (Adobe). Combined images were used for
measuring inter-DRG distances (Photoshop CS; Adobe).
Isolation and Culture of Neurospheres. The spinal cords of EGFP transgenic
axolotl tails were dissociated and incubated in L15 medium (Gibco) containing
30 U/mL papain (Sigma), 0.24 mg/mL cysteine, 40 μg/mL DNase I type IV, and 0.5
mg/mL trypsin inhibitor (Sigma) for 1 h at room temperature. Digestion was
stopped by adding an equal amount of ovomucoid inhibitor [0.5 mg trypsin
inhibitor (Sigma) and 0.5 mg/mL BSA (Sigma) in L15 medium (Gibco)]. The cells
were triturated with a ﬁre-polished Pasteur pipette, collected by centrifuga-
tion for 5 min at 80 × g, resuspended in 1 mL neurosphere medium [DMEM/F12
(Gibco), 2% (vol/vol) B27 (Gibco), 20 ng/mL human recombinant FGF-2 (R & D
Systems)], and plated at a density of 40,000 cells in 5 mL neurosphere medium.
After 3 wk primary neurospheres either were plated onto dishes coated with
poly-L-lysine (Sigma) and laminin (Sigma) for differentiation or were trans-
planted into the injured spinal cord of white (d/d) axolotls.
Neurosphere Transplantation and Imaging. For dissection, axolotls were
anesthetized in 0.03% (wt/wt) ethyl p-aminobenzoate (E-1501; Sigma) dis-
solved in water. An ∼2-mm-long portion of the spinal cord was removed
from 4-cm-long white axolotls (d/d alleles; our colony) and enough EGFP+
neurosphere(s) to ﬁll the gap were implanted (12). After 14 d of healing,
tails were amputated and imaged weekly on an Olympus SZX 12 stereomi-
croscope using a cell-imaging system (Diagnostic Imaging Systems). After 2
mo axolotl tail samples were ﬁxed in freshly made 4% (wt/wt) PFA at room
temperature and then overnight at 4 °C. Then they were washed twice for
30 min each washing in 1× PBS and placed overnight in a solution of 30%
(wt/wt) sucrose/1× PBS at 4 °C. For sectioning, the samples were embedded
in TissueTek (Sakura).
Clonal Neurosphere Formation and Implantation. The portions of tail spinal
cord isolated from EGFP transgenic axolotls were dissociated as described
above for the primary neurosphere cultures and were resuspended in neu-
rosphere medium supplemented with 20 ng/mL FGF-2. To isolate the single
EGFP+ cells from each other spatially, AggreWell 400 multiwell plates
(STEMCELL Technologies) were used. Before cells were added, plates were
centrifuged for 1 min at 1,000 × g in a plate centrifuge (Eppendorf Centri-
fuge 5804 with an A-2-DWP rotor) containing 600 μL neurosphere medium
per well to remove all air bubbles. EGFP+ cells were mixed with white feeder
cells at a ratio 1:5–1:10 and were distributed at a density of 600–1,000 EGFP+
cells per well. The plate was centrifuged at 100 × g for 2 min. The images of
every single EGFP+ cell per microwell were taken on a Zeiss Axiovert inverted
microscope with a Ph1 Plan Neoﬂuar 10×/0.30 objective using the Meta-
Morph cell-imaging system (Molecular Devices). The cells were rechecked
after 3–4 wk of culture to see if they formed clonal EGFP+ neurospheres.
Individual clonal EGFP+ neurospheres were implanted in a white host
spinal cord lesion (n = 28). After 1 wk of healing the tails were amputated
close to the implant and were imaged every few days on an Olympus SZX 16
stereomicroscope using a cell-imaging system (Diagnostic Imaging Systems).
After the process of regeneration had been completed, axolotl tail samples
were ﬁxed in freshly made 3.7% (wt/wt) formaldehyde in 1× MEM (Eagles’
minimum essential medium). After three washings for 30 min each in 1× PBS,
they were placed overnight in a solution of 20% (wt/wt) sucrose/1× PBS at
4 °C. For cryosectioning, the samples were embedded in TissueTek (Sakura).
Sox2 and HoxA9 A13 Antibody Preparation. A GST-fusion protein with amino
acids 1–44 of the axolotl Sox2 was expressed in bacteria and puriﬁed by
standard methods on Glutathione Sepharose (GSTrap; GE Healthcare).
Rabbits were injected with 200 μg of puriﬁed protein in each of three
boosts. Anti-serum was afﬁnity puriﬁed using MBP-Sox2 fusion proteins
conjugated to 1 mL of NHS-Sepharose resin (GE Healthcare).
For HoxA9 antibody production, a HoxA9-GST fusion with amino acids
RHYGIKPEPLPPGTRRGDCTTFDSSHTLSLSDYGSSPADKQSSEGAFPEAPAETEASG-
DKPAIDPNNPAANW was used to immunize rabbits. Antibody was afﬁnity
puriﬁed using a HoxA9-MBP fusion with amino acids PLPPGTRRGDCTTFD-
SSHTLSLSDYGSSPADKQSSEGAFPEAPAETEASGDKPA.
For HoxA13, a GST-fusion protein with amino acids PTMVPTVGGPGEP-
RHEPLLPMEPYQPWALTNGWNGQVYCSKEQGQPPHLWKSSLPDVVSHPSDAN
was used to immunize rabbits. Antibody was afﬁnity puriﬁed using an
MBP fusion protein to the same sequence.
Speciﬁcity of antibody immunostaining was conﬁrmed by comparing in
situ hybridization pattern and immunostaining on developing limb buds.
Immunohistochemistry. Neurosphere or tail sections were washed in PBS/0.1%
(vol/vol) Tween and blocked in PBS/0.1% (vol/vol) Tween with 20% (vol/vol)
goat serum or 1% (wt/wt) BSA. Sections were stained with primary antibodies
against the following proteins: GFAP (1:500) (Chemicon); Musashi-1 (rat;
1:500) (gift of Hideyuki Okano, Keio University, Tokyo) (20); NeuN (1:1,000)
(Chemicon), βIII-tubulin (mouse;1:500) (Chemicon); MBP (1:500) (GeneTex);
PAX7 (Development Studies Hybridoma Bank); PAX6 (made in house); and
MAP2 (mouse; 1:200) (Sigma). Appropriate secondary antibodies [goat anti-
mouse Cy3, 1:100 (Chemicon); goat anti-mouse Cy5, 1:100 (Chemicon); and
goat anti-rat Cy3, 1:100 (Dianova)] were applied and incubated for 1 h at
room temperature. Nuclei were labeled with 1 μg/mL Hoechst for 15 min.
Images were photographed with a Zeiss LSM UV laser-scanning confocal
Mchedlishvili et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 24, 2012
|
E2265
DEVELOPMENTAL
BIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 175.122.76.13 on September 2, 2022 from IP address 175.122.76.13.

microscope or Zeiss Apotome microscope and Zeiss Axiocam HR camera. All
images were combined for ﬁgures using MetaView, Axiovision 4.6, and
Photoshop CS (Adobe).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Hideyuki Okano for providing anti-
Musashi antibodies; Jeremy Brockes for providing anti-HNK1; Verdon
Taylor for introducing us to neurosphere-culturing techniques; Heino
Andreas for axolotl care; Regina Wegner for assistance with cell culture;
and Hans H. Epperlein. This work was supported by funding from the
Volkswagen Foundation Conditional Activation of Gene Expression; by
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) Grants DFG-SFB655: Cells to Tis-
sues, SPP1109 DFG TA-275/1-3, and DFG TA-274/3-1; and by institutional
funds from the Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genet-
icsand from the DFG Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden.
1. Iten LE, Bryant SV (1976) Regeneration from different levels along the tail of the
newt, Notophthalmus viridescens. J Exp Zool 196:293–306.
2. Arsanto JP, et al. (1992) Formation of the peripheral nervous system during tail
regeneration in urodele amphibians: Ultrastructural and immunohistochemical
studies of the origin of the cells. J Exp Zool 264:273–292.
3. Benraiss A, Arsanto JP, Coulon J, Thouveny Y (1997) Neural crest-like cells originate
from the spinal cord during tail regeneration in adult amphibian urodeles. Dev Dyn
209:15–28.
4. Géraudie J, Nordlander R, Singer M, Singer J (1988) Early stages of spinal ganglion
formation during tail regeneration in the newt, Notophthalmus viridescens. Am J
Anat 183:359–370.
5. Echeverri K, Tanaka EM (2002) Ectoderm to mesoderm lineage switching during
axolotl tail regeneration. Science 298:1993–1996.
6. McHedlishvili L, Epperlein HH, Telzerow A, Tanaka EM (2007) A clonal analysis of
neural progenitors during axolotl spinal cord regeneration reveals evidence for both
spatially restricted and multipotent progenitors. Development 134:2083–2093.
7. Fraisse P (1885) Die Regeneration von Geweben und Organen bei den Wirbeltheiren
besonders Amphibien und Reptilien (T. Fisher, Kassel< Germany).
8. Le Douarin NM, Kalcheim C (1999) The Neural Crest (Cambridge Univ Press,
Cambridge, UK).
9. Maro GS, et al. (2004) Neural crest boundary cap cells constitute a source of neuronal
and glial cells of the PNS. Nat Neurosci 7:930–938.
10. Vermeren M, et al. (2003) Integrity of developing spinal motor columns is regulated
by neural crest derivatives at motor exit points. Neuron 37:403–415.
11. Schnapp E, Kragl M, Rubin L, Tanaka EM (2005) Hedgehog signaling controls
dorsoventral patterning, blastema cell proliferation and cartilage induction during
axolotl tail regeneration. Development 132:3243–3253.
12. Sobkow L, Epperlein HH, Herklotz S, Straube WL, Tanaka EM (2006) A germline GFP
transgenic axolotl and its use to track cell fate: Dual origin of the ﬁn mesenchyme
during development and the fate of blood cells during regeneration. Dev Biol 290:
386–397.
13. Adameyko I, et al. (2009) Schwann cell precursors from nerve innervation are
a cellular origin of melanocytes in skin. Cell 139:366–379.
14. Lin G, Chen Y, Slack JM (2007) Regeneration of neural crest derivatives in the Xenopus
tadpole tail. BMC Dev Biol 7:56.
15. Yang CT, Sengelmann RD, Johnson SL (2004) Larval melanocyte regeneration
following laser ablation in zebraﬁsh. J Invest Dermatol 123:924–929.
16. Epperlein HH, Perris R, Löfberg J (1986) Environmental control in pigment pattern
formation of the axolotl larva. Prog Clin Biol Res 217B:191–194.
17. Weiss S, et al. (1996) Multipotent CNS stem cells are present in the adult mammalian
spinal cord and ventricular neuroaxis. J Neurosci 16:7599–7609.
18. Gritti A, et al. (1996) Multipotential stem cells from the adult mouse brain proliferate
and self-renew in response to basic ﬁbroblast growth factor. J Neurosci 16:1091–1100.
19. Hitoshi S, et al. (2004) Primitive neural stem cells from the mammalian epiblast
differentiate to deﬁnitive neural stem cells under the control of Notch signaling.
Genes Dev 18:1806–1811.
20. Kaneko Y, et al. (2000) Musashi1: An evolutionally conserved marker for CNS
progenitor cells including neural stem cells. Dev Neurosci 22:139–153.
21. Sugiura T, et al. (2004) Differential gene expression between the embryonic tail bud
and regenerating larval tail in Xenopus laevis. Dev Growth Differ 46:97–105.
22. Sharma K, Korade Z, Frank E (1995) Late-migrating neuroepithelial cells from the
spinal cord differentiate into sensory ganglion cells and melanocytes. Neuron 14:
143–152.
23. Rawls JF, Johnson SL (2000) Zebraﬁsh kit mutation reveals primary and secondary
regulation of melanocyte development during ﬁn stripe regeneration. Development
127:3715–3724.
24. Matsuzaki Y, Kinjo K, Mulligan RC, Okano H (2004) Unexpectedly efﬁcient homing
capacity of puriﬁed murine hematopoietic stem cells. Immunity 20:87–93.
25. Osawa M, Hanada K, Hamada H, Nakauchi H (1996) Long-term lymphohematopoietic
reconstitution by a single CD34-low/negative hematopoietic stem cell. Science 273:
242–245.
26. Enomoto M, Shinomiya K, Okabe S (2003) Migration and differentiation of neural
progenitor cells from two different regions of embryonic central nervous system after
transplantation into the intact spinal cord. Eur J Neurosci 17:1223–1232.
27. Akesson E, et al. (2007) Long-term culture and neuronal survival after intraspinal
transplantation of human spinal cord-derived neurospheres. Physiol Behav 92:60–66.
28. Akesson E, et al. (2001) Solid human embryonic spinal cord xenografts in acute and
chronic spinal cord cavities: A morphological and functional study. Exp Neurol 170:
305–316.
29. Wu S, et al. (2002) Immunohistochemical and electron microscopic study of invasion
and differentiation in spinal cord lesion of neural stem cells grafted through
cerebrospinal ﬂuid in rat. J Neurosci Res 69:940–945.
30. Ogawa Y, et al. (2002) Transplantation of in vitro-expanded fetal neural progenitor
cells results in neurogenesis and functional recovery after spinal cord contusion injury
in adult rats. J Neurosci Res 69:925–933.
31. Wu S, et al. (2001) Migration, integration, and differentiation of hippocampus-
derived neurosphere cells after transplantation into injured rat spinal cord.
Neurosci Lett 312:173–176.
E2266
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1116738109
Mchedlishvili et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 175.122.76.13 on September 2, 2022 from IP address 175.122.76.13.

===== Meletis2008_PLoSBiol_NSC+EpendymalCell =====
Spinal Cord Injury Reveals Multilineage
Differentiation of Ependymal Cells
Konstantinos Meletis1[¤a, Fanie Barnabe´-Heider1[, Marie Carle´n1[¤a, Emma Evergren2¤b, Nikolay Tomilin2,
Oleg Shupliakov2, Jonas Frise´n1*
1 Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 2 Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden
Spinal cord injury often results in permanent functional impairment. Neural stem cells present in the adult spinal cord
can be expanded in vitro and improve recovery when transplanted to the injured spinal cord, demonstrating the
presence of cells that can promote regeneration but that normally fail to do so efficiently. Using genetic fate mapping,
we show that close to all in vitro neural stem cell potential in the adult spinal cord resides within the population of
ependymal cells lining the central canal. These cells are recruited by spinal cord injury and produce not only scar-
forming glial cells, but also, to a lesser degree, oligodendrocytes. Modulating the fate of ependymal progeny after
spinal cord injury may offer an alternative to cell transplantation for cell replacement therapies in spinal cord injury.
Citation: Meletis K, Barnabe´-Heider F, Carle´n M, Evergren E, Tomilin N, et al. (2008) Spinal cord injury reveals multilineage differentiation of ependymal cells. PLoS Biol 6(7):
e182. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182
Introduction
Transplantation of different types of stem cells improves
functional recovery after spinal cord injury in rodents and
primates. The beneﬁcial effects appear to be mediated by
several mechanisms, including replacement of lost cells,
secretion of neurotrophic factors, and probably most
importantly, the generation of oligodendrocytes that remye-
linate spared axons in the vicinity of a lesion [1,2].
Neural stem cells present in the adult spinal cord can be
propagated in vitro [3,4], and promote functional recovery
when transplanted to the injured spinal cord [5]. Endogenous
neural stem cells could therefore be attractive candidates to
manipulate for the production of desired progeny after
spinal cord injury as an alternative to stem cell trans-
plantation. This approach would offer a noninvasive strategy
that avoids the need for immune suppression, but has been
held back by difﬁculties in identifying adult spinal cord
neural stem cells and developing rational ways to modulate
their response to injury. Studies using indirect techniques
have suggested that the neural stem cell potential in the adult
rodent spinal cord resides in the white matter parenchyma
[6,7] or close to the central canal, either in the ependymal
layer [8] or subependymally [9].
We have employed genetic fate mapping to characterize a
candidate neural stem cell population in the adult spinal cord
and show that close to all in vitro neural stem cell potential
resides within the population of ependymal cells. Ependymal
cells give rise to a substantial proportion of scar-forming
astrocytes as well as to some myelinating oligodendrocytes after
spinal cord injury. Modulating the fate of ependymal cell
progeny after injury could potentially promote the generation
of cell types that may facilitate recovery after spinal cord injury.
Results
Genetic Labeling of Cells in the Adult Spinal Cord
Ependymal Layer
In order to fate map candidate neural stem cells close to
the central canal, we generated two transgenic mouse lines
expressing tamoxifen-dependent Cre recombinase (CreER)
under the control of FoxJ1 (HFH4) or Nestin regulatory
sequences. FoxJ1 expression is speciﬁc to cells possessing
motile cilia or ﬂagella [10–13]. In the adult forebrain, a subset
of astrocytes in the subventricular zone contact the ventricle
and have an immotile primary cilium [14], but FoxJ1
expression is restricted to cells with motile cilia [10–13].
Nestin is expressed in central nervous system stem and
progenitor cells during development and in adulthood [15–
19]. In the adult spinal cord, nestin is expressed by cells lining
the central canal, endothelial cells, and sparse white matter
glial cells [20]. The second intron enhancer in the Nestin gene
allows for selective expression of CreER in the neural lineage
[21], eliminating expression in for example endothelial cells.
CreER expression in the adult spinal cord is limited to cells
lining the central canal in both the FoxJ1-CreER and Nestin-
CreER mouse lines (Figure 1). Administration of tamoxifen to
mice on an R26R [22] or Z/EG [23] Cre reporter background
allows inducible, permanent. and heritable genetic labeling
by the expression of b-galactosidase (b-gal; R26R) or GFP (Z/
EG) in cells expressing CreER (the strategy is schematically
depicted in Figure S1). Recombination in the absence of
Academic Editor: Asa Abeliovich, Columbia University, United States of America
Received November 23, 2007; Accepted June 16, 2008; Published July 22, 2008
Copyright:  2008 Meletis et al. This is an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author
and source are credited.
Abbreviations: b-gal, b-galactosidase; BrdU, 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine; CreER,
tamoxifen-dependent Cre recombinase; CSPG, chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans;
GFP, green fluorescent protein; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; MBP, myelin
basic protein; SD, standard deviation
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: jonas.frisen@ki.se
[ These authors contributed equally to this work.
¤a Current address: Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Picower Institute
for Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America
¤b Current address: Medical Research Council (MRC) Laboratory of Molecular
Biology, Cambridge, United Kingdom
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
July 2008 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e182
1494
PLoS BIOLOGY

tamoxifen was exceptionally rare (,1 cell/30 coronal 20-lm-
thick sections in both transgenic lines) and limited to CreER-
expressing cells in the ependymal layer. Administration of
tamoxifen (ﬁve daily injections) resulted in recombination of
the reporter allele (Figure 1A–1D) in 82 6 4% of transgene-
expressing cells in Nestin-CreER mice and 88 6 4% in FoxJ1-
CreER mice (mean 6 standard deviation [SD], n ¼ 6 mice for
each mouse line).
Phenotypic Characterization of Adult Spinal Cord
Ependymal Cells
The cells at the central canal expressing CreER protein
from the Nestin-CreER or FoxJ1-CreER transgene are immu-
noreactive to Crocc, a marker for ciliated cells (Figure S2).
They contain the intermediate ﬁlaments nestin and vimentin,
associated with immature neural cells [15], but notably not
glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP) (Figures S2 and S3),
which is present in some neural stem cells in the adult
forebrain [24]. The transgene expressing cells display other
markers associated with neural stem/progenitor cells such as
CD133/prominin-1, Musashi1, PDGFR-a, Sox2, Sox3, and
Figure 1. Genetic Labeling of Spinal Cord Ependymal Cells
Transgenic mice with tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase (CreER) under the control of the FoxJ1 promoter (A and B) or the Nestin second intron
enhancer (C and D) drive expression and induce recombination after 5 daily tamoxifen injections (resulting in b-gal expression) in cells lining the central
canal in the adult spinal cord.
(A and C) Overviews of coronal sections from the thoracic spinal cord and (B and D) higher magnification of the central canal region demonstrating
recombination in the majority of cells and cytoplasmic CreER protein 6 days after the last tamoxifen administration. Cell nuclei are visualized with DAPI
in (A and C). Scale bars indicate 100 lm in (A) and (C), and 25 lm in (B) and (D).
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.g001
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
July 2008 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e182
1495
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells
Author Summary
Spinal cord injuries occur in more than 30.000 individuals each year
worldwide and result in significant morbidity, with patients
requiring long physical and medical care. The recent identification
of resident stem cells in the adult spinal cord has opened up for the
possibility of pharmacological manipulation of these cells to
produce cell types promoting recovery after injury. We have
employed genetic tools to specifically address the identity and
reaction to injury of a spinal cord subpopulation of cells known as
ependymal cell. Genetic labeling of this putative stem cell
population allows for the evaluation of stem cell activity in vitro
and in vivo. We found that ependymal cells lining the central canal
act as neural stem cells in vitro and contribute extensively to the
glial scar in vivo. Interestingly, injury induces proliferation of
ependymal cells and migration of ependyma-derived progeny
towards the site of injury. Moreover, ependymal cell progeny
differentiate and give rise to astrocytes as well as myelinating
oligodendrocytes. In summary, our results point to ependymal cells
as an attractive candidate population for non-invasive manipulation
after injury.

Sox9 but are negative for the oligodendroglial progenitor
marker Olig2 (Figures S2 and S3). All above-mentioned
proteins appear uniformly expressed by the cells lining the
central canal, and we have not found any molecular marker
delineating any subpopulations.
Immunoelectron microscopy established that the Nestin-
CreER and FoxJ1-CreER transgenes are expressed in identical
cell populations by the central canal; their expression is
restricted to lumen-contacting cells with motile cilia (9 þ 2
axonemes), and all such cells express both transgenes (Figures
2A–2C, S4, and S5). Ultrastructural analysis in serial sections
revealed morphological heterogeneity among the lumen-
contacting ciliated cells, with some cells displaying typical
cuboidal ependymal cell morphology and others a tanycyte
morphology [25] (Figures 2C, 2D, S4, and S5). In addition,
there is a less numerous third cell type, which we refer to as a
radial ependymal cell. Radial ependymal cells share the
morphology of the cytoplasm, and often nucleus, with
ependymal cells, but have a long basal process (Figures 2B,
2D, and S5). The radial ependymal cells almost invariably
reside in the dorsal or ventral pole of the ependymal layer,
with a basal process oriented along the dorsoventral axis
(Figures 2A and S5). Although the lumen-contacting ciliated
cells can be subdivided into these three groups, cells with
intermediary phenotypes are frequent (Figure 2E and Table
S1), which together with their homogeneous molecular
proﬁle suggests that they are closely related. The naming of
ependymal cell types is based solely on morphological criteria
and does not imply any function. The central canal-
contacting ciliated cells have in common that they reside in
the ependymal layer, thus we collectively refer to them as
ependymal cells.
Adult Spinal Cord Stem Cells Are Largely Contained within
the Ependymal Cell Population
Adult spinal cord neural stem cells can be propagated in
vitro [3], but their precise identity has been difﬁcult to
establish unequivocally [6–9]. We utilized our genetic labeling
paradigms to ask whether adult spinal cord ependymal cells
have neural stem cell properties in vitro. Adult FoxJ1-CreER
and Nestin-CreER mice on Cre recombination reporter back-
ground (R26R or Z/EG) received ﬁve daily injections of
tamoxifen to induce recombination, and primary cultures
were initiated after an additional 6 d without tamoxifen
(Figure 3A). Tamoxifen and its active metabolite 4-hydrox-
ytamoxifen have a half-life of 6–12 h in the mouse [26], and
accordingly CreER protein was no longer detectable in the
nucleus after 6 d without tamoxifen (Figure 1B and 1D).
Spinal cords were dissociated and plated at clonal density in
standard conditions that allow for neurosphere formation
(Figure 3B). We found that 76 6 5.7% of neurospheres from
Nestin-CreER and 85 6 2.2% from FoxJ1-CreER mice were
recombined and thus derived from recombined ependymal
cells (mean 6 SD, n ¼ 6 mice analyzed separately per line,
Figure 2. Characterization of Spinal Cord Ependymal Cells
(A–C) Immunoelectron microscopy of the central canal in a FoxJ1-CreER mouse. Pseudocoloring in (A) illustrates the localization of CreER-
immunoreactive radial ependymal cells (B), cuboidal ependymal cells, and tanycytes (C).
(D) Table with color code for (A–C), describing the characteristics of the three cell types that line the central canal.
(E) Venn diagram illustrating the percentage of cuboidal ependymal cells, tanycytes, radial ependymal cells, and intermediate morphologies (see
Figures S4 and S5, and Table S1 for details on the ultrastructural analysis). Scale bars indicate 10 lm in (A) and 3 lm in (B) and (C).
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.g002
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
July 2008 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e182
1496
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells

Figure 3C and 3E). Neurospheres were either homogeneously
recombined or not recombined, verifying their clonal origin.
Since recombination never was fully penetrant in the
ependymal cells, the analysis of the proportion of neuro-
spheres that were recombined may underestimate the true
contribution of this cell population to neurosphere forma-
tion. If there is a stochastic distribution of recombination
within the CreER expressing cell population, rather than
recombination demarcating a subpopulation that differs with
regard to neurosphere-forming potential, one can estimate
the contribution of the cell population to neurosphere
formation by normalizing it to the observed recombination
rate. To estimate the theoretically maximal proportion of
neurosphere-initiating cells that are ependymal cells, we
Figure 3. Ependymal Cells Display Neural Stem Cell Properties In Vitro
(A) Schematic depiction of tamoxifen administration paradigm and (B) analysis of neural stem cell properties and in vivo and in vitro recombination
frequency.
(C) The high proportion of recombined (rec.) neurospheres (mean þ SD, n ¼ 6 mice for each transgenic mouse line) demonstrates that the majority
derives from ependymal cells.
(D) Estimate of the proportion of neurospheres that derive from ependymal cells by normalization to the recombination rate in tissue sections of the
spinal cords that were used to initiate the cultures (mean 6 SD).
(E) Recombined primary neurospheres from FoxJ1-CreER mice on R26R background visualized by X-gal staining (arrow points to one unrecombined
neurosphere).
(F) Differentiation of a clonally derived recombined neurosphere into neurons (bIIItub), astrocytes (GFAP), and oligodendrocytes (O4).
(G) Flow cytometric isolation of GFPþ cells from the spinal cord of adult FoxJ1-CreER mice based on the IRES-GFP signal (GFP gate). 7-AAD labels dead
cells, which were excluded.
(H–K) Brightfield (BF) and fluorescent images (I and K) of a single GFPþ sorted cell and a neurosphere (J) formed from such a cell, which is GFP due to
the lack of FoxJ1 expression (K).
Scale bars indicate 400 lm in (E), 20 lm in (F), 100 lm in (H) and (I), and 50 lm in (J) and (K).
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.g003
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
July 2008 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e182
1497
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells

analyzed the recombination frequency in CreER-expressing
cells in sections from each spinal cord sample that was used
for neurosphere cultures (Figure 3B). Normalizing the
recombination frequency in neurospheres to the recombina-
tion frequency in the CreER-expressing cells in vivo,
suggested that close to all neurosphere-initiating potential
could reside within the ependymal cell population under
these conditions (Figure 3D).
Progenitor cells with limited self-renewal capacity can give
rise to neurospheres, but are incapable of generating new
neurospheres when passaged more than twice [27,28]. We
found that 100% of the recombined neurospheres from both
Nestin-CreER and FoxJ1-CreER could be serially passaged at
least eight times to give rise to new neurospheres (n ¼ 6
neurospheres per 4 transgenic mice). The number of cells
increased exponentially during passaging (Figure S6). Anal-
ysis of the differentiation potential of ependymal cell-derived
neurospheres after three passages revealed that 100% of the
neurosphere clones were multipotent and differentiated into
neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes (Figure 3F).
We also isolated prospectively identiﬁed ependymal cells by
ﬂow cytometry independently of Cre-mediated recombina-
tion by utilizing the green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP)
expression under the bicistronic control of the FoxJ1
promoter (Figures 3G and S1). Flow cytometric isolation of
adult spinal cord cells substantially reduced neurosphere
formation, and 0.18 6 0.06% (mean 6 SD from in average
1,600 GFP-positive (GFPþ) cells/mouse, n ¼ 6 mice analyzed
separately) of GFPþ ependymal cells formed neurospheres
(Figure 3H–3K). In contrast, not a single neurosphere
developed from the same number of cells in the GFP non-
ependymal fraction from any animal in the same experi-
ments. Thus, the neural stem cell potential in the adult spinal
cord, at least under the conditions employed here, largely
resides within the ependymal cell population.
Ependymal Cells Self-Renew In Vivo
Cells in the adult spinal cord ependymal layer proliferate,
albeit slowly or rarely [8]. Continuous administration for one
month in the drinking water of 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine
(BrdU), which is incorporated into DNA in cells in S-phase,
resulted in labeling of 19.9 6 4.2% of ependymal cells (mean
6 SD from three mice, Figure 4A and 4B). The BrdU-labeled
ependymal cells constituted 4.8 6 0.9% of all BrdU-labeled
cells in a spinal cord segment (mean 6 SD from three mice).
The majority of BrdU-labeled ependymal cells were found in
pairs, indicating that most mitoses resulted in self-duplica-
tion rather than the generation of another cell that had left
the ependymal layer (Figure 4A and 4B). In line with this,
analysis of the distribution of recombined cells up to 8 mo
after tamoxifen administration in the FoxJ1-CreER and Nestin-
CreER mice did not provide evidence for the generation of
cells that leave the ependymal layer under normal conditions
(unpublished data).
Whether a speciﬁc cell population is derived from another
cell type or it is maintained through self-duplication can be
established by analyzing the genetic labeling frequency at
different time points after induction of recombination
[29,30]. There was no reduction in the proportion of
recombined ependymal cells for up to 10 mo after tamoxifen
administration (Figure 4C–4E), indicating that ependymal
cells are maintained by self-renewal and are not replenished
by another cell population.
Ependymal Cells Are Activated by Spinal Cord Injury
We next assessed the response of ependymal cells to spinal
cord injury. We used the same labeling paradigm as before
(Figure 3A), with a 6-d period between the last tamoxifen
dose and the injury. This ensures that all recombination
occurs prior to the insult and that even if other cells than
ependymal cells would start to express the FoxJ1-CreER or
Nestin-CreER transgene in response to the injury (nestin is
indeed expressed by reactive astrocytes [20]), it would not
result in recombination. An incision in the dorsal funiculus,
which does not compromise the integrity of the ependymal
layer, dramatically increased the proliferation of ependymal
cells (Figures 5A, 5B, and S7). In contrast to the uninjured
spinal cord, where proliferation of ependymal cells appears
largely limited to self-renewing divisions, recombined cells
started to migrate and were located outside the ependymal
layer 4 d after the injury (Figure 5C–5I). Migrating recom-
bined cells lost their ependymal phenotype as judged by the
loss of immunoreactivity to Sox2 and Sox3 and lack of CreER
expression from the FoxJ1 promoter (Figure 3D and unpub-
lished data). Most emigrating cells expressed Sox9 and some
the astrocyte marker GFAP (Figure 5F, 5H, and 5I). Ultra-
structural analysis revealed that ependymal cell morphology
was largely unaltered by the injury, with the exception of a
darker cytoplasm due to a higher content of ﬁlaments (Figure
5J and 5K).
Figure 4. Ependymal Cells Self-Renew In Vivo
(A and B) BrdU incorporation in ependymal cells after 4-wk admin-
istration in the drinking water. Many of the labeled cells are found in
pairs (arrowheads).
(A) shows a coronal and (B) a sagittal section.
(C–E) The recombination (rec.) rate of ependymal cells remains at the
same level from 2 d to 10 mo after tamoxifen administration (mean and
SD from 3–4 mice at each time point).
The scale bar indicates 25 lm in (A–D).
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.g004
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
July 2008 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e182
1498
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells

Ependymal Cells Contribute to Scar Formation after Injury
Ependymal progeny migrated towards the injury site in the
dorsal funiculus and an increasing number of recombined
cells accumulated in the forming glial scar over several weeks
and remained there for at least 10 mo after the insult (Figure
6A–6C). The recombined ependyma-derived cells occupied
18.3 6 6.9% (mean 6 SD from three FoxJ1-CreER mice) of the
area in the scar tissue 2 wk after the injury, which is likely to
be a slight underestimate of the true contribution since
recombination never was fully penetrant. The ependyma-
derived cells were not evenly distributed throughout the
injury site, but the scar consisted of patches of recombined
and unrecombined cells (Figure 6H and 6I). The reaction of
the ependymal cells was restricted to the injured segment and
was absent in adjacent segments (Figures 5A–5H and 6A–6C),
which are indirectly affected by the severance of axons and
Wallerian degeneration. There were no recombined cells
outside the ependymal layer in animals in which only the
spinal cord was exposed but no lesion was made (sham lesion,
Figure S8), and a lesion did not induce recombination in
animals that had not received tamoxifen (unpublished data).
Since some ependymal cells extend processes along the
dorsolateral midline, it was possible that the activation of
ependymal cells by a dorsal funiculus incision was triggered
by the severance of such processes. To investigate this, we
performed incisions in the lateral spinal cord, which do not
directly injure the ependymal cell processes in the dorso-
lateral midline. In these animals, ependymal cell progeny
were generated and migrated laterally towards the injury
(Figure S8). The ependyma-derived cells migrating to the
lesion appeared less numerous after a lateral than after a
dorsal incision, suggesting that severance of ependymal cell
processes in the midline is not necessary for the activation of
ependymal cells, but that it may augment their reaction. The
migration of ependyma-derived cells to the site of injury
suggests the presence of attractive signals originating in the
lesion area. SDF1, through its receptor CXCR4, mediates
attraction of progeny from neural stem/progenitor cells after
some types of injuries [31,32]. The majority of ependymal
Figure 5. Ependymal Cells Are Activated by Injury
Uninjured and adjacent injured segments from mice 4 d after a dorsal funiculus incision. Recombined cells leave the ependymal layer in the injured
segments (arrowheads). (A and B) Ki67 immunoreactivity indicates ependymal proliferation in the injured, but not in the uninjured segment. Migrating
recombined cells lose Sox3 expression (D), but most are Sox9 immunoreactive, and a smaller population is GFAP immunoreactive (F–I). Some
ependymal cells within the ependymal layer (outlined by hatched line in [I]) become GFAP immunoreactive (arrows). (J and K) Electron micrographs of
an extended ependymal cell with a dense filamentous matrix (f) in the cytoplasm 4 wk after injury in a FoxJ1-CreER mouse. n, nucleus.
Scale bars indicate 25 lm in (A–H), 10 lm in (I), 1.5 lm in (J), and 0.2 lm in (K).
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.g005
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
July 2008 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e182
1499
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells

Figure 6. Ependymal Cells Contribute to Scar Formation after Spinal Cord Injury
(A) Distribution of b-gal–immunoreactive ependyma-derived cells in coronal sections from an uninjured segment (left) further towards the lesion
epicenter (right).
(B and C) Sagittal sections show the distribution of recombined cells 1 mo (B) and 10 mo (C) after a dorsal funiculus incision (indicated by hatched lines).
(D and E) Recombined cells outside the ependymal layer display either (D) the astrocytic marker GFAP or (E) a Sox9/vimentin double-positive profile.
(F and G) Other recombined cells are Olig2 immunoreactive (arrowheads) and have oligodendrocyte morphology at later time points ([F] is at 1 mo and
[G] 10 mo).
(H and I) The scar tissue is compartmentalized with patches of ependyma-derived cells.
(J and K) Electron micrographs of b-gal–immunoreactive cells with astrocyte (J) or oligodendrocyte (K) morphology. Boxed areas are shown at a higher
magnification in the insets.
(L) Drawing (based on [C]) depicting the distribution of recombined cells of different phenotypes.
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
July 2008 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e182
1500
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells

cells as well as their progeny were, however, negative for
CXCR4 (Figure S9), making it unlikely that this receptor
mediates the attraction of ependymal cell progeny to a spinal
cord lesion.
Analysis of the fate of the ependymal cell progeny by
molecular markers and electron microscopy after a dorsal
funiculus incision revealed that the majority were immunor-
eactive to Sox9 and vimentin and had an astrocyte-like
morphology (Figures 6E, 6H, 6J, 6M, and S10). A smaller
subpopulation of the recombined cells expressed GFAP and
nestin, but the vast majority of cells with this phenotype were
not recombined (Figure 6D, 6H, 6I, and 6M). Recombined
GFAP- and nestin-expressing cells were typically located close
to the surface of the spinal cord (Figure 6D, 6H, 6I, and 6L),
whereas the Sox9- and vimentin-expressing cells were most
abundant in the core of the scar tissue (Figures 6L and S10). We
conclude that the glial scar is comprised of two different
populations of astrocyte-like cells, where the majority of the
Sox9þ/vimentinþ population derives from ependymal cells and
the GFAPþ/nestinþcells are mainly reactive resident astrocytes.
We further investigated the contribution of ependymal
cells to other lineages. None of the recombined cells in the
scar tissue had neuronal morphology or were immunoreac-
tive to the neuron-speciﬁc epitope NeuN (unpublished data).
A population of recombined cells expressed Olig2 (Figure 6F
and 6G). The ﬁrst month after injury, Olig2-expressing
recombined cells were scattered throughout the injury site
and had an ultrastructural morphology corresponding to
immature oligodendrocytes (Figure 6F, 6K, 6L, and 6M). At
later time points, Olig2-expressing ependyma-derived cells
were excluded from the scar tissue and were restricted to the
uninjured tissue that bordered the scar (Figure 6G, 6L, and
6M). Lesions in the lateral funiculus resulted in the
generation of ependymal progeny of the same fates as after
a dorsal funiculus incision (Figure S8).
Relationship between Ependymal Cell Progeny,
Extracellular Matrix Molecules, and Axons in Spinal Cord
Scar Tissue
The scar tissue that forms at spinal cord injuries is thought
to inhibit axonal growth [33,34]. Chondroitin sulphate
proteoglycans (CSPG) appear to be the principal axonal
growth inhibiting molecules in glial scars [35]. Ependyma-
derived cells at the injury formed a complementary non-
overlapping pattern with areas that were CSPG immunor-
eactive (Figure 7A and 7B), indicating that ependymal cell
progeny do not contribute to the production of axonal
growth-inhibiting CSPG.
In parallel with the production of axonal growth-inhibiting
factors in the glial scar, there is an increase in some axonal
growth-promoting molecules, such as the extracellular matrix
molecules laminin and ﬁbronectin [36,37]. In the injury
model employed here, axons send sprouts into the scar tissue,
mainly during the ﬁrst month after an injury, and the axons
are preferentially associated with areas in the scar tissue that
have high levels of laminin [38,39]. Both laminin and
ﬁbronectin immunoreactivity were widely distributed
throughout the scar tissue, overlapping both with CSPG-
immunoreactive domains and areas occupied by ependyma-
derived cells (Figure 7A and 7B). Neuroﬁlament-immunor-
eactive axons were present in the center of the scar tissue and
were often wiggly and oriented in all directions (Figure 7C–
7H). This is in contrast to the rostrocaudal orientation of
axons seen in the uninjured dorsal funiculus, suggesting that
many of the axons present in the scar were severed and
sprouting into the scar tissue [39]. Neuroﬁlament-immunor-
eactive axons were present in domains dominated by
ependyma-derived cells, as well as in other areas of the scar
where these cells were less abundant (Figure 7C–7H). Axons
were often present in direct proximity to ependyma-derived
cells (Figure 7D, 7E, 7G, and 7H). The ﬁnding that ependyma-
derived progeny is not associated with the main scar-
associated axonal growth-inhibiting factor, CSPG, together
with their proximity to axonal sprouts, argues against these
cells being a major factor in glial scar-associated axonal
growth inhibition.
Ependymal Cells Generate Oligodendrocytes after Injury
The ﬁnding that some ependymal cell progeny displayed a
marker proﬁle and ultrastructural morphology suggesting
oligodendroglial differentiation (Figure 6) prompted us to
characterize these cells further and to address whether they
may contribute to axonal remyelination at later time points.
Ten months after spinal cord injury, the majority of
ependyma-derived progeny are located in the scar tissue that
has formed at the injury site, but a substantial number of cells
are sparsely distributed in a large area of the intact grey and
white matter bordering the lesion (Figure 8A–8C). Most of
these cells are Olig2þ and display mature oligodendrocyte
morphology with processes that extend along and enwrap
myelin basic protein (MBP)-immunoreactive myelin en-
sheathing axons (Figure 8B–8D).
Nuclear regions and processes of two ependyma-derived
cells were followed in the electron microscope in serial
utrathin sections (Figures 9 and S11, and unpublished data).
They both displayed a typical mature oligodendrocyte
morphology [25], such as oval nuclei with clumped chromatin,
a cytoplasmic matrix that appeared denser than in surround-
ing astrocytes, a granular endoplasmic reticulum represented
by several short cysternae, and tight junctions with adjacent
oligodendrocyte processes (Figure 9). Few processes emerged
from the cell body, and unlike those of astrocytes, they did
not form many branches and did not contain evident ﬁbrils
(Figure 9). The processes of the recombined cells could be
traced along axons, surrounding their myelin sheaths (Figure
9D). Thus, in addition to the generation of astrocytes,
ependymal cells generate myelinating oligodendrocytes.
Discussion
Stem cells are notoriously difﬁcult to identify, and their
localization in the adult spinal cord has been controversial
[6–9]. We report that ependymal cells constitute the vast
(M) Marker profile of recombined ependyma-derived cells (mean and SD from 3 mice at each time point) in the area encompassing the injury indicated
by hatched lines in (L).
c, caveolae; f, filaments; ld, lipid droplet; n, nucleus.
Scale bars indicate 25 lm in (D–G) and (H), 50 lm in (I), 2 lm in (J), 1 lm in (K), and 0.15 lm in insets in (J) and (K).
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.g006
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
July 2008 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e182
1501
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells

Figure 7. Relationship between Ependymal Cell-Derived Progeny, Axonal Growth-Modulating Molecules, and Axons in the Scar Tissue
(A–E) Chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans (CSPG), which are axonal growth inhibitory, are abundant in the scar tissue 2 wk after a dorsal funiculus
lesion. CSPG are present in a complementary and nonoverlapping pattern to b-gal–expressing ependyma-derived cells. The extracellular matrix proteins
fibronectin (A) and laminin (B and F), which are permissive to axonal sprouting, are widely distributed within the scar tissue and overlap with b-gal–
expressing ependyma-derived cells. (C–H) Neurofilament (NF)-immunoreactive axons in the scar tissue are rarely present in CSPGþ areas (C–E) but are
associated with ependymal cell progeny (C–H) and laminin (F–H) in the core of the forming scar tissue 2 wk after injury. Scale bars indicate 100 lm.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.g007
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
July 2008 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e182
1502
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells

majority of cells displaying in vitro neural stem cell proper-
ties in the adult spinal cord. Ependymal cells self-renew in
vivo, but do not generate appreciable numbers of other cell
types under homeostatic conditions. Their normally limited
proliferation increases dramatically after spinal cord injury
and they then produce oligodendrocytes, and more abun-
dantly, astrocytes that migrate to the site of injury and make a
substantial part of the glial scar.
The immediate descendants of tissue stem cells, progenitor
cells with limited self-renewal capacity and/or lineage
potential, can in some situations acquire stem cell properties
[40]. For example, spermatogonial progenitor cells can regain
stem cell function after injury and during aging and forebrain
neurospheres may be derived from committed progenitors
[41,42]. It appears unlikely that this would explain the neural
stem cell properties displayed by ependymal cells in vitro, as
they are not replenished by any other cell type in the adult,
but are self-renewing. However, although ependymal cells at
the population level display cardinal stem cell features in
vivo, such as self-renewal and generation of diverse progeny,
it is difﬁcult to study these properties at the single cell level in
the tissue, and we cannot conclude that they act as stem cells
in vivo.
In addition to ependymal cells, neural progenitors (ex-
pressing NG2, Olig2, and/or Nkx2.2) reside in the white and
gray matter of the adult rodent spinal cord [6,43–46].
Different studies have suggested that the parenchymal
progenitors represent multipotent neural stem cells or
more-restricted glial progenitors [6,43,47]. Under the stand-
ard neurosphere assay conditions employed here, the vast
majority of the neural stem cell potential resides within the
ependymal population. However, we cannot exclude that
other cells contribute, to a comparatively smaller degree, to
neurosphere formation under our conditions or that they
may display neural stem cell properties under other
conditions. The parenchymal progenitors are likely to serve
to replace glial cells in the uninjured spinal cord, which we do
not ﬁnd evidence that ependymal cells do. Parenchymal
progenitors are rapidly depleted after spinal cord injury, but
are later replaced and may participate in the generation of
glial cells after injury [6,44,46]. It is possible that some of the
ependyma-derived Olig2þ cells observed shortly after injury
represent regenerated parenchymal progenitors.
The limited functional recovery typically associated with
central nervous system injuries is in part due to the failure of
severed axons to regrow and reinnervate their targets. Axonal
Figure 8. Ependymal Cells Give Rise to Oligodendrocytes after Injury
(A) Ependymal cell-derived progeny are most abundant within the core of the scar tissue forming at the injury (arrow). Ependyma-derived cells are also
found, more sparsely, over a larger area in the intact tissue bordering the lesion (arrowheads), where they are associated with myelin basic protein
(MBP)-immunoreactive myelin ensheathing neurofilament (NF)-immunoreactive axons.
(B–D) Ependymal cell-derived progeny harboring an oligodendrocytic morphology are found both in the grey (B) and white matter (C), and some
recombined processes wrap around myelinated axon (D).
Scale bars indicate 100 lm in (A), 25 lm in (B) and (C), and 10 lm in (D).
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.g008
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
July 2008 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e182
1503
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells

regeneration is inhibited by scar formation and growth-
inhibitory factors associated with myelin and astrocytes
[48,49]. Modulating the responsiveness to axonal growth-
inhibitory factors and glial scar formation are attractive
strategies to improve functional recovery after central
nervous system injuries [50–53]. The majority of ependyma-
derived cells differentiate to astrocyte-like cells after injury
and are found in the core of the scar tissue. However, these
cells are found in complementary nonoverlapping domains
to areas immunoreactive to CSPG, the most important axonal
growth inhibitor associated with glial scars [35,36]. Moreover,
axons in the scar tissue, most likely sprouts from severed
axons growing into the scar tissue, were frequently found in
direct proximity to ependyma-derived cells. This argues that
ependyma-derived cells in the scar tissue do not constitute a
major impediment to axonal growth, and may even suggest
that they support some local sprouting.
Spinal cord injury results in the loss of oligodendrocytes
and demyelination of axons even at some distance to the
lesion [54,55]. Spinal cord injuries are most commonly
incomplete in man, leaving spared tissue connecting the
spinal cord above and below the lesion, but the function of
remaining axons is often compromised due to demyelination.
Without insulating sheaths of myelin, spared axons close to,
but not directly affected by the injury, become less efﬁcient in
their ability to conduct electrical impulses [56]. Moreover,
chronically demyelinated axons are vulnerable to degener-
ation. Axons are remyelinated with time, and this is thought
to occur through the generation of new oligodendrocytes by
stem or progenitor cells rather than by self-duplication of
mature remaining oligodendrocytes [57–59]. We report here
that ependymal cells contribute to the regeneration of
oligodendrocytes and remyelination after spinal cord injury.
The differentiation pattern of ependymal cells after injury is
reminiscent to that seen for in vitro expanded adult spinal
cord neural stem cells transplanted to the injured spinal cord
[5]. Transplanted adult spinal cord-derived neurospheres
improve functional recovery, and if they are forced to
generate more oligodendrocytes, functional recovery is
further improved [5]. Since ependymal cells are the main
source of neurospheres from the adult spinal cord (Figure 3),
promoting oligodendrocyte generation from these cells in
vivo could potentially improve recovery after spinal cord
injury. The development of pharmacological strategies to
modulate endogenous stem cells and their progeny may be an
attractive alternative to cell transplantation for the treatment
of spinal cord injury.
Materials and Methods
Generation of transgenic mice. For Nestin-CreER, we used the
enhancer found in the second intron of the rat nestin gene fused to a
minimal hsp68 promoter [18,60,61] that controls the expression of
CreERT2 [62], as previously described [21]. For FoxJ1-CreER, we used a
human FOXJ1 promoter [13] fused to a CreERT2 ires-EGFP construct.
Transgenic mice were generated at the Karolinska Center for
Transgene Technologies by standard procedures utilizing pronuclear
injection of CBA 3 C57BL/six fertilized eggs. Potential founder
animals were screened by Southern blot analysis and PCR analysis
using a CreERT2-speciﬁc fragment as probe or PCR template.
Founder mice were bred to wild-type C57Bl/6 mice. Expression of
the transgene was analyzed by confocal microscopy of sections
stained with anti-Cre antibodies and cell-speciﬁc markers. Recombi-
nation was induced by ﬁve daily intraperitoneal injections of 2 mg of
tamoxifen (Sigma; 20 mg/ml in corn oil).
Immunohistochemistry. Adult mice were perfused transcardially
with PBS followed by 4% formaldehyde in PBS, spinal cords were
post-ﬁxed overnight at 4 8C and then cryoprotected in 30% sucrose.
Coronal (14 or 20 lm) or sagittal (20 lm, from ;9-mm-long pieces)
sections were collected alternating on ten slides (8–10 sections per
slide). Sections were incubated with blocking solution (10% donkey
serum in PBS, with 0.3% Triton-X100) for 1 h at room temperature,
then incubated at 4 8C or room temperature in a humidiﬁed chamber
for 12–48 h with primary antibodies diluted in blocking solution. For
MBP staining, sections were ﬁrst delipidized. For antibodies raised in
mouse, the M.O.M. kit (Vector), ABC kit (Vector), and TSA system
(Perkin Elmer) were used following the manufacturers’ instructions.
The following primary antibodies were used: b-galactosidase (1:5,000,
rabbit; ICN Biomedicals, or 1:1,000, goat; Biogenesis), BrdU, (1:200,
rat; Accurate), CD133 (1:500, rat, clone 13A4; eBioscience), chon-
droitin sulfate (1:1,000, mouse; Sigma), Cre (1:2,000, mouse; Nordic
BioSite), Crocc (1:5,000, rabbit, Root6; gift from T.Li), CXCR4 (1:500,
mouse; BD Pharmingen), ﬁbronectin (1:1,000, rabbit; Sigma), GFAP
(1:1,000, mouse, clone G-A-5; Sigma), Ki67 (1:1,000, rabbit; Neo-
markers), Olig2 (1:500, goat; R&D Systems), laminin (1:1,000, rabbit;
Sigma), MBP (1:500, rabbit; Chemicon), musashi-1 (1:2,000, rat, clone
14H1; gift from H.Okano), nestin (1:5,000, rabbit [63] or 1:500, mouse;
BD Pharmingen), neuroﬁlament heavy (1:1,000, chicken; Chemicon),
PDGFRa (1:500; BD Pharmingen), RC1 (1:200, mouse; DSHB), Sox2
(1:500, mouse; Chemicon, or 1:1,000, goat; gift from J. Muhr), Sox3
(1:500, rabbit; gift from T.Edlund), Sox9 (1:500, goat; R&D Systems),
vimentin (1:1,000, chicken; Chemicon). After washing, antibody
staining was revealed using species-speciﬁc ﬂuorophore-conjugated
(Cy3, Cy5 from Jackson, and Alexa 488 from Molecular Probes) or
biotin-conjugated secondary antibodies (Jackson). Biotinylated sec-
ondary antibodies were revealed using the ABC kit (Vector Labs) with
TSA ﬂuorescent ampliﬁcation kit (Perkin-Elmer). Sections were
counterstained with DAPI (1 lg/ml; Sigma). Control sections were
stained with secondary antibody alone. Pictures were taken using a
Zeiss Axioplan 2, Zeiss Axiovert 200M or a LSM510 META confocal
microscope with Zeiss and Openlab (Improvision) software. Image
processing and assembly was performed in ImageJ and Photoshop.
Figure 9. Ultrastructure of an Ependyma-Derived Oligodendrocyte
Electron micrograph of an ependyma-derived b-gal–expressing cell in
the nuclear plane 10 mo after injury (nucleus labeled with asterisk in [A]).
(A) The cell displays ultrastructural characteristics of a mature
oligodendrocyte such as a denser cytoplasm with fewer intermediate
filaments than that of a neighboring astrocyte (As), (B) tight junctions (tj)
between the cell body, and an oligodendrocyte process of another cell
and (C) granular endoplasmic reticulum (er) cycternae in the perikaryon.
Ax, axon; f, filamentous matrix.
(D) A process (p) of the cell adjacent to the myelin sheath on an axon.
Scale bars indicate 1 lm in (A) and 250 nm in (C) and (D).
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.g009
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
July 2008 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e182
1504
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells

Immunoelectron microscopy. Anaesthetized mice were perfused
transcardially with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS. The spinal cord was
dissected out and post-ﬁxed for 4 h. Sections (60 lm) were
immunolabled with Cre or b-gal antibodies in 0.1% Triton X100
and 10% donkey serum in PBS. A secondary antibody conjugated to
biotin was used with an ABC kit (Vector Labs). In some sections, a
ﬂuorescent secondary antibody was used, and sections were labeled
with DAPI to map the location of the nuclei of the surrounding cells
(Figure S11). The sections were post-ﬁxed in 3% glutaraldehyde in 0.1
M cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4) and in 1% osmium tetraoxide in 0.1 M
cacodylate buffer, dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol, stained
with uranyl acetate, and embedded in Durcupan resin (Fluka). Serial
sections (200 nm) of FoxJ1-CreER spinal cord were used to deﬁne the
ultrastructural morphology of cells lining the central canal. The
complete series of sections from individual cells were traced in 90
sections to characterize the morphology in three dimensions. Serial
semi- and ultrathin sections (2 lm and 70 nm, respectively) were used
in correlative light and electron microscopic evaluation (CLEM) of the
fate of ependyma-derived cells 4 wk after a spinal cord injury (Figure
S6). The semithin sections were used to identify immunopositive cells,
and the ultrathin sections to show the morphology of the identiﬁed
cells. Sections (70–200 nm) were placed on Formvar-coated copper
grids, counterstained with 2% uranyl acetate and Reynold’s lead
citrate. Sections were examined in a Tecnai 12 electron microscope
(FEI) equipped with 2kx2k TemCam-F224HD camera (TVIPS).
Neural stem cell cultures. Spinal cords were dissected and cells
dissociated using papain (Worthington). Neurospheres were cultured
as described [8] in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with B27 and
EGF and bFGF (both 10 ng/ml). Approximately 200,000 cells were
plated in 10-cm cultures dishes, corresponding to a density of 20 cells/
microliter, which allows the generation of clonal neurospheres [64].
For assaying self-renewal and multipotentiality, FoxJ1-CreERxR26R (n
¼6) and Nestin-CreERxR26R (n¼6) adult mice were administered with
tamoxifen intraperitoneally for 5 d with a washout period of 6 d (see
Figure 3). Single spheres were manually collected and split into two
wells. One well was used for continuous passaging and subsequent
neural stem cell differentiation, whereas the other well was used for
X-gal staining. For assaying self-renewal, four clonal recombined
neurospheres per animal were manually isolated after 12 d of primary
neurosphere formation. All recombined neurospheres were serially
passaged eight times. In vitro differentiation by growth factor
withdrawal for 10 d was assessed in passage 3 and passage 6 by
staining as described above for bIII-tubulin (Tuj1, 1:1,000; Covance),
GFAP (1:5,000; DAKO), and O4 (1:200; Chemicon).
Flow cytometry. Spinal cords were dissected from FoxJ1-CreER
mice and dissociated using papain (Worthington) and DNase in 13
HBSS at 37 8C for 1 h. Ovomucoid inhibitor (Worthington) was added
and cells were collected by centrifugation at 300g for 5 min. Cells
were resuspended in Leibovitz-15/B27 with 7AAD, which labels dead
cells. Single GFPþ (based on the ires-GFP signal), 7AAD cells were
isolated using a FACSAria (BD). Singlets were identiﬁed based on
forward scatter width (FSC-W) versus forward scatter height (FCS-H)
[65]. Single cell sorting and GFP ﬂuorescence was conﬁrmed by
microscopic examination.
Spinal cord injury, BrdU, and growth factor treatments. Mice were
anesthetized with 2.5% Avertin, and the dorsal funiculus at mid-
thoracic level was cut transversely and was extended rostrally with
microsurgical scissors to span one segment [39]. In other animals, the
lateral funiculus was cut transversally and the lesion extended
rostrally to span one segment.
BrdU (1 mg/ml and 1% sucrose, exchanged every 3–4 d) was
administered in the drinking water to label dividing cells.
Quantitative analyses. In order to correlate recombination
frequency in neurosphere cultures to the in vivo recombination
frequency of spinal cord tissue, the ratio between CreERþ and b-galþ
cells (n ¼ 60) was quantiﬁed in a small postﬁxed biopsy from the same
spinal cords used for neurosphere cultures.
The percentage of BrdUþ ependymal cells was obtained from three
animals treated for 4 wk with BrdU in the drinking water (3–5
coronal sections/animal analyzed). The total number of cells per
section was obtained counting all nuclei stained with DAPI.
The in vivo recombination frequency was assessed by counting the
number of recombined cells over the total number of ependymal cells
(Vimentinþ) from ﬁve coronal sections per animals at 2 d (4 animals: 2
Nestin-CreERxR26R, 2 FoxJ1-CreERxR26R) and 10 mo (3 animals: 3
FoxJ1-CreERxR26R) after tamoxifen treatment (Figure 4E).
The contribution of recombined cells at the site of injury was
established by measuring the relative area occupied by b-galþ cells
within the epicenter of the lesion (using ImageJ software) of 3 FoxJ1-
CreERxR26R animals (2 sagittal sections per animal) 2 wk after spinal
cord injury.
The cell fate distribution of ependyma-derived progeny was
obtained by scoring recombined cells positive for Olig2, GFAP or
Sox9 in either coronal (3–5 sections per animal) or sagittal (1–2
sections per animal) sections encompassing the lesion site from 1
month (3 animals: 1 Nestin-CreERxZ/EG, 2 FoxJ1-CreERxR26R) and 8–
10 mo (4 animals: 1 Nestin-CreERxZ/EG and 3 FoxJ1-CreERxR26R) after
spinal cord injury (Figure 6M).
The frequency of proliferation of ependymal cells and their
progeny was assessed by counting the number of Ki67þ recombined
cells over the total number of recombined cells from three segments
(rostral to, caudal to, and at the injury site; average of 15 coronal
sections, or 300 recombined cells, per segment analyzed) from 2
FoxJ1-CreERxR26R animals 4 d after spinal cord injury (Figure S7C).
Supporting Information
Figure S1. Schematic Illustration of Transgenic Constructs and
Genetic Labeling Strategy
(A) The Nestin 2nd intron central nervous system (CNS)-speciﬁc stem/
progenitor enhancer (NestinE) with a minimal hsp68 promoter drives
CreER expression. The human FoxJ1 promoter drives CreER and
EGFP expression in ependymal cells with motile cilia. CreER protein
is cytoplasmic due to the association with the heat-shock chaperone
complex.
(B) Nuclear localization of CreER and recombination is induced upon
4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) binding to the ER domain. The
reporter allele consists of a loxP-ﬂanked transcriptional stop cassette.
Cre recombination induces the expression of the reporter protein (b-
gal or GFP) under a general and ubiquitous promoter.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.sg001 (205 KB TIF).
Figure S2. Molecular Marker Expression by Adult Spinal Cord
Ependymal Cells
(A–D) Ciliary rootlet coiled-coil protein (Crocc, also known as
Rootletin) is expressed in Sox2 (a neural stem cell marker) positive
ciliated ependymal cells of the adult spinal cord and colocalizes with
b-gal expression in recombined ependymal cells.
(E–H) Ependymal cells are immunoreactive to the neural stem cell-
associated protein CD133/Prominin, which is localized at the luminal
surface (shown in higher magniﬁcation in [H]).
(I–L) Nestin, but not GFAP, is expressed in recombined b-galþ
ependymal cells.
(M–P) The RC1 antigen associated with radial glial cells is expressed
in ependymal cells and recombined ependymal cells express Sox9, an
immature glial marker. The analysis is from uninjured FoxJ1-
CreERxR26R mice 6 d after termination of tamoxifen administration.
The scale bar indicates 25 lm.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.sg002 (5.51 MB TIF).
Figure S3. Molecular Marker Expression by Adult Spinal Cord
Ependymal Cells
(A–D) Musashi-1 (Msi1), (E–H) PDGFRa and vimentin, all associated
with neural stem/progenitor cells, are expressed in recombined
ependymal cells. Recombined ependymal cells also express the neural
stem cell-associated proteins Sox3 (I–L) and Sox2 (M–O), but not the
astrocyte marker GFAP (D) nor the oligodendrocyte progenitor
marker Olig2 (P). The analysis is from uninjured FoxJ1-CreERxR26R
mice 6 d after termination of tamoxifen administration. The scale bar
indicates 25 lm.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.sg003 (6.78 MB TIF).
Figure S4. Correlative Light and Electron Microscopy (CLEM)
Analysis
(A) Schematic illustration showing the sequence of semithin and
ultrathin sections used to study the morphology of cells migrating
from the central canal in three dimensions. (B) An example of a b-
galþ cell identiﬁed at the light microscopic level following PAP
immunocytochemistry. The labeled cell is shown in an electron
micrograph from a neighboring, ultrathin section in (C). The scale
bar indicates 2 lm.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.sg004 (3.37 MB TIF).
Figure S5. Morphological Features of Ependymal Cells
(A) An electron micrograph of ependymal cells (e) and tanycytes (t)
lining the central canal of the spinal cord. Arrows point to processes
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
July 2008 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e182
1505
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells

extending from tanycytes. The inset shows a light micrograph of a
neighboring 2-lm semithin section where the PAP staining is evident.
Asterisks mark lipid droplets.
(B) An ependymal cell with a cilium (c) and multiple villi (v).
(C) An electron micrograph of a multiciliated tanycyte with a process.
Note that the tanycyte has a darker cytoplasm compared to
ependymal cells.
(D) A cross-section of a cilium with microtubules arranged in a 9 þ 2
array. Only this type of cilium was found in ependymal cells,
tanycytes, and radial ependymal cells.
(E) The electron dense PAP reaction product signaling for Cre is
shown at high magniﬁcation.
(F) An example of an ependymal cell with two cilia. Arrows point to
the basal bodies.
(G) A tight junction (arrow) between an ependymal cell and a
tanycyte.
(H) An electron micrograph showing a Creþ radial ependymal cell (r)
with a process (arrow) and a lipid droplet (asterisk). The inset shows a
light micrograph of the PAP labeling.
(I) High magniﬁcation of the cytoplasm and villi of a radial
ependymal cell extending into the lumen of the central canal.
(J) An electron micrograph of the basal body and cilia of a radial
ependymal cell.
(A–J) are from FoxJ1-CreER mice.
(K) Electron micrograph of Cre-immunopositive ependymal cells,
radial ependymal cells, and tanycytes at the central canal of the spinal
cord from the Nestin-CreER mouse.
bv: blood vessel; m: mitochondrion; n: nucleus.
The scale bars indicate 5 lm in (A) and (K), 1 lm in (B), (E), (F), and (J),
2 lm in (C) and (H), 0.1 lm in (D) and (G), and 0.25 lm in (I).
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.sg005 (7.38 MB TIF).
Figure S6. Exponential Growth of Ependymal Cell-Derived Neuro-
sphere Cells In Vitro
The number of cells obtained after sequential clonal passaging,
starting with individual recombined primary neurospheres from
Nestin-CreER crossed with R26REYFP mice [66]. Each line represents
the mean 6 SD from four clones from one animal.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.sg006 (124 KB TIF).
Figure S7. Spinal Cord Injury Induces Proliferation of Ependymal
Cells
(A and B) Proliferation and Ki67 expression are induced in
ependymal cells close to and in the injury (B), but not in adjacent
uninjured segments (A).
(C) Quantiﬁcation of the injury-induced proliferative response of
ependymal cells at different locations relative to the epicenter of the
injury.
(D–F) Representative image of the quantiﬁed area (D), with boxed
areas depicting the central canal region (E) and the migrating
ependyma-derived cells entering the lesion area (F).
Scale bars indicate 25 lm in (A), (B), (E), and (F), and 50 lm in (D).
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.sg007 (3.21 MB TIF).
Figure S8. Migration of Ependymal Cell Progeny to Lateral Spinal
Cord Lesions
(A–C) Distribution of b-gal–immunoreactive ependymal cells and
their progeny 2 wk after a laminectomy only (sham [A]) and a right (B)
or a left (C) lateral funiculus incision. GFAP immunoreactivity
demarcates the injury site (indicated by hatched lines).
Four weeks after a lateral injury, ependymal cells give rise to Sox9þ
(D), GFAPþ (E), and Olig2þ (F) cells, as after a dorsal funiculus lesion.
Scale bars indicate 200 lm in (A–C) and 20 lm in (D–F).
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.sg008 (2.22 MB TIF).
Figure S9. Relationship between Ependymal Cells, Their Progeny, and
CXCR4 Immunoreactivity
(A–F) Most ependymal cells (identiﬁed by b-gal and vimentin in a
FoxJ1-CreERxR26R mouse) do not display detectable CXCR4-
immunoreactivty (yellow arrowheads), although some ependymal cell
processes appear CXCR4-immunoreactive (white arrowheads).
(G–I) Two weeks after a dorsal funiculus lesion, many cells in the
forming scar tissue are CXCR4 immunoreactive, but the b-gal–
expressing ependyma-derived cells appear negative for CXCR4.
Scale bars indicate 25 lm in (A–F) and 50 lm in (G–I).
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.sg009 (3.27 MB TIF).
Figure S10. Central Canal Ependymal Cells Are Not Depleted after
Injury and Maintain Their Phenotype over 8 Mo
(A and B) A sagittal section showing Sox9 and vimentin expression in
recombined ependymal cells of the central canal in an uninjured
segment 8 mo after spinal cord injury.
(C–E) In the injured segment of the same animal, ependyma-derived
recombined (b-galþ) cells occupying the scar tissue ([C] and higher
magniﬁcation in [D]) as well as ependymal cells at the central canal
([C] and higher magniﬁcation in [E]) are still Sox9þ and Vimþ 8 mo
after injury.
Scale bars indicate 25 lm in (A) and (D) and 100 lm in (C) and (E).
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.sg010 (3.87 MB TIF).
Figure S11. Identiﬁcation of an Ependyma-Derived Cell at the
Ultrastructural Level
(A and B) The nuclei of an ependyma-derived b-gal–immunoreactive
cell and surrounding cells were labeled with DAPI. The b-gal–
immunoreactive cell was identiﬁed in the electron microscope by the
position of the nucleus in a 3D reconstruction of serial 120-nm-thick
sections of the whole area.
(C) The b-gal–immunoreactive cell is indicated by an asterisk and
surrounding cells are numbered. BV: blood vessel.
Scale bars indicate 10 lm.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.sg011 (907 KB TIF).
Table S1. Morphological Characteristics of Ependymal Cells
Details for the studied cells lining the central canal of the spinal cord
by immunoelectron microscopy, which underlie classiﬁcation into
the cell types shown in Figure 1. Each cell shown in the table was
traced in complete series of ultrathin sections. Color coding
corresponds to the Venn diagram in Figure 1. Ependymal cells are
cyan, tanycytes are orange, and radial ependymal cells are purple.
Green represents an intermediate population of cells with a dark
cytoplasm, without any process. Black represents a second inter-
mediate population with a light cytoplasm, multiple cilia, and with a
process. Red represents a population of cells with an irregular
nucleus, light cytoplasm, a process, and only one cilium.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060182.st001 (323 KB TIF).
Acknowledgments
We are indebted to K. Fernandes, O. Hermanson, U. Lendahl for
valuable discussions, L. Ostrowski for the FoxJ1 promoter construct,
Daniel Metzger and Pierre Chambon for the Cre-ERT2 cDNA, and
Karin Hamrin and Marcelo Toro for help with ﬂow cytometry.
Author contributions. KM, FBH, MC, and JF conceived and
designed the experiments. KM, FBH, MC, EE, NT, OS, and JF
performed the experiments and analyzed the data. KM, FBH, MC, and
JF wrote the paper.
Funding. This study was supported by grants from the Swedish
Research Council, the Swedish Cancer Society, the Foundation for
Strategic Research, the Karolinska Institute, Tobias Stiftelsen,
Wallenbergs Stiftelsen, and the European Commission Framework
VI Programme, EuroStemCell. FBH. was supported by postdoctoral
fellowships from Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) and
Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation, and MC and EE were
supported by postdoctoral fellowship from the Swedish Brain
Foundation.
Competing interests. The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
References
1.
Thuret S, Moon LD, Gage FH (2006) Therapeutic interventions after spinal
cord injury. Nat Rev Neurosci 7: 628–643.
2.
Enzmann GU, Benton RL, Talbott JF, Cao Q, Whittemore SR (2006)
Functional considerations of stem cell transplantation therapy for spinal
cord repair. J Neurotrauma 23: 479–495.
3.
Weiss S, Dunne C, Hewson J, Wohl C, Wheatley M, et al. (1996) Multipotent
CNS stem cells are present in the adult mammalian spinal cord and
ventricular neuroaxis. J Neurosci 16: 7599–7609.
4.
Shihabuddin LS, Ray J, Gage FH (1997) FGF-2 is sufﬁcient to isolate
progenitors found in the adult mammalian spinal cord. Exp Neurol 148:
577–586.
5.
Hofstetter CP, Holmstrom NA, Lilja JA, Schweinhardt P, Hao J, et al. (2005)
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
July 2008 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e182
1506
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells

Allodynia limits the usefulness of intraspinal neural stem cell grafts;
directed differentiation improves outcome. Nat Neurosci 8: 346–353.
6.
Ohori Y, Yamamoto S, Nagao M, Sugimori M, Yamamoto N, et al. (2006)
Growth factor treatment and genetic manipulation stimulate neurogenesis
and oligodendrogenesis by endogenous neural progenitors in the injured
adult spinal cord. J Neurosci 26: 11948–11960.
7.
Horner PJ, Power AE, Kempermann G, Kuhn HG, Palmer TD, et al. (2000)
Proliferation and differentiation of progenitor cells throughout the intact
adult rat spinal cord. J Neurosci 20: 2218–2228.
8.
Johansson CB, Momma S, Clarke DL, Risling M, Lendahl U, et al. (1999)
Identiﬁcation of a neural stem cell in the adult mammalian central nervous
system. Cell 96: 25–34.
9.
Martens DJ, Seaberg RM, van der Kooy D (2002) In vivo infusions of
exogenous growth factors into the fourth ventricle of the adult mouse brain
increase the proliferation of neural progenitors around the fourth ventricle
and the central canal of the spinal cord. Eur J Neurosci 16: 1045–1057.
10. Lim L, Zhou H, Costa RH (1997) The winged helix transcription factor
HFH-4 is expressed during choroid plexus epithelial development in the
mouse embryo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94: 3094–3099.
11. Blatt EN, Yan XH, Wuerffel MK, Hamilos DL, Brody SL (1999) Forkhead
transcription factor HFH-4 expression is temporally related to ciliogenesis.
Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 21: 168–176.
12. Hackett BP, Brody SL, Liang M, Zeitz ID, Bruns LA, et al. (1995) Primary
structure of hepatocyte nuclear factor/forkhead homologue 4 and
characterization of gene expression in the developing respiratory and
reproductive epithelium. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 92: 4249–4253.
13. Ostrowski LE, Hutchins JR, Zakel K, O’Neal WK (2003) Targeting
expression of a transgene to the airway surface epithelium using a ciliated
cell-speciﬁc promoter. Mol Ther 8: 637–645.
14. Doetsch F, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (1999) Regeneration of a
germinal layer in the adult mammalian brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96:
11619–11624.
15. Lendahl U, Zimmerman L, McKay R (1990) CNS stem cells express a new
class of intermediate ﬁlament protein. Cell 60: 585–595.
16. Hockﬁeld S, McKay RD (1985) Identiﬁcation of major cell classes in the
developing mammalian nervous system. J Neurosci 5: 3310–3328.
17. Frederiksen K, McKay RD (1988) Proliferation and differentiation of rat
neuroepithelial precursor cells in vivo. J Neurosci 8: 1144–1151.
18. Kawaguchi A, Miyata T, Sawamoto K, Takashita N, Murayama A, et al.
(2001) Nestin-EGFP transgenic mice: visualization of the self-renewal and
multipotency of CNS stem cells. Mol Cell Neurosci 17: 259–273.
19. Doetsch F, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (1997) Cellular composi-
tion and three-dimensional organization of the subventricular germinal
zone in the adult mammalian brain. J Neurosci 17: 5046–5061.
20. Frise´n J, Johansson CB, To¨ ro¨ k C, Risling M, Lendahl U (1995) Rapid,
widespread, and longlasting induction of nestin contributes to the
generation of glial scar tissue after CNS injury. J Cell Biol 131: 453–464.
21. Carle´n M, Meletis K, Barnabe´-Heider F, Frise´n J (2006) Genetic visual-
ization of neurogenesis. Exp Cell Res 312: 2851–2859.
22. Soriano P (1999) Generalized lacZ expression with the Rosa26 Cre reporter
strain. Nat Genet 21: 70–71.
23. Novak A, Guo C, Yang W, Nagy A, Lobe CG (2000) Z/EG, a double reporter
mouse line that expresses enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein upon Cre-
mediated excision. Genesis 28: 147–155.
24. Doetsch F, Caille I, Lim DA, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (1999)
Subventricular zone astrocytes are neural stem cells in the adult
mammalian brain. Cell 97: 703–716.
25. Peters A, Palay SL, Webster HD (1991) The ﬁne structure of the nervous
system: the neurons and supporting cells. New York: Oxford University
Press. 487 pp.
26. Robinson SP, Langan-Fahey SM, Johnson DA, Jordan VC (1991) Metabo-
lites, pharmacodynamics, and pharmacokinetics of tamoxifen in rats and
mice compared to the breast cancer patient. Drug Metab Dispos 19: 36–43.
27. Reynolds BA, Rietze RL (2005) Neural stem cells and neurospheres—re-
evaluating the relationship. Nat Methods 2: 333–336.
28. Seaberg RM, van der Kooy D (2003) Stem and progenitor cells: the
premature desertion of rigorous deﬁnitions. Trends Neurosci 26: 125–131.
29. Dor Y, Brown J, Martinez OI, Melton DA (2004) Adult pancreatic beta-cells
are formed by self-duplication rather than stem-cell differentiation. Nature
429: 41–46.
30. Hsieh PC, Segers VF, Davis ME, Macgillivray C, Gannon J, et al. (2007)
Evidence from a genetic fate-mapping study that stem cells refresh adult
mammalian cardiomyocytes after injury. Nat Med 13: 970–974.
31. Imitola J, Raddassi K, Park KI, Mueller FJ, Nieto M, et al. (2004) Directed
migration of neural stem cells to sites of CNS injury by the stromal cell-
derived factor 1alpha/CXC chemokine receptor 4 pathway. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 101: 18117–18122.
32. Thored P, Arvidsson A, Cacci E, Ahlenius H, Kallur T, et al. (2006)
Persistent production of neurons from adult brain stem cells during
recovery after stroke. Stem Cells 24: 739–747.
33. Davies SJA, Fitch MT, Memberg SP, Hall AK, Raisman G, et al. (1997)
Regeneration of adult axons in white matter tracts of the central nervous
system. Nature 390: 680–684.
34. Silver J, Miller JH (2004) Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nat Rev
Neurosci 5: 146–156.
35. Busch SA, Silver J (2007) The role of extracellular matrix in CNS
regeneration. Curr Opin Neurobiol 17: 120–127.
36. Grimpe B, Silver J (2002) The extracellular matrix in axon regeneration.
Prog Brain Res 137: 333–349.
37. Tom VJ, Doller CM, Malouf AT, Silver J (2004) Astrocyte-associated
ﬁbronectin is critical for axonal regeneration in adult white matter. J
Neurosci 24: 9282–9290.
38. Frise´n J, Haegerstrand A, Risling M, Fried K, Elde R, et al. (1995) Spinal
axons in CNS scar tissue are closely related to laminin-immunoreactive
astrocytes. Neuroscience 65: 293–304.
39. Frise´n J, Fried K, Sjo¨ gren AM, Risling M (1993) Growth of ascending spinal
axons in CNS scar tissue. Int J Dev Neurosci 4: 461–475.
40. Simon A, Frisen J (2007) From stem cell to progenitor and back again. Cell
128: 825–826.
41. Doetsch F, Petreanu L, Caille I, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A (2002)
EGF converts transit-amplifying neurogenic precursors in the adult brain
into multipotent stem cells. Neuron 36: 1021–1034.
42. Nakagawa T, Nabeshima Y, Yoshida S (2007) Functional identiﬁcation of
the actual and potential stem cell compartments in mouse spermato-
genesis. Dev Cell 12: 195–206.
43. Yamamoto S, Yamamoto N, Kitamura T, Nakamura K, Nakafuku M (2001)
Proliferation of parenchymal neural progenitors in response to injury in
the adult rat spinal cord. Exp Neurol 172: 115–127.
44. Horky LL, Galimi F, Gage FH, Horner PJ (2006) Fate of endogenous stem/
progenitor cells following spinal cord injury. J Comp Neurol 498: 525–538.
45. Yamamoto S, Nagao M, Sugimori M, Kosako H, Nakatomi H, et al. (2001)
Transcription factor expression and Notch-dependent regulation of neural
progenitors in the adult rat spinal cord. J Neurosci 21: 9814–9823.
46. Zai LJ, Wrathall JR (2005) Cell proliferation and replacement following
contusive spinal cord injury. Glia 50: 247–257.
47. Yoo S, Wrathall JR (2007) Mixed primary culture and clonal analysis
provide evidence that NG2 proteoglycan-expressing cells after spinal cord
injury are glial progenitors. Dev Neurobiol 67: 860–874.
48. Fawcett JW (2006) Overcoming inhibition in the damaged spinal cord. J
Neurotrauma 23: 371–383.
49. Schwab ME (2004) Nogo and axon regeneration. Curr Opin Neurobiol 14:
118–124.
50. Okada S, Nakamura M, Katoh H, Miyao T, Shimazaki T, et al. (2006)
Conditional ablation of Stat3 or Socs3 discloses a dual role for reactive
astrocytes after spinal cord injury. Nat Med 12: 829–834.
51. Kaneko S, Iwanami A, Nakamura M, Kishino A, Kikuchi K, et al. (2006) A
selective Sema3A inhibitor enhances regenerative responses and functional
recovery of the injured spinal cord. Nat Med 12: 1380–1389.
52. Freund P, Schmidlin E, Wannier T, Bloch J, Mir A, et al. (2006) Nogo-A-
speciﬁc antibody treatment enhances sprouting and functional recovery
after cervical lesion in adult primates. Nat Med 12: 790–792.
53. Kwon BK, Fisher CG, Dvorak MF, Tetzlaff W (2005) Strategies to promote
neural repair and regeneration after spinal cord injury. Spine 30: S3–13.
54. Grossman SD, Rosenberg LJ, Wrathall JR (2001) Temporal-spatial pattern
of acute neuronal and glial loss after spinal cord contusion. Exp Neurol
168: 273–282.
55. Lytle JM, Wrathall JR (2007) Glial cell loss, proliferation and replacement in
the contused murine spinal cord. Eur J Neurosci 25: 1711–1724.
56. Waxman SG (1989) Demyelination in spinal cord injury. J Neurol Sci 91: 1–
14.
57. Blakemore WF, Patterson RC (1978) Suppression of remyelination in the
CNS by X-irradiation. Acta Neuropathol 42: 105–113.
58. Keirstead HS, Blakemore WF (1997) Identiﬁcation of post-mitotic
oligodendrocytes incapable of remyelination within the demyelinated
adult spinal cord. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 56: 1191–1201.
59. Yang H, Lu P, McKay HM, Bernot T, Keirstead H, et al. (2006) Endogenous
neurogenesis replaces oligodendrocytes and astrocytes after primate spinal
cord injury. J Neurosci 26: 2157–2166.
60. Zimmerman L, Lendahl U, Cunningham M, McKay R, Parr B, et al. (1994)
Independent regulatory elements in the nestin gene direct transgene
expression to neural stem cells or muscle precursors. Neuron 12: 11–24.
61. Lothian C, Lendahl U (1997) An evolutionarily conserved region in the
second intron of the human nestin gene directs gene expression to CNS
progenitor cells and to early neural crest cells. Eur J Neurosci 9: 452–462.
62. Indra AK, Warot X, Brocard J, Bornert JM, Xiao JH, et al. (1999)
Temporally-controlled site-speciﬁc mutagenesis in the basal layer of the
epidermis: comparison of the recombinase activity of the tamoxifen-
inducible Cre-ER(T) and Cre-ER(T2) recombinases. Nucleic Acids Res 27:
4324–4327.
63. Dahlstrand J, Collins VP, Lendahl U (1992) Expression of the class VI
intermediate ﬁlament nestin in human central nervous system tumors.
Cancer Res 52: 5334–5341.
64. Seaberg RM, van der Kooy D (2002) Adult rodent neurogenic regions: the
ventricular subependyma contains neural stem cells, but the dentate gyrus
contains restricted progenitors. J Neurosci 22: 1784–1793.
65. Wersto RP, Chrest FJ, Leary JF, Morris C, Stetler-Stevenson MA, et al. (2001)
Doublet discrimination in DNA cell-cycle analysis. Cytometry 46: 296–306.
66. Srinivas S, Watanabe T, Lin CS, William CM, Tanabe Y, et al. (2001) Cre
reporter strains produced by targeted insertion of EYFP and ECFP into the
ROSA26 locus. BMC Dev Biol 1: 4
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
July 2008 | Volume 6 | Issue 7 | e182
1507
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cells

===== MeloNarvaez2020_EurRespirRev+LungRegen =====
Lung regeneration: implications of
the diseased niche and ageing
M. Camila Melo-Narváez1, John Stegmayr
2, Darcy E. Wagner
2 and
Mareike Lehmann
1
Affiliations: 1Research Unit Lung Repair and Regeneration, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research
Center for Environmental Health, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, University Hospital Grosshadern, Member of
the German Center of Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany. 2Lung Bioengineering and Regeneration,
Department of Experimental Medical Sciences, Wallenberg Centre for Molecular Medicine, Stem Cell Center,
Faculty of Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
Correspondence: Mareike Lehmann, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental
Health, Research Unit Lung Repair and Regeneration, Max-Lebsche-Platz 31, 81377 Munich, Germany.
E-mail: mareike.lehmann@helmholtz-muenchen.de
@ERSpublications
Once thought to be a quiescent organ, we now know the lung demonstrates an incredible capacity for
regeneration in response to injuries. However, there is also a growing appreciation for impairments in
these processes such as ageing and the diseased niche. https://bit.ly/3hJgAAS
Cite this article as: Melo-Narváez MC, Stegmayr J, Wagner DE, et al. Lung regeneration: implications of
the diseased niche and ageing. Eur Respir Rev 2020; 29: 200222 [https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0222-
2020].
ABSTRACT
Most chronic and acute lung diseases have no cure, leaving lung transplantation as the only
option. Recent work has improved our understanding of the endogenous regenerative capacity of the lung
and has helped identification of different progenitor cell populations, as well as exploration into inducing
endogenous regeneration through pharmaceutical or biological therapies. Additionally, alternative
approaches that aim at replacing lung progenitor cells and their progeny through cell therapy, or whole
lung tissue through bioengineering approaches, have gained increasing attention. Although impressive
progress has been made, efforts at regenerating functional lung tissue are still ineffective. Chronic and
acute lung diseases are most prevalent in the elderly and alterations in progenitor cells with ageing, along
with an increased inflammatory milieu, present major roadblocks for regeneration. Multiple cellular
mechanisms, such as cellular senescence and mitochondrial dysfunction, are aberrantly regulated in the
aged and diseased lung, which impairs regeneration. Existing as well as new human in vitro models are
being developed, improved and adapted in order to study potential mechanisms of lung regeneration in
different contexts. This review summarises recent advances in understanding endogenous as well as
exogenous regeneration and the development of in vitro models for studying regenerative mechanisms.
Introduction
The lung is continuously exposed to different environmental insults such as dust, aerosols, smoke and
pathogens, which can cause cellular damage. Despite its normally quiescent nature, the lung possesses a
potent reparative capacity, in which the resident progenitor cell populations proliferate and differentiate
into diverse cell types after injury [1, 2]. Recent findings support the existence of several stem or
progenitor cells that are spatially and temporally restricted in the lung, rather than a single progenitor cell
able to give rise to all the different pulmonary cells [1, 2]. However, the enormous cellular diversity in the
adult lung and the low cell turnover rate have hindered the identification of human lung progenitor cells
and most of the available data come from mouse models of lung injury [1, 2]. Despite the similarities in
Copyright ©ERS 2020. This article is open access and distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Non-Commercial Licence 4.0.
Provenance: Commissioned article, peer reviewed.
Received: 9 July 2020 | Accepted after revision: 20 Aug 2020
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0222-2020
Eur Respir Rev 2020; 29: 200222
ASSEMBLY 3 REVIEW
LUNG REGENERATION

lung development among mammals, there are significant differences in structure, cellular composition,
molecular mechanisms and responses between mouse and human lungs [3, 4]. This highlights the need
for new human models to study lung regeneration and disease. Here, we will describe the main progenitor
populations, their niches and how alterations in these populations in ageing and disease compromise their
capacity to regenerate the lung. We will further describe models that might be helpful to understand these
processes in the human lung.
Endogenous regeneration
The human respiratory system consists of several epithelial, mesenchymal and immune cells with a defined
distribution along the respiratory tract [5]. In the proximal airways of mice and humans, basal epithelial
cells act as progenitor cells, giving rise to either secretory or ciliated cells [1, 6, 7]. Studies in mice and
humans have shown that the Notch signalling pathway is crucial for basal cell differentiation under
physiological conditions or after injury [8–10]. Other progenitor populations, such as club cells and
variant club cells, support the homeostasis and repair responses in the rodent lung [1, 5, 6].
More distally, the human epithelium is predominantly composed of club cells and fewer basal and goblet
cells [5]. Moreover, single neuroendocrine cells (NECs) are found along the airway and clustered in
neuroepithelial bodies (NEBs) at the airway branch points [11]. NECs proliferate, self-renew and replenish
club and ciliated cells after injury. Although NECs are not essential for epithelial repair, the NEB
microenvironment supports the maintenance of progenitor cell populations in the lung [11, 12].
Conversely, rodent bronchioles are lined by a simple epithelium composed mainly of ciliated and club cells
[3]. Furthermore, bronchioalveolar stem cells contribute to the replenishment of both bronchial epithelial
and alveolar cells after injury in mice [5, 13, 14]. However, the existence of these cells in human lungs, as
well as of other potential progenitor cells, remains to be elucidated.
The alveoli are covered by a thin, single layer of squamous alveolar epithelial type 1 (AT1) cells that are
the main site for gas exchange [1, 2, 6] and cuboidal alveolar epithelial type 2 (AT2) cells that have a
critical role in the synthesis of surfactant lipids and serve as progenitor cells [1, 2, 5, 6, 15]. In early
developmental stages in mice, AT1 and AT2 cells are derived from a bipotent alveolar progenitor [16, 17],
while a subset of AT2 cells with active Wnt signalling (Axin2+) serve as progenitor cells during
homeostasis and upon injury in adult mice [18]. In line with this, single-cell sequencing revealed a keratin
(KRT)8+ intermediate progenitor population derived from AT2 and club cells after injury in mice; KRT8
populations in human lungs showed an enrichment of Wnt signalling [19]. In the alveolar regions, niche
fibroblasts maintain the stemness and determine the fate of AT2 cells via paracrine Wnt signalling [18].
This demonstrates the importance of epithelial–mesenchymal crosstalk in regeneration of the lung.
Moreover, immune cells are believed to influence progenitor cell function; however, our understanding of
immune–progenitor cell crosstalk in the lung is in its infancy.
The response after injury varies along the pulmonary tract and depends not only on the persistent
exogenous insults but also on endogenous factors such as genetic alterations or ageing. Given the fact that
most chronic lung diseases are related to ageing [6, 20], a better understanding of the changes in
regeneration processes in the ageing lung is critical for the development of new therapeutic options.
Regeneration of the ageing lung
Ageing is a natural process composed of physiological and molecular changes leading to progressive
impairment of organ function [2, 6, 20]. In the lung, ageing diminishes pulmonary remodelling and
regeneration capacity. Age-associated hallmarks include telomere shortening, mitochondrial dysfunction,
cellular senescence and stem cell exhaustion [2, 20]. Most hallmarks are interconnected and drive each
other, thereby contributing to the inability of the lung to respond to injuries [2].
Accordingly, aged mice are more susceptible to lung injury caused by cigarette smoke or bleomycin [21–
23]. For example, aged bleomycin-treated mice showed increased transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1
secretion, excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition and increased recruitment of circulating
fibrocytes [2, 21, 24]. Notably, bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (B-MSCs) derived from
young mice have a protective role against fibrosis, whereas aged B-MSCs had a lower regenerative capacity
[21, 24, 25].
Cellular senescence is characterised by an irreversible cell cycle arrest along with a pro-inflammatory
senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) [26]. Under physiological conditions, accumulating
senescent cells are readily cleared to promote tissue regeneration [27, 28]. However, upon chronic damage
or ageing, senescent cells persist in the tissue, contributing to impaired regeneration [2, 26, 29, 30].
Evasion of clearance mechanisms is potentially mediated by a change in SASP [31] or by age-related
immune system dysfunction (immunoageing) [32]. Accordingly, increased autoimmunity, reduced
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0222-2020
2
LUNG REGENERATION | M.C. MELO-NARVÁEZ ET AL.

pathogen clearance, and chronic low-grade sterile inflammation (inflammageing) are characteristics of the
ageing lung [33–35]. Increased DNA damage and mitochondrial dysfunction induce senescence in
B-MSCs, which show a reduced protective ability in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) patients [36] and
induce senescence and collagen deposition in fibroblasts via their SASP [2]. Similarly, fibroblasts derived
from IPF patients show increased cellular senescence markers and differentiation rate towards
myofibroblasts and a lower response to TGF-β [37–39]. In line with these findings, bleomycin-treated mice
display an accumulation of senescent myofibroblasts [23], with an increased expression of the
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase-4 (Nox4) and impaired NFE2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)
antioxidative responses in the lung. Thus, elevated levels of Nox4 and reduced levels of Nrf2 in IPF lungs
might contribute to nonresolving fibrosis.
In the alveolar region, the main progenitor cells (AT2 cells) become senescent in older mice, losing their
progenitor capacity [40]. Under physiological conditions, the Wnt signalling pathway is required for AT2
progenitor cell function and tissue homeostasis [40, 41], while aberrantly activated Wnt/β-catenin
signalling in AT2 cells has been related to IPF pathogenesis and cellular senescence [40, 42]. Moreover,
AT2 cells in older mice exhibit higher Nrf2-mediated oxidative stress responses and mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) activity [43]. This suggests that aberrant activation of developmental pathways might
drive premature ageing phenotypes, thereby compromising the regenerative potential of the lung.
Age-related changes are also observed in the bronchiolar epithelium, leading to a compromised clearance
capacity in the proximal airways characterised by increased apoptosis, abnormal cilia and altered mucus
[2, 43]. Moreover, as shown for AT2 cells, a redox imbalance indicated by lower Nrf2-mediated oxidative
stress response and higher mTOR signalling has been described for club cells, a main progenitor cell in
proximal airways [43]. In conclusion, inflammageing, cellular senescence and stem cell depletion
contribute to impaired tissue regeneration in the aged lung. Further studies regarding the contribution of
rare progenitor populations in the aged human lung are needed.
Regeneration of a diseased lung
Chronic diseases
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
IPF, a chronic, progressive, irreversible and usually lethal disease, is the most common interstitial lung
disease [44]. Most IPF patients are elderly (median age ∼66 years) with a poor survival rate and lung
transplantation is the only curative treatment [44]. Although IPF pathogenesis is not fully understood, it
has been proposed that an abnormal wound healing process after repetitive insults to the epithelium might
compromise the regenerative potential of the lung, thereby promoting fibrotic changes [20, 45].
Age-related cellular changes in IPF patients, such as telomere shortening and increased oxidative stress
and senescence, suggest a strong connection between premature ageing mechanisms and pulmonary
fibrosis [30, 44]. AT2 cells show reduced progenitor potential in aged lungs challenged with influenza [46]
and have been described as the main target of apoptosis and premature senescence in IPF [30, 45, 47].
Additionally, the accumulation of abnormal surfactant proteins inside AT2 cells (or persistent viral
infections) activates the unfolded protein response, thereby promoting apoptosis of AT2 cells and
subsequent fibrogenesis in mice [48]. Moreover, the main regulator of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
response in AT2 cells, the chaperone GRP78, is downregulated with ageing, rendering the alveolar
epithelium more prone to ER-dependent apoptosis [49]. Additionally, re-epithelialisation of the lung is
compromised by reprogramming of AT2 cells along with the acquisition of mesenchymal markers partially
induced
by
ER-dependent
TGF-β
activation
[50].
Furthermore,
senescent
AT2
cells
induce
a
fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition (FMT) in surrounding fibroblasts via TGF-β1 [51], Nanog [52],
mTOR [53] and Wnt [40, 42] pathways, processes that have been related to exaggerated ECM deposition
in IPF lungs [54, 55].
Bronchial epithelial cells can re-epithelialise the alveolar regions after exaggerated loss of alveolar
epithelium [56]. Surprisingly, increased senescence markers and Sirtuin 6 expression have been described
in the aberrantly activated bronchial epithelial cells lining the cystic lesions of IPF patients [56]. These
cells are susceptible to TGF-β-induced senescence and their high interleukin (IL)-1β secretion was
sufficient to induce FMT in vitro [56]. Moreover, several recent studies have utilised single-cell RNA
sequencing to explore the diversity of cell types and aberrant transcriptional programmes in IPF. Despite
the fact that cells were sequenced from small biopsies of individual patients, these studies all identified the
emergence of novel epithelial populations in the lungs of patients with IPF [57–59]. One such novel
population recently identified in two independent studies is a KRT5−/KRT17+ population that
co-expresses other basal cell, mesenchymal and senescence markers [58, 59]. This cell population also
expressed elevated levels of profibrotic and ECM genes and is localised on the epithelium overlying fibrotic
foci in IPF lungs (termed aberrant basaloid cells in one study) [58]. While aberrant basaloid cells were not
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0222-2020
3
LUNG REGENERATION | M.C. MELO-NARVÁEZ ET AL.

initially classified as an independent cell type in the first single-cell RNA sequencing cohort [57], these
cells were observed in a subsequent work by reanalysing the data [58], further reinforcing their existence
with relative abundance in IPF patients. This cell population presumably acts as a secondary progenitor
after AT1 and AT2 depletion, as observed for rodent bronchioalveolar stem cells.
In conclusion, senescence and SASP signals seem to modulate the epithelial–mesenchymal crosstalk in an
unsuccessful attempt at repair in the lung, highlighting their important role in the pathobiology of IPF.
Consistently, depletion of senescent cells using senolytic drugs or genetic models has a beneficial effect
against fibrosis and other age-related diseases in mice [29, 30, 51, 60]. However, some (pre-)senescent cells
seem to be essential for homeostasis and repair in the mouse [61, 62], highlighting the importance of
understanding how cell-type-specific senescence modulates IPF.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
COPD is a heterogeneous disease affecting both the upper and lower airways and has a poor prognosis
[63, 64]. Similarly to IPF, lung transplantation is the only therapeutic option for end-stage patients. The
main pathogenic features are airway inflammation and remodelling, increased mucus production,
peri-bronchial fibrosis and loss of alveolar architecture, leading to impaired lung function [64]. The
impaired regenerative capacity of the lung observed in COPD patients is linked to a mixture of genetic and
external factors, such as indoor and outdoor pollution, cigarette smoking, respiratory infections and
occupational exposures [64]. Moreover, given the increasing incidence of COPD with age, and the
acceleration of ageing-related processes by smoking, ageing plays a role in COPD pathogenesis [65].
Accordingly, emphysematous changes have been described in multiple accelerated ageing models [65–71],
which also show a higher susceptibility to development of emphysema after acute cigarette smoke exposure
[68, 70]. However, it is important to highlight that these accelerated ageing models do not fully
recapitulate the accumulation of injuries seen during the natural ageing process [64, 72].
COPD patients have significantly shorter telomeres in the lung and in the peripheral circulation compared
to age-matched healthy donors [47, 73]. Moreover, autophagy and proteostasis are impaired in COPD
patients, thereby promoting cellular senescence in alveolar epithelial cells [64, 65]. Increases in senescence
markers have also been observed in mesenchymal populations such as endothelial cells and fibroblasts,
suggesting that the altered parenchymal remodelling observed in COPD might be related to a
senescence-associated mesenchymal dysfunction [74, 75]. Moreover, primary small airway epithelial cells
derived from COPD patients show increased oxidative stress and telomere damage-induced senescence,
along with highly activated pro-inflammatory NF-κB signalling upon cigarette smoke exposure [64, 76–
78]. Furthermore, impaired immune responses characterised by reduced clearance capacity and higher
susceptibility to infections are related to the accumulation of senescent T-lymphocytes and macrophages in
COPD lungs [64]. Although studies depleting senescent cells using genetic models have generated
conflicting results [79–81], the pharmacological depletion of senescent cells using the senolytic drug
ABT-263 conferred resistance to elastase-induced emphysema in both young and aged mice [79].
Contrary to IPF, signalling pathways such as canonical Wnt/β-catenin and Notch are downregulated in the
epithelium in COPD [82]. Alterations in these pathways might reduce proliferation and differentiation
potential of epithelial progenitors in the lung [63, 82, 83]. Notably, an increase in non-canonical WNT5A/
5B signalling in fibroblasts has been observed in aged and COPD lungs, and inhibition of WNT5A/5B
reduces lung tissue destruction and improves progenitor potential of AT2 cells in mouse models [63]. The
role of TGF-β in COPD seems to be cell type specific, with TGF-β expression being activated in the airway
epithelium of smokers, which might explain the fibrotic airway remodelling in these areas and the loss of
alveolar structures in the distal lung [84, 85]. Conversely, alveolar macrophages release lower levels of
TGF-β1 in COPD, suggesting an impaired anti-inflammatory response in the lung [86]. Moreover,
proliferation and elastin production in response to TGF-β1 is impaired in COPD fibroblasts, indicating a
lower repair capacity in COPD [85, 87].
Acute disease
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is the main acute condition to be considered in the context of
lung regeneration. ARDS is a major health concern worldwide [88], exemplified by the current
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. The incidence of ARDS has been estimated at 10–86
cases per 100000; however, it is speculated that the condition is underrecognised [89]. ARDS is a critical
condition associated with a high fatality rate [90], with only moderate improvements during the last
decades and increased mortality in elderly patients [91]. The initial lung injury leading to ARDS may be
caused by numerous factors, such as infection, gastric aspiration, hyperoxia, mechanical stress
(e.g. ventilator-induced) or adverse drug/chemical reactions; however, infection is by far the most common
underlying factor for development of ARDS [92]. In addition, some patients undergoing lung
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0222-2020
4
LUNG REGENERATION | M.C. MELO-NARVÁEZ ET AL.

transplantation experience acute lung injury within the first 72 h (primary graft dysfunction). While a
distinct clinical entity, primary graft dysfunction shares many clinical features and is radiographically
similar to ARDS [93]. Histologically, patients with ARDS typically display diffuse alveolar damage (DAD)
[94]. On a tissue level, ARDS is characterised by an exudative phase with rapid recruitment of leukocytes,
acute inflammation, pneumocyte/endothelial cell death, hyaline membrane formation and oedema,
followed by an organising/proliferative phase with AT2 hyperplasia and loose organising fibrosis [89].
Around 70% of the COVID-19-related deaths have been due to severe ARDS [95]. Some reports have
additionally reported DAD or DAD-like histological patterns in COVID-19 patients [96–99]. While most
patients surviving the acute phase of ARDS transition to a resolving phase, returning the lung parenchyma
to a (near) normal state, some patients transition into a fibrosing phase [100, 101]. The fact that the lung
tissue is restored in most patients after the massive ARDS-associated damage highlights the regenerative
potential of the lung. There are several mechanisms that are critical in ARDS-associated lung regeneration,
including oedema re-absorption (i.e. re-establishment of effective ion transport by the alveolar epithelium
and re-formation of tight junctions), resolution of inflammation (e.g. regulation of crosstalk between the
innate and adaptive immune systems), cell proliferation/differentiation to re-populate the damaged
epithelium and/or endothelium (e.g. proliferation and differentiation of AT2 cells), and remodelling of the
ECM [102–104]. However, the endogenous repair of the lung on a molecular level after ARDS and why
some patients develop chronic fibrosis is still incompletely understood.
Exogenous regeneration
Bioengineering
The only available treatment for end-stage lung disease remains lung transplantation. There are not enough
donor lungs to meet current or anticipated future needs. Approximately 5000 lung transplants are performed
annually worldwide, including 1000 in Europe, with equal numbers of patients on waiting lists [105].
Transplantation recipients require lifelong immunosuppression and 5-year survival after lung transplantation
remains only ∼50%. New options to increase the number of donor lungs are desperately needed.
A promising area of research is the (re)generation of pulmonary tissue using ex vivo bioengineering
methods. In these approaches, cells are combined with a scaffold outside of the body, with the goal of
forming new tissue for transplantation [106]. Scaffolds can be derived from either biological or artificial
materials (or a combination thereof in hybrid approaches) and could be seeded with an appropriate cell
source to regenerate functional lung tissue for subsequent transplantation. While these techniques are still
not fully developed, one of their purported benefits is that scaffolds could be re-cellularised with
autologous cells derived from the eventual transplant recipient, thus minimising the immunological
complications typically accompanying lung transplantation. Similar approaches have already been used
clinically for structurally simpler tissues such as skin and cardiac valves [107].
Early work has focused on proof-of-concept studies in rodents, including transplantation of bioengineered
grafts. Major advances have also been made with regard to deriving biological scaffolds from human and
porcine lungs, while research using synthetic or engineered materials remains at an earlier stage [106].
Protocols to consistently de-cellularise lungs from a variety of species (including rodent, porcine and
human) have been developed, while the development of synthetic and engineered scaffolds is still relatively
in its infancy [106]. Acellular lung scaffolds support the viability of diverse primary stem and progenitor
cells over several weeks. Importantly, bioreactors that support human- and porcine-sized scaffolds have
been developed and used for studying the potential for re-endothelialisation and re-epithelialisation [108,
109]. One of the major challenges of these studies is growing a sufficient number of cells to cover the
endothelial or epithelial surfaces of acellular human or porcine lungs. Several different approaches have
been described recently for growing large amounts of induced pluripotent stem cells for deriving
endothelium [109] as well as primary basal epithelial progenitor cells from the proximal [110] and distal
lung [108], which retain the potential for differentiation into multiple cell types found in the lung
epithelium. Furthermore, porcine scaffolds re-cellularised with human cells have been transplanted into
porcine recipients (left lung only) [111, 112] and animals survived for up to 1 month [111], demonstrating
the potential of this approach. However, transplanted grafts were not fully functional and there was
evidence of aberrant remodelling over time [111]. While these are important advances, we are still far
away from generating tissue for clinical translation. As the lung is composed of over 40 cell types, further
advances are needed to generate tissue that contains the diversity of cell types seen in normal lung tissue
and that can function over time.
Cell therapy
Cell therapy approaches seek either to replace damaged tissue through delivery and engraftment of
administered cells or to stimulate endogenous repair and regeneration via immunomodulation. A variety
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0222-2020
5
LUNG REGENERATION | M.C. MELO-NARVÁEZ ET AL.

of cell types and cell-derived products are currently being explored, with many showing a remarkable
capacity to contribute to lung repair in pre-clinical small and large animal models [113–117]. Owing to
their success in pre-clinical models, several different cell types have been explored in clinical trials for lung
diseases. B-MSCs have been the most widely explored in clinical trials for ARDS and COPD and their
potential for immunomodulation, but there have been no reports of clear efficacy in human trials [118].
One area of intense discussion is the suitability of the pre-clinical animal models and the timing of MSC
administration [119]. To date, most animal studies have been performed in young animals, which are
known to have a high capacity for regeneration. Clinically, the overwhelming majority of patients with
acute and chronic lung disease are older and the baseline capacity for repair is known to be different. In
addition, there are open questions with regard to how best to scale cell-dosing strategies for human trials
and the effect of manufacturing, including cell freezing and thawing [120].
In addition to MSCs, endogenous progenitor cells and induced pluripotent derived endogenous progenitor
cells (e.g. epithelial, endothelial and alveolar macrophage) are being explored for replacing damaged
resident lung cells [118, 119, 121]. These cell types have been explored to a more limited extent in
pre-clinical models than MSCs, but some have shown promise in different acute and chronic lung disease
animal models. AT2 cells have been explored in a small cohort of patients with IPF [122], and basal
epithelial progenitor cells in bronchiectasis [123]. While no adverse side-effects were reported in either of
these clinical studies, cells were administered to a small number of patients and the studies therefore
provide limited insight into the potential for efficacy. More mechanistic studies in relevant pre-clinical
models showing efficacy, including in humanised models, are critical for moving cell therapy safely into
the clinic.
Models of lung disease and regeneration
A variety of in vitro models have emerged in recent years to better understand the biology associated with
lung regeneration as well as to evaluate potential therapies. Major biological and physiological differences
exist in the lungs between species. Thus, development of humanised models is critical. While isolated
primary human cells can be used to study lung disease and regeneration in vitro, these studies do not
mimic the complexity and communication between cell types found in vivo. Several different
three-dimensional models have emerged in the last few years and each have different strengths and
weaknesses that are important to consider when using them to study lung regeneration. Here we will focus
on organoids, acellular lung scaffolds and precision-cut lung slices (PCLS), as these have been most
extensively used to study lung disease and regeneration. However, other models such as air–liquid
interface cultures, lung-on-a-chip and engineered systems on the macro scale, which use human tissue or
cells, have also shown promise and have been reviewed elsewhere [124, 125].
Organoids
Organoids have been widely used to characterise stem cell function and regenerative potential of different
progenitor cells in human and rodent lungs. Typically, primary cells are isolated by cell sorting using
specific cell markers and seeded in the presence or absence of mesenchymal cells on an anti-adherent
substrate such as Matrigel [126]. Recently, human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived organoids were
developed, allowing the modelling of several diseases including cystic fibrosis [127], cancer or pulmonary
fibrosis [128]. Depending on the application, different epithelial progenitor cells can be used for organoid
formation. Rodent basal cells can self-renew and give rise to differentiated ciliated cells by cultivation
without stromal cells to obtain bronchospheres [129]. Moreover, human airway organoids can be derived
by isolating primary airway basal cells and obtaining human bronchospheres composed of ciliated, goblet
and basal cells [110, 130] or a mixture of human adult primary bronchial epithelial cells, lung fibroblasts
and lung endothelial cells [131]. These culturing methods show a high efficiency in obtaining and
expanding the organoids, allowing high-throughput screening for regenerative applications [110, 130].
Furthermore, the progenitor capacity and their response to injury of mouse cell populations in the
proximal airways, such as club cells, was determined using organoid assays [132]. Additionally, organoid
platforms have been used to study rare bipotent bronchial alveolar progenitors, highlighting the
importance of the epithelial–mesenchymal or epithelial–endothelial crosstalk in progenitor activation and
tissue repair after injury [133, 134].
AT2 cells isolated using either genetic lineage tracing [126] or antibody labelling of surface markers for
mice [132, 133, 135] or humans generally require the presence of mesenchymal cells to form organoids
[132, 133, 135]. Additionally, the fact that AT2 cells cannot currently be expanded without losing their
progenitor phenotype limits their application in high-throughput studies [126]. However, murine alveolar
organoids have been very useful to study age-related changes [40, 63, 136] and how they impair progenitor
cell potential and epithelial–mesenchymal crosstalk [137]. Recently, organoid assays led to the discovery of
a murine epithelial progenitor population that requires low Wnt/β-catenin signalling, which is impaired in
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0222-2020
6
LUNG REGENERATION | M.C. MELO-NARVÁEZ ET AL.

emphysema [41]. Likewise, transient inhibition of the retinoic acid pathway followed by histone
deacetylase inhibition was identified as a potential therapeutic option for regenerative treatments [138].
Alveolar organoids derived from human pluripotent cells have also been used as a model for pulmonary
fibrosis, identifying the role of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-11 [128]. In general, organoid assays
allow the discovery of progenitor populations and the study of regenerative mechanisms. However, the
isolated populations are typically heterogeneous, making it challenging to attribute organoid formation
capacity to a specific subpopulation, especially under conditions of disease that might change cell
composition or cell fates. Moreover, even with advances in organoids, they fail to recapitulate the
complexity of the distal lung, as immune cells and endothelial cell interactions mostly remain absent.
Acellular lung scaffolds and cell-derived ECM
The role of the ECM and local stem cell niche in regulating repair and regeneration under homeostatic
and diseased conditions has recently received increased attention. Historically, this has been challenging to
study due to a lack of experimental techniques to study interactions between cells and the ECM in
disease-relevant contexts. Acellular scaffolds have recently emerged as a valuable model and can be derived
by de-cellularising normal and diseased lungs across species, including human lungs [139], or alternatively
derived from de-cellularisation of monocultures [140]. In contrast to scaffolds that include only one or two
ECM components or ECM-mimicking binding sites, acellular scaffolds derived at the tissue or cell level
retain diverse ECM components and associated growth factors that represent the complexity of the in vivo
environment [46, 141, 142]. Scaffolds can be re-cellularised with one or more cell types derived from
normal or diseased lung tissue and studied for up to 1 month. Thus far, a variety of different cell types
have been seeded onto acellular scaffolds, including distal and proximal epithelial cells, macrophages,
fibroblasts, MSCs derived from different tissues and induced pluripotent stem cell-derived endothelial and
epithelial cells [139].
While some studies have included multiple cell types in re-cellularised acellular scaffolds, the majority of
studies have only included one or two cell types and it remains challenging to direct re-cellularised
populations to the exact location where they are found in the lung (e.g. interstitial fibroblasts).
Incorporation of more cell populations in these models, as well as directing them to their native locations
to reconstruct the appropriate cell–niche interactions, are important challenges to overcome in order to
mimic more closely the native tissue environment. Nonetheless, these studies have outlined the critical role
that the environment and niche play in directing repair and regenerative processes in several chronic lung
diseases, including IPF, COPD and pulmonary hypertension, as well as ageing [143]. The majority of these
studies indicate that changes in the microenvironment are major drivers of disease and may play a role in
inhibiting normal regeneration. Normal cells seeded into diseased environments change their phenotype
and lose function, mimicking changes seen in diseased patients [140–142, 144]. Conversely, cells isolated
from diseased patients and seeded into environments mimicking normal lung lose some disease-like
phenotypes [144]. These studies and others point to a previously underrecognised degree of cellular
plasticity in patients with chronic lung disease, whereby diseased cells can reacquire a more normal state if
placed in the right environment. To date, the majority of drugs explored for repair or regeneration have
focused on modulating cell behaviour. Targeting the environment may be a more promising approach and
the use of de-cell and re-cell systems could play an important role for drug discovery as they are readily
amenable to high-throughput studies [141] and can be performed using human tissue that mimics patient
disease, including patient heterogeneity.
Precision-cut lung slices
PCLS derived from several species have recently attracted increased attention as models of disease [145],
due to the fact that they conserve the architecture and cellular diversity of the lung and remain viable
ex vivo for several days [145]. One major disadvantage of PCLS is the absence of recruited immune cells.
However, some immune cells, such as alveolar macrophages, dendritic cells or mast cells, are still present
and their interaction with the residing cells could be studied in mouse and human PCLS [145, 146]. This
suggests that this model could be adapted to study certain immune–structural cell crosstalk upon viral,
bacterial or fungal infections in the future. Notably, post-natal alveologenesis can be monitored and
manipulated ex vivo using PCLS derived from mice [147], highlighting the potential of this ex vivo model
to study regenerative processes in real time [148]. Moreover, fibrotic changes in the lung can be studied on
PCLS derived from mice and rats previously treated with bleomycin, or PCLS generated from IPF patients,
which both maintain fibrotic changes in ECM components as well as soluble mediators, as observed
in vivo [149, 150]. These PCLS models have helped in the identification and characterisation of potential
novel therapeutic compounds, such as a mTOR/phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor, or in
identifying previously unknown effects of known drugs such as nintedanib or pirfenidone (e.g. on the
alveolar epithelium) [149, 150]. Notably, specific depletion of senescent cells using senolytic drugs reduced
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0222-2020
7
LUNG REGENERATION | M.C. MELO-NARVÁEZ ET AL.

SASP factor secretion and ECM markers in fibrotic mouse PCLS [30]. A potential role of canonical Wnt/
β-catenin and WNT5A/5B in fibrosis and COPD, respectively, was also investigated using PCLS [40, 83].
The induction of fibrotic-like changes ex vivo has recently been achieved with a “fibrotic cocktail”
composed of several cytokines and growth factors present in the IPF disease milieu that was used to treat
PCLS derived from tissue without interstitial lung disease, resulting in increased expression of fibrotic
markers of the mesenchyme, losses in phenotypic markers of epithelial progenitor cells, and deposition of
ECM proteins (e.g. collagen) [151]. Similar to IPF, PCLS isolated from COPD patients maintain their
phenotype in culture and pharmacological activation of Wnt/β-catenin signalling induces repair [152].
Altogether, PCLS are emerging as a tool to bridge the gap between target identification and translation,
allowing for future precision medicine approaches.
Challenges and future directions
Promising approaches, both in the field of bioengineering and exogenous lung regeneration as well as in
the activation of endogenous regenerative potential, have been put forward in recent years. The ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic highlights the need for a better understanding of lung regeneration in the face of
overwhelming acute viral injury. Specific challenges in these approaches are not only the impaired
progenitor cell function but the destructive niche and ECM in aged and diseased lung (figure 1).
Reprogramming of the niche by removing prematurely aged cells or reverting the immunoageing
phenotype in the aged or diseased lung, employing either cell therapy or pharmacological compounds, will
be essential for allowing efficient regeneration and might be efficient in combination with other cell
therapy and bioengineering approaches. In order to achieve this goal, (human) models recapitulating the
complexity of cell–cell interactions, ECM and the instructive niche are promising tools for furthering our
understanding of activating lung regeneration and developing strategies to therapeutically activate and
support these processes to target chronic and acute lung diseases.
Conflict of interest: M.C. Melo-Narváez has nothing to disclose. J. Stegmayr has nothing to disclose. D.E. Wagner
reports grants from the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation and the Swedish Research Council, during the conduct
of the study; and personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, outside the submitted work. In addition, D.E. Wagner has a
patent WO2014169111A1 pending. M. Lehmann reports grants from The German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment
(BfR), during the conduct of the study.
Support statement: Funding was received from Bundesinstitut für Risikobewertung (Grant “Lung aging in a dish”), the
Swedish Research Council and Knut och Alice Wallenbergs Stiftelse. Funding information for this article has been
deposited with the Crossref Funder Registry.
Healthy
Supportive
Inhibitive
Niche
Progenitor
cell
Progenitor
cell
Niche
Aged/diseased
Therapeutic strategies
Regeneration:
  Cell therapy
  Extracellular vesicles
  Pharmaceutical
Replacement:
  Bioengineering
  Cell therapy
O
O
H
N
NH
O
N
N
O
N
FIGURE 1 Therapeutic strategies to repair the diseased lung. Functional progenitor cells and instructive niche
promote repair and regeneration in the healthy lung (green). Conversely, progenitor cell dysfunction and
inhibitory factors in the niche impair proper lung regeneration and promote disease in the aged/diseased lung
(red). Novel therapeutic strategies based on tissue regeneration and/or replacement aim to cure acute and
chronic lung diseases by recovering progenitor cell function and/or reprogramming the niche environment.
Tissue regeneration could be stimulated with cell therapy, extracellular vesicles or through pharmaceutical
approaches targeting the niche or progenitor cells. Alternatively, diseased or damaged cells could be
replaced via cell therapy or through bioengineering new tissue or niches. Reproduced and modified from
Servier Medical Art with permission.
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0222-2020
8
LUNG REGENERATION | M.C. MELO-NARVÁEZ ET AL.

References
1
Kotton DN, Morrisey EE. Lung regeneration: mechanisms, applications and emerging stem cell populations.
Nat Med 2014; 20: 822–832.
2
Cho SJ, Stout-Delgado HW. Aging and lung disease. Annu Rev Physiol 2020; 82: 433–459.
3
Nikolić MZ, Sun D, Rawlins EL. Human lung development: recent progress and new challenges. Development
2018; 145: dev163485.
4
Pan H, Deutsch GH, Wert SE. Comprehensive anatomic ontologies for lung development: a comparison of
alveolar formation and maturation within mouse and human lung. J Biomed Semantics 2019; 10: 18.
5
Lee RE, Miller SM, Randell SH. Adult pulmonary epithelial stem cells and their niches. In: Reis RL, ed.
Encyclopedia of Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine. Oxford, Academic Press, 2019; pp. 319–336.
6
Navarro S, Driscoll B. Regeneration of the aging lung: a mini-review. Gerontology 2017; 63: 270–280.
7
Morrisey EE. Basal cells in lung development and repair. Dev Cell 2018; 44: 653–654.
8
Rock JR, Gao X, Xue Y, et al. Notch-dependent differentiation of adult airway basal stem cells. Cell Stem Cell
2011; 8: 639–648.
9
Paul MK, Bisht B, Darmawan DO, et al. Dynamic changes in intracellular ROS levels regulate airway basal stem
cell homeostasis through Nrf2-dependent Notch signaling. Cell Stem Cell 2014; 15: 199–214.
10
Pardo-Saganta A, Law BM, Tata PR, et al. Injury induces direct lineage segregation of functionally distinct airway
basal stem/progenitor cell subpopulations. Cell Stem Cell 2015; 16: 184–197.
11
Song H, Yao E, Lin C, et al. Functional characterization of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells in lung development,
injury, and tumorigenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2012; 109: 17531–17536.
12
Reynolds SD, Giangreco A, Power JH, et al. Neuroepithelial bodies of pulmonary airways serve as a reservoir of
progenitor cells capable of epithelial regeneration. Am J Pathol 2000; 156: 269–278.
13
Kim CFB, Jackson EL, Woolfenden AE, et al. Identification of bronchioalveolar stem cells in normal lung and
lung cancer. Cell 2005; 121: 823–835.
14
Liu Q, Liu K, Cui G, et al. Lung regeneration by multipotent stem cells residing at the bronchioalveolar-duct
junction. Nat Genet 2019; 51: 728–738.
15
Evans KV, Lee JH. Alveolar wars: the rise of in vitro models to understand human lung alveolar maintenance,
regeneration, and disease. Stem Cells Transl Med 2020; 9: 867–881.
16
Treutlein B, Brownfield DG, Wu AR, et al. Reconstructing lineage hierarchies of the distal lung epithelium using
single-cell RNA-seq. Nature 2014; 509: 371–375.
17
Frank DB, Penkala IJ, Zepp JA, et al. Early lineage specification defines alveolar epithelial ontogeny in the
murine lung. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2019; 116: 4362–4371.
18
Nabhan A, Brownfield DG, Krasnow MA, et al. A single cell Wnt signaling niche maintains stemness of alveolar
type 2 cells. Science 2018; 359: 1118–1123.
19
Strunz M, Simon L, Ansari M, et al. Longitudinal single cell transcriptomics reveals Krt8+ alveolar epithelial
progenitors in lung regeneration. bioRxiv 2019; preprint [https://doi.org/10.1101/705244].
20
Meiners S, Eickelberg O, Königshoff M. Hallmarks of the ageing lung. Eur Respir J 2015; 45: 807–827.
21
Xu J, Gonzalez ET, Iyer SS, et al. Use of senescence-accelerated mouse model in bleomycin-induced lung injury
suggests that bone marrow-derived cells can alter the outcome of lung injury in aged mice. J Gerontol A Biol Sci
Med Sci 2009; 64: 731–739.
22
John-Schuster G, Günter S, Hager K, et al. Inflammaging increases susceptibility to cigarette smoke-induced
COPD. Oncotarget 2016; 7: 30068–30083.
23
Hecker L, Logsdon NJ, Kurundkar D, et al. Reversal of persistent fibrosis in aging by targeting Nox4-Nrf2 redox
imbalance. Sci Transl Med 2014; 6: 231ra47.
24
Bustos ML, Huleihel L, Kapetanaki MG, et al. Aging mesenchymal stem cells fail to protect because of impaired
migration and antiinflammatory response. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2014; 189: 787–798.
25
Kapetanaki MG, Mora AL, Rojas M. Influence of age on wound healing and fibrosis. J Pathol 2013; 229:
310–322.
26
Muñoz-Espín D, Serrano M. Cellular senescence: from physiology to pathology. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2014; 15:
482–496.
27
Krizhanovsky V, Yon M, Dickins RA, et al. Senescence of activated stellate cells limits liver fibrosis. Cell 2008;
134: 657–667.
28
Kang TW, Yevsa T, Woller N, et al. Senescence surveillance of pre-malignant hepatocytes limits liver cancer
development. Nature 2011; 479: 547–551.
29
Schafer MJ, White TA, Iijima K, et al. Cellular senescence mediates fibrotic pulmonary disease. Nat Commun
2017; 8: 14532.
30
Lehmann M, Korfei M, Mutze K, et al. Senolytic drugs target alveolar epithelial cell function and attenuate
experimental lung fibrosis ex vivo. Eur Respir J 2017; 50: 1602367.
31
Pereira BI, Devine OP, Vukmanovic-Stejic M, et al. Senescent cells evade immune clearance via HLA-E-mediated
NK and CD8+ T cell inhibition. Nat Commun 2019; 10: 2387.
32
Ovadya Y, Landsberger T, Leins H, et al. Impaired immune surveillance accelerates accumulation of senescent
cells and aging. Nat Commun 2018; 9: 5435.
33
Franceschi C, Campisi J. Chronic inflammation (inflammaging) and its potential contribution to age-associated
diseases. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2014; 69: Suppl. 1, S4–S9.
34
Metcalf TU, Cubas RA, Ghneim K, et al. Global analyses revealed age-related alterations in innate immune
responses after stimulation of pathogen recognition receptors. Aging Cell 2015; 14: 421–432.
35
Li Z, Jiao Y, Fan EK, et al. Aging-impaired filamentous actin polymerization signaling reduces alveolar
macrophage phagocytosis of bacteria. J Immunol 2017; 199: 3176–3186.
36
Cárdenes N, Álvarez D, Sellarés J, et al. Senescence of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells from
patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Stem Cell Res Ther 2018; 9: 257.
37
Paxson JA, Gruntman A, Parkin CD, et al. Age-dependent decline in mouse lung regeneration with loss of lung
fibroblast clonogenicity and increased myofibroblastic differentiation. PLoS One 2011; 6: e23232.
38
Yanai H, Shteinberg A, Porat Z, et al. Cellular senescence-like features of lung fibroblasts derived from idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis patients. Aging 2015; 7: 664–672.
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0222-2020
9
LUNG REGENERATION | M.C. MELO-NARVÁEZ ET AL.

39
Álvarez D, Cárdenes N, Sellarés J, et al. IPF lung fibroblasts have a senescent phenotype. Am J Physiol Lung Cell
Mol Physiol 2017; 313: L1164–L1173.
40
Lehmann M, Hu Q, Hu Y, et al. Chronic WNT/β-catenin signaling induces cellular senescence in lung epithelial
cells. Cell Signal 2020; 70: 109588.
41
Hu Y, Ng-Blichfeldt JP, Ota C, et al. Wnt/β-catenin signaling is critical for regenerative potential of distal lung
epithelial progenitor cells in homeostasis and emphysema. Stem Cells 2020; in press [https://doi.org/10.1002/stem.
3241].
42
Königshoff M, Kramer M, Balsara N, et al. WNT1-inducible signaling protein-1 mediates pulmonary fibrosis in
mice and is upregulated in humans with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. J Clin Invest 2009; 119: 772–787.
43
Angelidis I, Simon LM, Fernandez IE, et al. An atlas of the aging lung mapped by single cell transcriptomics and
deep tissue proteomics. Nat Commun 2019; 10: 963.
44
King TE, Pardo A, Selman M. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Lancet 2011; 378: 1949–1961.
45
Plataki M, Koutsopoulos AV, Darivianaki K, et al. Expression of apoptotic and antiapoptotic markers in
epithelial cells in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Chest 2005; 127: 266–274.
46
Wagner DE, Bonenfant NR, Parsons CS, et al. Comparative decellularization and recellularization of normal
versus emphysematous human lungs. Biomaterials 2014; 35: 3281–3297.
47
Chilosi M, Poletti V, Rossi A. The pathogenesis of COPD and IPF: distinct horns of the same devil? Respir Res
2012; 13: 3.
48
Lawson WE, Crossno PF, Polosukhin VV, et al. Endoplasmic reticulum stress in alveolar epithelial cells is
prominent in IPF: association with altered surfactant protein processing and herpesvirus infection. Am J Physiol
Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2008; 294: L1119–L1126.
49
Borok Z, Horie M, Flodby P, et al. Grp78 loss in epithelial progenitors reveals an age-linked role for endoplasmic
reticulum stress in pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2020; 201: 198–211.
50
Maitra M, Cano CA, Garcia CK. Mutant surfactant A2 proteins associated with familial pulmonary fibrosis and
lung cancer induce TGF-β1 secretion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2012; 109: 21064–21069.
51
Yao C, Guan X, Carraro G, et al. Senescence of alveolar stem cells drives progressive pulmonary fibrosis. bioRxiv
2019; preprint [https://doi.org/10.1101/820175].
52
Chen X, Xu H, Hou J, et al. Epithelial cell senescence induces pulmonary fibrosis through Nanog-mediated
fibroblast activation. Aging 2019; 12: 242–259.
53
Calhoun C, Shivshankar P, Saker M, et al. Senescent cells contribute to the physiological remodeling of aged
lungs. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2016; 71: 153–160.
54
Shivshankar P, Brampton C, Miyasato S, et al. Caveolin-1 deficiency protects from pulmonary fibrosis by
modulating epithelial cell senescence in mice. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2012; 47: 28–36.
55
Herrera J, Forster C, Pengo T, et al. Registration of the extracellular matrix components constituting the
fibroblastic focus in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. JCI Insight 2019; 4: e125185.
56
Minagawa S, Araya J, Numata T, et al. Accelerated epithelial cell senescence in IPF and the inhibitory role of
SIRT6 in TGF-β-induced senescence of human bronchial epithelial cells. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol
2011; 300: L391–L401.
57
Reyfman PA, Walter JM, Joshi N, et al. Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of human lung provides insights into
the pathobiology of pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2019; 199: 1517–1536.
58
Adams TS, Schupp JC, Poli S, et al. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals ectopic and aberrant lung-resident cell
populations in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Sci Adv 2020; 6: eaba1983.
59
Habermann AC, Gutierrez AJ, Bui LT, et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals profibrotic roles of distinct
epithelial and mesenchymal lineages in pulmonary fibrosis. Sci Adv 2020; 6: eaba1972.
60
Baker DJ, Wijshake T, Tchkonia T, et al. Clearance of p16Ink4a-positive senescent cells delays ageing-associated
disorders. Nature 2011; 479: 232–236.
61
Grosse L, Wagner N, Emelyanov A, et al. Defined p16High senescent cell types are indispensable for mouse
healthspan. Cell Metab 2020; 32: 87–99.
62
de Mochel NR, Cheong KN, Cassandras M, et al. Sentinel p16INK4a+ cells in the basement membrane form a
reparative niche in the lung. bioRxiv 2020; preprint [https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.10.142893].
63
Baarsma HA, Skronska-Wasek W, Mutze K, et al. Noncanonical WNT-5A signaling impairs endogenous lung
repair in COPD. J Exp Med 2017; 214: 143–163.
64
Barnes PJ, Baker J, Donnelly LE. Cellular senescence as a mechanism and target in chronic lung diseases. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2019; 200: 556–564.
65
Vij N, Chandramani-Shivalingappa P, Van Westphal C, et al. Cigarette smoke-induced autophagy impairment
accelerates lung aging, COPD-emphysema exacerbations and pathogenesis. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2018; 314:
C73–C87.
66
Kuro-o M, Matsumura Y, Aizawa H, et al. Mutation of the mouse klotho gene leads to a syndrome resembling
ageing. Nature 1997; 390: 45–51.
67
Koike K, Kondo Y, Sekiya M, et al. Complete lack of vitamin C intake generates pulmonary emphysema in
senescence marker protein-30 knockout mice. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2010; 298: L784–L792.
68
Uejima Y, Fukuchi Y, Nagase T, et al. Influences of inhaled tobacco smoke on the senescence accelerated mouse
(SAM). Eur Respir J 1990; 3: 1029–1036.
69
Suga T, Kurabayashi M, Sando Y, et al. Disruption of the klotho gene causes pulmonary emphysema in
mice. Defect in maintenance of pulmonary integrity during postnatal life. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2000; 22:
26–33.
70
Sato A, Hirai T, Imura A, et al. Morphological mechanism of the development of pulmonary emphysema in
klotho mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007; 104: 2361–2365.
71
Calvi CL, Podowski M, D’Alessio FR, et al. Critical transition in tissue homeostasis accompanies murine lung
senescence. PLoS One 2011; 6: e20712.
72
Zhou S, Wright JL, Liu J, et al. Aging does not enhance experimental cigarette smoke-induced COPD in the
mouse. PLoS One 2013; 8: e71410.
73
Savale L, Chaouat A, Bastuji-Garin S, et al. Shortened telomeres in circulating leukocytes of patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2009; 179: 566–571.
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0222-2020
10
LUNG REGENERATION | M.C. MELO-NARVÁEZ ET AL.

74
Amsellem V, Gary-Bobo G, Marcos E, et al. Telomere dysfunction causes sustained inflammation in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011; 184: 1358–1366.
75
Holz O, Zühlke I, Jaksztat E, et al. Lung fibroblasts from patients with emphysema show a reduced proliferation
rate in culture. Eur Respir J 2004; 24: 575–579.
76
Tsuji T, Aoshiba K, Nagai A. Alveolar cell senescence exacerbates pulmonary inflammation in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Respiration 2010; 80: 59–70.
77
Ahmad T, Sundar IK, Tormos AM, et al. Shelterin telomere protection protein 1 reduction causes telomere
attrition and cellular senescence via Sirtuin 1 deacetylase in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir
Cell Mol Biol 2017; 56: 38–49.
78
Baker JR, Vuppusetty C, Colley T, et al. MicroRNA-570 is a novel regulator of cellular senescence and
inflammaging. FASEB J 2019; 33: 1605–1616.
79
Mikawa R, Suzuki Y, Baskoro H, et al. Elimination of p19ARF-expressing cells protects against pulmonary
emphysema in mice. Aging Cell 2018; 17: e12827.
80
Sundar IK, Rashid K, Gerloff J, et al. Genetic ablation of p16INK4a does not protect against cellular senescence in
mouse models of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease/emphysema. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2018; 59:
189–199.
81
Cottage CT, Peterson N, Kearley J, et al. Targeting p16-induced senescence prevents cigarette smoke-induced
emphysema by promoting IGF1/Akt1 signaling in mice. Commun Biol 2019; 2: 307.
82
Chilosi M, Carloni A, Rossi A, et al. Premature lung aging and cellular senescence in the pathogenesis of
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and COPD/emphysema. Transl Res 2013; 162: 156–173.
83
Wu X, van Dijk EM, Ng-Blichfeldt JP, et al. Mesenchymal WNT-5A/5B signaling represses lung alveolar
epithelial progenitors. Cells 2019; 8: 1147.
84
Takizawa H, Tanaka M, Takami K, et al. Increased expression of transforming growth factor-β1 in small airway
epithelium from tobacco smokers and patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2001; 163: 1476–1483.
85
Morty RE, Königshoff M, Eickelberg O. Transforming growth factor-β signaling across ages. Proc Am Thorac Soc
2009; 6: 607–613.
86
Pons AR, Sauleda J, Noguera A, et al. Decreased macrophage release of TGF-β and TIMP-1 in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J 2005; 26: 60–66.
87
Zhang J, Wu L, Feng MX, et al. Pulmonary fibroblasts from COPD patients show an impaired response of elastin
synthesis to TGF-β1. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2011; 177: 236–240.
88
Confalonieri M, Salton F, Fabiano F. Acute respiratory distress syndrome. Eur Respir Rev 2017; 26: 160116.
89
Thompson BT, Chambers RC, Liu KD. Acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med 2017; 377: 562–572.
90
Bellani G, Laffey JG, Pham T, et al. Epidemiology, patterns of care, and mortality for patients with acute
respiratory distress syndrome in intensive care units in 50 countries. JAMA 2016; 315: 788–800.
91
Phua J, Badia JR, Adhikari NK, et al. Has mortality from acute respiratory distress syndrome decreased over
time? A systematic review. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2009; 179: 220–227.
92
Matthay MA, Ware LB, Zimmerman GA. The acute respiratory distress syndrome. J Clin Invest 2012; 122:
2731–2740.
93
Suzuki Y, Cantu E, Christie JD. Primary graft dysfunction. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2013; 34: 305–319.
94
Cardinal-Fernandez P, Lorente JA, Ballen-Barragan A, et al. Acute respiratory distress syndrome and diffuse
alveolar damage. New insights on a complex relationship. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2017; 14: 844–850.
95
Zhang B, Zhou X, Qiu Y, et al. Clinical characteristics of 82 cases of death from COVID-19. PLos One 2020; 15:
e0235458.
96
Xu Z, Shi L, Wang Y, et al. Pathological findings of COVID-19 associated with acute respiratory distress
syndrome. Lancet Respir Med 2020; 8: 420–422.
97
Tian S, Hu W, Niu L, et al. Pulmonary pathology of early-phase 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pneumonia
in two patients with lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol 2020; 15: 700–704.
98
Barton LM, Duval EJ, Stroberg E, et al. COVID-19 autopsies, Oklahoma, USA. Am J Clin Pathol 2020; 153:
725–733.
99
Aguiar D, Lobrinus JA, Schibler M, et al. Inside the lungs of COVID-19 disease. Int J Legal Med 2020; 134:
1271–1274.
100
Herridge MS, Moss M, Hough CL, et al. Recovery and outcomes after the acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) in patients and their family caregivers. Intensive Care Med 2016; 42: 725–738.
101
Thille AW, Esteban A, Fernandez-Segoviano P, et al. Chronology of histological lesions in acute respiratory
distress syndrome with diffuse alveolar damage: a prospective cohort study of clinical autopsies. Lancet Respir
Med 2013; 1: 395–401.
102
Huppert LA, Matthay MA. Alveolar fluid clearance in pathologically relevant conditions: in vitro and in vivo
models of acute respiratory distress syndrome. Front Immunol 2017; 8: 371.
103
Gonzalez-Lopez A, Albaiceta GM. Repair after acute lung injury: molecular mechanisms and therapeutic
opportunities. Crit Care 2012; 16: 209.
104
Davey A, McAuley DF, O’Kane CM. Matrix metalloproteinases in acute lung injury: mediators of injury and
drivers of repair. Eur Respir J 2011; 38: 959–970.
105
Yusen RD, Edwards LB, Kucheryavaya AY, et al. The Registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung
Transplantation: thirty-second official adult lung and heart-lung transplantation report – 2015; focus theme:
early graft failure. J Heart Lung Transplant 2015; 34: 1264–1277.
106
De Santis MM, Bölükbas DA, Lindstedt S, et al. How to build a lung: latest advances and emerging themes in
lung bioengineering. Eur Respir J 2018; 52: 1601355.
107
Crapo PM, Gilbert TW, Badylak SF. An overview of tissue and whole organ decellularization processes.
Biomaterials 2011; 32: 3233–3243.
108
Gilpin SE, Charest JM, Ren X, et al. Regenerative potential of human airway stem cells in lung epithelial
engineering. Biomaterials 2016; 108: 111–119.
109
Ren X, Moser PT, Gilpin SE, et al. Engineering pulmonary vasculature in decellularized rat and human lungs.
Nat Biotechnol 2015; 33: 1097–1102.
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0222-2020
11
LUNG REGENERATION | M.C. MELO-NARVÁEZ ET AL.

110
Butler CR, Hynds RE, Gowers KHC, et al. Rapid expansion of human epithelial stem cells suitable for airway
tissue engineering. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2016; 194: 156–168.
111
Nichols JE, La Francesca S, Niles JA, et al. Production and transplantation of bioengineered lung into a
large-animal model. Sci Transl Med 2018; 10: eaao3926.
112
Zhou H, Kitano K, Ren X, et al. Bioengineering human lung grafts on porcine matrix. Ann Surg 2018; 267:
590–598.
113
Bölükbas DA, Da Silva IAN, Rydell-Törmänen K, et al. Preclinical evidence for the role of stem/stromal cells in
COPD. In: Burgess JK, Heijink IH, eds. Stem Cell-Based Therapy for Lung Disease. Cham, Springer, 2019; pp.
73–96.
114
Cruz T, Rojas M. Preclinical evidence for the role of stem/stromal cells in targeting ARDS. In: Burgess JK,
Heijink IH, eds. Stem Cell-Based Therapy for Lung Disease. Cham, Springer, 2019; pp. 199–217.
115
Cruz FF, Rocco PRM. The potential of factors released from mesenchymal stromal cells as therapeutic agents in
the lung. In: Burgess JK, Heijink IH, eds. Stem Cell-Based Therapy for Lung Disease. Cham, Springer, 2019; pp.
57–70.
116
Patete CL, Toonkel RL, Glassberg M. Stem cell based therapy for lung disease Preclinical evidence for the role of
stem/stromal cells Clinical application of stem/stromal cells in lung fibrosis. In: Burgess JK, Heijink IH, eds. Stem
Cell-Based Therapy for Lung Disease. Cham, Springer, 2019; pp. 119–130.
117
Rolandsson Enes S, Weiss DJ. Cell therapy for lung disease: current status and future prospects. Curr Stem Cell
Rep 2020; 6: 30–39.
118
Ikonomou L, Wagner DE, Turner L, et al. Translating basic research into safe and effective cell-based treatments
for respiratory diseases. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2019; 16: 657–668.
119
Ryan AL, Ikonomou L, Atarod S, et al. Stem cells, cell therapies, and bioengineering in lung biology and
diseases 2017. An official American Thoracic Society workshop report. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2019; 61:
429–439.
120
Matthay MA, Calfee CS, Zhuo H, et al. Treatment with allogeneic mesenchymal stromal cells for moderate to
severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (START study): a randomised phase 2a safety trial. Lancet Respir Med
2019; 7: 154–162.
121
Berical A, Lee RE, Randell SH, et al. Challenges facing airway epithelial cell-based therapy for cystic fibrosis.
Front Pharmacol 2019; 10: 74.
122
Serrano-Mollar A, Gay-Jordi G, Guillamat-Prats R, et al. Safety and tolerability of alveolar type II cell
transplantation in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Chest 2016; 150: 533–543.
123
Ma Q, Ma Y, Dai X, et al. Regeneration of functional alveoli by adult human SOX9+ airway basal cell
transplantation. Protein Cell 2018; 9: 267–282.
124
Asmani M, Velumani S, Li Y, et al. Fibrotic microtissue array to predict anti-fibrosis drug efficacy. Nat Commun
2018; 9: 2066.
125
Zscheppang K, Berg J, Hedtrich S, et al. Human pulmonary 3D models for translational research. Biotechnol J
2018; 13: 1700341.
126
Barkauskas CE, Chung MI, Fioret B, et al. Lung organoids: current uses and future promise. Development 2017;
144: 986–997.
127
McCauley KB, Hawkins F, Serra M, et al. Efficient derivation of functional human airway epithelium from
pluripotent stem cells via temporal regulation of Wnt signaling. Cell Stem Cell 2017; 20: 844–857.
128
Strikoudis A, Cieślak A, Loffredo L, et al. Modeling of fibrotic lung disease using 3D organoids derived from
human pluripotent stem cells. Cell Rep 2019; 27: 3709–3723.
129
Rock JR, Onaitis MW, Rawlins EL, et al. Basal cells as stem cells of the mouse trachea and human airway
epithelium. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009; 106: 12771–12775.
130
Hild M, Jaffe AB. Production of 3-D airway organoids from primary human airway basal cells and their use in
high-throughput screening. Curr Protoc Stem Cell Biol 2016; 37: IE.9.1–IE.9.15.
131
Tan Q, Choi KM, Sicard D, et al. Human airway organoid engineering as a step toward lung regeneration and
disease modeling. Biomaterials 2017; 113: 118–132.
132
Chen H, Matsumoto K, Brockway BL, et al. Airway epithelial progenitors are region specific and show
differential responses to bleomycin-induced lung injury. Stem Cells 2012; 30: 1948–1960.
133
Lee JH, Bhang DH, Beede A, et al. Lung stem cell differentiation in mice directed by endothelial cells via a
BMP4-NFATc1-thrombospondin-1 axis. Cell 2014; 156: 440–455.
134
Lee JH, Tammela T, Hofree M, et al. Anatomically and functionally distinct lung mesenchymal populations
marked by Lgr5 and Lgr6. Cell 2017; 170: 1149–1163.
135
McQualter JL, Yuen K, Williams B, et al. Evidence of an epithelial stem/progenitor cell hierarchy in the adult
mouse lung. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010; 107: 1414–1419.
136
Alder JK, Barkauskas CE, Limjunyawong N, et al. Telomere dysfunction causes alveolar stem cell failure. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2015; 112: 5099–5104.
137
Ng-Blichfeldt JP, de Jong T, Kortekaas RK, et al. TGF-β activation impairs fibroblast ability to support adult lung
epithelial progenitor cell organoid formation. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2019; 317: L14–L28.
138
Ng-Blichfeldt JP, Schrik A, Kortekaas RK, et al. Retinoic acid signaling balances adult distal lung epithelial
progenitor cell growth and differentiation. EBioMedicine 2018; 36: 461–474.
139
Gilpin SE, Wagner DE. Acellular human lung scaffolds to model lung disease and tissue regeneration. Eur Respir
Rev 2018; 27: 180021.
140
van der Velden JL, Wagner DE, Lahue KG, et al. TGF-β1-induced deposition of provisional extracellular matrix
by
tracheal
basal
cells
promotes
epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition
in
a
c-Jun
NH2-terminal
kinase-1-dependent manner. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2018; 314: L984–L997.
141
Wagner DE, Bonenfant NR, Sokocevic D, et al. Three-dimensional scaffolds of acellular human and porcine
lungs for high throughput studies of lung disease and regeneration. Biomaterials 2014; 35: 2664–2679.
142
Booth AJ, Hadley R, Cornett AM, et al. Acellular normal and fibrotic human lung matrices as a culture system
for in vitro investigation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2012; 186: 866–876.
143
Godin LM, Sandri BJ, Wagner DE, et al. Decreased laminin expression by human lung epithelial cells and
fibroblasts cultured in acellular lung scaffolds from aged mice. PLoS One 2016; 11: e0150966.
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0222-2020
12
LUNG REGENERATION | M.C. MELO-NARVÁEZ ET AL.

144
Parker MW, Rossi D, Peterson M, et al. Fibrotic extracellular matrix activates a profibrotic positive feedback loop.
J Clin Invest 2014; 124: 1622–1635.
145
Alsafadi HN, Uhl FE, Pineda RH, et al. Applications and approaches for three-dimensional precision-cut lung
slices. Disease modeling and drug discovery. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2020; 62: 681–691.
146
Martin C, Uhlig S, Ullrich V. Cytokine-induced bronchoconstriction in precision-cut lung slices is dependent
upon cyclooxygenase-2 and thromboxane receptor activation. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2001; 24: 139–145.
147
Akram KM, Yates LL, Mongey R, et al. Live imaging of alveologenesis in precision-cut lung slices reveals
dynamic epithelial cell behaviour. Nat Commun 2019; 10: 1178.
148
Burgstaller G, Vierkotten S, Lindner M, et al. Multidimensional immunolabeling and 4D time-lapse imaging of
vital ex vivo lung tissue. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2015; 309: L323–L332.
149
Lehmann M, Buhl L, Alsafadi HN, et al. Differential effects of nintedanib and pirfenidone on lung alveolar
epithelial cell function in ex vivo murine and human lung tissue cultures of pulmonary fibrosis. Respir Res 2018;
19: 175.
150
Woodcock HV, Eley JD, Guillotin D, et al. The mTORC1/4E-BP1 axis represents a critical signaling node during
fibrogenesis. Nat Commun 2019; 10: 6.
151
Alsafadi HN, Staab-Weijnitz CA, Lehmann M, et al. An ex vivo model to induce early fibrosis-like changes in
human precision-cut lung slices. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2017; 312: L896–L902.
152
Uhl FE, Vierkotten S, Wagner DE, et al. Preclinical validation and imaging of Wnt-induced repair in human 3D
lung tissue cultures. Eur Respir J 2015; 46: 1150–1166.
https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0222-2020
13
LUNG REGENERATION | M.C. MELO-NARVÁEZ ET AL.

===== Mescher1996_IntJDevBiol_UrodeleLimbRegeneration =====
Int. J. Dev. BinI. 40: 785-795
(1996)
785
The cellular
basis
of limb regeneration
in urodeles
ANTHONY L. MESCHER'
Medical Sciences Program, Indiana University School of Medicine, Bloomington,
Indiana, USA
ABSTRACT
Formation
of a regeneration
blastema
on the
amputated
urodele
limb
involves
changes
in the gene activity
of differentiated
cells resulting
in their histological
dedifferentiation
and
their
return
to a proliferative
state.
This review
summarizes
studies
in limb regeneration
and in the
related
fields
of tissue
repair
and
limb
development
that
provide
new
insights
into
regulatory
mechanisms
of likely importance
in establishing
the blastema.
Factors
required
for epithelialization
of the
wound
are
briefly
described,
followed
by what
is known
regarding
the
biochemistry
of
extracellular
matrix
remodeling
in the
regenerating
limb. Cellular
"dedifferentiation"
is discussed,
emphasizing
variations
in the
process
among
major
cell types
that
give
rise
to
the
blastema:
fibroblasts,
cells
of skeletal
tissue,
muscle
cells,
Schwann
cells,
and
vascular
endothelial
cells.
Attention
is drawn to evidence
that cells of connective
tissue
have a special
role in establishing
the pre-
pattern
of the
new
limb in the
early phase
of blastema
formation
and that
angiogenesis
may
be
controlled
differently
during
epimorphic
regeneration
than
in the process
of wound
repair.
Several
possible
sources
of the
mitogens
which
stimulate
cell cycle
re-entry
during
dedifferentiation
are
described,
as well as evidence
suggesting
the importance
in limb regeneration
of one such class
of
mitogens,
the fibroblast
growth
factors.
The trophic
effect
of nerves
required
for cells of dedifferen-
tiating
tissues
to progress
through
the
cell cycle
is summarized
briefly,
along
with
recent
work
suggesting
how this neural influence
is exerted.
Finally, the critical role of the wound
epithelium
in the
cellular events
forming
the blastema
and factors
that may mediate
the epithelial
effect are discussed.
KEY WORDS:
regeneration,
angiogenesis,
fibroblasts.
nervrs.
tran.~rnTin
Introduction
Urodeles
have
the
greatest
capacity
of all vertebrates
for
regeneration
of new body parts. This ability to regenerate
has been
described
for many organs,
including
lens, retina, intestine,
cardiac
ventricle,
upper and lower jaws, and tail, but the cellular
interac-
tions involved
have been most thoroughly
studied
in amputated
limbs
(see Stocum
in this issue).
All larval
amphibians
probably
have some ability to regenerate
appendages.
but the regenerative
capacity
in adults is restricted
to the order Urodela,
particularly
the
aquatic
newts and salamanders
(Wallace,
1981). The events that
lead
to perfect
replacement
for an amputated
body
part
have
fascinated
developmental
biologists
for centuries
(see Dinsmore
in
this issue),
but current
interest
in limb regeneration
can be attrib-
uted to the fact that it includes
basic aspects
of two very important
and
normally
distinct
developmental
processes:
post-traumatic
repair
of complex
tissues
and
limb formation
during
embryonic
development.
Research
on amphibian
limb regeneration
has pro-
vided insighls
into both of these processes.
This article will review the most important
cellular
changes
and
interactions
during
the
early
phases
of limb
regeneration
and
briefly summarize
the current
understanding
of how the reparative
events
occurring
initially
in the amputated
limb are extended
and
converted
into the .epimorphic.
process
that culminates
in a new
appendage.
Recent
studies
on mammalian
tissue
repair
and
embryonic
limb formation
are obviously
relevant
to an understand-
ing of limb regeneration,
and many inferences
from such work are
included
here. The evidence
that patterning
mechanisms
during
amphibian
limb regeneration
are similar
to those
in limb develop-
ment is reviewed
by Stocum
and by Bryant
in this issue.
What features
characterize
epithelialization
of the
wound?
Within
an hour of limb amputation
basal epidermal
cells at the
wound
edge
mobilize
by removing
desmosomes
and extending
pseudopodia
(Repesh
and Oberpriller.
1978, 1980). Migration
of
the
epithelial
sheet
from
the epidermis
across
the amputation
surface
depends
on
interactions
between
integrins
of
the
--
.1.blnrviatioT/\ liied in lhj~ papt-r: \\T,
wound
epithdium;
1.:C\I, extI,l<Tllular
matrix:
\I\IP,
matrix
metalloproteinase;
G:\'{;.
!o":"yco~lIninogl~c;tn;
I):\',
plasminoKen
aCliv<tlor; TI\II',
tif.f.II(' inhihitor
of Ilwtalloprotdnase;
TGF,
trallsforming
growth
factor;
F(;F, fihrohlast
growth
faCIoI'; \lRF,
myogenic
f('gulatory
factor;
let, inhibitor
of difkrt'ntiation:
GGF, glial growth
factor;
IGF. insulin-like
growth
factor;
A.lR. apical
e("(odermal
ridge.
'Address
for
reprints:
Medical
Sciences
Program,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Bloomington,
IN 47405, USA. FAX: 812.855-4436. e.mail:
mescher@indiana.edu
02] 4-6282/96/$03.00
Cl:BCPrtss
Printedi"Spain

786
A.L. Mescher
keratinocytes
with fibrin and fibronectin in the substrate (Donaldson
and
Mahan,
1983;
Donaldson
et al., 1989).
Such
epithelialization
occurs
much
more
rapidly
in newts
than
in humans, possibly
because
the
relevant
integrins
are
expressed
constitutively
in
keratinocytes
ot urodeles
(Donaldson
et al., 1995).
Wound
closure
is generally
complete
within
24 hours
of amputation.
The
newly
formed
epithelium
thickens
considerably
in the next few days due
to continued
keratinocyte
migration
and
proliferation,
forming
the
wound
epithelium
(WE) or apical
epithelial
cap
which
is critically
important
for limb regeneration.
Cells of the WE do not immediately
produce
a new basal lamina,
remaining
in direct
contact
with the fibrin meshwork
and with the
extracellular
matrix (ECM) and cells of the cut tissues (Repesh
and
Oberpriller,
1980). Ultrastructural
evidence
indicates
roles for this
epithelium
in extruding
inert material from the limb stump and in
phagocytosis
of fibrin and debris. This function,
along with removal
of bacteria,
is augmented
by the
action
01 macrophages
and
neutrophils
in the
injured
tissues
(Singer
and
Salpeter,
1961;
Repesh
and Oberpriller.
1980).
How is the extracellular
matrix remodeled?
Amputation
trauma
elicits a localized
process
similar
in some
respects
to inflammation
in the wound
healing
response
of other
vertebrates.
Blood loss is usually
minimal.
due apparently
to very
rapid vasoconstriction
and blood coagulation
in urodeles
(Schmidt,
1968), and edema
normally
occurs
tollowing
epithelial
closure
of
the amputation
surface.
Leukocytes
quickly
begin to accumulate
and prominent
among these are macrophages
associated
with the
injured
tissues,
the
WE,
and
the
subepithelial
space
(Schmidt,
1968).
Concomitant
with the arrival
of macrophages
is the onset
of
histolysis
and dissociation
of injured
muscle,
connective
tissue,
nerve sheaths,
skeletal
elements,
and other tissues.
As described
below,
constituent
cells
revert
to a mesenchymal,
embryonic
appearance
as collagen,
glycosaminoglycans
(GAGs) and other
extracellular
matrix material
of these tissues
are degraded.
Colla-
genolytic
activity
in the amputated
amphibian
limb was assayed
in
the pioneering
work
of Gross
(reviewed
by Stocum,
1995),
but
characterization
of specific
extracellular
enzymes
has only
re-
cently been accomplished.
Yang and Bryant (1994) demonstrated
that
activities
of five separate
gelatinases
or collagenases
are
elevated
in axolotl
limb tissues
during
regeneration.
The largest
and most rapid increase
occurs with a 90-kDa gelatinase
similar to
mammalian
matrix metalloproteinase
9 (MMP-9),
an enzyme
im-
portant for remodeling
ECM in many developmental
and neoplastic
events.
Formerly
considered
"the macrophage
gelatinase,"
MMP-
9 is now known to be secreted
by several fibroblastic
and epithelial
cells (reviewed
by Matrisian,
1992),
suggesting
multiple
sources
for the enzyme
in the limb stump. The increase
in urodele
MMP-9
activity
occurs
independently
of the WE and was also seen during
repair of nonlimb
tissues
(Yang
and
Bryant,
1994).
As in tissues of other vertebrates,
the inflammatory
response
in
urodele
limb stumps
is likely to involve
expression
of plasminogen
activators
(PAs) by macrophages
and other cells of the affected
tissue (reviewed by Dano et al., 1985; Matrisian and Hogan, 1990),
PA secretion leads to the rapid generation of plasmin, a non-
specific serine protease, in the interstitial fluid. Plasmin not only
readily degrades most extracellular proteins by itself, but also
--
TABLE 1
SECRETORY PRODUCTS OF MACROPHAGES
Representative
degradative
enzymes
plasminogen
activators
(tissue-
and urokinase-types)
matrix
metalloproteinases
for collagens
I. II, III, IV, and gelatin
elastase
lysozyme
hyaluronidase
cathepsins
B, L, H, N
amyloid
proteinase
lipoprotein
lipase
acid hydrolases
B-gatactosidase
l1-glucuronidase
acid phosphatases
sulfatases
amylase
Representative
growth
factors
and cytokines
fibroblast
growth
factors
platelet-derived
growth
factor
transforming
growth
factor-B
erythropoietin
granulocyte/monocyte
colony
stimulating
factOr
insulin-like
growth
factors
interleukins-l,
-6, -8
tumor
necrosis
factor
-0:
interferons
a, B. and r
From Adams and Hami!ton,
1992
activates
(by removal
of "pro" domains)
latent MMPs, including
collagenases
and stromelysins
with broad substrate
specificities.
Thus, the appearance
of plasmin produces
a cascade
of extracel-
lular proteolytic activities which, together with lysosomal enzymes
such as elastases
and cathepsins,
are capable
of degrading
both
fibrillar and nonfibrillar proteins
ot the ECM (Dan0
et al., 1985;
Matrisian, 1992). Table 1 lists otherdegradativeenzymes
secreted
by macrophages.
Histolysis normally occurs only in distal areas of the limb stump,
a restriction that may involve localization of the PAs to the surfaces
of macrophages
and other proteolytically active cells (reviewed by
Saksela and Rifkin, 1988). As discussed by Woessner
(1991),
proteolytic activity in the ECM is also regulated by local production
of
protease
inhibitors,
including
tissue
inhibitors
of
metalloproteinases (TIMPs), PA inhibitors, and other well-charac-
terized factors involved in mammalian tissue remodeling.More-
over, localized activation or secretion of regulatory factors such as
transforming growth factor-B (TGF-B), which repress MMP expres-
sion and elevate levels of TIMP and a PA inhibitor, may also help
restrict histolysis to distal tissues.
It is clear however that the accumulation of proliferating mesen-
chymal cells beneath the WE ultimately reverses the process of
tissue dissociation and intensifies production of new ECM during
tissue redifferentiation. This shift from degradation to synthesis of
ECM components is probably due to the activity of the various
growth factors that have been shown to regulate expression of
PAs, PA inhibitors, many metalloproteases, and TIMPs (reviewed
by Matrisian and Hogan, 1990). The wealth of data on the role of
such regulatory factors in the control of ECM remodeling during

mammalian development strongly suggests that similar roles for
these factors willbe found during the transition from histolysis to
growth in urodele limb stumps.
As collagen and other fibrillarproteins are degraded in distal
stump tissues,
multimeric
glycoproteins
of the ECM are removed
from
their
characteristic
locations
and
resynthesized
more
dif-
fusely.
This change
in the
concentration
and
location
of factors
important
for caU attachment
can be expected
to have
profound
effects on the adhesivity,
migration,
and proliferation
of the dedif-
ferentiating
cells
(reviewed
by
Raghow,
1994).
Fibronectin
is
removed
from
its normal
sites during
histolysis
(Repesh
et al.,
1982), but is expressed
by the WE and most mesenchymal
cells,
becoming
very abundant
throughout
the ECM during growth (Nace
and Tassava,
1995). Tenascin,
which
is restricted
primarily
to the
tendons,
periosteum
or perichondrium,
and
basal
epidermal gran-
ules in urodeles,
accumulates
like fibronectin
throughout
the ECM
during histolysis
and growth (Onda et al., 1990), being synthesized
by essentially
all the mesenchymal
cells
(Onda
et al.,
1991).
Laminin
disappears
as
basal
laminae
of muscle
fibers,
blood
vessels,
and
Schwann
cells
are
broken
down,
and
is not
resynthesized
until redifferentiation
(Gulati
et al., 1983).
Hyaluronan
is the principal
GAG produced
during the first phase
of regeneration.
Hyaluronan
synthesis
begins with the
onset
of
histolysis,
increases
rapidly, and continues throughout the period
of growth
(Mescher
and Munaim,
1986; Toole and Gross,
1971).
Unlike
the smaller
sulfated
GAGs,
which
are synthesized
and
attached
to core proteins
in the Golgi, hyaluronan
is elaborated
by
cell
membrane
enzyme complexes
and extruded
as
extremely
large polymers
directly
into the extracellular
space (Prehm,
1989).
Moreover,
production
of hyaluronan
is directly
linked to the cells'
proliferative
activity
(reviewed
by Toole,
1991).
In regenerating
limbs
hyaluronan
synthesis
is stimulated
by certain
mitogens
(Mescher
and Munaim,
1986) and by growing axons (Mescher
and
Cox,
1989).
Histochemical
studies
indicate
the
presence
of
hyaluronan
among the mesenchymal
cells (Mescher
and Munaim,
1986), in areas also rich in fibronectin
and tenascin
(Gulati
et al.,
1983; Onda et al., 1990), where its accumulation
may be correlated
with
increased
intercelluiar
space
(Mescher
and
Cox,
1988).
Based on work in other systems,
production
of hydrophilic
hyaluronan
in the limb stump is expected
to facilitate
celi migration
and
increase
the volume
of the growing
tissue
(Toole,
1991).
Synthesis
of chondroitin
sulfate and other uncharacterized
sulfated
GAGs also begins
during
histolysis,
but does not become
promi-
nent until the onset of redifferentiation
(Mescher
and Munaim,
1986).
How does the "dedifferentiation"
process
vary among
cell types in the limb?
Cells of limb tissues
undergoing
histolysis
and ECM remodeling
revert to a mesenchymal
appearance
in a process
referred
to as
"dedifferentiation."
Such
cells proliferate
and accumulate
beneath
the WE to form a growing
mass of cells, the blastema.
Although
they are relatively
homogeneous
cytologically,
blastema
cells are
derivedfrom different tissues, and heterogeneity can be detected
immunohistochemicallyusing monoclonalantibodiesas cellmark-
ers (reviewed
by Stocum,
1995).
The molecular
basis of dedifferentiation
is poorly
understood,
but this situation
may change rapidly with new understanding
of the
Cel/ular hasis oj limh regeneration
787
interplay
between proliferation and differentiation in mesenchymal
cell lineages,
particularlymyoblasts, at the molecular level. Certain
mitogens,
such as the fibroblast
growth factors
(FGFs),
have been
shown
to repress
myogenesis
by various
functionally
redundant
mechanisms:
by stimulating
phosphorylation
of myogenic
regula-
tory factors
(MRFs);
by inducing
expression
of the helix-loop-helix
protein Id (inhibitor
ofddferentiation)
which
inactivates MRFs; and
by inducing expression
of certain immediate
early
gene
products
that also repress
the effects
of MRFs
(reviewed
by Olson,
1992).
Mitogens
released
during
histolysis
in amputated
urodele
limbs
(see below) are likely therefore
to repress
differentiation
as weli as
elicit
proHferation
in cells
derived
from
muscle
and
other
tissues.
During
dedifferentiation
in newt
limb
stumps,
expression
of the
homeobox
gene msx-t
is strongly
upregulated,
and MRF-4
ex-
pression
in muscle
is turned
off until the onset
of myogenesis
in the
regenerate
(Simon et al., 1995). As discussed
below, msx-l
is also
expressed in the
mesenchyme
of embryonic
limb
buds
under
the
influence
of FGFs (Fallon
et al., 1994). Moreover,
expression
of Id
colocalizes
with that of msx-l
in the developing
limb (Muneoka
and
Sassoon,
1992).
Current
work
strongly
suggests
therefore
that
both
the
signaling
factors
and
the transcription
factors
involved
in
dedifferentiation
and
the
renewal
of cell cycling
in limb
regenera-
tion
are
similar
to those
controlling
the
balance
between
growth
and
differentiation
in limb
buds.
Classic
work
in limb
regeneration
using
grafts
of marked
tissue
suggests
that each tissue of the stump probably
contributes
most
of the
cells
for the
corresponding
tissue
in the
regenerate,
and,
despite
the embryonic
appearance
of blastema
cells, there is no
evidence that
extensive
metaplasia
or transdifferentiation
is in-
volved
in normal blastema development (reviewed by Wallace,
1981).
Because
crossover
among the major cell lineages
does not
appear
to be
widespread
during
normal
limb
regeneration,
it is
instructive
to
review
the
information
available
on
the
origin
of
blastema
cells from the individual
limb
tissues.
Fibrobtasts
Cells referred to collectively as fibroblasts populate connective
tissue in the dermis,
the sheaths of musclesand nerves, and the
outerlayers of large blood vessels.There isconsiderableevidence
that certain fibroblast
populations
make the most important
contri-
bution to the initial regeneration
blastema,
both quantitativelyand
qualitatively. Using a triploid axolotl cell marker, Muneoka et al.
(1986) found that cells from the dermis comprise nearly half of the
cell population in upper limb blastemas. This cellular contribution
to the blastema is more than twice that expected based on the
percentage
of dermal fibroblasts
in the total numberof
mesodermal
cells in the upper limb. The origin of the other blastema cells
counted by Muneoka et al. (1986) could not be determined, but
many of them are also likely to have arisen from stump connective
tissues
since the dermis
contains
only about
half of all fibroblasts
present in axolotl limbs at this level (Tank and Holder, 1979).
Schmidt (1968) compared the proliferation and migration of
fibroblasts in forming the early blastema to the immigration of these
celis in forming granulation
tissue during mammalian
tissue repair.
The significance
of the major fibroblast
contribution
to the blastema
is not completely
understood,
but it is clear from grafting
experi-
ments that cells of connective tissues are major determinants of
positional
information
during
regeneration
and
are
capable
of
position-dependent growth. Bryant et al. (1987) have reviewed

788
AL
Mescher
numerous
studies
on transplanted
dermis
and other limb tissues
which indicate that fibroblasts
alone have the capacity
to provoke
position-dependent formation of supernumerary
limbs. These
au-
thors have proposed
that fibroblasts
migrating
from stump connec-
tive tissues
to form the early
blastema
interact
with one another
according
to their positions,
giving
rise to an "outline"
of the limb
pattern
(Gardiner
et al., 1986; Bryant and Gardiner,
1989), While
establishing
the pattern for the new growth,
these cells would also
interact
with cells of the other lineages
in the limb stump to direct
their locations
and differentiative
pathways
during
histogenesis.
According
to this view,
the framework
of positional
information
produced
by fibroblasts
from the stump acts as a .scaffold"
for the
interaction
of other cell types as the distribution
of new tissues
in
the regenerate
is established
(Muneoka
and Sassoon,
1992).
Clear
evidence
for the self-organizational
capacity
of dermal
fibroblasts
comes from studies using axolotl limbs with X-irradiated
internal
tissues
and
grafted
normal
skin
(Holder,
1989).
Most
regenerates
from such limbs lacked musculature
either
completely
or partially,
but nevertheless
showed
a remarkably
normal pattern
of connective
tissue components,
including
skeleton,
retinaculae,
digital tendons
and aponeuroses.
Such work indicates
that dermal
fibroblasts
can autonomously
give
rise to all connective
tissue
components
in their proper
arrangement
and suggests
strongly
that such cells may playa
role in patterning
other tissues
during
regeneration.
Vascular
endothelial
cells
Chalkley
(1954)
obselVed
that
blood
vessels
of the
newt
limb
stump contribute
very few cells to the early regeneration
blastema.
Arteries,
veins,
and
capillaries
in the
distal
area
of the
stump
dissociate
during
the histolytic
phase
of regeneration,
with blood
flow restricted
to more proximal
regions.
Histological
analyses
and
vascular
injection
studies with adult and larval urodele
limbs agree
that the distal preblastemic
area of dedifferentiated
cells and the
early
blastema
are essentially
free
of functional
blood
vessels
(Peadon
and Singer,
1966; Iten and Bryant,
1973; Revardel
and
Chapron,
1975; Smith
and Wolpert,
1975). The work of Peadon
and Singer
(1966)
indicates
that capillaries
do not begin to pen-
etrate proximal
regions of the dedifferentiated
zone until a growing
blastema
is well-formed
(Fig. 1). Vascular
ingrowth
begins periph-
erally near the skin of the stump, then gradually
continues
toward
the center
of the blastema.
The distal
region
near the WE is not
vascularized
until the cone stage of blastemal
growth.
The
relationship
between
the
vascular
supply
and
cellular
survival and growth has been studied extensively
in tumors, where
it is well-established
that growth
beyond
a specific
size does not
continue
without
invasion
of capillaries
from surrounding
tissue.
It
is estimated
that no cell in a rapidly
growing
tumor
is more than
about
100 ~m from the nearest
capillary
(reviewed
by Blood and
Zetter,
1990;
Sutherland,
1988).
Extensive
angiogenesis
also
characterizes
normal tissue repair in mammals,
transiently
forming
more
capillaries
than
were
present
in the
uninjured
tissue
to
support
the demands
of the
healing
process
for nutrients
and
oxygen (revs. Niinikoski,
1980; Arnold and West, 1991). Embryonic
limb buds have well-developed
capillary
networks
surrounded
by
a subectodermal
zone
of avascular
mesenchyme
(reviewed
by
Caplan,
1985).
Given
the importance
of angiogenesis
for tissue
growth,
the
early period of limb regeneration,
in which distal areas most active
in cell
proliferation
remain
poorly
vascularized
and
sprouting
---
--
A
v,b,),
B
a,b.p_
Fig. 1. Drawings
of whole-mount
preparations
of dye-injected
and
cleared
regenerates
of adult
newt forelimbs.
reproduced
with slight
modification
from
Pea don
and
Singer
(19661.
The scale is approximate
and abbreviations
are: a.b.p., artery brachialis
profunda;
v.b.i., vein brachialis
lateralis. (AI Regenerate
of right limb at {ate dedifferentiation
stage
(lten
and Bryant
1973). tilted anterior
view, showing
blood vessels in the wound
area arranged
as the rim around
a central
.crater.
of avascular
tissue.
The
apparent
crater is filled with dedlfferentiared
mesenchymal
rissue and is
capped
by a thickened
wound
eplrhelium.
(8)
Regenerate
of left
11mb in
early
bud srage
(lten
and Bryant,
1973), flat anterior
view,
showing
the
avascular
blastema
and the edge of the rim of vessels
at the approximate
level of amputation.
Vascular sprouting
into proximal
levels of the blastema
has begun
at this stage bur is not visible
from
this angle.
capillaries
appear to "avoid" the rapidly growing blastema (Peadon
and Singer,
1966),
appears
to be somewhat
unusual.
The blast-
ema
is however
well-supplied
with
regenerating
axons
which
emerge
from nelVes in the stump,
course throughout
the mesen-
chymal tissue and penetrate
the overlying
epithelium
(reviewed
by
Singer,
1952).
As described
below,
these
axons
are critical
for
blastemal
cell proliferation,
and recent
studies
indicate
that they
can supply
growth
requirements
that are otherwise
provided
via
capillaries
(reviewed
by Mescher,
1992). Release oftrophic
factors
from axons, together
with the respiratory
exchange
across the skin
of aquatic
urodeles,
may explain the ability of the early blastema
to
grow rapidly
in the absence
of a blood supply.
Why
the early
blastema
does
not become
vascularized
like
tissues
undergoing
simple repair is not known. Given the apparent
similarities
between
the
initial
period
after
amputation
and the
inflammatory
phase of mammalian
wound
healing,
such as immi-

gration
of leukocytes
and remodeling
of the ECM, it is likely that
various factors
are released
in injured stump
tissues
that would
normally
stimulate
capillary
ingrowth
(reviewed
by Sunderkotter
et
al., 1994). Yet angiogenesis
is delayed
until the blastema
is well
formed. The failure of capillaries
to grow immediately
into dediffer-
entiating
tissues
could
involve
localized
accumulation
of hyaluronan
during
this period.
It is known
that
hyaluronan
inhibits
proliferation
of vascular
endothelial
cells
even
in the
presence
of angiogenic
factors
(Arnold
and West,
1991) and that local concentrations
of
hyaluronan are important in determining where blood vessels form
during limb ontogeny
(Brand-Saberi
et al., 1995). However,
control
of capillary
growth during tissue repair involves a complex
interplay
of signaling
factors
and
several
ECM components,
with
a fine line
apparently
separating
angioinhibition
and angiogenesis
(reviewed
by POlverini, 1994).
It is not surprising given the elementary state
of knowledge of such processes
in mammalian
tissues
that nothing
is known of these activities
in urodele repair or regeneration.
Delayed
angiogenesis
of distal areas during the early phase of
limb regeneration
could
be important
for subsequent
epimorphic
growth. The processes
of dedifferentiation,
reformation
of the ECM
to facilitate cellular
migration,
and
Npatterning"
interactions
among
the cells of the early blastema
may involve changes
incompatible
with endothelial cell differentiation. The result would be inhibition of
capillary
ingrowth
until the cellular
migration
and
interactions
required to produce the regeneration blastema are accomplished.
Cells of skeletal
tissue
Following
amputation
the
bones
in adult
urodeles
and
the
cartilaginous
elements
of larval limbs are slowly eroded
at the cut
site by monocyte-derived
osteoclastsormacrophages.
Osteocytes
and chondrocytes
thus freed from their lacunae
may contribute
to
the blastema I population,
but probably
only to a minimal
extent
(Muneoka
et al., 1986). Instead,
the majority
of cells that give rise
to skeletal tissue in the new limb
appear to arise from precursor
cells in the periosteum
or perichondrium
(Chalkley,
1954; Hay and
Fischman,
1961). These
tissues
undergo
less complete
destruc-
tion than the skeletal matrix and release cells that proliferate and
migrate
into the blastema.
As blastema
growth
proceeds
distally,
these cells aggregate
and differentiate
as chondroblasts
to form
proximal
cartilaginous
elements
continuous
with
the
cartilage
or
bone in the stump. In adults cartilage
elements
of the new limb are
gradually
replaced
by ossification
to produce
typical
bones.
Under
experimental
conditions
other cells of the
limb can
produce cartilage in the regenerate.
If the humerus is removed
prior
to amputation
through
the upper
arm,
skeletal
tissue
is
present
in the regenerated
limb but is not reformed
in regions
proximal
to the level of amputation.
In this situation
chondroblasts
producing
the new skeleton
apparently
arise from "fibroblasts"
in
various
connective
tissues,
including
the
dermis
(Dunis
and
Namenwirth,
1977). Similarly,
Holder (1989) has shown that cells
of unirradiated
dermis
grafted
onto X-irradiated
limb stumps
can
give rise to the complete
skeleton
of the regenerate.
It appears
therefore
that in the absence
of viable
skeletal
elements
in the
stump, other
connective
tissue
cells
acquire
the
ability
during
Mdedifferentiation"
to become
chondroblasts
in the
blastema.
Muscle
cells
Myogenic cells of the blastema are clearly derived from the
stump musculature. possibly from the multinucleated fibers as well
as from a population of muscle progenitor cells (Stocum, 1995).
-
--
Cellular
basis of limb regeneration
789
Histological
analyses
suggested
that the proliferating
myogenic
cells
arise
from
Mmononucleated
fragmentsM
of dissociating
muscle
fibers
(Thornton,
1968; Hay and Fischman,
1961),
but Schmidt
(1968)
seriously
questioned
this
interpretation
of the
data
on
technical
grounds.
Recent
evidence
in favor
of this hypothesis
has
been reported
by Lo et al. (1993) who doubly labeled multinucleate
myotubes
derived
from
newt
limbs
in vitro with
3H-thymidine
and
fluorescent
dextran.
After pelleting
and implanting
the myotubes
into limb stumps,
individual
doubly-labeled
cells could be detected
histologically
days later in the blastemas,
primarily
in the mesen-
chyme
around
the central
chondrogenic
mass.
Label
did not persist
through
the period
of muscle
fiber
redifferentiation.
The
results
suggest
that partially
differentiated
myotubes
from newt cells can
revert
to myoblasts,
which
is consistent
with
the concept
that
multinucleated
muscle
fibers
dedifferentiate
and
give
rise to myo-
genic
cells
during
limb
regeneration.
Hinterberger
and
Cameron
(1990)
have
reviewed
evidence
indicating
that
muscle
of the
regenerated
limb
also
develops
from
myogenic
reserve
cells
resembling
satellite
cells,
which
are
the
primary
source
of
new
myotubes
during
muscle
repair
in other
vertebrates.
These
putative
reserve
cells
could
be
selectively
labeled with 3H-thymidine
in ex planted
newt limb muscle and their
progeny
traced during their fusion into myotubes
(Cameron
et al.,
1986). The observation
that such myotubes
are also labeled
with
a monoclonal
antibody specific for both blastema cells and myoblasts
further
supports
the hypothesis
that cells similar
to satellite
cells
can contribute
to the myogenic
population
of the blastema.
Schwann
cells
Axonsfrom nerves
in the limb stump grow profusely throughout
the developing blastema. The general dissociation of the injured
tissues
includes
the nerves,
with breakdown
of the connective
tissue
layers
and
loss of the
myelin
sheaths
covering
axons.
Macrophages
that
invade
the dissociating
nerves
become
en-
gorged with lipid as they engulf myelin during dedifferentiation ot
the Schwann cells. Dedifferentiated Schwann cells and fibroblasts
of nerves proliferate (Hay and Fischman, 1961) and contribute
cells to the blastema (Chalkley, 1954), but probably remain asso-
ciated with the regenerating
axons and begin to form myelin again
in nerves of the stump once the blastema is formed (Schmidt,
1968). Cells identified as Schwann cells through useof a monoclonal
antibody marker are first
seen only in proximal
regions of the
blastema
in adult newts (Ferretti
and Brockes,
1991).
How is cell proliferation
re-initiated?
Duringhistolysis and dissociation
of stump tissues,
cells that will
migrate distally and contribute to the blastema either re-enter the
cell cycle or, in the case of larval limbs, increase
their rate of cell
cycling. Classic
work demonstrated
that proliferation
is an integral
part of cellular dedifferentiation in the urodele limb stump, and
recent
research
has provided
important
insights into how cellular
activities
leading
to either
differentiation
or proliferation
can be
regulated.
As discussed
earlier,
investigations
of lineage-specific
transcription
factors
such
as those
of the
MyoD
family
have
indicated
several
mechanisms
by which activation
or maintenance
of a differentiation program is opposed by signaling pathways
triggered by mifogenic polypeptides (reviewed by Olson, 1992).
The production of additional probes for urodele homologues of
such regulatory factors can be expected to lead to rapid progress in
-
-
-
--

-----
790
A.L. Mescher
understanding
the dedifferentiation
process
in limb regeneration.
The
renewal
of cell
proliferation
during
dedifferentiation
is
triggered
by the injury and
does
not depend
on the tissue
interac-
tions
required
to produce
the regeneration
blastema.
The percent-
age of cells replicating
DNA during the first few days after amputa-
tion is not affected
by removal
of either the nerve supply
(Tassava
et al., 1974; Mescher
and Tassava,
1975;
Maden,
1978)
or the
WE (Mescher,
1976;
Loyd and Tassava,
1980).
Specific
factors
stimulating
the
onset
of proliferation
in the
limb stump
have
not
been
identified,
but work on mammalian
tissue
repair
suggests
that
several
sources
for such
mitogens
will be found.
First,
various
mitogenic
factors
are
released
during
blood
co~
agulation,
including
members
of at least
three
growth
factor
fami-
lies released
during
platelet
degranulation,
and
kinins,
which
are
derived
directly
from plasma
kininogen
within seconds
of extrava-
sation
(Dvorak
et al.,
1988).
Kinins
have
been
proposed
as a
stimulus
for the transient
rise in inositol
phosphate
levels
that
occurs
in cells
at the site of injury
during
the first five minutes
postamputation
in larval
axolotl
limbs
(Tsonis
et al., 1991).
The
injury-triggered
increase
in inositol
triphosphate,
an important
component
for intracellular
signaling,
may be critical
for subse-
quent
mitogenesis
or other initial activities
in regeneration,
since
inhibiting
this
increase
with
beryllium
ion administered
for five
minutes
or less at amputation
also blocks regeneration
(Thornton,
1968; Tsonis
et al., 1991).
Growth
factors
are also stored
within
the ECM or in cells and
are released
during
matrix
breakdown
and cell injury,
becoming
available
to promote
the
proliferative
aspects
of tissue
repair
(reviewed
by Raghow,
1994).
FGFs
and other
heparin-binding
growth
factors are concentrated
at pericellular
matrix
sites con-
taining
heparan
sulfate
proteoglycans
throughout
connective
tissues
and basal laminae.
Degradation
of matrix proteins
during
inflammation
releases
FGF bound
to heparan
sulfate
to trigger
growth
in neighboring
cells. That exogenous
FGF can stimulate
growth
of blastema
cells
has been
known
for many
years
(re-
viewed
by Gospodarowicz
and
Mescher,
1980).
Bailly
el al.
(1991)
have
reported
the presence
of FGF-1
in extracts
of both
mesenchyme
and WE from young axolotl blastemas.
Immunohis-
tochemistry
using
either
antisera
against
bovine
FGF-1
(Bailly,
1989) or against
a synthetic
decapeptide
representing
the amino
terminal
of FGF-2
(Mescher,
unpublished)
indicates
the diffuse
presence
of this factor
on cells and in the ECM throughout
the
blastema,
the WE, and in proximal
tissues
of the limb.
Using in
situ
hybridization
on
sections
of
newt
blastemas,
Poulin
at
al.
(1993) demonstrated
that the receptor
specific
for FGF-1, -2, and
-4 is expressed
in all mesenchymal
cells, while cells of the WE and
perichondrium
express
a receptor
specific
for FGF-1 and FGF-7
(keratinocyte
growth
factor).
Collectively
these
data
strongly
suggest
that FGFs have important
roles as mitogens
or regulators
of other activities
during
regeneration.
A third
source
of growth
factors
during
the initiation
of limb
regeneration
is likely to be the macrophages
infiltrating
distal areas
of the limb stump.
In addition
to secreting
enzymes,
many of which
degrade
ECM components
and release
matrix-bound
mitogens,
mammalian
macrophages
are one of the most important
sources
of growth factors in wound repair(reviewed
by Rappolee
and Werb,
1992).
Some
macrophage-derived
growth
factors
are
listed
in
Table 1. Although
this has not been examined
in urodeles,
similar
roles for macrophages
can be expected
in the amputated
limb.
Many of the polypeptide
growth
factors
released
from platelets,
After amputation,
release
or mitogenic
factors
from:
Other
growth
rrquirements
from:
+
'growing
axons
- plasma
-other
sources
-macrophages
-platelets
'ECM
- injured
cells
- otber
sources
..
Growth and repair
of injured limb
tissues+
Factors
from
Wound
Epithelium..
Development
of blastema
for epimorpbic
limb regeneration
(cell migration,
positional
determinations,
proximo-
distal growth and differentiation)
Fig. 2. Sources
of growth-promoting
factors
for tissue
repair
and
blastema
growth
after amputation
of urodele
limbs.
the ECM, injured cells, and macrophages have been shown to
stimulate proliferation
in the same target cells. The fact that
growth factors with apparently overlapping mitogenic effects are
released from many sources during inflammation may reflect the
adaptive value of such redundancy in promoting reliable and
efficient wound repair during the evolution of multicellular ani-
mals.
How do nerves
provide
their
trophic
effect?
That urodefe
limb regeneration
requires
an adequate
supply of
nerves in the appendage
has long been known. Work reviewed
by
Singer (1952, 1978) shows that any type of nerve can support
limb
regeneration
and that
nerves
affect
only
mitotic
activity
in the
blastema,
not pattern
formation
or histogenesis.
As indicated
above,
nerves
are not required
for dedifferentiation
of cells in the
stump.
Moreover,
once
a sufficiently
large
blastema
has been
formed
and redifferentiation
has begun proximally,
nerves can be
removed
and formation
of a new limb will nevertheless
proceed
(reviewed
by Singer, 1952). Results from a wide variety of studies
indicate
the growth-promoting
activity
is mediated
by protein(s)
transported
and released
from axons
(reviewed
by Carlone
and
Mescher,
1985; Wallace,
1981).
Regeneration
of limb buds and
"aneurogenic"
limbs (discussed
below)
suggest
that synthesis
of
the protein
is widespread
in the embryo
and
is not unique
to
nervous
tissue
(Singer,
1978). The trophic
factor(s)
has not been
purified
nor its gene cloned,
primarily
due to the lack of a simple
and reproducible
bioassay
for the effect on blastemal
growth.

Important
information
about
the
nature
of the neural
agent
emerged from
work designed to elucidate
more clearly the nerve-
dependent
activities
in the cell cycle (reviewed
by Tassava
el al.,
1987).
If adult
or larval
forelimbs
are completely
denervated
by
nerve transection
near the
brachial
plexus,
either
at the
time
of
amputation
or a few days earlier to allow complete elimination of
axonal factors,
tissue
dedifferentiation
still occurs
and
a normal
percentage
of cells
re-enter
the cell cycle
and
incorporate
3H_
thymidine
(Mescher
and Tassava,
1975; Maden,
1978). However
the onset of mitotic activity is severely
inhibited in such limb stumps
and no blastema
forms.
DNA microspectrophotometry
indicates
that the
3H-thymidine
incorporation
does
represent
replication
rather than repair and that cells do not accumulate in either G1 or
G2 (Le., with either 2C or 4C DNA content)
(Mescher
and Tassava,
1975;
Loyd
and
Connelly,
1981).
The
data
suggest
that
the
dedifferentiated
cells fail to progress
through the S phase of the cell
cycle. The lack of mitotic activity followed
by the apparent
removal
of dedifferentiated
cells in amputated
larval limbs results
in mor-
phological
resorption
of the limb if the denervated
state
is main-
tained (reviewed
by Singer,
1952), although
the fate of cycling cells
in limbs
denervated
at amputation
remains
unknown.
When
denervation
is delayed
until the late bud or cone stage of regenera-
tion,
blastema
cells
complete
mitosis
and
accumulate
in the
G1
phase of the cell cycle (Maden,
1979; Loyd and Connelly,
1981).
Taken together
the blastema
cell cycle studies suggest
that the
neural
effect
on cell proliferation
in the early,
nerve-dependent
phase of regeneration
involves
substances
needed
to sustain
cell
cycling,
rather than mitogens triggering
cells to enter the cycle. This
is consistent
with
Singer's
(1978)
conclusion,
after
reviewing
the
effects
of denervation
on metabolic
and
synthetic
activity
in blast-
ema
cells,
that
nerves
affect
the
rate
of cellular
activity
without
directly
influencing
gene expression
or the nature of what the cells
are doing.
Muneoka
et al. (1989)
reviewed
other aspects
of the
neural effect on blastema
growth and concluded
that axons do not
release a factor
that
regufatescell
proliferation,
but provide
one
or
more
growth
requirements
necessary
for proliferation-competent
cells to progress
through
the cell cycle.
The
trophic
effect
of nerves
has
been
proposed
to involve
various
mitogenic
factors
associated
with this tissue,
such
as FGFs
(Gospodarowicz
and Mescher,
1980) and glial growth factor (GGF;
Brockes
and Kintner,
1986).
FGF-'
is abundantly
expressed
in
both sensory
and motor neurons
(Elde et a/., 1991), but whether
it
is transported
and
secreted
are
not known
(reviewed
by Mason,
1994).
Members
of the neuregulin
family,
including
GGF,
have
been
shown
to have
various
activities
in developing
nerves
(Jo et
al., 1995). Present
understanding
of the roles of neural FGFs and
neuregulins
is very
primitive,
and
it is unclear
whether
the func-
tional
repertoire
of these
signaling
proteins
includes
the permissive
or nutritive trophic
effect suggested
by analyses
of nerve-depend-
ent blastema
activities
(Muneoka
et al., 1989).
Moreover,
since
several
mitogenic
factors
including
FGFs
are thought
to be re-
leased
in the early
regenerate
from
multiple
sources,
it is not clear
how axonal
release
of additional,
redundant
mitogens
could lead
to the dependence on nerves for blastema growth.
Peripheral
nerves, particularly
regenerating
nerves, also con-
tain high concentrations
of nonregulatory trophic factors required
to sustain cell proliferation, such as insulin-like growth factors I and
II (IGF-I, -II) (Hansson,
1993) and transferrin
(Oh and Markelonis,
1984). Such proteins
are also abundant
in plasma
and are deliv-
ered to cells by capillaries,
although
the IGFs are also paracrine
--
Cel/ular
basis of limb regelleratioll
791
factors
synthesized
by many cells in injured
tissue
(reviewed
by
Sara and Hall,
1990).
We have suggested
that release
of such
proteinsfrom regenerating
axons
is important
for local cell prolif-
eration
in avascular
tissues
with
limited
access
to plasma-derived
factors (Mescher
and Munaim,
1988; Mescher,
1992). Dedifferen-
tiated
cells
in the
distal
amphibian
limb
stump
and
the
early
blastema
would
be expected
to have reduced
access
to plasma
proteins
because
of the
avascularity
and
proteolytic
extracellular
environment
in these
tissues.
Axonal
transport
and
release
of
plasma
factors
required
for growth
would
explain
both
the
nerve-
dependence
of proliferation
in the early
regenerate
and the re-
duced
neural dependence
for growth
during
the late bud or cone
stage,
when
proteolysis
is inhibited
and vascularization
is underway
throughout
the blastema.
An absolute
requirement
for growth
of all animal
cells,
transfer-
rin is an 80
kDa
plasma
protein
that
transports
two
atoms
of ferric
iron.
Iron is obtained
by cells
via receptor.
mediated
endocytosis
of
transferrin,
which
is
followed
by
recycling
and
release
of
apotransferrin
capable
of further
rounds
of iron
binding
and
deliv-
ery. Uptake of ferric iron is absolutely
necessary
for cell prolifera-
tion,
primarily
because
this
metal
is required
as
a cofactor
for
activity
of ribonucleotide
reductase,
the
rate-limiting
enzyme
for
DNA
replication,
and
for synthesis
of mitochondrial
cytochromes
(reviewed
by Kuhn
et al., 1990).
In early
embryos
transferrin
is
synthesized
locally
and
supplied
in
an
autocrine
or
paracrine
manner
to cells of many developing
organs,
but as development
proceeds
production
becomes
increasingly
restricted
to the yolk
sac and
liver and
to specific
cells
with
"trophic"
functions
in organs
having
blood-tissue
barriers,
e.g.,
Sertoli
cells,
glial
cells
and
ependyma
(Welch,
1992).
Several
laboratories
have shown
that
transferrin is abundant in peripheral nerves (reviewed by Mescher
and Munaim,
1988).
Inhibiting
uptake
of
iron-transferrin
by
growing
cells
in
vitro
causes
the
cells
to
arrest
rapidly
in a manner
similar
to
that
observed
with celis of denervated
early blastemas: in the S or G4
phases
of the cell
cycle
(Kuhn
et al.,
1990).
The
presence
01
transferrin
in peripheral
nerves and the similarity between
this
factor's
role
in cell
proliferation
and
the
neural
influence on blast-
ema cell growth have prompted
several tests of the hypothesis
that
transferrin mediates the nerve's
effect
in regeneration.
Transferrin is present in neurons and Schwann cells of axolotl
sciatic nerves and becomes
concentrated
over 20-fold inthe nerve
during
limb regeneration
(Kiffmeyer
et al., 1991). As predicted
for
the trophic factor, transferrin
undergoes
anterograde
fast transport
in axons
and is released
distally
at growth cones
(Mescher
and
Kiffmeyer,
1992).
Denervation
results in a 50%
reduction
of the
transferrin
content in the distal half of the
blastema,
concomitant
with the decrease
in proliferative
activity
(Kiffmeyer
et al., 1991).
The blastema growth-promoting
activity
of brain
tissue
extracts
in
vitro,
investigated
by several
laboratories
(Carlone
and
Mescher,
1985),
is completely
lost by removing
either
iron
(Munaim
and
Mescher,
1986) or transferrin
(Mescher
and Connell,
unpublished)
and is completely
restored
by their readdition.
Urodele
limbs that develop
in the absence
of the nerve supply
nonetheless regenerate, paradoxically, after amputation (reviewed
by Wallace,
1981). limb
buds aiso regenerate
with a nerve supply
much smaller
than
that
normally
needed
to promote
blastema
growth,
suggesting
that the factor(s)
which nerves
provide
during
limb regeneration
is already
present
locally
in the embryonic
limb
(Singer,
1978). One explanation
for regeneration
of "aneurogenic"
--

792
A.L Mescher
limbs therefore
is that cells of these
limbs. unlike those of normal
limbs. continue to produce
the required factor(s). We have found
that transferrin
is synthesized
in developing
limbs
and that this
synthesis
is important
for the regenerative
ability
of such
limbs
(Mescher,
Overton
and Clarkson,
in preparation).
Experiments
are
currently
in progress
to test
the
hypothesis
that
endogenous
transferrin
production
is involved
in the regenerative
capacity
of
aneurogenic
limbs.
The evidence
reviewed
briefly here makes transferrin
an excel-
lent candidate
for a factor mediating
the neural effect on blastema
growth.
IGF-I, another
trophic
factor
stimulating
cellular
metabo-
lism and cell cycle
progression,
is also transported
in peripheral
nerves (Hansson,
1993) and may be important
in limb
regeneration
if released
from growing
axons
and not otherwise
available
in the
blastema. Moreover, since information about intercellular signaling
during dedifferentiation
and blastema growth is currently almost
non-existent,
the possibility
remains
that other mitogenic
or regu-
latory factors
released
by axons
may also play growth-promoting
roles.
What role does the wound epithelium play in blastema
formation?
The tissue interaction
that is perhaps
most critical for epimorphic
regeneration
and which is unique to urodeles
among adult amphib-
ians is the effect exerted
by the WE on the underlying
mesenchy-
mal
cells.
This
epithelial
influence
changes
the course
of the
proliferative
activity
in the injured
tissues
of the amputated
limb
from a process
of repair to one of epimorphic
regeneration.
The WE
causes
cells
to proliferate
more
extensively
than
required
for
simple repair (Mescher,
1976) and to accumulate
distally
beneath
the epithelium
(Thornton,
1968).
In many
respects
this effect
is
similar to that of the apical ectodermal
ridge (AER) in producing
a
progress
zone for mesenchymal
outgrowth
during
ontogenic
limb
development.
Secretion
of FGFs
has been
strongly
implicated
in the AER
effect.
Both '9'-2 (Savage
et al.. 1993) and Igl-4 (Niswander
et al.,
1993) are expressed
in chick AERs,
and exogenous
applications
of FGF-2 (Fallon
et al., 1994) or FGF-4
(Niswander
et al., 1993)
support
continued
growth
and
development
of limb
buds
after
removal
of the AER.
Niswander
and
Martin
(1993)
found
with
mouse limb buds that other FGFs also supported
growth after ridge
removal.
FGF-2 application
has also been shown to allow regen-
eration
of complete
limbs
in buds amputated
at the prospective
zeugopodium
(Taylor
et al., 1994).
Fallon et al. (1994) have shown further that FGF-2, like the AER,
also
promotes
expression
of
the
homeobox
gene
msx-l
in
neighboring
mesenchymal
cells
of the
limb
bud.
Msx-l
is ex-
pressed
in various
embryonic
regions where ectoderm
and meso-
derm interact to produce
progress
zones of proliferating
cells. FGF-
4 in combination
with
retinoic
acid also activates
expression
of
polarizing
signals such as sonic hedgehog,
which induces expres-
sion of other signaling
factors such as bone morphogenetic
protein
4 in mesoderm
and
FGF-4
in ectoderm.
The
data
suggest
the
existence
of a positive
feedback
loop operating
between
cells of
the mesenchyme
and the overlying
AER to coordinate
patterning
events with growth
in the limb bud (Laufer
et al., 1994; Niswander
et al., 1994). The chick AER also induces synthesis
of IGF-I mRNA
in the subridge
mesenchyme,
an effect that may also be produced
by epithelial
FGFs (Dealy
and Kosher,
1995).
Similar
mechanisms
involving
FGFs are likely to operate
be-
tween the WE and blastema
mesenchyme
in urodele
limb regen-
eration.
Immunoreactive
FGF is clearly
present
in the WE (Boilly,
1989; Mescher,
unpublished)
and implants
of FGF-2
have been
shown to maintain
full mitotic activity of dedifferentiated
cells in the
absence
of the WE (Chew and Cameron,
1983). Exogenous
FGF-
2 also stimulates
hyaluronan
secretion
by dedifferentiated
newt
limb cells (Mescher
and Munaim,
1986) and by mesenchymal
cells
of Chick limb buds (Munaim el al., 1991). Stimulation
of a hyaluronan-
rich matrix in adjacent
mesenchyme
thus represents
a mechanism
by which
epithelial
FGF could positively
influence
cellular
migra-
tory activity in addition to the effect on proliferation.
Moreover,
both
mesenchymal
cells of limb buds (Muneoka
and Sassoon,
1992)
and blastemas
(Crews et al.. 1995; Simon et al., 1995) express
the
msx-1 homeobox
gene and downregulate
expression
of myogenic
factors during the period of limb outgrowth.
In the chick distribution
of msx-1 transcripts
is initially widespread
throughout
the limb bud,
but soon becomes
restricted
to the region underlying
the ridge. By
analogy
with the AER
(Fallon
et al., 1994), msx-l
expression
in
dedifferentiating
cells
and their progeny
in the blastema
is also
likely to be controlled
by FGFs derived
from the WE.
As discussed
by Simon
et al. (1995),
msx-1
expression
in
embryonic
progress
zones
including
that of limb buds overlaps
expression
of Id, which
represses
activity
of myoD-like
transcrip-
tion factors and inhibits
myogenesis.
Signaling
factors
of the FGF
family
secreted
by the
WE
may
therefore
not
only
positively
regulate
cell proliferation,
but also induce expression
of transcrip-
tion factors
which
prevent
redifferentiation
and maintain
the -de-
differentiated"
state.
The
ability
of urodeles
to heal
amputated
limbs with epithelia
functionally
similar
to the AER of vertebrate
limb buds is clearly of key importance
in their capacity forepimorphic
regeneration.
Conclusions
Twenty
years
ago Tassava
and Mescher
(1975)
summarized
existing information
on the cellular interactions
leading to blastema
formation
in terms of the cell cycle. Dedifferentiation
and the onset
of proliferation
in injured tissues
of the limb stump were shown to
be effects
of the injury
alone.
The
requirement
for nerves
was
proposed
to involve axon ally released factor(s) that allowed growth-
competent
cells to progress
through
the cell cycle and complete
mitosis. The role of the WE in this model was to promote continued
proliferation
leading
to a blastema
and
to prevent
cells
from
redifferentiating
in a process
of tissue
repair.
New
knowledge
acquired
on several
fronts,
particularly
on the signaling
roles of
polypeptide
growth
factors during
tissue repair and limb develop-
ment,
has not only validated
this model
but has also elucidated
mechanisms
which could constitute
the molecular
basis of blast-
ema formation.
The major sources
of factors
important
for regen-
eration
are summarized
in Figure 2.
Studies
of tissue
repair
indicate
that macrophages
arriving
at
the site of injury are critically
important
for subsequent
repair, and
one can predict that similar roles will be found for these cells in the
initial
events
of limb
regeneration.
Macrophages
are
a major
source of enzymes
and regulatory
facfors through
which the ECM
of injured tissue is remodeled
in a controlled
manner,
as well as an
important
source
of growth
factors.
Mitogens
with activity
appar-
ently
redundant
to
those
secreted
by
macrophages
are
also
released from platelets,
injured cells, and the ECM. Remodelling
of

the ECM and the onset of cell proliferation
and migration
lead to the
mesenchymal
appearance
of distal limb stump tissues.
New
work
on the molecular
basis of myogenesis
indicates
that mitogens
also
induce expression
of transcription
factors which inhibit differentiative
activity
at the level of the gene.
The WE, which
is functionally
similar
to the embryonic
AER
(Stocum,
1995), is likely to promote
continued
cycling
and inhibit
redifferentiation
in neighboring
cells by production
of FGF signaling
factors which maintain
localized
expression
of transcription
factors
such
as msx-1.
The distal
progress
zone
established
under
the
influence
of the WE remains
avascular
throughout
the period
of
blastema
growth.
This avascularity,
possibly
abetted
byextracel-
lular protease
activity,
may lead to the dependence
on local nerves
for factors
needed
by blastema
cells to complete
the cell cycle.
Axons
regenerating
in the blastema
are an abundant
source
of
transferrin,
a requirement
for
cell
cycle
progression
normally
provided by capillaries.
The
first
cells in the blastema I progress zone appear to be
fibroblasts
migrating
from
dermis
and other
connective
tissues.
These cells are important
repositories
of positional
information
and
interactfo
establish the pre pattern or "scaffold" for proper patterning
during subsequent
blastema development
(Muneoka
and Sassoon,
1992).
Thoughtransdifferentiation
of regenerating limb tissues can
be observed
in certain experimental
situations,
such as limbs from
which
bones
have
been
removed,
there
is little
evidence
for
metaplasia
in normal
regeneration.
Cells of the myogenic,
chon-
drogenic,
and Schwann
lineages,
along with vascular
endothelial
sprouts,
redifferentiate
proximally
in continuity
with
the proper
tissues
of the stump as growth extends
the progress
zone distally.
The effect of the WE to induce and maintain the blastemal
progress
zone,
in which
patterning
events
occur
that
direct
subsequent
histogenesis,
is critical
for the unique
regenerative
capacity
of
urodeles.
References
ADAMS,
D.O. and HAMILTON,
T.A. (1992).
Macrophages
as destructive
cells in host
defense.
In Inflammation:
BasicPrinciplesandClinica/Correlates(Eds.
J.I. Gallin,
!.M. Goldstein
and R. Snyderman).
Raven
Press,
New York,
pp. 637-662.
ARNOLD,
F. and WEST,
D.C. (1991).
Angiogenesis
in wound
healing.
Pharmacol.
Ther. 52: 407-422.
BLOOD,
C.H.
and ZETTER,
B.R.
(1990).
Tumor
interactions
with the vasculature:
Angiogenesis
and tumor
metastasis.
Biochim.
Biophys.
Acta
1032: 89-118.
BOILLY,
B.
(1989).
Production
of growth
factors
by
the
blastema
during
limb
regeneration
of urodeles
(Amphibia).
In Recent
Trends in Regeneration
Research
(Eds. V, Kiortsis,
S. Koussoulakos
and H. Wallace).
Plenum
Press,
New York, pp.
81-96
BOllL
Y, B., CAVANAUGH.
K.P., THOMAS,
D., HONDERMARCK,
H., BRYANT,
S.V.
and
BRADSHAW.
R.A.
(1991).
Acidic
fibroblast
growth
faclor
is present
in
regenerating
limb blastemas
ofaxolotls
and binds specifically
to blastema
tissues.
Dev. BioI. 145: 302-310.
BRAND-SABERI,
B., SEIFERT,
R., GRIM,
M., WILTING,
J., KUHLEWEIN,
M. and
CHR!ST.
B.
(1995).
Blood
vessel
formation
in the
avian
limb
bud
involves
angioblastic and angiotrophic growth. Dev. Dynamics 202: 181-194.
BROCKES,
J.P. and K!NTNER,
C.R. (1986).
Glial growth factor and nerve-dependent
proliferation
in the regeneration
blastema
of urodele
amphibians.
Ce1/45: 301-
306.
BRYANT,
S.V. and GARDINER,
D.M. (1989).
Position-dependent
growth
control
and
pattern
formation
in limb
regeneration.
In Recent
Trends in Regeneration Re-
$~srth
(Eds.
V. Kiortsis,
S. Koussoulakos
and H. Wallace).
Plenum Pr~ss, New
York,
pp. 377-390.
BRYANT,
SV.
GARDINER,
D.M. and MUNEOKA,
K. (1987).
limb
development
and
regeneration.
Am.
Zool.
27: 675-696.
Cel/ular basis of limb regeneration
793
CAMERON,
J.A., HILGERS,
AR.
and HINTERBERGER,
1.J. (1986).
Evidence
that
reserve
cells are a source
of regenerated
adult
newt muscle
in vitro. Nature
321:
607-610.
CAPLAN, AI. (1985). The vasculature and limb development. Cell Differ. 16: 1-11.
CARLONE,
R.L.
and
MESCHER,
A.L.
(1985).
Trophic
factors
from
nerves.
In
Regulation
of Vertebrate
Limb
Regeneration
(Ed. R.E. Sicard),
Oxford
University
Press,
New York,
pp. 93-105.
CHALKLEY,
D.T. (1954).
A quantitative
histological
analysis
of forelimb
regeneration
in Triturus
viridescens.
J. Morphol.
94: 21-70.
CHEW,
K.E, and CAMERON,
J.A. (1983).
Increase
in mitotic
activity
of regenerating
axololilimbs
by growth factor-impregnated implants. J. Exp. Zool. 226: 325-329.
CREWS,
l., GATES,
P.B., BROWN,
A.,JOLlOT,A,
FOLEY,
C., BROCKES,
J.P. and
GANN,
A.A.F.
(1995).
Expression
and activity
of the newt Msx-1
gene in relation
to limb regeneration.
Proc.
R. Soc.
Lond.
B259:
161-171.
DAN0,
K.,
ANDREASEN,
P.A.,
GR0NDAHL-HANSEN,
J.,
KRISTENSEN,
P.,
NIELSEN,
LS. and SKRIVER,
L. (1985).
Plasminogen
activators,
tissuedegrada-
tion,
and cancer.
Adv.
Cancer
Res_ 44: 139-239.
DEALY,
C.N. and KOSHER,
R.A. (1995).
Studies
on insulin-like
growth
factor-I
and
insulin
in chick
limb morphogenesis.
Dev.
Dynamics
202:
67-79.
DONALDSON,
D.J. and MAHAN,
J.T. (1 983),
Fibrinogen
and fibronectin
as substrates
for epidermal
cell migration
during
wound
closure.
J. Cell Sci.
62:
117-127.
DONALDSON,
D.J.,
MAHAN,
J.T., AMRANI,
D. and HAWIGER,
J. (1989).
Fibrino-
gen-mediated
epidermal
cell migration:
structural
correlates
for fibrinogen
func-
tion. J. CeIlSci.
94:
101-108
DONALDSON,
D.J. MAHAN,
J.T. YANG,
H. and
YAMADA,
K. M. (1995).
Integrin
and
phosphotyrosine
expression
in normal
and migrating
newt
keratinocytes.
Ana/.
Rec.
241:
49-58.
DUNIS,
D.A. and
NAMENWIRTH,
M. (1977).
The role of grafted
skin in the regenera-
tion of X-irradiated
axololilimbs.
Dev.
BioI. 56: 97-109.
DVORAK,
H.F.,
KAPLAN,
AP.
and CLARK,
R.A.F.
(1988).
Potential
functions
of the
clotting
systems
in wound
repair.
In The Molecular
and Cellular
Bi%gyof
Wound
Repair
(Eds. A.A.F.
Clark and P.M. Henson).
Plenum
Press,
New York, pp. 57-86.
ELDE,
R., CAO, Y., CINTRA,
A., BRELJE,
T.C., PELTO-HUIKKO,
M., JUNTILLA,
T.,
FUXE,
K., PETTERSON,
R.F. and HOKFEL
T, 1. (1991).
Prominent
expression
of
acidic
fibroblast
growth
factor
in motor and sensory
neurons.
Neuron
7: 349-364.
FALLON,
J.F., LOPEZ,
A., ROS,
M.A., SAVAGE,
M.P., OLWIN,
B.B. and SIMANDL,
B.K. (1994).
FGF-2:
apical
ectodermal
ridge growth
signal for chick limb develop-
ment.
Science
264:
104-107
FERRETTI,
P. and
BROCKES,
J.P.
(1991).
Cell origin
and identity
in limb regenera-
tion and development.
Glia 4: 214-224.
GARDINER.
D.M., MUNEOKA,
K. and BRYANT,
S.V. (1986).
The migration
of dermal
cells during
blastema
formation
in axolotls.
Dev. Bioi.
118: 488-493.
GOSPODAROWICZ,
D. and
MESCHER,
A.L. (1980).
Fibroblastgrowthfactor
and the
control
of vertebrate
regeneration
and repair.
Ann.
NY Acad.
Sci. 339: 151-174.
GULATI, A.K., ZALEWSKI, A.A. and REDDI. A.H. (1983).
An immunofluorescent
study of the distribution
of fibronectin
and lam inin during
limb regeneration
in the
adult
newt.
Dev. BioI. 96: 355-365.
HANSSON,
H.A. (1993).
Insulin-like
growth factors and nerve
regeneration.
Ann. NY
Acad.
Sci, 692:
161-171.
HAY,
E.D. and FISCHMAN,
D.A. (1961).
Origin
of the blastema
in regenerating
limb
of the newt,
Triturus
viridescens.
Dev. BioI. 3: 26-59.
HINTERBERGER,
1.J.
and
CAMERON,
JA
(1990).
Myoblasts
and
connective-
tissue
cells
in regenerating
amphibian
limbs.
Ontogenez
21: 341-357.
HOLDER, N. (1989). Organization of connective
tissue
patterns
by dermal
fibroblasts
in the
regenerating
axolotl
limb.
Development
105: 585-593.
ITEN,
L.E. and
BRYANT,
S.V. (1973).
Forelimb
regeneration
from different
levels
of
arnputation
in the newt, Notophthalmus
vlridescens:length,
rate and stages. Raux
Arch.
173: 263-282.
JO,
S.A.,
ZHU,
X., MARCHIONNI,
M.A. and
BURDEN,
S.J.
(1995).
Neuregulins
are
concentrated
at nerve-muscle
synapses
and activate
ACh-receptor
gene expres-
sion. Nature
373: 158-161.
KIFFMEYER,
W.A.,
TOMUSK,
E.T. and
MESCHER,
A.L
(1991).
Axonal
transport
and release
of transferrin
in nerves
of regenerating
amphibian
limbs.
Dev.
Bioi.
147: 392-402.

794
A.L. Mescher
KUHN, LC. SCHULMAN, H.M. and PONKA, P. (1990).lron-lransferrin
requirements
and transferrin
receptor
expression
in proliferating
cells.
In Iron
Transport
and
Storage
(Eds. P. Ponka,
H.M. Schulman
and R.C. Woodworth).
CRG
Press,
Boca
Raton
(FL),
pp. 149.191.
LAUFER,
E., NELSON,
C.E., JOHNSON,
R.l:,
MORGAN,
B.A. andTABIN,
C. (1994).
Sonic
hedgehog
and Fgf-4 act through
a signaling cascade
and feedback
loop to
integrate growth and patterning of the developing limb bud. Gel! 79: 993-1003.
LO, D.C., ALLEN,
F. and BROCKES,
J.P. (1993).
Reversal
of muscle
differentiation
during
urodele
limb regeneration.
Proc.
Nat!. Acad.
Sci. USA 90: 7230-7234.
LOYD,
R.A. and TASSAVA,
A.A.
(1980).
DNA
synthesis
and mitosis
in adult
newt
limbs following amputation and insertion into the body cavity, J. Exp. Zool. 214: 61-
69.
LOYD,
RA
and CONNELLY,
T.G. (1981).
Microdensitometricanalysisofdenervation
effects
on newt limb blastema
cells.
Experientia
37: 967-969.
MADEN,
M. (1978).
Neurotrophic
control
of the cell
cycle
during
amphibian
limb
regeneration.
J. Embryol.
Exp. Morphol.
48: 169-175.
MADEN,
M. (1979).
Neurotrophic
and
x-ray
blocks
in the
blastemal
cell cycle.
J.
Embryol.
Exp. Morphol.
50: 169-173.
MASON,
I.J. (1994).
The ins and outs of fibroblast
growth
factors.
Ce1/78:
547-552.
MATRISIAN,
l.M.
(1992).
The matrix-degrading
metalloproteinases.
BioEssays
14:
455-463.
MATRISIAN,
l.M.
and
HOGAN,
B.l.M.
(1990).
Growth
factor-regulated
proteases
and extracellular
matrix
remodeling
during
mammalian
development.
Dev. Bioi.
24: 219-259.
MESCHER,
Al.
(1976).
Effects
on
adult
newt
limb
regeneration
of partial
and
complete
skin flaps
over the amputation
surface.
J. Exp. Zool. 195: 117-127.
MESCHER,
A.L. (1992).
Trophic
activity
of regenerating
peripheral
nerves.
Comm.
Dev. Neurobiol.
1: 373-390.
MESCHER,
AL.
and
cox,
CA
(1988).
Hyaluronate
accumulation
and
nerve-
dependent
growth
during
regeneration
of larval Ambystoma
limbs.
Differentiation
38: 161-168.
MESCHER,
A.L. and COX,
CA
(1989).
Neural
influence
on the extracellular
matrix
during
blastema
formation.
In Recent
Trends
in Regeneration
Research
(Eds. V.
Kiortsis,
S. Koussoulakos
and H. Wallace).
Plenum
Press,
NY, pp. 205-215.
MESCHER,
AL.
and
KIFFMEYER,
W,R.
(1992).
Axonal
release
of transferrin
in
peripheral
nerves
ofaxolotls
during
regeneration.
In Keys for Regeneration
(Eds.
CH
Taban
and B. Boilly).
Karger,
Basel,
pp. 100-109.
MESCHER,
AL.
and MUNAIM,
S.I. (1986).
Changes
in the extracellular
matrix
and
glycosaminoglycan
synthesis
during
the initiation
of regeneration
in adult
newt
forelimbs.
Anat.
Rec.214:424-431.
MESCHER,
Al.
and
MUNAIM,
S.I. (1988).
Transferrin
and the growth-promoting
effect
of nerves.
In/, Rev.
Gytol.
110: 1-26.
MESCHER,
A.L. and TASSAVA,
RA
(1975).
Denervation
effects
on DNA replication
and mitosis
during
the initiation
of limb regeneration
in adult newts.
Dev.
Bioi.
44'
187-197.
MUNAIM,
S.I. and MESCHER,
AL.
(1986).
Transferrin
and the trophic
effect of neural
tissue
on amphibian
limb regeneration
blastemas,
Dev.
BioI. 116:
138-142.
MUNAJM,
5.1., KLAGSBRUN,
M. and TOOLE,
B.P. (1991).
Hyaluronan-dependent
pericellular
coats
of chick
embryo
limb
mesodermal
cells:
induction
by basic
fibroblast
growth
factor.
Dev.
Bioi.
143: 297-302.
MUNEOKA,
K. and
SASSOON,
D. (1992).
Molecular
aspects
of regeneration
in
developing
vertebrate
limbs.
Dev.
BioI.
152: 37-49
MUNEOKA, K., BRYANT, S.V. and GARDINER, D.M. (1989). Growth
control
in limb
regeneration.
In Developmental
Biology of the Axolotl (Eds. J.B. Armstrong and
G.M.
Malacinski).
Oxford
University
Press,
New York,
pp. 143-156.
MUNEOKA,
K., FOX,
W.F.
and
BRYANT,
S,V.
(1986).
Cellular
contribution
from
dermis
and cartilage
to the regenerating
limb blastema
in axolotls.
Dev.
Bioi.
116:
256-260.
NACE,
J.D.
and
TASSAVA,
R.A. (1995).
Examination
of fibronectin
distribution
and
its sources
in the
regenerating
newt
limb
by immunocytochemistry
and
in situ
hybridization.
Dev.
Dynamics
202:
153-164.
NIINIKOSKI,
J. (1980).
The effect
of blood
and oxygen
supply
on the biochemistry
of
repair.
In Wound
Healingand
Wound
Infection
(Ed. T.K. Hunt). Appleton-Century-
Crofts,
New York,
pp. 56-70.
NISWANDER,
L. and MARTIN,
G.R. (1993).
Mixed signals
from the AER: FGF-4
and
BMP-2
have opposite
effects
on limb growth.
In Limb Development
and Regen-
eration(Eds.
J.F. Fallon,
P.F. Goetinck,
R.O. Kelley and D.L. Stocum).
Wiley-Liss,
New York,
pp. 625-633.
NISWANDER,
L., JEFFREY,
S., MARTIN,
G.R. and TICKLE,
C. (1994).
A positive
feedback
loop coordinates
growth
and patterning
in the vertebrate
limb.
Nature
371:
609-612.
NISWANDER,
L., TICKLE,
C., VOGEL,
A., BOOTH,
I. and MARTIN,
G,R.
(1993).
FGF-4
replaces
the apical
ectodermal
ridge and directs
outgrowth
and patterning
of the limb.
Ge1/75:
579-587.
OH,
T.H.
and
MARKElONIS,
G.J.
(1984).
Sciatin
(transferrin)
and
other
muscle
trophic
factors.
In Growth
and Maturation
Factors
(Ed. G. Guroff).
Wiley,
New
York,
pp. 55-85.
OLSON,
E.N.
(1992).
Interplay
between
proliferation
and differentiation
within
the
myogenic
lineage.
Dev.
Bioi.
154: 261-272.
ONDA,
H. GOLDHAMER,
D.J.
and
TASSAVA,
R.A. (1990).
An extracellular
matrix
molecule
of newt
and axolotl
regenerating
limb blastemas
and embryonic
limb
buds: immunological
relationship
of MT1 antigen
with tenascin.
Development
108:
657-668
ONDA, H. POULIN, M.L., TASSAVA, RA
andCHIU,
I-M. (1991).
Characterization
of
a newt
tenascin
cON A and
localization
of tenascin
mRNA
during
newt
limb
regeneration
by in situ hybridization.
Dev. BioI. 148: 219-232.
PEADON,
A.M. and
SINGER,
M. (1966).
The blood vessels
of the regenerating
limb
of the adult
newt.
Triturus.
J. Morphol.
118: 79-90.
POLVERINI, P.J. (1994). Inhibitors of neovascularization:
Critical
mediators
in the
coordinate
regulation
of angiogenesis.
In Angiogenesis:
Molecular
Biology,
Glini-
ca/Aspects(Eds.
M.E. Maragoudaki,
P.M. Gullinoand
P.I. Lelkes).
Plenum
Press,
New York,
pp. 29-37.
POULIN,
M.L.,
PATRIE,
K.M.,
BOTELHO,
M.J.,
TASSAVA,
RA
and
CHIU,
I-M.
(1993).
Heterogeneity
in the
expression
of fibroblast
growth
factor
receptors
during
limb
regeneration
in newts
(Notophthalmus
viridescens).
Development.
119: 353-361.
PREHM,
P. (1989).
Identification
and regulation
of the eukaryotic
hyaluronan
syn-
thase. Ciba Found.
Symp.
143: 21-40.
RAGHOW,
R. (1994).
The
role of extracellular
matrix
in postinflammatory
wound
healing
fibrosis,
FASEB
J. 8: 823-831.
RAPPOLEE,
DA
and
WERB,
Z. (1992).
Macrophage-derived
growth
factors.
In
Macrophage Biology and Activation (Ed. S.w. Russell and S. Gordon).
Current
Topics
in Microbiology
and Immunology,
Vol. 181. Springer-Verlag,
New York, pp.
87-140.
REPESH,
L.A. and
OBERPRillER,
J,C.
(1978).
Scanning
electron
microscopy
of
epidermal
cell migration
in wound
healing
during
limb regeneration
in the adult
newt,
Notophthalmus
viridescens.
Am.
J. Anat.
151: 539-556.
REPESH,
L.A and
OBERPRILLER,
J.C. (1980).
Ultrastructural
studies
on migrating
epidermal
cells during
the wound
healing
stage
of regeneration
in the adult newt,
Notophtha/mus
v/n'descens.
Am.
J. Anat.
159: 187-208.
REPESH,
L.A.,
FITZGERALD,
T.J.
and
FURCHT,
L.T.
(1982).
Changes
in the
distribution
of fibronectin
during
limb regeneration
in newts
using
immunocyto-
chemistry.
Differentiation
22:
125-131.
REVARDEL,
J-L.
and
CHAP RON,
C. (1975).
Influence
de la vascularisation
sur la
regeneration
des membres
chez les larves d'Urodeles.
Nouvelle
interpretation
du
role du systeme
nerveux.
C.R. Acad.
Sci. Paris
280:
1409-1411.
SAKSELA,
O. and
RIFKIN,
D.B.
(1988).
Cell-associated
plasminogen
activation:
regulation
and physiological
functions.
Annu.
Rev. Gell BioI. 4: 93-126.
SARA,
V.R. and
HALL, K. (1990).
Insulin-like
growth factors
and their binding
proteins.
Physiol.
Rev.
70: 591-614.
SAVAGE,
M.P.,
HART,
C.E.,
RILEY,
B.B.,
SASSIE,
J., OLWIN,
8.B. and FALLON,
J.F.
(1993).
Distribution
of FGF-2
suggests
it has a role in chick limb bud growth.
Dev.
Dynamics
198: 159-170.
SCHMIDT,
A.J.
(1968).
Ceilular
Biology
of Vertebrate
Regeneration
and
Repair.
University
of Chicago
Press.
SIMON,
H-G., NELSON,
C., GOFF,
D., LAUFER,
E., MORGAN,
BA
and TABIN,
C.
(1995).
Differential
expression
of myogenic
regulatory
genes
and msx-1
during
dedifferentiation
and
redifferentiation
of
regenerating
amphibian
limbs.
Dev.
Dynamics 202: 1-12.

SINGER,
M. (1952).
The
influence
of the nerve
in regeneration
of the amphibian
extremity.
Q. Rev. Bioi. 27: 169-200.
SINGER,
M. (1978).
On the nature
of the neurotrophic
phenomenon
in urodele
limb
regeneration.
Am. Zool.
18: 829-841.
SINGER,
M. and SALPETER,
M.M. (1961).
Regeneration
in vertebrates:
The role of
the wound
epithelium.
In Growth in Living Systems
(Ed. M. Zarrow).
Basic Books,
New York,
pp, 277-311.
SMITH,
A.R. and WOLPERT,
L. (1975).
Nerves
and angiogenesis
in amphibian
limb
regeneration. Nature 257: 224-225.
STOCUM,
D.L.
(1995).
Wound
Repair,
Regeneration,
and Artificial
Tissues.
R.G
Landes
Co., Austin,
Texas.
SUNDERKOTTER,
C.,
STEINBRINK,
K., GOEBELER,
M.,
BHARDWAJ,
R. and
SORG, C. (1994). Macrophages and angiogenesis. J. Leukocyte Bioi. 55: 410-
422.
SUTHERLAND,
R.M. (1988). Cell and environment
interactions
in tumor micro regions:
the multicell
spheroid
model.
Science
240:
177-184.
TANK,
p.w.
and HOLDER,
N. (1979).
The distribution
of cells
in the upper
forelimb
of the axolotl,
Ambystoma
mexicanum.
J. Exp. Zool.
209: 435-442.
TASSAVA,
A.A.
and
MESCHER,
A.L.
(1975).
The
roles
of injury,
nerves,
and the
wound
epidermis
during
the initiation
of amphibian
limb regeneration.
Differentia-
tion 4: 23-24.
TASSAVA,
A.A.,
BENNETT,
L.L. and ZITNIK,
GD.
(1974).
DNA synthesis
without
mitosis
in amputated
denervated
forelimbs
of larval
axolotls.
J. Exp. Zool.
190'
111-116.
TASSAVA,
R.A.
GOLDHAMER,
D.J.
and
TOMLINSON,
B.L.
(1987).
Cell
cycle
Cellular basis of limb regeneration
795
controls and the role of nerves
and the regenerate
epithelium
in urodele
forelimb
regeneration:
possible
modifications
of basic
concepts.
Biochem.
Cell Bioi.
65:
739-749.
TAYLOR,
G.P., ANDERSON,
R., REGINELLI,AD.
and MUNEOKA,
K. (1994).
Rapid
communication
FGF-2
induces
regeneration
of the chick limb bud.
Dev.
Bio/'
163:
282-284
THORNTON,
C.S.
(1968).
Amphibian
limb regeneration.
Adv.
Morphogen.
7: 205-
249.
TOOLE,
B.P. (1991).
Proteoglycans
and hyaluronan
in morphogenesis
and differen-
tiation.
In Cell Biology
of Extracellular
Matrix,
2nd.
ed. (Ed.
ED.
Hay).
Plenum
Press,
New York,
pp. 305-342.
TOOLE,
B.P. and GROSS,
J.L. (1971).
The extracellular
matrix
of the regenerating
newt limb: synthesis
and removal
01 hyaluronate
prior to differentiation.
Dev, Bioi.
25: 57-77.
TSONIS,
P.A., ENGLISH, D. and
MESCHER,
AL. (1991).
Increased
content
of
inositol
phosphates
in amputated
limb of axolotl
larvae,
and the effect ofberyllium.
J. Exp. Zool. 259: 252-258.
WALLACE,
H. (1981).
Vertebrate
Limb
Regeneration.
John Wiley & Sons, Chichester
(UK).
WELCH,
S. (1992).
Transferrin:
The Iron Carrier.
CRC
Press,
Boca
Raton.
WOESSNER,
J.F. (1991).
Matrix metalloproteinases
and their inhibitors
in connective
tissue
remodeling.
FASEB
J. 5: 2145-2154.
YANG,
E.v.
and
BRYANT,
S.V.
(1994).
Developmental
regulation
of
a matrix
metalloproteinaseduring
regeneration
of axololl
appendages.
Dev. Bioi. 166:696-
703

===== Milich2021_JExpMed_SCI+scTx =====
TECHNICAL ADVANCES AND RESOURCES
Single-cell analysis of the cellular heterogeneity and
interactions in the injured mouse spinal cord
Lindsay M. Milich1,2*, James S. Choi1*, Christine Ryan1,2, Susana R. Cerqueira1, Sofia Benavides1, Stephanie L. Yahn1,2, Pantelis Tsoulfas1,
and Jae K. Lee1
The wound healing process that occurs after spinal cord injury is critical for maintaining tissue homeostasis and limiting tissue
damage, but eventually results in a scar-like environment that is not conducive to regeneration and repair. A better
understanding of this dichotomy is critical to developing effective therapeutics that target the appropriate pathobiology, but
a major challenge has been the large cellular heterogeneity that results in immensely complex cellular interactions. In this
study, we used single-cell RNA sequencing to assess virtually all cell types that comprise the mouse spinal cord injury site. In
addition to discovering novel subpopulations, we used expression values of receptor–ligand pairs to identify signaling
pathways that are predicted to regulate specific cellular interactions during angiogenesis, gliosis, and fibrosis. Our dataset is a
valuable resource that provides novel mechanistic insight into the pathobiology of not only spinal cord injury but also other
traumatic disorders of the CNS.
Introduction
In the adult mammalian nervous system, a diverse population of
glial and vascular cells are essential for optimal neuronal func-
tion. After spinal cord injury (SCI), this cellular diversity be-
comes even more heterogeneous by infiltrating leukocytes,
which, together with neural cells regulate inflammation, cell
proliferation, and tissue remodeling events, are collectively
termed the wound healing process, which has been studied ex-
tensively in the past (Kigerl et al., 2006; Loy et al., 2002; Velardo
et al., 2004). Although we currently understand the major cell
types that comprise the injury site after SCI, we have a limited
knowledge of the phenotypic heterogeneity within each cell type
and how these cells interact during the wound healing process.
SCI triggers multiple processes that occur in a temporally
defined manner. At 1 d post-injury (dpi), an innate immune
response initiated by microglia is amplified by peripheral my-
eloid cells, mainly neutrophils and monocytes, which migrate to
the injury site (Beck et al., 2010; Kigerl et al., 2006; Milich et al.,
2019). By 3 dpi, most glial cells, including astrocytes, microglia,
and oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs), are at the peak of
their proliferative state, resulting in recovery of cell number and
initiating gliosis (Barnab´e-Heider et al., 2010; White et al., 2010).
Concurrently, monocytes differentiate into macrophages that
phagocytose cellular debris, acquire different phenotypic states,
and activate perivascular fibroblasts to initiate fibrosis (Kigerl
et al., 2009; Zhu et al., 2015). By 7 dpi, the numbers of macro-
phages and fibroblasts have reached their peak, and the fibrotic
scar begins to be surrounded by the astroglial scar, which limits
their infiltration into the spinal cord parenchyma (Herrmann
et al., 2008; Sofroniew, 2015). In addition, during these first 7
d, hypoxic conditions at the injury site promote angiogenesis
and revascularization (Loy et al., 2002; Whetstone et al., 2003).
By 14 dpi, gliosis, fibrosis, and angiogenesis have reached a
more stable state (Baldwin et al., 1998; Soderblom et al., 2013;
Whetstone et al., 2003). Thus, the first 7 d after injury are highly
dynamic and provide a window of therapeutic intervention for
multiple pathological processes, but we currently have a limited
understanding of the cellular interactions that occur during this
critical period.
One way to investigate cellular responses to injury is through
transcriptomic profiling of cell types that comprise the injury
site. Traditional methods of using FACS, or more recent methods
using immunoprecipitation of cell type–specific polyribosomes
or nuclei, have provided important insight into central nervous
system (CNS) pathobiology (Heiman et al., 2008; Sanz et al.,
2009). However, these studies have been limited by the focus
on a single cell type as well as the lack of information on sub-
population heterogeneity and different cell states. Recent ad-
vances in single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) technologies
.............................................................................................................................................................................
1Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Miami School of Medicine, Miami, FL;
2University of Miami Neuroscience Graduate
Program, Miami, FL.
*L.M. Milich and J.S. Choi contributed equally to this paper; Correspondence to Jae K. Lee: JLee22@med.miami.edu.
© 2021 Milich et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the
publication date (see http://www.rupress.org/terms/). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 4.0
International license, as described at https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).
Rockefeller University Press
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
1 of 25
J. Exp. Med. 2021 Vol. 218 No. 8
e20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

have circumvented these limitations by providing a more accurate
depiction of the heterogeneous subpopulations that comprise a
single cell type (Vanlandewijck et al., 2018; Zeisel et al., 2018). In
addition, many different cell types can be obtained and analyzed
from a single tissue sample simultaneously, enabling examination
of relationships and signaling mechanisms between multiple
cell types.
In this study, we used scRNA-seq to generate a single-cell
transcriptomics dataset of virtually all cell types that comprise
the uninjured and injured spinal cord at 1, 3, and 7 dpi using a
mouse mid-thoracic contusion model. We characterized the
unique molecular signatures of multiple cell types, as well as
their subtypes, and identified the transient appearance of injury-
induced subpopulations during this acute period. By assessing
expression of ligand–receptor pairs on different cell types, we
highlight potential signaling relationships that may mediate an-
giogenesis, gliosis, and fibrosis. As the first scRNA-seq analysis of
all cells that make up the SCI site, our transcriptomic dataset will
provide the field with novel and comprehensive insight into early
SCI pathology as well as other traumatic injuries to the CNS.
Results
Molecular identification of immune, vascular, and glial cells in
the acute injury site
To assess the cellular heterogeneity involved in spinal cord
wound healing, we performed mid-thoracic contusion SCI in
mice and generated single-cell suspensions for sequencing. After
excluding low-quality cells and potential doublets (see Materials
and methods), we obtained a total of 66,178 cells from uninjured
(12,488 cells across three biological replicates from five animals),
1 dpi (21,010 cells across three biological replicates from five
animals), 3 dpi (17,491 cells across two biological replicates from
three animals), and 7 dpi tissue (15,189 cells across two biological
replicates from three animals). Cluster analysis of these cells
resulted in 15 distinct clusters with specific temporal progres-
sion when visualized on a uniform manifold approximation
and projection (UMAP) plot (Fig. 1, A and B). These 15 clusters
represented all major cell types that are known to comprise
the SCI site including microglia, monocytes, macrophages,
neutrophils, dendritic cells, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, OPCs,
neurons, fibroblasts, pericytes, ependymal cells, and endothelial
cells. Principal component analysis (PCA) showed separation
between myeloid, vascular, and macroglia cell types (data not
shown), and cells were grouped into these categories for further
analysis as described below. The distribution of each biological
replicate in the UMAP for each cell group category is shown in
Fig. S1. Neurons were excluded from the analysis because they
were not expected to survive our dissociation protocol and thus
were subject to a selection bias. Lymphocytes were also excluded
because they are primarily involved in autoimmunity after SCI
(Ankeny and Popovich, 2009; Jones, 2014), which is beyond the
scope of this study. Cell types pertaining to each cluster were
identified using annotated lineage markers and the automatic
annotation tool SingleR (Aran et al., 2019; Fig. S2, A and B).
These methods combined gave us confidence in the correct
identification of the major cell types.
The highest differentially expressed genes (DEGs) provided a
unique molecular signature for each cell type (Fig. 1, C and D),
which in some cases were different from canonical markers
used in prior studies (Fig. S2 C). For example, the highest DEGs
in OPCs were noncanonical genes such as tenascin-R (Tnr) and
lipoma HMGIG fusion partner (Lhfpl3), which displayed better
specificity than canonical OPC markers such as Pdgfra and Cspg4
that were expressed in multiple cell types including fibroblasts
and pericytes (Fig. S2 C). Interestingly, while certain marker
genes were expressed both before and after injury, others,
such as Postn in fibroblasts, changed expression in an injury-
dependent manner. While Postn was not expressed in uninjured
fibroblasts, there was a graded increase as injury progressed
(Fig. 1 C). We validated this by genetic lineage tracing in PostnEYFP
mice, which showed enhanced YFP (EYFP) cells present in the
fibrotic scar and overlying meninges but absent in surrounding
spinal cord tissue (Fig. S2 D). In contrast to marker genes that
identify a cell type both before and after SCI, injury-dependent
genes offer useful information on cellular pathological states and
can serve as potential biomarkers. Taken together, our analysis of
DEGs between major cell types uncovers highly specific molecular
identifiers, many of which are noncanonical and display temporal
specificity.
Myeloid analysis reveals temporal changes in macrophage and
microglial subtypes
To better understand myeloid heterogeneity, we performed fur-
ther cluster analysis of neutrophils, monocytes, macrophages,
microglia, and dendritic cells and identified 12 distinct subtypes
(Fig. 2, A and B). Overall structure of the resulting UMAP revealed
two large clusters corresponding to microglia and peripherally
derived myeloid cells as identified by annotated marker gene
expression (Fig. 2 C). These marker genes displayed expected ex-
pression patterns between microglia and monocytes/macrophages
for certain genes, but revealed novel insight for others (Fig. 2 C).
Of the canonical microglial markers (P2ry12, Siglech, Cx3cr1, and
Tmem119), Siglech seemed to be the most specific to microglia
(versus monocytes/macrophages), although P2ry12 and Cx3cr1
were expressed at higher levels. Ccr2 and Arg1 were highly spe-
cific to monocytes/macrophages (versus microglia) but displayed
macrophage subtype specificity.
We identified four microglial subtypes. Homeostatic mi-
croglia were identified based on its expression of several
annotated markers of steady-state microglia, such as P2ry12,
Siglech, and Tmem119 (Fig. 2 C; and Fig. 3, B and C). As ex-
pected, homeostatic microglia were the predominant myeloid
population in the uninjured spinal cord, but by 1 dpi, they were
replaced by microglia subtypes that displayed different tran-
scriptional signatures. We identified three nonhomeostatic mi-
croglia subtypes, which were labeled inflammatory, dividing,
and migrating microglia based on their gene ontology (GO)
terms for biological processes (Fig. 3 D). Inflammatory microglia
GO terms were mostly associated with cell death and cytokine
production. Genes associated with the cell death terms were not
self-death pathways (e.g., caspases), but rather mostly cytokines
(data not shown). Inflammatory microglia were identified by
low expression of the purinergic receptor P2ry12 and increased
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
2 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

Figure 1.
Transcriptomic identification of major cell types that comprise the mouse mid-thoracic spinal cord contusion site at acute time points.
(A) UMAP plot of all cells collected from the uninjured spinal cord and injured spinal cord at 1, 3, and 7 dpi (66,178 cells). Cells are colored and annotated by cell
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
3 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

expression of Igf1. GO terms for dividing microglia were mostly
related to cell cycle. Dividing microglia expressed low levels of
P2ry12, increased expression of Msr1, and high levels of cell
cycle–related genes such as Cdk1. The presence of inflamma-
tory and dividing microglia in uninjured tissue is perhaps due
to dissociation-induced stress (Hammond et al., 2019; Wu
et al., 2017) and suggests they are the first nonhomeostatic
phenotypic states (see Discussion). GO terms for migrating
microglia, which represented the smallest subtype, were as-
sociated with cell migration and motility. Migrating microglia
had low levels of P2ry12, and high levels of Msr1 and the growth
factor Igf1.
We used flow cytometry to validate the presence of mi-
croglia subtypes in vivo. We focused on dividing/migrating
microglia due to their distinct molecular signatures as compared
with homeostatic microglia (Fig. 3 C). Microglia were gated on
P2RY12 and MSR1 expression based on our sequencing data
(Fig. 3, E and F). As expected, >90% of microglia present in the
uninjured spinal cord were in the homeostatic state (P2RY12hi/
MSR1lo), and this decreased to 20% at 1 dpi (Fig. 3 F). Similar to
our sequencing data, uninjured samples also contained a small
population of P2RY12lo/MSR1lo inflammatory microglia, which
most likely resulted from dissociation-induced stress as men-
tioned above. At 1 dpi, there was a large increase in MSR1hi
microglia, consistent with the appearance of dividing/migrating
microglia. However, the majority of MSR1hi microglia at 1 dpi
were also P2RY12hi, likely representing a transition state be-
tween homeostatic and nonhomeostatic microglia, which are
expected to be P2RY12lo. At 7 dpi, we observed a significant
decrease in P2RY12hi/MSR1hi transition microglia and a partial
return of homeostatic microglia. Taken together, our flow cy-
tometry data support the appearance of several nonhomeostatic
microglia subtypes after SCI in vivo, but the temporal effects
were more graded than those predicted from our sequencing
data, perhaps due to a delay in manifestation of gene expression
changes at the protein level.
The peripherally derived myeloid clusters revealed mono-
cytes and two macrophage subtypes in addition to border-
associated macrophages (Van Hove et al., 2019) and dendritic
cells (Fig. 2 A). The two macrophage subtypes were named
chemotaxis-inducing macrophages and inflammatory macro-
phages based on their GO biological processes terms (Fig. 4 A).
GO terms for chemotaxis-inducing macrophages were associ-
ated with chemotaxis of other leukocytes such as neutrophils
and granulocytes. GO terms for inflammatory macrophages
were associated with glial and macrophage activation and in-
flammatory response. Neutrophils, monocytes, and chemotaxis-
inducing macrophages were the predominant populations at 1 dpi,
whereas inflammatory and chemotaxis-inducing macrophages
were the predominant populations at 7 dpi (Fig. 4 B). Both
subtypes expressed the lysosomal gene Cd63 but were distin-
guished by preferential expression of heme oxygenase Hmox1 in
chemotaxis-inducing macrophages and Apoe in inflammatory
macrophages (Fig. 4 C). A heatmap of the top DEGs shows both
distinct and overlapping molecular signatures in the monocyte-
macrophage lineage (Fig. 4 D). The two macrophage subtypes
did not correspond to the M1/M2 genetic nomenclature
(Murray, 2017). They both expressed low levels of M1 marker
genes, and when all myeloid cells were hierarchically clustered
based on these marker genes, inflammatory and chemotaxis-
inducing macrophages clustered together, indicating that they
could not be distinguished from each other based on traditional
M1 classification (Fig. 4 E). Although they clustered separately
using M2 marker genes, this was driven primarily by higher
expression of Chil3 and Arg1 in chemotaxis-inducing macro-
phages (Fig. 4 E). The higher expression of the anti-inflammatory
Arg1 in chemotaxis-inducing macrophages was consistent with
GO terms associated with inflammation and glial activation being
more prevalent in inflammatory than in chemotaxis-inducing
macrophages (Fig. 4 A). In conclusion, our data reveal the pres-
ence of multiple cellular states in the monocyte-macrophage
lineage that display temporal progression toward a more pro-
inflammatory state.
To validate the presence of chemotaxis-inducing and in-
flammatory macrophage subtypes in vivo, we performed im-
munohistochemistry using antibodies against CD63 and APOE to
spatially validate our results (Fig. 5 A). While CD11b+ myeloid
cells were present at all time points, CD11b+/CD63+ cells started
to appear by 3 dpi. By 7 dpi, many CD11b+/CD63+ cells that were
either APOElo (chemotaxis-inducing) or APOEhi (inflammatory)
were present at the lesion core. Since graded expression based
on fluorescence intensity is difficult to quantify using immu-
nohistochemistry, we used flow cytometry to quantify the rel-
ative proportion of these two macrophage subtypes. After
separating monocytes/macrophages from other leukocytes in-
cluding microglia (see Materials and methods), we isolated
macrophages based on CD63hi expression (Fig. 5 B). Further
separation on APOE and CD11b expression revealed two dis-
tinct clusters that were consistent with chemotaxis-inducing
(CD63hi/CD11bmed/APOElo) and inflammatory (CD63hi/CD11bhi/
APOEhi) subtypes (Fig. 5 B). Similar to our sequencing data, the
CD63−myeloid cells were the predominant population at 1 dpi,
and decreased by 7 dpi, whereas inflammatory macrophages
(APOEhi) were the most represented macrophage subtype at
7 dpi (Fig. 5 C). Therefore, both immunohistochemistry and
flow cytometry data support the molecular identification of
chemotaxis-inducing and inflammatory subtypes and their
temporal progression after SCI in vivo. In summary, analysis of
type based on a combination of DEGs, canonical marker genes, and previously published spinal cord scRNA-seq datasets (Fig. S2, A and B). Cell counts for each
cell type are displayed in parentheses in the legend on the right. (B) UMAP of all cells split by each time point. Cells are colored by neighborhood density in
UMAP space to illustrate shifts over time. Darker red colors indicate greater cell density in the UMAP or gray if not from indicated time point. (C) Dot plot of
highest DEGs for each major cell type at each time point (right axis). Dot color intensity represents the z-score of expression values, and dot size represents
percent of cells with at least one UMI detected per gene. (D) UMAP of expression pattern of the DEG that best identifies each cell type. Values indicated are log-
normalized counts per cell. n = 3 biological replicates for uninjured and 1 dpi; n = 2 biological replicates for 3 and 7 dpi. Div, dividing; OPC, oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells.
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
4 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

Figure 2.
Transcriptomic identification of major myeloid subtypes acutely after SCI. (A) UMAP plot of all myeloid cells from uninjured spinal cord and 1,
3, and 7 dpi. Neutrophils, monocytes, macrophages, microglia, div-myeloid, and dendritic cells (Fig. 1 A) were extracted, reclustered, and re-embedded in new
UMAP coordinates. Cells are colored by myeloid subtype as shown in legend on right. Cell counts in parentheses. Subtypes were annotated using a combination
of DEGs, GO enrichment analyses, and previously published data. (B) UMAP of myeloid cells split by each time point. Cells are colored by neighborhood density
in UMAP space to illustrate shifts over time. Darker red colors indicate greater cell density in the UMAP or gray if not from indicated time point. (C) Expression
pattern of canonical marker genes, DEGs, and genes implicated in disease from previous studies. Cells are colored by expression value. Values are log-
transformed normalized expression counts. The large cluster on the left was identified as microglia by the expression of P2ry12, Tmem119, and Siglech. The large
cluster on the right was identified as peripheral myeloid cells by the expression of Ccr2 and Ly6c2. Homeostatic microglia (H-microglia) were identified by high
expression of P2ry12, Siglech, and Tmem119. Inflammatory microglia were identified by Igf1, and migrating microglia were identified by Msr1 and Igf1. Dividing
myeloid cells were identified by Mki67 and Top2a. Monocytes were identified by Ccr2 and Ly6c2. Macrophages (Mac) were identified by Cd63 and the reduced
expression of monocyte markers. BA, border-associated; Div, dividing.
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
5 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

Figure 3.
Molecular and temporal profile of microglia subtype heterogeneity acutely after SCI. (A) Proportion of each microglia subtype among all
microglia at each time point. (B) Dot plot of marker genes that differentiate nonhomeostatic microglia subtypes from homeostatic microglia. Color of dots
represents z-scored expression level, and size of dots represents percentage of cells with at least one UMI detected per gene. (C) Heatmap of the highest DEGs
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
6 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

myeloid cells reveals novel subtypes of microglia and macro-
phages during SCI progression.
Vascular heterogeneity analysis identifies tip cell dynamics
To better understand the heterogeneity of vascular cells, we
performed further cluster analysis of endothelial cells, fibro-
blasts, and pericytes and identified nine distinct subtypes of
vascular cells. UMAPs of vascular subtypes revealed a coarse
division between endothelial and mural cells and displayed
specific temporal progression (Fig. 6, A and B). We annotated
each cluster using marker genes from a previous scRNA-seq
study of the brain vasculature (Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). We
identified fibroblasts, pericytes, and vascular smooth muscle
cells (VSMCs) as three distinct populations of perivascular
mural cells that were identified based on their expression of
Col1a1, Kcnj8, and Acta2, respectively (Fig. S3, A and B). We also
identified an unknown vascular subtype (U-vascular) that
clustered with mural cells due to its molecular similarity with
pericytes, but also expressed endothelial cell markers (Fig. S3, A
and C), similar to a cell type described previously (Vanlandewijck
et al., 2018; Zeisel et al., 2018). To determine whether the
U-vascular cells represented capture of two different cell types
during single-cell dissociation (i.e., doublet), we compared dou-
blet likelihood scores (see Materials and methods) and found that
this was unlikely.
Next, we identified an arterial, a venous, and a capillary
subtype based on annotated markers (Vanlandewijck et al.,
2018). Arterial endothelial cells were identified by expression
of Gkn3 and Stmn2, whereas venous endothelial cells were
identified by Vwf and Vcam1. Capillary endothelial cells were
identified by the expression of general endothelial cell markers
Ly6a and Cldn5, combined with the lack of selective arterial and
venous markers (Fig. 6 D and Fig. S3). The fourth endothelial
cluster was identified as tip cells based on their expression of the
canonical marker Apln. Tip cells are leading cells present during
vasculogenesis and angiogenesis, and they have not yet been
systematically assessed in SCI. Tip cells were absent in the un-
injured spinal cord, but increased considerably at 1 dpi, and
gradually decreased by 7 dpi (Fig. 6 C). This tip cell temporal
profile was validated using in situ hybridization for Apln mRNA
combined with immunostaining for podocalyxin as an endo-
thelial cell marker (Fig. 6 E). In the uninjured cord, Apln tran-
scripts were detected scattered throughout the gray matter,
consistent with previous reports of Apln expression in neurons
(Reaux et al., 2002). After SCI, dense areas of Apln transcripts
were detected in elongated podocalyxin-positive cells near the
injury site. These tip cells were most abundant at 1 dpi, and
decreased significantly by 3 dpi (Fig. 6 F). Taken together, our
analysis identified all known major vascular cell types at the
injury site, including previously undescribed tip cell molecular
and temporal profiles.
Cellular interactions via angiopoietin (Angpt) and VEGF
signaling during angiogenesis
To gain insight into mechanisms of cellular interactions during
angiogenesis after SCI, we adapted CellPhoneDB (Vento-Tormo
et al., 2018) to calculate “interaction scores” based on the average
expression levels of a ligand and its receptor between two cells
(Fig. 7 A). Higher interaction scores indicate stronger predicted
interactions between two cells via the specified ligand–receptor
pathway. We used a database of all known ligand–receptor pairs
(Ramilowski et al., 2015) to determine putative interactions
between endothelial/tip cells and other cell types at the injury
site in an unsupervised manner. Analysis of the uninjured spinal
cord showed expected canonical vascular signaling pathways
such as Vegfb and Angpt1 (data not shown). We focused on 1 dpi
interactions since tip cells were most abundant at this time
point, and we included subtype information only for myeloid
and oligodendrocyte lineage cells. Interaction plots were gen-
erated separately for myeloid, vascular, and macroglia cell types
(Fig. 7, B–D). Endothelial and tip cells shared largely similar
patterns of interaction scores with other cell types. A notable
difference was strong Spp1-Itgav signaling that was specific
between chemotaxis-inducing macrophages and tip cells (Fig. 7
B). While the predicted interactions included several canonical
angiogenesis pathways such as Vegf, Notch, and Angpt signal-
ing, our analysis revealed several unexpected pathways in the
context of CNS injury such as Plgf (placental growth factor),
which was present across most vascular and macroglia cell
types, and Trf (transferrin), which was highly specific to oli-
godendrocytes (Fig. 7, C and D). Furthermore, while certain in-
teraction pairs, such as the ADAM–integrins, were shared
among all three compartments, others, such as the collagen–
integrins, were present only for vascular cells and macroglia but
not for myeloid cells.
We focused on Angpt and vascular endothelial growth factor
(Vegf) signaling due to their well-known roles in angiogenesis
(Lee et al., 2009). Angpt1 is an agonist that promotes stabiliza-
tion, whereas Angpt2 is an antagonist that promotes destabili-
zation of blood endothelium by binding to the Tie2 receptor
(Eklund et al., 2017). Interestingly, Angpt2–Tie2 interaction was
only present among vascular cells at 1 dpi (Fig. 7 C). Expression
analysis showed that Angpt2 is expressed most highly by tip cells
at 1 dpi followed by a gradual decrease over the next 7 d, and Tie2
(and Tie1) is expressed in endothelial cells at all time points
(Fig. 7 E). VSMCs and fibroblasts also contributed to this sig-
naling interaction with endothelial cells, albeit at a lower level.
Interestingly, Angpt1 expression shifted from VSMC at 1 dpi to
per microglia subtype. Color represents z-score expression level. Inset stars in B and C indicate statistically significant greater expression compared with all
other microglia combined (adjusted P value < 10−10; Wilcoxon rank-sum with Bonferroni correction; see Materials and methods). (D) GO enrichment analysis of
the DEGs per subtype. GO biological process terms displayed along y axis, and –log10 (Bonferroni-corrected P values) displayed along x axis. (E) Scatter plot of
flow cytometry analysis of microglia in the uninjured spinal cord and injured spinal cord at 1 and 7 dpi. Y axis and x axis display fluorescence intensities
of P2RY12 and MSR1, respectively. After removing nonviable cells and gating out Ly6G+ cells, CD45med/CD11b+ microglia were selected from other leukocytes
for further gating along P2RY12 and MSR1 quadrants (see Materials and methods and Fig. 5 B). (F) Quantification of proportion of microglia subtypes in flow
cytometry as gated in E. adj., adjusted; H-microglia, homeostatic microglia; Prop., proportion; Uninj, uninjured; Trans, transition; Lo, low; Hi, high.
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
7 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

Figure 4.
Molecular and temporal profile of monocyte/macrophage subtype heterogeneity acutely after SCI. (A) GO enrichment analysis of the DEGs
distinguishing the two macrophage subtypes. GO biological process terms displayed along y axis and –log10 (Bonferroni-corrected P values) displayed along x
axis. (B) Proportion of each peripheral myeloid subtype among all peripheral myeloid cells at each time point. (C) Dot plot of marker genes that differentiate
peripheral myeloid subtypes. Color of dots represents z-scored expression level, and size of dots represents percentage of cells with at least one UMI detected
per gene. (D) Heatmap of the highest DEGs per peripheral myeloid subtype. Color represents z-score expression level. (E) Heatmaps of M1 marker gene (left)
and M2 marker gene (right) expression among all myeloid subtypes show that neither inflammatory nor chemotaxis-inducing subtypes exclusively display M1
or M2 gene signatures. A notable exception is higher expression of M2 markers Chil3 and Arg1 in monocytes and chemotaxis-inducing macrophages compared
with inflammatory macrophages. Dendrograms along axes display hierarchical clustering results. Color of tiles represents z-scored expression value. Inset stars
in C–E indicate statistically significant greater expression compared with all other cells combined (adjusted P value < 10−10; Wilcoxon rank-sum with Bonferroni
correction; see Materials and methods). Prop., proportion; Mac, macrophage.
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
8 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

Figure 5.
In vivo validation of chemotaxis-inducing and inflammatory macrophages after SCI. (A) Immunohistochemical validation of chemotaxis-
inducing and inflammatory macrophages and their temporal changes after SCI. Injured spinal cord tissue shows a steady increase in macrophages (CD11b+/
CD63+) over time. APOE expression differentiates between chemotaxis-inducing (CD11b+/CD63+/APOElo) and inflammatory (CD11b+/CD63+/APOEhi) mac-
rophages. Chemotaxis-inducing macrophages are identified by white arrowheads, while inflammatory macrophages are identified by red arrowheads. Boxed
regions on the left are shown in higher magnification on the right. Representative images from a total of three biological replicates per each time point. Scale
bars in merged images are 300 µm, and scale bars in magnified images are 25 µm. Blue is DAPI to label nuclei. (B) Scatter plot of flow cytometry analysis and
gating strategy (see Materials and methods for description) to quantify relative proportions of the two macrophage subtypes. After excluding neutrophils and
lymphocytes, monocytes/macrophages were separated from microglia based on CD11b and CD45. After gating for CD63hi macrophages, separation based on
CD11b and APOE resulted in CD11bmed/APOElo (chemotaxis-inducing macrophages) and CD11bhi/APOEhi (inflammatory macrophages) clusters. (C) Quantifi-
cation showed increased proportion of CD11bhi/APOEhi macrophages at 7 dpi compared with 1 dpi. n = 5 biological replicates at each time point for flow
cytometry experiment. Macro, macrophage; Mono, monocyte.
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
9 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

Figure 6.
Molecular and temporal profile of vascular cell subtype heterogeneity acutely after SCI. (A) UMAP plot of all vascular cells from uninjured
spinal cord and 1, 3, and 7 dpi. Fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and pericytes (Fig. 1 A) were extracted, reclustered, and re-embedded in new UMAP coordinates.
Cells are colored by vascular subtype as shown in the legend on the right. Cell counts in parentheses. Subtypes were annotated using a combination of DEGs,
canonical marker genes, and previously published data (Fig. S3). (B) UMAP of vascular cells split by each time point. Cells are colored by neighborhood density
in UMAP space to illustrate shifts over time. Darker red colors indicate greater cell density in the UMAP or gray if not from indicated time point. (C) Proportion
of each vascular subtype at each time point among all vascular cells except for a U-vascular subtype. (D) Dot plot of marker genes that differentiate vascular
subtypes. Color of dots represents z-scored expression level, and size of dots represents percentage of cells with at least one UMI detected per gene. Inset
stars indicate statistically significantly greater expression compared with all other cells combined (adjusted P value < 10−10; Wilcoxon rank-sum with Bonferroni
correction; see Materials and methods). (E) Histological validation of the temporal progression of tip cells at the injury site. Uninjured, 1, 3, and 7 dpi spinal cord
sections were assessed by immunohistochemistry for podocalyxin (green) to label endothelial cells and for GFAP (purple) to label astrocytes and delineate the
injury site. In situ hybridization was used for apelin mRNA (Apln; white puncta) to label tip cells. White box represents the corresponding region of the magnified
images on the right. Arrowheads identify tip cells that coexpress podocalyxin and apelin. (F) Quantification of histological analysis represented as the average
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
10 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

astrocytes at 3 and 7 dpi (Fig. 7 E), suggesting that astrocytes are
important in vessel stabilization. Collectively, our data provide
putative interactions between vascular and neural cells with
endothelial cells via Angpt signaling after SCI. These data lead to
the potential hypothesis that tip cells promote vessel destabili-
zation during early angiogenesis, and astrocytes mediate vessel
stabilization at later periods.
Vegfa binding to Vegfr1 and Vegfr2 on endothelial cells fa-
cilitates the proliferation, survival, and directional sprouting of
tip cell filipodia during angiogenesis (Apte et al., 2019; Gerhardt
et al., 2003; Reinert et al., 2014). High Vegfa interaction scores
were present for many cell types across myeloid, vascular, and
macroglia categories (Fig. 7, B–D). Vegfa expression was highest
in astrocytes before injury and at 1 dpi, and Vegfr1 and Vegfr2
receptors were highly expressed by endothelial cells at all time
points. These data may lead to the hypothesis that major cues for
new vessel formation are derived from multiple cell types in-
cluding infiltrating myeloid as well as resident neural cells
(Fig. 7 F). Strikingly, the strongest interactions among the Vegf
family members after SCI were associated with Plgf binding to
Vegfr1 (Fig. 7, C and D). PLGF mediates angiogenesis by binding
to VEGFR1 (Nagy et al., 2003; Ribatti, 2008), and our expression
analysis showed tip cells and VSMC to be the primary source,
although lower levels of Plgf were also expressed by fibroblasts
and astrocytes (Fig. 7 F). Similar to our Angpt analysis above,
our Vegf analysis may lead to the potential hypothesis that tip
cells play a major role in facilitating their own migration and
growth, as well as those of other endothelial cells. Collectively,
our data provide a rational and temporal framework of how
endothelial cells interact with multiple cell types via Angpt
and Vegf pathways to revascularize the injured tissue, and
highlight the autocrine and paracrine effects of tip cells in this
process. However, it is important to note that these interaction
scores provide predictive models, rather than final experimental
findings, which can be used to generate hypotheses to be tested
in the future.
Analysis of macroglia heterogeneity reveals their molecular
relationships during gliosis
To assess macroglial heterogeneity, oligodendrocyte lineage
cells, astrocytes, and ependymal cells were further clustered
into nine distinct clusters that were identified based on anno-
tated marker genes (Fig. 8 A and Fig. S4 A). UMAP of macroglia
clusters revealed notable temporal progression after injury
(Fig. 8 B). We identified two ependymal and an astroependymal
subtypes. The two ependymal subtypes did not express molec-
ular markers distinct from each other (Fig. 8 E), and displayed
only slight differences in top DEGs (Fig. S5 A) suggesting that
they are likely a single population. However, astroependymal
cells displayed unique features and a notable temporal progres-
sion. Astroependymal cells were absent in the uninjured spinal
cord, but increased considerably at 1 dpi and then decreased
gradually by 7 dpi (Fig. 8, B and C). They were best identified by
expression of the crystallin Crym, and shared common markers
with both astrocytes (e.g., Timp1 and Gfap) and ependymal cells
(e.g., Vim and Tm4sf1; Fig. 8 E and Fig. S4 A). However, they did
not express any cilia-associated genes that are hallmarks of
ependymal cells (Fig. S5 A). Consistent with the sequencing
data, in situ hybridization for Crym showed highest expression
at 1 dpi in central canal cells near the injury site, which de-
creased significantly by 3 dpi (Fig. S4, B and C). Gliotic regions
around the injury site included GFAP+ cells that also expressed
Crym (Fig. S4 B).
The oligodendrocyte lineage cells segregated into expected
clusters that showed a spatial and temporal progression from
OPC to dividing OPC and preoligodendrocytes with mature oli-
godendrocytes forming their own cluster (Fig. 8, A and B). We
identified two OPC clusters (OPC-A and -B) that displayed dis-
tinct temporal and molecular features. Whereas OPC-A were
present in abundance at all time points, likely representing
prototypical OPCs, OPC-B appeared only after injury, with
numbers peaking at 1 dpi and decreasing significantly by 7 dpi
(Fig. 8 D). OPC-A expressed canonical OPC genes such as Cspg4
and Pdgfra (Fig. S4 A) but was best distinguished from other
non-OPC cell types by its expression of Tnr (Fig. 8 E). OPC-B was
distinguished from OPC-A by its expression of tenascin-C (Tnc)
and lower expression levels of Cspg4 and Pdgfra (Fig. 8 E and Fig.
S4 A). GO analysis of DEGs between OPC-A and OPC-B showed
biological processes associated with neural development and
myelination in OPC-A, and cell growth and proliferation in
OPC-B (Fig. S5 C). Interestingly, OPC-B had several features in
common with astroependymal cells, including its temporal
progression, and expression of Crym and Vim at lower levels
(Fig. 8 E and Fig. S4 A). In fact, hierarchical clustering of the top
DEGs showed OPC-B, astroependymal cells, and astrocytes
forming their own cluster, indicating the shared similarities
between these subtypes (Fig. S5 A). In addition, transcription
factor expression showed Ascl1 in OPC-A but Sox9 expression in
OPC-B (Fig. S5 B). Taken together, our data highlight the het-
erogeneity and potential lineage relationships between OPCs,
astrocytes, and ependymal cells that reflect the effect of SCI on
their differentiation state.
Although gliosis has been synonymous with reactive as-
trocytes, accumulating evidence indicates that OPCs are also an
important component of the glial scar (Hackett et al., 2016;
Hackett and Lee, 2016). To assess changes in OPC and astrocyte
function during injury progression, we tested for DEGs between
each sequential time point for each cell type and performed GO
enrichment analysis for biological processes. (Fig. 8 F). At 1 dpi,
top biological processes for both astrocytes and OPCs pertain to
translation and biosynthetic processes. By 3 dpi, astrocytes are
defined by processes related to mitochondrial function and ox-
idative phosphorylation, whereas OPCs are defined by mitosis
and cell proliferation. DEGs between 3 and 7 dpi in astrocytes
percent area of apelin and podocalyxin colocalization relative to the entire podocalyxin-positive area. Dots represent individual biological replicates. n = 3–6
mice per time point. Error bars, SEM. *, P < 0.05 compared with all other time points; one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni multiple comparisons. A, arterial; C,
capillary; Prop., proportion; Uninj, uninjured; U, unknown; V, venous; VSMC, vascular smooth muscle cell.
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
11 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

Figure 7.
Ligand–receptor analysis to assess endothelial and tip cell interactions with other cell types after SCI. (A) Overview of ligand–receptor
analysis method. Interaction scores were calculated as the mean of the average log-normalized expression of receptor gene in one cell type and the average
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
12 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

were related to lipid processing, whereas those in OPCs were
related to glial cell development, differentiation, and migration.
To assess the potential effects of reactive astrocytes and OPCs on
axonal growth, we compared the expression levels of axon
growth inhibitory molecules using a previously curated list
(Anderson et al., 2016; Fig. 8 G). Interestingly, inhibitory pro-
teoglycans such as Acan, Bcan, Ncan, and Vcan were expressed
preferentially by OPC-A and -B compared with astrocytes or
astroependymal cells. In summary, our data suggest that al-
though astrocytes and OPCs initially display similar generic
responses to injury, by 7 dpi, they acquire unique functional
identities, and many processes that have traditionally been at-
tributed to reactive astrocytes are also present in OPCs.
Myeloid-mediated mechanisms of gliosis and fibrosis
Previous studies have shown that STAT3 plays an important role
in astrogliosis (Bonni et al., 1997; Herrmann et al., 2008; Wanner
et al., 2013), but its upstream activators have yet to be clearly
defined. Since IL-6 cytokine family members are the main
STAT3 activators, we assessed their expression across all cell
types and found oncostatin M (Osm) expressed at highest levels
in myeloid cells, Il6 expressed at highest levels in fibroblasts, and
Clcf1 expressed at highest levels in astroependymal cells and
OPC-B (Fig. 9 A). Other IL6 cytokines were either not expressed
highly or dropped out of our sequencing analysis. Osm receptor
(Osmr) and the signaling coreceptor gp130 (Il6st) were expressed
highly in fibroblasts, pericytes, and astrocytes, and interaction
scores for IL-6 cytokine family members were highest for OSM
signaling between myeloid cells and these three cell types (Fig. 9
B). To validate the sequencing data, we used 7 dpi injury site
tissue to perform double in situ hybridization for Osm and Itgam
(i.e., CD11b) and found a significant increase in Osm in Itgam+
myeloid cells compared with Itgam−non-myeloid cells (Fig. 10, A
and C). To assess OSMR expression, we used immunohisto-
chemistry in adjacent sections and found increasing expression
of OSMR in both PDGFRβ+ fibroblasts and GFAP+ astrocytes in
the fibrotic and glial scars, respectively (Fig. 10, B, D, and E).
Taken together, our results lead to the hypothesis that the gp130
signaling pathway induced by OSM is a common mechanism by
which astrocytes and fibroblasts are preferentially activated by
myeloid cells after SCI.
To identify other putative pathways by which macrophage
subtypes mediate astrogliosis and fibrosis, we used a database of
all known ligand–receptor pairs (Ramilowski et al., 2015) to
calculate interaction scores between chemotaxis-inducing/in-
flammatory macrophages and astrocytes/fibroblasts at 3 and 7
dpi (Fig. 10 E). While many ligands expressed by macrophages
signaled to receptors on both astrocytes and fibroblasts
(i.e., common pathways), there were many more ligand–
receptor pairs unique to macrophage–fibroblast interactions
than macrophage–astrocyte interactions (i.e., distinct pathways).
These unique macrophage–fibroblast interactions included sig-
naling related to IL1α/β, Vegfa/b, Pdgfa, and Tgfβ1. Overall, the
highest interaction scores were associated with Spp1 and Apoe
signaling, which were common to both astrocytes and fibroblasts.
In general, chemotaxis-inducing and inflammatory macrophage
subtypes displayed interaction patterns similar to those of as-
trocytes and fibroblasts. In summary, our analysis highlights the
utility of our scRNA-seq dataset in identifying putative signaling
mechanisms that can be hypothesized to mediate astrogliosis and
fibrosis after SCI.
Discussion
The overall goal of this study was to generate a detailed tran-
scriptomic profile at the single-cell level in order to gain insight
into the complex cellular heterogeneity and interactions that
occur at the SCI site. We were successful in isolating every major
cell type known to be present at the injury site, which provided
an opportunity to assess the wound healing process with much
less bias than prior studies that focused on specific cell types and
molecules. In this regard, we found that myeloid subtypes dis-
play distinct temporal regulation of angiogenesis, gliosis, and
fibrosis. These results support previous studies showing that
myeloid depletion leads to reduced angiogenesis, astrogliosis,
and fibrosis after CNS injury (Amankulor et al., 2009; Bellver-
Landete et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2015), and provide new molecular
and cellular details by specific myeloid subtypes. Although there
are species-specific features of these pathological processes (e.g.,
mice have more fibrosis and less cavitation compared with rats
and humans), these differences appear at time points after those
investigated in this study. During the first 7 d after SCI, mice and
rat injury sites are mostly similar in terms of histopathology,
which is one of the reasons we chose these particular time
points.
It is important to note that while we were successful in iso-
lating all major cell types present at the injury site, the cell re-
covery numbers do not accurately reflect the true number of
cells that are present at the injury site (e.g., 930 astrocytes
versus 7,717 ependymal cells). This is likely due to the dissoci-
ation process being more optimal for certain cell types than
others, and is in line with our expectation that cells such as
log-normalized expression of ligand gene in a second cell type. To test for enrichment in specific pairs, we used a permutation test and compared scores against
these random values (see Materials and methods). (B) Dot plot of the interaction scores at 1 dpi between select myeloid subtypes as the ligand-expressing cell
(top axis) and endothelial/tip cells as the receptor-expressing cells (bottom axis). Specific ligand–receptor pairs are listed along left axis. Size of the dot
indicates –log10(P value). Color of dot indicates interaction score where dark red dots signify stronger predicted interactions. (C) Dot plot of the interaction
scores at 1 dpi between vascular subtypes and endothelial/tip cells. (D) Dot plot of interaction scores at 1 dpi between select macroglial subtypes (see Fig. 8)
and endothelial/tip cells. (E) Dot plot of expression of Angpts (left of dotted line) and their receptors (right of dotted line) in cell types across all time points.
(F) Dot plot of expression of VEGF family member ligands (left of dotted line) and their receptors (right of dotted line) in cell types across all time points. In
E and F, color of dots indicates z-scored expression, and size of dot indicates percentage of cells with at least one UMI detected per gene. Inset stars indicate
statistically significant greater expression compared with all other cells combined (adjusted P value < 10−10; Wilcoxon rank-sum with Bonferroni correction; see
Materials and methods). Div, dividing; Oligo, oligodendrocyte; OPC, oligodendrocyte progenitor cell; VSMC, vascular smooth muscle cell.
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
13 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

Figure 8.
Molecular and temporal profile of macroglial heterogeneity acutely after SCI. (A) UMAP plot of all macroglial cells from uninjured spinal cord
and 1, 3, and 7 dpi. Ependymal cells, astrocytes, OPCs and oligodendrocytes (Fig. 1 A) were extracted, reclustered, and reembedded in new UMAP coordinates.
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
14 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

leukocytes, endothelial cells, and ependymal cells would survive
the dissociation procedure better than more vulnerable neural
cell types such as oligodendrocytes, OPCs, astrocytes, and, most
of all, neurons. However, within a cell population, our data seem
to portray a more accurate representation of the subpopulation
proportions. For example, the percentages of microglia sub-
populations are similar between our single-cell and flow cy-
tometry data (Fig. 3, A and E). To consider potential confounds
from tissue dissociation, we compared our data to previous SCI
bulk RNA-seq data (Chen et al., 2013) and found that temporal
changes in gene expression were in agreement with the ap-
pearance of all the injured microglia subsets and their molecular
markers. For example, in the bulk RNA-seq data, expression of
P2ry12 was decreased by 2 d post-injury and restored to unin-
jured levels by 7 dpi, whereas activated microglia genes such as
Igf1, Spp1, Osm, and Msr1 remained elevated at 2 and 7 dpi com-
pared with uninjured controls (data not shown). However, using
bulk RNA-seq data to assess the effects of dissociation-induced
stress in uninjured tissue is difficult because we do not know
whether low FPKM values are due to basal expression levels that
are not physiologically relevant or whether stress-induced gene
expression was diluted by the bulk processing technique. Thus,
we tried to address this issue using expression data from the
Allen Brain Atlas and found very low expression of Igf1 (mostly
in neurons), and almost undetectable expression of Il1b. Since
Igf1 and Il1b were markers of the inflammatory microglia sub-
cluster, this suggests that their presence in our uninjured sam-
ples may be due to tissue dissociation. However, it is important
to note that the single-cell analysis allowed us to distinguish the
true homeostatic microglia subcluster in the uninjured tissue,
which was used for downstream analyses. This provides confi-
dence that our analyses were not confounded by dissociation-
induced artifacts. In addition, using in situ hybridization, a
recent study has shown Igf1 as a molecular marker of activated
microglia in the injured spinal cord (Bellver-Landete et al.,
2019), suggesting that inflammatory microglia present in our
injured samples are likely due to SCI rather than dissociation-
induced stress. Last, although a very recent study reported
expression of many immediate early genes due to dissociation-
induced stress in microglia (Hammond et al., 2019), we detected
only Fos among the DEGs in the inflammatory microglia.
We can begin to infer putative functions of the two macro-
phage subtypes by placing their temporal progression in context
of prior studies. Our finding that inflammatory and chemotaxis-
inducing macrophage subtypes do not correspond to the M1/M2
nomenclature (Fig. 4 E) is consistent with findings from other
scRNA-seq studies (Lin et al., 2019; Müller et al., 2017; Ydens
et al., 2020). In fact, we found that the commonly used M2
marker CD206 (Mrc1) was almost exclusively expressed by
border-associated macrophages (Fig. 4 C), which adds com-
plexity to the M1/M2 debate. However, there are parallels with
the generally accepted view that macrophages shift to a more
pro-inflammatory state over time after SCI (Kigerl et al., 2009;
Kroner et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2015). As the major peripheral
myeloid composition at the injury site shifts from monocytes to
chemotaxis-inducing macrophages and then to inflammatory
macrophages over time, there is a progressive decrease in
the classic anti-inflammatory enzyme arginase 1 that is asso-
ciated with increased pro-inflammatory biological processes in
inflammatory macrophages. Despite these pro-inflammatory
functions, our data identified several mechanisms by which
macrophages may have beneficial effects on the wound healing
process. For example, inflammatory macrophages express Vegfa,
which is well-known to be necessary for growth and differen-
tiation of endothelial cells during angiogenesis (Neufeld et al.,
1999). In addition, macrophages are a major source of osteo-
pontin (Spp1) and Apoe, both of which have neuroprotective roles
after SCI. Spp1 and APOE knockout mice both display worse
histopathology and behavioral recovery after SCI, whereas ad-
ministration of APOE mimetic improves recovery (Hashimoto
et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2018). Thus, a future
challenge is to limit the pro-inflammatory macrophage state
without interfering with macrophages’ beneficial effects on
wound healing.
Microglia were notable for their increasing expression of
Msr1 from inflammatory to migrating subtypes, as well as their
expression of the neuroprotective growth factor Igf1 (Guan et al.,
2015). We noted that dividing microglia expressed only mod-
erate levels of Igf1. It may be that their identity as dividing cells
makes them unique compared with the other two subtypes.
Interestingly, a recent microglia depletion study demonstrated
that they have a neuroprotective role by inducing astrogliosis
via Igf1, and that Igf1-expressing microglia are located between
the astroglial and fibrotic scars (Bellver-Landete et al., 2019).
Although the three nonhomeostatic microglia subtypes showed
a transcriptional decrease in P2ry12, there was some divergence
in our flow cytometry data, which showed a large population of
P2RY12hi/MSR1hi microglia at 1 dpi. Based on increased MSR1
expression, these are most likely dividing and migrating mi-
croglia, whose transcriptional decrease of P2ry12 has not yet
Cells are colored by macroglia subtype as shown in legend on right. Cell counts in parentheses. Subtypes were annotated using a combination of DEG, GO
enrichment analyses, canonical markers, and transcription factor expression (Figs. S4 and S5). (B) UMAP of macroglial cells split by each time point. Cells are
colored by neighborhood density in UMAP space to illustrate shifts over time. Darker red colors indicate greater cell density in the UMAP or gray if not from
indicated time point. (C) Proportions of subtypes among astrocytes and ependymal cells and (D) proportions of oligodendrocyte-lineage subtypes at each time
point. (E) Dot plot of marker genes that differentiate macroglial subtypes. Color of dots represent z-scored expression level and size of dots represent percent
of cells with at least one UMI detected per gene. Inset stars indicate statistically significant greater expression compared with all other cells combined (adjusted
P value < 10−10, Wilcox rank sum with Bonferroni correction; Materials and methods). (F) GO biological process terms associated with the top DEGs between
time points for astrocytes (left) and OPCs (right). OPC-A and OPC-B were combined for this analysis. (G) Violin plot of expression of common axon growth
inhibitors between astroependymal cells, astrocytes, and OPC subtypes. Expression levels are log-normalized counts along right axis. Assemb, assembly;
Biogen, biogenesis; Div, dividing; Oligo, oligodendrocyte; OPC, oligodendrocyte progenitor cell; Organiz, organization; Proc, process; Prop., proportion; Uninj,
uninjured.
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
15 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

manifested at the protein level. Indeed, by 7 dpi, these transi-
tional dividing/migrating microglia are significantly decreased.
However, this model does not account for the decreased P2ry12
expression in inflammatory microglia, which seem to be the
earliest nonhomeostatic microglia state since they are present in
uninjured tissue (most likely due to dissociation-induced stress;
Wu et al., 2017). Therefore, it is possible that rather than a
linear progression from inflammatory to dividing to migrating
Figure 9.
Ligand–receptor analysis of IL-6 cytokine family members identify oncostatin M signaling between myeloid cells and astrocytes/fibro-
blasts. (A) Dot plot of expression of IL-6 family member ligands (left) and their receptors (right) in previously identified cell subtypes across injury time points.
In each panel, dotted lines demarcate myeloid (left column), vascular (middle column), or macroglial (right column) subtypes. Color of dots represents z-scored
expression, and size of dots represents percentage of cells with at least one UMI detected per gene. Gene members of the IL-6 cytokine family that were not
expressed in at least 10% of any subtype at any time point were excluded. Inset stars indicate statistically significant greater expression compared with all other
cells combined (adjusted P value < 10−10; Wilcoxon rank-sum with Bonferroni correction; see Materials and methods). (B) Dot plot of ligand–receptor in-
teraction scores of IL-6 family member signaling shows highest predicted interactions between myeloid cells and astrocytes/fibroblasts via onctostatin M
signaling. Size of dot represents –log10(P value), and color represents interaction score where dark red colors indicate greater predicted interactions. Specific
IL-6 family ligand–receptor pairs are listed along left axis. Ligand-expressing cells are listed across top axis. Receptor-expressing subtypes are listed across
bottom axis. Select subtypes with greatest number of significant scores are shown. A, arterial; Astroepen., astroependymal; C, capillary; Div, dividing; Homeo,
homeostatic; Inflamm, inflammatory; Mac, macrophage; OPC, oligodendrocyte progenitor cell; V, venous.
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
16 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

Figure 10.
Validation of Osm and Osmr expression and ligand–receptor analysis of other potential interactions between macrophages and as-
trocytes/fibroblasts. (A) Left column: Histological validation of Osm expression in myeloid cells at all time points after injury. Spinal cord sections were
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
17 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

microglia, inflammatory and dividing/migrating microglia fol-
low a divergent path of activation from homeostatic microglia.
The vascular analysis revealed novel insight into the contri-
bution of tip cells and astrocytes during angiogenesis after SCI.
The data indicate that tip cells are highly dynamic; they appear
quickly at 1 dpi and are mostly gone by 7 dpi. They are a major
source of Angpt-2, which destabilizes vessels, as well as Plgf,
which promotes vessel formation, suggesting that tip cells me-
diate vessel remodeling during the few days after SCI. Inter-
estingly, their disappearance overlaps with increased expression
of Angpt-1 in astrocytes. Angpt-1 typically promotes vessel sta-
bilization, suggesting that astrocytes contribute to vessel mat-
uration after the initial phase of vascular remodeling by tip cells.
This is corroborated by a previous study demonstrating that
when the blood–spinal cord barrier is restored by 21 dpi, blood
vessels closely associated with astrocytes in the glial scar region
express Glut1, whereas vessels in the astrocyte-devoid fibrotic
region do not express this mature blood–spinal cord barrier
marker (Whetstone et al., 2003). These data highlight an un-
derstudied role of astrogliosis in vessel maturation after SCI, and
provide new insight into prior astrocyte ablation studies that
suggested “corralling” of infiltrating leukocytes by the astroglial
scar (Faulkner et al., 2004; Wanner et al., 2013). Our data pro-
vide mechanistic insight into previous astrocyte ablation studies
showing that reducing astrogliosis prevents maturation of
blood vessels, which leads to increased infiltration of leukocytes
into the spinal cord parenchyma surrounding the injury site
(Sofroniew, 2015). Other possible mechanisms of interactions
between astrocytes, vasculature, and axons need to be explored
in the future.
The appearance of astroependymal cells in our data is not-
able due to previous studies showing that ependymal cells can
differentiate into astrocytes and oligodendrocytes after SCI
(Barnab´e-Heider et al., 2010), although the extent of this dif-
ferentiation is debated (Ren et al., 2017). Consistent with these
previous findings, astroependymal cells were present only after
injury, and expressed astrocyte markers such as Gfap as well as
some overlapping markers with OPC-B. Hierarchical clustering
of the macroglial subtypes showed astrocytes, astroependymal
cells, and OPC-B in the same cluster (Fig. S5 A). In addition, GO
analysis of DEG between OPC-A and OPC-B showed epithelial
development genes enriched with OPC-B, which is notable since
ependymal cells are the epithelial lining of the central canal. The
transient appearance of astroependymal cells after SCI (1–3 dpi)
as well as their lack of proliferation may explain their limited
contribution to the glia population at the injury site, and raise
the possibility of whether experimentally extending their pres-
ence would enhance the regenerative response after SCI.
Our scRNA-seq dataset is the first comprehensive tran-
scriptomic analysis that captures virtually all cells that con-
tribute to the injury site pathology acutely after SCI. This dataset
can be used to assess not only heterogeneity of the cells that
comprise the injury site but also signaling pathways that un-
derlie cellular interactions at the injury site. Our own analysis
revealed novel insight into myeloid cell heterogeneity, and
specific signaling pathways by which unique myeloid subtypes
contribute to the wound healing process, including angiogenesis
and scar formation. These new insights can help decode the
complex processes that underlie SCI pathobiology.
Materials and methods
Mice and SCIs
For sequencing, flow cytometry, and histological validation of
tip cells, female C57BL/6J mice 8–10 wk of age were purchased
from Jackson Laboratory (stock 000664). Injury sites (or cor-
responding segments in uninjured controls) were dissected for
dissociation as described below. One sample from each time
point consisted of cells from a single spinal cord. In all other
samples, cells were pooled from two animals. In total, we se-
quenced three uninjured biological replicates (from five ani-
mals), three biological replicates at 1 dpi (from five animals), two
biological replicates at 3 dpi (from three animals), and two
biological replicates at 7 dpi (from three animals). For histo-
logical validation of activated fibroblasts, Postn-CreER mice
(Jackson Laboratory; stock 029645) were bred to Rosa26-EYFP
mice (Jackson Laboratory; stock 006148) to generate PostnEYFP
mice. All PostnEYFP mice were of the C57BL/6 background. To
induce EYFP expression, PostnEYFP mice were injected i.p. with
0.124 mg/g body weight of tamoxifen (MP Biomedicals; dis-
solved in 90% sunflower oil and 10% ethanol) for five consecu-
tive days. Contusive SCIs were performed 7 d after the last
tamoxifen injection.
Contusive SCIs for all mice were performed as previously
described (Zhu et al., 2015). Briefly, mice were anesthetized
using ketamine/xylazine (100 mg/15 mg/kg i.p.) and received a
65-kilodyne mid-thoracic (T8) contusion injury. Laminectomies
were performed at the T8 vertebral level followed by stabiliza-
tion via a spinal frame clamping the T7/T9 spinous processes. A
computer-controlled contusion injury was delivered using the
assessed by in situ hybridization for Itgam mRNA (also known as CD11b; green puncta) to label myeloid cells and Osm mRNA (white puncta). DAPI (blue)
denotes cell nuclei. White arrowheads indicate CD11b+/Osm+ nuclei. Dotted white box represents the corresponding region of the magnified images on the
right. Right column: Histological validation of oncostatin M receptor expression in astrocytes and fibroblasts at all time points after injury. Spinal cord sections
were assessed by immunohistochemistry for GFAP (red) to label astrocytes, PDGFRβ (green) to label fibroblasts, and OSMR (white). Scale bar, 15 µm.
(B) Quantification of Osm expression in myeloid (DAPI+/Itgam+/Osm+) and nonmyeloid (DAPI+/Itgam−/Osm+) cells shows significantly higher Osm expression in
myeloid cells. (C and D) Quantification showed increasing colocalization of OSMR with PDGFRβ (C) and GFAP (D) immunoreactivity over time. Error bars
represent SEM. *, P < 0.05 compared with uninjured tissue. One-way ANOVA and Tukey’s post hoc test. Each data point represents a biological replicate.
(E) Dot plot of interaction scores for select ligand–receptor pairs at 3 and 7 dpi. Data are segregated to show interactions unique between macrophages and
astrocytes (red bracket on top), unique between macrophages and fibroblasts (green bracket on bottom), or common between astrocytes and fibroblasts with
macrophages (blue bracket). Macrophage interactions were split further by chemotaxis-inducing (Chemo) or Inflammatory (Inflam) macrophage subtypes.
Astro, astrocyte; Fibro, fibroblast; Macro, macrophage; uninj, uninjured.
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
18 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

Infinite Horizon Impactor device (Precision Systems and In-
strumentation, LLC). Injured mice were given post-operative
fluids subcutaneously consisting of lactated Ringer’s solution (1
ml), gentamycin (5 mg/kg), and buprenorphine (0.05 mg/kg)
twice daily for 7 d. Bladders were manually expressed twice
daily until the end of the experiment. All procedures were in
accordance with University of Miami Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee and National Institutes of Health guidelines.
Tissue dissociation
Mice were anesthetized with Avertin (250 mg/kg i.p) before
transcardial perfusion with artificial cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
solution (87 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4, 26 mM
NaHCO3, 75 mM sucrose, 20 mM glucose, 1.0 mM CaCl2, and
2 mM MgSO4). The solution was oxygenated on ice for 10 min
before use. An 8-mm section of spinal cord centered at the injury
site (or the corresponding location in uninjured tissue) was
dissected. After removal of the meninges, the tissue was chop-
ped using a razor blade, washed with 5 ml CSF solution,
and centrifuged at 300 g for 5 min at 4°C. The pelleted cells
were processed using the Miltenyi Neural Tissue Dissociation
Kit-P (cat #130–092-628) following the manufacturer’s sug-
gested protocol to obtain a single-cell suspension. In brief, the
pellets were incubated in 2 ml of enzyme mixture 1 for 30 min at
37°C (50 µl Enzyme P in 1.9 ml Buffer X) with gentle shaking by
hand every 5 min. 30 µl of enzyme mixture 2 (10 µl Enzyme A in
20 µl Buffer Y) was added to the cell suspensions and manually
triturated (slowly, 10 times per sample) with a large-opening
(1,000 µm diameter) fire-polished pipette. After being incu-
bated for 10 min at 37°C, suspensions were triturated with a
medium- and then small-opening (750 µm and 500 µm diame-
ter, respectively) fire-polished pipette to produce single-cell
suspensions. Suspensions were strained through a 70-µM cell
strainer and washed with 10 ml CSF solution. Suspensions were
centrifuged at 300 g for 5 min, and supernatants were discarded.
Cell pellets were incubated in 10 µl Miltenyi Myelin Removal
Beads II (cat #130–096-733) and 90 µl MACS buffer (0.5% BSA in
HBSS without [w/o] Ca2+/Mg2+) for 15 min at 4°C. Cells were
washed with 10 ml MACS buffer and centrifuged at 300 g for
5 min. Supernatants were discarded, and pellets were resuspended
in 1 ml MACS buffer. Suspensions were then applied onto
equilibrated LS Miltenyi MACS Magnetic Bead Columns (cat
#130–042-401). Columns were washed with 2 ml MACS buffer,
flow-through was centrifuged at 300 g for 5 min, and super-
natants were discarded.
We enriched our second set (and third set for uninjured and
1-dpi samples) of replicates with astrocytes by pooling from two
spinal cord samples. We processed two spinal cords from each
injury time point in parallel as described above to yield two
suspensions per time point. One suspension from each time
point was kept on ice while the other was further processed with
the Miltenyi Anti-ACSA-2 MicroBead kit according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, suspensions were incu-
bated with Miltenyi ACSA2 Beads for 15 min at 4°C and subse-
quently washed with 1 ml of MACS buffer. Suspensions were
applied to LS Miltenyi MACS Magnetic Bead Columns, and the
remaining cells were flushed from each column using LS
Miltenyi column syringes and collected in separate tubes. ACSA-
2–enriched flow-throughs were then pooled with the single-cell
suspension from the other tissue.
Combined suspensions were centrifuged at 300 g for 5 min,
and the pellets were resuspended in Red Blood Cell Lysis buffer
(155 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM KHCO3, and 0.09 mM Na4-EDTA) and
incubated at room temperature (RT) for 1 min. After washing
with 5 ml MACS Buffer, suspensions were centrifuged at 300 g
for 5 min, and supernatants were discarded. Pellets were re-
suspended in 50 µl FACS buffer (1% BSA + 0.05% sodium azide
in HBSS w/o Ca2+/Mg2+) and processed for scRNA-seq. Before
submitting for sequencing, each sample underwent a quality
control assessment that included cell viability and number.
Briefly, cell suspensions were incubated with ViaStain AOPI
Staining Solution, and cell concentration/viability was assessed
using the Nexcelom Cellometer K2. Each submitted sample met a
viability cutoff of 80% or higher. Each sample was diluted ac-
cordingly to achieve a target cell capture of 10,000 cells, with
our actual capture for the replicates totaling 12,488 for uninjured
(five animals for three biological replicates), 21,010 for 1 dpi (five
animals for three biological replicates, 17,491 for 3 dpi (three animals
for two biological replicates), and 15,189 for 7 dpi (three animals for
two biological replicates).
Histology
Mice were anesthetized with Avertin as described above and
transcardially perfused with cold 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in
PBS. Whole spinal cords were dissected, post-fixed in 4% PFA for
2 h, and transferred to 30% sucrose in PBS solution for overnight
incubation on a shaker. An 8-mm segment of spinal cord cen-
tered at the injury site (or corresponding region in uninjured
samples) was embedded in O.C.T. compound (Tissue-Tek) and
sectioned sagittally at 16-µm thickness on a cryostat. Serial tis-
sue sections were mounted onto Superfrost Plus slides and were
stored at −20°C.
Immunohistochemistry
After drying at RT, tissue sections were washed once with PBS,
permeabilized with 0.3% Triton X-100 in PBS (PBS-T) for 10 min
at RT, and incubated in blocking solution (5% normal donkey
serum in PBS-T) for 1 h at RT. Sections were then incubated in
primary antibody diluted in 5% normal donkey serum overnight
at 4°C (primary antibodies are listed below). After primary an-
tibody incubation, slides were washed two times with PBS for
2 min each. Slides were incubated with appropriate Alexa Fluor
secondary antibodies (1:500 in PBS-T) for 1 h at RT. Slides were
washed twice with PBS for 2 min each and incubated with DAPI
(1:15,000) for 3 min at RT in the dark. Slides were washed with
PBS, and glass coverslips were mounted with Fluoromount-G
(Southern Biotech; cat #0100–01). Images were taken on an
Olympus Fluoview1000 Confocal Microscope or on an Olympus
VSI Slide Scanner. Primary antibodies used were: chicken anti-
GFAP (Abcam; ab4674/AB-304558; 1:500), rat anti-GFAP (Life
Technologies; 13–0300/AB-86543; 1:500), rabbit anti-PDGFRβ
(Abcam; ab32570/AB-777165; 1:200), goat anti-OSMR (R&D
Systems; AF-662-SP/AB-355511; 1:100), goat anti-Podocalyxin
(R&D Systems; AF1556/AB-354858; 1:200), rabbit anti-APOE
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
19 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

(Abcam; ab183597/AB-2832971; 1:100), CD63 (PE/Dazzle 594;
Biolegend; 143913/2565503; 1:100), and rat anti-CD11b (BioRad;
MCA74GA/AB-324660; 1:500).
In situ hybridization
Tissue sections were prepared as described above. In situ
hybridization was performed using the RNAscope Multiplex
Fluorescent Kit v2 (Advanced Cell Diagnostics; cat #323100)
with a few modifications to the manufacturer’s protocol. All
incubations were at RT unless otherwise noted. Briefly, slides
were incubated in hydrogen peroxide for 10 min. After washing
with distilled water, slides were incubated in 1× Target Retrieval
Solution at 95°C for 1 min. After washing with distilled water,
slides were incubated in 100% EtOH for 3 min. Slides were left
to dry before incubation in RNAscope Protease III solution at
40°C for 30 min (all 40°C incubations were in the Advanced
Cell Diagnostics HybEZ Oven). After incubation, slides were
washed with distilled water and incubated in probe solution for
2 h at 40°C. The following probes were purchased from Ad-
vanced Cell Diagnostics: C2 Mm-OSM (cat #427071-C2; 1:50),
C1 Mm-ITGAM (cat #311491; no dilution, used working solu-
tion), C2 Mm-Apln (cat #415371-C2; 1:50), and C3 Mm-Crym (cat
#466131-C3; 1:50). Following probe hybridization, each ampli-
fier was individually incubated with slides for 30 min at 40°C.
Before each fluorophore incubation, slides were incubated in
RNAscope HRP solution for 15 min at 40°C. Fluorophores for
each channel were prepared at 1:750 in RNAscope Diluent So-
lution, and individually incubated with slides for 30 min at
40°C. Different combinations of TSA Plus Cyanine 5 (Perkin
Elmer; cat #NEL745001KT) and TSA Plus Fluorescein (Perkin
Elmer; cat #NEL74100KT) were used with different probe
channels. After each individual fluorophore incubation, slides
were washed with RNAscope 1× Wash Buffer and incubated
with RNAscope HRP Blocker solution for 15 min at 40°C. After
in situ hybridization, slides were washed with PBS and im-
munohistochemically stained with appropriate primary anti-
bodies as described above.
Tissue quantifications
For each sagittal tissue section of the OSMR/GFAP/PDGFR-β
and OSM/GFAP/CD11b stain (immunohistochemistry and in situ
hybridization, respectively), three 40× confocal images were
taken surrounding the injury site (three serial tissue sections
were analyzed per animal). Images were analyzed using the
Cellomics High-Content Screening software (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). To quantify total signal colocalization between
GFAP/PDGFR-β and OSMR, we used the Target Activation V3
algorithm, with a minimum intensity threshold set to 350 for
OSMR fluorescence. To count the number of OSM+/CD11b+ nu-
clei within the injury site, we used the Colocalization V4 algo-
rithm. For each sagittal section of the Apln/podocalyxin/GFAP
stain, a 1,000-µm2 box was drawn surrounding the injury site.
Within this region, cells were analyzed for colocalization of Apln
and podocalyxin using the Colocalization Threshold function in
ImageJ. Areas were reported as the average area of all individual
colocalizing particles within the 1,000-µm2 box. Individual
particle areas were restricted to an area of 2 µm2 or larger using
the Analyze Particles function in ImageJ. For each sagittal sec-
tion of the Crym/GFAP stain, a 200-µm2 area of central canal
was isolated for analysis. To analyze the colocalization of Crym
particles within DAPI+ nuclei, the Analyze Particles function
was used in ImageJ.
Flow cytometry
Mice received SCI as described above, and injury sites were
processed for flow cytometry. Mice were anesthetized with
Avertin followed by transcardial perfusion with ice-cold PBS. An
8-mm segment of the spinal cord centered at the injury site was
dissected, and the meningeal layer was removed. Spinal cords
were manually dissociated by mechanical grinding against a 70-
µm cell strainer (the plunger of a 3-ml syringe was used for
mechanical dissociation). Strainers were washed with 10 ml
HBSS (w/o Ca2+/Mg2+) and centrifuged at 300 g for 10 min.
Supernatant was aspirated, and the pellet was resuspended in
10 µl Miltenyi Myelin Removal Beads II (Miltenyi Biotec; cat
#130–096-733) and 90 µl MACS buffer (0.5% BSA in HBSS w/o
Ca2+/Mg2+) and incubated for 15 min at 4°C. Cells were washed
with 10 ml MACS buffer and centrifuged at 300 g for 10 min. The
pellet was resuspended in 1 ml MACS buffer and applied onto
equilibrated LS Miltenyi MACS Magnetic Bead Columns (Mil-
tenyi Biotec; cat #130–042-401). Columns were washed with
2 ml MACS buffer, and the suspension was centrifuged at 300 g
for 5 min. The pellet was resuspended in RBC lysis buffer
(155 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM KHCO3, and 0.09 mM Na4-EDTA) and
kept at RT for 1 min. To identify live cells, the pellet was re-
suspended in Zombie Aqua Viability Dye and incubated for
30 min at RT (Biolegend; cat #423101). Following a wash in PBS
and spin at 300 g, cells were resuspended in Fix/Perm Solution
for 20 min at 4°C to fix and permeabilize the cells (BD Bioscience
Cytofix/Cytoperm; cat #554714). After incubation, cells were
washed with 1 ml of Perm/Wash solution. After centrifugation at
300 g for 10 min, supernatant was aspirated, and the cells were
incubated in blocking buffer mixture for 5 min at 4°C (1 μl anti-
mouse CD16/32 TruStain Fcx; RRID: AB-1574975; Biolegend; cat
#101320; and 99 μl FACS buffer [1% BSA + 0.05% sodium azide in
HBSS w/o Ca2+/Mg2+]). Antibody mixture was added directly to
the cell suspension and incubated for 20 min at 4°C. Cells were
washed with 5 ml FACS buffer and centrifuged at 300 g for
10 min. For fixation, cells were resuspended in 4% PFA and in-
cubated for 30 min at 4°C. After centrifugation at 300 g for
10 min, cells were resuspended in 250 µl FACS buffer and
transferred into a flat bottom 96-well plate. 10 µl of 123 eBeads
Counting Beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific; cat #01–1234-42)
were added to each sample well, and cells were kept at 4°C until
analysis on a Cytoflex Flow Cytometer (Beckman Coulter).
Antibody mixture for macrophages was as follows: CD16/32
TruStain Fcx (Biolegend; 101320/AB-1574975; 1:100), Zombie
Aqua Viability Dye (Biolegend; 423101/NA; 1:2.5), CD45.2 (APC-
Cy7; Biolegend; 103116/312981; 1:200), CD11b (APC; Biolegend;
101212/312795; 1:200), Ly6G (PerCP Cy5.5; Biolegend; 127616/
AB-1877271; 1:200), CD63 (PE/Dazzle 594; Biolegend; 143913/
2565503; 1:100), and APOE (Dylight 680; Novus Biologicals;
NB110-60531FR/NA; 1:100). Antibody mixture for microglia was
as follows: CD16/32, Zombie Aqua Dye, CD45.2, CD11b, and Ly6G
Milich et al.
Journal of Experimental Medicine
20 of 25
Single-cell analysis of spinal cord injury
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210040
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jem/article-pdf/218/8/e20210040/1418088/jem_20210040.pdf?casa_token=qq9ggThMeAkAAAAA:lfJOL9nrjm2eZrgHVv5VajS-eQVWOnimTe52ti3JPlCywZNlKryVI4r7UsqobI8SxNZq2f49pg by Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology user on 01 July 2021

===== Min2023_JBC_Blastema =====
Limb blastema formation: How much do we know at a
genetic and epigenetic level?
Received for publication, December 22, 2021, and in revised form, December 13, 2022 Published, Papers in Press, December 31, 2022,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102858
Sangwon Min
and Jessica L. Whited*
From the Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
Edited by Dennis Voelker
Regeneration of missing body parts is an incredible ability
which is present in a wide number of species. However, this
regenerative capability varies among different organisms.
Urodeles (salamanders) are able to completely regenerate limbs
after amputation through the essential process of blastema
formation. The blastema is a collection of relatively undiffer-
entiated progenitor cells that proliferate and repattern to form
the internal tissues of a regenerated limb. Understanding
blastema formation in salamanders may enable comparative
studies with other animals, including mammals, with more
limited regenerative abilities and may inspire future thera-
peutic approaches in humans. This review focuses on the cur-
rent state of knowledge about how limb blastemas form in
salamanders, highlighting both the possible roles of epigenetic
controls in this process as well as limitations to scientiﬁc un-
derstanding that present opportunities for research.
Regeneration is a process of restoring the lost organs, tissue,
appendages, or large body parts. The regenerative capacity
varies among different species spanning from ﬂatworms, such
as planaria, showing a fascinating ability to regenerate body
parts including new heads, tails, or even entire organism from
a small body fragment (1, 2), to vertebrates, including sala-
manders as well as teleost ﬁsh, such as zebraﬁsh, both of which
can fully restore many body parts including limbs and ﬁns (3,
4). Unlike these species, humans have more limited natural
abilities to regenerate complex body parts and can only
regenerate a few, such as liver, ribs, and digit tips (5–10). In
addition to such limited regenerative ability, humans often
exhibit incomplete regeneration; for example, the newly-
formed digit tips have cosmetic deformities and/or other
physiological limitations including numbness or hypersensi-
tivity (8–10). Loss of larger area, such as a full digit, a hand, a
foot, or the entire limb or organ, results in an inability to
regenerate and, thus, requires allogenic transplant or use of
prosthetics as treatment. Such inability to regenerate in
humans has sparked a profound interest in several comple-
mentary biomedical ﬁelds towards understanding and, ulti-
mately, stimulating regeneration. Among them, understanding
limb regeneration in salamanders has held longstanding sci-
entiﬁc intrigue over the last several centuries. The advent of
molecular genetic tools operational in salamanders (11–21) is
now enabling a more solid and reﬁned understanding of nat-
ural limb regeneration.
In salamanders, successful limb regeneration can be divided
into two major phases: (1) formation of a blastema that re-
sembles the early embryonic limb bud, with a few key differ-
ences
which
include
innervation-dependent
blastema
formation (22–24) and (2) blastema-mediated redevelopment,
which involves growth and redifferentiation (Fig. 1). Upon
amputation, a specialized wound epidermis is formed via cell
migration (25) within few hours after injury. Wound epidermal
cells become innervated and this transient tissue is thickened
with continued migration of dermal cells beneath the wound
epidermis and cellular proliferation (26–28). Subsequently, a
visible blastema is formed at the end of the stump, directly
beneath the wound epidermis. The blastema cells undergo
several rounds of expansion until the blastema acquires a cone
shape that then broadens and initiates differentiation. These
cells grow in a proximal-to-distal direction obeying the rule of
distal transformation, in which tissues can only regenerate the
structures distal to the amputation plane (29, 30), and the new
tissues reconnect to the stump. The patterning and growth
processes following blastema formation largely recapitulates
the behavior of a limb bud that forms during embryonic limb
development (27, 31).
During regeneration, considerable changes take place,
including stem and progenitor cell differentiation into multiple
tissue types and reactivation of genes originally expressed
during development (27, 32). Such processes are associated
with signaling pathways that direct epigenetic reprogramming
of the chromatin state through histone modiﬁcation to alter
the transcriptional landscape (33, 34). As genomic DNA is
wrapped
around
histones,
numerous
different
post-
translational modiﬁcations of histone tails occur regulating
opening or closing of transcriptional regions during regener-
ation. These modiﬁcations include acetylation, methylation,
phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and sumoylation (35). In
addition, DNA methylation/demethylation is important as it is
involved in epigenetic processes including gene expression,
RNA splicing, and imprinting (36–41). While extensive
research has now focused on deﬁning the repertoire and
abundance of mRNAs expressed during limb regeneration,
very little is known about the involvement of epigenetics in
blastema formation. In this review, we will focus on currently
* For correspondence: Jessica L. Whited, jessica_whited@harvard.edu.
REVIEWS
J. Biol. Chem. (2023) 299(2) 102858 1
© 2023 THE AUTHORS. Published by Elsevier Inc on behalf of American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. This is an open access article under the CC
BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

known molecular and epigenetic regulation behind successful
blastema formation.
Wound healing in response to injury
Limb regeneration in salamanders is initiated in response
to injury by forming the wound epidermis. Stress signals and
inﬂammation (42–44) are upregulated upon trauma through
multiple mechanisms which have not been fully elucidated.
Following amputation, thrombin catalyzes the formation of
ﬁbrin clot to protect the wound tissue as well as provide
temporary adhesive substrate for the epidermal cell migration
(45, 46). The wound is usually closed 2 to 6 h post-
amputation with migration of nonmitotic epidermal basal
cells through the clot forming a wound epidermis (25). These
migrating cells are primarily comprised of a single layer of
keratinocytes (47) and are supplied from proximal mitotic
epidermal cells (25, 48). The wound epidermis is distin-
guished by the expression of antigens WE3 and WE6 (49, 50)
which are not expressed in uninjured epidermis, although the
molecular identity of these antigens has not yet been deter-
mined. Similarly, keratin 5 (KRT5) and KRT17 is expressed in
the basal layer during wound healing process and remains
until late bud-blastema stage (51). Several studies have cata-
loged global gene expression in wound epidermis (52–54) and
some have used gene expression in single cells to deﬁne
cellular subtypes (16).
The importance of wound epidermis requirement for
blastema formation has been demonstrated by suturing the
skin ﬂap over the amputated surface (55), repetitive removal
of wound epidermis (56), or insertion of amputated stump
into the body cavity (57), all of which lead to a block in
outward blastema formation and, thus, regenerative failure.
Scar tissue can also form when the formation of wound
epidermis is experimentally blocked, which may further
contribute
to
regenerative
failure
in
salamander
limbs
(58–60). Repetitive limb removal has been shown to impair
limb regeneration and to simultaneously promote a scar-like
tissue composition, with accompanying changes to gene
expression—reminiscent of scarring in mammalian contexts
(61). These data imply the importance of scar-free healing
promoted by the wound epidermis as a basis for blastema
formation and regeneration. In mammals, wound healing
typically results in scar tissue formation, with some excep-
tions:
for
example,
scar-free
wound
healing
has
been
observed in human fetal skin prior to the third trimester
(62); the human oral cavity typically heals scar-free (although
pathological complications can lead to scars (63)); the Afri-
can spiny mouse has an incredible ability to fully restore its
skin, hair follicles, sweat glands, dermis after large skin loss
(64). Scar formation is a result of accumulation of collage-
nous ﬁbers at wounded site (65), which is associated with
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β) signaling affecting
extracellular matrix organization (66). TGF-β has been
identiﬁed as an important regulator of wound healing as it
induces
proliferation
of
skin
ﬁbroblasts
and
promotes
migration of ﬁbroblasts and keratinocytes (67, 68). In Xen-
opus laevis froglets, wounding triggers high expression of
TGF-β, which results in scar-less wound healing (69).
However, its expression is decreased in adults, resulting a
scar-like tissue formation (69).
In
axolotl
salamanders,
recent
studies
showed
that
important factors for wound epidermis formation without
scarring are controlled by epigenetic regulation involving
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)—a process in
which
the
epithelial
cells
gain
a
motile
mesenchymal
phenotype by losing the junctions and polarity (70, 71).
Pharmacological inhibition of both canonical and nonca-
nonical TGF-β signaling showed signiﬁcant decrease in EMT
marker expression and a reduction in the rate of keratinocyte
migration during wound closure (72). This study suggests
that canonical and noncanonical TGF-β signaling regulates
wound closure through epigenetic modiﬁcation directing
keratinocytes to migrate by undergoing EMT to lose their
polarity and anchorage (70, 71). In addition, SALL4, a tran-
scription
factor
which
is
not
detectably
expressed
in
Figure 1. Key stages of salamander limb regeneration. Upon amputation, the epidermal cells migrate over the amputated site forming wound
epidermis. Within days, wound epidermis becomes innervated which then becomes the apical epidermal cap (AEC). Blastema-forming cells are attracted to
the AEC resulting a blastema formation which will continue to undergo proliferation and differentiation until a newly regenerated limb is formed.
Figure adapted from McCusker et al. 2015 (147).
JBC REVIEWS: Limb blastema formation at genetic and epigenetic level
2
J. Biol. Chem. (2023) 299(2) 102858

uninjured tissue, has been identiﬁed to play a role in scar-free
wound healing in axolotls. SALL4 expression is upregulated
in cells localized to the wounded area of the epidermal,
dermal, and muscle regions (73), where it regulates collagen
transcription. In Xenopus tadpoles, SALL4 was shown to be
highly expressed in the blastema during hindlimb regenera-
tion (74). It has been suggested that SALL4 keeps the cells in
an undifferentiated state in the blastema in both axolotls and
Xenopus (73, 74). Experimental downregulation of SALL4
resulted in excessive collagen deposition at the wound site
(73), a hallmark of scar formation (65). Interestingly, SALL4
has been previously shown to interact with transcription
factors OCT4, NANOG, and SOX2 (75–77), which function
in cellular reprogramming through altering epigenetic land-
scape (78, 79). Currently, the cooperative role of TGF-β and
SALL4, if any, in wound healing is unclear. However, these
studies underscore the importance of epigenetic modiﬁcation
in proregenerative wound healing.
Blastema formation
Innervation is required for AEC formation
Within 2 to 3 days post-amputation, wound epidermis be-
comes innervated as cells accumulate and the apex thickens
(80, 81). In response to nerve signals, wound epidermis ma-
tures and is then referred to as the apical epidermal cap (AEC).
The AEC undergoes several additional changes, including
stratiﬁcation, prior to—or in parallel with—blastema forma-
tion (82).
Innervation of the wound epithelium is a critical event
directing regeneration as denervated limbs do not regenerate
(83) but instead heal with a densely packed scar-like layer of
cells (22, 23). The importance of innervation in regeneration
was also observed in the accessory limb model (ALM). This
model system is a proxy for limb regeneration insofar as it
seeks to experimentally deﬁne what tissues or molecular
signaling components are sufﬁcient for growth of new limbs
(84). In this method, skin from the posterior region of the limb
is grafted to the anterior region of the contralateral limb, and
brachial nerve is surgically deviated to the site of this experi-
mentally prepared anterior skin wound. This operation results
in the formation of an ectopic blastema equivalent to an
amputation-induced blastema, which, in the best cases, goes
on to develop into a new limb (84). However, if the nerve is not
deviated toward the skin graft, the ectopic blastema is not
formed and instead scar-free wound healing occurs (84).
Ectopic limb formation is therefore made possible due to the
positional disparity between grafted cells and those at the
wounded site, in collaboration with nerves. This interaction
stimulates the intercalation of an amputated limb ﬁeld, thus
generating an ectopic limb.
Using the ALM system, the importance of innervation
was supported by investigating the role of buttonhead-like
zinc-ﬁnger transcription factor SP9 in limb regeneration.
SP9 is expressed in the apical ectoderm of developing limb
buds of the larva and regulates the outgrowth of the
developing limb (85). An ALM assay demonstrated that SP9
expression is dependent on innervation as SP9 is reex-
pressed after amputation in the basal keratinocytes of the
wound epidermis and remains continuously expressed dur-
ing limb regeneration (86). However, another study discov-
ered that ALM with nondeviated nerves show ectopic limb
generation when treated with FGFs and BMPs – FGF2,
FGF8, and BMP2 or BMP7 promoted the most robust rates
of limb formation (87, 88). FGF2, BMP2, and BMP7 are
neurotrophic factors (89), and FGF8 is expressed in both the
basal layer of the AEC (87, 89) and the dorsal root ganglion
(where sensory nerve cell bodies reside) (90). This study
suggests that FGF2, FGF8, and BMP2 or BMP7 may perhaps
be sufﬁcient to generate ectopic limb in the absence of
innervation.
Epigenetic regulation during AEC formation
Nerve signaling promotes wound epidermis transition to
AEC, and denervation or lack of wound epidermis results in
failure to form the blastema (55, 57, 86). During the process
of AEC formation, subjacent tissues to the wound epidermis
including those harboring ﬁbroblasts, muscle, and skeletal
cells undergo activation, reenter the cell cycle, commence
proliferation, and, in cases of those destined to become
blastema cells, migrate to the tip of the stump (91) (Fig. 2).
Upon injury, SP9 expression is reinitiated by reopening of
the gene’s regulatory region, allowing access to regulatory
factors to initiate transcription (92). This event demonstrates
that keratinocytes undergo nerve-dependent dedifferentia-
tion into a limb bud–like state through epigenetic modiﬁ-
cation and mimicking the limb development stage. In the
ALM system, innervation was shown to downregulate DNA
methyltransferase 3a (DNMT3a) expression in the wound
epidermis and subsequently enhance SP9 expression (92). As
DNMT3a can perform de novo methylation of CpG islands
(93), decrease in DNMT3a expression during innervation
could be required for the wound epidermis to differentiate
and acquire the signaling properties of the AEC, perhaps by
preventing methylation of SP9 regulatory regions (86). In
contrast, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), which functions to
repress
transcription
by
assembling
heterochromatin
through histone deacetylation (94), was upregulated in the
wound epithelium (95, 96). Conversely, denervation prior to
amputation or HDAC1 inhibition impeded regeneration (95,
96), in an agreement with previous studies where HDAC
inhibition hampered regeneration of axolotl larvae tail and
Xenopus tadpole tail and limbs (97–99). This study further
reported that treatment with neurotrophic factors FGF2,
FGF8, and BMP7, introduced earlier (87), resulted in a
partial rescue in HDAC1 expression and limb regeneration.
Interestingly, FGF8, which is expressed in both dorsal root
ganglion and AEC basal cells (87, 89, 90), was shown to be
regulated by SP9 during embryonic limb development (85).
Taken together, it is possible that, through concerted
epigenetic regulation of gene expression, neurotrophic fac-
tors may repress DNMT3a to subsequently upregulate SP9
and
FGF8
expression
and
thus
activate
HDAC1
for
JBC REVIEWS: Limb blastema formation at genetic and epigenetic level
J. Biol. Chem. (2023) 299(2) 102858 3

regeneration (Fig. 3). However, this hypothesis needs addi-
tional experimentation to be fully tested.
Blastema formation and growth
Dedifferentiated blastema cells exhibit lineage restriction
Following AEC formation, blastema progenitor cells accu-
mulate to form the early blastema. Prior to blastema forma-
tion, resident cells at the wounded site reenter the cell cycle
(100, 101), leading to proliferation. To examine the mecha-
nistic property of cycling cells (4N), the transcriptional proﬁles
of cycling cells were compared to that of the wound epidermis
and nondividing cells (2N). Surprisingly, pathway analysis
revealed that several growth factor signaling pathways are
suppressed in 4N cell population, while HIPPO, WNT, and
TGF-β signaling, which are important in wound epidermis and
blastema formation, were upregulated (72, 102, 103). To
examine which tissues contribute to blastema formation,
transplant experiments have been performed. Early trans-
plantation experiments leveraged experimentally created trip-
loid axolotls, with tissues grafted into typical diploid hosts (26,
104). More recent chimeras have been generated using
transgenic axolotls with ubiquitous GFP expression, often
taking advantage of existing embryonic fate maps in the
Figure 2. Blastema formation with the migration of blastema-forming cells. Newly activated blastema-forming cells migrate towards the stump
forming the blastema.
Figure 3. Proposed epigenetic regulation of blastema formation after wound healing. (Phase I, top) Innervation downregulates DNMT3a in the wound
epidermis which then leads to initiation of FGF8 transcription by transcription factor SP9. FGF8 is then released to extracellular matrix. (Phase II, bottom)
FGF8 present in the extracellular matrix initiates cell signaling through autocrine or paracrine signaling to induce HDAC1 contributing to blastema for-
mation. DNMT3a, DNA methyltransferase 3a; FGF, ﬁbroblast growth factor; HDAC, histone deacetylase.
JBC REVIEWS: Limb blastema formation at genetic and epigenetic level
4
J. Biol. Chem. (2023) 299(2) 102858

experimental design (13, 105–107). For example, transplanting
GFP-labeled Schwann cells and epidermal cells showed
contribution to blastema formation, and grafts indicated these
cell types produce daughter cells of similar cell types in the
regenerate limb (108) (Fig. 4A). Interestingly, dermal cells
initially contributed to blastema but later differentiated into
dermal and cartilage, demonstrating acquisition of bipotency
(26, 108) (Fig. 4B).
More reﬁned lineage tracing is enabled by genetic labeling
methods, and these are now being applied in salamander
systems. Muscle cells have been documented to have different
activities upon amputation depending on type and life stage of
salamander. While both larval and adult newts have muscle
satellite cells, which serve as stem cells for muscle regeneration
in many other systems (109–111), only larval newts utilize
satellite cells for limb regeneration, whereas mononucleated
myoﬁbers are dedifferentiated to serve as muscle progenitors
in adult newts (112, 113). It is not clear why a dedifferentiation
strategy is used exclusively in adults. Possible explanations
might include compartmentalization of function, a scenario in
which satellite cells are used for muscle maintenance whereas
dedifferentiation is used for regeneration upon injury.
Unlike tissues such as skin and muscle, which show no
evidence
of
transdifferentiation,
periosteum-derived
cells
contribute to the blastema formation, but their ultimate
contribution to the regenerate limb appears in descendent cells
populating numerous tissues including skeletal (cartilage,
bone, periosteum), dermal, and ﬁbroblast-like tissue (114)
(Fig. 4C). Transplant studies using cartilage demonstrated that
cartilage can contribute to cartilage, tendons, and perichon-
drium (108). However, whether the contribution of cartilage is
attributable to inclusion of perichondrium or not is still
unclear.
From these studies, it could be concluded that the blastema
is a heterogenous tissue consisting of multipotent and lineage-
restricted progenitor cells, some of which arise via stem cell
activation and some of which may arise via dedifferentiation.
Blastema cells may also be derived from the activation of
uncharacterized cells with stem cell-like properties. In cases of
either stem cell activation or dedifferentiation, it remains un-
clear whether progenitor cells randomly undergo activation or
dedifferentiation to form blastema or whether there are spe-
ciﬁc cells from each lineage that are reserved for use as blas-
temal progenitors. Each of these possible scenarios could
theoretically be inﬂuenced by epigenetic mechanisms that
await discovery.
Maintaining positional memory is essential for axolotl limb
regeneration
In addition to lineage restriction, dedifferentiated axolotl
blastema cells possess positional memory, a molecular system
for maintaining the position of origin in relation to neigh-
boring cells (115) (Fig. 5). Positional memory is restricted to
ﬁbroblast-derived dedifferentiated cells, including cartilage
cells, which form the blastema (108, 116–118). These cells
proliferate and differentiate by the rule of distal trans-
formation, forming only the lost structures (108, 118). Posi-
tional memory is apparent after individually transplanting
undifferentiated blastemas from wrist, elbow, and mid-upper
arm levels of the forelimb to the blastema-stump junction of
hindlimbs. The results showed that wrist, elbow, and mid-
upper arm level blastemas were directed correctly to the cor-
responding hindlimb region—ankle, knee, and femur, respec-
tively (119). These outcomes were altered by retinoic acid
treatment, which causes proximalization of transplanted
blastemas (119), similar to its effects in bullfrog and axolotl
limb regeneration following simple amputation (120–122). It is
suggested that retinoic acid treatment causes proximalization
through upregulation of genes that are expressed in proximal
regions (123). Those include stylopod-speciﬁc transcription
factors MEIS1/2 (124–126) and PBX1 (127). In addition, genes
that are expressed in the distal region and required for distal
identity including HOXA13 (108, 127), LHX9 (128), and
SPRY1 (129) were downregulated (123). A more recent study
further investigated experimental proximalization (130) using
SHOX2, which had previously been discovered to serve as a
marker gene whose expression is enriched in blastemas
Figure 4. Contribution map of various cells during limb regeneration. A, Schwann cells and epidermal cells both contribute to blastema formation.
However, Schwann cells and epidermal cells are lineage restricted contributing to itself. B, dermal cells contribute to blastema and then behaves as bipotent
progenitor cell giving rise to dermal and cartilage. C, periosteum-derived cells are multipotent which contributes to blastema then regenerates dermal,
ﬁbroblast-like, and skeletal cells (cartilage, bone, periosteum).
JBC REVIEWS: Limb blastema formation at genetic and epigenetic level
J. Biol. Chem. (2023) 299(2) 102858 5

derived from proximal amputations versus those derived from
distal amputations (15). Upon grafting a full-thickness wrist
skin on the amputated stylopod (upper arm or thigh), in which
the host skin was stripped prior to amputation, SHOX2
expression was detected in the blastema despite the fact that
grafted tissue was of distal origin (130). These studies indicate
a possible role for epigenetic regulation in maintaining posi-
tional memory of cells during limb regeneration, but additional
work is necessary to support this prediction.
Not all cells are thought to have positional memory, and our
current knowledge about the kind of cellular programming
needed to maintain positional memory is lacking. As recently
reported, anteroposterior and dorsoventral skin grafting seems
to show minimal effect in positional memory. During limb
regeneration, SHH is expressed in the posterior region of the
blastema. However, only a few cells from the blastema were
able to express SHH when GFP-labeled anterior skin was
grafted to the posterior side prior to amputation (130). On the
contrary, SHH expression remained in the anterior side of the
blastema upon grafting GFP-labeled posterior skin to anterior
side (130). Similar stability in positional memory was also seen
after transplanting a GFP-labeled wrist blastema to an
amputated upper arm of non-GFP axolotl. In this study, only
the hand displayed GFP expression (118). When GFP-labeled
cartilage from the ﬁngertip is transplanted to the upper arm,
GFP-labeled blastema cells showed contribution only to the
hand (108). In contrast, the muscle- and Schwann cell–derived
blastema lacks positional memory as their regenerative pattern
initiated immediately distal from the recipient blastema (108).
From these data, it is possible that positional memory of each
tissue type is maintained differently, and it is also possible that
each tissue shows tissue-speciﬁc cellular behavior in limb
regeneration.
During limb development, the stylopod (upper arm or
thigh), zeugopod (lower arm or leg), and autopod (hand or
foot) are speciﬁed by MEIS, HOXA11, and HOXA13 expres-
sion (131). When upper arm blastemas or wrist blastemas are
transplanted and stained for MEIS and HOXA3, a great
number of upper arm–derived blastema cells are MEIS+ at the
proximal end, whereas wrist-derived blastema cells show
restricted expression of HOXA13 at the distal end (108).
When Schwann cell–derived blastema cells are stained, both
MEIS and HOXA13 expression was not observed, indicating
that Schwann cells do not have position-speciﬁc identity.
Figure 5. Positional memory is maintained in the cell. Cartoon showing that positional memory is maintained in each cell. (Top) Transplanting GFP+
distal blastema to proximal amputated region shows that GFP+ blastema cell contribution is limited to host hand. (Bottom) GFP+ proximal blastema
transplanted to proximal amputated region shows that GFP+ blastema cells contribute to the entire host limb.
JBC REVIEWS: Limb blastema formation at genetic and epigenetic level
6
J. Biol. Chem. (2023) 299(2) 102858

Positional memory of blastema cells may be retained by
epigenetic memory
Among the blastema cells, not all cells must theoretically
possess both progenitor cell properties and positional memory.
As each blastema cell theoretically may retain a different po-
sitional memory, distinct epigenetic states may be required for
maintenance. Despite such possible intricate regulation, not
much is known about the epigenetic landscape of the blastema
and
its
modiﬁcation
during
different
stages
of
limb
regeneration.
In X. laevis, limb regeneration occurs in a similar manner as
axolotls by forming a blastema which is thought to obtain the
limb patterning properties from the stump cells and is retained
throughout regeneration (132). To test whether the patterning
information is retained as epigenetic memory, the histone
marks including histone
H3 at
lysine
4 trimethylation
(H3K4me3) and histone H3 at lysine 27 trimethylation
(H3K27me3) were examined in developing limb bud and
regenerative blastema (133). When histone modiﬁcation pro-
ﬁles of developing limb buds and regenerating blastemas were
compared through a genome-wide comprehensive analysis,
both limb bud and blastema cells showed similar histone
marks. These results support that histone modiﬁcations are
maintained as epigenetic memory (133).
Although axolotls also show that the patterning mecha-
nism in development and regeneration are largely similar as
in Xenopus (31), conducting this experiment in axolotls is
important to determine if the outcome is similar. Future
comparative studies examining of epigenetic landscape that
occur in cells with different positional memories during
regeneration and development will provide further insights
into
the
epigenetic
mechanisms
underlying
limb
regeneration.
Conclusion and future perspective
Limb regeneration is a dynamic cellular process which is
dependent on blastema formation followed by subsequent
proliferation and differentiation. Once the blastema is created,
the regeneration process mimics the limb development pro-
gram from several perspectives, albeit on a different scale.
The gene expression changes underlying these events imply
that epigenetic modiﬁcations and relationships may be key
upstream controls. As epigenetics changes play a large role in
biological process at the chromatin reorganization and tran-
scription level, histone posttranslational modiﬁcations or
DNA modiﬁcations lead to “open” or “closed” chromatin,
leading to changes in gene expression (35). As previously
discussed, current knowledge is limited to the role of
DNMT3a and HDAC1, which has been investigated in ALM
(92) and during tail/limb regeneration (95–97), respectively.
Unfortunately, compared to other organs and tissues from
other organisms, epigenetic mechanisms are not still well
understood and the science addressing these issues in sala-
mander limb regeneration is still in its infancy. However, a
study leveraging ATAC-seq, which quantiﬁes chromatin
accessibility of DNA based on transposase insertion in vitro,
was recently performed to proﬁle the chromatin accessibility
dynamics of the blastema and redifferentiated cells (134). As
this study provides temporal enrichment of transcription
factors,
further
complementary
studies
proﬁling
histone
modiﬁcations to understand important aspects of regenera-
tion including blastema formation, positional memory, and
cellular
reprogramming
may
arise
based
on
this
data.
Therefore, elucidating epigenetic controls of limb regenera-
tion promises to inform regenerative biology and, ultimately,
regenerative medicine.
Axolotls show remarkable ability to regenerate different
body parts including limbs, tail, upper and lower jaw, lens, and
many others (3, 135–137). Perhaps due to their multiple
regenerative abilities, axolotl cells show plasticity during
regeneration and can even be coaxed to generate supernu-
merary limbs, as shown with ALM. Taking advantage of these
plastic cellular properties, experimentally modulating the
epigenetic landscape of stump cells in nonregenerative con-
texts might enable regeneration. Possible starting point for
such explorations are contexts in which axolotl regeneration is
blocked, which includes repeated amputation (61) or full-
thickness skin ﬂap suturing across the amputation plane
(55). Insights from these kinds of approaches might then be
applied to the stumps of otherwise non-regenerative extant
animals, such as mammals.
In mammals, digit tip is a comparably well-studied model
for regeneration and shares similar regenerative phases with
axolotl limb regeneration including inﬂammation, histolysis,
wound closure, blastema formation, and differentiation to
restore amputated part (138, 139). Unlike axolotls, which
have a pool of both multipotent and lineage-speciﬁc cells in
the blastema, mouse digit tip regeneration occurs through
lineage-restricted progenitor cells (140, 141). In addition,
digit tip regeneration proceeds without innervation (142)
implying that nerve-mediated signals are not necessary for
the initial step of regeneration. However, it is currently un-
clear how the pool of lineage-restricted mouse stem and
progenitor cells could be induced to have similar regenerative
potential
to
salamanders.
Perhaps
given
the
restricted
regenerative capacity after mouse digit tip amputation,
reprogramming digit tip cells into pluripotent stem cells akin
to limb bud cells might enable regeneration following more
proximal amputations (143–146). Another, non mutually-
exclusive possibility is that mammalian cells can be tweaked
using epigenetic approaches to express genes necessary for
salamander limb regeneration. These ideas are exciting to
consider, and research investigating the natural cellular
reprogramming
that
occurs
during
limb
regeneration,
leveraging new tools to probe genomics and epigenomics, is
likely to explode in coming years and decades.
Author contributions—S. M. and J. L. W. conceptualization; S. M.
writing–original draft; S. M. and J. L. W. writing–review and editing.
Funding and additional information—This work was supported by
R01HD095494 (J. W.) and Harvard University Faculty of Arts and
Sciences.
JBC REVIEWS: Limb blastema formation at genetic and epigenetic level
J. Biol. Chem. (2023) 299(2) 102858 7

Conﬂict of interest—The authors declare that they have no conﬂicts
of interest with the contents of this article.
Abbreviations—The abbreviations used are: AEC, apical epidermal
cap; ALM, accessory limb model; DNMT, DNA methyltransferase;
EMT, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition; FGF, ﬁbroblast growth
factor; HDAC, histone deacetylase; TGF-β, transforming growth
factor-beta.
References
1. Dalyell, J. G. (1814) Observations on Some Interesting Phenomena in
Animal Physiology Exhibited by Several Species of Planari, A. Constable,
Edinburgh
2. Morgan, T. H. (1898) Experimental studies of the regeneration of
Planaria maculata. Roux’s Arch. Dev. Biol. 7, 364–397
3. Young, H. E., Bailey, C. F., and Dalley, B. K. (1983) Gross morphological
analysis of limb regeneration in postmetamorphic adult Ambystoma.
Anat. Rec. 206, 295–306
4. Morgan, T. H. (1900) Regeneration in teleosts. Archiv für Mikroskopische
Anatomie 10, 120–134
5. Michalopoulos, G. K. (2007) Liver regeneration. J. Cell Physiol. 213,
286–300
6. Philip, S. J., Kumar, R. J., and Menon, K. V. (2005) Morphological study
of rib regeneration following costectomy in adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis. Eur. Spine J. 14, 772–776
7. Illingworth, C. M. (1974) Trapped ﬁngers and amputated ﬁnger tips in
children. J. Pediatr. Surg. 9, 853–858
8. Ipsen, T., Frandsen, P. A., and Barfred, T. (1987) Conservative treatment
of ﬁngertip injuries. Injury 18, 203–205
9. Jafari, P., Muller, C., Grognuz, A., Applegate, L. A., Raffoul, W., di
Summa, P. G., et al. (2017) First insights into human ﬁngertip regen-
eration by Echo-Doppler imaging and wound microenvironment
assessment. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 18, 1054
10. Shieh, S. J., and Cheng, T. C. (2015) Regeneration and repair of human
digits and limbs: fact and ﬁction. Regeneration (Oxf) 2, 149–168
11. Schloissnig, S., Kawaguchi, A., Nowoshilow, S., Falcon, F., Otsuki, L.,
Tardivo, P., et al. (2021) The giant axolotl genome uncovers the evo-
lution, scaling, and transcriptional control of complex gene loci. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 118, e2017176118
12. Nowoshilow, S., Schloissnig, S., Fei, J. F., Dahl, A., Pang, A. W. C.,
Pippel, M., et al. (2018) The axolotl genome and the evolution of key
tissue formation regulators. Nature 554, 50–55
13. Sobkow, L., Epperlein, H. H., Herklotz, S., Straube, W. L., and
Tanaka, E. M. (2006) A germline GFP transgenic axolotl and its use to
track cell fate: dual origin of the ﬁn mesenchyme during development
and the fate of blood cells during regeneration. Dev. Biol. 290,
386–397
14. Whited, J. L., Tsai, S. L., Beier, K. T., White, J. N., Piekarski, N., Hanken,
J., et al. (2013) Pseudotyped retroviruses for infecting axolotl in vivo and
in vitro. Development 140, 1137–1146
15. Bryant, D. M., Johnson, K., DiTommaso, T., Tickle, T., Couger, M. B.,
Payzin-Dogru, D., et al. (2017) A tissue-mapped axolotl de novo tran-
scriptome enables identiﬁcation of limb regeneration factors. Cell Rep.
18, 762–776
16. Leigh, N. D., Dunlap, G. S., Johnson, K., Mariano, R., Oshiro, R., Wong,
A. Y., et al. (2018) Transcriptomic landscape of the blastema niche in
regenerating adult axolotl limbs at single-cell resolution. Nat. Commun.
9, 5153
17. Stewart, R., Rascón, C. A., Tian, S., Nie, J., Barry, C., Chu, L. F., et al.
(2013) Comparative RNA-seq analysis in the unsequenced axolotl: the
oncogene burst highlights early gene expression in the blastema. PLoS
Comput. Biol. 9, e1002936
18. Fei, J. F., Schuez, M., Knapp, D., Taniguchi, Y., Drechsel, D. N., and
Tanaka, E. M. (2017) Efﬁcient gene knockin in axolotl and its use to test
the role of satellite cells in limb regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S.
A. 114, 12501–12506
19. Voss, S. R., Palumbo, A., Nagarajan, R., Gardiner, D. M., Muneoka, K.,
Stromberg, A. J., et al. (2015) Gene expression during the ﬁrst 28 days of
axolotl limb regeneration I: experimental design and global analysis of
gene expression. Regeneration (Oxf) 2, 120–136
20. Keinath, M. C., Timoshevskiy, V. A., Timoshevskaya, N. Y., Tsonis, P. A.,
Voss, S. R., and Smith, J. J. (2015) Initial characterization of the large
genome of the salamander Ambystoma mexicanum using shotgun and
laser capture chromosome sequencing. Sci. Rep. 5, 16413
21. Monaghan, J. R., Epp, L. G., Putta, S., Page, R. B., Walker, J. A., Beachy,
C. K., et al. (2009) Microarray and cDNA sequence analysis of tran-
scription during nerve-dependent limb regeneration. BMC Biol. 7, 1
22. Salley, J. D., and Tassava, R. A. (1981) Responses of denervated adult
newt limb stumps to reinnervation and reinjury. J. Exp. Zool 215,
183–189
23. Tassava, R. A., and Loyd, R. M. (1977) Injury requirement for initiation
of regeneration of newt limbs which have whole skin grafts. Nature 268,
49–50
24. TJ, T. (1823) On the process of reproduction of the members of aquatic
salamander. Q. J. Sci. Literat. Arts 16, 84–96
25. Hay, E. D., and Fischman, D. A. (1961) Origin of the blastema in
regenerating limbs of the newt Triturus viridescens. An autoradio-
graphic study using tritiated thymidine to follow cell proliferation and
migration. Dev. Biol. 3, 26–59
26. Gardiner, D. M., Muneoka, K., and Bryant, S. V. (1986) The migration of
dermal cells during blastema formation in axolotls. Dev. Biol. 118,
488–493
27. Bryant, S. V., Endo, T., and Gardiner, D. M. (2002) Vertebrate limb
regeneration and the origin of limb stem cells. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 46,
887–896
28. Gardiner, D. M., Endo, T., and Bryant, S. V. (2002) The molecular basis
of amphibian limb regeneration: integrating the old with the new. Semin.
Cell Dev. Biol. 13, 345–352
29. Rose, S. M. (1962) Tissue-arc control of regeneration in the amphibian
limb. In Regeneration, Ronald Press, NY: 153–176
30. Maden, M. (1980) Intercalary regeneration in the amphibian limb and
the rule of distal transformation. J. Embryol. Exp. Morphol. 56, 201–209
31. Muneoka, K., and Bryant, S. V. (1982) Evidence that patterning mech-
anisms in developing and regenerating limbs are the same. Nature 298,
369–371
32. Géraudie, J., and Ferretti, P. (1998) Gene expression during amphibian
limb regeneration. Int. Rev. Cytol. 180, 1–50
33. Bonasio, R., Tu, S., and Reinberg, D. (2010) Molecular signals of
epigenetic states. Science 330, 612–616
34. Arzate-Mejía, R. G., Valle-García, D., and Recillas-Targa, F. (2011)
Signaling epigenetics: novel insights on cell signaling and epigenetic
regulation. IUBMB Life 63, 881–895
35. Kouzarides, T. (2007) Chromatin modiﬁcations and their function. Cell
128, 693–705
36. Wu, H., D’Alessio, A. C., Ito, S., Wang, Z., Cui, K., Zhao, K., et al. (2011)
Genome-wide analysis of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine distribution reveals
its dual function in transcriptional regulation in mouse embryonic stem
cells. Genes Dev. 25, 679–684
37. Zhu, W. G., Srinivasan, K., Dai, Z., Duan, W., Druhan, L. J., Ding, H.,
et al. (2003) Methylation of adjacent CpG sites affects Sp1/Sp3 binding
and activity in the p21(Cip1) promoter. Mol. Cell Biol. 23, 4056–4065
38. Laurent, L., Wong, E., Li, G., Huynh, T., Tsirigos, A., Ong, C. T., et al.
(2010) Dynamic changes in the human methylome during differentia-
tion. Genome Res. 20, 320–331
39. Anastasiadou, C., Malousi, A., Maglaveras, N., and Kouidou, S. (2011)
Human epigenome data reveal increased CpG methylation in alterna-
tively spliced sites and putative exonic splicing enhancers. DNA Cell
Biol. 30, 267–275
40. Guo, J. U., Su, Y., Zhong, C., Ming, G. L., and Song, H. (2011) Hy-
droxylation of 5-methylcytosine by TET1 promotes active DNA
demethylation in the adult brain. Cell 145, 423–434
41. Hackett, J. A., Sengupta, R., Zylicz, J. J., Murakami, K., Lee, C., Down, T.
A., et al. (2013) Germline DNA demethylation dynamics and imprint
erasure through 5-hydroxymethylcytosine. Science 339, 448–452
JBC REVIEWS: Limb blastema formation at genetic and epigenetic level
8
J. Biol. Chem. (2023) 299(2) 102858

42. Godwin, J. W., Pinto, A. R., and Rosenthal, N. A. (2013) Macrophages
are required for adult salamander limb regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 110, 9415–9420
43. Lewis, J. L., and Sullivan, A. M. (2020) Salamander stress and duress: the
relationship between CORT, autotomy and regeneration, and explor-
atory behaviour. Zoology (Jena) 139, 125751
44. Love, N. R., Chen, Y., Ishibashi, S., Kritsiligkou, P., Lea, R., Koh, Y., et al.
(2013) Amputation-induced reactive oxygen species are required for
successful Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration. Nat. Cell Biol. 15, 222–228
45. Repesh, L. A., Furcht, L. T., and Smith, D. (1981) Immunocytochemical
localization of ﬁbronectin in limb tissues of the adult newt, Notoph-
thalmus viridescens. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 29, 937–945
46. Donaldson, D. J., Mahan, J. T., Hasty, D. L., McCarthy, J. B., and Furcht,
L. T. (1985) Location of a ﬁbronectin domain involved in newt
epidermal cell migration. J. Cell Biol. 101, 73–78
47. Repesh, L. A., and Oberpriller, J. C. (1978) Scanning electron micro-
scopy of epidermal cell migration in wound healing during limb
regeneration in the adult newt, Notophthalmus viridescens. Am. J. Anat.
151, 539–555
48. Lash, J. W. (1955) Studies on wound closure in urodeles. J. Exp. Zoolog.
128, 13–28
49. Castilla, M., and Tassava, R. A. (1992) Extraction of the WE3 antigen
and comparison of reactivities of mAbs WE3 and WE4 in adult newt
regenerate epithelium and body tissues. Monogr. Dev. Biol. 23, 116–130
50. Estrada, C. M., Park, C. D., Castilla, M., and Tassava, R. A. (1993)
Monoclonal antibody WE6 identiﬁes an antigen that is up-regulated in
the wound epithelium of newts and frogs. Prog. Clin. Biol. Res. 383a,
271–282
51. Moriyasu, M., Makanae, A., and Satoh, A. (2012) Spatiotemporal
regulation of keratin 5 and 17 in the axolotl limb. Dev. Dyn. 241,
1616–1624
52. Knapp, D., Schulz, H., Rascon, C. A., Volkmer, M., Scholz, J., Nacu, E.,
et al. (2013) Comparative transcriptional proﬁling of the axolotl limb
identiﬁes a tripartite regeneration-speciﬁc gene program. PLoS One 8,
e61352
53. Campbell, L. J., Suárez-Castillo, E. C., Ortiz-Zuazaga, H., Knapp, D.,
Tanaka, E. M., and Crews, C. M. (2011) Gene expression proﬁle of the
regeneration epithelium during axolotl limb regeneration. Dev. Dyn.
240, 1826–1840
54. Monaghan, J. R., Athippozhy, A., Seifert, A. W., Putta, S., Stromberg, A.
J., Maden, M., et al. (2012) Gene expression patterns speciﬁc to the
regenerating limb of the Mexican axolotl. Biol. Open 1, 937–948
55. Mescher, A. L. (1976) Effects on adult newt limb regeneration of partial
and complete skin ﬂaps over the amputation surface. J. Exp. Zool 195,
117–128
56. Thornton, C. S. (1957) The effect of apical cap removal on limb
regeneration in Amblystoma larvae. J. Exp. Zool 134, 357–381
57. Goss, R. J. (1956) Regenerative inhibition following limb amputation and
immediate insertion into the body cavity. Anat. Rec. 126, 15–27
58. Butler, E. G., and Schotté, O. E. (1941) Histological alterations in
denervated non-regenerating limbs of urodele larvae. J. Exp. Zoolog. 88,
307–341
59. Schotté, O. E., and Butler, E. G. (1941) Morphological effects of
denervation and amputation of limbs in urodele larvae. J. Exp. Zoolog.
87, 279–322
60. Singer, M., and Craven, L. (1948) The growth and morphogenesis of the
regenerating forelimb of adult Triturus following denervation at various
stages of development. J. Exp. Zool 108, 279–308
61. Bryant, D. M., Sousounis, K., Payzin-Dogru, D., Bryant, S., Sandoval, A.
G. W., Martinez Fernandez, J., et al. (2017) Identiﬁcation of regenerative
roadblocks via repeat deployment of limb regeneration in axolotls. NPJ
Regen. Med. 2, 30
62. Longaker, M. T., Whitby, D. J., Adzick, N. S., Crombleholme, T. M.,
Langer, J. C., Duncan, B. W., et al. (1990) Studies in fetal wound healing,
VI. Second and early third trimester fetal wounds demonstrate rapid
collagen deposition without scar formation. J. Pediatr. Surg. 25, 63–68
63. Turksen, K. (2018) Wound Healing: Stem Cells Repair and Restorations,
Basic and Clinical Aspects, Wiley Blackwell, Hoboken, NJ
64. Seifert, A. W., Kiama, S. G., Seifert, M. G., Goheen, J. R., Palmer, T. M.,
and Maden, M. (2012) Skin shedding and tissue regeneration in African
spiny mice (Acomys). Nature 489, 561–565
65. Ehrlich, H. P., and Krummel, T. M. (1996) Regulation of wound healing
from a connective tissue perspective. Wound Repair Regen. 4, 203–210
66. Roberts, A. B., McCune, B. K., and Sporn, M. B. (1992) TGF-beta:
regulation of extracellular matrix. Kidney Int. 41, 557–559
67. Gailit, J., Welch, M. P., and Clark, R. A. (1994) TGF-beta 1 stimulates
expression of keratinocyte integrins during re-epithelialization of cuta-
neous wounds. J. Invest. Dermatol. 103, 221–227
68. Lévesque, M., Gatien, S., Finnson, K., Desmeules, S., Villiard, E., Pilote,
M., et al. (2007) Transforming growth factor: beta signaling is essential
for limb regeneration in axolotls. PLoS One 2, e1227
69. Bertolotti, E., Malagoli, D., and Franchini, A. (2013) Skin wound healing
in different aged Xenopus laevis. J. Morphol. 274, 956–964
70. Skrypek, N., Goossens, S., De Smedt, E., Vandamme, N., and Berx, G.
(2017) Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal transition: epigenetic reprogramming
driving cellular plasticity. Trends Genet. 33, 943–959
71. Lamouille, S., Xu, J., and Derynck, R. (2014) Molecular mechanisms of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 15, 178–196
72. Sader, F., Denis, J. F., Laref, H., and Roy, S. (2019) Epithelial to
mesenchymal transition is mediated by both TGF-β canonical and non-
canonical signaling during axolotl limb regeneration. Sci. Rep. 9, 1144
73. Erickson, J. R., Gearhart, M. D., Honson, D. D., Reid, T. A., Gardner, M.
K., Moriarity, B. S., et al. (2016) A novel role for SALL4 during scar-free
wound healing in axolotl. NPJ Regen. Med. 1, 16016
74. Neff, A. W., King, M. W., Harty, M. W., Nguyen, T., Calley, J., Smith, R.
C., et al. (2005) Expression of Xenopus XlSALL4 during limb develop-
ment and regeneration. Dev. Dyn. 233, 356–367
75. Forghanifard, M. M., Ardalan Khales, S., Javdani-Mallak, A., Rad, A.,
Farshchian, M., and Abbaszadegan, M. R. (2014) Stemness state regu-
lators SALL4 and SOX2 are involved in progression and invasiveness of
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Med. Oncol. 31, 922
76. Wu, Q., Chen, X., Zhang, J., Loh, Y. H., Low, T. Y., Zhang, W., et al.
(2006) Sall4 interacts with Nanog and co-occupies Nanog genomic sites
in embryonic stem cells. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 24090–24094
77. Tan, M. H., Au, K. F., Leong, D. E., Foygel, K., Wong, W. H., and Yao,
M. W. (2013) An Oct4-Sall4-Nanog network controls developmental
progression in the pre-implantation mouse embryo. Mol. Syst. Biol. 9,
632
78. Maherali, N., Sridharan, R., Xie, W., Utikal, J., Eminli, S., Arnold, K.,
et al. (2007) Directly reprogrammed ﬁbroblasts show global epigenetic
remodeling and widespread tissue contribution. Cell Stem Cell 1, 55–70
79. Papp, B., and Plath, K. (2011) Reprogramming to pluripotency: stepwise
resetting of the epigenetic landscape. Cell Res. 21, 486–501
80. Singer, M., and Egloff, F. R. (1949) The nervous system and regeneration
of the forelimb of adult Triturus; the effect of limited nerve quantities on
regeneration. J. Exp. Zool 111, 295–314
81. Salpeter, M. M. (1965) Disposition of nerve ﬁbers in the regenerating
limb of the adult newt, Triturus. J. Morphol. 117, 201–211
82. Singer, M., and Inoue, S. (1964) The nerve and the epidermal apical cap
in regeneration of the forelimb of adult triturus. J. Exp. Zool 155,
105–116
83. Todd, J. T. (1823) On the process of reproduction of the members of the
aquatic salamander. Q. J. Sci. Lit. Arts 16, 84–96
84. Endo, T., Bryant, S. V., and Gardiner, D. M. (2004) A stepwise model
system for limb regeneration. Dev. Biol. 270, 135–145
85. Kawakami, Y., Esteban, C. R., Matsui, T., Rodríguez-León, J., Kato, S.,
and Izpisúa Belmonte, J. C. (2004) Sp8 and Sp9, two closely related
buttonhead-like transcription factors, regulate Fgf8 expression and limb
outgrowth in vertebrate embryos. Development 131, 4763–4774
86. Satoh, A., Graham, G. M., Bryant, S. V., and Gardiner, D. M. (2008)
Neurotrophic regulation of epidermal dedifferentiation during wound
healing and limb regeneration in the axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum).
Dev. Biol. 319, 321–335
87. Makanae, A., Mitogawa, K., and Satoh, A. (2014) Co-operative Bmp- and
Fgf-signaling inputs convert skin wound healing to limb formation in
urodele amphibians. Dev. Biol. 396, 57–66
JBC REVIEWS: Limb blastema formation at genetic and epigenetic level
J. Biol. Chem. (2023) 299(2) 102858 9

88. Satoh, A., Makanae, A., Nishimoto, Y., and Mitogawa, K. (2016) FGF and
BMP derived from dorsal root ganglia regulate blastema induction in
limb regeneration in Ambystoma mexicanum. Dev. Biol. 417, 114–125
89. Mullen, L. M., Bryant, S. V., Torok, M. A., Blumberg, B., and Gardiner,
D. M. (1996) Nerve dependency of regeneration: the role of distal-less
and FGF signaling in amphibian limb regeneration. Development 122,
3487–3497
90. Makanae, A., Hirata, A., Honjo, Y., Mitogawa, K., and Satoh, A. (2013)
Nerve independent limb induction in axolotls. Dev. Biol. 381, 213–226
91. Thornton, C. S. (1968) Amphibian limb regeneration. In: Abercrombie,
M., Brachet, J., King, T. J., eds. Advances in Morphogenesis, United
Kingdom Edition, Academic Press Inc (London) Ltd, USA: 205–249
92. Aguilar, C., and Gardiner, D. M. (2015) DNA methylation dynamics
regulate the formation of a regenerative wound epithelium during
axolotl limb regeneration. PLoS One 10, e0134791
93. Moore, L. D., Le, T., and Fan, G. (2013) DNA methylation and its basic
function. Neuropsychopharmacology 38, 23–38
94. Gallinari, P., Di Marco, S., Jones, P., Pallaoro, M., and Steinkühler, C.
(2007) HDACs, histone deacetylation and gene transcription: from
molecular biology to cancer therapeutics. Cell Res. 17, 195–211
95. Wang, M. H., Hsu, C. L., Wu, C. H., Chiou, L. L., Tsai, Y. T., Lee, H. S.,
et al. (2021) Timing does matter: nerve-mediated HDAC1 paces the
temporal expression of morphogenic genes during axolotl limb regen-
eration. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 9, 641987
96. Wang, M. H., Wu, C. H., Huang, T. Y., Sung, H. W., Chiou, L. L., Lin, S.
P., et al. (2019) Nerve-mediated expression of histone deacetylases
regulates limb regeneration in axolotls. Dev. Biol. 449, 122–131
97. Voss, S. R., Ponomareva, L. V., Dwaraka, V. B., Pardue, K. E., Baddar, N.,
Rodgers, A. K., et al. (2019) HDAC regulates transcription at the outset
of axolotl tail regeneration. Sci. Rep. 9, 6751
98. Taylor, A. J., and Beck, C. W. (2012) Histone deacetylases are required
for amphibian tail and limb regeneration but not development. Mech.
Dev. 129, 208–218
99. Tseng, A. S., Carneiro, K., Lemire, J. M., and Levin, M. (2011) HDAC
activity is required during Xenopus tail regeneration. PLoS One 6,
e26382
100. Johnson, K., Bateman, J., DiTommaso, T., Wong, A. Y., and Whited, J. L.
(2018) Systemic cell cycle activation is induced following complex tissue
injury in axolotl. Dev. Biol. 433, 461–472
101. Tanaka, E. M., Drechsel, D. N., and Brockes, J. P. (1999) Thrombin
regulates S-phase re-entry by cultured newt myotubes. Curr. Biol. 9,
792–799
102. Ghosh, S., Roy, S., Séguin, C., Bryant, S. V., and Gardiner, D. M. (2008)
Analysis of the expression and function of Wnt-5a and Wnt-5b in
developing and regenerating axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum) limbs.
Dev. Growth Differ. 50, 289–297
103. Hayashi, S., Tamura, K., and Yokoyama, H. (2014) Yap1, transcription
regulator in the Hippo signaling pathway, is required for Xenopus limb
bud regeneration. Dev. Biol. 388, 57–67
104. Muneoka, K., Holler-Dinsmore, G. V., and Bryant, S. V. (1985)
A quantitative analysis of regeneration from chimaeric limb stumps in
the axolotl. J. Embryol. Exp. Morphol. 90, 1–12
105. Khattak, S., Schuez, M., Richter, T., Knapp, D., Haigo, S. L., Sandoval-
Guzmán, T., et al. (2013) Germline transgenic methods for tracking cells
and testing gene function during regeneration in the axolotl. Stem Cell
Rep. 1, 90–103
106. Monaghan, J. R., and Maden, M. (2012) Visualization of retinoic acid
signaling in transgenic axolotls during limb development and regener-
ation. Dev. Biol. 368, 63–75
107. Flowers, G. P., Timberlake, A. T., McLean, K. C., Monaghan, J. R., and
Crews, C. M. (2014) Highly efﬁcient targeted mutagenesis in axolotl
using Cas9 RNA-guided nuclease. Development 141, 2165–2171
108. Kragl, M., Knapp, D., Nacu, E., Khattak, S., Maden, M., Epperlein, H. H.,
et al. (2009) Cells keep a memory of their tissue origin during axolotl
limb regeneration. Nature 460, 60–65
109. Moss, F. P., and Leblond, C. P. (1970) Nature of dividing nuclei in
skeletal muscle of growing rats. J. Cell Biol. 44, 459–462
110. Reznik, M. (1969) Thymidine-3H uptake by satellite cells of regenerating
skeletal muscle. J. Cell Biol. 40, 568–571
111. Snow, M. H. (1977) Myogenic cell formation in regenerating rat skeletal
muscle injured by mincing. II. An autoradiographic study. Anat. Rec.
188, 201–217
112. Tanaka, H. V., Ng, N. C. Y., Yang Yu, Z., Casco-Robles, M. M., Maruo,
F., Tsonis, P. A., et al. (2016) A developmentally regulated switch from
stem cells to dedifferentiation for limb muscle regeneration in newts.
Nat. Commun. 7, 11069
113. Sandoval-Guzmán, T., Wang, H., Khattak, S., Schuez, M., Roensch, K.,
Nacu, E., et al. (2014) Fundamental differences in dedifferentiation and
stem cell recruitment during skeletal muscle regeneration in two sala-
mander species. Cell Stem Cell 14, 174–187
114. McCusker, C. D., Diaz-Castillo, C., Sosnik, J., A, Q. P., and Gardiner, D.
M. (2016) Cartilage and bone cells do not participate in skeletal
regeneration in Ambystoma mexicanum limbs. Dev. Biol. 416, 26–33
115. Mittenthal, J. E. (1981) The rule of normal neighbors: a hypothesis for
morphogenetic pattern regulation. Dev. Biol. 88, 15–26
116. Muneoka, K., Fox, W. F., and Bryant, S. V. (1986) Cellular contribution
from dermis and cartilage to the regenerating limb blastema in axolotls.
Dev. Biol. 116, 256–260
117. McCusker, C. D., and Gardiner, D. M. (2013) Positional information is
reprogrammed in blastema cells of the regenerating limb of the axolotl
(Ambystoma mexicanum). PLoS One 8, e77064
118. Nacu, E., Glausch, M., Le, H. Q., Damanik, F. F., Schuez, M., Knapp, D.,
et al. (2013) Connective tissue cells, but not muscle cells, are involved in
establishing the proximo-distal outcome of limb regeneration in the
axolotl. Development 140, 513–518
119. Crawford, K., and Stocum, D. L. (1988) Retinoic acid coordinately
proximalizes regenerate pattern and blastema differential afﬁnity in
axolotl limbs. Development 102, 687–698
120. Niazi, I. A., and Saxena, S. (1978) Abnormal hind limb regeneration in
tadpoles of the toad, Bufo andersoni, exposed to excess vitamin A. Folia
Biol. (Krakow) 26, 3–8
121. Maden, M. (1982) Vitamin A and pattern formation in the regenerating
limb. Nature 295, 672–675
122. Maden, M. (1983) The effect of vitamin A on the regenerating axolotl
limb. J. Embryol. Exp. Morphol. 77, 273–295
123. Nguyen, M., Singhal, P., Piet, J. W., Shefelbine, S. J., Maden, M., Voss, S.
R., et al. (2017) Retinoic acid receptor regulation of epimorphic and
homeostatic regeneration in the axolotl. Development 144, 601–611
124. Mercader, N., Leonardo, E., Piedra, M. E., Martínez, A. C., Ros, M. A.,
and Torres, M. (2000) Opposing RA and FGF signals control prox-
imodistal vertebrate limb development through regulation of Meis
genes. Development 127, 3961–3970
125. Mercader, N., Tanaka, E. M., and Torres, M. (2005) Proximodistal
identity during vertebrate limb regeneration is regulated by Meis
homeodomain proteins. Development 132, 4131–4142
126. Roselló-Díez, A., Ros, M. A., and Torres, M. (2011) Diffusible signals,
not autonomous mechanisms, determine the main proximodistal limb
subdivision. Science 332, 1086–1088
127. Selleri, L., Depew, M. J., Jacobs, Y., Chanda, S. K., Tsang, K. Y., Cheah,
K. S., et al. (2001) Requirement for Pbx1 in skeletal patterning and
programming chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation. Develop-
ment 128, 3543–3557
128. Tzchori, I., Day, T. F., Carolan, P. J., Zhao, Y., Wassif, C. A., Li, L., et al.
(2009) LIM homeobox transcription factors integrate signaling events
that control three-dimensional limb patterning and growth. Develop-
ment 136, 1375–1385
129. Wang, Y. H., and Beck, C. W. (2014) Distal expression of sprouty (spry)
genes during Xenopus laevis limb development and regeneration. Gene
Expr. Patterns 15, 61–66
130. Iwata, R., Makanae, A., and Satoh, A. (2020) Stability and plasticity of
positional memory during limb regeneration in Ambystoma mex-
icanum. Dev. Dyn. 249, 342–353
131. Tabin, C., and Wolpert, L. (2007) Rethinking the proximodistal axis of
the vertebrate limb in the molecular era. Genes Dev. 21, 1433–1442
JBC REVIEWS: Limb blastema formation at genetic and epigenetic level
10
J. Biol. Chem. (2023) 299(2) 102858

132. Suzuki, M., Yakushiji, N., Nakada, Y., Satoh, A., Ide, H., and Tamura, K.
(2006) Limb regeneration in Xenopus laevis froglet. Sci.WorldJournal 6,
26–37
133. Hayashi, S., Kawaguchi, A., Uchiyama, I., Kawasumi-Kita, A., Kobaya-
shi, T., Nishide, H., et al. (2015) Epigenetic modiﬁcation maintains
intrinsic limb-cell identity in Xenopus limb bud regeneration. Dev. Biol.
406, 271–282
134. Wei, X., Li, H., Guo, Y., Zhao, X., Liu, Y., Zou, X., et al. (2021) An
ATAC-seq Dataset uncovers the regulatory landscape during axolotl
limb regeneration. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 9, 651145
135. Baranowitz, S. A., Maderson, P. F., and Connelly, T. G. (1979) Lizard and
newt tail regeneration: a quantitative study. J. Exp. Zool 210, 17–37
136. Ghosh, S., Thorogood, P., and Ferretti, P. (1994) Regenerative capability
of upper and lower jaws in the newt. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 38, 479–490
137. Reyer, R. W. (1954) Regeneration of the lens in the amphibian eye. Q.
Rev. Biol. 29, 1–46
138. Fernando, W. A., Leininger, E., Simkin, J., Li, N., Malcom, C. A.,
Sathyamoorthi, S., et al. (2011) Wound healing and blastema formation
in regenerating digit tips of adult mice. Dev. Biol. 350, 301–310
139. Simkin, J., Sammarco, M. C., Dawson, L. A., Tucker, C., Taylor, L. J., Van
Meter, K., et al. (2015) Epidermal closure regulates histolysis during
mammalian (Mus) digit regeneration. Regeneration (Oxf) 2, 106–119
140. Lehoczky, J. A., Robert, B., and Tabin, C. J. (2011) Mouse digit tip
regeneration is mediated by fate-restricted progenitor cells. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108, 20609–20614
141. Rinkevich, Y., Lindau, P., Ueno, H., Longaker, M. T., and Weissman, I. L.
(2011) Germ-layer and lineage-restricted stem/progenitors regenerate
the mouse digit tip. Nature 476, 409–413
142. Mohammad, K. S., and Neufeld, D. A. (2000) Denervation retards but
does not prevent toetip regeneration. Wound Repair Regen. 8,
277–281
143. [preprint] Atsuta, Y., Lee, C., Rodrigues, A. R., Colle, C., Tomizawa, R.
R., Lujan, E. G., et al. (2021) Direct reprogramming of non-limb ﬁbro-
blasts to cells with properties of limb progenitors. bioRxiv. https://doi.
org/10.1101/2021.10.01.462632
144. Chen, Y., Xu, H., and Lin, G. (2017) Generation of iPSC-derived limb
progenitor-like cells for stimulating phalange regeneration in the adult
mouse. Cell Discov. 3, 17046
145. Mori, S., Sakakura, E., Tsunekawa, Y., Hagiwara, M., Suzuki, T.,
and Eiraku, M. (2019) Self-organized formation of developing ap-
pendages from murine pluripotent stem cells. Nat. Commun. 10,
3802
146. Yamada, D., Nakamura, M., Takao, T., Takihira, S., Yoshida, A., Kawai,
S., et al. (2021) Induction and expansion of human PRRX1(+) limb-bud-
like mesenchymal cells from pluripotent stem cells. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 5,
926–940
147. McCusker, C., Bryant, S. V., and Gardiner, D. M. (2015) The axolotl
limb blastema: cellular and molecular mechanisms driving blastema
formation and limb regeneration in tetrapods. Regeneration (Oxf) 2,
54–71
JBC REVIEWS: Limb blastema formation at genetic and epigenetic level
J. Biol. Chem. (2023) 299(2) 102858 11

===== Miron2020_TrendsImmunol_Microglia =====
Special Issue: Microglia and Astrocytes
Opinion
Investigating Microglia in Health and Disease:
Challenges and Opportunities
Veronique E. Miron1,* and Josef Priller2,3
Microglia are tissue-resident macrophages implicated in central nervous system
(CNS) development, homeostasis, and response to injury. Recent advances in
transcriptomics, multiplex protein expression analysis, and experimental deple-
tion of microglia have cemented their importance. However, it is still unclear
which models are best suited to investigate microglia and explore their function
in human disease. Here, we discuss issues regarding off-targeting during exper-
imental manipulation, and differences and similarities between human and ro-
dent microglia. With new developments in transgenic lines and human–rodent
chimeras, we anticipate that in coming years, a clearer picture of microglia func-
tion in health and disease will emerge.
Importance of Microglia in Central Nervous System Development, Homeostasis,
Injury, and Repair
Microglia are CNS-resident macrophages increasingly implicated in neural health and dysfunc-
tion. Derived from erythromyeloid progenitors in the mammalian yolk sac, microglia seed the
CNS in early embryogenesis and self-maintain throughout life [1–4]. Microglia are early re-
sponders to CNS perturbations and thus, involved in the response to damage or infection,
which can be either detrimental or beneﬁcial to the host. For instance, microglia may support my-
elin regeneration (remyelination) [5,6] and protect from the consequences of ischemia [7], yet, are
also associated with regulating the toxicity of misfolded proteins [8], suppressing brain tumor
growth [9], and causing neural circuit desynchronization during inﬂammation [10] in mice, as
well as causing chemotherapy-induced cognitive impairment [11] and hypomyelination (see
Glossary) following perinatal brain injury [12] in mice and humans. However, microglia are not sim-
ply lying in wait for instruction, but are actively shaping the CNS. They have been implicated in var-
ious developmental and homeostatic processes, including myelination [13,14], the generation
and maintenance of neural cells [13,15,16], the reﬁnement of synapses and circuits [17–19],
the elimination/clearance of cells [20–22], as well as learning and memory [23–25].
Collectively, these studies have been instrumental in gaining insights into the importance of mi-
croglia for CNS health across the lifespan. To further our knowledge of the speciﬁc roles of
microglia, recent work has suggested that we need to consider differentiating them from other
macrophage populations [26]. These include additional CNS-resident macrophages residing in
the perivascular spaces, the choroid plexus, and the meninges [collectively called border-
associated macrophages (BAMs) or CNS-associated macrophages (CAMs)], and blood
monocyte-derived macrophages that transiently inﬁltrate the CNS in development, and following
injury [26,27]. Distinguishing between microglia and these other macrophages is important as
they can show differential requirements for development [28], and distinct functions [29] and re-
sponses [30,31] during or following injury. In addition, recent advances in sequencing and prote-
omics have revealed differences between rodent and human microglia [32–36], which may need
to be taken into account when modeling human disease. Here, we hypothesize that novel
Highlights
In the central nervous system, experi-
mentally tracking or targeting microglia
can be confounded by off-target effects
on other resident macrophages or
those derived from blood monocytes.
Human and mouse microglia share
many similarities, yet important differ-
ences exist that should be considered
and these relate to gene expression,
aging, and cell turnover rate.
We posit that new transgenic tools and
the development of human microglia
models will help elucidate microglia-
speciﬁc responses in health and disease.
1Medical Research Council Centre for
Reproductive Health, The Queen’s
Medical Research Institute, The
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
2Department of Neuropsychiatry and
Laboratory of Molecular Psychiatry,
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin and
DZNE, Berlin, Germany
3UK Dementia Research Institute, The
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
*Correspondence:
vmiron@ed.ac.uk (V.E. Miron).
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.it.2020.07.002
785
© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Trends in Immunology

research tools can improve our understanding of the speciﬁc roles of microglia, and how these
relate to human CNS function and dysregulation.
Considerations in Experimental Manipulation of Microglia
Microglia have been implicated in a plethora of CNS processes through their depletion,
commonly achieved by phagocytosis of death-inducing clodronate liposomes, knockout (KO)
of genes required for microglia development or survival, or transgenic or pharmacological induc-
tion of microglial death [37] (Box 1). However, all these methods do not only target microglia.
BAMs/CAMs and monocytes may also be targeted using these approaches as these cell types
phagocytose liposomes and express genes targeted in the abovementioned KO and transgenic
strategies (e.g., murine Tgfb, Sfp1, Cx3cr1, Cd11b, and Csf1r) [27,29,38–40]. Monocytes can,
however, be excluded from inducible genetic targeting in mice (e.g., in Cx3cr1-driven lines) by cap-
italizing on their rapid turnover compared with long-lived and self-renewing CNS-resident macro-
phages [3,31,41]. Pharmacologically induced microglial death using the colony stimulating
factor 1 receptor (CSF1R) inhibitors such as BLZ945 or PLX3397 also decreases BAMs/CAMs
and monocytes in mice and humans, respectively [38,42]. CSF1R inhibitors may have additional
off-target effects by acting on cells of neural [43] or hematopoietic [44] lineages in mice in vivo,
as well as on other receptors (such as KIT, FLT3, and PDGFRβ) as shown in cell-free assays
in vitro [45,46]. These off-target effects can be avoided using a recently developed blood–brain
barrier (BBB)-permeable CSF1R inhibitor (PLX5622) which has over 20-fold higher afﬁnity for
CSF1R relative to other receptors, and does not impact neural cells either in vitro or in vivo at
low concentrations [43,46]. One must consider that low efﬁciency of microglia depletion (b50%),
as seen in the Cx3cr1-CreER;Csf1rﬂ/ﬂconditional KO or using CD11b-targeted ribosome inactiva-
tion in mice, causes recruitment of monocytes into the brain, tracked by GFP-expressing
bone marrow chimeras or parabiotic partners, and by ﬂow cytometry for CD11b+CD45hi or
CX3CR1loLy6Chi cells [47,48]. These conditions are relevant as these monocytes differentiate
into macrophages and can reside in the mouse CNS long-term; here, they adopt a transcriptome
distinct from microglia [48], which may in turn, inﬂuence neural cells. Subsequent to depletion, the
microenvironment might also be altered by the presence of dead microglia and the damage-
associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) they release, although this remains to be tested
upon microglial depletion. How dead microglia are cleared and whether uptake by other cell
Glossary
Astrogliosis: activation of astrocytes to
a reactive state, commonly identiﬁed as
increased proliferation, expression of
glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein, and thickness
of processes.
Border-associated macrophages
(BAMs): also known as CNS-
associated macrophages, are CNS-
resident macrophages residing in border
zones such as the vasculature,
meninges, and choroid plexus. These
are distinct from microglia.
Choroid plexus: collection of cells in
the ventricles of the brain that produce
cerebrospinal ﬂuid.
Colony stimulating factor 1 receptor
(CSF1R): receptor expressed by
macrophages which is required for their
survival and function.
Complement system: component of
the innate immune system which
increases, via the activation of a series of
complement proteins, the clearance of
microbes and damaged cells or cellular
structures by antibodies or phagocytes.
Cre recombinase: enzyme catalyzing
the recombination of genes between
loxP sites, leading to excision.
Spontaneous recombination (or
‘leakiness’) in tamoxifen-inducible Cre
transgenic lines refers to the activation of
Cre recombinase in the absence of
tamoxifen.
Damage-associated molecular
patterns (DAMPs): molecules
released by damaged, stressed, or
dying cells which act on pattern
recognition receptors to induce an
inﬂammatory response.
Diphtheria toxin receptor (DTR):
receptor for diphtheria toxin, not
normally expressed in mouse. Induced
DTR expression under the control of cell
type-speciﬁc or -enriched promoters
allows elimination of cells following
diphtheria toxin administration, with
75–99% efﬁciency in microglia.
Disease-associated microglia
(DAMs): microglia subpopulation
originally identiﬁed in mouse models of
neurodegenerative disease,
characterized by the expression of
genes such as Apoe, Trem2, Clec7a,
Cst7, and Spp1.
Haploinsufficiency: expression of a
gene is halved, potentially affecting cell
function.
Heterogeneity: herein, refers to
subpopulations of a cell type showing
differences in gene or protein
expression.
Box 1. Microglia Depletion Strategies
There are various approaches to experimentally deplete microglia in animal models.
(i)
The use of liposomes encapsulating the iron chelator clodronate to induce cell death following phagocytosis. This
method capitalizes on the enhanced phagocytic capacity of macrophages over other neural cells, yet liposomes
need to be directly injected into the CNS to deplete microglia due to their inability to cross the BBB [92].
(ii)
The use of global knockouts of genes required for microglia development and survival, such as Tgfb, Sfp1, Csf1, and
Csf1r, resulting in a reduction or elimination of microglia [37]. However, mice can show gross developmental
abnormalities and die within days or weeks of birth, limiting their use for investigation of microglia in developing
CNS, adulthood, or aging.
(iii)
Inhibition of microglia proliferation using ganciclovir treatment in CD11b-HSVTK transgenic mice, which express
herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase in macrophages and microglia [93].
(iv)
Transgenic models where expression of DTR, not normally expressed in mouse, is induced in microglia, thus
rendering them susceptible to the administered toxin [49]. Mice in which Cre recombinase is expressed under control
of the myeloid Cd11b or Cx3cr1 promoter are crossed to ﬂoxed-stop-DTR mice.
(v)
Administration of kinase activity inhibitors of CSF1R, expressed by myeloid cells and required for macrophage
survival, resulting in elimination of up to 99% of microglia [46,51].
Approaches (iv) and (v) have revealed that microglia have a robust capacity to repopulate the brain following deple-
tion, with rapid re-establishment of microglia numbers within 1 week. Persistent reduction in microglia numbers there-
fore requires continuous exposure to the CSF1R inhibitor, normally achieved through chow, or repeated diphtheria
toxin administration.
Trends in Immunology
786
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9

types inﬂuences their metabolic and inﬂammatory states remains unknown. Moreover, the
CNS environment may be altered over a prolonged period when depleting microglia
using approaches which take several days to reach maximal effect [clodronate liposomes,
diphtheria toxin receptor (DTR), or CSF1R inhibition]. Indeed, the DTR approach can
induce cytokine production and astrogliosis in mice [49], the latter also observed in Csf1r-/-
mice [50], although these effects are not always observed in the DTR system [25]. Nonetheless,
CSF1R inhibitors and DTR transgenics are useful in inducing a robust depletion of all CNS
macrophages by up to 99% [49,51]. As not all microglia are depleted using these approaches,
a lack of effect may reﬂect compensation by a small number of residual microglia. This creates
the opportunity for investigating the possibility that surviving microglia represent a distinct
resistant subpopulation, a particularly relevant concept in microglia repopulation studies.
In summary, these microglia depletion tools are highly effective in eliminating microglia,
yet one must consider potential off-target effects on other macrophage populations and
receptors, in addition to possible alterations to the microenvironment (Figure 1).
An additional approach used to assess the role of microglia is transgenic targeting. Cre
recombinase drivers most commonly used to date (e.g., Cx3cr1- or Cd11b-driven) have
the advantage of yielding extremely high genetic recombination efﬁciency in microglia
[3,41,52]. However, these would be expected to target BAMs/CAMs, and in some instances,
monocytes [53,54]. Sall1-CreERT2, Cx3cr1-Cre, and Cx3cr1-CreERT2 lines can have sponta-
neous recombination in non-microglial cells such as neurons, complicated by the inherent leak-
iness of speciﬁc reporter lines such as Rosa26-ZsGreen or Rosa26-tdT [52,55,56].
Nonetheless, these Cre lines have been instrumental in gaining insights into microglia function.
To reﬁne this understanding, additional transgenic lines have been developed with high
microglial Cre recombinase activity or ﬂuorescent labeling, as well as with low-to-absent
targeting of BAMs/CAMs and peripheral monocytes (e.g., using a reporter ﬂuorophore or Cre
recombinase expression driven by Sall1, and recently, using Tmem119, Hexb, or P2ry12)
[54,57–59] (Table 1). Of note,Tmem119 reporter lines can label a small population of choroid
plexus or leptomeningeal macrophages (5–6% of total targeted cells [57,60]); the Sall1-CreER
Humanized mice: have one aspect of
their physiology replaced with human
cells, tissues, or genes.
Hypomyelination: reduction or lack of
myelin.
Induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs): are derived from somatic cells,
and can then be differentiated into
mature cell types.
Meninges: membranes covering the
brain and spinal cord, composed of
three layers (pia mater, dura mater, and
arachnoid mater). The pia mater and
arachnoid mater form the
leptomeninges.
Liposomes: spheres composed of
phospholipids which can encapsulate
drugs. Macrophages preferentially
engulf liposomes due to their high
phagocytic capacity. Encapsulation of
the iron-chelator clodronate has been
used to induce death in macrophages.
Organoids: 3D collection of cells for
physiological modeling studies.
Process ramification: extension and
arborization of cellular processes.
Repopulation: re-establishment of
cells following depletion or loss.
Microglia readily repopulate within 1
week of experimental depletion.
Trends
Trends in
in Immunology
Immunology
Figure 1. Considerations for Experimental Microglia Depletion Paradigms in Rodents. Summary of potential off-
target effects of experimental microglia depletion paradigms, such as targeting of other macrophage populations and
receptors, and alteration of the microenvironment due to monocyte recruitment, accumulation of dead cells and their
released products, and increased astrogliosis and cytokine release. Evidence of such effects are noted for the following
depletion strategies: clodronate-liposomes (blue), DTR transgenic (green), global knockouts (KOs) of genes required for
microglia development (orange), CSF1R pharmacological inhibitors (red), and Csf1r conditional knockout or CD11b-
targeted saporin (purple). Abbreviations: BAMs, border-associated macrophages; CSF1R, colony-stimulating factor 1
receptor; DTR, diphtheria toxin receptor. This ﬁgure was created using BioRender (https://biorender.com/).
Trends in Immunology
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9
787

line also shows Cre activity in developing neural progenitors and in oligodendrocytes and astro-
cytes in adulthood [40]. Additionally, the Hexb-tdT knockin in mice affects expression of an ad-
ditional gene, Gfm2 [54]. One also needs to take into account the potential for low level
expression of Tmem119 or P2ry12 by monocytes in speciﬁc contexts, such as following
CNS transplant [61] or upon monocyte recruitment to chronically demyelinated CNS [62]; in
the context of inducible microglial labeling or targeting using these new lines, allowing mono-
cytes to turn over after tamoxifen administration and prior to experimentation would be pre-
dicted to eliminate monocytes that have undergone recombination. Another issue relates to
the high rates of tamoxifen-independent expression of ﬂuorescent proteins for certain reporter
lines commonly used to track microglia; for example, up to 61% spontaneous recombination
can occur in microglia and up to 5% in monocytes using the Rosa26-ZsGreen line [52],
which can be avoided using the mT/mG or Rosa26-YFP reporter lines [52]. Tamoxifen itself
can have a direct inﬂuence on microglia [63], highlighting the importance of appropriate con-
trols for monitoring recombination-independent effects. Moreover, some microglia-enriched
promoters may be less active following injury, as seen for Tmem119 and P2ry12, which may
present difﬁculties in targeting microglia in some models of disease; this issue is avoided in
Hexb lines as the gene is stably expressed in several models of neurodegeneration (facial
nerve axotomy, 5xFAD model of Alzheimer’s disease; AD) and demyelination (experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis, cuprizone toxin model) [54]. The opportunity to compare
results from these new microglia-targeting tools with those from pre-existing approaches
targeting all CNS macrophages provides an exciting strategy to dissect the roles of speciﬁc
macrophage populations.
Similarities and Differences between Human and Rodent Microglia
Human and rodent microglia show many important similarities (Figure 2). For instance, response
to stimuli (e.g., endotoxin) in vitro, process ramification [34], dependence on CSF1R signaling
for maintenance and homeostasis [64,65], and transcriptomic signatures in tissues [32,34] are
largely conserved between the species. Murine microglia show heterogeneity during develop-
ment and across different brain regions [22,66,67], recently conﬁrmed for human microglia
[35,36,68]. Moreover, clusters of disease-associated microglia (DAMs) have been identiﬁed
in the brain in mouse models of neurodegeneration (5xFAD and SOD1G39A) and demyelination
(cuprizone toxin model), characterized by the expression of genes such as Apoe, Trem2,
Table 1. New Mouse Transgenic Lines for Investigating Microglia Phenotypes and Functions
Category
Line
Efﬁciency
Non-microglial activity
Refs
Reporter
Tmem119-eGFP
N96% IBA1+
N99% CD11b+CD45lo
6% of CD11b+CD45int/hi
[57]
Tmem119-tdT
N96% CD11b+CD45lo
5% of CD11b+CD45hi and small number of choroid
plexus macrophages
[60]
Hexb-tdT
N99% IBA1+ (no injury)
N80% IBA1+ (injury)
Small number of perivascular and
meningeal macrophages
[54]
Cre linea
Tmem119-CreERT2*
N90% IBA1+
N90% CD11b+CD45lo
Small number of leptomeningeal and choroid
plexus cells 2–3% of total in CD11b+ CD45int/hi
population
[57]
P2ry12-CreERT2*
N99% CD11b+CD45lo
0.4% of total in CD11b+ CD45hi population and
small number of choroid plexus macrophages
[59]
Hexb-CreERT2θ
N90% IBA1+ in development
70–89% IBA1+ in adulthood
Small number of perivascular macrophages
[54]
Microglia deﬁcient
Csf1r-FIREΔ/Δ
No parenchymal IBA1+ or P2RY12+
Unknown
[64]
aEfﬁciency in Cre lines assessed using Ai14 tdTomato* or Rosa26-YFPθ
Trends in Immunology
788
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9

Clec7a, Cst7, and Spp1 [67,69,70]. Similarly, DAM states have also been identiﬁed in human
brain in AD and multiple sclerosis (MS) [67,71]. Of relevance, microglia heterogeneity is crucial
for region-speciﬁc functions (e.g., clearing dead cells) [22] and differences in rates of
transcriptomic change with aging [66]. Both mouse and human microglia show a subtle age-
associated shift toward a more immunogenic proﬁle, characterized by the expression of genes
involved in inﬂammation [68,72].
However, there are differences between human and rodent microglia which need to be consid-
ered (Figure 2). Human microglia turn over at a 2–3-fold higher rate than their mouse counterparts
[2]. There are also differences in gene expression between human and mouse microglia
[32–34,73]. For instance with aging, some genes related to proliferation and cell cycle (TAL1
and IFI16) are exclusively expressed in human microglia [32]. Relative to mice, human microglia
also show an enrichment of genes associated with the complement system (C2, C3, VSIG4,
and SERPING1) and brain structure (SYNDIG1, GLDN, CTTNBP2, and ROBO3) [33], as well
as with neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric diseases (e.g., SPP1, CLEC7A, ADAM28, and
MSR1) [34]. Moreover, the transcriptomic heterogeneity of human microglia is much greater
than that of other species such as mouse, macaque, marmoset, sheep, and hamster, which
have one predominant microglia transcriptional state under nonpathological conditions [34].
These dissimilarities do not likely reﬂect differences in the methods for isolating microglia or mea-
suring RNA, as distinct protocols have not impacted, to our knowledge, the overlap between
human and mouse microglia in young murine brains [32]. However, as these mouse studies
have compared human parietal or temporal lobe with whole cortex or brain, it is unknown whether
precise regional comparisons would yield different results, especially given that the rate of microg-
lia aging appears to be region dependent [66].
Considering that microglia are highly plastic cells that depend on signals from their microenviron-
ment for survival and function [51,74], removing microglia from their natural habitat results in rapid
Trends
Trends in
in Immunology
Immunology
Figure 2. Human Microglia Properties and Model Systems. Similarities and differences between human and rodent
microglia (left) and approaches to studying human microglia (right) including primary microglia, iPSC-derived organoids
which develop microglia, or microglia-like cells derived from iPSCs or ESCs, which can then be transplanted into mouse
brain or organoids. Abbreviations: CSF1R, colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor; ESCs, embryonic stem cells; iPSCs,
induced pluripotent stem cells. This ﬁgure was created using BioRender (https://biorender.com/).
Trends in Immunology
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9
789

and persistent changes in their transcriptomic signature [33,75]. This poses a unique challenge
for in vitro experiments, which are required for studying human cells. The complexity of microglia
states and the species-speciﬁc differences outlined above call for models that involve human cells
in an environment that resembles healthy or diseased CNS (Figure 2). Given the limitations in
obtaining primary human microglia, several protocols have been developed over the last few
years to generate microglia-like cells from human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) [76,77] or from
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) [78–82]. These techniques provide large amounts of
human microglia-like cells, which have been successfully employed to reveal metabolic and func-
tional deﬁcits in microglia bearing gene variants associated with AD and Parkinson’s disease
(TREM2, APOE4, and SNCA), as well as for the study of complement in schizophrenia [83–87].
However, there are issues of variability and reproducibility, and none of the protocols provide
cells that fully replicate the phenotype of mature microglia in vivo. Recently, iPSC-derived microg-
lia were grown in cerebral organoids either following transplant, or upon endogenous microglia
generation using deﬁned culture media [81,88], providing an excellent opportunity to study their
interaction with other neural cells. The latest developments include the establishment of xeno-
transplantation models, where microglia-like cells (generated from human ESCs, iPSC-derived
hematopoietic stem cells, or iPSC-derived microglia) are transplanted into immunodeﬁcient
mice that express human growth factors, such as human CSF1 – required for human microglia
survival [77,89,90]. The engrafted human cells display a transcriptional proﬁle that is more similar
to human microglia than in vitro differentiated microglia-like cells, and the cellular heterogeneity
of human microglia is replicated [77,89,90]. However, there are still important differences, and
a key consideration is that even mouse macrophages remain transcriptionally distinct from
yolk-sac-derived microglia after prolonged residence in the mouse CNS [91], suggesting that
transplanted human microglia-like cells may maintain transcriptional differences to primary
cells. The immunologically abnormal host environment, the variability in engraftment, and the
expression of foreign proteins in humanized mice also need to be taken into consideration.
Nevertheless, these elegant new models provide an unprecedented opportunity to investigate
human-speciﬁc responses of microglia in the context of neurological diseases.
Concluding Remarks
The recent development of new tools and models provides an exciting opportunity to investigate
the roles of microglia in CNS health and disease, and the capacity to address outstanding ques-
tions in the ﬁeld (see Outstanding Questions). In rodent studies, these will allow comparisons of
the consequences of microglia-speciﬁc targeted manipulation with those previously observed
using broader approaches targeting all CNS macrophages. These comparisons may help identify
population-speciﬁc functions, and can be complemented by new iPSC and xenotransplantation
systems to facilitate the study of human microglia function in disease models.
For instance, recently developed mouse transgenic lines with high speciﬁcity and efﬁciency
(Table 1) include P2ry12-CreERT2 and Tmem119-CreERT2 lines that maintain endogenous
protein expression without confounding haploinsufficiency or disruption of gene function
[57,59,60]. The new Tmem119- and Hexb-driven lines also allow tracking of microglia in early
development [54,57] at ages when the Tmem119 protein is not uniformly expressed by all
microglia – although recombination efﬁciency can vary in a region-dependent manner [54,57].
Additionally, due to stable expression, the new Hexb lines permit the conditional manipulation
or tracking of microglia even in disease states [54]. Another model of interest is one where microg-
lia are depleted, yet BAMs/CAMs are largely retained following genomic deletion of a super
enhancer in the Csf1r locus (fms-intronic regulatory element; Csf1r-FIREΔ/Δ)[64]. These mice
present a signiﬁcant advantage over Csf1r global knockout mice, which lack all CNS
macrophages, show gross brain abnormalities, and die within the ﬁrst postnatal month [50].
Outstanding Questions
As BAMs are commonly targeted in
experimental manipulation aimed at
impacting microglia, what are the
distinct functions of BAMs compared
with
microglia
in
development,
homeostasis, and following injury?
What tools are most appropriate to
answer this question?
How do we bioengineer drug delivery
strategies which speciﬁcally target
microglia in disease, considering their
intra- and inter-regional heterogeneity?
How can experimental microglial
depletion studies guide therapeutic
interventions which seek to normalize
microglia activity in disease and injury?
Should microglial subpopulations or
speciﬁc genes be targeted?
How does sexual dimorphism of
microglia inﬂuence their function
throughout the life course of an
animal in health and disease?
How do we best model age-related
human neurological disease in experi-
mental models for which some differ-
ences between human and rodent
microglia have been documented?
Trends in Immunology
790
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9

Csf1r-FIREΔ/Δ mice could be particularly useful for xenotransplantation to investigate human
microglia behavior in vivo in health and disease; studies in these mice allow for investigation
of transplanted microglia-like cells without potentially confounding mouse host microglial
responses. The mouse lines may also inform on the importance of BAMs/CAMs versus microglia
in various contexts. In summary, we anticipate that these newly developed tools will further
elucidate microglia functions and clarify novel therapeutic strategies targeting microglia in disease.
Acknowledgments
V.E.M. is funded by grants from the Medical Research Council, the UK Multiple Sclerosis Society, and the National Centre for
the Replacement, Reﬁnement and Reduction of Animals in Research. J.P. is supported by grants from the German
Research Foundation, and the UK Dementia Research Institute (Momentum and Programme Awards). Diagrams were
created using BioRender.
References
1.
Reu, P. et al. (2017) The lifespan and turnover of microglia in the
human brain. Cell Rep. 20, 779–784
2.
Askew, K. et al. (2017) Coupled proliferation and apoptosis
maintain the rapid turnover of microglia in the adult brain. Cell
Rep. 18, 391–405
3.
Tay, T.L. et al. (2017) A new fate mapping system reveals
context-dependent random or clonal expansion of microglia.
Nat. Neurosci. 20, 793–803
4.
Schulz, C. et al. (2012) A lineage of myeloid cells independent of
Myb and hematopoietic stem cells. Science 336, 86–90
5.
Lloyd, A.F. and Miron, V.E. (2019) The pro-remyelination proper-
ties of microglia in the central nervous system. Nat. Rev. Neurol.
15, 447–458
6.
Lloyd, A.F. et al. (2019) Central nervous system regeneration is
driven by microglia necroptosis and repopulation. Nat. Neurosci.
22, 1046–1052
7.
Kanazawa, M. et al. (2017) Microglia preconditioned by oxygen-
glucose deprivation promote functional recovery in ischemic
rats. Sci. Rep. 7, 42582
8.
Hickman, S.E. et al. (2019) Heterozygous CX3CR1 deﬁciency in
microglia restores neuronal beta-amyloid clearance pathways
and slows progression of Alzheimer's like-disease in PS1-APP
mice. Front. Immunol. 10, 2780
9.
Benbenishty, A. et al. (2019) Prophylactic TLR9 stimulation re-
duces brain metastasis through microglia activation. PLoS Biol.
17, e2006859
10. Akiyoshi, R. et al. (2018) Microglia enhance synapse activ-
ity to promote local network synchronization. eNeuro 5
ENEURO.0088-18.2018
11. Gibson, E.M. et al. (2019) Methotrexate chemotherapy induces
persistent tri-glial dysregulation that underlies chemotherapy-
related cognitive impairment. Cell 176, 43–55 e13
12. Van Steenwinckel, J. et al. (2019) Decreased microglial
Wnt/beta-catenin signalling drives microglial pro-inﬂammatory
activation in the developing brain. Brain 142, 3806–3833
13. Hagemeyer, N. et al. (2017) Microglia contribute to normal
myelinogenesis and to oligodendrocyte progenitor maintenance
during adulthood. Acta Neuropathol. 134, 441–458
14. Wlodarczyk, A. et al. (2017) A novel microglial subset plays a key
role in myelinogenesis in developing brain. EMBO J. 36,
3292–3308
15. Diaz-Aparicio, I. et al. (2020) Microglia actively remodel adult hip-
pocampal neurogenesis through the phagocytosis secretome.
J. Neurosci. 40, 1453–1482
16. Ueno, M. et al. (2013) Layer V cortical neurons require microglial
support for survival during postnatal development. Nat.
Neurosci. 16, 543–551
17. Schafer, D.P. et al. (2012) Microglia sculpt postnatal neural cir-
cuits in an activity and complement-dependent manner. Neuron
74, 691–705
18. Paolicelli, R.C. et al. (2011) Synaptic pruning by microglia is nec-
essary for normal brain development. Science 333, 1456–1458
19. Squarzoni, P. et al. (2014) Microglia modulate wiring of the em-
bryonic forebrain. Cell Rep. 8, 1271–1279
20. Cunningham, C.L. et al. (2013) Microglia regulate the number of
neural precursor cells in the developing cerebral cortex.
J. Neurosci. 33, 4216–4233
21. Punal, V.M. et al. (2019) Large-scale death of retinal astrocytes
during normal development is non-apoptotic and implemented
by microglia. PLoS Biol. 17, e3000492
22. Ayata, P. et al. (2018) Epigenetic regulation of brain region-
speciﬁc microglia clearance activity. Nat. Neurosci. 21,
1049–1060
23. Wang, C. et al. (2020) Microglia mediate forgetting via
complement-dependent synaptic elimination. Science 367,
688–694
24. Torres, L. et al. (2016) Dynamic microglial modulation of spatial
learning and social behavior. Brain Behav. Immun. 55, 6–16
25. Parkhurst, C.N. et al. (2013) Microglia promote learning-
dependent synapse formation through brain-derived neuro-
trophic factor. Cell 155, 1596–1609
26. Kierdorf, K. et al. (2019) Macrophages at CNS interfaces:
ontogeny and function in health and disease. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 20, 547–562
27. Goldmann, T. et al. (2016) Origin, fate and dynamics of macro-
phages at central nervous system interfaces. Nat. Immunol. 17,
797–805
28. Utz, S.G. et al. (2020) Early fate deﬁnes microglia and non-
parenchymal brain macrophage development. Cell 181,
557–573 e18
29. Yamasaki, R. et al. (2014) Differential roles of microglia and
monocytes in the inﬂamed central nervous system. J. Exp.
Med. 211, 1533–1549
30. Plemel, J.R. et al. (2020) Microglia response following acute de-
myelination is heterogeneous and limits inﬁltrating macrophage
dispersion. Sci. Adv. 6, eaay6324
31. Jordao, M.J.C. et al. (2019) Single-cell proﬁling identiﬁes myeloid
cell subsets with distinct fates during neuroinﬂammation.
Science 363
32. Galatro, T.F. et al. (2017) Transcriptomic analysis of puriﬁed
human cortical microglia reveals age-associated changes. Nat.
Neurosci. 20, 1162–1171
33. Gosselin, D. et al. (2017) An environment-dependent transcrip-
tional network speciﬁes human microglia identity. Science 356
34. Geirsdottir, L. et al. (2019) Cross-species single-cell analysis re-
veals divergence of the primate microglia program. Cell 179,
1609–1622 e16
35. Bottcher, C. et al. (2019) Human microglia regional heterogeneity
and phenotypes determined by multiplexed single-cell mass cy-
tometry. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 78–90
36. Sankowski, R. et al. (2019) Mapping microglia states in the
human brain through the integration of high-dimensional tech-
niques. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 2098–2110
37. Li, F. et al. (2019) Microglia in the developing retina. Neural Dev.
14, 12
38. Van Hove, H. et al. (2019) A single-cell atlas of mouse brain mac-
rophages reveals unique transcriptional identities shaped by on-
togeny and tissue environment. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 1021–1035
Trends in Immunology
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9
791

39. Mrdjen, D. et al. (2018) High-dimensional single-cell mapping of
central nervous system immune cells reveals distinct myeloid
subsets in health, aging, and disease. Immunity 48, 380–395 e6
40. Chappell-Maor, L. et al. (2020) Comparative analysis of CreER
transgenic mice for the study of brain macrophages: A case
study. Eur. J. Immunol. 50, 353–362
41. Goldmann, T. et al. (2013) A new type of microglia gene
targeting shows TAK1 to be pivotal in CNS autoimmune inﬂam-
mation. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1618–1626
42. Butowski, N. et al. (2016) Orally administered colony stimulating
factor 1 receptor inhibitor PLX3397 in recurrent glioblastoma: an
Ivy Foundation Early Phase Clinical Trials Consortium phase II
study. Neuro-Oncology 18, 557–564
43. Liu, Y. et al. (2019) Concentration-dependent effects of CSF1R
inhibitors on oligodendrocyte progenitor cells ex vivo and
in vivo. Exp. Neurol. 318, 32–41
44. Lei, F. (2020) CSF1R inhibition by small molecule affects hematopoi-
esis and the function of macrophages. bioRxiv Published online
January 26, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.27.889469
45. Pyonteck, S.M. et al. (2013) CSF-1R inhibition alters macro-
phage polarization and blocks glioma progression. Nat. Med.
19, 1264–1272
46. Spangenberg, E. et al. (2019) Sustained microglial depletion with
CSF1R inhibitor impairs parenchymal plaque development in an
Alzheimer's disease model. Nat. Commun. 10, 3758
47. Yao, Y. et al. (2016) Dynamics of spinal microglia repopulation
following an acute depletion. Sci. Rep. 6, 22839
48. Cronk, J.C. et al. (2018) Peripherally derived macrophages can
engraft the brain independent of irradiation and maintain an iden-
tity distinct from microglia. J. Exp. Med. 215, 1627–1647
49. Bruttger, J. et al. (2015) Genetic cell ablation reveals clusters of
local self-renewing microglia in the mammalian central nervous
system. Immunity 43, 92–106
50. Erblich, B. et al. (2011) Absence of colony stimulation factor-1
receptor results in loss of microglia, disrupted brain development
and olfactory deﬁcits. PLoS One 6, e26317
51. Elmore, M.R. et al. (2014) Colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor
signaling is necessary for microglia viability, unmasking a microg-
lia progenitor cell in the adult brain. Neuron 82, 380–397
52. Van Hove, H. et al. (2020) Identifying the variables that
drive tamoxifen-independent CreERT2 recombination: Implications
for microglial fate mapping and gene deletions. Eur. J. Immunol.
50, 459–463
53. Bennett, M.L. and Bennett, F.C. (2020) The inﬂuence of environ-
ment and origin on brain resident macrophages and implications
for therapy. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 157–166
54. Masuda, T. et al. (2020) Novel Hexb-based tools for studying
microglia in the CNS. Nat. Immunol. 21, 802–815
55. Zhao, X.F. et al. (2019) Targeting microglia using Cx3cr1-Cre
lines: revisiting the speciﬁcity. eNeuro 6 ENEURO.0114-19.2019
56. Zhang, B. et al. (2018) The speciﬁcity and role of microglia in
epileptogenesis in mouse models of tuberous sclerosis com-
plex. Epilepsia 59, 1796–1806
57. Kaiser, T. and Feng, G. (2019) Tmem119-EGFP and Tmem119-
CreERT2 transgenic mice for labeling and manipulating microg-
lia. eNeuro 6 ENEURO.0448-18.2019
58. Buttgereit, A. et al. (2016) Sall1 is a transcriptional regulator deﬁn-
ing microglia identity and function. Nat. Immunol. 17, 1397–1406
59. McKinsey, G.L. et al. (2020) A new genetic strategy for targeting
microglia in development and disease. eLife 9, e54590
60. Ruan, C. et al. (2020) A novel Tmem119-tdTomato reporter
mouse model for studying microglia in the central nervous sys-
tem. Brain Behav. Immun. 83, 180–191
61. Bennett, F.C. et al. (2018) A combination of ontogeny and
CNS environment establishes microglial identity. Neuron 98,
1170–1183 e8
62. Grassivaro, F. et al. (2020) Convergence between microglia and
peripheral macrophages phenotype during development and
neuroinﬂammation. J. Neurosci. 40, 784–795
63. Wang, X. et al. (2017) Tamoxifen provides structural and func-
tional rescue in murine models of photoreceptor degeneration.
J. Neurosci. 37, 3294–3310
64. Rojo, R. et al. (2019) Deletion of a Csf1r enhancer selectively im-
pacts CSF1R expression and development of tissue macro-
phage populations. Nat. Commun. 10, 3215
65. Kempthorne, L. et al. (2020) Loss of homeostatic microglial pheno-
type in CSF1R-related leukoencephalopathy. Acta Neuropathol.
Commun. 8, 72
66. Grabert, K. et al. (2016) Microglial brain region-dependent diver-
sity and selective regional sensitivities to aging. Nat. Neurosci.
19, 504–516
67. Masuda, T. et al. (2019) Spatial and temporal heterogeneity of
mouse and human microglia at single-cell resolution. Nature
566, 388–392
68. Young, A.M.H. et al. (2019) A map of transcriptional hetero-
geneity and regulatory variation in human microglia. bioRxiv
Published online December 20, 2019. https://doi.org/
10.1101/2019.12.20.874099
69. Keren-Shaul, H. et al. (2017) A unique microglia type associated
with restricting development of Alzheimer's disease. Cell 169,
1276–1290 e17
70. Krasemann, S. et al. (2017) The TREM2-APOE pathway drives
the transcriptional phenotype of dysfunctional microglia in neuro-
degenerative diseases. Immunity 47, 566–581 e9
71. Mathys, H. et al. (2019) Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of
Alzheimer's disease. Nature 570, 332–337
72. Hammond, T.R. et al. (2019) Single-cell RNA sequencing of mi-
croglia throughout the mouse lifespan and in the injured brain re-
veals complex cell-state changes. Immunity 50, 253–271 e6
73. Patir, A. et al. (2019) A core transcriptional signature of human
microglia: Derivation and utility in describing region-dependent
alterations associated with Alzheimer's disease. Glia 67,
1240–1253
74. Butovsky, O. et al. (2014) Identiﬁcation of a unique TGF-beta-
dependent molecular and functional signature in microglia. Nat.
Neurosci. 17, 131–143
75. Bohlen, C.J. et al. (2017) Diverse requirements for microglial sur-
vival, speciﬁcation, and function revealed by deﬁned-medium
cultures. Neuron 94, 759–773 e8
76. Claes, C. et al. (2019) Human stem cell-derived monocytes and
microglia-like cells reveal impaired amyloid plaque clearance
upon heterozygous or homozygous loss of TREM2. Alzheimers
Dement. 15, 453–464
77. Mancuso, R. et al. (2019) Stem-cell-derived human microglia
transplanted in mouse brain to study human disease. Nat.
Neurosci. 22, 2111–2116
78. Muffat, J. et al. (2016) Efﬁcient derivation of microglia-like cells
from human pluripotent stem cells. Nat. Med. 22, 1358–1367
79. Pandya, H. et al. (2017) Differentiation of human and murine
induced pluripotent stem cells to microglia-like cells. Nat.
Neurosci. 20, 753–759
80. Haenseler, W. et al. (2017) A highly efﬁcient human pluripotent
stem cell microglia model displays a neuronal-co-culture-
speciﬁc expression proﬁle and inﬂammatory response. Stem
Cell Rep. 8, 1727–1742
81. Abud, E.M. et al. (2017) iPSC-derived human microglia-like cells
to study neurological diseases. Neuron 94, 278–293 e9
82. McQuade, A. et al. (2018) Development and validation of a sim-
pliﬁed method to generate human microglia from pluripotent
stem cells. Mol. Neurodegener. 13, 67
83. Sellgren, C.M. et al. (2017) Patient-speciﬁc models of microglia-
mediated engulfment of synapses and neural progenitors. Mol.
Psychiatry 22, 170–177
84. Haenseler, W. et al. (2017) Excess alpha-synuclein compromises
phagocytosis in iPSC-derived macrophages. Sci. Rep. 7, 9003
85. Lin, Y.T. et al. (2018) APOE4 causes widespread molecular and
cellular alterations associated with Alzheimer's disease pheno-
types in human iPSC-derived brain cell types. Neuron 98,
1141–1154 e7
86. Konttinen, H. et al. (2019) PSEN1DeltaE9, APPswe, and APOE4
confer disparate phenotypes in human iPSC-derived microglia.
Stem Cell Rep. 13, 669–683
87. Piers, T.M. et al. (2020) A locked immunometabolic switch
underlies TREM2 R47H loss of function in human iPSC-derived
microglia. FASEB J. 34, 2436–2450
88. Ormel, P.R. et al. (2018) Microglia innately develop within
cerebral organoids. Nat. Commun. 9, 4167
89. Hasselmann, J. et al. (2019) Development of a chimeric model to
study and manipulate human microglia in vivo. Neuron 103,
1016–1033 e10
Trends in Immunology
792
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9

90. Svoboda, D.S. et al. (2019) Human iPSC-derived microglia assume a
primary microglia-like state after transplantation into the neonatal
mouse brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 116, 25293–25303
91. Shemer, A. et al. (2018) Engrafted parenchymal brain macro-
phages differ from microglia in transcriptome, chromatin land-
scape and response to challenge. Nat. Commun. 9, 5206
92. Miron, V.E. et al. (2013) M2 microglia and macrophages drive
oligodendrocyte differentiation during CNS remyelination. Nat.
Neurosci. 16, 1211–1218
93. Heppner, F.L. et al. (2005) Experimental autoimmune encepha-
lomyelitis repressed by microglial paralysis. Nat. Med. 11,
146–152
Trends in Immunology
Trends in Immunology, September 2020, Vol. 41, No. 9
793

===== Mitoh2021_CurrBiol+SeaSlugRegeneration =====
Magazine
ll
Current Biology 31, R215–R240, March 8, 2021 © 2021 Elsevier Inc. R233
Extreme autotomy 
and whole-body 
regeneration in 
photosynthetic sea 
slugs
Sayaka Mitoh* and Yoichi Yusa
Autotomy, the voluntary shedding of 
a body part, is common to distantly-
related animals such as arthropods, 
gastropods, asteroids, amphibians, and 
lizards1,2. Autotomy is generally followed 
by regeneration of shed terminal body 
parts, such as appendages or tails. 
Here, we identify a new type of extreme 
autotomy in two species of sacoglossan 
sea slug (Mollusca: Gastropoda). 
Surprisingly, they shed the main 
body, including the whole heart, and 
regenerated a new body.  In contrast, the 
Correspondence
shed body did not regenerate the head. 
These sacoglossans can incorporate 
chloroplasts from algal food into their 
cells to utilise for photosynthesis 
(kleptoplasty3), and we propose that 
this unique characteristic may facilitate 
survival after autotomy and subsequent 
regeneration. 
Five in 15 (33%) laboratory-bred 
individuals of a morphotype of Elysia 
cf. marginata species complex 
(see Supplemental Experimental 
Procedures), and a ﬁ eld-collected 
individual of another morphotype of 
Elysia cf. marginata, autotomised at 
their neck position during lifetime 
(Figure 1 and Methods S1E). One 
individual even autotomised twice. 
 In all cases,  the pericardium region, 
including the heart, was left completely 
in the autotomised body (Figure 1A). 
Furthermore, the shed body was highly 
likely to contain the kidney, intestine, 
and most of the reproductive organs4. 
The head, separated from the heart 
and body, moved autonomously, even 
immediately after autotomy (Figure 1B 
and Video  S1).  The wound closure 
of the head was completed within a 
day, and the heads of relatively young 
(226–336 days after hatching; N = 3) 
 individuals started to feed on algae 
within a few hours. Surprisingly,  they 
started regeneration of the heart within 
7 days (Figure 1B) and completed 
regeneration of the whole body within 
~20 days (Figure  1C,D). The heads of 
older individuals (480–520 days after 
hatching; N = 2) did not feed and died in 
10 days. The bodies moved, reacting to 
tactile stimuli, for several days to months 
(Methods S1E). However, none of the 
bodies regenerated the head. The bodies 
gradually shrank and became pale, 
apparently from losing chloroplasts, and 
eventually decomposed. The beating of 
the heart was visible just before the body 
decomposed. 
 Likewise, among 82 individuals of 
Elysia atroviridis that were ﬁ eld-collected 
and parasitised by the copepod 
Arthurius sp. (Figure 1J), three (4%) 
A
10 mm
10 mm
10 mm
10 mm
5 mm
1 mm
1 mm
1 mm
1 mm
1 mm
B
C
D
E
F
H
J
I
G
Figure 1. Autotomy and regeneration of body in Elysia cf. marginata (A–D) and Elysia atroviridis (E–H). 
(A) Head and body of Elysia cf. marginata (individual no. 1) just after autotomy (day 0), with the pericardium (heart) remaining in body section (arrow). 
(B) day 7, (C) day 14, (D) day 22, showing whole-body regeneration. (E) Head and body of Elysia atroviridis (individual no. 1) just after autotomy (day 
0). (F) day 3, (G) day 14, and (H) day 28. (I) Healthy individual of Elysia cf. marginata with a ‘breakage plane’ at their neck (dotted line). (J) Arthurius 
sp., the internal parasitic copepod of Elysia atroviridis. 

Magazine
R234 Current Biology 31, R215–R240, March 8, 2021 
ll
autotomised at their neck position 
(Figure 1E and Methods S1E). Two of 
them regenerated their bodies within a 
week (Figure 1F–H).  The shed bodies 
moved, reacting to stimuli as in E. cf. 
marginata, and by dissection it was 
conﬁ rmed that they contained the 
parasite.  In addition, other 39/82 (48%) 
individuals gradually lost part of their 
bodies, presumably by autolysis, without 
autotomy during rearing, and discharged 
the copepods. Among them, 13 (33%) 
regenerated the lost body part, but the 
remaining died without regeneration. 
In contrast, none of 64 parasite-free 
individuals collected simultaneously 
autotomised any body part. 
These two sacoglossan ‘species’ 
have a transverse groove at their neck, 
which appears to be a predetermined 
‘breakage plane’ (Figure 1I). We gently 
tied this part using a ﬁ ne nylon string 
in six individuals of Elysia cf. marginata 
(Methods S1A–E). Five of them 
autotomised at the tied position within a 
day (Methods S1E). The tied position of 
the remaining individual  shifted slightly 
lower, and it autotomised at the neck 9 
days after treatment. Their autotomised 
bodies represented 80–85% of the total 
weight. In contrast, imitated predator 
attacks, like pinching of the head 
and cutting of the parapodia (lateral 
extensions), did not induce autotomy 
(see Supplemental Experimental 
Procedures). 
Both Elysia cf. marginata and 
E. atroviridis shed the main body, 
including the heart. Some other 
sea slugs also autotomise, but they 
shed minor body parts such as 
tails, parapodia, or dorsal papillae1. 
Other invertebrates (e.g., cnidarians, 
planarians, and asteroids) can regenerate 
their main body following division. Also, 
some amphibians are known to have 
a high regeneration capacity, including 
tails, limbs, eyes, and even the heart 
ventricle5. However, autotomy in this 
study is remarkable in that animals with 
complex body plans can survive even if 
they lose the main body, including the 
heart, and subsequently regenerate the 
whole lost area. The reason why the 
head can survive without the heart and 
other important organs is unclear. We 
have succeeded in a complete rearing 
of Elysia cf. marginata for multiple 
generations — thus, they can be used as 
a model system for studying autotomy 
and regeneration of the body. 
The function of this large-scale 
autotomy remains unclear at present. 
Most animals, including some 
sacoglossans1,2, are considered to 
autotomise to escape predation. 
However, adult sacoglossans generally 
have few predators due to their cryptic 
coloration and presence of toxic 
chemicals incorporated from their food3,6 
(but see Nakano et al.7). Our experiments 
also showed that autotomy of E. cf. 
marginata took several hours, which is 
not effective to avoid predation, and that 
imitated predator attacks did not induce 
autotomy. Therefore, their autotomy 
is unlikely to function as predation 
escape. We suggest that removing 
internal parasites is a likely function of 
autotomy, at least in E. atroviridis. All 
autotomised individuals (and autolysed 
ones as well) had a parasite, and after 
regeneration they became parasite-
free. The parasites occupy most of the 
main body of E. atroviridis and strongly 
inhibit its reproduction during lifetime 
( data not shown). Thus, removing such 
parasites by autotomy likely enhances 
the host’s reproductive success. Elysia 
cf. marginata did not appear to have 
parasites in our culture, but this species 
complex has another congeneric 
parasite8. Such ‘parasitic autotomy’ has 
been shown in earthworms to counteract 
a protozoan parasite9. Alternatively, 
but not mutually exclusive to this idea, 
autotomy by the sacoglossans may 
function to escape from being tangled 
in algae or to remove accumulated toxic 
chemicals. 
The body shedding of the 
sacoglossans appears to,  ﬁ rstly, have 
a defensive function (to eliminate 
endoparasites); secondly, occur by an 
intrinsic mechanism; and thirdly, be a 
controlled loss. All of these are conditions 
often used to distinguish autotomy from 
other losses of body parts1. Why these 
sacoglossans can regenerate their body 
even if they lose most organs remains 
unclear, but we suspect involvement of 
kleptoplasty. In Elysia, a highly branched 
 digestive gland is spread over the 
majority of its body surface, including the 
head, and the gland is lined by cells that 
maintain ingested algal chloroplasts4. 
Thus, these sacoglossans can obtain 
energy for survival and regeneration from 
photosynthesis by kleptoplasts, even 
when they cannot digest food10. Further 
investigation of autotomy in these and 
other sacoglossans will elucidate its 
function, mechanism, and evolutionary 
origin.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes 
experimental procedures, methods ﬁ le, and one 
video and can be found with this article online 
at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2021.01.014.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Yayoi M. Hirano and Rie Nakano for 
information on sea slugs, Kosuke Sudo for 
information on copepods, Mitsunobu Kamiya 
for providing sea algae, Kunifumi Tagawa and 
the staff at Mukaishima Marine Biological 
Laboratory of Hiroshima University for help in 
collection. We also thank the member of our 
laboratory for discussion, Ariana Gaskin for 
English editing, and three anonymous reviewers 
for constructive comments.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
REFERENCES
 1. Fleming, P.A., Muller, D., and Bateman, P.W. 
(2007). Leave it all behind: a taxonomic 
perspective of autotomy in invertebrates. Biol. 
Rev. 82, 481–510.
 2. Higham, T.E., Russell, A.P., and Zani, P.A. (2013). 
Integrative biology of tail autotomy in lizards. 
Physiol. Biochem. Zool. 86, 603–610.
 3. Giménez-Casalduero, F., Muniain, C., González-
Wangüemert, M., and Garrote-Moreno, A. (2011). 
Elysia timida (Risso, 1818) three decades of 
research. Anim. Biodivers. Conserv. 34, 217–227.
 4. Neusser, T.P., Hanke, F., Haszprunar, G., 
and Jörger, K.M. (2019). ‘Dorsal vessels’? 
3D-reconstruction and ultrastructure of 
the renopericardial system of Elysia viridis 
(Montagu, 1804) (Gastropoda: Sacoglossa), 
with a discussion of function and homology. J. 
Molluscan Stud. 85, 79–91.
 5. Brockes, J.P. (1997). Amphibian limb regeneration: 
rebuilding a complex structure. Science 276, 
81–87.
 6. Wägele, H. (2015). Photosynthesis and the 
role of plastids (kleptoplastids) in Sacoglossa 
(Heterobranchia, Gastropoda) a short review. 
Aquat. Sci. Manag. 3, https://doi.org/10.35800/
jasm.3.1.2015.12431.
 7. Nakano, R., Tanaka, K., Dewa, S., Takasaki, K., 
and Ono, A. (2007). Field observations on the 
feeding of the nudibranch Gymnodoris spp. in 
Japan. Veliger 49, 91–96.
 8. Risbec, M.J. (1930). Observations biologiques sur 
quelques mollusques de la Nouvelle-Calédonie. 
Bull. Mus. Natl. Hist. Nat. Paris 2, 660–664.
 9. Bilej, M., De Baetselier, P., and Bechin, A. (2000). 
Antimicrobial defense of the earthworm. Folia 
Microbiol. 45, 283–300.
 10. Shiroyama, H., Mitoh, S., Ida, T.Y., and Yusa, Y. 
(2020). Adaptive signiﬁ cance of light and food 
for a kleptoplastic sea slug: implications for 
photosynthesis. Oecologia 194, 455–463.
Nara Women’s University, Kitauoya-nishi, Nara 
630-8506, Japan. 
*E-mail: sayaka.elysia.mitoh@gmail.com

===== Mokalled0216_Science_GlialBridging+Zebrafish =====
NEUROREGENERATION
Injury-induced ctgfa directs glial
bridging and spinal cord
regeneration in zebrafish
Mayssa H. Mokalled,1 Chinmoy Patra,2* Amy L. Dickson,1 Toyokazu Endo,1
Didier Y. R. Stainier,2 Kenneth D. Poss1†
Unlike mammals, zebrafish efficiently regenerate functional nervous system tissue
after major spinal cord injury. Whereas glial scarring presents a roadblock for
mammalian spinal cord repair, glial cells in zebrafish form a bridge across severed
spinal cord tissue and facilitate regeneration. We performed a genome-wide profiling
screen for secreted factors that are up-regulated during zebrafish spinal cord
regeneration. We found that connective tissue growth factor a (ctgfa) is induced in
and around glial cells that participate in initial bridging events. Mutations in ctgfa
disrupted spinal cord repair, and transgenic ctgfa overexpression or local delivery of
human CTGF recombinant protein accelerated bridging and functional regeneration.
Our study reveals that CTGF is necessary and sufficient to stimulate glial bridging
and natural spinal cord regeneration.
T
he spinal cord of adult zebrafish recovers
spontaneously after injury (Fig. 1A and fig.
S1, A and B). Efficient axon growth, adult
neurogenesis, and absence of glial scarring
distinguish this injury response from that
in mammals (1, 2). After initial inflammation,
ependymal cells proliferate and glia form a bridge
that is thought to provide a scaffold for axonal
growth (3). The severed cord reconnects, and new
neuronal connections lead to functional recovery
(Fig. 1A) (4). Here, we analyzed extracellular fac-
tors up-regulated in the regenerating zebrafish
spinal cord.
To identify potential secreted, pro-regenerative
signaling molecules, we screened zebrafish tran-
scriptomes for genes induced after spinal cord
injury (Fig. 1B and table S1). Our screen iden-
tified seven genes encoding secreted extra-
cellular proteins, including fibronectin 1 a (fn1a),
previously implicated in axon growth promotion
(5, 6). Transcripts for fn1a, fn1b, connective tis-
sue growth factor a (ctgfa), myostatin b (mstnb),
and stanniocalcin 1 like (stc1l) increased in ep-
endymal cells at 1 and 2 weeks post-injury (wpi)
(Fig. 1C and fig. S1C). Whereas fn1a was ex-
pressed around the entirety of the central canal
at 2 wpi, mstnb and ctgfa were predominantly
expressed in the dorsal and ventral ependyma,
respectively (Fig. 1C).
CTGF is a matricellular, multifunctional pro-
tein that can influence the activity of multiple
major signaling pathways, affecting cell adhe-
sion, migration, proliferation, and differentiation.
CTGF expression increases after central nervous
system (CNS) trauma in rodents, but its function
after spinal cord injury has not been elucidated
(7–9). Because ctgfa is induced upon spinal cord
injury in zebrafish, we hypothesized that it may
have pro-regenerative roles. We analyzed ctgfa
expression along the rostrocaudal spinal cord
axis (Fig. 1D). At 1 wpi, ctgfa transcription was
induced in multiple cell types across the lesion
site and in ependymal cells at the central canal
near the lesion. At this time point, we detected
strongest ctgfa expression in the ventral epen-
dyma. By 2 wpi, ctgfa expression localized to
ventral ependymal cells and marked the cellular
bridge that had formed at the lesion site. Ex-
pression declined beyond 3 wpi (fig. S2A). Thus,
ctgfa expression correlates with formation of
the glial bridge.
To identify the cell populations that express
ctgfa during spinal cord repair, we generated
transgenic reporter zebrafish with a 5.5-kb ge-
nomic sequence upstream of the ctgfa translation-
al start site fused to an enhanced green fluorescent
protein (EGFP) reporter cassette. ctgfa:EGFP flu-
orescence resembled endogenous ctgfa mRNA
expression in spinal cord tissue at 2 wpi (fig. S2,
B and C). As early as 5 days post-injury (dpi),
domains of ctgfa:EGFP and glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP), a marker of multiple glial cells
in the CNS, overlapped within a subpopulation
of glial cells at the injury site (Fig. 1E). We inter-
pret these to be bridging cells. Similarly, ctgfa:
EGFP colocalized with the GFAP+ bridge at 2 wpi
(Fig. 1E). Comparison of ctgfa:EGFP and GFAP
expression on serial cross sections revealed that
~97% of GFAP+ bridging glia at the lesion core
were also EGFP+ at 1 wpi (fig. S3). Further away
from the lesion, ctgfa:EGFP was mainly present
in ventral ependymal cells (fig. S3). We also de-
tected ctgfa:EGFP in skeletal muscle, bone cells,
and reactive fibroblast-like cells around the le-
sion site. ctgfa-driven expression suggested de-
lineation of “pioneer” bridging glia.
To determine whether ctgfa is required for
spinal cord regeneration, we generated a ctgfa
mutant allele (ctgfabns50; referred to as ctgfa−)
that harbors a frameshift-causing 7-nucleotide
deletion within the third exon of the ctgfa locus
(fig. S4, A to C). ctgfa−/−animals are adult viable
and appear to have unaffected motor function
capacity (10) (fig. S4D). However, ctgfa−/−ani-
mals showed diminished swim capacity after
spinal cord injury, with no significant functional
recovery between 2 and 6 wpi (Fig. 2A). Heter-
ozygous (ctgfa+/−) animals showed partial recov-
ery of swim capacity by 6 wpi (Fig. 2A). At 4 wpi,
anterograde axon tracing indicated that axon
regeneration across the lesion site was reduced by
~25% in ctgfa+/−and ~60% in ctgfa−/−spinal cords
proximal to the lesion, and by ~40% in ctgfa+/−
and ~80% in ctgfa−/−cords distally (Fig. 2B). Thus,
ctgfa is required for spinal cord regeneration.
Deficits in glial bridging might underlie the
defects in spinal cord regeneration displayed
by ctgfa mutants. Using GFAP and acetylated
a-tubulin immunohistochemistry, we observed
robust glial bridges in wild-type and ctgfa+/−ani-
mals at 4 wpi (Fig. 2C and fig. S5A). However,
ctgfa−/−animals displayed ~71% less bridging than
did wild-type clutchmates (Fig. 2C and fig. S5A).
At 2 wpi, glial cells within ctgfa−/−injury sites
often failed to extend projections into the lesion
(fig. S5B). 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU) incor-
poration assays showed that ctgfa−/−zebrafish
displayed a ~48% reduction in glial cell prolif-
eration at 1 and 2 wpi (Fig. 2D and fig. S6).
EdU+GFAP−cell numbers were comparable in
wild-type, ctgfa+/−, and ctgfa−/−tissues at 1 wpi
(Fig. 2D), which suggests that the effects of
ctgfa mutations were preferential to glial cells.
Thus, ctgfa is required for the changes in pro-
liferation and morphology of glial cells during
spinal cord regeneration.
To examine the effects of excess ctgfa on spi-
nal cord regeneration, we generated and injured
transgenic fish that express full-length ctgfa un-
der control of a heat-inducible promoter (hsp70:
ctgfa-FL) (fig. S7). Recovery of swim capacity was
improved in ctgfa-overexpressing animals given
daily heat shocks and assessed at 2, 4, and 6 wpi
(Fig. 3A). Swim capacity was comparable between
sham-injured hsp70:ctgfa-FL and wild-type clutch-
mates at 2 and 6 weeks after heat shock (Fig. 3A),
indicating contextual effects of ctgfa overexpres-
sion. Histology indicated increased bridging and
axon regeneration in ctgfa-overexpressing fish
relative to controls at 2 and 4 wpi, respectively
(Fig. 3, B and C, and fig. S8A). Thus, whole-animal
ctgfa overexpression promotes regeneration after
spinal cord injury.
CTGF harbors four protein interaction domains
and a protease domain that self-cleaves CTGF
into profibrotic N-terminal and proliferative
C-terminal peptides (11, 12). To determine the
active portion of zebrafish Ctgfa during spinal
cord regeneration, we created transgenic fish with
heat-inducible expression of either N-terminal
or C-terminal ctgfa fragments (hsp70:ctgfa-NT
and hsp70:ctgfa-CT) (fig. S7A). Only ctgfa-CT over-
expression recapitulated the pro-regenerative
630
4 NOVEMBER 2016 • VOL 354 ISSUE 6312
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
1Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710, USA. 2Department of Developmental
Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research,
61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany.
*Present address: Agharkar Research Institute, Pune, India.
†Corresponding author. Email: kenneth.poss@duke.edu
RESEARCH
|
REPORTS
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on May 08, 2022

effects of ctgfa-FL (Fig. 3, D to F). By 6 wpi, swim
capacity was markedly increased in ctgfa-CT–
overexpressing animals relative to ctgfa-NT–
overexpressing or wild-type clutchmates (Fig. 3D).
Anatomically, ctgfa-CT overexpression resulted
in a factor of >3 increase in glial bridging at
2 wpi and a factor of >2 increase in axon growth
at 4 wpi (Fig. 3, E and F, and fig. S8B). These
experiments indicate that the pro-regenerative
activity of Ctgfa maps to its C-terminal domains.
To examine whether the effects of Ctgfa aug-
mentation could be reproduced by localized de-
livery into the spinal cord lesion site, we injured
wild-type animals and applied human recombi-
nant CTGF (HR-CTGF-FL and HR-CTGF-CT) pep-
tides adjacent to the lesion site at 5 and 10 dpi
using a gelfoam sponge. We then assessed re-
generation at 2 and 4 wpi, corresponding to 9
and 23 days after initial treatment. Human CTGF
and zebrafish Ctgfa are 81% identical and 87%
similar at the amino acid level within the four
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
4 NOVEMBER 2016 • VOL 354 ISSUE 6312
631
Fig. 1. Identification of ctgfa from a screen for regulators of spinal cord
regeneration. (A) Schematic of the multistep process of spinal cord regenera-
tion in zebrafish. (B) A screen for secreted factors expressed during spinal cord
regeneration (fpkm, fragments per kilobase of transcript per million; GO, Gene
Ontology). (C) In situ hybridization on spinal cord cross sections at 1 and
2 wpi and in uninjured control tissue. Sections proximal to the lesion from the
rostral side are shown; dashed lines delineate the central canals. The canal
dilates after injury. (D) ctgfa in situ hybridization on longitudinal spinal cord
sections at 1 and 2 wpi and in uninjured control tissue. (E) ctgfa:EGFP reporter
expression and GFAP immunohistochemistry during early bridging events at
5 dpi (top) and after bridge formation at 2 wpi (bottom). The middle panel
shows a high-magnification view of the boxed area in the top panel. In (D) and
(E), dashed lines delineate spinal cord edges, arrows point to sites of bridging,
and arrowheads point to ventral ependymal cells. Scale bars, 50 mm.
RESEARCH
|
REPORTS
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on May 08, 2022

protein interaction domains (fig. S9). Treatment
with either HR-CTGF-FL or HR-CTGF-CT enhanced
zebrafish spinal cord regeneration (Fig. 3, G to I,
and fig. S8C). Swim capacity was improved in
HR-CTGF-FL–treated or HR-CTGF-CT–treated
animals by 2 wpi (Fig. 3G), near that of uninjured
animals. As early as 1 wpi, we observed increased
GFAP expression and a factor of >10 enhance-
ment of glial bridging in HR-CTGF-CT–treated ani-
mals relative to vehicle-treated controls (fig. S8D).
Bridging remained greater at 2 wpi by a factor
of ~3 (Fig. 3H). At 4 wpi, axon regeneration was
increased by a factor of ~1.5 to 3 in HR-CTGF-
FL–treated or HR-CTGF-CT–treated animals re-
lative to vehicle controls (Fig. 3I). Application of
exogenous CTGF protein at the lesion site res-
cued functional and anatomical spinal cord re-
generation in ctgfa mutants, indicating specificity
of both the phenotype and treatment (fig. S10).
Thus, human CTGF protein, ostensibly via its
C-terminal domains, enhances spinal cord regen-
eration in zebrafish.
Glial cell responses are thought to dictate the
outcomes of spinal cord injury across species. We
632
4 NOVEMBER 2016 • VOL 354 ISSUE 6312
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 2. ctgfa is necessary for glial bridging and spinal cord regeneration.
(A) Swim assays assessed animals’ capacity to swim against increasing water
current inside an enclosed swim tunnel. Seven wild-type (ctgfa+/+), 10 ctgfa
heterozygous (ctgfa+/−), and 10 mutant (ctgfa−/−) clutchmates were assayed
at 2, 4, and 6 wpi. Statistical analyses of swim times are shown for ctgfa−/−
(red) and ctgfa+/−(orange) relative to wild type. Recovery of ctgfa−/−animals
was not significant between 2 and 6 wpi. (B) Anterograde axon tracing in
ctgfa mutant animals at 4 wpi. For quantification of axon growth at areas proxi-
mal (shown in images) and distal to the lesion core, 16 wild-type, 17 ctgfa+/−,
and 20 ctgfa−/−zebrafish from two independent experiments were used.
(C) GFAP immunohistochemistry in ctgfa mutant spinal cords at 4 wpi. Per-
cent bridging was quantified for 10 wild-type, 9 ctgfa+/−, and 10 ctgfa−/−
clutchmates from three independent experiments. Dashed lines delineate
glial GFAP staining; arrows point to sites of bridging. (D) Glial cell prolifera-
tion in wild-type, ctgfa+/−, and ctgfa−/−spinal cords at 1 wpi. Arrowheads
indicate EdU-positive gfap:GFP-positive cells. For quantification of glial
proliferation indices (left) and number of EdU-positive gfap:GFP-negative
cells (right), 10 wild-type, 12 ctgfa+/−, and 15 ctgfa−/−animals from two
independent experiments were used. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001; ns,
not significant. Scale bars, 100 mm.
RESEARCH
|
REPORTS
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on May 08, 2022

found that Ctgfa promotes zebrafish spinal cord
regeneration, at least in part by facilitating the
proliferation and bridging activity of pioneer glial
cells that also express ctgfa. Other cell types also
induce ctgfa in the injured zebrafish spinal cord
and might contribute additional functions dur-
ing regeneration. In mammals, reactive gliosis
causes scarring and inhibits regeneration (13, 14),
although evidence indicates that the lesion
contains a heterogeneous pool of glial cells that
release both axon growth–inhibiting and axon
growth–permissive factors (6, 15–19). We suggest
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
4 NOVEMBER 2016 • VOL 354 ISSUE 6312
633
Fig. 3. ctgfa promotes glial bridging and spinal cord regeneration. (A) Swim
assays determined motor function recovery of 10 hsp70:ctgfa-FL (green) and
10 wild-type (gray) clutchmates at 2, 4, and 6 wpi. For sham controls, 8 ctgfa-
FL–overexpressing (dashed green) and 7 wild-type (dashed gray) zebrafish
were analyzed. Statistical analyses of swim times are shown for injured
ctgfa-FL (green) relative to wild type. (B) GFAP immunohistochemistry was
used to quantify glial bridging at 2 wpi in 18 ctgfa-FL–overexpressing and 16
wild-type zebrafish from three independent experiments. (C) Anterograde
axon tracing at 4 wpi after ctgfa-FL overexpression. Quantification at areas prox-
imal (shown in images) and distal to the lesion core represents 12 ctgfa-FL–
overexpressing and 10 wild-type zebrafish from two independent experiments.
(D) Swim assays for 8 ctgfa-CT–overexpressing (blue), 10 ctgfa-NT–over-
expressing (violet), and 9 wild-type clutchmate animals (wild-type controls
for CT in dashed blue and for NT in dashed violet). Statistical analyses of
swim times are shown for ctgfa-CT (blue) relative to wild type. (E) Glial
bridging at 2 wpi in 19 ctgfa-CT–overexpressing and 20 wild-type animals
from two independent experiments. (F) Anterograde axon tracing at 4 wpi
after ctgfa-CT overexpression. Quantification represents 16 ctgfa-CT–over-
expressing and 16 wild-type animals from two independent experiments.
(G) Swim capacity was assessed for 9 vehicle-treated (gray), 8 HR-CTGF-
FL–treated (green), and 9 HR-CTGF-CT–treated (blue) animals. Statistical
analyses are shown for HR-CTGF-FL (green) and HR-CTGF-CT (blue) treat-
ments relative to vehicle controls. (H) Glial bridging at 2 wpi in 18 HR-CTGF-
CT–treated and 15 vehicle-treated animals from three independent experiments.
(I) Anterograde axon tracing at 4 wpi after HR-CTGF-CT treatment. Quan-
tification represents 18 vehicle-treated, 16 HR-CTGF-FL–treated, and 14 HR-
CTGF-CT–treated animals from two independent experiments. For histology
in (B), (E), and (H), dashed lines delineate glial GFAP staining and arrows
point to sites of bridging. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. Scale bars,
100 mm.
RESEARCH
|
REPORTS
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on May 08, 2022

that identifying the mammalian glial subtype
that can produce CTGF, or that is competent to
respond to it, could reveal a pro-regenerative mam-
malian counterpart to the zebrafish bridging glia.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1.
T. Becker, M. F. Wullimann, C. G. Becker, R. R. Bernhardt,
M. Schachner, J. Comp. Neurol. 377, 577–595 (1997).
2.
S. P. Hui, A. Dutta, S. Ghosh, Dev. Dyn. 239, 2962–2979
(2010).
3.
Y. Goldshmit et al., J. Neurosci. 32, 7477–7492 (2012).
4.
M. M. Reimer et al., J. Neurosci. 28, 8510–8516 (2008).
5.
C. Y. Lin, Y. S. Lee, V. W. Lin, J. Silver, J. Neurotrauma 29,
589–599 (2012).
6.
V. J. Tom, C. M. Doller, A. T. Malouf, J. Silver, J. Neurosci.
24, 9282–9290 (2004).
7.
M. Hertel, Y. Tretter, C. Alzheimer, S. Werner, Eur. J. Neurosci.
12, 376–380 (2000).
8.
Y. Liu et al., Diagn. Pathol. 9, 141 (2014).
9.
S. Conrad, H. J. Schluesener, M. Adibzahdeh, J. M. Schwab,
J. Neurosurg. Spine 2, 319–326 (2005).
10. J. Wang et al., Development 138, 3421–3430 (2011).
11. G. R. Grotendorst, M. R. Duncan, FASEB J. 19, 729–738
(2005).
12. P. M. Robinson et al., Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 53,
8093–8103 (2012).
13. M. V. Sofroniew, Trends Neurosci. 32, 638–647 (2009).
14. C. Raposo, M. Schwartz, Glia 62, 1895–1904 (2014).
15. L. Waselle, X. Quaglia, A. D. Zurn, Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 42,
315–327 (2009).
16. B. D. White et al., Stem Cells 28, 297–307 (2010).
17. M. A. Anderson et al., Nature 532, 195–200 (2016).
18. K. Meletis et al., PLOS Biol. 6, e182 (2008).
19. S. J. Hill, E. Barbarese, T. K. McIntosh, J. Neuropathol.
Exp. Neurol. 55, 1221–1229 (1996).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank A. Johnson, C. Eroglu, and M. Bagnat for discussions;
N. Lee and K. Jones for technical and bioinformatics help; and the
Duke University School of Medicine Zebrafish Shared Resource
for animal care. Supported by NIH training grant T32HL007101
(M.H.M.), NIH grant R01 HL081674 (K.D.P.), the Max Planck
Society (C.P. and D.Y.R.S.), and Duke University School of Medicine
(K.D.P.). RNA sequencing data are archived at GEO (accession
number GSE77025). The supplementary materials contain
additional data. M.H.M. and K.D.P. are inventors on patent
applications (62/159,413 and 62/398,781) submitted by Duke
University that cover the use of Ctgf for spinal cord regeneration.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencemag.org/content/354/6312/630/suppl/DC1
Materials and Methods
Figs. S1 to S10
Table S1
References (20–26)
20 January 2016; resubmitted 15 August 2016
Accepted 27 September 2016
10.1126/science.aaf2679
PLANT SCIENCE
A selective insecticidal protein
from Pseudomonas for controlling
corn rootworms
Ute Schellenberger,1* Jarred Oral,1 Barbara A. Rosen,1 Jun-Zhi Wei,1 Genhai Zhu,1
Weiping Xie,1 Mark J. McDonald,1 David C. Cerf,1 Scott H. Diehn,2 Virginia C. Crane,2
Gary A. Sandahl,2 Jian-Zhou Zhao,2 Timothy M. Nowatzki,2 Amit Sethi,2 Lu Liu,2
Zaiqi Pan,2 Yiwei Wang,2 Albert L. Lu,2 Gusui Wu,2 Lu Liu1†
The coleopteran insect western corn rootworm (WCR) (Diabrotica virgifera virgifera LeConte)
is a devastating crop pest in North America and Europe. Although crop plants that produce
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) proteins can limit insect infestation, some insect populations have
evolved resistance to Bt proteins. Here we describe an insecticidal protein, designated
IPD072Aa, that is isolated from Pseudomonas chlororaphis. Transgenic corn plants expressing
IPD072Aa show protection from WCR insect injury under field conditions. IPD072Aa leaves
several lepidopteran and hemipteran insect species unaffected but is effective in killing WCR
larvae that are resistant to Bt proteins produced by currently available transgenic corn.
IPD072Aa can be used to protect corn crops against WCRs.
T
he coleopteran insect western corn rootworm
(WCR)(DiabroticavirgiferavirgiferaLeConte)
and related species cause extensive damage
to corn (Zea mays L.) in North America and
Europe, resulting in crop yield losses and
management costs (1–3). Farmer adoption of corn
plants that produce insecticidal proteins for con-
trolling major corn pests, including WCRs, has
increased productivity in areas with insect pres-
sure (4). Commercial transgenic crops introduced
to date for insect control have been developed
with genes from Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) (5, 6).
These genes encode insect-specific crystal proteins
(Cry) or vegetative insecticidal proteins (Vip).
Four of them—mCry3A, Cry3Bb1, eCry3.1Ab, and
the binary protein complex Cry34Ab1/Cry35Ab1—
have been commercialized for WCR control in
the United States (5, 7). Emergence of WCR resist-
ance to mCry3A, Cry3Bb1, and eCry3.1Ab pro-
teins (8–10) under field conditions demonstrates
the need for broader, more durable strategies to
control insect infestations and limit the develop-
ment of resistance. The genetic diversity of Bt has
already been explored in a search for additional
insecticidal proteins (5). An alternative approach
involves disabling WCR genes by RNA interfer-
ence through the expression of double-stranded
RNA (11). We hypothesized that, like Bt, other
soil bacteria that live with soil-dwelling coleop-
teran larvae may produce proteins that kill corn
rootworms. Here we describe a potent and sel-
ective insecticidal protein from a Gram-negative
bacterium, Pseudomonas chlororaphis, which
we identified through screening soil-isolated
microbial strains. This protein protects trans-
genic corn plants from WCR injury under field
conditions.
We collected soil samples from the U.S. states
of Iowa, Illinois, and Wisconsin, and isolated
microbial strains under growth conditions to
favor species other than Bt. Crude protein extracts
from these isolates were screened for activity
against WCRs in artificial diet bioassays. One
isolate—identified as P. chlororaphis by 16S ribo-
somal DNA sequence analysis (12)—showed a po-
tent inhibitory effect on WCRs. We used multistep
chromatography to isolate the insecticidal protein
and achieved high-purity (>80%) enrichment in
the final step (fig. S1). The major protein band
with an apparent molecular weight of ~10 kDa
was digested with trypsin and subjected to iden-
tification by liquid chromatography–tandem mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We used the LC-MS/
MS data of tryptic peptides to search against a
protein database including protein sequences
translated from the in-house genome sequence
of this specific P. chlororaphis isolate. A high-
confidence match to a hypothetical protein en-
coded by a gene from our specific P. chlororaphis
isolate was obtained. This gene encodes a small
protein of 86 amino acids, which we designated
IPD072Aa (GenBank accession number KT795291).
IPD072Aa was clonedand expressed in Escherichia
coli to confirm that it was responsible for the
insecticidal activity. Affinity-purified recombinant
IPD072Aa was highly potent against WCR larvae
and also active against northern corn rootworm
(NCR) (Diabrotica barberi) larvae in diet bioassays
(Fig. 1).
To evaluate the activity spectrum, we tested
purified recombinant IPD072Aa protein at con-
centrations up to 875 mg/ml in diet assays against
several lepidopteran and hemipteran species—
includingblack cutworm (Agrotis ipsilon Hufnagel),
corn earworm (Helicoverpa zea Boddie), Euro-
pean corn borer (Ostrinia nubilalis Hübner), fall
armyworm (Spodoptera frugiperda J. E. Smith),
soybean looper (Pseudoplusia includens Walker),
and western tarnished plant bug (Lygus hesperus
Knight)—and observed no mortality or inhibitory
effect on any of those insect species. We also used
an Agrobacterium-mediated transient gene expres-
sionsystem (13) toexpress IPD072Aa undercontrol
of a double-enhanced mirabilis mosaic virus
viral promoter (14) in common bean (Phaseolus
vulgaris). Sets of leaf disks transiently expressing
634
4 NOVEMBER 2016 • VOL 354 ISSUE 6312
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
1DuPont Pioneer, Hayward, CA 94545, USA. 2DuPont Pioneer,
Johnston, IA 50131, USA.
*Present address: TeneoBio, 1490 O’Brien Drive, Menlo Park, CA
94025, USA. †Corresponding author: Email lu.liu@pioneer.com
RESEARCH
|
REPORTS
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on May 08, 2022

Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science (ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue NW,
Washington, DC 20005. The title Science is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science
Injury-induced ctgfa directs glial bridging and spinal cord regeneration in zebrafish
Mayssa H. MokalledChinmoy PatraAmy L. DicksonToyokazu EndoDidier Y. R. StainierKenneth D. Poss
Science, 354 (6312), • DOI: 10.1126/science.aaf2679
Spinal cord regeneration in zebrafish
Unlike humans, zebrafish can regenerate their spinal cord. Mokalled et al. identified a growth factor in zebrafish that
helps this process (see the Perspective by Williams and He). The protein encoded by ctgfa (connective tissue growth
factor a) is secreted after injury and encourages glial cells to form a bridge across the spinal lesion. Addition of this
protein improved spinal cord repair in injured zebrafish.
Science, this issue p. 630; see also p. 544
View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aaf2679
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology on May 08, 2022

===== Mokalled2018_DevCell_RegenerationToolkit =====
Developmental Cell
Perspective
A Regeneration Toolkit
Mayssa H. Mokalled1,* and Kenneth D. Poss2,3,*
1Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA
2Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA
3Regeneration Next, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA
*Correspondence: mmokalled@wustl.edu (M.H.M.), kenneth.poss@duke.edu (K.D.P.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2018.10.015
The ability of animals to replace injured body parts has been a subject of fascination for centuries. The
emerging importance of regenerative medicine has reinvigorated investigations of innate tissue regeneration,
and the development of powerful genetic tools has fueled discoveries into how tissue regeneration occurs.
Here, we present an overview of the armamentarium employed to probe regeneration in vertebrates, high-
lighting areas where further methodology advancement will deepen mechanistic ﬁndings.
Regenerative capacity differs profoundly between organisms.
Planarian species are famous for their ability to regenerate whole
animals from virtually any body portions, a process that relies on
a population of somatic stem cells called neoblasts (Newmark
and Sa´ nchez Alvarado, 2000; Wagner et al., 2011). Insect tissues
such as imaginal disc and gut can also regenerate (Brock et al.,
2017; Guo et al., 2016; Harris et al., 2016; Katsuyama et al., 2015;
Martı´n et al., 2017; Micchelli and Perrimon, 2006; Ohlstein and
Spradling, 2006). Among vertebrates, salamanders and zebra-
ﬁsh are capable of regenerating limbs, ﬁns, spinal cord, heart,
brain, and other tissues lost or damaged by extreme injury
(Becker et al., 1997; Diep et al., 2011; Kyritsis et al., 2012; Pish-
arath et al., 2007; Poss et al., 2002b; Vihtelic and Hyde, 2000). In
contrast, regeneration is more tissue- and age-dependent in
mammals and avians. For instance, the mammalian liver and
skeletal muscles are highly regenerative, whereas the heart
and central nervous system (CNS) possess limited abilities to
repair. Notably, fetal and newborn mice show increased poten-
tial to regenerate complex tissues such as the heart, a capacity
that declines past neonatal life (Porrello et al., 2011). Principles
that might govern the evolution of regenerative capacity remain
speculative. An intriguing idea is that most species have main-
tained the genetic machinery that allows for tissue regeneration
but not the regulatory mechanisms required to activate these
dormant genetic networks after injury (Kang et al., 2016; Liu
et al., 2013). It is also plausible that among different organisms,
processes such as increased tissue complexity, altered meta-
bolic demands, reproductive strategy, or tumor suppression
may have evolved at the expense of tissue regeneration mecha-
nisms (Kang et al., 2013; Pomerantz and Blau, 2013; Puente
et al., 2014; Tanaka et al., 1997; Yun et al., 2013). Why innate
regenerative capacity has changed with such disparity across
vertebrate species remains arguably the most fascinating ques-
tion in the ﬁeld, if not also the most challenging and least
tractable.
In recent years, the prospects of regenerative medicine have
intensiﬁed multidisciplinary efforts to decipher mechanisms of
endogenous tissue repair. In a report epitomizing the application
of discovery biology to regenerative medicine, autologous trans-
genic keratinocyte cultures were employed to replenish a func-
tional epidermis in a child suffering from junctional epidermolysis
bullosa, a lethal epidermal genetic disease (Hirsch et al., 2017).
Cell transplantation and direct somatic cell reprogramming are
exciting technologies but have signiﬁcant hurdles (Qian et al.,
2012; Song et al., 2012; Zhou et al., 2008) such as limitations
in reprogramming efﬁciency and cell maturation. In concert
with or instead of reprogramming, it may also be necessary to
prime host tissues to support regeneration for therapeutic suc-
cess. The motivation to understand and manipulate innate tissue
regeneration, for fundamental discovery and for clinical goals,
has reinvigorated the ﬁeld and the need for molecular genetic re-
agents in key model systems.
We provide here an overview of the tools available to study tis-
sue regeneration. Rather than a comprehensive review of regen-
erative biology, we highlight available and needed methodology
for continued discoveries in regeneration. In particular, we focus
on molecular genetic methodologies employed to visualize,
characterize, and modulate regeneration events in vertebrate
model systems. We realize that this review reﬂects only a fraction
of the ongoing work in the ﬁeld, and we cite other reviews to help
circumvent its coverage limitations.
Model Systems for Innate Tissue Regeneration
Principles that govern tissue regeneration have emerged from
studies across many species. One such principle is the activa-
tion of a balanced inﬂammatory response, acute enough to
enact a regenerative response but self-limiting to avert chronic
damage. Reactivation of signaling pathways employed ﬁrst at
embryonic stages is another blueprint of regeneration. An effec-
tive laboratory model system for regeneration possesses two
crucial components: elevated regenerative capacity, ideally
throughout the lifespan of the animal, and amenability to genetic
manipulations. Rapid generation time, small genome content,
and sizable progeny also grant advantages. The previous scar-
city of molecular and genetic tools in famously regenerative
model systems such as salamanders once set limits on the
scope and depth of investigations, but, excitingly, contemporary
genetics has broken those barriers and now offers access to an
expanding directory of vertebrate model systems and injury
models. In the absence of a species that embodies all criteria
one would like in a model system for regeneration, investigation
of regeneration across diverse species remains crucial for the
ﬁeld. This section and Figure 1 brieﬂy summarize tools and ad-
vantages of several popular model systems.
Developmental Cell 47, November 5, 2018 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc.
267

Amphibians
High regenerative capacity, retained throughout life, is likely the
most recognizable characteristic of salamanders such as newts
and axolotls (Voss et al., 2013). Red-spotted newts can spend
many seasons as terrestrial efts before metamorphosis to
aquatic adults, whereas axolotls retain larval features and can
typically begin breeding at a comparatively young 9 months of
age. The shorter generation time in axolotls is thus clearly favor-
able for the application of molecular genetics. Yet, the use of
multiple salamander species also enables important mecha-
nistic comparisons. For instance, newts and axolotls employ
distinct, if not opposite, mechanisms to replace muscle in
post-amputation limb tissue. Evidence indicates that post-meta-
morphic newts use myoﬁber dedifferentiation to replenish their
myogenic progenitor pool, whereas axolotls possess a muscle
stem cell population that supports regeneration (Fei et al.,
2017; Sandoval-Guzma´ n et al., 2014; Tanaka et al., 2016).
Salamanders possess a complex genome several times the
size of the human genome (Elewa et al., 2017; Nowoshilow
et al., 2018). The toolkit for salamander regeneration was once
dominated by methods such as gene electroporation, retroviral
infection, and morpholino-based knockdown (Kawakami et al.,
2006; Roy et al., 2000), but additional genetic manipulations
such as transgenesis (Khattak et al., 2009), targeted mutations,
and gene cassette knockin technology have become available
in the past few years (Fei et al., 2017; Fei et al., 2014; Flowers
et al., 2017; Flowers et al., 2014). Guided by the recent reports
of the Iberian ribbed newt (Pleurodeles waltl) and Mexican axolotl
(Ambystoma mexicanum) genomes, the availability of these tools
will increase the use of salamanders to explore understudied
questions in regenerative capacity and mechanisms (Elewa
et al., 2017; Nowoshilow et al., 2018).
Frogs have also been important for regeneration research (re-
viewed by Tandon et al., 2017). Xenopus laevis is the most com-
mon anuran used for tissue regeneration, capitalizing on the spe-
cies’ biochemical and microsurgical advantages as a model for
embryogenesis, in addition to a fully sequenced genome (Ses-
sion et al., 2016). Gene editing and transgenesis are available
to Xenopus researchers (Blitz et al., 2013; Kroll and Amaya,
1996; Nakayama et al., 2013). The animal’s generation time of
1–2 years is a potential impediment to molecular genetics but
high-efﬁciency gene editing can allow assessment of animals
Figure 1. The Regeneration Toolkit
Table includes major regeneration model systems and includes established, recent, and future tools employed in each system.
268
Developmental Cell 47, November 5, 2018
Developmental Cell
Perspective

manipulated at the one-cell stage. While Xenopus laevis may
still be favored for regeneration research, Xenopus tropicalis
is a smaller species with a diploid genome (relative to an allo-
tetraploid genome in X. laevis) and shorter generation time
(4 months) that facilitate genetic techniques. Xenopus research
has focused on their loss of regenerative capacity during meta-
morphosis: early-stage tadpoles, but not more mature animals,
can regenerate tails, hindlimbs, brain, and spinal cord (Beck,
2012; Edwards-Faret et al., 2017). Interestingly, optic nerve
regeneration occurs throughout the lifespan of the animal
(Gaze, 1959; Sperry, 1948). This metamorphic transition pro-
vides an opportunity for molecular geneticists to explore how
regenerative capacity is developmentally regulated and poten-
tially manipulated. For instance, post-metamorphic frogs can
regenerate amputated limbs after receiving transplants of larval
limb progenitor cells (Lin et al., 2013).
Teleosts
Among teleost species, zebraﬁsh are the most used model sys-
tem for regeneration. Originally employed to interrogate verte-
brate embryogenesis (Streisinger et al., 1986; Streisinger et al.,
1981), they also have a strong regenerative capacity. For
example, zebraﬁsh are generally considered the ﬁrst animal
found unequivocally to be able to regenerate portions of their
heart upon injury (Poss et al., 2002b). The experimental advan-
tages of zebraﬁsh as a system include large clutches of 200 or
more embryos, rapid external development, a reasonably short
generation time of 3 months, and a relatively small genome
size that is half of that of humans. Transgenesis, targeted
knockout, and genome-editing-based knockins are established,
and protocols for cell-speciﬁc manipulations, and more recently,
knockin and conditional alleles (Hoshijima et al., 2016; Sugimoto
et al., 2017) are available though not yet commonplace. Non-
saturating forward genetic screens for ﬁn regeneration have
been carried out in adult zebraﬁsh (Johnson and Weston,
1995), identifying temperature-sensitive mutations in genes
including fgf20a, laminin beta 1a, and mps1, which bypass early
development but block the regeneration of amputated tail ﬁns.
(Chen et al., 2015; Makino et al., 2005; Nechiporuk et al., 2003;
Poss et al., 2002a; Whitehead et al., 2005). High-throughput
sequencing-based mapping and efﬁcient gene editing tools
should augment this classic genetic approach (Hoshijima et al.,
2016; Howe et al., 2013; Hwang et al., 2013; Leshchiner et al.,
2012), which has faced the challenges of laborious ﬁltration of
temperature-sensitive mutants to ﬁnd those informative for
regeneration.
In the past few years, Japanese medaka, African killiﬁsh, and
bichirs have also emerged as regeneration models. Medaka
have a genome less than half the size of the zebraﬁsh genome,
with a much smaller clutch size. While medaka regenerate
amputated ﬁns (Katogi et al., 2004), recent studies indicate
that their regenerative capacity is not as broad as their zebraﬁsh
counterparts. Injuries to the medaka heart elicit ﬁbrotic re-
sponses more similar to the scarring that occurs in the injured ro-
dent heart than to the cardiomyogenic response of injured zebra-
ﬁsh (Ito et al., 2014; Lai et al., 2017). Similarly, needle injury to
medaka retinae elicits a proliferative response by Muller glial
cells, without differentiation, as opposed to the neurogenic injury
response that zebraﬁsh Muller glia demonstrate (Lust and Witt-
brodt, 2018). This observed limited regeneration in medaka pla-
ces it as a system that can be used to test for pharmacologic or
genetic manipulations that can awaken dormant regenerative
capacity. Short-lived African killiﬁsh have a lifespan of a year or
less, with time to sexual maturity suspected to be as short as
14 days in wild populations (Vrtı´lek et al., 2018). They regenerate
amputated ﬁns and most likely other injured tissues of interest,
and, thus, they are conducive to experiments that address how
regeneration is impacted by rapid aging (Wendler et al., 2015).
Bichirs (Polypterus) are an air-breathing species considered
the most basal of remaining actinopterygian ﬁsh, sharing some
features with extinct and extant tetrapod species. Bichirs regen-
erate after amputation injuries to their lobed pectoral ﬁns and
also display regenerative responses to cardiac injury (Cuervo
et al., 2012; Kikuchi et al., 2011; King and Yin, 2016). Though
not maintained as lab colonies, bichirs could be an informative
model for questions that address the evolution of regenerative
capacity.
Mouse
Researchers of common laboratory mice—Mus musculus—
have beneﬁted for decades from myriad tools for sophisti-
cated genetic manipulations and high-resolution mechanistic
interpretations. Transgenic and mutagenic manipulations (dis-
cussed later in this review) have become increasingly reﬁned
for spatiotemporal control, instrumental to the elevated posi-
tion of the mouse as the primary genetic model for human
development and disease. Similarly, for highly regenerative
mammalian tissues such as skeletal muscle, skin, blood, in-
testinal epithelium, and liver, the use of mouse models has
been transformative in resolving key mechanisms of tissue
repair.
The mouse is also informative for studying the basis and
boundaries of limited innate regenerative capacity in mammalian
tissues such as heart, kidney, pancreas, and CNS. This includes
the study of stage- and age-dependent regenerative capacity,
which generally declines with maturation and aging (Brunet
and Rando, 2017), as well as screens and hypothesis testing
for loss- or gain-of-function manipulations that improve poor
innate regenerative potential. Additionally, the large panels of
available inbred mouse strains can be harnessed to identify ge-
netic modiﬁers of regenerative capacity. For instance, increased
CNS axonal regenerative capacity has been reported in CAST/Ei
strain mice as compared to more commonly used laboratory
strains such as C57BL/6 (Omura et al., 2015). Moreover, a recent
work reported intrinsic variability in cardiomyocyte proliferation
and functional recovery after ischemic myocardial injury be-
tween dozens of strains of inbred mice (Patterson et al., 2017).
While this study implicated a polymorphism that appears to
contribute to this variability, the genetic bases for regenerative
capacity may well be challenging to methodically pick apart
through strain comparisons and mapping of genetic modi-
ﬁer loci.
Compared to laboratory mouse strains, there are other mouse
species that have unique regenerative abilities: African spiny
mouse (Acomys) species are capable of shedding and regener-
ating large, full-thickness patches of skin or ear hole punches
(Seifert et al., 2012). It is possible to maintain spiny mouse col-
onies in research laboratories (Haughton et al., 2016), and the
emergence of genetic and genome tools will amplify their value
for studying the basis of skin regeneration.
Developmental Cell 47, November 5, 2018
269
Developmental Cell
Perspective

Experimental Approaches
Diverse cellular mechanisms of regeneration exist among tissues
and species, most notably the employment of distinct mecha-
nisms by which a source of cells recreates the lost tissue. Over
the past decade, new technologies have enriched our under-
standing of injury-induced cell behaviors. Key advances include
cell type-restricted injuries, retrospective fate-mapping tech-
niques to deﬁne cellular origins and fate decisions during regen-
eration, and imaging platforms to visualize dynamics of regener-
ating cells at individual and population levels.
Cell Ablation by Cell Type-Restricted Injury
Classic mechanical injuries such as amputation, stab, ischemia,
or freezing, along with chemically induced injury models, allow
local inﬂiction of necrotic or apoptotic cell death and have
been widely used in vertebrate regeneration studies (Chablais
et al., 2011; Cornelison et al., 2004; Currie et al., 2016; Fausett
and Goldman, 2006; Fimbel et al., 2007; Gonza´ lez-Rosa et al.,
2011; Kragl et al., 2009; Kyritsis et al., 2012; Poss et al.,
2002b; Sugiura et al., 2016; Yan et al., 2003). In recent years,
reﬁned molecular genetic tools have enabled ablation of speciﬁc
cell types—or, more precisely, cells that can be deﬁned by their
activation of a speciﬁc DNA regulatory sequence, such as
the controlled expression of the cytotoxin diphtheria toxin A
(DTA) or diphtheria toxin receptor (DTR) to induce cell death
(Brockschnieder et al., 2004). Multiple DTA/DTR-based models
have been employed to ablate pancreatic b cells in mice to
examine pancreatic b cell regeneration (Nir et al., 2007; Thorel
et al., 2010). Targeted transgenesis of a rat insulin promoter-
driven DTR cassette into the HPRT locus was employed to
induce near-complete b cell ablation (Thorel et al., 2010). Intrigu-
ingly, alpha and delta cells were shown to transdifferentiate into
b cells under these conditions (Chera et al., 2014; Thorel et al.,
2010), revealing unsuspected developmental plasticity between
pancreatic cell types and suggesting new strategies for treating
diabetes. Although such ablation studies allow for the explora-
tion of the boundaries of regenerative mechanisms, the caveat
remains that the cellular responses to cell ablation may not be
entirely relevant to natural biology or disease and are rather a
response to an unnatural experimental injury. Along these lines,
Shamsi et al. (2014) investigated b cell renewal in the RipCreER
TIF-IA mouse line, mimicking the slow progression and the
extent of b cell loss occurring in type 1 diabetes, and reported
in this context that adaptive proliferation of lineage-traced
surviving b cells is the main mechanism contributing to b cell
regeneration (Shamsi et al., 2014).
Cell type-restricted ablation also enables tests for the require-
ments of ancillary cell types that either impair or direct regener-
ation in complex tissues. Frisen and colleagues have used induc-
ible methods for regulatory sequence-directed Ras inactivation
to investigate in the mouse the contribution of type A pericytes
to the normally limited repair response to a crushed spinal
cord (Dias et al., 2018) (Figures 2A–2C). In this study, pericyte-
speciﬁc deletion of ﬂoxed KRas in mice was achieved using
Glast-CreERT2 and combined with HRas and NRas mutant al-
leles. Inducible pericyte inactivation in these ‘‘Glast-Rasless’’
mice resulted in increased axon regeneration and improved
sensorimotor function, revealing detrimental inﬂuences of peri-
cyte-derived scarring after spinal cord injury. In zebraﬁsh, tar-
geted expression of a bacterial nitroreductase (NTR) converts
a metronidazole substrate added to aquarium water into a potent
toxin that crosslinks nuclei acids and has been widely employed
to induce reversible, cell-speciﬁc ablation (Curado et al., 2008).
NTR-based ablation was used to ablate either the tcf21-express-
ing epicardial layer enveloping the heart (Wang et al., 2015) or
the foxp3-expressing T-regulatory cells that home to the injury
site after cryoinjury or resection (Hui et al., 2017). In each case,
the key injury response of cardiac muscle cell proliferation was
reduced, revealing essential interactions between muscle and
non-muscle cells that in these cases likely rely on secreted fac-
tors. How these ancillary cell types themselves regenerate or fail
to regenerate upon depletion is also, in and of itself, fascinating
biology. For instance, the depleted epicardium quickly regener-
ates back over the naked cardiac surface from spared cells, in a
wave that requires both cell division and generation of a leading
front of polyploid cells (Cao et al., 2017) (Figures 2D and 2E).
A broadened panel of cell type-speciﬁc, inducible ablation
strains would be a powerful addition to the vertebrate regenera-
tion toolkit. Additionally, the innovation of new systems with
distinct inducing agents would allow for interesting combinations
of spatiotemporally controlled cell depletion injuries.
Lineage Mapping Approaches
Before contemporary genetic tools became widely accessible
across model organisms, cell transplantation and transient
cell labeling techniques provided foundational observations for
modern studies of tissue repair. Stem cell transplantation re-
mains a powerful approach in tissues such as skeletal muscle,
where satellite cells expand locally, and hematopoietic systems,
where hematopoietic stem cells colonize marrow sites. None-
theless, many vertebrate tissues do not harbor an exemplary
counterpart to satellite cells or hematopoietic stem cells, thus
requiring different genetic manipulation paradigms to track
regenerative cell dynamics. We describe here examples of
commonly used approaches and recent adaptations for regener-
ation applications; lineage mapping approaches in general
are more comprehensively reviewed elsewhere (Woodworth
et al., 2017).
Visual Strategies.
Permanent genetic tagging and monitoring
of speciﬁc cell types in their microenvironment during regenera-
tion overcomes potential artifacts from transplantation and tran-
sient labeling techniques that do not represent native regenera-
tion. For example, the activities of transplanted cells may be
affected by collection and puriﬁcation methods. The cells may
also not see the same signals for regeneration as cells situated
long term in a deﬁned niche. Cre recombinase tools, controlled
by the estrogen analog tamoxifen or by doxycycline, have
been commonly used for temporal and cell-speciﬁc fate map-
ping during regeneration for more than a decade (Chera et al.,
2014; Dor et al., 2004; Ramachandran et al., 2012; Thorel
et al., 2010). When combined with a caged ﬂuorescent trans-
genic reporter cassette, tamoxifen-inducible transgenic Cre
(CreER) lines can permanently label a speciﬁc cell type—again,
deﬁned by activation of a regulatory sequence—and then allow
tracking of its progeny after tissue injury. Two often cited weak-
nesses of CreER-based approaches are (1) the persistence of
tamoxifen, which could confound interpretation of lineage rela-
tionship by catalyzing recombination in progeny of source cells
well after animal treatments; and (2) the reliance on regulatory
sequences, which mark expression of a gene and, though often
270
Developmental Cell 47, November 5, 2018
Developmental Cell
Perspective

assumed a priori to mark a deﬁned cell type, may not necessarily
be speciﬁc to a cell type. Studies of regeneration in adult sys-
tems can largely avoid the tamoxifen persistence issue by delay-
ing injury for days to weeks after the permanent labeling event.
The second pitfall can be addressed by techniques to reﬁne
the speciﬁcity of the regulatory sequences. For instance, a
recent study used a second recombinase called Dre, which
has its own rox recognition sites, to help assess the controversial
issue of whether non-myocardial cells expressing the c-kit stem
cell marker differentiate to cardiomyocytes in uninjured or injured
animals. Using transgenic Dre animals to disable loxP sites in
cardiomyocytes, the differentiation of c-kit-CreER-expressing
non-cardiomyocytes could be more precisely assessed upon
tamoxifen introduction (He et al., 2017) (Figure 2F). The authors
reported no evidence for de novo differentiation of cardiomyo-
cytes from stem cells using Dre reﬁnement, strongly indicating
that cardiomyocyte labeling in c-kit:CreER animals without this
reﬁnement occurs by direct labeling in c-kit-expressing cardio-
myocytes themselves.
Clonal analysis examines the contribution of individual cells in
regenerating tissues. Tools that limit unicolor cell tagging to rare
events have unveiled cellular dynamics that are otherwise
Figure 2. Genetic Ablation Strategies in Regeneration
(A–C) Genetic strategy to inhibit cell proliferation in type A pericytes following spinal cord injury (A). Sagittal view of the lesion site shows diminished platelet-
derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)-b-positive ﬁbrotic scar in tamoxifen-treated (C) animals relative to vehicle controls (B) at 2 weeks post-injury.
(D) Cartoon indicating ablation of epicardial cells from the ventricular surface induced in explanted hearts of transgenic zebraﬁsh using the metronidazole/
nitroreductase system. Epicardium (green) regenerates in a wave from the base of the ventricle to the apex (red arrows indicate direction of regeneration).
(E) Epicardial sheets growing ex vivo segregate into large, binucleated leader cells with indicators of high tension (white, phosphorylated myosin light chain II
[pMLC]) and smaller, mononucleate follower cells (above yellow dashed line). These cell behaviors mimic epicardial regeneration in vivo.
(F) Schematic showing the use of dual recombinases for precise lineage tracing. In this example, a speciﬁc marker, c-Kit is expressed in two subpopulations
(cardiomyocytes and non-cardiomyocytes). In Tnni3–Dre 3 Kit–CreER 3 IR1 cardiomyocytes, Dre ﬁrst removes one loxP site and ZsGreen from the interleaved
reporter allele, precluding potential Kit-Cre–loxP-mediated labeling within cardiomyocytes.
(G) Simultaneous single-cell proﬁling of lineages and cell types. During development, CRISPR-Cas9 edits record cell lineage in mutated barcodes at multiple time
points during development (early T1 in blue and late T2 in yellow). Simultaneous recovery of transcriptomes and barcodes from the same cells can be used to
generate cell lineage trees and also classify them into discrete cell types (c1–c6).
Images in (A)–(C) are adapted from Dias et al. (2018). Images in (D) are adapted from Wang et al. (2015). Image in (E) is adapted from Cao et al. (2017). Image in (F) is
adapted from He et al. (2017). Image in (G) is adapted from Raj et al. (2018).
Developmental Cell 47, November 5, 2018
271
Developmental Cell
Perspective

overlooked without single-cell resolution. These include identiﬁ-
cation of cellular hierarchies such as the presence of dominant
stem cells in the context of mouse hematopoietic stem cells
and the temporal and spatial resolution of expansion by individ-
ual progenitor cells after injury in the axolotl digit (Carrelha et al.,
2018; Currie et al., 2016). The sparse cell labeling conditions
used for clonal analysis, ideally 0 or 1 permanent tagging events
per tissue compartment, generally increase the rigor of lineage
relationship conclusions. This is because the low dose of inducer
is (1) less likely to persist in the animals and stimulate multiple
recombination events in a line of progeny and (2) less likely to
stimulate unintended recombination in cells that have lower
expression from the regulatory sequence than the principal ex-
pressing cells. Large, non-transparent tissues of adult animals
have technical challenges, necessitating tissue sectioning and
clone reconstruction from multiple sections. The recent evolu-
tion of techniques to clear whole organs or animals has helped
‘‘clear’’ this hurdle. By rendering normally opaque tissues trans-
parent yet retaining the ability to detect and amplify ﬂuorescent
signals in labeled cell clones, tissue clearing enables examina-
tion of clones in three-dimensional tissue space (Chung et al.,
2013; Susaki et al., 2014). Nevertheless, one must still retrospec-
tively assess cell dynamics in ﬁxed internal tissues of sacriﬁced
animals, which requires a high degree of inference. By contrast,
in surface tissues, ﬂuorescently labeled cells can be visualized
without sacriﬁcing the animal, enabling the longitudinal acquisi-
tion of useful biological information. For instance, Tornini et al.
(2016) recently mapped contributions of individual cells in
the blastemal compartments of regenerating zebraﬁsh ﬁns by
tracking scores of clones over weeks of regeneration (Tornini
et al., 2016).
Rather than tracking sparsely labeled cells in an experimental
cohort of many animals, Brainbow-based genetic tools enable
simultaneous multicolor labeling of a large number of individual
cells within a single animal. First developed by Livet (2007) to
distinctly label neurons in complex brain tissues (Livet, 2007),
the Brainbow system employs inducible Cre recombination of
a Brainbow cassette, which includes three different ﬂuorescent
reporter genes ﬂanked by distinct pairs of loxP sites. Integration
of Brainbow cassette concatemers at a single locus and random
selection of a single color in each cassette result in a specialized
combinatorial color for each cell within a population. In more
recent studies, Brainbow-based systems were adopted to retro-
spectively assess the contributions of individual cell-derived
clones during tissue regeneration. Multicolor cell labeling can
help elucidate mechanistic insights that are technically chal-
lenging to obtain from single color cell-tagging strategies or
need supplementation with mathematical models. Moreover,
the results can provide strikingly visual mechanisms for how tis-
sue is regenerated or maintained from the collective activity of in-
dividual cells (Gupta and Poss, 2012; Snippert et al., 2010).
Technical challenges have limited the application of multicolor
clonal analysis to regenerative biology. First, there is a require-
ment for a perfect marriage between a tamoxifen-inducible Cre
strain and a multicolor reporter strain, with no leakiness in Cre
expression without induction and the ability to titrate to an ideal
level of recombination and resultant color diversity. Second, co-
lor resolution can take days after recombination events, as stabi-
lization of hues requires degradation of ﬂuorescent protein prod-
ucts of deleted gene cassettes, potentially limiting interpretation
of rapid events. Most critically, hue diversity from many trans-
gene copies is paramount—the larger the palette, the more con-
ﬁdence one has to assign clonal partnerships in a sea of colors.
To capture the dynamism of cellular events during tissue
regeneration, direct, live imaging has certain clear advantages
over retrospective fate mapping. Most notably, detailed changes
in cell morphology, mobility, division, gene expression, and fate
can be monitored and quantiﬁed to yield important biological in-
formation. In recent years, innovative transgenic reporters com-
bined with advances in microscopy have yielded new live imag-
ing platforms with enhanced spatiotemporal resolution and
reduced toxicity. For instance, light-sheet imaging enables in
toto acquisition of cell behaviors during early development of ze-
braﬁsh embryos, transparent specimens that can conveniently ﬁt
and develop normally in a cylindrical imaging chamber. The chal-
lenges of imaging tissue regeneration have been discussed in-
depth recently (Di Talia and Poss, 2016; Park et al., 2016). On
the data acquisition side, access to ﬂuorescent cells within
mature tissue of immobilized adult animals over long timescales
is the primary hurdle. On the data processing side, computa-
tional methods involving machine learning that can simulta-
neously track and quantify the behaviors of hundreds of cells
during regeneration are needed and not yet widely available.
The challenges on the data acquisition side have been circum-
vented in several ways. For some tissues, injury models in trans-
parent embryos can activate parallel events to adult contexts
and be used as a proxy to understand the adult process. For
instance, a recent study showed that satellite cell activation after
skeletal muscle injury to larval zebraﬁsh involves extreme
morphologic changes, followed by events in which spared myo-
ﬁbers extend actin-based ﬁlopodia to guide myoblast fusion
events (Gurevich et al., 2016). Surface tissues such as skin
epidermis and appendages also make excellent substrates for
live imaging. Greco and colleagues have monitored mouse
skin stem cells and their progeny during epidermis and hair
regeneration using intravital two-photon microscopy combined
with genetic lineage tracing (Rompolas et al., 2012; Rompolas
et al., 2013). Live imaging showed, for instance, that the position
of a hair follicle stem cell within its niche can predict its fate dur-
ing regeneration and that skin epithelial cells, which do not nor-
mally participate in hair growth, can sustain regeneration in the
absence of hair follicle stem cells.
Nuclear or membrane markers can be sufﬁcient to allow a
researcher to tag, follow, and segment cells using quantitative
imaging. The incorporation of Brainbow-based tools to increase
color diversity can further enable reliable tracking with a lower
frequency of sampling. Recent work in zebraﬁsh used multicolor
labeling to bar-code superﬁcial skin epithelial cells with 70 or
more distinct colors and software to track hundreds of cells
simultaneously, from which were made quantitative observa-
tions pertaining to epithelial cell behaviors during regeneration
(Chen et al., 2016). Intravital imaging of deeper tissue is also
possible but requires visualization methods such as imaging
‘‘windows’’ for access, as was used recently to observe ﬂuores-
cently tagged neural stem cells in the zebraﬁsh brain and crypt
stem cells in the mouse intestine (Barbosa et al., 2015; Ritsma
et al., 2014). The incorporation into toolkits of fusion protein re-
porters will provide further subcellular resolution of regeneration
272
Developmental Cell 47, November 5, 2018
Developmental Cell
Perspective

events. For instance, FUCCI-based cell cycle reporter systems
enable quantitative imaging of cell-cycle length and detection
of dynamics such as endoreplication during regeneration, in
addition to their advantages as a screening tool in embryos (Sa-
kaue-Sawano et al., 2008; Bajar et al., 2016).
Sequencing-Based Strategies.
Visual strategies for lineage
analysis have certain limitations. We have mentioned that the
reliance on the ﬁdelity of regulatory sequences to deﬁne a candi-
date progenitor cell type has a risk of false positives. Also
inherent in this process is that potentially diverse progenitor
and progeny cell subpopulations are binned into singular cell
types purely based on expression of only one or a few markers.
This can mask both the identiﬁcation of progenitor subtypes and
the characterization of progeny, some of which may express the
same set of canonical cell markers but a different set of factors
that relates directly to regeneration roles. Multiple related strate-
gies have arisen to address some of these shortfalls, the most
recent based on high-throughput genome and transcriptome
sequencing to present a more in-depth view of gene expression
associated with speciﬁc cells.
Cre-based recombination of loxP sites at a single locus is typi-
cally employed to leave an indelible genome scar (sequence
deletion) as well as a visual readout (ﬂuorescent protein expres-
sion) that will be inherited by progeny. Induced transposon mobi-
lization and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeat (CRISPR)-Cas9 genome editing of a transgene array
with guide RNA (gRNA) target sites (GESTALT) (McKenna
et al., 2016) are two other scarring techniques with the potential
to create hundreds of distinct, stable sequences within a
population of cells to allow individual marking and tracking.
Sequencing of cell populations, particularly if ﬁrst sorted using
ﬂow cytometry into different cell type groups, enables the de-
convolution of a population by the prevalence of sequence barc-
odes and approximation of the number of progenitors within the
assayed population. For instance, the assessment of clonal dy-
namics within the hematopoietic system has been particularly
challenging, given the high diversity of hematopoietic stem cell
progeny and the mobilization and diaspora of those progeny
throughout the body. This contrasts with cardiomyocytes where
visual tools are adequate to trace certain key clonal dynamics, as
the cells have restricted plasticity and motility and form tissue
patches with clonal partners through division (Gupta and Poss,
2012). Recent studies have used inducible transposon mobiliza-
tion systems combined with sequence-based identiﬁcation of
insertion sites to estimate the number of progenitors that main-
tain the hematopoietic system and its various lineages, as well
as the incidence of single-lineage progenitors versus those giv-
ing rise to multiple hematopoietic cells (Rodriguez-Fraticelli
et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2014). These approaches have the poten-
tial to relate to regeneration of solid tissues in addition to blood
regeneration.
Taking high-throughput transcriptome sequencing one step
further, single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) has the capac-
ity to generate individual transcriptomes for many thousands of
cells within complex tissue, at costs accessible to many labora-
tories. Cellular subpopulations can be inferred by clustering
analysis of cells with similar transcriptomes to provide new views
of tissue complexity and identify new cell markers that are highly
speciﬁc to these clusters (Haber et al., 2017; Jaitin et al., 2014;
Macosko et al., 2015). A series of recent papers assessed
thousands of cell transcriptomes from developing zebraﬁsh or
Xenopus embryos at several progressive stages, and they esti-
mated cell histories during embryogenesis using computational
methods to compare differential gene expression among the
identiﬁed cell types at different developmental time points
(Briggs et al., 2018; Farrell et al., 2018; Wagner et al., 2018).
Other recent work paired an inducible Cas9-based editing sys-
tem to an expressed gRNA target site transgenic array in zebra-
ﬁsh, facilitating the generation of cells with stable expression of
an expressed barcode at any point in life (Raj et al., 2018). Com-
bined with large-scale scRNA-seq analysis in an approach called
scGESTALT, this enables linking of speciﬁc transcriptomes (to
identify cell subpopulations) with genome scars (to identify line-
age relationships) within complex tissues containing hundreds of
cell types (Figure 2G). Conceivably, these technologies could be
applied to tissue regeneration to help deconstruct the develop-
mental ‘‘trajectories’’ or ‘‘landscapes’’ of tissue regenerating af-
ter injury, and initial efforts are underway (Alemany et al., 2018).
Technology advancement in cell recovery will ensure inclusion of
rare cell types, a potential limitation. Moreover, the recovery of
restricted markers from these proﬁles can validate the ap-
proaches by identifying spatial domains of cell subpopulations
in tissue and by inspiring new tools for cell puriﬁcation and fate
mapping. Ultimately, one envisages integration of visual ap-
proaches such as multicolor clonal analysis with sequencing-
based approaches such as scGESTALT to reconstruct regener-
ation at single- cell resolution.
Finding Triggers and Brakes for Regeneration
Once cell sources and behaviors that drive regeneration are
delineated, the molecular triggers that direct these sources
and behaviors can be interpreted. Gene manipulation tools that
circumvent the challenges of regeneration will ultimately deﬁne
the ﬁeld. There is a historic advantage to working with mice,
given the abundance of existing transgenic lines and genetic
tools that allow mutagenesis to be spatially and temporally
induced. On the other hand, although lacking in tools to more
precisely deﬁne gene function, many non-mammalian vertebrate
species have an elevated regenerative capacity relative to mam-
mals. We discuss tools that have revealed pro-regenerative
factors and gene regulatory mechanisms of regeneration, and
we suggest opportunities for the ﬁeld as it harnesses new
genome-wide proﬁling data for targets to manipulate in contem-
porary ways.
Genetic Tools: Past, Present, and Future
Tamoxifen-, doxycycline-, or heat shock-inducible promoters
have been employed for the last two decades in vertebrates
for spatial and/or temporal control of gain- or loss-of-function
transgene cassettes, addressing questions in regeneration
along the way (Khattak et al., 2013; Knopf et al., 2010; Mosimann
and Zon, 2011; Shoji and Sato-Maeda, 2008). Interpretations of
overexpression phenotypes have familiar caveats such as po-
tential unintended toxicity or non-speciﬁc effects on interacting
pathways. Gene editing technologies such as CRISPR/Cas9
have brought targeted mutagenesis to many species for tradi-
tionally rigorous genetic loss-of-function studies. Indeed, these
approaches in making targeted mutations have uncovered re-
quirements for Sox2, a SRY-related high-mobility group box
Developmental Cell 47, November 5, 2018
273
Developmental Cell
Perspective

Figure 3. Gene Regulation and Manipulation
(A) The dual inducible, ﬂuorescent, and functional genetic mosaic (ifgMosaic) method was used to analyze the proliferative capacity of single cells with different
combinations of Notch and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling. Schematic representation of the genetic constructs of iMb-Vegfr2-Mosaic and
iChr-Notch-Mosaic mice and representative confocal micrographs of retinal vessels expressing the different combinations of genes and ﬂuorescent proteins
(legend continued on next page)
274
Developmental Cell 47, November 5, 2018
Developmental Cell
Perspective

transcription factor, connective tissue growth factor a (ctgfa), a
secreted matrix factor, and inhibin beta a (inhbaa) in axolotl spi-
nal cord regeneration, zebraﬁsh spinal cord regeneration, and
zebraﬁsh heart regeneration, respectively (Dogra et al., 2017;
Fei et al., 2014; Mokalled et al., 2016). Importantly, animal devel-
opment was grossly normal in sox2, ctgfa, and inhbaa mutants,
suggesting speciﬁc or preferential regenerative functions for
these genes. Alternatively, there might be more compensatory
mechanisms such as transcriptional adaptation (El-Brolosy and
Stainier, 2017) to neutralize loss of gene function in the embryo,
relative to the adult.
The CRISPR/Cas9 system is an evolving space for epigenome
editing as well, and the regeneration ﬁeld is positioned to take
advantage of this. Engineered nuclease-deﬁcient Cas9 (dCas9)
can be repurposed for non-mutagenic targeting. dCas9 can be
fused to various effector proteins or chromatin modiﬁers to either
activate or repress gene transcription from a promoter (Chavez
et al., 2016; Hilton et al., 2015; Kearns et al., 2015), a signiﬁcant
advancement over ectopic induction of a dominant negative
transgene. With the employment of dCas9 to achieve program-
mable single base editing or to shield speciﬁc transcription factor
binding sites (Gaudelli et al., 2017; Vigouroux et al., 2018), there
is a profound capacity to modify genomic and epigenetic land-
scapes. The compilation of repertoires of tissue-targeted Cas9
versions carries the potential to study injury-induced gene regu-
lation and regenerative gene regulatory networks and to assess
SNPs that might modulate regenerative capacities.
Sophisticated genetic strategies such as conditional knock-
outs are needed to study candidate genes suspected to have
essential roles in embryonic development. Conditional knock-
outs enabled by tamoxifen-inducible Cre or Flp recombinases
and recognition site-ﬂanked alleles have been employed for
many years in mice to address these challenges. In species
without established embryonic stem cell systems for gene tar-
geting, transgenic and CRISPR techniques have been combined
to achieve tissue-speciﬁc mutagenesis for regeneration studies.
Zebraﬁsh and axolotls have an expanding repertoire of Cre lines
available to their researchers (Fei et al., 2017). loxP recognition
sites for Cre have been inserted to ﬂank coding sequences in
zebraﬁsh (Hoshijima et al., 2016), and an invertible gene trap
cassette was recently used to knock out an Hh ligand gene in
adult zebraﬁsh to study heart regeneration (Sugimoto et al.,
2017). Other methods for gene knockouts in adult animals
could integrate additional spatiotemporal control for transgenic
expression of Cas9 and gRNA delivery as in zebraﬁsh embryos
(Ablain et al., 2015; Yin et al., 2015), or electroporation of injected
Cas9 protein and gRNA complexes in axolotls, as performed
recently to target neural stem cells in spinal cord (Fei et al.,
2016). These approaches could be adapted for multiplex target-
ing in multiple tissues. However, somatic CRISPR/Cas9 ap-
proaches do have potential issues with off-target effects and
mosaicism that might cloud interpretations. Mosaicism is an
especially interesting challenge in regeneration research, given
that regeneration is essentially a regulative developmental pro-
cess where wild-type cells could compensate for defective
mutant cells. Relevant to this, Burns and colleagues recently
used Cre and Flp recombinases to differentially control expres-
sion of multiple gene cassettes and permanently label cardiac
muscle cells that had experienced transient genetic inhibition
of a cytokinesis effector during larval and juvenile growth. This
enabled quantiﬁcation of the contributions of multinucleate
versus mononucleate cells to heart regeneration in mosaic ani-
mals (Gonza´ lez-Rosa et al., 2018). Similar applications in regen-
eration contexts can incorporate overexpressed molecular fac-
tors into Brainbow expression cassettes as shown recently in
mice (Pontes-Quero et al., 2017) (Figure 3A), allowing associa-
tion of a color with a high-resolution cellular phenotype caused
by overexpression within a mosaic cell population.
Alongside CRISPR-based gene editing tools, RNA and protein
editing tools are on the horizon for regeneration research. Induc-
ible and reversible protein degradation allow precise control that
might be necessary for a ‘‘Goldilocks’’ level of gene product—
that is, not too much and not too little—in a regenerating struc-
ture (Clift et al., 2017; Nishimura et al., 2009). Current strategies
need reﬁnement, given that the requirement for continuous drug
treatment (versus a single pulse) or a speciﬁc antibody to induce
degradation can add a layer of difﬁculty to experiments. Simi-
larly, RNA editing tools are particularly needed in model systems
that are not RNAi compatible. Type VI CRISPR-Cas systems,
which employ the deactivated RNA-guided RNases Cas13
(dCas13), have been adapted for RNA targeting and await
applications in regeneration research (Cox et al., 2017).
Regenerative Gene Regulation
The number of genes that are exclusively dedicated to tissue
regeneration is expected to be limited: the presumed dominant
mechanism for regeneration is that injury induces large-scale re-
purposing of genes with functions in embryonic development or
tissue homeostasis. Thus, how injury signals trigger growth pro-
grams must be deﬁned and understood at the gene regulatory
level. Decades of research into gene regulatory elements have
highlighted the involvement of enhancer elements, short DNA
sequences that engage with transcription factors and gene
promoters to control gene expression (Lagha et al., 2012). Chro-
matin proﬁling is now routine, and myriad studies have charac-
terized the signatures of histone modiﬁcations, chromatin modi-
ﬁcation enzymes, transcription factors, DNA accessibility, DNA
(expression cassettes A–F). Higher-magniﬁcation pictures show dual ﬂuorescent clones. Histogram shows frequency and clone size according to their dual nuclei
and membrane color (Notch- and VEGF-signaling level).
(B) A DNA element upstream of leptin b (LEN) directs regeneration-dependent gene expression in the zebraﬁsh ﬁn and cardiac ventricle. Top panels show
transgene expression in regenerating ﬁns at 2 days post amputation (dpa) (Arrows, blastemal eGFP). Bottom panels indicate enhancer activation in resected
ventricular region at 3 dpa (Arrows, endocardial eGFP).
(C) Rib fracture (arrows) activates a distinct, adult-speciﬁc regulatory region that is inactive embryonically. A 17.8 kb genomic fragment (Ph7) activates lacZ
expression in POD4 rib fractures in whole mount (left) and cross-sections (right).
(D) In situ capture of locus-speciﬁc chromatin interactions by biotinylated dCas9. In this system, dCas9 is biotinylated in vivo by the biotin ligase BirA together with
sequence-speciﬁc single guide RNAs (sgRNAs), followed by isolation of macromolecules associated with the targeted sequence. The puriﬁed protein, RNA, and
DNA complexes are identiﬁed and analyzed by proteomics, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), and chromosome conformation capture sequencing (3C-seq).
Image in (A) is adapted from Pontes-Quero et al. (2017). Images in (B) are adapted from Kang et al. (2016). Images in (C) are adapted from Guenther et al. (2015).
Image in (D) is adapted from Liu et al. (2017).
Developmental Cell 47, November 5, 2018
275
Developmental Cell
Perspective

methylation, and other chromatin features associated with
different cell types and tissue contexts for the prediction of active
or poised regulatory sequences (Adam and Fuchs, 2016;
Perino and Veenstra, 2016). However, regeneration researchers
proﬁling for regulatory elements preferential or speciﬁc to regen-
eration face challenges not felt by those proﬁling marks in
cultured cells. Gene regulation is a cell-speciﬁc phenomenon,
and proﬁles of whole complex tissues can have noise that masks
enhancer identiﬁers that are present in minor cell types. Cell pu-
rity can be achieved by tissue dissociation and ﬂow cytometry
based on marker expression. However, not all cell types are
equally accessed through dissociation, and the process of tissue
disruption and protease digestion itself is expected to change
chromatin structure at some level. Techniques to isolate nuclei
from ﬁxed tissue for proﬁling can circumvent these issues, as
can expression of tagged DNA-associating factors from cell
type-restricted promoters that are recoverable by direct pull-
down of the tag. The future of chromatin proﬁling is at the sin-
gle-cell level, and the evolution of straightforward techniques
to obtain chromatin mark or conformation (e.g., Hi-C) proﬁles
from single cells could potentially transform the pursuit of tissue
regeneration enhancer elements. Issues with tissue dissociation
notwithstanding, such single-cell proﬁles, matched with a corre-
sponding transcriptome to identify the cell subtype and level of
gene expression, could provide clear views of the gene regula-
tory landscape of tissue regeneration. This would give rise to
higher resolution snapshots of regeneration programs and ever
better tools to control gene expression during regeneration.
A handful of recent studies have begun to shed light on
enhancer elements that activate gene expression in injury and
tissue regeneration contexts. One early study developed condi-
tions to maintain embryonic E11.5 mouse hearts in culture for a
few days to allow transfection and assessment of regulatory
sequence reporter constructs, with the aim of identifying
enhancer elements responsible for injury-activated gene expres-
sion in the epicardial tissue covering the heart (Huang et al.,
2012). Screening of putative enhancer elements, identiﬁable by
conserved sequences linked to epicardial marker genes, re-
vealed two short enhancer elements with predicted binding sites
that implicated C/EBP transcription factors in epicardial gene
expression, both in developing mouse embryos and in the
injured adult heart. Other studies focused on zebraﬁsh and pro-
ﬁled histone modiﬁcations (Histone 3 Lysine 27 acetylation, a
mark of active enhancer elements [Kang et al., 2016]) or variants
(Histone 3.3, which replaces Histone 3.1 in areas of open chro-
matin including active gene expression [Goldman et al., 2017])
to identify potential enhancer sequences that direct gene
expression during heart or ﬁn regeneration (Figure 3B). These se-
quences, in combination with a minimal promoter, were sufﬁ-
cient to direct and maintain expression of a transgenic reporter
or even a potent mitogen in regeneration settings but not in un-
injured adult tissue. Together, these studies and others, such
as those identifying injury-responsive sequences near the mu-
rine BMP5 gene or chromatin regions that are modulated by
exposure to inﬂammation in murine skin epithelial stem cells
(Guenther et al., 2015; Naik et al., 2017), indicate that there
may exist thousands of cis-regulatory elements that activate
gene expression after tissue injury or stress and/or during regen-
eration. Elements such as these provide ways researchers can
further
probe
gene
function
during
regeneration
through
their inherent ability to turn on and off in response to injury and
regeneration.
Once armed with a list of regulatory elements, tasks ahead are
to validate regulatory elements experimentally and to decipher
the circuits and speciﬁc factors that link tissue injury to key
regeneration effectors. Regulatory elements should be validated
in context, not presumed exclusively from marks. Questions of
conservation, addressed by cross-species sequence analysis,
and of sufﬁciency, addressed in transgenic reporter strains
screened arduously at the adult stage after injury, are important,
as is the extent to which regulatory elements are required for
expression during regeneration. Enhancer redundancy is an es-
tablished phenomenon (Osterwalder et al., 2018), and genome
editing enables precise deletion from the genome in virtually
any laboratory animal to deﬁne essential elements. Potential up-
stream regulators that bind to key enhancers and promoter se-
quences also must be experimentally validated, not estimated
by presence of predicted binding sites. These regulators can
potentially be revealed by chromatin immunoprecipitation using
cell type-restricted expression of tagged transcription factors,
if a certain binding protein is suspected. Starting with the
sequence and identifying its regulators is more difﬁcult, but
contemporary approaches that target tagged dCas9 enzymes
to interesting regulatory elements are promising gateways (Liu
et al., 2017). One goal upon ﬁnding key regeneration enhancer
elements may include targeting of chromatin or transcriptional
regulators to speciﬁc regulatory elements in attempts to control
gene expression during regeneration. Together, a combined
knowledge of early injury response signals, transcriptional regu-
latory mechanisms, and downstream effector mechanisms
can inspire new tools for dissecting regeneration, and possibly,
new therapeutic strategies.
Summary and Perspectives
Achieving regenerative medicine hinges upon the acquisition
and application of insights into how and why organ regeneration
occurs. There will likely never be (even with leaps in technology) a
perfect singular model system for regeneration. What the range
of laboratory models can reveal about regeneration is limited
only by their respective research toolkits. Thus, community in-
vestment in molecular genetic tools for each model system is
paramount. While regeneration can be visualized, deciphered,
and manipulated like never before, there is still room to improve
precision. Human tissue provides a unique perspective for
regeneration as it has for other ﬁelds, and organoid generation
from stem cells is an exploding area with the central goals of
achieving native cellular maturation, tissue complexity, and
physiology. Ex vivo injury and regeneration studies in organoids
have been reported and should approximate components of hu-
man tissue regeneration (Nakamura and Sato, 2018; Voges et al.,
2017). Translation of discovery biology into new regenerative
medicines in many tissues will likely involve gene therapy.
Thus, concomitant advances in viral vector technology to hold
larger cargos, to enable targeting of speciﬁc cell types, and to
allow for intricate gene regulation will be pivotal. The outlook is
healthy if the scientiﬁc community continues to harvest and
apply new tools for dissecting and manipulating regeneration
in a broad array of species, tissues, and contexts.
276
Developmental Cell 47, November 5, 2018
Developmental Cell
Perspective

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We apologize to trainees and principal investigators whose work we omitted
or discussed only brieﬂy due to space limitations. We thank J.A. Goldman
and V. Cigliola for comments on the manuscript. We acknowledge support
from the Washington University School of Medicine, the Missouri Spinal
Cord Injury/Disease Research Program, and NIH (T32-HL007101) to M.H.M.
and from NIH (R01-GM074057, R01-HL0810674, R01-HL131319, R01-
HL136182, and R21-NS096617), Fondation Leducq, and American Heart
Association to K.D.P. In memory of Steve Johnson, a rigorous scientist and
selﬂess mentor who pioneered genetic approaches to tissue regeneration.
REFERENCES
Ablain, J., Durand, E.M., Yang, S., Zhou, Y., and Zon, L.I. (2015). A CRISPR/
Cas9 vector system for tissue-speciﬁc gene disruption in zebraﬁsh. Dev.
Cell 32, 756–764.
Adam, R.C., and Fuchs, E. (2016). The yin and yang of chromatin dynamics in
stem cell fate selection. Trends Genet. 32, 89–100.
Alemany, A., Florescu, M., Baron, C.S., Peterson-Maduro, J., and van
Oudenaarden, A. (2018). Whole-organism clone tracing using single-cell
sequencing. Nature 556, 108–112.
Bajar, B.T., Lam, A.J., Badiee, R.K., Oh, Y.H., Chu, J., Zhou, X.X., Kim, N., Kim,
B.B., Chung, M., Yablonovitch, A.L., et al. (2016). Fluorescent indicators for
simultaneous reporting of all four cell cycle phases. Nat. Methods 13, 993–996.
Barbosa, J.S., Sanchez-Gonzalez, R., Di Giaimo, R., Baumgart, E.V., Theis,
F.J., Go¨ tz, M., and Ninkovic, J. (2015). Neurodevelopment. Live imaging of
adult neural stem cell behavior in the intact and injured zebraﬁsh brain. Science
348, 789–793.
Beck, C.W. (2012). Studying regeneration in Xenopus. Methods Mol. Biol. 917,
525–539.
Becker, T., Wullimann, M.F., Becker, C.G., Bernhardt, R.R., and Schachner,
M. (1997). Axonal regrowth after spinal cord transection in adult zebraﬁsh.
J. Comp. Neurol. 377, 577–595.
Blitz, I.L., Biesinger, J., Xie, X., and Cho, K.W. (2013). Biallelic genome modi-
ﬁcation in F(0) Xenopus tropicalis embryos using the CRISPR/Cas system.
Genesis 51, 827–834.
Briggs, J.A., Weinreb, C., Wagner, D.E., Megason, S., Peshkin, L., Kirschner,
M.W., and Klein, A.M. (2018). The dynamics of gene expression in vertebrate
embryogenesis at single-cell resolution. Science 360, eaar5780.
Brock, A.R., Seto, M., and Smith-Bolton, R.K. (2017). Cap-n-Collar promotes
tissue regeneration by regulating ROS and JNK signaling in the Drosophila
melanogaster wing imaginal disc. Genetics 206, 1505–1520.
Brockschnieder, D., Lappe-Siefke, C., Goebbels, S., Boesl, M.R., Nave, K.A.,
and Riethmacher, D. (2004). Cell depletion due to diphtheria toxin fragment A
after Cre-mediated recombination. Mol. Cell. Biol. 24, 7636–7642.
Brunet, A., and Rando, T.A. (2017). Interaction between epigenetic and meta-
bolism in aging stem cells. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 45, 1–7.
Cao, J., Wang, J., Jackman, C.P., Cox, A.H., Trembley, M.A., Balowski, J.J.,
Cox, B.D., De Simone, A., Dickson, A.L., Di Talia, S., et al. (2017). Tension cre-
ates an endoreplication wavefront that leads regeneration of epicardial tissue.
Dev. Cell 42, 600–615.e4.
Carrelha, J., Meng, Y., Kettyle, L.M., Luis, T.C., Norfo, R., Alcolea, V., Boukar-
abila, H., Grasso, F., Gambardella, A., Grover, A., et al. (2018). Hierarchically
related lineage-restricted fates of multipotent haematopoietic stem cells.
Nature 554, 106–111.
Chablais, F., Veit, J., Rainer, G., and Jazwinska, A. (2011). The zebraﬁsh heart
regenerates after cryoinjury-induced myocardial infarction. BMC Dev. Biol.
11, 21.
Chavez, A., Tuttle, M., Pruitt, B.W., Ewen-Campen, B., Chari, R., Ter-Ova-
nesyan, D., Haque, S.J., Cecchi, R.J., Kowal, E.J.K., Buchthal, J., et al.
(2016). Comparison of Cas9 activators in multiple species. Nat. Methods 13,
563–567.
Chen, C.H., Merriman, A.F., Savage, J., Willer, J., Wahlig, T., Katsanis, N., Yin,
V.P., and Poss, K.D. (2015). Transient laminin beta 1a induction deﬁnes
the wound epidermis during zebraﬁsh ﬁn regeneration. PLoS Genet. 11,
e1005437.
Chen, C.H., Puliaﬁto, A., Cox, B.D., Primo, L., Fang, Y., Di Talia, S., and Poss,
K.D. (2016). Multicolor cell barcoding technology for long-term surveillance of
epithelial regeneration in zebraﬁsh. Dev. Cell 36, 668–680.
Chera, S., Baronnier, D., Ghila, L., Cigliola, V., Jensen, J.N., Gu, G., Furuyama,
K., Thorel, F., Gribble, F.M., Reimann, F., et al. (2014). Diabetes recovery by
age-dependent conversion of pancreatic delta-cells into insulin producers.
Nature 514, 503–507.
Chung, K., Wallace, J., Kim, S.Y., Kalyanasundaram, S., Andalman, A.S., Da-
vidson, T.J., Mirzabekov, J.J., Zalocusky, K.A., Mattis, J., Denisin, A.K., et al.
(2013). Structural and molecular interrogation of intact biological systems.
Nature 497, 332–337.
Clift, D., McEwan, W.A., Labzin, L.I., Konieczny, V., Mogessie, B., James, L.C.,
and Schuh, M. (2017). A method for the acute and rapid degradation of endog-
enous proteins. Cell 171, 1692–1706.e18.
Cornelison, D.D., Wilcox-Adelman, S.A., Goetinck, P.F., Rauvala, H., Rap-
raeger, A.C., and Olwin, B.B. (2004). Essential and separable roles for Synde-
can-3 and Syndecan-4 in skeletal muscle development and regeneration.
Genes Dev. 18, 2231–2236.
Cox, D.B.T., Gootenberg, J.S., Abudayyeh, O.O., Franklin, B., Kellner, M.J.,
Joung, J., and Zhang, F. (2017). RNA editing with CRISPR-Cas13. Science
358, 1019–1027.
Cuervo, R., Herna´ ndez-Martı´nez, R., Chimal-Monroy, J., Merchant-Larios, H.,
and Covarrubias, L. (2012). Full regeneration of the tribasal Polypterus ﬁn.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 3838–3843.
Curado, S., Stainier, D.Y., and Anderson, R.M. (2008). Nitroreductase-medi-
ated cell/tissue ablation in zebraﬁsh: a spatially and temporally controlled
ablation method with applications in developmental and regeneration studies.
Nat. Protoc. 3, 948–954.
Currie, J.D., Kawaguchi, A., Traspas, R.M., Schuez, M., Chara, O., and Ta-
naka, E.M. (2016). Live imaging of axolotl digit regeneration reveals spatiotem-
poral choreography of diverse connective tissue progenitor pools. Dev. Cell
39, 411–423.
Dias, D.O., Kim, H., Holl, D., Werne Solnestam, B., Lundeberg, J., Carle´ n, M.,
Go¨ ritz, C., and Frise´ n, J. (2018). Reducing pericyte-derived scarring promotes
recovery after spinal cord injury. Cell 173, 153–165.e22.
Diep, C.Q., Ma, D., Deo, R.C., Holm, T.M., Naylor, R.W., Arora, N., Wingert,
R.A., Bollig, F., Djordjevic, G., Lichman, B., et al. (2011). Identiﬁcation of adult
nephron progenitors capable of kidney regeneration in zebraﬁsh. Nature
470, 95–100.
Di Talia, S., and Poss, K.D. (2016). Monitoring Tissue Regeneration at Single-
Cell Resolution. Cell Stem Cell 19, 428–431.
Dogra, D., Ahuja, S., Kim, H.T., Rasouli, S.J., Stainier, D.Y.R., and Reischauer,
S. (2017). Opposite effects of activin type 2 receptor ligands on cardiomyocyte
proliferation during development and repair. Nat. Commun. 8, 1902.
Dor, Y., Brown, J., Martinez, O.I., and Melton, D.A. (2004). Adult pancreatic
beta-cells are formed by self-duplication rather than stem-cell differentiation.
Nature 429, 41–46.
Edwards-Faret, G., Mun˜ oz, R., Me´ ndez-Olivos, E.E., Lee-Liu, D., Tapia, V.S.,
and Larraı´n, J. (2017). Spinal cord regeneration in Xenopus laevis. Nat. Protoc.
12, 372–389.
El-Brolosy, M.A., and Stainier, D.Y.R. (2017). Genetic compensation: a phe-
nomenon in search of mechanisms. PLoS Genet. 13, e1006780.
Elewa, A., Wang, H., Talavera-Lo´ pez, C., Joven, A., Brito, G., Kumar, A.,
Hameed, L.S., Penrad-Mobayed, M., Yao, Z., Zamani, N., et al. (2017).
Reading and editing the pleurodeles waltl genome reveals novel features of
tetrapod regeneration. Nat. Commun. 8, 2286.
Farrell, J.A., Wang, Y., Riesenfeld, S.J., Shekhar, K., Regev, A., and Schier,
A.F. (2018). Single-cell reconstruction of developmental trajectories during ze-
braﬁsh embryogenesis. Science 360, eaar3131.
Fausett, B.V., and Goldman, D. (2006). A role for alpha1 tubulin-expressing
Muller glia in regeneration of the injured zebraﬁsh retina. J. Neurosci. 26,
6303–6313.
Developmental Cell 47, November 5, 2018
277
Developmental Cell
Perspective

Fei, J.F., Knapp, D., Schuez, M., Murawala, P., Zou, Y., Pal Singh, S., Drechsel,
D., and Tanaka, E.M. (2016). Tissue- and time-directed electroporation of
CAS9 protein-gRNA complexes in vivo yields efﬁcient multigene knockout
for studying gene function in regeneration. NPJ Regen. Med. 1, 16002.
Fei, J.F., Schuez, M., Knapp, D., Taniguchi, Y., Drechsel, D.N., and Tanaka,
E.M. (2017). Efﬁcient gene knockin in axolotl and its use to test the role of sat-
ellite cells in limb regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114, 12501–12506.
Fei, J.F., Schuez, M., Tazaki, A., Taniguchi, Y., Roensch, K., and Tanaka, E.M.
(2014). CRISPR-mediated genomic deletion of Sox2 in the axolotl shows a
requirement in spinal cord neural stem cell ampliﬁcation during tail regenera-
tion. Stem Cell Reports 3, 444–459.
Fimbel, S.M., Montgomery, J.E., Burket, C.T., and Hyde, D.R. (2007). Regen-
eration of inner retinal neurons after intravitreal injection of ouabain in zebra-
ﬁsh. J. Neurosci. 27, 1712–1724.
Flowers, G.P., Sanor, L.D., and Crews, C.M. (2017). Lineage tracing of
genome-edited alleles reveals high ﬁdelity axolotl limb regeneration. Elife 6,
e25726.
Flowers, G.P., Timberlake, A.T., McLean, K.C., Monaghan, J.R., and Crews,
C.M. (2014). Highly efﬁcient targeted mutagenesis in axolotl using Cas9
RNA-guided nuclease. Development 141, 2165–2171.
Gaudelli, N.M., Komor, A.C., Rees, H.A., Packer, M.S., Badran, A.H., Bryson,
D.I., and Liu, D.R. (2017). Programmable base editing of A$T to G $C in
genomic DNA without DNA cleavage. Nature 551, 464–471.
Gaze, R.M. (1959). Regeneration of the optic nerve in Xenopus laevis. Q. J.
Exp. Physiol. Cogn. Med. Sci. 44, 290–308.
Goldman, J.A., Kuzu, G., Lee, N., Karasik, J., Gemberling, M., Foglia, M.J.,
Karra, R., Dickson, A.L., Sun, F., Tolstorukov, M.Y., et al. (2017). Resolving
heart regeneration by replacement histone proﬁling. Dev. Cell 40, 392–404.e5.
Gonza´ lez-Rosa, J.M., Martı´n, V., Peralta, M., Torres, M., and Mercader, N.
(2011). Extensive scar formation and regression during heart regeneration after
cryoinjury in zebraﬁsh. Development 138, 1663–1674.
Gonza´ lez-Rosa, J.M., Sharpe, M., Field, D., Soonpaa, M.H., Field, L.J., Burns,
C.E., and Burns, C.G. (2018). Myocardial polyploidization creates a barrier to
heart regeneration in zebraﬁsh. Dev. Cell 44, 433–446.e7.
Guenther, C.A., Wang, Z., Li, E., Tran, M.C., Logan, C.Y., Nusse, R., Panta-
lena-Filho, L., Yang, G.P., and Kingsley, D.M. (2015). A distinct regulatory
region of the Bmp5 locus activates gene expression following adult bone frac-
ture or soft tissue injury. Bone 77, 31–41.
Guo, Z., Lucchetta, E., Rafel, N., and Ohlstein, B. (2016). Maintenance of the
adult Drosophila intestine: all roads lead to homeostasis. Curr. Opin. Genet.
Dev. 40, 81–86.
Gupta, V., and Poss, K.D. (2012). Clonally dominant cardiomyocytes direct
heart morphogenesis. Nature 484, 479–484.
Gurevich, D.B., Nguyen, P.D., Siegel, A.L., Ehrlich, O.V., Sonntag, C., Phan,
J.M., Berger, S., Ratnayake, D., Hersey, L., Berger, J., et al. (2016). Asym-
metric division of clonal muscle stem cells coordinates muscle regeneration
in vivo. Science 353, aad9969.
Haber, A.L., Biton, M., Rogel, N., Herbst, R.H., Shekhar, K., Smillie, C., Burgin,
G., Delorey, T.M., Howitt, M.R., Katz, Y., et al. (2017). A single-cell survey of the
small intestinal epithelium. Nature 551, 333–339.
Harris, R.E., Setiawan, L., Saul, J., and Hariharan, I.K. (2016). Localized epige-
netic silencing of a damage-activated WNT enhancer limits regeneration in
mature Drosophila imaginal discs. Elife 5, e11588.
Haughton, C.L., Gawriluk, T.R., and Seifert, A.W. (2016). The biology and hus-
bandry of the African spiny mouse (Acomys cahirinus) and the research uses of
a laboratory colony. J. Am. Assoc. Lab. Anim. Sci. 55, 9–17.
He, L., Li, Y., Li, Y., Pu, W., Huang, X., Tian, X., Wang, Y., Zhang, H., Liu, Q.,
Zhang, L., et al. (2017). Enhancing the precision of genetic lineage tracing us-
ing dual recombinases. Nat. Med. 23, 1488–1498.
Hilton, I.B., D’Ippolito, A.M., Vockley, C.M., Thakore, P.I., Crawford, G.E.,
Reddy, T.E., and Gersbach, C.A. (2015). Epigenome editing by a CRISPR-
Cas9-based acetyltransferase activates genes from promoters and en-
hancers. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 510–517.
Hirsch, T., Rothoeft, T., Teig, N., Bauer, J.W., Pellegrini, G., De Rosa, L., Sca-
glione, D., Reichelt, J., Klausegger, A., Kneisz, D., et al. (2017). Regeneration of
the entire human epidermis using transgenic stem cells. Nature 551, 327–332.
Hoshijima, K., Jurynec, M.J., and Grunwald, D.J. (2016). Precise editing of the
zebraﬁsh genome made simple and efﬁcient. Dev. Cell 36, 654–667.
Howe, K., Clark, M.D., Torroja, C.F., Torrance, J., Berthelot, C., Muffato, M.,
Collins, J.E., Humphray, S., McLaren, K., Matthews, L., et al. (2013). The ze-
braﬁsh reference genome sequence and its relationship to the human genome.
Nature 496, 498–503.
Huang, G.N., Thatcher, J.E., McAnally, J., Kong, Y., Qi, X., Tan, W., DiMaio,
J.M., Amatruda, J.F., Gerard, R.D., Hill, J.A., et al. (2012). C/EBP transcription
factors mediate epicardial activation during heart development and injury. Sci-
ence 338, 1599–1603.
Hui, S.P., Sheng, D.Z., Sugimoto, K., Gonzalez-Rajal, A., Nakagawa, S., Hes-
selson, D., and Kikuchi, K. (2017). Zebraﬁsh regulatory T cells mediate organ-
speciﬁc regenerative programs. Dev. Cell 43, 659–672.e5.
Hwang, W.Y., Fu, Y., Reyon, D., Maeder, M.L., Tsai, S.Q., Sander, J.D., Peter-
son, R.T., Yeh, J.R., and Joung, J.K. (2013). Efﬁcient genome editing in zebra-
ﬁsh using a CRISPR-Cas system. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 227–229.
Ito, K., Morioka, M., Kimura, S., Tasaki, M., Inohaya, K., and Kudo, A. (2014).
Differential reparative phenotypes between zebraﬁsh and medaka after car-
diac injury. Dev. Dyn. 243, 1106–1115.
Jaitin, D.A., Kenigsberg, E., Keren-Shaul, H., Elefant, N., Paul, F., Zaretsky, I.,
Mildner, A., Cohen, N., Jung, S., Tanay, A., et al. (2014). Massively parallel sin-
gle-cell RNA-seq for marker-free decomposition of tissues into cell types. Sci-
ence 343, 776–779.
Johnson, S.L., and Weston, J.A. (1995). Temperature-sensitive mutations that
cause stage-speciﬁc defects in zebraﬁsh ﬁn regeneration. Genetics 141,
1583–1595.
Kang, J., Hu, J., Karra, R., Dickson, A.L., Tornini, V.A., Nachtrab, G., Gemberl-
ing, M., Goldman, J.A., Black, B.L., and Poss, K.D. (2016). Modulation of tissue
repair by regeneration enhancer elements. Nature 532, 201–206.
Kang, J., Nachtrab, G., and Poss, K.D. (2013). Local Dkk1 crosstalk from
breeding ornaments impedes regeneration of injured male zebraﬁsh ﬁns.
Dev. Cell 27, 19–31.
Katogi, R., Nakatani, Y., Shin-i, T., Kohara, Y., Inohaya, K., and Kudo, A. (2004).
Large-scale analysis of the genes involved in ﬁn regeneration and blastema
formation in the medaka, Oryzias latipes. Mech. Dev. 121, 861–872.
Katsuyama, T., Comoglio, F., Seimiya, M., Cabuy, E., and Paro, R. (2015).
During Drosophila disc regeneration, JAK/STAT coordinates cell proliferation
with Dilp8-mediated developmental delay. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112,
E2327–E2336.
Kawakami, Y., Rodriguez Esteban, C., Raya, M., Kawakami, H., Martı´, M., Du-
bova, I., and Izpisu´ a Belmonte, J.C. (2006). Wnt/beta-catenin signaling regu-
lates vertebrate limb regeneration. Genes Dev. 20, 3232–3237.
Kearns, N.A., Pham, H., Tabak, B., Genga, R.M., Silverstein, N.J., Garber, M.,
and Maehr, R. (2015). Functional annotation of native enhancers with a Cas9-
histone demethylase fusion. Nat. Methods 12, 401–403.
Khattak, S., Richter, T., and Tanaka, E.M. (2009). Generation of transgenic
axolotls
(Ambystoma
mexicanum).
Cold
Spring
Harb.
Protoc.
2009,
pdb.prot5264.
Khattak, S., Schuez, M., Richter, T., Knapp, D., Haigo, S.L., Sandoval-Guz-
ma´ n, T., Hradlikova, K., Duemmler, A., Kerney, R., and Tanaka, E.M. (2013).
Germline transgenic methods for tracking cells and testing gene function dur-
ing regeneration in the axolotl. Stem Cell Reports 1, 90–103.
Kikuchi, K., Holdway, J.E., Major, R.J., Blum, N., Dahn, R.D., Begemann, G.,
and Poss, K.D. (2011). Retinoic acid production by endocardium and epicar-
dium is an injury response essential for zebraﬁsh heart regeneration. Dev.
Cell 20, 397–404.
King, B.L., and Yin, V.P. (2016). A conserved microRNA regulatory circuit is
differentially controlled during limb/appendage regeneration. PLoS One 11,
e0157106.
Knopf, F., Schnabel, K., Haase, C., Pfeifer, K., Anastassiadis, K., and
Weidinger, G. (2010). Dually inducible TetON systems for tissue-speciﬁc
278
Developmental Cell 47, November 5, 2018
Developmental Cell
Perspective

conditional gene expression in zebraﬁsh. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107,
19933–19938.
Kragl, M., Knapp, D., Nacu, E., Khattak, S., Maden, M., Epperlein, H.H., and
Tanaka, E.M. (2009). Cells keep a memory of their tissue origin during axolotl
limb regeneration. Nature 460, 60–65.
Kroll, K.L., and Amaya, E. (1996). Transgenic Xenopus embryos from sperm
nuclear transplantations reveal FGF signaling requirements during gastrula-
tion. Development 122, 3173–3183.
Kyritsis, N., Kizil, C., Zocher, S., Kroehne, V., Kaslin, J., Freudenreich, D., Iltz-
sche, A., and Brand, M. (2012). Acute inﬂammation initiates the regenerative
response in the adult zebraﬁsh brain. Science 338, 1353–1356.
Lagha, M., Bothma, J.P., and Levine, M. (2012). Mechanisms of transcriptional
precision in animal development. Trends Genet. 28, 409–416.
Lai, S.L., Marı´n-Juez, R., Moura, P.L., Kuenne, C., Lai, J.K.H., Tsedeke, A.T.,
Guenther, S., Looso, M., and Stainier, D.Y. (2017). Reciprocal analyses in ze-
braﬁsh and medaka reveal that harnessing the immune response promotes
cardiac regeneration. Elife 6, e25605.
Leshchiner, I., Alexa, K., Kelsey, P., Adzhubei, I., Austin-Tse, C.A., Cooney,
J.D., Anderson, H., King, M.J., Stottmann, R.W., Garnaas, M.K., et al.
(2012). Mutation mapping and identiﬁcation by whole-genome sequencing.
Genome Res. 22, 1541–1548.
Lin, G., Chen, Y., and Slack, J.M. (2013). Imparting regenerative capacity to
limbs by progenitor cell transplantation. Dev. Cell 24, 41–51.
Liu, S.Y., Selck, C., Friedrich, B., Lutz, R., Vila-Farre´ , M., Dahl, A., Brandl, H.,
Lakshmanaperumal, N., Henry, I., and Rink, J.C. (2013). Reactivating head re-
growth in a regeneration-deﬁcient planarian species. Nature 500, 81–84.
Liu, X., Zhang, Y., Chen, Y., Li, M., Zhou, F., Li, K., Cao, H., Ni, M., Liu, Y., Gu,
Z., et al. (2017). In situ capture of chromatin interactions by biotinylated dCas9.
Cell 170, 1028–1043.e19.
Livet, J. (2007). The brain in color: transgenic ‘‘Brainbow’’ mice for visualizing
neuronal circuits. Med. Sci. (Paris) 23, 1173–1176.
Lust, K., and Wittbrodt, J. (2018). Activating the regenerative potential of Muller
glia cells in a regeneration-deﬁcient retina. Elife 7, e32319.
Macosko, E.Z., Basu, A., Satija, R., Nemesh, J., Shekhar, K., Goldman, M.,
Tirosh, I., Bialas, A.R., Kamitaki, N., Martersteck, E.M., et al. (2015). Highly
parallel genome-wide expression proﬁling of individual cells using nanoliter
droplets. Cell 161, 1202–1214.
Makino, S., Whitehead, G.G., Lien, C.L., Kim, S., Jhawar, P., Kono, A., Kawata,
Y., and Keating, M.T. (2005). Heat-shock protein 60 is required for blastema
formation and maintenance during regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
102, 14599–14604.
Martı´n, R., Pinal, N., and Morata, G. (2017). Distinct regenerative potential of
trunk and appendages of Drosophila mediated by JNK signalling. Develop-
ment 144, 3946–3956.
McKenna, A., Findlay, G.M., Gagnon, J.A., Horwitz, M.S., Schier, A.F., and
Shendure, J. (2016). Whole-organism lineage tracing by combinatorial and cu-
mulative genome editing. Science 353, aaf7907.
Micchelli, C.A., and Perrimon, N. (2006). Evidence that stem cells reside in the
adult Drosophila midgut epithelium. Nature 439, 475–479.
Mokalled, M.H., Patra, C., Dickson, A.L., Endo, T., Stainier, D.Y., and Poss,
K.D. (2016). Injury-induced ctgfa directs glial bridging and spinal cord regener-
ation in zebraﬁsh. Science 354, 630–634.
Mosimann, C., and Zon, L.I. (2011). Advanced zebraﬁsh transgenesis with Tol2
and application for Cre/lox recombination experiments. Methods Cell Biol.
104, 173–194.
Naik, S., Larsen, S.B., Gomez, N.C., Alaverdyan, K., Sendoel, A., Yuan, S., Po-
lak, L., Kulukian, A., Chai, S., and Fuchs, E. (2017). Inﬂammatory memory sen-
sitizes skin epithelial stem cells to tissue damage. Nature 550, 475–480.
Nakamura, T., and Sato, T. (2018). Advancing intestinal organoid technology
toward regenerative medicine. Cell. Mol. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 5, 51–60.
Nakayama, T., Fish, M.B., Fisher, M., Oomen-Hajagos, J., Thomsen, G.H., and
Grainger, R.M. (2013). Simple and efﬁcient CRISPR/Cas9-mediated targeted
mutagenesis in Xenopus tropicalis. Genesis 51, 835–843.
Nechiporuk, A., Poss, K.D., Johnson, S.L., and Keating, M.T. (2003). Positional
cloning of a temperature-sensitive mutant emmental reveals a role for sly1 dur-
ing cell proliferation in zebraﬁsh ﬁn regeneration. Dev. Biol. 258, 291–306.
Newmark, P.A., and Sa´ nchez Alvarado, A. (2000). Bromodeoxyuridine specif-
ically labels the regenerative stem cells of planarians. Dev. Biol. 220, 142–153.
Nir, T., Melton, D.A., and Dor, Y. (2007). Recovery from diabetes in mice by
beta cell regeneration. J. Clin. Invest. 117, 2553–2561.
Nishimura, K., Fukagawa, T., Takisawa, H., Kakimoto, T., and Kanemaki, M.
(2009). An auxin-based degron system for the rapid depletion of proteins in
nonplant cells. Nat. Methods 6, 917–922.
Nowoshilow, S., Schloissnig, S., Fei, J.F., Dahl, A., Pang, A.W.C., Pippel, M.,
Winkler, S., Hastie, A.R., Young, G., Roscito, J.G., et al. (2018). The axolotl
genome and the evolution of key tissue formation regulators. Nature
554, 50–55.
Ohlstein, B., and Spradling, A. (2006). The adult Drosophila posterior midgut is
maintained by pluripotent stem cells. Nature 439, 470–474.
Omura, T., Omura, K., Tedeschi, A., Riva, P., Painter, M.W., Rojas, L., Martin,
J., Lisi, V., Huebner, E.A., Latremoliere, A., et al. (2015). Robust axonal regen-
eration occurs in the injured CAST/Ei mouse CNS. Neuron 86, 1215–1227.
Osterwalder, M., Barozzi, I., Tissie` res, V., Fukuda-Yuzawa, Y., Mannion, B.J.,
Afzal, S.Y., Lee, E.A., Zhu, Y., Plajzer-Frick, I., Pickle, C.S., et al. (2018).
Enhancer redundancy provides phenotypic robustness in mammalian devel-
opment. Nature 554, 239–243.
Park, S., Greco, V., and Cockburn, K. (2016). Live imaging of stem cells:
answering old questions and raising new ones. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 43, 30–37.
Patterson, M., Barske, L., Van Handel, B., Rau, C.D., Gan, P., Sharma, A., Par-
ikh, S., Denholtz, M., Huang, Y., Yamaguchi, Y., et al. (2017). Frequency of
mononuclear diploid cardiomyocytes underlies natural variation in heart
regeneration. Nat. Genet. 49, 1346–1353.
Perino, M., and Veenstra, G.J. (2016). Chromatin control of developmental dy-
namics and plasticity. Dev. Cell 38, 610–620.
Pisharath, H., Rhee, J.M., Swanson, M.A., Leach, S.D., and Parsons, M.J.
(2007). Targeted ablation of beta cells in the embryonic zebraﬁsh pancreas us-
ing E. coli nitroreductase. Mech. Dev. 124, 218–229.
Pomerantz, J.H., and Blau, H.M. (2013). Tumor suppressors: enhancers or
suppressors of regeneration? Development 140, 2502–2512.
Pontes-Quero, S., Heredia, L., Casquero-Garcı´a, V., Ferna´ ndez-Chaco´ n, M.,
Luo, W., Hermoso, A., Bansal, M., Garcia-Gonzalez, I., Sanchez-Mun˜ oz,
M.S., Perea, J.R., et al. (2017). Dual ifgMosaic: a versatile method for multi-
spectral and combinatorial mosaic gene-function analysis. Cell 170, 800–
814.e18.
Porrello, E.R., Mahmoud, A.I., Simpson, E., Hill, J.A., Richardson, J.A., Olson,
E.N., and Sadek, H.A. (2011). Transient regenerative potential of the neonatal
mouse heart. Science 331, 1078–1080.
Poss, K.D., Nechiporuk, A., Hillam, A.M., Johnson, S.L., and Keating, M.T.
(2002a). Mps1 deﬁnes a proximal blastemal proliferative compartment essen-
tial for zebraﬁsh ﬁn regeneration. Development 129, 5141–5149.
Poss, K.D., Wilson, L.G., and Keating, M.T. (2002b). Heart regeneration in ze-
braﬁsh. Science 298, 2188–2190.
Puente, B.N., Kimura, W., Muralidhar, S.A., Moon, J., Amatruda, J.F., Phelps,
K.L., Grinsfelder, D., Rothermel, B.A., Chen, R., Garcia, J.A., et al. (2014). The
oxygen-rich postnatal environment induces cardiomyocyte cell-cycle arrest
through DNA damage response. Cell 157, 565–579.
Qian, L., Huang, Y., Spencer, C.I., Foley, A., Vedantham, V., Liu, L., Conway,
S.J., Fu, J.D., and Srivastava, D. (2012). In vivo reprogramming of murine car-
diac ﬁbroblasts into induced cardiomyocytes. Nature 485, 593–598.
Raj, B., Wagner, D.E., McKenna, A., Pandey, S., Klein, A.M., Shendure, J.,
Gagnon, J.A., and Schier, A.F. (2018). Simultaneous single-cell proﬁling of lin-
eages and cell types in the vertebrate brain. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 442–450.
Developmental Cell 47, November 5, 2018
279
Developmental Cell
Perspective

Ramachandran, R., Reiﬂer, A., Wan, J., and Goldman, D. (2012). Application of
Cre-loxP recombination for lineage tracing of adult zebraﬁsh retinal stem cells.
Methods Mol. Biol. 884, 129–140.
Ritsma, L., Ellenbroek, S.I.J., Zomer, A., Snippert, H.J., de Sauvage, F.J., Si-
mons, B.D., Clevers, H., and van Rheenen, J. (2014). Intestinal crypt homeo-
stasis revealed at single-stem-cell level by in vivo live imaging. Nature 507,
362–365.
Rodriguez-Fraticelli, A.E., Wolock, S.L., Weinreb, C.S., Panero, R., Patel, S.H.,
Jankovic, M., Sun, J., Calogero, R.A., Klein, A.M., and Camargo, F.D. (2018).
Clonal analysis of lineage fate in native haematopoiesis. Nature 553, 212–216.
Rompolas, P., Deschene, E.R., Zito, G., Gonzalez, D.G., Saotome, I., Haber-
man, A.M., and Greco, V. (2012). Live imaging of stem cell and progeny behav-
iour in physiological hair-follicle regeneration. Nature 487, 496–499.
Rompolas, P., Mesa, K.R., and Greco, V. (2013). Spatial organization within a
niche as a determinant of stem-cell fate. Nature 502, 513–518.
Roy, S., Gardiner, D.M., and Bryant, S.V. (2000). Vaccinia as a tool for func-
tional analysis in regenerating limbs: ectopic expression of Shh. Dev. Biol.
218, 199–205.
Sandoval-Guzma´ n, T., Wang, H., Khattak, S., Schuez, M., Roensch, K., Nacu,
E., Tazaki, A., Joven, A., Tanaka, E.M., and Simon, A. (2014). Fundamental dif-
ferences in dedifferentiation and stem cell recruitment during skeletal muscle
regeneration in two salamander species. Cell Stem Cell 14, 174–187.
Sakaue-Sawano, A., Kurokawa, H., Morimura, T., Hanyu, A., Hama, H.,
Osawa, H., Kashiwagi, S., Fukami, K., Miyata, T., Miyoshi, H., et al. (2008).
Visualizing spatiotemporal dynamics of multicellular cell-cycle progression.
Cell 132, 487–498.
Seifert, A.W., Kiama, S.G., Seifert, M.G., Goheen, J.R., Palmer, T.M., and Ma-
den, M. (2012). Skin shedding and tissue regeneration in African spiny mice
(Acomys). Nature 489, 561–565.
Session, A.M., Uno, Y., Kwon, T., Chapman, J.A., Toyoda, A., Takahashi, S.,
Fukui, A., Hikosaka, A., Suzuki, A., Kondo, M., et al. (2016). Genome evolution
in the allotetraploid frog Xenopus laevis. Nature 538, 336–343.
Shamsi, F., Parlato, R., Collombat, P., and Mansouri, A. (2014). A genetic
mouse model for progressive ablation and regeneration of insulin producing
beta-cells. Cell Cycle 13, 3948–3957.
Shoji, W., and Sato-Maeda, M. (2008). Application of heat shock promoter in
transgenic zebraﬁsh. Dev. Growth Differ. 50, 401–406.
Snippert, H.J., van der Flier, L.G., Sato, T., van Es, J.H., van den Born, M.,
Kroon-Veenboer, C., Barker, N., Klein, A.M., van Rheenen, J., Simons, B.D.,
et al. (2010). Intestinal crypt homeostasis results from neutral competition be-
tween symmetrically dividing Lgr5 stem cells. Cell 143, 134–144.
Song, K., Nam, Y.J., Luo, X., Qi, X., Tan, W., Huang, G.N., Acharya, A., Smith,
C.L., Tallquist, M.D., Neilson, E.G., et al. (2012). Heart repair by reprogram-
ming non-myocytes with cardiac transcription factors. Nature 485, 599–604.
Sperry, R.W. (1948). Patterning of central synapses in regeneration of the optic
nerve in teleosts. Physiol. Zool. 21, 351–361.
Streisinger, G., Singer, F., Walker, C., Knauber, D., and Dower, N. (1986).
Segregation analyses and gene-centromere distances in zebraﬁsh. Genetics
112, 311–319.
Streisinger, G., Walker, C., Dower, N., Knauber, D., and Singer, F. (1981). Pro-
duction of clones of homozygous diploid zebra ﬁsh (Brachydanio rerio). Nature
291, 293–296.
Sugimoto, K., Hui, S.P., Sheng, D.Z., and Kikuchi, K. (2017). Dissection of ze-
braﬁsh shha function using site-speciﬁc targeting with a Cre-dependent ge-
netic switch. Elife 6, e24635.
Sugiura, T., Wang, H., Barsacchi, R., Simon, A., and Tanaka, E.M. (2016).
MARCKS-like protein is an initiating molecule in axolotl appendage regenera-
tion. Nature 531, 237–240.
Sun, J., Ramos, A., Chapman, B., Johnnidis, J.B., Le, L., Ho, Y.J., Klein, A.,
Hofmann, O., and Camargo, F.D. (2014). Clonal dynamics of native haemato-
poiesis. Nature 514, 322–327.
Susaki, E.A., Tainaka, K., Perrin, D., Kishino, F., Tawara, T., Watanabe, T.M.,
Yokoyama, C., Onoe, H., Eguchi, M., Yamaguchi, S., et al. (2014). Whole-brain
imaging with single-cell resolution using chemical cocktails and computational
analysis. Cell 157, 726–739.
Tanaka, E.M., Gann, A.A., Gates, P.B., and Brockes, J.P. (1997). Newt myo-
tubes reenter the cell cycle by phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein.
J. Cell Biol. 136, 155–165.
Tanaka, H.V., Ng, N.C., Yang Yu, Z., Casco-Robles, M.M., Maruo, F., Tsonis,
P.A., and Chiba, C. (2016). A developmentally regulated switch from stem cells
to dedifferentiation for limb muscle regeneration in newts. Nat. Commun.
7, 11069.
Tandon, P., Conlon, F., Furlow, J.D., and Horb, M.E. (2017). Expanding the ge-
netic toolkit in Xenopus: approaches and opportunities for human disease
modeling. Dev. Biol. 426, 325–335.
Thorel, F., Ne´ pote, V., Avril, I., Kohno, K., Desgraz, R., Chera, S., and Herrera,
P.L. (2010). Conversion of adult pancreatic alpha-cells to beta-cells after
extreme beta-cell loss. Nature 464, 1149–1154.
Tornini, V.A., Puliaﬁto, A., Slota, L.A., Thompson, J.D., Nachtrab, G., Kaushik,
A.L., Kapsimali, M., Primo, L., Di Talia, S., and Poss, K.D. (2016). Live moni-
toring of blastemal cell contributions during appendage regeneration. Curr.
Biol. 26, 2981–2991.
Vigouroux, A., Oldewurtel, E., Cui, L., Bikard, D., and van Teeffelen, S. (2018).
Tuning dCas9’s ability to block transcription enables robust, noiseless knock-
down of bacterial genes. Mol. Syst. Biol. 14, e7899.
Vihtelic, T.S., and Hyde, D.R. (2000). Light-induced rod and cone cell death
and
regeneration
in
the
adult
albino
zebraﬁsh
(Danio
rerio)
retina.
J. Neurobiol. 44, 289–307.
Voges, H.K., Mills, R.J., Elliott, D.A., Parton, R.G., Porrello, E.R., and Hudson,
J.E. (2017). Development of a human cardiac organoid injury model reveals
innate regenerative potential. Development 144, 1118–1127.
Voss, G.J., Kump, D.K., Walker, J.A., and Voss, S.R. (2013). Variation in sala-
mander tail regeneration is associated with genetic factors that determine tail
morphology. PLoS One 8, e67274.
Vrtı´lek, M., Za´ k, J., Psenicka, M., and Reichard, M. (2018). Extremely rapid
maturation of a wild African annual ﬁsh. Curr. Biol. 28, R822–R824.
Wagner, D.E., Wang, I.E., and Reddien, P.W. (2011). Clonogenic neoblasts are
pluripotent adult stem cells that underlie planarian regeneration. Science 332,
811–816.
Wagner, D.E., Weinreb, C., Collins, Z.M., Briggs, J.A., Megason, S.G., and
Klein, A.M. (2018). Single-cell mapping of gene expression landscapes and
lineage in the zebraﬁsh embryo. Science 360, 981–987.
Wang, J., Cao, J., Dickson, A.L., and Poss, K.D. (2015). Epicardial regenera-
tion is guided by cardiac outﬂow tract and Hedgehog signalling. Nature 522,
226–230.
Wendler, S., Hartmann, N., Hoppe, B., and Englert, C. (2015). Age-dependent
decline in ﬁn regenerative capacity in the short-lived ﬁsh Nothobranchius fur-
zeri. Aging Cell 14, 857–866.
Whitehead, G.G., Makino, S., Lien, C.L., and Keating, M.T. (2005). FGF20 is
essential for initiating zebraﬁsh ﬁn regeneration. Science 310, 1957–1960.
Woodworth, M.B., Girskis, K.M., and Walsh, C.A. (2017). Building a lineage
from single cells: genetic techniques for cell lineage tracking. Nat. Rev. Genet.
18, 230–244.
Yan, Z., Choi, S., Liu, X., Zhang, M., Schageman, J.J., Lee, S.Y., Hart, R., Lin,
L., Thurmond, F.A., and Williams, R.S. (2003). Highly coordinated gene regula-
tion in mouse skeletal muscle regeneration. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 8826–8836.
Yin, L., Maddison, L.A., Li, M., Kara, N., LaFave, M.C., Varshney, G.K., Burgess,
S.M., Patton, J.G., and Chen, W. (2015). Multiplex conditional mutagenesis
using transgenic expression of Cas9 and sgRNAs. Genetics 200, 431–441.
Yun, M.H., Gates, P.B., and Brockes, J.P. (2013). Regulation of p53 is
critical for vertebrate limb regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110,
17392–17397.
Zhou, Q., Brown, J., Kanarek, A., Rajagopal, J., and Melton, D.A. (2008). In vivo
reprogramming of adult pancreatic exocrine cells to beta-cells. Nature 455,
627–632.
280
Developmental Cell 47, November 5, 2018
Developmental Cell
Perspective

===== Mortimer2010_PNAS_AxonGuidance+GrowthRate =====
Axon guidance by growth-rate modulation
Duncan Mortimera,1, Zac Pujica,1, Timothy Vaughana,1, Andrew W. Thompsona, Julia Feldnera, Irina Vettera,
and Geoffrey J. Goodhilla,b,2
aQueensland Brain Institute and bSchool of Mathematics and Physics, University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia
Edited by Charles F. Stevens, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, and approved February 2, 2010 (received for review August 14, 2009)
Guidance of axons by molecular gradients is crucial for wiring up the
developing nervous system. It often is assumed that the unique
signature of such guidance is immediate and biased turning of the
axontiptowardorawayfrom thegradient.However,here weshow
that such turning is not required for guidance. Rather, by a
combination of experimental and computational analyses, we
demonstrate that growth-rate modulation is an alternative mech-
anism for guidance. Furthermore we show that, although both
mechanisms may operate simultaneously, biased turning domi-
nates in steep gradients, whereas growth-rate modulation may
dominate in shallow gradients. These results suggest that biased
axon turning is not the only method by which guidance can occur.
chemotaxis | growth cone | nerve growth factor | neural development |
computational neuroscience
F
or the brain to function correctly, its neurons must be connected
correctly, and wiring problems are known to underlie a number of
nervous system disorders (1, 2). Some of the most important cues
guiding the formation of connections between neurons in the devel-
opingnervoussystemaremoleculargradients(3–10).Torespondtoa
gradient cue, an axon must be able both to make a decision regarding
gradient direction and then to convert that decision into directed
motion (8). Although recent research has addressed the mechanisms
involved in the decision-making step (11), how a decision regarding
gradientdirectionissubsequentlyconvertedintoachangeinbehavior
of the growth cone is largely unknown.
The most obvious mechanism in this regard is immediate and
biased turning, whereby the axon tip is more likely to turn up the
gradient (or down in the case of repulsive factors) each time the
gradient direction is assessed. Such behavior is observed in in vitro
assays that examine the response of axons to steep gradients of
tropic factors in two dimensions (12–17). However, 3D in vitro
assays, which reproduce more closely the conditions of axon growth
in vivo, often fail to show consistent turning of axons. Rather, in
these assays it tends to be the collective growth of a population of
axons that is biased by the gradient (e.g., refs.18–20). Whether
immediate and biased turning of axons in response to gradient sig-
nals occurs in vivo can be hard to assess, because in any speciﬁc
situation axons are likely to respond to a combination of many dif-
ferent types of guidance cue. Here, we show that asymmetric growth
of axons in response to a gradient signal does not require immediate
and biased turning, and we identify an alternative mechanism for
axonal chemotaxis based on growth-rate modulation. Our data
suggest that, although immediate and biased turning and growth-
rate modulation may operate together, the former dominates in
steep gradients, whereas the latter dominates in shallow gradients.
Results
Lack of Neurite Turning for Explants in Gradients. Previous analyses
of neurite outgrowth from explants in 3D collagen gels generally
have not included a quantitative analysis of turning. We therefore
developed an automated method for measuring turning in explant
images using asteerable ridge ﬁlter(21)(Materials and Methods)that
enabled us to label each part of the image objectively as representing
turning up or down the gradient. This identiﬁcation was based on
local information for each small region of the image rather than on
complete axon trajectories, because the high density of neurite out-
growth made it impossible to reconstruct complete trajectories from
our images. From these measurements an overall turning ratio (TR)
was deﬁned for each explant that varied between +1 (all turning up
the gradient) and −1 (all turning down the gradient), with a zero
value representing no net turning (Materials and Methods). We
validatedthismethodbyshowingthat itishighlycorrelatedwithboth
human assessments of turning in real explant images (Fig. S1) and
with explicitly curvature-based measures of turning in simulated
explant images for which complete trajectory information was
available (Fig. S2).
WethenmeasuredhowtheTRvariedwithgradientconditionsina
dataset of ≈2,500 dorsal root ganglion (DRG) explants grown for
48 h in exponentially shaped gradients of nerve growth factor (NGF)
inwhichboththegradientsteepnessandabsoluteconcentrationwere
varied precisely, as described in ref. 11. Fig. 1 shows examples of
explant images and the values of the TRs obtained as a function of
gradient conditions.Alsoshownarethepreviouslydeterminedvalues
oftheguidanceratio(GR),whichcomparestheoverallgrowthupthe
gradientwiththatdownthegradient(11,22)(MaterialsandMethods).
Although some TR values are signiﬁcantly different from the zero-
gradientcondition(TableS1),allareclosetozero,evenwhentheGR
values are strongly positive. Restricting the turning analysis to only a
subregion of each image, such as a narrow strip oriented perpendic-
ulartothegradientthroughthecenterofeachexplant,didnotchange
the TR values signiﬁcantly. Thus, explants can display highly asym-
metric neurite growth without strongly biased turning of neurites.
Asymmetric Outgrowth Is Not Explained by a Purely Trophic Response.
How is this asymmetric growth possible? In common with axon
guidance molecules such as netrin (23) and ephrinA (26), NGF can
have both chemotactic (tropic) and growth-promoting (trophic)
effects on the same neurites. Therefore one potential explanation
for the asymmetric neurite growth we observed in our explants is
that the growth of neurites on the side of the explant facing up the
gradient is differentially promoted simply because there is more
NGF on the up-gradient side. To eliminate this possibility, we
exploited the precise and reproducible control over gradient con-
ditions afforded by the collagen gel pump assay (11, 22) and cul-
tured a zigzag pattern of DRG explants in an NGF gradient (Fig.
2A). The trophic hypothesis, i.e., that the only inﬂuence on the
movement of a growth cone is the absolute concentration of ligand
it experiences at each moment, independent of how that concen-
tration changes with space or time, predicts that total neurite
growth from each side of each explant should be independent of
whether that side is facing up or down the gradient and will be
determined purely by the ligand concentration at each position
(shown schematically in Fig. 2B). In contrast, the tropic hypothesis
Author contributions: G.J.G. designed research; D.M., Z.P., T.V., A.W.T., J.F., and I.V.
performed research; T.V. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; D.M., Z.P., A.W.T.,
J.F., and I.V. analyzed data; and D.M., Z.P., T.V., and G.J.G. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1D.M., Z.P., and T.V. contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: g.goodhill@uq.edu.au.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/
0909254107/DCSupplemental.
5202–5207
|
PNAS
|
March 16, 2010
|
vol. 107
|
no. 11
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0909254107
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 175.122.76.13 on September 11, 2022 from IP address 175.122.76.13.

predicts that total neurite growth from each side should depend
strongly on whether the side is facing up or down the gradient but
should be relatively independent of concentration. The amount of
neurite growth observed experimentally (Fig. 2C) was the same for
the explant sides facing up the gradient, even though those sides
were at different concentrations, and this growth was signiﬁcantly
greater than for the explants sides facing down the gradient,
although for half of these downward-facing explant sides the NGF
concentration was higher than for the explant sides facing up the
gradient. These data are consistent with the tropic hypothesis but
are inconsistent with the trophic hypothesis.
Delaying Gradient Application Does Not Produce Turning. A second
possible explanation for biased outgrowth without immediate and
biased turning is that most turning occurs before neurites leave the
explant and thus is invisible to our turning-ratio analysis. To test
this hypothesis, we delayed application of the NGF gradient for up
to 24 h after explant plating to allow the neurites time to emerge
from the explant (for details see ref. 11). We then analyzed the
pattern of neurite turning 48 h after plating. It might be expected
that a gradient applied to already visible neurites initially growing
in an undirected manner would cause an obvious turn. However,
when we analyzed turning in these explants, we found no change in
the TR with time delay, and again the turning response was small in
magnitude (Fig. S3). Thus, initial turning of neurites inside the
explant cannot explain the lack of strong turning after they have
emerged from the explant.
Lack of Turning Is Not Explained by Straightening of Neurites by
Tension. A third possible explanation for the lack of strong
turning in explant images at 48 h is that neurite trajectories were
indeed curved as they grew but subsequently straightened be-
cause of neurite tension (27). To test this hypothesis, we per-
formed time-lapse imaging of neurite growth from explants in
gradients in collagen gels and compared the actual path taken by
the neurite tip over several hours with the ﬁnal trajectory of the
neurite (Fig. S4). There was little difference between the
instantaneous and ﬁnal trajectories, demonstrating that later
straightening of trajectories does not explain the lack of strong
turning seen in our experiments.
If Immediate and Biased Turning Is Present, It Can Be Detected. A
fourth possible explanation is that there is underlying immediate and
biasedturning,butourmethodforquantifyingturningisnotsensitive
enough to detect it. To test this possibility, we analyzed simulated
explant images which we knew contained immediate and biased
turning. We recently have shown that the bias in axonal response
to gradients as a function of gradient parameters is well matched by
a Bayesian model for how growth cones combine noisy receptor-
binding measurements to make a decision regarding gradient
direction (11). However, that model made no commitment as to how
this decision was translated into a change in behavior of the growth
cone. We therefore extended this model by coupling it to a biased
random-walk model of neurite growth. Besides moving forward, at
each timestep each neurite tip made a turn up the gradient with a
probability related to the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) calculated
fromtheBayesianmodel(fordetails,seeMaterialsandMethods).We
used this model to generate artiﬁcial explants with properties of
neurite growth and image noise matched to our experimental data
(Fig. 3A). The GR and TR for these artiﬁcial explants then were
measured using the same n values and SNR conditions used for the
experimental data. The simulated GR curves match well with the
experimental data (compare Figs. 1 and 3B). However, the simu-
lated TR values are much larger than those measured exper-
imentally. Thus, when immediate and biased turning was known to
be present, our method for quantifying turning was able to detect it.
Because we had complete knowledge of the underlying neurite
trajectories used to generate the simulated explants, we also used
these simulations to show that the TR values are strongly correlated
with a measure explicitly based on curvature (Fig. S2).
Growth-Rate Modulation Explains These Data. Because the model
based purely on immediate and biased turning failed to repro-
duce our data, we considered a different model for how a deci-
sion regarding gradient direction is converted to directed
motion. The immediate and biased model can be imagined as
representing a growth cone making a comparison in ligand
receptor binding between its left and right side and then
immediately turning left or right accordingly. We now imagined
that, instead, the growth cone makes a comparison along its
front-to-back axis and then modulates its speed of growth rela-
tive to the SNR calculated from the Bayesian model (Materials
and Methods). At each timestep the growth cone also turns slightly,
but the direction of this turn is assumed to be random and unrelated
to the gradient direction. Artiﬁcial explants grown with this mech-
anism under the same conditions as those used experimentally (Fig.
3C) appear visually similar to explants simulated with the explicit
turning model (Fig. 3A). However, applying the GR and TR
analyses as before revealed that both the GR and the TR now
match the experimental data much more closely (Fig. 3D). In par-
ticular, even for gradient conditions for which explants show a large
GR value, the TR value is small. A more direct comparison of the
GR and TR values produced experimentally with those produced
from the two different models conﬁrms that the experimental data
match the growth-rate modulation much more closely than the
turning model (Fig. 3E). Although in the growth-rate model the
Fig. 1.
DRG neurites show little average turning in gradients which produce
strongly biased outgrowth. (A) Example of DRG explants grown in precisely
controlled gradients for 48 h (stained with β3-tubulin), and corresponding
TR values. NGF gradient increased upwards in each case. Images at left
and upper right are representative and have low turning ratios. The image
at lower right is an atypical case with a very high turning ratio. (Scale bar,
500 μm.) (B) The y axis refers to the values of both the GR and TR. Bright lines
show TRs as the background NGF concentration varies; different colors
represent the different gradient slopes (deﬁned as fractional change across
10 μm) as shown in the key. Shadowed lines show the previously determined
corresponding GRs (11). Some TRs are signiﬁcantly different from the no-
gradient control condition (for n and P values, see Table S1), but all TRs are
small compared with the GRs. At high NGF concentrations there is strong
fasciculation and low neurite outgrowth (11), and thus both the GR and TR
data become noisier and less reliable. Error bars are SEMs.
Mortimer et al.
PNAS
|
March 16, 2010
|
vol. 107
|
no. 11
|
5203
NEUROSCIENCE
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 175.122.76.13 on September 11, 2022 from IP address 175.122.76.13.

steps up the gradient tend to be slightly longer than the steps down
the gradient, it nonetheless is equally probable that a neurite seg-
ment chosen at random will be curving away from the gradient as
curving toward it. This fact is illustrated by simulation in Fig. 3F and
is proved mathematically in the SI Text (see also Figs. S5 and S6).
Which Guidance Strategy Dominates Depends on the Steepness of the
Gradient. The above experimental and computational results sug-
gest that neurites respond to shallow gradients in 3D collagen gels
primarily by varying their growth rate rather than by immediate and
biased turning. This ﬁnding contrasts with the strong turning re-
Fig. 2.
Trophism does not explain biased outgrowth in
a gradient. Culture dishes (35 mm), each containing a
zigzag pattern of six DRG explants, were printed with an
NGF gradient of 0.3% fractional change across 10
microns, with an absolute concentration of 0.3 nM at the
line equidistant between the two rows of explants. (A)
Reconstruction of DRG explants in one plate (NGF gra-
dient increasing upwards). (Scale bar, 1 mm.) The yellow
dashed line marks the center of the zigzag pattern, and
the gray dashed lines mark the approximate centers of
the two sets of explants. On the left, the shape of the
NGF
gradient
is
shown
schematically,
along
with
accompanying estimates of the actual concentration
present at different positions in this gradient. On the
right, the red and green numbers label the groups of
neurites whose outgrowth are compared. (B) If the
amount of outgrowth from each side of an explant is
purely a function of absolute concentration, then the
amount of outgrowth should be ordered as group 1 >
group 2 > group 3 > group 4 (shown schematically),
because the average concentration decreases between
each of these regions. On the other hand, if the amount
of outgrowth is determined by the direction of the gradient vector, the ordering should be group 1 ≈group 3 > group 2 ≈group 4; that is, growth should
depend more on the direction of neurite growth relative to the gradient than on absolute concentration. (C) Measured outgrowth for the four groups of
neurites labeled in A. Group 1 has the same growth as group 3, group 2 has the same growth as group 4, and group 2 has signiﬁcantly lower outgrowth than
group 3 despite being at a slightly higher NGF concentration, ruling out the trophic hypothesis. n = 93–95 per group, averaged over three separate
experiments. P values shown are from a t test. The two green bars are not signiﬁcantly different, nor are the two red bars.
Fig. 3.
A computational model of growth-rate mod-
ulation matches the data better than a model of
turning. (A) Examples of explants produced by the
immediate and biased turning model. (B) GR (shad-
owed lines) and TR (bright lines) values produced by
the immediate and biased turning model. When this
ﬁgure is compared with Fig. 1, it can be seen that the
GR values match well, but the TR values in the model
are much larger than those seen experimentally. (C)
Examples of explants produced by the growth-rate
modulation model. (D) GR and TR values produced by
the growth-rate modulation model. Both the GR and
TR values match the experimental data (Fig. 1). (E)
Correlation between GR and TR values for the exper-
imental data and the two models, conﬁrming that the
growth-rate modulation model ﬁts the experimental
data much more closely than does the immediate and
biased turning model. There is one point of each color
for each of the 38 combinations of gradient steepness
and concentration investigated experimentally. (F)
Simulated explants generated using the growth-rate
modulation mechanism fail to show signiﬁcantly more
neurites curving in the direction of the gradient than
away from it, even at very long timescales (100 times
longer than those used in panels A and C). Each point
shows mean ± SEM, n = 50 explants; curvature ratio is
deﬁned in Fig. S2).
5204
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0909254107
Mortimer et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 175.122.76.13 on September 11, 2022 from IP address 175.122.76.13.

sponse observed for neurites on 2D substrates with steep gradients
(12–17). But do neurites in steep gradients also modulate their
growth rate depending on whether they are growing up or down the
gradient? First we conﬁrmed that, as observed for other types of
neurons (14), superior cervical ganglion (SCG) neurites respond to
gradientsofNGFintheconventionalpipetteorgrowthconeturning
assay by turning (Fig. 4 A and B). We then adapted this assay to
compare the growth rate of individual neurites when the pipette was
placed directlyinfront ofthegrowthcone withthegrowthrate when
the pipette was placed directly behind the growth cone (Materials
and Methods). Growth rates were indistinguishable in the two con-
ditions (Fig. 4 C and D), suggesting that the strategy of growth-rate
modulation for chemotaxis observed in shallow gradients in 3D
collagen gels does not generalize to the steep gradients of the 2D
pipette assay.
Finally, we asked whether the difference in chemotactic strategy is
caused by the parameters of the gradient or the nature of the sub-
strate. We did so by developing a version of the pipette assay in a 3D
collagen gel, thus changing the gradient parameters without chang-
ing the substrate (Materials and Methods). In this case, turning of
SCGneuritestowardthepipettewasobserved(Fig.4EandF).Thus,
gradient steepness, rather than the nature of the substrate, deter-
mines the chemotactic strategy used.
Discussion
It often is assumed that the only way to determine unambiguously if a
growth cone has detected a gradient is for the growth cone to display
immediate and biased turning in response to that gradient. We have
shown that growth-rate modulation is an alternative read-out mech-
anism that can be important under certain circumstances. Thus,
although immediate and biased turning certainly suggests guidance, a
lack of such turning does not deﬁnitively imply no guidance. It has
been discussed previously that axons sometimes grow further when
movingstraightupagradientthanwhenmovingeitherstraightdowna
gradient or on a uniform concentration (24–26). Our growth-rate
modulation model is consistent with these proposals but is expressed
more precisely as a computational model of axon movement in two
dimensions. Furthermore, we have shown that this model is quanti-
tatively consistent with the behavior of axons grown under precisely
controlled gradient conditions.
Why might gradient steepness be a key factor in determining
which read-out mechanism dominates? We suggest a crucial issue
is that immediate turning requires comparing concentrations be-
tween the left- and right-hand sides of the growth cone, a distance
that is generally only a few microns. On this scale the differences in
receptor binding induced by a shallow ligand gradient can be ex-
tremely small, particularly for low ligand concentrations (11).
Thus, under these circumstances, a decision to turn left or right will
be very unreliable. In contrast, a growth-rate modulation method
potentially allows comparisons of concentrations over much lon-
ger distances. The comparison could be between the growth cone
and regions of the axon shaft many tens of microns behind the
growth cone, or indeed between the growth cone and the soma
itself. This increase in distance relative to the width of the growth
cone dramatically increases the difference in concentration to be
detected and thus the ﬁdelity of the guidance decision. However,
in this case, a read-out in terms of immediate and biased turning is
no longer possible, leaving a change in growth rate as the obvious
alternative. For the measurements we have made so far, it is not
possible to determine this distance, because it is combined with
other unknown biological variables in the proportionality constant
in our expression governing how response varies with gradient
parameters [Eq. 2] (Materials and Methods).
Immediate and biased turning and growth-rate modulation need
notbeexclusivemechanisms.ThefactthatasmallbutsigniﬁcantTR
is seen in our explant data is consistent with the idea that growth
cones still are attempting to turn in response to the gradient but do
so very unreliably, as expected from the very small change in con-
centration across their width. Growth-rate modulation then is the
dominant mechanism. In contrast, in the pipette assay, where the
gradient is highly localized, the difference in concentration between
the growth cone and more distal parts of the axon is independent of
gradient direction, and so no growth-rate modulation would be
expected. A similar transition between gradient-detection strategies
could apply as growth cone size varies with species and/or assay
conditions. For large growth cones, biased turning may be a sufﬁ-
ciently reliable response, whereas for small growth cones growth-
rate modulation may become more effective. Overall, we suggest
that immediate and biased turning and growth-rate modulation
work together to guide axons to their targets, but we predict that the
relative importance of each mechanism in any particular case will be
determined by the parameters of the gradient.
Materials and Methods
Printing Assay. DRGs from P2 rat pups were dissected into ice-cold Leibovitz’s
medium, trimmed of excess axonal tissue, and digested with 0.25% trypsin for
Fig. 4.
Turning dominates growth-rate modulation in steep gradients. (A
and B) Conﬁrmation that rat SCG neurites turn in response to gradients of NGF
in the pipette assay. (A) Traces of individual neurite trajectories in the control
(PBS gradient) condition. Arrow shows direction of the pipette (Materials and
Methods). n = 12, mean turning angle =−2.1°. (B) Neurite traces for 10 μM NGF
in the pipette. n = 10, mean turning angle = 15.6°. The NGF and control con-
ditions are signiﬁcantly different (P = 0.003, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test). (C and
D) Comparison of neurite growth rates with the pipette directly in front of the
growth cone and with the pipette directly behind the growth cone. (C) Paired
data (n = 9): each line shows the growth rates for the same neurite growing up
or growing down the gradient. “First” and “second” refer to the order in
which the gradients were presented to each axon. Gradient direction has no
effect on growth rate (P = 0.92, paired t test). (D) Overall comparison of growth
rates (unpaired data, n = 11 up, 14 down, P = 0.36, unpaired t test). (E and F)
SCG neurites turn in NGF gradients produced from a pipette in 3D collagen. (E)
PBS control. n = 10, mean turning angle = −6.8 ± 6.2° (not statistically different
from zero, P = 0.3, one-sample t test). (F) NGF (10 μM) in the pipette. n = 18,
mean turning angle = 10.3° (mean is statistically different from zero, P = 0.04,
one-sample t test). The distributions of E and F are signiﬁcantly different (P =
0.01, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.)
Mortimer et al.
PNAS
|
March 16, 2010
|
vol. 107
|
no. 11
|
5205
NEUROSCIENCE
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 175.122.76.13 on September 11, 2022 from IP address 175.122.76.13.

10 min. DRGs then were embedded in collagen, and an NGF gradient was
printed as described elsewhere (11, 22). Brieﬂy, 750 μL of 0.2% type I rat tail
collagen was allowed to set in a 35-mm Petri dish. Six DRGs then were
embedded in 750 μL of collagen which overlaid the ﬁrst layer. A Nanoplotter
(Gesim) then was used to print gradients of NGF of varying steepness. For the
zigzag experiment, the DRGs were positioned on either side of a line at which
the NGF concentration was 0.3 nM and steepness was 0.3% across 10 μm (Fig.
2A). After 2 days incubation at 37 °C and 5% CO2, the DRGs were immunos-
tained for β3-tubulin and photographed using ApoTome imaging with a Zeiss
Z1 microscope.
Measurement of Neurite Outgrowth and Explant Asymmetry. Outgrowth
asymmetry was quantiﬁed using the guidance ratio GR = (H −L)/(H + L), H and
L being the number of neurite pixels on the high and low ligand concen-
tration sides of the explant, respectively (11). Total outgrowth was calcu-
lated as the total number of neurite pixels (i.e., H + L) divided by E, the
number of pixels in the explant. For the zigzag experiment, outgrowth on
each side was calculated as H/E and L/E, respectively.
Time-Lapse Imaging of DRG Neurites. DRGs were subjected to the printing
assay as described above (0.3%/0.3 nM gradient of NGF). After 24 h of growth
in an incubator at 37 °C and 5% CO2, neurites were photographed using
phase-contrast microscopy with a 20× objective on a Zeiss Z1 microscope at
10-min intervals for up to 6 h. The position of the growth cone at each
interval then was marked using ImageJ (http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/download.
html) and compared with the trace of the resulting axon.
Quantiﬁcation of Neurite Turning. Because of the high density of neurite
outgrowthfromourexplants,itwasnotpossibletoreconstructindividualneurite
trajectories reliably. Thus, to each pixel we assigned a turning value corre-
sponding to a neurite in the micrograph and used these values directly. In par-
ticular, a steerable ridge ﬁlter (21, 28) was applied to the nonexplant region of
image to identify pixels corresponding to neurites and to estimate the ori-
entation angle of the associated neurite (for more details, see SI Text). For each
neurite pixel we determined the difference vector of smallest magnitude
between each of the two opposing unit vectors lying parallel to the neurite
orientation angle and the unit vector pointing from the center of the explant to
the neurite pixel. We classiﬁed each neurite pixel as turning up or down the
gradient according to the sign of the component of this vector pointing up the
ligand gradient (Fig. S1A). The turning ratio of the explant then was calculated
by TR = (U −D)/(U + D), U and D being the number of pixels turning up-gradient
and down-gradient, respectively.
To conﬁrm that this measure was consistent with human estimates of the
degree of turning in explant images, seven observers assigned each member of a
selected corpus of 188 explant images an integer score ranging from −2 (strong
downward turning) to +2 (strong upward turning), with zero representing no
turning. There is good correlation between the two sets of values (Fig. S1B).
Furthermore, we conﬁrmed that for simulated explants in which substantial
turning is present, the turning ratio measure is highly correlated with a measure
basedexplicitlyonthecurvatureofindividualneuritetrajectories(Figs.S2andS5).
Explant Simulations. Simulating a single explant involved three steps: (i) gen-
erating a mock explant body and seeding it with neurite outgrowth sites, (ii)
generating neurite trajectories according to the growth models of interest, and
(iii) compositing the explant body with the neurite trajectories (with a degree of
imaging noise) to generate a ﬁnal simulated explant image. For details of the
ﬁrst and third steps, see SI Text.
Two distinct mechanisms were used for generating neurite trajectories. The
turning mechanism assumes that neurites respond to an imposed gradient by
making small turns in their direction of growth, biased in the direction of the
gradient (although subject torandom noise),and growth rateremains constant.
Thegrowth-ratemechanismassumesthatrateofneuritegrowthismodulatedby
the gradient, and the probability of turning up or down the gradient remains
unbiased. We brieﬂy summarize these mechanisms below. To mimic the
experimental condition that neurites growing in a 3D medium tend to move in
and out of the plane of focus, we simulated the z-coordinate of the neurite
trajectory with a persistent random walk uncoupled to the x and y coordinates.
Turning Mechanism. At each timestep, the neurite moves a set distance in the
direction it is currently heading. It then makes a small turn of magnitude δθ =
π/30 to the left or right. The presence of the gradient biases this choice, and
we modeled this bias by assuming that the growth cone detects the change
in concentration across its width, with a measurement whose SNR is related
to the background concentration γ, gradient steepness μ, gradient direction
θNGF, and the growth cone current direction θ according to
SNR ∝μ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
γ
ð1 þ γÞ3
s
sin

θ −θNGF

:
[1]
(see ref. 11). In other words, to decide whether the growth cone turns left or
right, we sampled from a Gaussian distribution N ðSNR; 1Þ with mean given
by Eq. 1 and variance 1. If the sign of this quantity was positive, the growth
cone turned right, and if it was negative, the growth cone turned left.
Growth-Rate Mechanism. In the growth-rate mechanism, at each timestep the
neurite moves a variable distance in the direction it is currently heading. It
then makes a small turn δθ = π/30 to the right or left, selected in an unbiased
manner. The gradient inﬂuences the neurite trajectory only through mod-
ulation of its growth rate. As with the turning mechanism, the growth rate is
modulated in proportion to a measurement, with the SNR related to the
gradient parameters., In this case, however, the measurement is made along
the length of the growth cone, rather than across its width:
SNR ∝μ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
γ
ð1 þ γÞ3
s
cos

θ −θNGF

:
[2]
The length of the step taken then is determined by multiplying the average
step size by a factor 1 þ k∗N ðSNR; 1Þ, where k was set empirically to 0.5. The
distance over which the comparison is made is encoded by μ, the fractional
change in concentration over that distance. Thus, for example, the SNR will
be much larger if the comparison is between the growth cone and the soma
rather than just across the spatial extent of the growth cone.
Pipette Assay in 2D. SCGs were isolated by microdissection from postnatal day
1 (P1)–P3 Wistar rat pups (29). The SCGs were cut into thirds and incubated in
Hanks’ solution containing 0.25% trypsin at 37 °C for 20 min and then were
gently triturated through ﬂamed-polished Pasteur pipettes for 10 min to
dissociate individual cells. The cells were plated in Opti-MEM solution con-
taining 10 μg/mL laminin and 0.2 nM NGF on 35-mm Petri dishes and incu-
bated overnight at 37 °C.
Theassayswerecarriedoutonaheatedmicroscopestage(FryerCo.)at37°Cto
maintain the neurons at a native, biologically relevant temperature. Growth
cones with a straight trailing axon of more than 20 μm of were selected for the
assay. Gradients were generated using the pulsatile ejection method reported
previously (12, 30). Brieﬂy, a PV820 Pneumatic PicoPump (World Precision
Instruments) and purpose-built electronic pulse stimulator was used to create a
pressure of 5 psi with an electronically gated pulsatile frequency of 2 Hz and
pulse duration of 50 ms. The NGF solution was applied to the axon through a
micropipette with an average tip diameter of 1.3 μm (glass capillary pulled by a
micropipette puller; Sutter Instrument) at a distance of 100 μm away from the
growth cone. For Fig. 4 A and B, the pipette was positioned at 45° to the initial
direction of growth of the neurite tip. For Fig. 4 C and D, the pipette was posi-
tioned at 0° (“in front”) or 180° (“behind”) to the initial direction of growth of
the neurite tip. To monitor the chemical gradient produced, 70-kDa dextran
labeled with ﬂuorescent tetramethylrhodamine (Molecular Probes Inc) was
added to the pipette solution.
A layer of prewarmed mineral oil was added gently to the top of the
culture medium before assaying to prevent atmospheric exchange lowering
the pH and to reduce evaporation. Images of the growing axon were taken
using the 20× objective of a Nikon Eclipse TE200 inverted microscope at 60-s
intervals for 1 h using a Q-Imaging camera and Q-Capture Pro software
(Quantitative Imaging , Inc). Images were saved as .avi ﬁles.
CustomMatlabcodewasusedtotracethepathofeachaxonandtocalculate
the turning angle and distance of neurite outgrowth. The pipette location,
initialdirectionofgrowth,andcenterofthegrowthconewereidentiﬁedinthe
ﬁrst frame of the movie, and then the center of the growth cone was located in
each subsequent frame. The turning angle was deﬁned as the angle between
theoriginaldirectionofgrowthandtheaveragepositionofthegrowthconein
the last ﬁve frames in the trace. Plots tracing the paths of neurite growth for
each condition also were generated automatically. The cumulative distri-
butions of turning angles for each condition were compared statistically using
the two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Only growth cones with more than
15 μm of net growth over the period of the assay were included in the analysis.
Pipette Assay in 3D Collagen. Dissociated SCG neurons were labeled with
pCAGYFPplasmidusinganAmaxanucelofector.Afternucleofection,cellswere
resuspended in 0.2% collagen (as for the printing assay above), and a layer of
collagen ≈100 μm thick was spread onto 35-mm glass-bottomed culture dishes
5206
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0909254107
Mortimer et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 175.122.76.13 on September 11, 2022 from IP address 175.122.76.13.

(MatTek). After gelling, the collagen was overlaid with 2 mL of Opti-MEM
containing 0.3 nM NGF, and cells were grown overnight in a 37 °C, 5% CO2
incubator. Neurites at least 50 μm long were positioned ≈100 μm from a
micropipette ﬁlled with 1 μM NGF placed at 45° to the direction of growth of
the neurite. NGF was ejected as per the 2D assay described above. While the
plate was maintained at 37 °C and with a 5% CO2 atmosphere, a 40-μm con-
focal z-stack (with a 4-μm interslice spacing) was acquired at 1-min intervals for
3 h using a Zeiss 5 Live microscope. Neurites that grew more than 20 μm in the
horizontal plane and less than 20 μm in the vertical plane were analyzed as for
the 2D assay described above using compressed z-stack .avi ﬁles.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank E. Scott, L. Richards, and M. Hilliard for
stimulating discussions and C. Haines for help with the human-scored turning
analysis. Funding comes from an Australian Postgraduate Award (D.M.), Program
Grant RPG0029/2008-C from the Human Frontier Science Program, Discovery
GrantDP0666126fromtheAustralianResearchCouncil,andProjectGrant456003
from the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council.
1. Yaron A, Zheng B (2007) Navigating their way to the clinic: Emerging roles for axon
guidance molecules in neurological disorders and injury. Dev Neurobiol 67:1216–
1231.
2. LinL,LesnickTG,MaraganoreDM,IsacsonO(2009)Axonguidanceandsynapticmaintenance:
Preclinical markers for neurodegenerative disease and therapeutics. Trends Neurosci 32:
142–149.
3. Tessier-Lavigne M, Goodman CS (1996) The molecular biology of axon guidance.
Science 274:1123–1133.
4. Dickson BJ (2002) Molecular mechanisms of axon guidance. Science 298:1959–1964.
5. Guan KL, Rao Y (2003) Signalling mechanisms mediating neuronal responses to
guidance cues. Nat Rev Neurosci 4:941–956.
6. Huber AB, Kolodkin AL, Ginty DD, Cloutier JF (2003) Signaling at the growth cone:
Ligand-receptor complexes and the control of axon growth and guidance. Annu Rev
Neurosci 26:509–563.
7. Plachez C, Richards LJ (2005) Mechanisms of axon guidance in the developing nervous
system. Curr Top Dev Biol 69:267–346.
8. Mortimer D, Fothergill T, Pujic Z, Richards LJ, Goodhill GJ (2008) Growth cone chemotaxis.
Trends Neurosci 31:90–98.
9. Mortimer D, Goodhill GJ (2009) Axonal pathﬁnding. Encylopedia of Neuroscience, ed
Squire LR (Academic, Oxford, UK), Vol 1, pp 1133–1138.
10. Lowery LA, Van Vactor D (2009) The trip of the tip: Understanding the growth cone
machinery. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10:332–343.
11. Mortimer D, et al. (2009) Bayesian model predicts the response of axons to molecular
gradients. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:10296–10301.
12. Lohof AM, Quillan M, Dan Y, Poo M-M (1992) Asymmetric modulation of cytosolic
cAMP activity induces growth cone turning. J Neurosci 12:1253–1261.
13. Zheng JQ, Felder M, Connor JA, Poo M-M (1994) Turning of nerve growth cones
induced by neurotransmitters. Nature 368:140–144.
14. Song HJ, Ming GL, Poo M-M (1997) cAMP-induced switching in turning direction of
nerve growth cones. Nature 388:275–279.
15. Dertinger SK, Jiang X, Li Z, Murthy VN, Whitesides GM (2002) Gradients of substrate-
bound laminin orient axonal speciﬁcation of neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:
12542–12547.
16. Yam PT, Langlois SD, Morin S, Charron F (2009) Sonic hedgehog guides axons through
a noncanonical, Src-family-kinase-dependent signaling pathway. Neuron 62:349–362.
17. Mai J, Fok L, Gao H, Zhang X, Poo M-M (2009) Axon initiation and growth cone turning
on bound protein gradients. J Neurosci 29:7450–7458.
18. Lumsden AGS, Davies AM (1983) Earliest sensory nerve ﬁbres are guided to peripheral
targets by attractants other than nerve growth factor. Nature 306:786–788.
19. Lumsden AG, Davies AM (1986) Chemotropic effect of speciﬁc target epithelium in
the developing mammalian nervous system. Nature 323:538–539.
20. Brose K, et al. (1999) Slit proteins bind Robo receptors and have an evolutionarily
conserved role in repulsive axon guidance. Cell 96:795–806.
21. Meijering E, et al. (2004) Design and validation of a tool for neurite tracing and
analysis in ﬂuorescence microscopy images. Cytometry A 58:167–176.
22. Rosoff WJ, et al. (2004) A new chemotaxis assay shows the extreme sensitivity of
axons to molecular gradients. Nat Neurosci 7:678–682.
23. Seraﬁni T, et al. (1994) The netrins deﬁne a family of axon outgrowth-promoting
proteins homologous to C. elegans UNC-6. Cell 78:409–424.
24. Bagnard D, Thomasset N, Lohrum M, Püschel AW, Bolz J (2000) Spatial distributions of
guidance molecules regulate chemorepulsion and chemoattraction of growth cones.
J Neurosci 20:1030–1035.
25. McLaughlin T, Hindges R, Yates PA, O’Leary DD (2003) Bifunctional action of ephrin-
B1 as a repellent and attractant to control bidirectional branch extension in dorsal-
ventral retinotopic mapping. Development 130:2407–2418.
26. Hansen MJ, Dallal GE, Flanagan JG (2004) Retinal axon response to ephrin-as shows a
graded, concentration-dependent transition from growth promotion to inhibition.
Neuron 42:717–730.
27. Bray D (1979) Mechanical tension produced by nerve cells in tissue culture. J Cell Sci
37:391–410.
28. Freeman WT, Adelson EH (1991) The design and use of steerable ﬁlters. IEEE Trans
Pattern Anal Mach Intell 13:891–906.
29. Higgins D, Lein P, Osterhout D, Johnson MI (1991) Tissue culture of autonomic neurons.
Culturing Nerve Cells, eds Banker G, Goslin K (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA), 1st Ed, pp
177–205.
30. Pujic Z, Giacomantonio CE, Unni D, Rosoff WJ, Goodhill GJ (2008) Analysis of the growth
cone turning assay for studying axon guidance. J Neurosci Methods 170:220–228.
Mortimer et al.
PNAS
|
March 16, 2010
|
vol. 107
|
no. 11
|
5207
NEUROSCIENCE
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 175.122.76.13 on September 11, 2022 from IP address 175.122.76.13.

===== Munoz2015_DevBiol_Xenopus+SCregen+Sox2 =====
Regeneration of Xenopus laevis spinal cord requires
Sox2/3 expressing cells
Rosana Muñoz a, Gabriela Edwards-Faret a, Mauricio Moreno a, Nikole Zuñiga a,
Hollis Cline b, Juan Larraín a,n
a Center for Aging and Regeneration, Millennium Nucleus in Regenerative Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, P. Universidad Católica de Chile,
Alameda 340, Santiago, Chile
b The Dorris Neuroscience Center, Department of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, United States
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 4 November 2014
Received in revised form
6 February 2015
Accepted 11 March 2015
Available online 19 March 2015
Keywords:
Sox2/3
Regeneration
Spinal cord injury
Xenopus
Neurogenesis
a b s t r a c t
Spinal cord regeneration is very inefﬁcient in humans, causing paraplegia and quadriplegia. Studying
model organisms that can regenerate the spinal cord in response to injury could be useful for
understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms that explain why this process fails in humans.
Here, we use Xenopus laevis as a model organism to study spinal cord repair. Histological and functional
analyses showed that larvae at pre-metamorphic stages restore anatomical continuity of the spinal cord
and recover swimming after complete spinal cord transection. These regenerative capabilities decrease
with onset of metamorphosis. The ability to study regenerative and non-regenerative stages in Xenopus
laevis makes it a unique model system to study regeneration. We studied the response of Sox2/3
expressing cells to spinal cord injury and their function in the regenerative process. We found that cells
expressing Sox2 and/or Sox3 are present in the ventricular zone of regenerative animals and decrease in
non-regenerative froglets. Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) experiments and in vivo time-lapse imaging
studies using green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) expression driven by the Sox3 promoter showed a rapid,
transient and massive proliferation of Sox2/3þ cells in response to injury in the regenerative stages. The
in vivo imaging also demonstrated that Sox2/3þ neural progenitor cells generate neurons in response to
injury. In contrast, these cells showed a delayed and very limited response in non-regenerative froglets.
Sox2 knockdown and overexpression of a dominant negative form of Sox2 disrupts locomotor and
anatomical-histological recovery. We also found that neurogenesis markers increase in response to
injury in regenerative but not in non-regenerative animals. We conclude that Sox2 is necessary for spinal
cord regeneration and suggest a model whereby spinal cord injury activates proliferation of Sox2/3
expressing cells and their differentiation into neurons, a mechanism that is lost in non-regenerative
froglets.
& 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Introduction
In mammals, including humans, spinal cord injury (SCI) results
in loss of motor and/or sensory function below the level of the
injury, leading to paraplegia and quadriplegia. Approximately
130,000 individuals/year have an acute SCI, joining a total of
2.5 million patients living with chronic paralysis (reviewed in
Thuret et al., 2006; Barnabé-Heider and Frisén 2008). SCI results in
a massive loss of neurons, oligodendrocytes and astrocytes and
almost no tissue regeneration or functional recovery is observed
(reviewed in Tuszynski and Steward, 2012; Sabelström et al.,
2013). Several therapies tested in clinical settings have had only
limited effects on functional recovery indicating that further
understanding of the basic mechanisms underlying regeneration
is required (reviewed in Tetzlaff et al., 2011).
Unlike mammals, teleost ﬁsh, amphibians such as adult uro-
deles (e.g. newts) and anuran larvae (e.g. Xenopus) can achieve
functional recovery after spinal cord transection (Filoni et al., 1984;
Becker et al., 1997; Tanaka and Ferretti, 2009; Díaz-Quiroz and
Echeverri, 2013; Lee-Liu et al., 2013). In mammals, regeneration
and tissue repair are restricted to the early stages of life and are
progressively lost during development (reviewed in Ferretti et al.,
2003; Godwin, 2014). Anuran amphibians such as Xenopus laevis
represent an interesting case of stage-dependent spinal cord
regeneration. Histological studies have shown that X. laevis larvae
before or at the beginning of metamorphosis (stage 50–54) have
strong regenerative capabilities, which are no longer present in
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/developmentalbiology
Developmental Biology
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.03.009
0012-1606/& 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
n Corresponding author at: Faculty of Biological Sciences, P. Universidad Católica
de Chile, Alameda 340, Santiago 8331150, Chile. Fax: þ562 686 2824.
E-mail address: jlarrain@bio.puc.cl (J. Larraín).
Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 229–243

post-metamorphic stage 66 froglets (Sims, 1962; Forehand and Farel,
1982; Filoni et al., 1984; Beattie et al., 1990; Gibbs et al., 2011; Gaete
et al., 2012). Nevertheless, no detailed characterization of how these
animals respond to injury nor a method to measure functional
recovery has been reported and a comparison between the cellular
and genetic mechanisms involved in spinal cord regeneration during
these two different stages is largely incomplete.
The presence of regenerative and non-regenerative stages, its
external development, its robustness for experimental manipula-
tions, the easy generation of hundreds of larvae and froglets together
with the recent advances in genomics and genetics makes Xenopus
laevis a unique model organism to study regenerative biology
(reviewed in Harland and Grainger, 2011). We recently performed a
transcriptome-wide proﬁle analysis comparing the response to injury
between regenerative and non-regenerative stages, and demon-
strated that at each stage a very different gene repertoire is deployed
in response to injury (Lee-Liu et al., 2014). Among other gene
ontology groups we have found that neurogenic genes respond
differentially between these two stages suggesting that activation
of neural stem and progenitor cells and their differentiation into
neurons could play an important role in spinal cord regeneration.
Sox2 and Sox3 are members of the SoxB1 family of SRY-related
transcription factors. Sox2 is expressed in early stages in the devel-
oping nervous system, in neural stem and progenitor cells and in
most epidermal and ectodermal stem cells (Kamachi and Kondoh,
2013; Sarkar and Hochedlinger, 2013). Sox2 also plays a key role in
early development, nervous system development, pluripotency of
stem cell biology, reprogramming, adult neurogenesis and tissue
homeostasis (Avilion et al., 2003; Ellis et al., 2004; Ferri et al., 2004;
Masui et al., 2007; Pevny and Nicolis, 2010; Arnold et al., 2011;
Kamachi and Kondoh, 2013; Thomson et al., 2011). Sox3 is also
expressed in ﬁsh, frog and chick throughout the ectoderm before
neural induction, and is then limited to the neuroectoderm (Brunelli
et al., 2003; Koyano et al., 1997; Okuda et al., 2006; Rex et al., 1997;
Rogers et al., 2008). Together, Sox3 and Sox2 are required for the
maintenance of a neural stem and progenitor cell pool and proper
development of the nervous system (Bylund et al., 2003; Sandberg
et al., 2005; Mizuseki et al., 1998; Rogers et al., 2009). We and others
have recently demonstrated that Sox2þ cells are also necessary for
spinal cord regeneration after tail amputation in X. laevis and axolotl
(Gaete et al., 2012; Fei et al., 2014).
Here we aimed to further characterize X. laevis to study SCI and to
examine the role of Sox2/3 expressing cells in spinal cord regenera-
tion. We provide a detailed histological characterization of the
response to spinal cord transection at different stages before and
during metamorphosis. We adapt a test to measure swimming as an
indicator of functional restoration, allowing its comparative analysis
with anatomical and histological recovery. We used immunoﬂuores-
cence in ﬁxed tissue and perform studies in live animals to show that
Sox2/3 expressing cells are present in the ventricular layer of the
spinal cord throughout metamorphosis, albeit with decreasing levels
of Sox2/3 protein and the number of cells expressing these genes. In
response to SCI, a massive and rapid activation of Sox2/3 expressing
cells occurs in regenerative animals. In contrast, a very slow and
partial activation of these cells is observed in non-regenerative
animals. Our functional studies using morpholino knockdown and
a dominant-negative Sox2 transgenic line demonstrate that the
activation of Sox2/3 expressing cells is necessary for regeneration.
Materials and methods
Growth and manipulation of Xenopus laevis
Frogs obtained from Nasco, were subjected to in vitro fertiliza-
tion and cultured as previously described (Gaete et al., 2012) until
they achieved Nieuwkoop and Faber stages 49 to 54 for regen-
erative stages (R-stages), and stage 56 to 66 for non-regenerative
stages (NR-stages). All animal procedures were approved by the
Committee on Bioethics and Biosafety from the Faculty of Biolo-
gical Sciences, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile. For spinal
cord transection, tadpoles and froglets were operated as described
(Gaete et al., 2012; Lee-Liu et al., 2014).
Hematoxylin and eosin staining
Histological analyses were performed in parafﬁn embedded
sections. For this, animals were ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde
(PFA). Tissue was delimited and dehydrated in methanol solutions
of increasing concentration (25 to 100%), followed by isopropanol
and
parafﬁn
embedding.
10 mm
longitudinal
sections
were
obtained and placed in silanized slides. For hematoxylin and eosin
staining, slides were deparafﬁnized with xylene followed by
dehydration in ethanol solutions (100% to 50%), after which slides
were incubated for 2 min in hematoxylin, subsequent ethanol
solutions and counter stained in eosin for 30 s. These were
followed by washes in ethanol and xylene. A coverslip was placed
on the slide and sealed with entellan mounting medium.
In situ hybridization and immunoﬂuorescence
Animals were ﬁxed in 4% PFA for 2 h at room temperature or
overnight at 4 1C. Delimited tissue was processed for cryosections
by embedding in sucrose solutions of increasing concentrations
(5–10–20%), followed by optimal cutting temperature compound
(OCT), frozen in liquid nitrogen and sectioned at 10 μm. Samples
were mounted on silanized slides.
In situ hybridization of sections was performed as described
(Lemaire and Gurdon, 1994; Sive et al., 2000), with minor
modiﬁcations: cryosections were pre-heated on a heating plate
at 65 1C overnight before starting the protocol. Sections were
incubated with proteinase K for 20 min. The neuroD and neuro-
genin3 probes were used at 1:200. Anti-digoxigenin AP Fab
fragment was used (1:10000, Roche, 11093274910).
To perform immunoﬂuoresence, samples were permeabilized
in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)þ0.2% Triton X-100 (PBST),
blocked for 30 min in PBSTþ10% goat serum, incubated with
primary antibody overnight, and secondary antibodies for 2 h at
room temperature in the same blocking solution, washed 3 times
for 10 min after each antibody incubation with PBST, and followed
by DNA staining and mounting with vectashield (Vector Labora-
tories, H-1000). For DNA staining, sections were incubated for
20 min in TOTO3 (1:1,000, Molecular Probes, T3604) in 1X PBS at
room
temperature. Antibodies
use in
this study are rabbit
polyclonal anti-Sox2 (1:200, Cell Signalling Technology, 2748S),
mouse anti-Sox2 (1:200, Cell Signaling Technology, 4900S), mouse
monoclonal anti-acetylated tubulin (1:500, Sigma, T7451), anti-
Doublecortin (Dcx, 1:500, Cell Signaling Technology, 4604S),
AlexaFluor 488 or 555 (1:500) as a secondary antibody. For
isolation and observation of the complete spinal cord (ﬂat mount),
spinal cords were dissected and immunoﬂuorescence was per-
formed as described above, except that 0.2% was replaced with 1%
PBS/Triton X100.
Proliferation assay
For proliferation assays, the thymidine analogue bromodeoxyur-
idine (BrdU) was added to the culture medium (0.1X Barth) to a
ﬁnal concentration of 400 μM for 16 h (Fig. 4) or 4 h (Fig. S3).
Double labeling for Sox2 and BrdU was performed as descri
bed (Yoshino and Tochinai, 2004). Mouse monoclonal anti-BrdU
was used (1:50, Roche, 11170376001). In experiments with the
R. Muñoz et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 229–243
230

thymidine analogue chlorodeoxyuridine (CldU, MP Biomedicals,
LLC, 105478), tadpoles were incubated with 3.8 mM CldU in 0.1X
Barth for 4 h after electroporation with X. Tropicalis Sox3 promoter
driving GFP (Sox3: GFP). Spinal cords were dissected, rinsed,
embedded in gelatin and cut into 30 mm sagittal sections using a
vibratome. For CldU labeling, spinal cord sections were blocked in
10% goat serum in PBST for 1 h, then incubated with rabbit anti-GFP
(1:500, Chemicon, AB3080) for 2 h, rinsed in PBST, and treated with
2 N HCl for 1 h at 37 1C, rinsed in PBST and blocked again in 10%
goat serum in PBST for 1 h before incubating overnight at 4 1C with
rat anti-CldU (1:400, OBT0030G). The CldU signal was enhanced
with biotin tagged goat anti-Rat secondary antibody (1:500, Jackson
ImmunoResearch) followed by detection with streptavidin-Alexa
Fluor 546 (1:500, Invitrogen, S11225). The sections were mounted
and imaged using confocal microscopy.
Spinal cord electroporation
Stage 50 tadpoles were anesthetized in 0.02% ethyl 3-amino
benzoate methanesulfonate (MS222), immobilized on a Sylgard elas-
tomer platform (Dow Corning, Wiesbaden, Germany) and injected 5 or
10 times with 1 mM morpholinos (4 nl/injection) in the ependymal
zone of the spinal cord using a pulled glass capillary. Morpholinos
were electroporated into the spinal cord by applying ﬁve 40 V pulses
(pulse length: 50 ms, frequency: 300 pps) in each polarity, across the
back with homemade platinum electrodes, using a SD9 Stimulator
(Grass Tele-factor, USA) (Echeverri and Tanaka, 2003). Animals were
transected and allowed to recover in 0.1X Barth containing antibiotics.
DNA electroporation and in vivo 2 photon imaging
Albino stage 50 animals were anesthetized in 0.02% MS222 and
the plasmid Sox3pXt-GFP (4 mg/ml) was injected with a glass
capillary into the central channel of the spinal cord. Voltage pulses
were applied with a Grass SD9 stimulator across the back using
platinum electrodes (5 pulses of 35 V in each polarity). The next
day or the second day after electroporation, animals were
screened and anesthetized in 0.01% MS222 for in vivo imaging
once a day over the next 10 days by 2 photon microscopy
(Javaherian and Cline, 2005; Bestman et al. 2012). Tadpoles were
placed in a custom-built chamber with the coverslip directly on
the surface of their backs.
Spinal cord isolation
Spinal cord samples were dissected from tadpoles and froglets
at 1, 2 or 6 days post-injury (dpt) or days post-sham operation
(dps). In tadpoles, this segment went from the start of the spinal
cord including the lesion site up to the middle of the tail
(approximately of 9 mm long). In froglets we isolated the segment
from the hindbrain, including the gap area, to the end of the spinal
cord (approximate of 3 mm long). For RT-qPCR we isolated a
fragment from the midpoint of the transection site (Lee-Liu
et al., 2014).
RT-qPCR and Western blot
Total RNA was obtained from dissected spinal cord samples and
analyzed by RT-qPCR as described (Lee-Liu et al., 2014). For
western blotting spinal cords from stages 50 (n¼10), 58 (n¼5)
and 66 (n¼3) were isolated and homogenized in RIPA lysis bu
ffer with protease inhibitors. Primary antibodies against Sox2
(1:2000, Cell Signaling Technology, 2748S), Dcx (1:2000, Cell
Signaling Technology, 4604S) and tubulin (1:200000, Sigma,
T8535) were used.
Morpholinos
Sox2-lissamine-morpholino
5'-AGCTCGGTCTCCATCATGCTGTA-3',
Gene Tools, Philomath, OR; Van Raay et al., 2005), Sox2a-lissa
mine-morpholino 5'-CCATCATGCTGTACATCGAGGCGGC3', Gene Tools,
Philomath, OR) Sox3-lissamine-morpholino 5'-GTCCAACATGCTATA-
CATTTGGAGC-3', Gene Tools, Philomath, OR) and standard control-
lissamine morpholino (50-CCTCTTACCTCAGTT-30, Gene Tools, Philo-
math, OR) were used.
Transgene constructs and transgenesis
The pHSP70: SOX2BD()GRHA: EGFP (dnSox2) was generated
from pISceI- HSP70: SOX2BD()GRHA and pISceI-HSP70: EGFP
(Gaete et al., 2012). Transgenesis was performed using the Restric-
tion Enzyme Mediated Integration method (REMI, Ishibashi et al.,
2007a,b,c). One-cell stage embryos were injected with 50 pg of
pHSP70: SOX2BD()GRHA: EGFP. Embryos were incubated until
stage 42 at 18 1C, and changed afterwards to 23 1C. At stage 50
tadpoles were heat shocked (30 min at 34 1C) to select the EGFPþ
animals and they were allowed to develop for 1 year until sexual
maturity. F1 tadpoles were generated through natural mating.
Once they reached stage 50, they were heat shocked (30 min at
34 1C) for 3 days (1, 1 and 2 dpt) and treated with 10 μM
dexamethasone dissolved in 0.1X Barth (see Fig. S6A). They were
analyzed by video-tracking at 0, 10, 15 and 20 days post-injury. At
15 dpt two animals were taken per time point to perform
immunoﬂuorescence in ﬂat-mounted spinal cords (Fig. S6B).
Swimming ability tracking
Swimming capability was evaluated by video-tracking free
swimming during 5 min at 0, 5, 10, 20 and 30 dpt. Animals were
placed in a 15 cm diameter plate ﬁlled with water and recorded
with a video camera. ANY-maze program (Stoelting Co, Wood Dale,
IL) was used to track swim paths (Guo et al., 2011). Mean lengths
of the swim paths (“total distance”) of the three trials were used
for graphical presentation and statistical analysis with Graph
Pad PRISM.
Imaging and statistical analysis
Samples were photographed using a confocal microscope (FV-
1000 Olympus Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope). Intensity was
measured using Z- plot analysis and ﬁre LUT pseudocoloring of
ImageJ (NIH). Total cell counts, including quantiﬁcation of coloca-
lization, were determined using the ImageJ (NIH) cell counter
plugin. Results for intensity were analyzed by two-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) and Bonferroni test, whereas cell counting was
analyzed by one-way ANOVA and Tukey post-hoc test. Results for
swim tracking were analyzed by 1 way ANOVA and Bonferroni
Multiple Comparison Test. Error bars in all ﬁgures indicate the
“standard error of the mean” (SEM). Differences were considered
statistically signiﬁcant at nPo0.05, nnPo0.01, and nnnPo0.001 of
at least 3 independent experiments.
Results
Characterization of regenerative and non-regenerative stages
Previous studies have described the decreased regenerative
capacity of the spinal cord during metamorphosis (Sims, 1962;
Michel and Reier, 1979; Filoni et al., 1984; Beattie et al., 1990, Gibbs
et al., 2011; Gaete et al., 2012), however, the value of Xenopus laevis
as a model organism to study spinal cord regeneration would be
R. Muñoz et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 229–243
231

signiﬁcantly enhanced by detailed characterization of the cellular
response to injury and quantitative methods to measure locomo-
tor recovery at regenerative and non-regenerative stages. We
therefore carried out: (i) a comparative histological analysis of
the
cellular
response
to
spinal
cord
injury
(SCI)
at
pre-
metamorphic (stages 50, 54), pro-metamorphic (stage 56) and
post-metamorphic (stage 66) stages, and (ii) a quantitative mea-
surement of the locomotor recovery after SCI. Results from these
studies allow us to correlate functional with histological recovery.
As a model of SCI we performed complete spinal cord transec-
tion at the mid-thoracic level by completely disrupting the rostral
to caudal continuity of the spinal cord (Filoni et al., 1984; Gaete
et al., 2012). For histological analysis we performed hematoxylin
and eosin staining of longitudinal sections from animals before
and after injury. Pre-metamorphic animals have a small spinal
cord (400–600 mm diameter) with an abundance of cells in the
ventricular layer, all with a characteristic dark-blue staining. The
cell layer has no complex stratiﬁcation and axons with reddish
staining are distributed through the white matter (Fig. 1A and F).
In pre-metamorphic (stage 50) animals at 2 days post transec-
tion (dpt) the rostral stump of the spinal cord was sealed closed
whereas the caudal stump remained open. Almost no cellular
material was observed in the ablation gap and axonal tracts were
completely disrupted (Fig. 1B and G dotted line indicates the injury
site). Notably, cell clusters with staining to similar cells in the
ventricular layer, together with some ﬁbrilar material were seen in
the ablation gap at 6 dpt in stage 50 animals (Fig. 1C and see
arrow). At 10 dpt a cellular bridge formed across the ablation gap.
Many axons crossed the injury site and a meningeal layer was
reconstituted (Fig. 1D and I yellow arrowheads indicate the
meningeal layer). At 20 dpt, at least 60% of the transected animals
exhibited continuity of the ependymal canal and axon tracts,
however the normal morphology was not restored and there were
fewer cells in the ventricular layer (Fig. 1E). Animals that were
injured at stage 54 demonstrated a similar initial response to
injury as seen in stage 50 tadpoles, except that fewer cell clusters
were detected at 6 dpt and most of them were associated with the
rostral stump (Fig. 1H and see arrow). By 20 dpt many axons
crossed the ablation gap, however a continuous ependymal canal
had not formed even though several cells populated the ablation
gap (Fig. 1J).
We analyzed locomotor recovery at different days after injury
by video tracking the swimming distance achieved by tadpoles
over 5 min. As expected, animals at stage 50 and 54 were unable to
move at 0 dpt, but they gradually recovered the ability to swim.
Functional restoration was statistically signiﬁcant at 20 dpt when
compared to animals immediately after transection (Fig. 1K and L).
Of note, animals after recovery seem to have a different swimming
behavior, most of the times swims mainly at the borders of the
plate or in short circles suggesting that recovery of the neuronal
circuitry is not perfect and that more detailed test are necessary to
fully understand spinal cord regeneration. Based on these results
we deﬁne stage 50 and 54 as regenerative-stages (R-stage),
although the efﬁciency of the cellular and function recovery is
lower in stage 54 compared to stage 50.
Similar histological and locomotor analyses were performed in
pro-metamorphic (stage 56), metamorphic climax (stage 58) and
post-metamorphic stages (stage 66). These animals have a larger
spinal cord (800–1600 mm diameter) with more complex organiza-
tion, composed of a stratiﬁed ventricular zone and many axonal
tracts (Fig. 2A, F and see Supplementary information Fig. S1A). In
contrast to the response of R-stage animals, the stumps of the spinal
cord did not seal closed at 2 dpt in these animals (Fig. 2B, G and see
Supplementary information Fig. S1B). Furthermore, at 6 and 10 dpt
cell clusters were scarcely found or completely absent in the ablation
gap. Instead, the ablation gap was ﬁlled with ﬁbrillary material
(Fig. 2C, D, H and I and see Supplementary information Fig. S1C and
D). In addition, in stage 66 froglets, other cells types inﬁltrated the
ablation gap (Fig. 2I). The differences in the response to injury
between the younger and older stages were even more evident at
20 dpt because continuity of the ependymal canal or axon tracts
were not achieved. Fibrillary material remained in the ablation gap
and closure of the stumps was not clearly detected (Fig. 2E, J and see
Supplementary information Fig. S1E). In some cases however, the
meninges did appear to be reconstituted, especially in stage 56 and
58 animals (Fig. 2E, see Supplementary information Fig. S1E).
No recovery of swimming ability was observed when the spinal
cord was injured at these older stages (Fig. 2K and L), consistent
with the anatomical and histological observations. Based on these
observations we deﬁned pro-metamorphic animals and froglets as
non-regenerative-stage (NR-stage) animals.
These studies clearly deﬁne R- and NR stages with regards to the
ability of X. laevis to restore spinal cord morphology and function
following spinal cord transection. This temporal distinction in the
capacity for regeneration will facilitate investigation of the genetic
and cellular underpinnings that allow spinal cord regeneration in
larvae, and why this capability is lost after metamorphosis in froglets
and adult X. laevis.
Expression of Sox2 and Sox3 during metamorphosis
The histological data presented above showed that cells in the
ventricular layer react differently to injury in R- and NR-stages,
suggesting that a response of cells in the ventricular layer is required
for recovery from injury. The data further suggest that a differential
response of ventricular layer cells to injury in R- and NR-stages may
account for the different regenerative capability in these two stages.
Our prior work showed that Sox2 is expressed in most cells of the
ventricular layer in stage 50 animals (Gaete et al., 2012). The peptide
used to generate the antibody against Sox2 is highly conserved
between both human and X. laevis Sox2 and Sox3, raising the
possibility that both proteins are detected in our experiments. For
clarity, when we use this antibody we refer to detection of ‘Sox2/3’ to
indicate that both Sox2 and Sox3 proteins may be detected. We
therefore characterized the expression of Sox2/3 in ventricular layer
cells at different stages during metamorphosis using indirect immu-
noﬂuorescence in longitudinal cryosections from R-stages (stage 50
and 54) and NR-stages (stage 58 and 66).
We have found that at stage 50 Sox2/3 is expressed at high
levels in the ventricular layer cells (Fig. 3A and B). Detailed
analysis showed heterogeneity of the nuclear shape and size,
although cells with an elongated and big nucleus, characteristic
of neural stem and progenitor cells, were the most prominent
immunolabeled cells seen at this stage (Fig. 3C, N and O). Similar
results were observed at stage 54, although Sox2/3 levels were
reduced and cells with elongated nuclei were less frequent
compared to stage 50 (Fig. 3D, F, N and O).
In non-regenerative tadpoles (stage 58) and froglets (stage 66)
Sox2/3 immunolabeling was lower and labeled nuclei were round.
No elongated nuclei were detected (Fig. 3G‐L, N and O). In addition,
the Sox2/3þ
cells were located in more than one layer and,
particularly in froglets, were mainly located in a sub-ventricular
zone (Fig. 3J).
Sox2/3 protein levels were also analyzed by Western blot of
spinal cords isolated from R- and NR-stages. In agreement with the
immunoﬂuorescence analysis and our previous report (Gaete et al.,
2012), higher levels of total Sox2/3 protein were present in the
R-stage, although detectable levels of the protein were still found
in NR-stage 66 (Fig. 3M). Intriguingly, qRT-PCR studies from
isolated spinal cords showed that sox2 and sox3 mRNA levels
remained unchanged and even are slightly increased during
metamorphosis suggesting that the observed changes in protein
R. Muñoz et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 229–243
232

level are regulated at a post-transcriptional level (see Supplemen-
tary information Fig. S2A and B).
In summary, we conclude that the number of Sox2/3þ cells and
the levels of Sox2/3 protein, but not the corresponding mRNAs, are
higher in the ventricular zone of the spinal cord in R-stages, and that
levels decrease during metamorphosis. The shape and location of the
Sox2/3þ cells also change during metamorphosis. These develop-
mental decreases in Sox2/3þ
cell numbers and protein levels
correlate with the loss of regenerative capacity, suggesting that
Sox2/3þ cells may play a role in the regenerative process.
Fig. 1. Characterization of regenerative stages of Xenopus laevis. Hematoxylin and eosin staining of longitudinal sections of spinal cord from uninjured animals and at 2, 6, 10
and 20 dpt in pre-metamorphic stage 50 (A–E) and 54 (F–J) respectively. Magniﬁcations shown in black box for stage 50 (A0–E0) and 54 (F0–J0). Samples of swim trajectories
(top, single representative animals for each step) and graphs of the total time animals spent swimming in 5 min at stage 50 (K) and stage 54 (L) in sham-operated animals
and in animals with spinal cord transection at 0, 5, 10, 20 and 30 dpt. Dotted line: injury site or ablation gap, yellow arrowheads: meningeal layer, arrow: cell clusters, vz:
ventricular zone, svz: sub-ventricular zone. Scale bar (A–J) 100 mm; (A0–J0) 30 mm. * Pr0.05. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)
R. Muñoz et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 229–243
233

Fig. 2. Characterization of non-regenerative stages of Xenopus laevis. Hematoxylin and eosin staining of longitudinal sections of spinal cords from uninjured animals and at 2,
6, 10 and 20 dpt in pro-metamorphic stage 56 (A–E) and post-metamorphic stage 66 (F–J) respectively. Black boxes indicate magniﬁcations for stage 56 (A0–E0) and 66 (F0–J0).
Samples of swim trajectories (top, single representative animals for each step) and graphs of the total time animals spent swimming in 5 min at stage 56 (K) and stage 66
(L) in sham-operated animals and in animals with spinal cord transection at 0, 5, 10, 20 and 30 dpt. Dotted line: injury site or ablation gap, yellow arrowheads: meningeal
layer, arrow: cell clusters, vz: ventricular zone, svz: sub-ventricular zone. Scale bar (A–E) 100 mm; (F–J) 200 mm; (A0–J0) 30 mm. (For interpretation of the references to color in
this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
R. Muñoz et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 229–243
234

Proliferative response of Sox2/3þ cells to spinal cord injury
The concomitant decrease in Sox2/3þ cell numbers and the loss
of the regenerative capacity and the fact that Sox2/3þ cells are still
present in NR-stages prompted us to study how these cells respond
to spinal cord transection. To evaluate the effect of injury on the
ability of Sox2/3þ cells to proliferate, we incubated animals at stage
50 and 66 with BrdU for 16 h before injury (uninjured), and at 2, 6, 10
and 20 dpt, ﬁxed and performed double immunoﬂuorescence for
BrdU and Sox2/3. Sox2/3þ cells incorporate BrdU in R-stage animals
before injury (Fig. 4A, B and see Supplementary information
Fig. S2C), reﬂecting the active proliferative process occurring at this
stage. This basal level of proliferation could be explained by the
process of neurogenesis that happens during larval stages of devel-
opment (Schlosser et al., 2002). Contrary to that, no BrdU incorpora-
tion was detected in non-injured stage 66 froglets (Fig. 4I, J).
In stage 50 animals at 2 dpt, we observed a massive prolifera-
tion of almost 50% of Sox2/3þ cells in the ventricular zone (Fig. 4C
and D, see arrows and supplementary Fig. S3G). BrdU incorpora-
tion was higher in the dorsal side of the spinal cord, possibly
because of the higher levels of Sox2/3 in the dorsal spinal cord
(Gaete et al., 2012). BrdU incorporation was also more abundant
rostral to the injury site compared to the ablation gap or caudal to
the injury (see Supplementary information Fig S3A–F). No increase
in
BrdU
incorporation
was
observed
in
uninjured
animals
(see Supplementary information Fig. S3A). BrdU was also incorpo-
rated in Sox2/3 negative cells, especially in skin and muscle cells
(Fig. 4C, see arrowheads).
This proliferation was transient and only detected at 2 dpt. At
6 dpt less than 10% of the Sox2/3þ cells were BrdUþ, and no double-
labeled cells were detected at 20 dpt (Fig. 4E‐H and see supplemen-
tary information Fig. S3G). Notably, at 6 dpt many Sox2/3þ cells were
found in the ablation gap as self-organized neural tube like structures
(Fig. 4E, F and see Supplementary information Fig. S3H).
Similar experiments performed in non-regenerative froglets
provided very different results. Most notably, no activation of
Sox2/3þ cells was observed at 2 dpt, and only BrdUþ and Sox2/3
negative cells were found in the ablation gap (Fig. 4K and L). Only
at 6 dpt were Sox2/3þ and BrdUþ cells detected, but the prolif-
eration level was far below that observed in regenerative animals.
In froglets, only 15% of Sox2/3þ cells were double-labeled with
BrdU (Fig. 4M, N and see Supplementary information Fig. S3G). At
20 dpt Sox2/3þ/BrdUþ cells were not observed, but proliferation
of other cell types persisted at the injury site (Fig. 4O and P). In
froglets, Sox2/3þ cells were not detected in the ablation gap at any
time-point after transection.
We conclude that although Sox2/3þ cells are present in both R-
and NR-stages, their response to injury is very different. Sox 2/3þ
cells exhibit a rapid, transient and massive response in regenerative
stages in contrast to a delayed, and very limited response in non-
Fig. 3. Analysis of Sox2/3 expression in the spinal cord in non-regenerative and regenerative stages. (A–L) Longitudinal cryosections through the spinal cord of animals at
stage 50 (A–C), 54 (D–F), 58 (G–I) and 66 (J–L), analyzed by immunostaining for Sox2/3 (green) and staining for TOTO3 (nuclei, blue). A, D, G and J. Double labeling for Sox2/3
and TOTO3. B,E,H and K. Sox2/3 only. (C, F, I and L) Higher magniﬁcation images of regions shown in white boxes in B, E, H, K. (M) Western blot showing immunolabeling for
Sox2/3 in tadpoles (stage 50–58) and froglets (stage 66). α-tubulin immunolabeling is shown as a loading control. (N) Analysis of the signal intensity of Sox2/3
immunolabeling in of B,E,H and K. (O) Analysis of the area of the nuclei of C,F,I and L. cc: central channel, vz: ventricular zone and svz: sub-ventricular zone. Scale bars (A, B,
D, E, G, H, J and K) 20 mm; (C, F, I and L) 2 mm. *P o0.05, **Po0.01, and ***Po0.001. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to
the web version of this article.)
R. Muñoz et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 229–243
235

regenerative froglets. In addition, Sox2/3þ cells were located in the
ablation gap of stage 50 animals, suggesting that Sox 2/3þ cell
migrate from the injured ventricular zone into the ablation gap.
In vivo analysis of the response to injury of Sox2/3 expressing cells
To demonstrate that X. laevis R-stage tadpoles are also amenable
for in vivo imaging and to study the behavior of Sox2/3þ cells in
response to injury we performed 2-photon microscopy. For this we
used a plasmid containing a 2 kb fragment of the X. tropicalis Sox3
promoter driving GFP expression (pSox3: GFP). Although it is not
possible to rule out the expression of this DNA in Sox2/3 negative
cells the following evidence suggest that this promoter drives
expression of GFP mainly in Sox2/3þ cells: (i) transgenic tadpoles
expressing pSox3: GFP showed GFP expression mainly in the neural
plate during early development and in the CNS at later stages (see
Supplementary information Fig. S4A–D); (ii) when this construct was
electroporated into the spinal cord in stage 50 animals GFP was
mainly detected in cells with radial glia morphology and co-localized
with Sox2/3 (Fig. 5B), something that was not observed when we
electroporated a construct that drives GFP expression under the
control of a constitutively active promoter (data not shown) and (iii),
the GFPþ cells incorporated CldU in response to injury (Fig. 5C).
To perform in vivo studies of Sox2/3þ cells, pSox3: GFP was injected
in the ependymal canal, animals were electroporated and analyzed by
in vivo time lapse 2-photon microscopy before and after spinal cord
transection (Fig. 5A). As a control experiment, we imaged pSox3: GFP-
expressing cells in sham-operated animals. GFPþ cells showed no
gross morphological changes 2, 4 and 6 days post-sham operation
(dps) compared to before injury. The number of GFPþ cells remained
relatively constant after the sham operation (Fig. 5D, G and T).
In contrast, spinal cord transection induced a dramatic change in
the pSox3: GFP expressing cells. The number of GFPþ cells increased
in more than 50% of transected animals compared to the same
animals before injury (Fig. 5H‐K, and U). The variability in the
magnitude of the changes in GFPþ cells is likely due to the variability
in the initial number of electroporated cells and because some cells
die after injury. The increased number of GFPþ cells was mainly
Fig. 4. Proliferation of Sox2/3þ cells in response to spinal cord injury. (A–P) Immunolabeling for BrdU and Sox2/3 in stage 50 or 66 animals at designated times after spinal
cord transection show dramatic increases in proliferation in regenerative stages but not non-regenerative stages. Spinal cords were transected and animals were treated for
16 h with BrdU and ﬁxed at 2, 6 or 10 dpt. Horizontal sections through the spinal cord were analyzed by double immunoﬂuorescence BrdU (green) and Sox2/3 (red) from
uninjured animals and at 2, 6 and 20 dpt in tadpoles stage 50 (A–H) and uninjured, 2, 6 and 10 dpt in froglets stage 66 (I–P). (B, D, F, H, J, L, N and P) Higher magniﬁcations of
regions shown in black boxes for A, C, E, G, I, K, M and O. Arrow and arrowheads in C, D and F: BrdUþSox2/3þ cells and BrdUþ Sox2/3- respectively. vz: ventricular zone and
svz: sub-ventricular zone. Nuclei: TOTO3 (blue). Scale bars are as indicated. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the
web version of this article.)
R. Muñoz et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 229–243
236

detected in the region proximal to the rostral stump (Fig. 5J and K).
Furthermore, GFPþ cells were detected in the ablation gap of most of
the animals analyzed (Fig. 5K, O and V).
In addition to the increase in proliferation, we also observed the
morphology of cells electroporated with pSox3: GFP. These cells
maintain a radial glia morphology, with a long process extending from
the central canal to the meninges. Some GFPþ cells were located in the
ablation gap (Fig. 5M‐O) or in the stumps (Fig. 5Q‐S).
These experiments demonstrate directly that injury induces
Sox2/3þ cells to proliferate and increase the number of Sox2/3þ
cells. The data further suggest that proliferation of Sox2/3þ cells,
especially close to the injury site, results in morphological changes
in Sox2/3þ cells and their migration into the ablation gap. These
events may be required for spinal cord regeneration.
Activation of Sox2/3þ cells is necessary for spinal cord regeneration
To test the function of Sox2/3 during spinal cord regeneration we
performed knockdown experiments during regenerative stages. As a
ﬁrst approach we used a morpholino previously shown to speciﬁcally
Fig. 5. In vivo time-lapse imaging of Sox2/3þ cells in response to spinal cord injury. (A) Schematic representation of in vivo electroporation and imaging by 2 Photon
Microscopy of pSox3: GFP in the spinal cord of stage 50 tadpoles. Double immunoﬂuorescence in sagittal sections of the spinal cord for (B) GFP (green), Sox2 immunolabeling
(red), (C) CldU (red). Co-localization analysis is shown in (B0 and C0) in a pseudo-color scale. (D–S) Z-stacks of in vivo 2 photon microscope images of GFP-expressing cells after
electroporation, show a control sham animal at (D) 1 day after electroporation (dpe), (E) 2 dps, (F) 4 dps, (G) 6 dps. After SCI, the increase in total number of GFPþ cells is
shown in (H) at 2 dpe, (I) 2 dpt, (J) 3 dpt, (K) 4 dpt, (H0–K0) magniﬁcations of (H–K). (L–S) Migration of GFPþ cells to the gap injury site is shown in (L) at 1 dpe, (M) 1 dpt,
(N) 3 dpt, (O) 7 dpt, magniﬁcations of (L–O) in (L0–O0), and no migration in (P) at 1 dpe, (Q) 1 dpt, (R) 3 dpt, (S) 8 dpt. Fold change of Sox3-GFP þ cells in sham control animals
(T), after injury (U) and migration to the gap injury (V). Scale bar in (B–C0; D–G; H–K; L–O; P–S) 100 mm, (H0–K0; L0–O0) 50 mm. (For interpretation of the references to color in
this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
R. Muñoz et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 229–243
237

knockdown Sox2 in the eye ﬁeld (Van Raay et al., 2005). This
morpholino has 5-mismatches with sox3 cDNA (see Supplementary
information Fig. S5), suggesting that the effects observed with this
morpholino are speciﬁc to Sox 2 (Eisen and Smith, 2008).
We evaluated Sox2 knockdown using immunoﬂuorescence in
tissue sections and by western blot. Lissamine-labeled morpholi-
nos were injected in the central canal of the spinal cord and
electroporated into the ependymal layer. The spinal cord was
transected after electroporation. Animals electroporated with the
control morpholino (Co_MO) and the Sox2_MO were screened at
1 dpt to identify animals with similar electroporation efﬁciency in
the ventricular layer based on lissamine labeling. We detected no
difference in Sox2/3 protein levels on 1 dpt (Fig. 6A and B, see
arrowsA0–A″0 and B0 –B″0), but by 2 dpt animals electroporated
with the Sox2_MO had fewer cells labeled with lissamine and they
had no detectable Sox2/3 protein. Furthermore, the number of
Sox2/3þ cells was reduced (Fig. 6D–D″0). Importantly, at 2 dpt cells
electroporated with Co_MO maintained the same levels of Sox2/3
protein as neighboring non-electroporated cells (Fig. 6C, see
arrows C0 –C″0). Western blots showed a clear reduction of Sox2
protein in animals electroporated with Sox2_MO compared to
those with Co_MO (Fig. 6E), conﬁrming that the morpholinos
efﬁciently reduced Sox2 protein and the number of Sox2þ cells in
stage 50 tadpoles.
To determine the effect of Sox2 knockdown in functional
recovery following spinal cord transfection we measured swim-
ming ability with video recordings. Animals electroporated with
the Co_MO showed full recovery 2–3 weeks after transection
(Fig. 6F, black circles) similar to wild type animals (Fig. 1K).
Importantly, tadpoles electroporated with Sox2_MO failed to show
signiﬁcant recovery of their swimming capability at any of the
time points measured (Fig. 6F, red circles).
To evaluate the effect of Sox2 knockdown at the cellular level,
animals were electroporated with Co_MO or Sox2_MO and ﬁxed at
15 dpt. Immunolabeling for acetylated tubulin indicates that axons
crossed through the injury site in animals treated with the Co_MO
(Fig. 6G), but not in Sox2 knockdown animals (Fig. 6H). Together
these results indicate that Sox2 is required for both functional
recovery from injury and morphological recovery of axon trajec-
tories after injury.
To study the function of Sox2 using a different approach we
prepared a transgenic line expressing a dominant negative Sox2
(dnSox2) construct that is under the control of a heat shock
promoter and requires dexamethasone to translocate to the
nucleus. This construct is known to disrupt neurogenesis during
early development and tail regeneration (Kishi et al., 2000, Gaete
et al., 2012). F1 founders carrying the transgene were crossed to
wild type animals, tadpoles were raised to stage 50, and heat-
shocked one day before transection and at 1 and 2 dpt. Swimming
ability and axonal tracts were measured as above. We found that
animals expressing the transgene (EGFPþ animals) have a delayed
functional recovery and axonal growth compared to animals that
do not express the transgene (Fig. 6I and see Supplementary
information Fig. S6A, B). Control animals that received heat shock
and dexamethasone showed full recovery of swimming (Fig. 6I,
empty circles), ruling out the possibility that the effect observed
was because of this treatment.
To determine the possible contribution of Sox3 to spinal cord
regeneration we designed a second morpholino against sox2
(Sox2a_MO) with 10 mismatches compared to sox3 mRNA and a
Sox3 morpholino (Sox3_MO) that has 9 mismatches compared to
sox2 mRNA (see Supplementary information Fig. S5). Electropora-
tion of each morpholino alone or a mix of both has no signiﬁcant
effect on Sox2 protein levels and in swimming recovery (see
Supplementary information Fig. S7 and data not shown). We
conclude from these results that Sox2 is required for both
functional recovery from injury and morphological recovery of
axon trajectories after injury, but we were unable to demonstrate
or discard a possible role for Sox3 in these processes.
Neurogenesis occurs during spinal cord regeneration in Xenopus
The formation of new neurons in response to SCI (tail amputa-
tion and transection) has been demonstrated in zebraﬁsh (Reimer
et al., 2008; Briona and Dorsky, 2014) and urodele amphibians
(Benraiss et al., 1999; Tanaka and Ferretti, 2009). To test whether
neurogenesis increases in response to SCI in X. laevis, we evaluated
the expression of several neurogenesis markers, including Dou-
blecortin (Dcx), neuro D and neurogenin. Dcx has been used
extensively to study neurogenesis (Xiong et al., 2008; Cai et al.,
2009; Kutsuna et al., 2012; Klempin et al., 2011; Fan et al., 2014), it
is expressed in neuroblasts and neuronal precursors during
development of the central nervous system (des Portes et al.,
1998; Francis et al., 1999; Gleeson et al., 1999; Meyer et al., 2002)
and in the sub-ventricular zone and the subgranular zone of the
hippocampus in the adult mammalian brain (Nacher et al., 2001).
Neurogenin and neuroD are transcription factors of the neural
basic helix–loop–helix (bHLH) class (Bertrand et al., 2002) that are
essential for neuronal differentiation during development in the
vertebrate embryo (Koyano-Nakagawa et al., 1999; Miyata et al.,
1999; Liu et al., 2000). In Xenopus they are expressed in all primary
neurons, neurogenic placodes, and retina strongly (Lee et al., 1995;
Schlosser and Northcutt, 2000).
Immunoﬂuorescence analysis of Dcx showed expression in
cells located in the ablation gap at 2 dpt (Fig. 7A, B). Furthermore,
western blots showed elevated levels of Dcx protein at 1 dpt that
continued to increase to 6 dpt (Fig. 7C). Similarly, in situ hybridiza-
tion demonstrated an increase in neuroD and neurogenin2 at 2 dpt
in cells outside the ependymal layer (Fig. 7D–E0).
Recently we reported a transcriptome-wide proﬁle comparing
the response to SCI between R- and NR-stages. We found that
genes
related
to
neurogenesis
were
differentially
regulated
between R- and NR-stages (Lee-Liu et al., 2014), strongly implicat-
ing neurogenesis as a mechanism that allows regeneration in stage
50 tadpoles. Here we further characterized the response of
neurogenin3, one of the genes identiﬁed. neurogenin3 mRNA was
transiently up-regulated at 2 dpt in R-stages but was not present
or up-regulated in NR-stage animals (Fig. 7F) suggesting that
injury-induced neurogenesis only occurs in regenerative stage.
The results depicted above suggested that neurogenesis is
activated in response to injury. To test whether Sox2/3 cells
contribute to injury-induced neurogenesis, we took advantage of
the fact that the long half-life of GFP allows cell-fate studies.
pSox3: GFP was electroporated into the ventricular layer of the
spinal cord. After spinal cord transfection, we used in vivo time-
lapse 2 photon imaging to determine the fates of GFPþ radial glial
progenitor cells (Bestman et al., 2012). We found that GFPþ cells
acquired neuronal morphology after transection including a long
axon and complex dendritic arbor (Fig. 7G, L and see Supplemen-
tary information Fig. S8). These results provide direct evidence
that Sox2/3þ ventricular layer cells generate neuronal progeny in
response to injury and demonstrate that neurogenesis is one of the
mechanisms contributing to spinal cord regeneration.
Discussion
Many vertebrates including rodents and the chick are able to
regenerate their spinal cord at early stages of development, but
this regenerative capacity is lost at later developmental stages.
One strategy to understand the mechanisms that permit or restrict
spinal cord regeneration would be to study these species at early
R. Muñoz et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 229–243
238

Fig. 6. Sox2 is required for functional recovery after spinal cord injury. (A–D″0) Tadpoles at stage 50 were electroporated with control lissamine-tagged morpholino (Co_MO,
red) and Sox2 lissamine-tagged morpholino (Sox2_MO, red), transected, and analyzed by immunoﬂuorescence against Sox2/3 (green) in longitudinal sections at 1 (A–B″0)
and 2 (C–D″0) dpt. (A0, A″, A″0), (B0, B″, B″0), (C0, C″, C″0) and (D0, D″, D″0) magniﬁcation of insets showed in A, B, C, D respectively. Arrows: co-localization of morpholino with
Sox2/3 antibody. (E) Western blot of Sox2/3 in Co_MO and Sox2_MO. (F) Graph of the total distance swam by tadpoles electroporated with Co_MO (black circles) and
Sox2_MO (red circles). (G–H) Immunoﬂuorescence of acetylated tubulin in spinal cord longitudinal sections of electroporated Co_MO tadpoles (G) and Sox2_MO (H) after 15
days post electroporation and transection. Morpholino (red) acetylated tubulin (green) and nuclei (blue). Pictures are representative of the results observed in two
independent experiments. (I) Graph of the total distance swam by transgenic tadpoles. All animals received a heat shock one day before transection and at 1 and 2 dpt. Red
circles: animals that overexpress dnSox2 (EGFPþ), black circles transgenic animals that do not overexpress the transgene (EGFP) and empty circles correspond to control
animals. m/5 min: meters in 5 min. Scale bar in (A–D) 100 mm, (A0–A″; B’–B″; C0–C″; D0–D″; G–H) 20 mm. *Po0.05, **Po0.01, and ***Po0.001. (For interpretation of the
references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
R. Muñoz et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 229–243
239

and later developmental stages. Here we present an alternate
strategy of using X. laevis, an experimental animal that has both
regenerative and non-regenerative stages, but also has the advan-
tage that its external development allows ready access to examine
and manipulate the spinal cord throughout development. We
provide a detailed histological analysis of spinal cord regeneration
showing that Xenopus laevis larvae lose their regenerative cap-
abilities concomitant with the progress of metamorphosis. We
complement the histological studies with a simple quantitative
locomotor test to measure recovery after SCI. We demonstrate that
Sox2/3þ radial glial progenitor cells proliferate and generate
neurons in response to injury. Finally, we use knockdown and
dominant negative strategies to demonstrate that Sox2 is required
for injury-induced neurogenesis.
This study advances the use of Xenopus as model system to study
the cellular and molecular mechanisms of spinal cord regeneration
by demonstrating the application of a variety of experimental
strategies. We had previously demonstrated that Xenopus can be
used as a genetic model organism to study regeneration (Lee-Liu
et al., 2014) by performing a transcriptome-wide analysis of spinal
cord regeneration in R- and NR-stages. Results of that study show
that useful transcriptomic information can be obtained by comparing
R- and NR-stages. To further demonstrate that Xenopus is amenable
as a model system to study spinal cord regeneration, we devised a
functional recovery test that evaluates regeneration through loco-
motor function (Guo et al., 2011). The differences in locomotor
recovery shown by R- and NR-stages indicate that this test provides
a simple method to evaluate, for example, gene function and the
Fig. 7. SCI induces neurogenesis in regenerative stage animals. (A–B″) Immunoﬂuorescence of the Doublecortin (Dcx, red) in spinal cord transversal cryosections at stage 50
in sham (A, A″) and 2 dpt (B, B″) animals. Nuclei: Hoescht (blue). (C) Western blot of Dcx in sham and 1, 2, 6 dpt tadpoles (upper panel) and Tubulin (bottom panel) as loading
control. (D–E0) In situ hybridization of neuroD and neurogenin2 in 2 dps (D, E) and 2 dpt (D0–E0) tadpoles. (F) Dynamic expression of neurogenin3 for RT-qPCR in tadpoles
(R) and froglets (NR) in 1, 2 and 6 dpt. (G–L0) Z-stack of in vivo imaging of Sox3: GFP electroporated cells after spinal injury showing early differentiation to neuronal
morphology in: animal I at (G) 2 dpe, (H) 2 dpt and (I) 4 dpt, and animal II at (J) 2 dpe, (K) 3 dpt and (L) 5 dpt. Magniﬁcations of (G–I) and (J–L) are show in (G0–I0) and (J0–L0)
respectively. vz: ventricular zone. Scale bar in (A–B″) 20 mm (G–L) 100 mm, (G0–L0) 50 mm. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)
R. Muñoz et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 229–243
240

effects of modifying gene expression on spinal cord regeneration. We
complement the behavioral analysis with classical histological meth-
ods, genetic manipulations, and state of the art in vivo time lapse
imaging for analysis of neurogenesis and cell fate. We anticipate that
application of such a multidisciplinary approach to study spinal cord
injury in Xenopus will continue to provide mechanistic insights into
mechanisms of recovery from injury.
Characterization of Sox2/3 cells during spinal cord regeneration
Here we analyzed Sox2/3 immunoreactive cells in Xenopus
tadpole tail regeneration and in spinal cord regeneration, using
an antibody that recognizes a highly conserved region of Sox2 and
Sox3. We were therefore unable to distinguish between these two
Soxb1 proteins. We found that Sox2/3 at stages 50–54 was
expressed in most cells in the ventricular zone lining the central
canal. These cells had large elongated nuclei, and were massively
activated to proliferate in response to injury. Sox2/3 immunor-
eactivity was strongly reduced in non-regenerative animals. At
these stages, the Sox2/3þ cells had small and round nuclei and
their proliferation was slowly and poorly induced in response to
injury. Cytoplasmic factors determine nuclear size to a greater
extent than DNA content (Walters et al., 2012, Levy and Heald,
2010). Therefore the larger size of the stage 50 nuclei could
indicate the presence of more lax chromatin and a greater
tendency for cell division compared to cells in stage 66 froglets,
where the nuclei are smaller and pyknotic. Our observations in
froglets are very much like those reported in rodent and primate
spinal cords, where Sox2þ cells are present in the adult spinal
cord, but are poorly activated in response to SCI (Bylund et al.,
2003; Sandberg et al., 2005; Mizuseki et al., 1998; Rogers et al.,
2009; Mothe et al., 2011). Intriguingly, we found that the levels of
Sox2 and Sox3 mRNA do not decrease during metamorphosis
suggesting that the protein levels are regulated through a post-
transcriptional mechanism. In line with this, recent publications
suggest a crucial role of miRNAs in the regulation of Sox2 protein
levels (Peng et al., 2012; Du et al., 2013; Georgi and Reh, 2010).
Sox2/3 expressing cells are necessary for spinal cord regeneration
Our previous work demonstrating that Sox2 is required for tail
regeneration in Xenopus laevis tadpoles (Gaete et al., 2012),
suggested that it may play a role in spinal cord regeneration. Here
we show that Sox2/3 immunoreactive cells proliferate in response
to injury in regenerative stages, but not in non-regenerative
stages. Furthermore our in vivo time lapse imaging demonstrates
that Sox2/3þ cells at the injury site proliferate and generate
neurons. Our loss-of-function studies, in which we decrease Sox2
function using morpholino antisense oligonucleotides or trans-
genic animals expressing dominant negative Sox2, indicate that
Sox2 is required for recovery of spinal cord structure and function
after injury. This may occur because radial glial progenitor cells are
unable to proliferate in the absence of Sox 2. Studies, on neural
development in non-mammalian vertebrates, where the loss of
any single SoxB1 resulted in minor phenotypes (Bylund et al.,
2003, Rogers et al., 2009; Dee et al., 2008; Fei, et al., 2014), suggest
functional redundancy of SoxB1 family members. Although with
the current available technical resources we are unable to rule out
the potential contribution of other SoxB1 family members, such as
Sox3, to spinal cord regeneration. Despite these caveats, our data
demonstrate that Sox2/3 expressing cells are key players in spinal
cord regeneration and that decreasing Sox2 function leads to loss
in regenerative capability.
Sox2/3 expressing cells: Mechanisms of spinal cord regeneration
Our data suggest two potential mechanisms by which Sox2/3
may be required for SC regeneration. One is that Sox 2 plays a role
in neurogenesis. This is supported by the observations that Sox2/
3þ cells proliferate in response to injury and the correlated
decrease in Sox2/3þ cells in non-degenerative stages. In addition,
neurogenesis markers were up-regulated in response to injury,
and Sox3-GFP expressing cells acquired a neuronal morphology,
suggest that the formation of new neurons from activated Sox2/3þ
cells is a possible mechanism to restore the neuronal circuits
destroyed by injury. Ependymal cells in mouse spinal cords are
activated in response to injury, but all are fated to glia and
oligodendrocytes (Meletis et al., 2008; Barnabé-Heider et al.,
2010). This result is consistent with the lost of regenerative
capacity in froglets, and conﬁrms our observation that all ependy-
mal cells are not equally capable of injury-induced neurogenesis.
Of note, neurospheres isolated from injured spinal cords make
neurons when transplanted in neurogenic environments (i.e.
dentate gyrus), but not when transplanted in non-neurogenic
tissue such as the spinal cord (Shihabuddin et al., 2000; Horner
et al., 2000; Horky et al., 2006). Studying the fate of Sox2/3 cells in
regenerative and non-regenerative stages could allow a better
understanding on how these cells are fated to neurons or glia and
identifying the intrinsic and extrinsic factors modulating these
options.
Another possible mechanism for Sox2/3 cells is the generation
of a permissive environment for axon regeneration. In newts, the
migration and subsequent repopulation of the ablation gap is
important for regeneration after SCI (Zukor et al., 2011). Moreover,
ependymal cells migrate to the injury site during regeneration,
and are thought to provide a permissive environment for axonal
growth (Michel and Reier, 1979; Goldshmit et al., 2012). We show
that regenerative stage 50 and 54 tadpoles seal the rostral stump
before the caudal stump at the second day after injury, and that at
6 and 10 days after injury ependymal-like cells invade the ablation
gap, followed by formation of a neural bridge and reestablishment
of the rostrocaudal continuity of the spinal cord. By contrast, in
stages 58 and 66, the injury stump does not close, ﬁbrillar tissue
forms in the ablation gap and ependymal cells are absent from the
ablation gap. Our data showing that Sox2/3þ cells populate the
ablation gap in regenerative stages suggests that a mechanism
whereby these cells provide a permissive substrate for axon
regeneration is possible. Analysis by electron microscopy has
shown that axons growth through the ablation gap in direct
contact with prolongations from ependymal cell (Michel and
Reier, 1979). In addition, such role has been described for Sox2
in peripheral nerve regeneration giving further support to this
possibility (Parrinello et al., 2010).
Conclusion
We demonstrate that X. laevis is a very useful model organism
to study spinal cord regeneration and use the comparison between
R- and NR-stages to study at the molecular, cellular and behavioral
levels how both stages respond to SCI. We expect that this
approach will aid in identifying the mechanisms that allow spinal
cord regeneration in frogs and explain why this capacity is lost in
mammals. To further develop X. laevis as a model organism we
applied methods to study gene-function (i.e. morpholino electro-
poration, transgenic lines) and in vivo microscopy. We envision
that comparing regenerative and non-regenerative stages of spinal
cord injury in X. laevis will provide novel insights into under-
standing why restoration of function is so inefﬁcient and fails in
mammals and humans.
R. Muñoz et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 229–243
241

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Dasfne Lee-Liu, Fernando Faunes, Emilio
Méndez and Germán Reig for critical reading of the our manu-
script and to Natalia Sánchez for her dedication and effort into
learning how to electroporate Xenopus. This work was funded by
research grants from: R. Muñoz: CONICYT “Inserción en la Acade-
mia”
N179090027
and
FONDECYT
”Iniciación”
N111110006;
G. Edwards-Faret: CONICYT PhD fellow and Gastos Operacionales
N121110043; M. Moreno: FONDECYT ”Iniciación” N111100348;
H. T. Cline: the US National Institutes of Health (National Eye
Institute: EY011261) and an endowment from the Hahn Family
Foundation
and
J.
Larraín:
FONDECYT
N11141162,
MINREB
RC120003, CARE Chile UC-Centro de Envejecimiento y Regenera-
ción PFB 12/2007 and ICGEB (CRP/CHI-13-01).
Appendix A. Supporting information
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in
the online version at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.03.009.
References
Avilion, A.A., Nicolis, S.K., Pevny, L.H., Perez, L., Vivian, N., Lovell-Badge, R., 2003.
Multipotent cell lineages in early mouse development depend on SOX2
function. Genes Dev. 17, 126–140.
Arnold, K., Sarkar, A., Yram, M.A., Polo, J.M., Bronson, R., Sengupta, S., Seandel, M.,
Geijsen, N., Hochedlinger, K., 2011. Sox2(þ) adult stem and progenitor cells are
important for tissue regeneration and survival of mice. Cell Stem Cell 9 (4),
317–329.
Barnabé-Heider, F., Frisén, J., 2008. Stemcells for spinal cord repair. Cell Stem Cell 3,
16–24.
Barnabé-Heider, F., Göritz, C., Sabelström, H., Takebayashi, H., Pfrieger, F.W., Meletis, K.,
Frisén, J., 2010. Origin of new glial cells in intact and injured adult spinal cord. Cell
Stem Cell 7, 470–482.
Beattie, M.S., Bresnahan, J.C., Lopate, G., 1990. Metamorphosis alters the response to
spinal cord transection in Xenopus laevis frogs. J. Neurobiol. 21, 1108–1122.
Becker, T., Wullimann, M.F., Becker, C.G., Bernhardt, R,R, Schachner, M., 1997.
Axonal regrowth after spinal cord transection in adult zebraﬁsh. J. Comp.
Neurol. 377, 577–595.
Benraiss, A., Arsanto, J.P., Coulon, J., Thouveny, Y., 1999. Neurogenesis during caudal
spinal cord regeneration in adult newts. Dev. Genes Evol. 209, 363–369.
Bertrand, N., Castro, D.S., Guillemot, F., 2002. Proneural genes and the speciﬁcation
of neural cell types. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 517–530.
Bestman, J.E., Lee-Osbourne, J., Cline, H.T., 2012. In vivo time lapse imaging of cell
proliferation and differentiation in the optic tectumof Xenopus laevis tadpoles.
J. Comp. Neurol. 520, 401–433.
Briona, L.K., Dorsky, R.I., 2014. Radial glial progenitors repair the zebraﬁsh spinal
cord following transection. Exp. Neurol. 256, 81–92.
Brunelli, S., Silva Casey, E., Bell, D., Harland, R., Lovell-Badge, R., 2003. Expression of
Sox3 throughout the developing central nervous system is dependent on the
combined action of discrete, evolutionarily conserved regulatory elements.
Genesis 36 (1), 12–24.
Bylund, M., Andersson, E., Novitch, B.G., Muhr, J., 2003. Vertebrate neurogenesis is
counteracted by Sox1-3 activity. Nat. Neurosci. 6 (11), 1162–1168.
Cai, Y., Xiong, K., Chu, Y., Luo, D.W., Luo, X.G., Yuan, X.Y., Struble, R.G., Clough, R.W.,
Spencer, D.D., Williamson, A., Kordower, J.H., Patrylo, P.R., Yan, X.X., 2009.
Doublecortin expression in adult cat and primate cerebral cortex relates to
immature neurons that develop into GABAergic subgroups. Exp. Neurol. 216 (2),
342–356.
Dee, C.T., Hirst, C.S., Shih, Y.H., Tripathi, V.B., Patient, R.K., Scotting, P,J., 2008. Sox3
regulates both neural fate and differentiation in the zebraﬁsh ectoderm. Dev.
Biol. 1 320 (1), 289–301.
des Portes, V., Pinard, J.M., Billuart, P., Vinet, M.C., Koulakoff, A., Carrie, A., Gelot, A.,
Dupuis, E., Motte, J., Berwald-Netter, Y., Catala, M., Kahn, A., Beldjord, C., Chelly, J.,
1998. A novel CNS gene required for neuronal migration and involved in X-linked
subcortical laminar heterotopia and lissencephaly syndrome. Cell 92, 51–61.
Díaz-Quiroz, J.F., Echeverri, K., 2013. Spinal cord regeneration: where ﬁsh, frogs and
salamanders lead the way, can we follow? Biochem. J. 451 (3), 353–364.
Du, Z.W., Ma, L.X., Phillips, C., Zhang, S.C., 2013. miR-200 and miR-96 families repress
neural induction from human embryonic stem cells. Development 140, 12.
Echeverri, K., Tanaka, E.M., 2003. Electroporation as a tool to study in vivo spinal
cord regeneration. Dev. Dyn. 226, 418–425.
Eisen, J.S., Smith, J.C., 2008. Controlling morpholino experiments: don’t stop
making antisense. Development 135, 10.
Ellis, P., Fagan, B.M., Magness, S.T., Hutton, S., Taranova, O., Hayashi, S., McMahon, A.,
Rao, M., Pevny, L., 2004. SOX2, a persistent marker for multipotential neural
stem cells derived from embryonic stem cells, the embryo or the adult. Dev.
Neurosci 26 (2–4), 148–165.
Fan, C., Zhang, M., Shang, L., Cynthia, N.A., Li, Z., Yang, Z., Chen, D., Huang, J., Xiong,
K., 2014. Short-term environmental enrichment exposure induces proliferation
and maturation of doublecortin-positive cells in the prefrontal cortex. Neural
Regen. Res. 9, 3.
Fei, J.F., Schuez, M., Tazaki, A., Taniguchi, Y., Roensch, K., Tanaka, E.M., 2014. CRISPR-
Mediated Genomic Deletion of Sox2 in the Axolotl Shows a Requirement in
Spinal Cord Neural Stem Cell Ampliﬁcation during Tail Regeneration. Stem Cell
Rep. 3 (3), 444–459.
Ferretti, P., Zhang, F., O’Neill, P., 2003. Changes in spinal cord regenerative ability
through phylogenesis and development: lessons to be learnt. Dev. Dyn. 226 (2),
245–256.
Ferri, A.L, Cavallaro, M., Braida, D., Di Cristofano, A., Canta, A., Vezzani, A.,
Ottolenghi, S., Pandolﬁ, P.P., Sala, M., DeBiasi, S., Nicolis, S.K., 2004. Sox2
deﬁciency causes neurodegeneration and impaired neurogenesis in the adult
mouse brain. Development 131, 3805–3819.
Filoni, S., Boscom, L., Cioni, C., 1984. Reconstitution of the spinal cord after ablation
in larval Xenopus laevis. Acta Embryol. Morphol. Exp. 5, 109–129.
Forehand, Farel, C.J., 1982. Anatomical and behavioral recovery from the effects of
spinal cord transection: dependence on metamorphosis in anuran larvae.
J. Neurosci. 2 (654–652).
Francis, F., Koulakoff, A., Boucher, D., Chafey, P., Schaar, B., Vinet, M.C., Friocourt, G.,
McDonnell, N., Reiner, O., Kahn, A., McConnell, S.K., Berwald-Netter, Y., Denou-
let,
P.,
Chelly,
J.,
1999.
Doublecortin
is
a
developmentally
regulated,
microtubule-associated protein expressed in migrating and differentiating
neurons. Neuron 23, 247–256.
Gaete, M., Muñoz, R., Sanchez, N., Tampe, R., Moreno, M., Contreras, E.G., Lee-Liu, D.,
Larrain, J., 2012. Spinal cord regeneration in xenopus tadpoles proceeds
through activation of Sox2 positive cells. Neural Dev 7, 13.
Georgi, S.A., Reh, T.A., 2010. Dicer is required for the transition from early to late
progenitor state in the developing mouse
retina. J. Neurosci. 30 (11),
4048–4061.
Gibbs, K.M., Chittur, S.V., Szarom, B.G., 2011. Metamorphosis and the regenerative
capacity of spinal cord axons in Xenopus laevis. Eur. J. Neurosci. 33 (1), 9–25.
Gleeson,
J.G.,
Lin,
P.T.,
Flanagan,
L.A.,
Walsh,
C.A.,
1999.
Doublecortin
is
amicrotubule-associated protein and is expressed widely by migrating neurons.
Neuron 23, 257–271.
Godwin, J., 2014. The promise of perfect adult tissue repair and regeneration in
mammals: learning from regenerative amphibians and ﬁsh. Bioessays 36 (9),
861–871.
Goldshmit, Y., Sztal, T.E., Jusuf, P.R., Hall, T.E., Nguyen-Chi, M., Currie, P.D., 2012. Fgf-
dependent glial cell bridges facilitate spinal cord regeneration in zebraﬁsh.
J. Neurosci. 32 (22), 7477–7492.
Guo, Y., Ma, L., Cristofanilli, M., Hart, R.P., Hao, A., Schachner, M., 2011. Transcription
factor Sox11b is involved in spinal cord regeneration in adult zebraﬁsh.
Neuroscience 172, 329–341.
Harland, R.M., Grainger, R.M., 2011. Xenopus research: metamorphosed by genetics
and genomics. Trends Genet 27, 507–515.
Horky, L.L., Galimi, F., Gage, F.H., Horner, P.J., 2006. Fate of endogenous stem/
progenitor cells following spinal cord injury. J. Comp. Neurol. 498, 525–538.
Horner, P.J., Power, A.E., Kempermann, G., Kuhn, H.G., Palmer, T.D., Winkler, J., Thal,
L.J., Gage, F.H., 2000. Proliferation and differentiation of progenitor cells
throughout the intact adult rat spinal cord. J. Neurosci. 20, 2218–2228.
Ishibashi, S., Kroll, K.L., Amaya, E., 2007a. Generation of Transgenic Xenopus laevis:
I. High-Speed Preparation of Egg Extracts. CSH Protoc:pdb.prot4838.
Ishibashi, S., Kroll, K.L., Amaya, E., 2007b. Generation of Transgenic Xenopus laevis:
II. Sperm Nuclei Preparation. CSH Protoc:pdb.prot4839.
Ishibashi, S., Kroll, K.L., Amaya, E., 2007c. Generation of Transgenic Xenopus laevis:
III. Sperm Nuclear Transplantation. CSH Protoc:pdb.prot4840.
Javaherian, A., Cline, H.T., 2005. Coordinated motor neuron axon growth and
neuromuscular synaptogenesis are promoted by CPG15 in vivo. Neuron 17
45 (4), 505–512.
Kamachi, Y., Kondoh, H., 2013. Sox proteins: regulators of cell fate speciﬁcation and
differentiation. Development 140 (20), 4129–4144.
Kishi, M., Mizuseki, K., Sasai, N., Yamazaki, H., Shiota, K., Nakanishi, S., Sasai, Y.,
2000. Requirement of Sox2-mediated signaling for differentiation of early
Xenopus neuroectoderm. Development 127, 791–800.
Klempin, F., Kronenberg, G., Cheung, G., Kettenmann, H., Kempermann, G., 2011.
Properties of doublecortin (DCX) expressing cells in the piriform cortex
compared to the neurogenic dentate gyrus of adult mice. PLoS One 6 (10),
e25760.
Koyano-Nakagawa, N., Wettstein, D., Kintner, C., 1999. Activation of Xenopus genes
required for lateral inhibition and neuronal differentiation during primary
neurogenesis. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 14, 327–339.
Koyano, S., Ito, M., Takamatsu, N., Takiguchi, S., Shiba, T., 1997. The Xenopus Sox3
gene expressed in oocytes of early stages. Gene 25 188 (1), 101–107.
Kutsuna, N., Suma, T., Takada, Y., Yamashita, A., Oshima, H., Sakatani, K., Yamamoto,
T., Katayama, Y., 2012. Decrease in doublecortin expression without neuronal
cell death in rat retrosplenial cortex after stress exposure. Neuroreport 23 (4),
211–215.
Lee, JE, Hollenberg, SM, Snider, L, Turner, DL, Lipnick, N, et al., 1995. Conversion of
Xenopus ectoderm into neurons by NeuroD, a basic helix-loop-helix protein.
Science 268, 836–844.
Lee-Liu, D., Edwards-Faret, G., Tapia, V.S., Larraín, J., 2013. Spinal cord regeneration:
lessons for mammals from non-mammalian vertebrates. Genesis 51, 529–544.
R. Muñoz et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 229–243
242

Lee-Liu, D., Moreno, M., Almonacid, L.I., Tapia, V.S., Muñoz, R., von Marées, J., Gaete,
M., Melo, F., Larraín, J., 2014. Genome-wide expression proﬁle of the response to
spinal cord injury in Xenopus laevis reveals extensive differences between
regenerative and non-regenerative stages. Neural Dev. 9, 12.
Lemaire, P., Gurdon, J.B., 1994. A role for cytoplasmic determinants in mesoderm
patterning: cell-autonomous activation of the goosecoid and Xwnt-8 genes
along the dorsoventral axis of early Xenopus embryos. Development 120,
1191–1199.
Liu, M, Pleasure, SJ, Collins, AE, Noebels, JL, Naya, FJ, et al., 2000. Loss of BETA2/
NeuroD leads to malformation of the dentate gyrus and epilepsy. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 865–870.
Levy, D.L., Heald, R., 2010. Nuclear Size Is Regulated by Importin a and Ntf2 in
Xenopus. Cell 143, 288–298.
Masui, S., Nakatake, Y., Toyooka, Y., Shimosato, D., Yagi, R., Takahashi, K., Okochi, H.,
Okuda, A., Matoba, R., Sharov, A.A., Ko, M.S., Niwa, H., 2007. Pluripotency
governed by Sox2 via regulation of Oct3/4 expression in mouse embryonic
stem cells. Nat. Cell Biol. 9 (6), 625–635.
Meletis, K., Barnabe-Heider, F., Carlen, M., Evergren, E., Tomilin, N., Shupliakov, O.,
Frisen, J., 2008. Spinal cord injury reveals multilineage differentiation of
ependymal cells. PLoS Biol. 6 (7), e182.
Meyer, G., Perez-Garcia, C.G., Gleeson, J.G., 2002. Selective expression of double-
cortin and LIS1 in developing human cortex suggests unique modes of neuronal
movement. Cereb. Cortex 12, 1225–1236.
Michel, M.E., Reier, P.J., 1979. Axonal-ependymal associations during early regen-
eration of the transected spinal cord in Xenopus laevis tadpoles. J. Neurocytol. 8,
529–548.
Miyata, T., Maeda, T., Lee, J.E., 1999. NeuroD is required for differentiation of the
granule cells in the cerebellum and hippocampus. Genes Dev. 13, 1647–1652.
Mizuseki, K., Kishi, M., Matsui, M., Nakanishi, S., Sasai, Y., 1998. Xenopus Zic-
related-1 and Sox-2, two factors induced by chordin, have distinct activities in
the initiation of neural induction. Development 125 (4), 579–587.
Mothe, A.J., Zahir, T., Santaguida, C., Cook, D., Tator, C.H., 2011. Neural stem/
progenitor cells from the adult human spinal cord are multipotent and self-
renewing and differentiate after transplantation. PLoS One 6 (11), e27079.
Nacher, J., Crespo, C., McEwen, B.S., 2001. Doublecortin expression in the adult rat
telencephalon. Eur. J. Neurosci 14, 629–644.
Okuda, Y., Yoda, H., Uchikawa, M., Furutani-Seiki, M., Takeda, H., Kondoh, H.,
Kamachi, Y., 2006. Comparative genomic and expression analysis of group B1
sox genes in zebraﬁsh indicates their diversiﬁcation during vertebrate evolu-
tion. Dev. Dyn. 235 (3), 811–825.
Parrinello, S., Napoli, I., Ribeiro, S., Wingﬁeld Digby, P., Fedorova, M., Parkinson, D.B.,
Doddrell, R.D., Nakayama, M., Adams, R.H., Lloyd, A.C., 2010. EphB signaling
directs peripheral nerve regeneration through Sox2- dependent Schwann cell
sorting. Cell 143, 145–155.
Peng, C., Li, N., Ng, Y.K., Zhang, J., Meier, F., Theis, F.J., Merkenschlager, M., Chen, W.,
Wurst, W., Prakash, N., 2012. A unilateral negative feedback loop between
miR-200 microRNAs and Sox2/E2F3 controls neural progenitor cell-cycle exit
and differentiation. J. Neurosci. 32 (38), 13292–13308.
Pevny, L.H., Nicolis, S.K., 2010. Sox2 roles in neural stem cells. Int. J. Biochem. Cell
Biol. 42 (3), 421–424.
Reimer, M.M., Sörensen, I., Kuscha, V., Frank, R.E., Liu, C., Becker, C.G., Becker, T.,
2008. Motor neuron regeneration in adult zebraﬁsh. J. Neurosci. 28, 8510–8516.
Rex, M., Uwanogho, D.A., Orme, A., Scotting, P.J., Sharpe, P.T., 1997. cSox21 exhibits a
complex and dynamic pattern of transcription during embryonic development
of the chick central nervous system. Mech. Dev. 66 (1–2), 39–53.
Rogers, C.D., Archer, T.C., Cunningham, D.D., Grammer, T.C., Casey, E.M., 2008. Sox3
expression is maintained by FGF signaling and restricted to the neural plate by
Vent proteins in the Xenopus embryo. Dev. Biol. 1 313 (1), 307–319.
Rogers, C.D., Harafuji, N., Archer, T., Cunningham, D.D., Casey, E.S., 2009. Xenopus
Sox3 activates sox2 and geminin and indirectly represses Xvent2 expression to
induce neural progenitor formation at the expense of non-neural ectodermal
derivatives. Mech. Dev. 126 (1–2), 42–55.
Sabelström, H., Stenudd, M., Réu, P., Dias, D.O., Elﬁneh, M., Zdunek, S., Damberg, P.,
Göritz, C., Frisén, J., 2013. Resident neural stem cells restrict tissue damage and
neuronal loss after spinal cord injury in mice. Science 1 342 (6158), 637–640.
Sandberg, M., Källström, M., Muhr, J., 2005. Sox21 promotes the progression of
vertebrate neurogenesis. Nat. Neurosci. 8 (8), 995–1001.
Sarkar, A., Hochedlinger, K., 2013. The sox family of transcription factors: versatile
regulators of stem and progenitor cell fate. Cell Stem Cell 12 (1), 15–30.
Schlosser, G., Northcutt, R.G., 2000. Development of neurogenic placodes in
Xenopus laevis. J. Comp. Neurol 418, 121–146.
Schlosser, G., Koyano-Nakagawa, N., Kintner, C., 2002. Thyroid hormone promotes
neurogenesis in the Xenopus spinal cord. Dev. Dyn. 225, 485–498.
Shihabuddin, L.S., Horner, P.J., Ray, J., Gage, F.H., 2000. Adult spinal cord stem cells
generate neurons after transplantation in the adult dentate gyrus. J. Neurosci.
20, 8727–8735.
Sims, R.T., 1962. Transection of the spinal cord in developing Xenopus laevis.
J. Embryol. Exp. Morphol 10, 115–126.
Sive, H.L., Grainger, R.M., Harland, R.M., 2000. Early Development of Xenopus laevis:
A Laboratory Manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laborarory Press, Cold Spring Harbor,
NY, USA.
Tanaka, E.M., Ferretti, P., 2009. Considering the evolution of regeneration in the
central nervous system. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 713–723.
Tetzlaff, W., Okon, E.B., Karimi-Abdolrezaee, S., Hill, C.E., Sparling, S., Plemel, J.R.,
Plunet, W.T., Tsai, E.C., Baptiste, D., Smithson, L.J., Kawaja, M.D., Fehlings, M.G.,
Kwon, B.K., 2011. A systematic review of cellular transplantation therapies for
spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 28 (8), 1611–1682.
Thomson, M., Liu, S.J., Zou, L.N., Smith, Z., Meissner, A., Ramanathan, S., 2011.
Pluripotency factors in embryonic stem cells regulate differentiation into germ
layers. Cell 145 (6), 875–889.
Thuret, S., Moon, L.D.F., Gage, F.H., 2006. Therapeutic interventions after spinal cord
injury. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 628–643.
Tuszynski, M.H., Steward, O., 2012. Concepts and methods for the study of axonal
regeneration in the CNS. Neuron 74, 777–791.
Van Raay, T.J., Moore, K.B., Iordanova, I., Steele, M., Jamrich, M., Harris, W.A., Vetter,
M.L., 2005. Frizzled 5 signaling governs the neural potential of progenitors in
the developing Xenopus retina. Neuron 46, 23–36.
Walters, A., Bommakanti, A., Cohen-Fix, O., 2012. Shaping the nucleus: factors and
forces. J. Cell. Biochem. 113, 2813–2821.
Xiong, K., Luo, D.W., Patrylo, P.R., Luo, X.G., Struble, R.G., Clough, R.W., Yan, X.X.,
2008. Doublecortin-expressing cells are present in layer II across the adult
guinea pig cerebral cortex: partial colocalization with mature interneuron
markers. Exp. Neurol. 211 (1), 271–282.
Yoshino, J., Tochinai, S., 2004. Successful reconstitution of the non-regenerating
adult telencephalon by cell transplantation in Xenopus laevis. Dev. Growth
Differ. 46, 523–534.
Zukor, K.A., Kent, D.T., Odelberg, S.J., 2011. Meningeal cells and glia establish a
permissive environment for axon regeneration after spinal cord injury in
newts. Neural Dev 6, 1.
R. Muñoz et al. / Developmental Biology 408 (2015) 229–243
243

===== Muthusamy2018_SciRep_FoxJ1+EC+NoContribution =====
1
SCieNtifiC REPOrts |  (2018) 8:1766  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-19913-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Foxj1 expressing ependymal cells 
do not contribute new cells to sites 
of injury or stroke in the mouse 
forebrain
Nagendran Muthusamy1, Andrew Brumm2, Xuying Zhang1, S. Thomas Carmichael   2 &  
H. Troy Ghashghaei1
The stem cell source of neural and glial progenitors in the periventricular regions of the adult forebrain 
has remained uncertain and controversial. Using a cell specific genetic approach we rule out Foxj1+ 
ependymal cells as stem cells participating in neurogenesis and gliogenesis in response to acute injury 
or stroke in the mouse forebrain. Non stem- and progenitor-like responses of Foxj1+ ependymal cells to 
injury and stroke remain to be defined and investigated.
Past reports have suggested that adult ependymal cells (ECs), or a subpopulation thereof, have endogenous stem 
cell potential with the ability to generate new neurons for the olfactory bulbs (OBs) and in response to stroke 
in the mouse forebrain. In one study, intraventricular injections of adeno or lenti viruses driving expression of 
reporters downstream of the human FOXJ1 promoter resulted in labeling of new cells generated from transduced 
cells only after induction of stroke but not in naïve adult mice1. The same human promoter element was used in 
a subsequent study leading the authors to postulate substantial plasticity in the EC lineage and their relationship 
to nearby astrocytes2. The same promoter was also cloned into a reporter piggyback vector and electroporated 
into the rat brain, resulting in lineage-traced cells in the olfactory bulbs after 6 or 12 weeks in both healthy and 
stroke-induced brains through medial cerebral artery occlusions (MCAO)3. In other studies of the spinal cord, 
similar lineage tracing approaches were utilized to show that a substantial portion of the glial scar in damaged 
spinal cords come from ECs4–6 presumably due to their extensive proliferation7.
Concerned that the human promoter element utilized in the past studies (a ~ 1 kb upstream human FOXJ1 
locus) was resulting in ectopic expression patterns, we generated a knock-in Foxj1creERT2::GFP mouse to lineage-trace 
potential EC progeny from the endogenous locus. This line has been characterized8 and was used in a recent study 
illustrating that spinal cord injury fails to induce Foxj1+ ECs to proliferate or to substantially contribute new 
cells to the glial scar9. To test the possibility that damage or stroke in the forebrain may contribute to the reported 
transformation of ependyma into neurogenic or gliogenic progenitors, a stab injury and three distinct stroke 
models were employed.
Results
Recombination was induced by tamoxifen administration (TAM) in naïve and experimental mice, and 
cre-dependent expression of tdTomato (tdTom) was quantified using the well-established Ai9 reporter allele. 
In experimental animals, TAM was administered daily at postnatal day 39 (P39) for five days in young adult 
mice, stab injuries were inflicted in the motor cortex on the forth day of TAM administration (at P42), followed 
by perfusion and analysis two weeks later at P56 (Fig. 1a). Two weeks post-injury is a well-established time line 
for neurogenic and gliogenic responses to injury and stroke based on numerous past studies10–12. Sectioning 
and microscopic analysis of each brain revealed little to no tdTom+ cells anywhere along the injured site or in 
surrounding forebrain regions (Fig. 1b/b’). The scarce tdTom+ cells near the site of injury were found within the 
1WM Keck Center for Behavioral Biology, Program in Genetics, Program in Comparative Biomedical Sciences, 
Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, 
1060 William Moore Dr., Raleigh, NC, 27607, USA. 2Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, 635 Charles Young Drive, CA, 90095, USA. Nagendran Muthusamy, Andrew 
Brumm and Xuying Zhang contributed equally to this work. Correspondence and requests for materials should be 
addressed to H.T.G. (email: Troy_Ghashghaei@ncsu.edu)
Received: 10 April 2017
Accepted: 10 January 2018
Published: xx xx xxxx
OPEN

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
SCieNtifiC REPOrts |  (2018) 8:1766  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-19913-x
scar tissue as revealed by GFAP staining (Fig. 1c/c’), and were nearly all glia-like (Fig. 2a). In addition, there was 
a slight, yet significant elevation in the number of cells found in the OBs of injured brains (Fig. 1d,e), with most 
of them resembling immature neurons (Figs 1f and 2a). Analysis with established markers for neurons and glia 
revealed robust overlap of the rare delaminated tdTom+ cells (those outside the ependymal layer) with the glial 
marker S100, and far less with GFAP or Olig2 within and around the scar region in the subependymal zone (SEZ), 
white matter (WM) or cortical parenchyma (Ctx) overlying the ventricles (Fig. 2b,c).
To assess whether prolonged survival post injury would recruit a potential slow-responsive ependymal pro-
genitor pool to contribute cells to the injured site, we extended survival of P42 induced/P46 injured mice to 
1-month post injury. Prolonged survival failed to capture any additional tdTom+ cells within the forebrain 
(Fig. 3). Moreover, since we consistently find some tdTom+ neurons in the OB when recombination is induced 
between P0-P21 in Foxj1creERT2 mice8, we wondered if a quiescent population of Foxj1+ ECs may only be geneti-
cally accessible during early postnatal periods. To test this possibility, early postnatal-induced mice (TAM admin-
istered P1-P5) were injured in their motor cortex at P42 (Fig. 4). Again, little to no tdTom+ cells were found 
within or surrounding the site of injury when analyzed at P56 (Fig. 4). As expected, and in contrast to P39-P44 
induced brains, there were substantially higher number of cells in the OBs (Fig. 4e) confirming our past findings, 
with most of them resembling neurons (Fig. 4f). However, there was no significant difference in number or types 
of cells in the OBs of experimental and naïve mice, suggesting no proliferative or differentiative response by 
Foxj1-derived cells to cortical injury. These findings suggest that ECs for the most part fail to participate in gener-
ation of new cells within sites of injury in the forebrain, as also recently reported in the spinal cord3.
Figure 1.  Lack of EC expansion or cellular contribution to sites of cortical injury. (a) Experimental paradigm 
for initiation of recombination in ECs, timing of cortical injury, and analysis. (b/b’) Low magnification 
images of tdTom and GFAP signals in forebrains of Naïve and cortically injured mice (fluorescent signals were 
rendered to black for visualization). Scale bar: 500 µm. Boxed areas in tdTom image under ‘Naïve’ represent 
areas magnified in (c/c’) (i–iv). (c/c’–d/d’) Higher magnification images of regions demarcated in (b/b’) of the 
caudal SEZ (i, v), dorsal SEZ (ii, vi), rostral SEZ (iii, vii), and OB (iv, viii). Scale bars: (c/c’), 50 µm; d/d’, 10 µm. 
(e) Quantification of cell numbers in forebrain regions of naïve and experimental mice in which sporadic cells 
were found (n = 5 sagittal sections per each of three mice per group). Data points are from individual sagittal 
forebrain sections. Error bars are for mean ± s.e.m.; Significance (*) was determined at p < 0.05, Student’s t test. 
(f) Identification of cells in forebrain regions of naïve and cortical injury (CI) mice as neurons, glia or immature 
cells (see Fig. 2 for morphological characterizations). Data points are from individual sagittal forebrain sections. 
Error bars are for mean ± s.e.m. Note on instances where the tdTom+ EC layer appears multilayered: the 
50 µm thickness of sections when mounted results in flattening of the surface of the ventricles and a mirage of 
multilayered ECs.

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
SCieNtifiC REPOrts |  (2018) 8:1766  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-19913-x
Next, to determine whether stroke transforms ependyma to gain progenitor properties as suggested in a prior 
study1, three models were used; photothrombotic (PT) induced stroke in the motor cortex (Fig. 5), as well as 
middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) and vasoconstrictive agent N5-(1-iminoethyl)-L-ornithine (L-NIO) 
induced striatal stroke (Fig. 6). The three models produce damage in three distinct forebrain regions; motor cor-
tex, somatosensory cortex and striatum, which are all associated with neurogenesis after stroke13,14. In all three 
models, P95 Foxj1creERT2 mice were subjects of a stroke induction with 5-day TAM administrations the same as 
the injury model described above, followed by 14 days of survival (Figs 5a and 6a). Similar to blunt stab injuries, 
few if any tdTom+ cells were found outside of the EC layer in any of the stroke models applied to TAM-induced 
Foxj1creERT2 mice. Interestingly, a few tdTom+ cells were delaminated from the EC layer into the overlying WM 
Figure 2.  Morphological characterization of neurons, glial and immature/unidentified cells in the forebrains of 
naïve and experimental mice. (a) Images are of tdTom+ cells rendered to monochrome for ease of visualization. 
Labels on each image indicate injury or stroke model (top row) and region from which the cell was captured 
(bottom row). (b) Marker analysis of the sparse tdTom+ cells found within the scar or infaract regions of injury 
and stroke models. GFAP, Olig2, Dcx label reactive astrocytes, glial progenitors and neuroblasts, respectively. 
Note, little to no overlap between these markers and the tdTom+ cells. Scale bars, 10 um. (c) Percentages of 
delaminated tdTom+ cells in mice with cortical injury, positive for various markers: GFAP, reactive astrocytes; 
Dcx, neuroblasts; Olig2, glia progenitors; S100, protoplasmic astrocytes; Tuj1, immature neurons; NeuN, mature 
neurons. Data points are from individual sagittal forebrain sections; n = 3 animals.

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
SCieNtifiC REPOrts |  (2018) 8:1766  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-19913-x
in the PT model (Fig. 5d’), but these were highly infrequent, and most cells remained within the white matter 
directly ventral to the site of stroke. There was a profound transformation in the shape of presumptive tdTom+ 
ECs near these sites exhibiting elongated processes toward the site of stroke (Fig. 5c/c’–d/d’). The delaminated 
cells did not resemble neurons or astrocytes. Interestingly, we did not observe these transformations in any of the 
mice inflicted with blunt injury suggesting possible differences in mechanisms that drive responses to trauma 
versus stroke-associated ischemia in the forebrain.
Discussion
Taken together, our results indicate minimal, if any, direct cellular contribution from the Foxj1+ ependymal 
cell pool to sites of insult or other forebrain regions after injury and stroke. These findings are consistent with 
the recent report on responses of Foxj1+ ECs in the spinal canal to injury9. At this juncture, we postulate that 
the human FOXJ1 promoter element was most likely the source of mislabeling in the past findings. In fact, two 
lines of transgenic mice driving EGFP and creERT2 expression under the same human FOXJ1 promoter exhibit 
far more expression outside the EC layer than the knock-in line employed in the current study. It is possible that 
a population of Foxj1-negative ECs will exhibit progenitor capacity, thus escaping our lineage tracing method. 
However, this is highly unlikely since the EC phenotype is unequivocally dependent on Foxj1 expression15,16. 
Moreover, characterization of recombination rate with our tamoxifen induction protocol labels the vast major-
ity of ECs8. Even though the current findings rule out Foxj1-expressing ependyma as a source of new cells in 
response to injury and stroke, the role of ECs in homeostasis of the brain and their cellular responses to injury, 
disease, and aging are beginning to be deciphered17,18.
Figure 3.  Lack of EC expansion or cellular contribution to sites of cortical injury after prolonged survival. (a) 
Experimental paradigm for initiation of recombination in ECs, timing of cortical injury, and analysis. (b/b’) 
Low magnification images of tdTom and GFAP signals in forebrains of Naïve and cortically injured mice 
(fluorescent signals are rendered to black for visualization). Scale bar: 500 µm. Boxed areas in tdTom image 
under ‘Naïve’ represent areas magnified in (c/c’) (i–iv). (c/c’–d/d’) Higher magnification images of regions 
demarcated in (b/b’) of the caudal SEZ (i, v), dorsal SEZ (ii, vi), rostral SEZ (iii, vii), and OB (iv, viii). Scale bars: 
(c/c’), 50 µm; d/d’, 10 µm. (e) Quantification of cell numbers in forebrain regions of naïve and experimental mice 
in which sporadic cells were found (n = 5 sagittal sections per each of three mice per group). Data points are 
from individual sagittal forebrain sections. Data are mean ± s.e.m.; Significance (*) was determined at p < 0.05, 
Student’s t test. (f) Identification of cells in forebrain regions of naïve and cortical injury (CI) mice as neurons, 
glia or immature cells (see Fig. 2 for morphological characterizations). Data points are from individual sagittal 
forebrain sections. Data are mean ± s.e.m. Note on instances where the tdTom+ EC layer appears multilayered: 
the 50 µm thickness of sections when mounted results in flattening of the surface of the ventricles and a mirage 
of multilayered ECs.

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
SCieNtifiC REPOrts |  (2018) 8:1766  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-19913-x
Methods
Animals. 
Use of mice was in accordance with the US National Institutes of Health Animal Protection 
Guidelines and approval from institutional animal care and use committees at North Carolina State University 
and University of California Los Angeles. Heterozygous Foxj1creERT2 mice (Jackson Laboratory, Stock No: 027012) 
on the Ai9 reporter background (Jackson Laboratory, Stock No: 007909) were generated as described before8. 
Mice were experimentally naïve prior to the studies, were housed at four mice per cage, and maintained on a 12 h 
light/dark cycle. Expression of tdTomato (tdTom) was induced in adult Foxj1creERT2/Ai9 mice using a five-day 
tamoxifen (TAM) induction protocol. Animals were induced at various postnatal time points through intraperi-
toneal injections of 4-OH TAM (10 mg/ml in 10% EtOH/90% corn oil, Sigma) at 100 mg/kg body weight once per 
diem for a period of five days. All stab injury and stroke surgeries were performed after a washout period of 14 
days following the end of TAM administration. Control animals received no injury or stroke but underwent the 
same 4-OH TAM induction protocol as animals in each injury and stroke group.
Cortical Stab Injuries. 
Ten Foxj1creERT2 mice at P1 and eight at P39 were induced by Tamoxifen (TAM, 
75 mg/kg body weight) administered intraperitoneally for five consecutive days either directly or to females 
with newborn pups. Both groups were anesthetized by isofluorane at P42 and received bilateral stab wounds in 
their motor cortices (1 mm lateral to Bregma) using a 0.5 mm-tipped sterile stainless steel probe mounted on a 
Figure 4.  Lack of EC expansion or cellular contribution to sites of cortical injury after induction during early 
postnatal days. (a) Experimental paradigm for initiation of recombination in ECs from P1 to P5, timing of 
stroke induction, and analysis. (b/b’) Low magnification images of tdTom and GFAP signals in forebrains 
of Naïve and cortically injured mice (fluorescent signals were rendered to black for visualization). Scale bar: 
500 µm. Boxed areas in tdTom image under ‘Naïve’ represent areas magnified in (c/c’) (i–iv). (c/c’–d/d’) Higher 
magnification images of regions demarcated in (b/b’) of the caudal SEZ (i, v), dorsal SEZ (ii, vi), rostral SEZ 
(iii, vii), and OB (iv, viii). Scale bars: (c/c’) 50 µm; (d/d’) 10 µm. (e) Quantification of cell numbers in forebrain 
regions of naïve and experimental mice in which sporadic cells were found (n = 5 sagittal sections per each of 
3 mice per group). Data points are from individual sagittal forebrain sections. Error bars are for mean ± s.e.m.; 
Significance (*) was determined at p < 0.05, Student’s t test. (f) Identification of cells in forebrain regions 
of naïve (N) and cortical injury (CI) mice as neurons, glia or immature cells (see Fig. 2 for morphological 
characterizations). Data points are from individual sagittal forebrain sections. Error bars are for mean ± s.e.m. 
Note on instances where the tdTom+ EC layer appears multilayered: the 50 µm thickness of sections when 
mounted results in flattening of the surface of the ventricles and a mirage of multilayered ECs.

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
SCieNtifiC REPOrts |  (2018) 8:1766  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-19913-x
stereotaxic apparatus. Mice were then sutured along the scalp, removed from the stereotactic frame and allowed 
to recover. Mice were sacrificed 14 or 30 days later by Avertin overdose followed by intracardial perfusion.
Stroke Models. 
Focal photothrombotic (PT) cortical strokes were produced as previously described19. Mice 
were placed in a stereotactic frame under isoflurane anesthesia and the skull was exposed through a midline inci-
sion. A cold light source (KL1500 LCD; Carl Zeiss MicroImaging) attached to a 40× objective provided a 2 mm 
diameter illumination spot and was positioned +1.50 mm lateral to bregma to produce a 2 mm diameter focal 
stroke upon illumination. Rose Bengal (10 mg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich) was administered via i.p. injection at 100 mg/
kg body weight. After 5 min, the brain was illuminated through the intact skull for 15 min. Mice were then sutured 
along the scalp, removed from the stereotactic frame and allowed to recover. Body temperature was maintained at 
37.0 °C with a homeothermic warming system (Kent Scientific) throughout the procedure.
Middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)-induced cortical barrel field strokes were produced by occlusion of 
a distal branch of the middle cerebral artery as previously described10 with modifications. In this model, ischemic 
cellular damage is localized to somatosensory and motor cortex. Under isoflurane anesthesia, mice were placed in 
a stereotaxic frame and the skull was exposed through an incision between the eye and external auditory meatus. 
A small burr hole was drilled in the skull to access and permanently occlude a distal branch of the MCA using 
a small heater probe. The surgical site was sutured and mice were then removed from the stereotaxic frame and 
placed in a supine position. A midline incision was used to expose the ipsilateral common carotid artery, which 
Figure 5.  Lack of EC expansion or cellular contribution in PT-induced cortical stroke. (a) Experimental 
paradigm for initiation of recombination in ECs, timing of stroke induction, and analysis. (b/b’) Low 
magnification images of tdTom and GFAP signals in forebrains of Naïve and cortically injured mice (fluorescent 
signals were rendered to black for visualization). Scale bar: 500 µm. Boxed areas in tdTom image under ‘Naïve’ 
represent areas magnified in (c/c’) (i-iv). (c/c’–d/d’) Higher magnification images of regions demarcated in 
(b/b’) of the caudal SEZ (i, v), dorsal SEZ (ii, vi), rostral SEZ (iii, vii), and OB (iv, viii). Scale bars: (c/c’) 50 µm; 
(d/d’) 10 µm. Arrows point to delaminated cells in various regions; arrowheads, EC process extensions into 
the white matter overlying the ventricles. (e) Quantification of cell numbers in forebrain regions of naïve and 
experimental mice in which sporadic cells were found (n = 5 sagittal sections per each of 3 mice per group). 
Data points are from individual sagittal forebrain sections. Error bars are for mean ± s.e.m.; Significance (*) was 
determined at p < 0.05, Student’s t test. (f) Identification of cells in forebrain regions of naïve (N) and cortical 
injury (CI) mice as neurons, glia or immature cells (see Fig. 2 for morphological characterizations). Data points 
are from individual sagittal forebrain sections. Error bars are for mean ± s.e.m. Note on instances where the 
tdTom+ EC layer appears multilayered: the 50 µm thickness of sections when mounted results in flattening of 
the surface of the ventricles and a mirage of multilayered ECs.

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
SCieNtifiC REPOrts |  (2018) 8:1766  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-19913-x
was permanently occluded using a small heater probe. The surgical site was sutured and mice were allowed to 
recover. Body temperature was maintained at 37.0 °C with a homoeothermic warming system throughout the 
procedure.
Ischemic strokes limited to the striatum were produced by injection of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase 
(eNOS) inhibitor N5-(1-iminoethyl)-L-ornithine (L-NIO) as described20 with modifications. Under isoflurane 
anesthesia, mice were placed in the supine position and a midline incision was used to expose the common 
carotid arteries adjacent to the trachea. The ipsilateral common carotid artery was permanently occluded using 
a small heater probe. The surgical site was sutured and mice were placed in a stereotaxic frame. The skull was 
exposed through a midline incision and a small burr hole was drilled in the skull at coordinates of +0.50 mm 
anterior and +2.75 mm lateral to bregma. A total of 4 µl L-NIO (27 mg/ml, Millipore) was injected with a micro-
liter syringe (Hamilton) through cortex and white matter into the striatum, delivering one-third of the 4 ul total 
volume of L-NIO at coordinates of −3.00 mm, −2.60 mm, and −2.20 mm ventral to bregma. Each injection was 
performed at 200 nl/min using a small volume syringe pump (Chemyx) attached to the stereotaxic frame. The 
surgical site was sutured and mice were allowed to recover. Body temperature was maintained at 37.0 °C with a 
homeothermic warming system throughout the procedure.
Immunohistochemistry, Imaging, and Cellular Quantifications. 
Mice of defined experimental 
end points were perfused with 4% Parafomaldehyde and the brains were removed from the skull and post-fixed 
Figure 6.  Lack of EC expansion or cellular contribution to sites of infarct after MCAO and L-NIO induced 
striatal stroke. (a) Experimental paradigm for initiation of recombination in ECs in P95 mice, timing of MCAO 
and L-NIO, and analysis. (b/b’) Low magnification images of tdTom and GFAP signals in forebrains of MCAO 
and L-NIO mice (fluorescent signals were rendered to monochrome for ease of visualization). Scale bar: 
500 µm. Boxed areas in tdTom image under ‘MCAO’ represent areas magnified in c/c’ (i-iv). (c/c’-d/d’) Higher 
magnification images of regions demarcated in (b/b’) of the caudal SEZ (i, v), dorsal SEZ (ii, vi), rostral SEZ 
(iii, vii), and OB (iv, viii). Scale bars: (c/c’) 50 µm; (d/d’) 10 µm. Arrows point to delaminated cells in various 
regions; arrowheads, EC process extensions into the white matter overlying the ventricles. (e) Quantification of 
cell numbers in forebrain regions of MCAO and L-NIO mice in which sporadic cells were found (n = 5 sagittal 
sections per each of 3 mice per group); data from naïve mice are also included for comparison. Data points are 
from individual sagittal forebrain sections. Error bars are for mean ± s.e.m.; Significance (*) was determined 
at p < 0.05, Student’s t test. (f) Identification of cells in forebrain regions of naïve (N) and cortical injury (CI) 
mice as neurons, glia or immature cells (see Fig. 2 for morphological characterizations). Data points are from 
individual sagittal forebrain sections. Error bars are for mean ± s.e.m. Note on instances where the tdTom + EC 
layer appears multilayered: the 50 µm thickness of sections when mounted results in flattening of the surface of 
the ventricles and a mirage of multilayered ECs.

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
SCieNtifiC REPOrts |  (2018) 8:1766  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-19913-x
overnight. Brains were sectioned into 50 µm sagittal sections with a vibratome. For immunohistochemistry, float-
ing brain sections were blocked with 10% goat serum and 1% Triton-X 100 in 0.1 M PBS for 1 hour at room tem-
perature. Sections were then incubated at 4 °C overnight with one or a combination of the following antibodies: 
Rabbit anti-RFP (Abcam, ab6231; 1:1000), Rabbit anti-GFAP (Millipore, MAB360; 1:1000), and Rat anti-GFAP 
(Life Technologies, 13-0300; 1:500), Guinea pig anti-DCX (Millipore, AB2283; 1:1000), Rabbit anti-Olig2 
(Millipore, AB9610, 1:1000), Mouse anti-TuJ1(Biolegend, 801201, 1:500), Rabbit anit-S100 (Dako, 20311; 
1:1000), Mouse anti-Neun (Millipore, MAB377; 1:1000). DAPI was used counterstaining the brain sections. All 
primary antibodies were dissolved in PBS with 1% goat serum, 0.3% Triton X-100. Sections were washed in PBS 
three times (five minutes each), followed by incubation with species-specific conjugated fluorescence secondary 
antibodies for one hour at room temperature. After secondary antibody incubation, the sections were washed 
with the same washing protocol and coverslipped. Sections were imaged on a Nikon Eclipse EZ-C1 or Olympus 
FV1000 confocal microscopes.
Foxj1creERT2 labeled tdTom+ cells in various forebrain structures in naïve and experimental mice were counted 
in tile-scanned confocal images of sagittal sections from three mice in each group (five sections containing 
intact olfactory bulbs, 20× objective, 1024 × 1024 resolution, 0.62 µm per pixel). DAPI counterstain was used 
to delineate architectonic boundaries using the Allen Brain Atlas P56 mouse sagittal reference panels (http://
atlas.brain-map.org/atlas?atlas=2). Counting was conducted in ImageJ using the Cell Counter plugin (ImageJ, 
US National Institutes of Health). Neuronal, glial, and unidentifiable cells were classified based on morphol-
ogy or marker co-labeling (Fig. 2). Cell counts were transferred to Microsoft Excel for statistical analyses. Total 
tdTom+ numbers presented in Figs 1e, 3e, 4e, 5e and 6e are mean ± s.e.m of cells counted in various regions from 
five sections per animal. Percentages of cell types presented in Figs 1f, 2c, 3f, 4f, 5f and 6f were calculated for each 
animal form the same sections and images, and presented as mean ± s.e.m calculated from three animals per 
experimental condition. Significance was determined by 2-tailed t test at p < 0.05.
References
	 1.	 Carlen, M. et al. Forebrain ependymal cells are Notch-dependent and generate neuroblasts and astrocytes after stroke. Nat Neurosci. 
12, 259–267 (2009).
	 2.	 Nomura, T., Goritz, C., Catchpole, T., Henkemeyer, M. & Frisen, J. EphB signaling controls lineage plasticity of adult neural stem cell 
niche cells. Cell Stem Cell 7, 730–743 (2010).
	 3.	 Devaraju, K., Barnabe-Heider, F., Kokaia, Z. & Lindvall, O. FoxJ1-expressing cells contribute to neurogenesis in forebrain of adult 
rats: evidence from in vivo electroporation combined with piggyBac transposon. Exp. Cell Res. 319, 2790–2800 (2013).
	 4.	 Meletis, K. et al. Spinal Cord Injury Reveals Multilineage Differentiation of Ependymal Cells. PLoS. Biol. 6, e182 (2008).
	 5.	 Barnabe-Heider, F. et al. Origin of new glial cells in intact and injured adult spinal cord. Cell Stem Cell 7, 470–482 (2010).
	 6.	 Sabelstrom, H. et al. Resident neural stem cells restrict tissue damage and neuronal loss after spinal cord injury in mice. Science 342, 
637–640 (2013).
	 7.	 Lacroix, S. et al. Central canal ependymal cells proliferate extensively in response to traumatic spinal cord injury but not 
demyelinating lesions. PLoS. One. 9, e85916 (2014).
	 8.	 Muthusamy, N., Vijayakumar, A., Cheng, G. Jr. & Ghashghaei, H. T. A knock-in Foxj1(CreERT2::GFP) mouse for recombination in 
epithelial cells with motile cilia. Genesis. 52, 350–358 (2014).
	 9.	 Ren, Y. et al. Ependymal cell contribution to scar formation after spinal cord injury is minimal, local and dependent on direct 
ependymal injury. Sci. Rep. 7, 41122 (2017).
	10.	 Ohab, J. J., Fleming, S., Blesch, A. & Carmichael, S. T. A neurovascular niche for neurogenesis after stroke. J. Neurosci. 26, 
13007–13016 (2006).
	11.	 Tsai, P. T. et al. A critical role of erythropoietin receptor in neurogenesis and post-stroke recovery. J. Neurosci. 26, 1269–1274 (2006).
	12.	 Cook, D. J. et al. Hydrogel-delivered brain-derived neurotrophic factor promotes tissue repair and recovery after stroke. J. Cereb. 
Blood Flow Metab 37, 1030–1045 (2017).
	13.	 Ohab, J. J. & Carmichael, S. T. Poststroke neurogenesis: emerging principles of migration and localization of immature neurons. 
Neuroscientist. 14, 369–380 (2008).
	14.	 Osman, A. M., Porritt, M. J., Nilsson, M. & Kuhn, H. G. Long-term stimulation of neural progenitor cell migration after cortical 
ischemia in mice. Stroke 42, 3559–3565 (2011).
	15.	 Jacquet, B. V. et al. FoxJ1-dependent gene expression is required for differentiation of radial glia into ependymal cells and a subset of 
astrocytes in the postnatal brain. Development 136, 4021–4031 (2009).
	16.	 Paez-Gonzalez, P. et al. Ank3-dependent SVZ niche assembly is required for the continued production of new neurons. Neuron 71, 
61–75 (2011).
	17.	 Muthusamy, N. et al. MARCKS-dependent mucin clearance and lipid metabolism in ependymal cells are required for maintenance 
of forebrain homeostasis during aging. Aging Cell 14, 764–773 (2015).
	18.	 Hamilton, L. K. et al. Aberrant Lipid Metabolism in the Forebrain Niche Suppresses Adult Neural Stem Cell Proliferation in an 
Animal Model of Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell Stem Cell 17, 397–411 (2015).
	19.	 Clarkson, A. N., Huang, B. S., Macisaac, S. E., Mody, I. & Carmichael, S. T. Reducing excessive GABA-mediated tonic inhibition 
promotes functional recovery after stroke. Nature 468, 305–309 (2010).
	20.	 Rosenzweig, S. & Carmichael, S. T. Age-dependent exacerbation of white matter stroke outcomes: a role for oxidative damage and 
inflammatory mediators. Stroke 44, 2579–2586 (2013).
Acknowledgements
HTG is supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (R01NS098370 and R01NS089795). STC is 
supported by R01NS081055 and the Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Medical Research Foundation.
Author Contributions
H.T.G. and S.T.C. conceived and designed the study. N.M., A.B. and X.Z. performed experiments, collected and 
analyzed data. H.T.G. analyzed data and wrote the manuscript.
Additional Information
Competing Interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
SCieNtifiC REPOrts |  (2018) 8:1766  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-19913-x
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2018

===== Nagoshi2018_StemCellsTranslMed_OPC+SCI =====
Human Spinal Oligodendrogenic Neural Progenitor
Cells Promote Functional Recovery After Spinal
Cord Injury by Axonal Remyelination and Tissue
Sparing
NARIHITO NAGOSHI,a,b,† MOHAMAD KHAZAEI,a,† JAN-ERIC AHLFORS,c CHRISTOPHER S. AHUJA,a,d,e
SATOSHI NORI,a,b JIAN WANG,a SHINSUKE SHIBATA,f MICHAEL G. FEHLINGSa,d,e
Key Words.
Stem cells • Spinal cord injury • Oligodendrogenic neural progenitor cells •
Remyelination • Regeneration • Oligodendrocytes
ABSTRACT
Cell transplantation therapy utilizing neural precursor cells (NPCs) is a conceptually attractive
strategy for traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI) to replace lost cells, remyelinate denuded host
axons and promote tissue sparing. However, the number of mature oligodendrocytes that differ-
entiate from typical NPCs remains limited. Herein, we describe a novel approach to bias the dif-
ferentiation of directly reprogrammed human NPCs (drNPCs) toward a more oligodendrogenic
fate (oNPCs) while preserving their tripotency. The oNPCs derived from different lines of human
NPCs showed similar characteristics in vitro. To assess the in vivo efﬁcacy of this approach, we
used oNPCs derived from drNPCs and transplanted them into a SCI model in immunodeﬁcient
Rowett Nude (RNU) rats. The transplanted cells showed signiﬁcant migration along the rostro-
caudal axis and proportionally greater differentiation into oligodendrocytes. These cells pro-
moted perilesional tissue sparing and axonal remyelination, which resulted in recovery of motor
function. Moreover, after transplantation of the oNPCs into intact spinal cords of immunodeﬁ-
cient NOD/SCID mice, we detected no evidence of tumor formation even after 5 months of
observation. Thus, biasing drNPC differentiation along an oligodendroglial lineage represents a
promising approach to promote tissue sparing, axonal remyelination, and neural repair after
traumatic SCI. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2018;7:806–818
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT
Spinal cord injuries (SCI) have devastating physical, social, and ﬁnancial consequences, and cur-
rently lack effective regenerative treatment options. The authors developed a method to gener-
ate myelinating oligodendrogenic tripotent neural progenitor cells (oNPCs) directly derived from
a patient’s own somatic bone marrow cells. Results of this study show a promising approach
using oNPCs to replace cells, re-myelinate axons and provide trophic support for tissue sparing,
ultimately resulting in functional recovery post-SCI.
INTRODUCTION
Traumatic spinal cord injuries (SCIs) are associ-
ated with substantial mortality and long-term
morbidity, including loss of functional indepen-
dence, which underscores the critical need for
effective neuroregenerative therapies. At a cel-
lular level, compressive and shearing forces
cause laceration, stretching, and mechanical
disruption of cell membranes [1–3]. This is fol-
lowed by a cascade of secondary injury events,
which lead to further necrotic and apoptotic
loss of neurons and glia over the coming days
and weeks. Oligodendrocytes are particularly
susceptible to the cytotoxic conditions within
the acute lesion environment, leading to demy-
elination of neurons and loss of efﬁcient salta-
tory
conduction
[4].
Remyelinating
white
matter tracts by replacing oligodendrocytes
represents a promising therapeutic strategy for
the treatment of SCI [5, 6].
Neural precursor cells (NPCs) are tripotent
cells capable of differentiating into neurons,
astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes [7]. Our labo-
ratory and other groups have shown that fol-
lowing
traumatic
SCI
NPCs
exert
a
neuroprotective effect on host cells while also
replacing
cells
from
all
three
neuroglial
aDivision of Genetics and
Development, Krembil
Research Institute,
University Health Network,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada,
bDepartment of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Keio
University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan,
cNew World Laboratories,
Laval, Quebec, Canada,
dInstitute of Medical
Sciences, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada, eDepartment of
Surgery and Spine Program,
University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada,
fElectron Microscope
Laboratory, Keio University
School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan
†Contributed equally.
Correspondence: Michael
G. Fehlings, M.D., Ph.D., FRCSC,
FACS, University of Toronto,
399 Bathurst St, Toronto West-
ern Hospital, Toronto, Ontario
M5T 2S8, Canada. Telephone:
1-416-603-5298, Fax:
1-416-603-5298. E-Mail:
michael.fehlings@uhn.on.ca
Received November 17, 2017;
accepted for publication June 5,
2018; ﬁrst published August
7, 2018.
http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/sctm.17-0269
This is an open access article
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivs
License, which permits use and
distribution in any medium,
provided the original work is
properly cited, the use is non-
commercial and no modiﬁca-
tions or adaptations are made.
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2018;7:806–818 www.StemCellsTM.com
© 2018 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
TISSUE-SPECIFIC PROGENITOR AND STEM CELLS
 21576580, 2018, 11, Downloaded from https://stemcellsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sctm.17-0269 by Korea Economic Research Institute(KERI), Wiley Online Library on [23/01/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

lineages [8–11]. However, in most studies, the proportion of
engrafted NPCs differentiating to oligodendrocytes is low,
especially when utilizing human NPCs. This has been further
conﬁrmed both in vitro and in vivo after transplantation into
the rodent central nervous system (CNS) [12, 13]. To improve
the potential for transplanted progenitors to differentiate into
oligodendrocytes and generate myelin in vivo, one approach
has been used to transplant oligodendrocyte progenitor cells
which are unipotent cells committed to the oligodendrocyte
fate [14, 15], or glial-restricted precursor cells which are bipo-
tent cells committed to both an astrocyte and oligodendrocyte
fate [16, 17]. However, these strategies fail to replace lost neu-
rons which are also involved in functional recovery, in contrast
to NPCs that can replace these cells [18, 19]. Therefore, we
sought to bias tripotent human NPCs toward a more oligoden-
drogenic fate to both preserve the potential for differentiation
toward neurons and increase the proportion of oligodendro-
cytes. Biasing NPCs would increase the proportion of differen-
tiated oligodendrocytes in vivo after transplantation while
preserving their ability to generate a complement of neurons
and astrocytes.
With respect to the cell source for NPCs, numerous studies
have intensively focused on induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs) [20–23]. iPSCs avoid ethical concerns associated with
embryonic stem cells or fetal tissue since they are generated
from non-embryonic somatic origin cells. However, recent
studies have identiﬁed risks associated with iPSC technology,
including genetic and epigenetic abnormalities, tumorigenicity,
and immunogenicity related to cell transplantation [24, 25].
Therefore, in this study, we focused on drNPCs which were
induced from somatic cells. The generation of drNPCs does
not involve the pluripotent state, thus making them potentially
safer than iPSC-derived grafts [26, 27]. Although mouse-
derived directly induced NPCs were assessed as a source for
cell transplantation in SCI [28], there have been no studies to
evaluate the effectiveness of grafted human drNPCs and their
derivatives in the injured spinal cord.
The
purpose
of
this
study
was
to
ﬁrst
generate
oligodendrogenic-NPCs (oNPCs) efﬁciently from established
human NPC lines, including drNPCs and iPSCs, using our novel
method [29]. We next assessed the efﬁcacy and safety of the
drNPC-derived oNPCs grafted in a rodent model of SCI. The
present study is particularly important as it is the ﬁrst study to
our knowledge which describes human drNPCs biased toward
an oligodendrogenic fate for neural repair and regeneration
following SCI.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Human Neural Progenitor Cells
Different lines of hPSCs were used to generate human NPCs
using dual SMAD inhibition in monolayer culture [30]. Human
iPSC line BC1 was provided by the Centre for Commercializa-
tion of Regenerative Medicine (CCRM; Toronto, ON), the
hiPSC-P70 was a kind gift from Dr. Andras Nagy (Lunenfeld-
Tanenbaum Research Institute, University of Toronto), and ESC
line H9 was obtained from WiCell (Wisconsin, MN). All hPSC
lines were maintained in feeder free conditions on Matrigel
and in mTeSR1.
Human drNPCs were provided by New World Laboratories,
Inc. (Laval, QC). drNPCs were directly differentiated from bone
marrow somatic cells using transient transfection of the three
factors Musashi-1 (Msi1), Neurogenin-2 (Ngn2), and methyl-
CpG binding domain protein 2 (MBD2) and deﬁned media con-
taining NeuroCult-XF Proliferation medium (StemCell Technolo-
gies; Vancouver, BC) supplemented with epidermal growth
factor (EGF) [20 ng/ml] (CellGenix; Freiburg, GER), ﬁbroblast
growth factor-2 (FGF-2) [50 ng/ml] (CellGenix), Valproic Acid
[VPA, 1 mM] (Sigma-Aldrich; St. Louis, MO), and Noggin
[20 ng/ml] (R&D Systems; Minneapolis, MN). VPA and Noggin
were replaced by heparin [100 ng/ml] (Scientiﬁc Protein Labo-
ratories) after 6 days of culture. Human fetal cortical and spi-
nal NPCs were obtained from Clontech. Different lines of
human iPSC-derived, directly reprogrammed or fetal NPCs
were cultured and maintained as monolayer on Laminin
(8 μg/ml) in NBM-DMEM/F12 (1:1) supplemented with Gluta-
max (Life Technologies Cat #10565–018; Waltham, MA), 50%
N2 supplement (Life Technologies #175020–01), B27 minus
retinoic
acid
(Life
Technologies
#12587–010)
and
FGF
(20 ng/ml), EGF (20 ng/ml), and heparin.
Biasing Human NPCs Toward an Oligodendrogenic Fate
We have optimized a general protocol to generate oNPCs from
different lines of human PSC-derived, directly reprogrammed
or fetal NPCs [29]. The protocol attempts to mimic develop-
mental cues to replicate neural tube patterning in vitro. In the
ﬁrst step, the NPCs were caudalized by culturing them on
growth factor reduced Matrigel in DMEM/F12, supplemented
with 0.1 μM retinoic acid (RA), B27 supplement (Life Technolo-
gies, Cat # 17504044), N2 supplement, and EGF (20 ng/ml) for
3 days. Cells underwent ventralization by treatment with 1 μM
sonic hedgehog (Shh) agonist Purmorphamine (Millipore, Cat #
540220) for 5 days. EGF was replaced by FGF-2 (10 ng/ml)
from the media for 3 days followed by the addition of 20 ng/ml
PDGF-AA (Peptrotech 100-13A; Rocky Hill, NJ) for 14 days. The
resulting cells were maintained on Laminin coated dishes in
DMEM/F12, B27-A, N1 supplement (Sigma Cat # N6530),
PDGF-AA (20 ng/ml), and FGF-2 (20 ng/ml) for three more pas-
sages prior to transplantation. During passaging, 10 μM Rock
inhibitor (Y-27632) was added on day 1.
Polymerase Chain Reaction
Cultured NPCs were collected into Buffer RL (Norgen Biotek;
Thorold, ON) with β-mercapthenol. Samples were processed
according to the manufacturer’s directions using a Total RNA
Puriﬁcation Kit (Norgen Biotek—Cat#17200). cDNA synthesis
was carried out with SuperScript First-Strand Synthesis System
for RT-PCR (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc—Cat# 11904018). RT-PCR
was carried out on GeneAmp PCR System 9700. Cycling condi-
tions consisted of polymerase activation and DNA denatur-
ation (2 mintues at 94C), followed by 35 cycles of 30 seconds
at 94C, 30 seconds at 58C, and 60 seconds at 72C. Values
were normalized to the GAPDH housekeeping gene. See the
detailed information regarding primer sequences in the Sup-
porting Information Table 1.
Differentiation and Immunocytochemistry
In order to study the differentiation potential of cells in vitro,
oNPCs were dissociated into single cells and plated on poly-
ornithine/Laminin
coated
cover
glasses
(24
well
plates:
www.StemCellsTM.com
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
Nagoshi, Khazaei, Ahlfors et al.
807
 21576580, 2018, 11, Downloaded from https://stemcellsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sctm.17-0269 by Korea Economic Research Institute(KERI), Wiley Online Library on [23/01/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

4 × 103 cells/well). Cells were grown in Neurobasal medium
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc 21103049; Waltham, MA) supple-
mented with N2 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc 17502048), B27
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc 17504044), 0.1% fetal bovine serum,
10 μM Forskolin (Stem Cell Technologies 72112) and glutamax
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc 21103049) for an additional 10 days.
Cells were ﬁxed for 20 minutes with 4% paraformaldehyde in
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and 40% sucrose at room
temperature. Following ﬁxation, cells were permeabilized in
0.1% Triton X-100 and 0.1% sodium citrate in PBS for 5 minutes
and then placed in blocking buffer (5% BSA) for 1 hour. Pri-
mary antibodies were diluted in a blocking buffer solution and
incubated with the cells overnight at 4C. Following extensive
washing, samples were incubated with DAPI and ﬂuorophore-
conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 hour. To quantify, three
wells stained for Nestin, βIII-Tubulin, GFAP, and O1 were
counted within the ﬁeld of view in ﬁve areas within each well.
The percentage of differentiated cells was calculated relative
to the total numbers of cells in each ﬁeld of view.
SCI Model
Female
RNU
rats
(athymic
nude
rats;
Crl:NIH-Foxn1rnu;
12-week old; strain code 316; Charles River Laboratories, Wil-
mington, MA) were used in this study. The clip compression
model of SCI has been characterized extensively and described
previously [31]. Under inhalational anesthesia using isoﬂurane
(1%–2%) and a 1:1 mixture of O2/N2O, the rats underwent a
T7–T9 laminectomy and received a 23 g clip (Walsh, Oakville,
Ontario, Canada) compression injury for 1 minute at the T7
level of the spinal cord. Gel foam (Ferrosan, Denmark) was put
on the spinal cord. Muscles were sutured, and the surgical
wound was closed. Their bladders were manually expressed
twice daily until the return of reﬂexive bladder control.
Cell Transplantation in the Spinal Cord
Nine days after injury, the rats were randomly divided into
three groups: vehicle (injection of aCSF), control drNPC trans-
planted, and oNPCs transplanted rats. Ten rats were used per
group. Under anesthesia, the spinal cord was reopened at the
injury area and the rats were injected with a cell suspension
of oNPCs. To prepare the cell suspension, a monolayer culture
passage of eight cells was collected using Accutase. The cells
were diluted in aCSF and used for cell transplantation. Using a
Hamilton syringe connected to a 32-gauge metal needle and a
stereotaxic injection system, a total volume of 8 μl of cell sus-
pension, containing 4 × 105 live cells, was injected into the
dorsal spinal cord. We injected the cells into the spinal cord at
two sites 2 mm rostral and two sites 2 mm caudal to the
lesional area on either side of the midline (0.6–0.8 mm). The
injected depth was 0.8–1.0 mm and injection speed was
0.6 μl/minutes.
Spinal Cord Tissue Processing and Lesion Morphometry
The animals were perfused with 0.1 M PBS, and ﬁxed with 4%
paraformaldehyde in the PBS. Postﬁxation was performed in
the same ﬁxative for 6 hours and 30% sucrose in 0.1 M PBS
for 24 hours. After ﬁxation, a 1.5 cm length of the spinal cord,
centered at the injury site, was collected and sectioned axially
at 30 μm. Serial sections were stained with the myelin-
selective stain luxol fast blue (LFB) and hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) as described previously [32]. Unbiased measurements
were made with a Cavalieri volume probe using Stereo Investi-
gator (MBF Bioscience, Williston, VT) for the area of total spi-
nal cord, gray matter, cavity, and total lesion reported. The
lesion area was identiﬁed as eosinophilic scar deposition with
immune inﬁltrates and/or nonviable or anuclear host tissue
[11]. For white matter area quantiﬁcation, the total area of
the total spinal cord was subtracted by the gray matter area
and total lesion area. Images were captured at the lesion epi-
center and 0.24, 0.48, 0.72, and 0.96 mm rostral and caudal to
the epicenter in axial sections.
Immunohistochemistry and Quantiﬁcation in Spinal
Cord Tissue Sections
For immunostaining, the primary antibodies (see Supporting
Information) and the appropriate secondary antibodies were
used. The images were taken using a Zeiss (Thornwood, NY)
LSM 510 laser confocal microscope.
The number of surviving NPCs was assessed by staining
with DAPI and anti-HuN on serial spinal cord sections with
240 μm apart. Under a Leica microscope with ×25 magniﬁca-
tion, the areas with HuN+ cells were traced on each cross sec-
tion. Using Stereo Investigator (MicroBrightField Bioscience,
Williston, VT), random ﬁelds (368 × 368 μm), dependent on
the size of the transplanted cell area, were imaged under ×40
magniﬁcation. Living NPCs (HuN+/DAPI+) were counted. Con-
sidering the thickness of each section and the distance
between the slides, the total number of cells was then esti-
mated using the Stereo Investigator.
To quantify Ki67+ cells and the proportion of differentiated
cell phenotypes in the injured spinal cord, we randomly
selected and captured 12 regions within 3,000 μm rostral and
caudal to the lesion epicenter at ×63 magniﬁcation (numeric
aperture). HuN+ transplanted cells and phenotypic marker-
positive cells were counted in each region.
Cell Transplantation into the Spinal Cord of
NOD/SCID Mice
For the evaluation of safety, we transplanted drNPC-derived
oNPCs or control unpatterned drNPCs from the same line as
oNPCs (referred to as control NPCs or simply NPCs) into intact
spinal cords of NOD/SCID mice (NOD/SCID mice; NOD.CB17-
Prkdcscid/NcrCrl) (18–22 g; 8-week old; strain code 394). The
mice were anesthetized using isoﬂurane (1%–1.5%) and 1:1
mixture of O2/N2O. The spinal cord was exposed with a T10
laminectomy. A total volume of 4 μl of cell suspension, con-
taining 2 × 105 live cells, was injected into the dorsal spinal
cord. The injection was performed at four sites with 0.5 mm
injected depth. To quantify Ki67+ cells in transplanted HuN+
cells in the intact spinal cord, we randomly selected and cap-
tured 12 regions at ×63 magniﬁcation (numeric aperture).
Immuno-Electron Microscopy and its Quantiﬁcation in
Spinal Cord Tissue Sections
The detailed procedure for immuno-electron microscopy has
been described previously [33]. Brieﬂy, frozen spinal cord axial
sections (eight sections derived from each group [drNPCs,
oNPCs, and PBS], n = 3 mice per group) adjacent to the sec-
tions were obtained for the quantiﬁcation of white/gray mat-
ter area. Sections were thawed and incubated with 5%
blockace (Dainihon Pharma) in 0.1 M phosphate buffer
(PB) with 0.01% saponin for an hour at 25C, followed by
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
808
Oligodendrogenic NPCs for Spinal Cord Injury
 21576580, 2018, 11, Downloaded from https://stemcellsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sctm.17-0269 by Korea Economic Research Institute(KERI), Wiley Online Library on [23/01/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

incubation
with
mouse
anti-human
cytoplasm
(Stem121)
monoclonal antibody (1:200 Takara bio) for 72 hours at 4C.
After washing three times in 0.1 M PB with 0.001% saponin,
the sections were incubated with nanogold-conjugated anti-
mouse IgG secondary antibody (1:100 Invitrogen) for 24 hours
at 4C. Sections were ﬁxed with 2.5% Glutaraldehyde in
0.1 M PB. HQ-Silver kit was used to enhance the gold signal
(Nanoprobes), and the sections were postﬁxed with 0.5% OsO4
for 90 minutes, dehydrated through graded ethanol (50%,
70%, 80%, 90%, and 100%), acetone (100%), QY1 (100%),
graded Epon (25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%), and embedded into
100% Epon. After complete polymerization for 72 hours at
60C, ultrathin sections (70 nm thick) were prepared with an
ultra-microtome (UC7 Leica), and were stained with heavy
metal (uranyl acetate and lead citrate), and observed under a
transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL 1400plus). One
hundred images with gold-labeled transplanted human cells
were randomly captured from three independent sections in
the epicenter from each group. The averaged diameter of
remyelinated axons (100 axons from each group for g-ratio),
and remyelination counted in the square area measurement
(total 300 axons for myelination frequency) was quantitatively
analyzed with the analysis software (TEM center, JEOL).
Basso, Beattie, and Bresnahan Open-Field Locomotion
Score
Hind-limb function was tested using the 21-point open-ﬁeld
Basso, Beattie, and Bresnahan (BBB) locomotor scale [34].
Tail-Flick Test
The tail-ﬂick test was performed as a measure of sensory func-
tion and allodynia. Animals were wrapped in a soft, dark mate-
rial to calm them. The dorsal surface of the tail between 4 and
6 cm from the tip was exposed to a beam of light calibrated
to 50C generated from an automated machine (IITC Life Sci-
ence, Woodland Hills, CA). The timer was stopped when the
animal ﬂicked its tail away from the beam of light, indicating
an aversive response. Latency was measured at 15-minute
intervals over three consecutive trials, with mean latency
reported. If animals did not respond to the beam by 20 sec-
onds, the procedure was stopped, and latency was scored
as 20.00.
Automated Gait Analysis (CatWalk)
Gait analysis was conducted using the CatWalk system (Noldus
Information Technology, Leesburg, VA). Files were collected
and analyzed using the CatWalk program, version 10.5. A vari-
ety of static and dynamic gait parameters can be measured
during locomotion; however, in the present study we analyzed
(a) hindlimb stride length (the distance between three consec-
utive hindlimb paw placements) and (b) hindlimb swing speed
(the speed of the paw during the swing phase).
Statistical Analysis
All data are reported as means  SEM. For immunohistological
and electron microscopic analyses, an unpaired two-tailed Stu-
dent’s t-test was used. Histomorphometric and behavioral data
were analyzed using two-way repeated-measures analysis of
Figure 1.
Generation of oligodendrogenic NPCs. (A): The gene expression pattern of rostral and caudal identity markers compared
between human iPSC-NPCs, drNPCs, fetal cortical NPCs, and fetal spinal NPCs. Hierarchical clustering trees reveal a strong similarity
between human iPSC-NPCs, drNPCs, and fetal cortical NPCs while fetal spinal NPCs demonstrated caudal identity. (B): Unpatterned NPCs
were caudalized using RA and then ventralized by treatment with Shh. To generate oNPCs, these cells were eventually treated with
PDGF/thyroxine. (C): Gradual changes in the morphology of NPCs after patterning toward oNPCs with elongated mono- and bi-polar mor-
phology. These representative micrographs are from drNPC-derived cells. (D): Stepwise changes in the expression proﬁle of NPCs during
generation of oNPCs. The expression of transcription factor Otx2, an important marker of brain identity, is reduced in caudalized NPCs
and they gain the expression of HoxA4, a marker of spinal identity in vNPCs. The expression of basic helix loop helix transcription factors
Nkx2.2, Olig2, and Nkx6.1, is upregulated in the oNPC stage. Scale bar: 50 μm in (C). Abbreviations: drNPCs, directly reprogrammed
human NPCs; iPSC, induced pluripotent stem cell; NPCs, neural precursor cells; oNPCs, oligodendrogenic-NPCs; RA, retinoic acid; vNPCs,
ventralized NPCs; Shh, sonic hedgehog.
www.StemCellsTM.com
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
Nagoshi, Khazaei, Ahlfors et al.
809
 21576580, 2018, 11, Downloaded from https://stemcellsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sctm.17-0269 by Korea Economic Research Institute(KERI), Wiley Online Library on [23/01/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

variance with Tukey’s post hoc tests. The signiﬁcance level for
all analyses was set at p < .05.
RESULTS
Human NPCs can be Biased Toward an
Oligodendrogenic Fate
First, we investigated whether replicating developmental cues
critical to oligodendroglial fate determination could predispose
human NPCs to differentiate into oligodendrocytes in propor-
tionally greater numbers. The generation of functional neuro-
glial subtypes in the vertebrate CNS is a complex process with
numerous key steps including the induction of neuroectoderm
from embryonic ectoderm, pattering of the neural plate with
regional niches along rostrocaudal and dorsoventral axes, and
the differentiation of regionalized progenitor cells into post-
mitotic neurons and glia [35, 36]. In order to generate oNPCs
from human NPCs, we mimicked these exogenous morpho-
genic cues to replicate neural tube patterning in vitro [29, 37].
To ﬁnd a consensus patterning protocol, we tested an array of
factors across concentrations and time points on four different
human NPC lines: fetal cortical NPCs, fetal spinal NPCs, iPSC-
derived NPCs, and drNPCs. Both hPSC-NPC and drNPC lines
demonstrated a rostral CNS identity, similar to fetal human cor-
tical NPCs, based on their expression levels of Otx2 and FoxG1
(Fig. 1A). Conversely, fetal spinal NPCs demonstrated expres-
sion of caudal identity markers (HoxA4, B5, C4, and C5; Fig. 1A).
To caudalize the typically rostral hNPC lines, they were trea-
ted with RA, a potent caudalizing factor, for 9 days. From days
6–12, Shh or its agonists were used as ventralizing morpho-
gens to drive hNPCs toward a ventral spinal progenitor fate
(Fig. 1B). Fetal human spinal NPCs were only treated with Shh
for 6 Days. After this time, cells acquired a spinal identity by
losing expression of transcription factor Otx2, an important
marker of brain identity, and gaining the expression of HoxA4,
a marker of spinal identity (Fig. 1D). Cells were treated with
PDGF-AA for an additional 2 weeks after which they demon-
strated
elongated
monopolar
and
bipolar
morphologies
(Fig 1C). The resulting cells expressed high levels of basic helix
loop helix transcription factors Nkx2.2 and Olig2 (Fig. 1D). The
expression of Nkx2.2 and oligodendrogenic transcription fac-
tors, such as Olig2 and Nkx6.1, were signiﬁcantly upregulated
in cells at this stage of oNPCs as compared to unpatterned
NPCs (Fig. 1D). The expression of neuron-determinant genes
Ngn1 and Ngn2 did not signiﬁcantly changes over different
stages of biasing, while NFIa and NFIb, two transcription fac-
tors involved in astrocyte determination [38], were slightly
decreased (Fig. 1D).
oNPCs Generate More Oligodendrocytes In Vitro than
Conventional NPCs
We next examined the differentiation of unpatterned NPC and
oNPC derivatives in vitro. Both unpatterned NPCs and oNPCs
demonstrated comparable expression of neural progenitor
markers
Pax6,
Sox2,
and
Nestin
(Fig.
2A).
The
bipolar
Figure 2.
In vitro differentiation proﬁle of oNPCs. (A): Both unpatterned NPCs and oNPCs demonstrated comparable expression of neu-
ral progenitor markers Pax6, Sox2, and Nestin. The bipolar morphology of oNPCs is evident as compared to NPCs. (B and C): Comparison
of the differentiation proﬁle of unpatterned NPCs and oNPCs after removal of growth factors epidermal growth factor, basic ﬁbroblast
growth factor, and the addition of 0.1% fetal bovine serum. These results and representative micrographs belong to directly repro-
grammed human NPCs-derived cells. Results are presented as mean percentage  SEM from three independent experiments (average of
10 random ﬁelds in each group). *p < .05, two-way analysis of variance. Scale bar: 20 μm. Abbreviations: NPCs, neural precursor cells;
oNPCs, oligodendrogenic-NPCs.
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
810
Oligodendrogenic NPCs for Spinal Cord Injury
 21576580, 2018, 11, Downloaded from https://stemcellsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sctm.17-0269 by Korea Economic Research Institute(KERI), Wiley Online Library on [23/01/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

morphology of oNPCs is evident as compared to NPCs. These
oNPCs could be expanded for up to three passages without
losing their proliferation and differentiation capacity. After this
stage, the proliferation rate of the cells slowed down and they
eventually ceased proliferating at passage 5–6, at which point,
they morphologically appeared as ﬂat expanded cells. The cell
cycle exit and initiation of differentiation was triggered by
removal of the growth factors EGF, basic ﬁbroblast growth fac-
tor, and addition of 0.1% fetal bovine serum. After 10 days in
differentiation conditions, unpatterned hNPCs were character-
ized by marked process outgrowth, with an increase in the
number of processes emanating from the cell body, and exten-
sive branching of these processes. The morphological changes
in drNPCs were accompanied by the expression of structural
markers characteristic of neuroglial differentiation: astrocytes
(GFAP+; 40.1  7.9%), neurons (β-III tubulin+; 17.2  2.05%),
and oligodendrocytes (O1+; 7.4.00  4.8%). The rest of the
cells remained in the progenitor stage after 10 days and
expressed Nestin (Fig. 2B and 2C). oNPCs cultured in the same
differentiation conditions for 10 days displayed a ramiﬁed
morphology with an intricate lacework of processes that sur-
rounded the cell body. Immunocytochemistry revealed the
presence of neurons (βIII-tubulin+; 19.1  3.23%), but fewer
astrocytes (GFAP+; 23.95  4.03%) and a signiﬁcant increase in
the numbers of oligodendrocytes (O1+; 30.23  6.22%, p < .5)
demonstrating the multipotency of oNPC and their predisposi-
tion for generating oligodendrocytes (Fig. 2C). A portion of
oNPCs (26.7  7.4%) remained in the progenitor stage and
expressed Nestin.
oNPCs Migrate and Differentiate Preferentially Toward
Oligodendrocytes In Vivo After SCI
To evaluate the efﬁcacy of oNPCs in vivo, we focused on using
drNPC derived oNPCs. We transplanted oNPCs 9 days after
injury into a clinically-relevant T7 clip-contusion SCI model in
T-cell deﬁcient RNU rats (a summary of the experimental time-
line is shown in Fig. 3A). As a control group, unpatterned
drNPC from the same line of oNPCs were used (hereafter is
referred as control NPCs). At 8 weeks post-transplantation,
oNPCs were found throughout the spinal cord extending ros-
trally and caudally from the injury site (Fig. 3B and 3C). The
total number of transplanted oNPCs counted by unbiased ste-
reology was 96549.40  28487.19 (n = 10), and its ratio was
24.14  10.07% of the starting population, which was not sig-
niﬁcantly different from those transplanted with control NPCs
(n
=
10;
cell
number:
115512.90

29673.44;
ratio:
28.89  10.49%) (Fig. 3D). The rostral-caudal distribution of
grafted cells was also similar between the groups (control
NPC: 4.08  0.75 mm; oNPC: 3.65  0.91 mm; p = .72; Fig. 3E).
The percentage of grafted HuN+ expressing Ki67+, a marker of
proliferation that can be elevated in tumors, was as low as
2.50  0.38% for oNPCs (number of Ki67+ and HNA+ cells:
1269.33

161.59
and
54849.67

13087.95)
and
2.86  0.53% for control NPCs (number of Ki67+ and HNA+
cells: 1445.33  406.82 and 58306.33  21527.87; Fig. 3F–
3H). The transplanted oNPCs differentiated into all three neu-
roglial phenotypes in vivo as assessed by βIII-tubulin (neurons),
GFAP (astrocytes), and APC (mature oligodendrocytes) is
shown in Fig. 4. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that,
similar to previous reports, some APC+ cells also expressed
GFAP [39]. Mature oligodendrocytes were identiﬁed as APC+/
Figure 3.
Transplanted oNPCs survive without tumorigenicity. (A): A
summary of the experimental timeline. (B and C): Representative images
of the lesion epicenter of the spinal cord, and 0.96 mm rostral and cau-
dal to the site with HuN label. HuN+ transplanted directly reprogrammed
human NPCs (drNPCs) (B) and drNPC-derived oNPCs (C) dispersed in the
tissue and migrated around lesion sites. (D) Quantitative analysis of
HuN+ total cells in the spinal cord (n = 10 per each group). (E): Quantita-
tive analysis of the transplanted cell distribution as graft length (n = 3
per each group). (F and G): HuN+ cells partially expressed Ki67 (arrow-
heads). (H): Quantitative analysis of Ki67+/HuN+ cells in the spinal cord
(n = 3 per each group). Scale bars: 200 μm in (B and C) and 20 μm in
(F and G). Abbreviations: NPCs, neural precursor cells; oNPCs,
oligodendrogenic-NPCs; N.S., not signiﬁcant; RNU, Rowett Nude.
www.StemCellsTM.com
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
Nagoshi, Khazaei, Ahlfors et al.
811
 21576580, 2018, 11, Downloaded from https://stemcellsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sctm.17-0269 by Korea Economic Research Institute(KERI), Wiley Online Library on [23/01/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

GFAP−(Fig. 4G). The grafted oNPCs gave rise to signiﬁcantly
greater numbers of oligodendrocytes (APC+/GFAP−) compared
to control NPCs (47.66  7.18% vs. 13.63  4.24%: p < .01;
Fig. 4H).
To analyze the oligodendrocyte-lineage cells differentiated
from oNPCs, detailed immunohistochemistry was conducted
with several oligodendrocyte markers. The transplanted oNPCs
differentiated into Olig2+ immature and GST-pi+ mature oligo-
dendrocytes (Fig. 5A and 5B). Notably, they expressed MBP
which are closely associated with host NF200+ axons (Fig. 5C
and 5D), indicating the potential of transplanted oNPCs to
remyelinate host axons in the injured spinal cord.
To evaluate the distribution of myelin after cell transplan-
tation, electron microscopic examination was performed at
the lesion epicenter. In the oNPC group, immature myelin
sheaths derived from engrafted human cells (nanogold-labeled
Stem121+) were frequently observed (Fig. 5E and 5F). In addi-
tion, endogenous myelin from host oligodendrocytes was
preserved (Fig. 5E and 5G). The myelination by the control
NPC group was not as robust as the oNPC group. The vehicle
group showed only a few myelinated axons at the lesion site
(Fig. 5I). To evaluate the potential for myelination by grafted
cells, we analyzed g-ratios for axons in both the NPC and oNPC
groups (Fig. 5J). This analysis revealed that the regression coef-
ﬁcient (in plots of g-ration vs. axonal diameter) was signiﬁcantly
smaller in the oNPC group compared with the one in the NPC
group (0.051 vs. 0.089, p < .01), suggesting that the trans-
planted oNPCs had more active ability to myelinate host axons.
In addition, the average number of myelinated axons per ﬁeld
was signiﬁcantly larger in the oNPC group, derived from both
grafted cells with characteristics of attachment of nanogold
dots (1.85  0.27 vs. 0.55  0.12, p < .01 in Fig. 5K) and endog-
enous
cells
without the
dot
attachment
(4.28

0.71
vs. 1.40  0.28, p < .01 in Fig. 5L). Therefore, similar to what
was observed in vitro, oNPCs generated myelinating oligoden-
drocytes following transplantation in vivo, and also preserved
Figure 4.
Transplanted oNPCs differentiated into neurons, oligodendrocytes, and astrocytes in the injured spinal cord. (A–F): A represen-
tative image of βIII-tubulin+/HuN+ neurons (A and D), GFAP+/HuN+ astrocytes (B and E; arrowheads), and APC+/HuN+ cells (C and F). (G):
Some of the APC+/HuN+ cells expressed GFAP (arrow). Oligodendrocytes are APC+/GFAP−cells (arrowheads). (H): Quantitative analysis of
tri-lineage differentiation proﬁles with speciﬁc markers (n = 4 per each group). **p < .01. Scale bar: 25 μm in (A and D), 20 μm in (B, C, E,
and F), and 10 μm in (G). Abbreviations: NPCs, neural precursor cells; oNPCs, oligodendrogenic-NPCs.
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
812
Oligodendrogenic NPCs for Spinal Cord Injury
 21576580, 2018, 11, Downloaded from https://stemcellsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sctm.17-0269 by Korea Economic Research Institute(KERI), Wiley Online Library on [23/01/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

endogenous oligodendrocytes with spared axons in comparison
with NPCs.
Given the EM ﬁndings demonstrating that oNPCs promote
the generation of new myelin and sparing of endogenous
myelin, we next performed a histomorphometric analysis of
the preserved tissue and lesion volume analysis. LFB- and
H&E-staining was examined 9 weeks after SCI (Fig. 6A). The
white matter area was signiﬁcantly larger in the oNPC group
Figure 5.
www.StemCellsTM.com
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
Nagoshi, Khazaei, Ahlfors et al.
813
 21576580, 2018, 11, Downloaded from https://stemcellsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sctm.17-0269 by Korea Economic Research Institute(KERI), Wiley Online Library on [23/01/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

compared to the other groups at the lesion epicenter, and
extending rostrally and caudally along the neuraxis (Fig. 6B).
There was no signiﬁcant difference in the size of the gray mat-
ter or cavity area among the groups (Fig. 6C and 6E). However,
the lesion area was signiﬁcantly reduced at the epicenter in
the oNPC group (Fig. 6D). Therefore, the transplanted oNPCs
contributed to white matter sparing and reduced lesion vol-
ume at 8 weeks post-transplantation.
Improvement of Motor Function Without Allodynia
After oNPC Transplantation
We evaluated locomotor coordination and trunk stability
using the BBB open-ﬁeld locomotion
scale. BBB
scores
showed signiﬁcantly improved functional recovery after SCI in
the oNPC group compared to the vehicle group (weeks 7–9;
p < .05) (Fig. 7A). Further, we conducted gait analysis using
the CatWalk Digital Gait Analysis system (Noldus, Inc.; Fig. 7B).
Gait analysis revealed that oNPC transplanted rats had signiﬁ-
cantly better recovery in terms of stride length and swing
speed relative to the vehicle and control NPC group (Fig. 7C
and
7D).
To
determine
whether
sensory
impairments
occurred following cell transplantation, the tail-ﬂick test was
used to measure thermal allodynia. Notably, we found no sig-
niﬁcant difference between groups, suggesting that the trans-
planted
cells
did
not
contribute
to
postinjury
sensory
dysfunction (Fig. 7E).
oNPC Transplantation is not Associated with Tumor
Formation In Vivo After Long-Term Follow-Up
To evaluate the tumorigenicity of oNPCs, we transplanted cells
into the intact spinal cords of NOD/SCID mice (n = 3) and observed
them over 150 days. The mice appeared healthy with no overt
neurological deﬁcits during the observational period. At 150 days
post-transplantation, a histological analysis was conducted with
immunohistochemistry for Ki67 and HuN showing colocalization
in only 0.94  0.47% of HuN+ cells in the cord (Supporting Infor-
mation Fig. S1B and S1D). A subpopulation of the transplanted
cells expressed Nestin, a marker for undifferentiated neural cells,
but the distribution was sparse and tumor-like masses were not
observed (Supporting Information Fig. S1E and S1F). Moreover,
H&E staining was performed at the injection site of cell transplan-
tation, and formation of neural rosettes was not detected
(Supporting Information Fig. S1G and S1H).
DISCUSSION
After SCI, all neural cell types (neurons, oligodendrocytes, and
astrocytes) are subjected to cell death. Thus, we would antici-
pate that ideal cell replacement for traumatic SCI therapy
would replace all neural cell types. As the host microenviron-
ment plays an important role in fate determination of
engrafted cells, the level of maturation and differentiation of
cells at the time of transplantation is another critical factor
determining their fate and integration. In the post injury niche,
most transplanted NPCs tend to differentiate to astrocytes,
and to a lesser extent neurons, while the proportion of oligo-
dendrocytes is very low. To address this, we biased the differ-
entiation proﬁle of NPCs toward more oligodendrocytes rather
than astrocytes. This study generates a novel tripotent human
NPC, which has been biased prior to transplant toward an oli-
godendrogenic fate, and assesses its efﬁcacy in a highly clini-
cally relevant contusion-compression model of T-cell deﬁcient
rodent thoracic SCI.
Previous studies have demonstrated that transplantation
of oligodendrogenic cells can promote tissue repair and func-
tional recovery [15, 40]. The post-transplanted oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells derived from ESCs or iPSCs at the subacute
stage have been shown to promote white matter preservation,
along with an increased number of surviving endogenous oli-
godendrocytes
and
reduced
cavity
volume,
resulting
in
enhanced functional motor recovery [41–43]. The underlying
mechanism in these studies was remyelination, local immuno-
modulation, trophic support, and environmental conditioning
through the provision of a physical scaffolding for elongating
axons. The current study builds on these results and revealed
that cells derived from transplanted oNPCs are capable of
remyelinating host axons and generating new neurons. Fur-
thermore, engrafted oNPCs migrated throughout the lesional
and perilesional regions, reduced the total lesional area, and
increased white matter volumes due to differentiation of mye-
linating oligodendrocytes and preservation of host tissues. The
enhanced
myelination
was
observed
to
correlate
with
improved motor recovery and trunk stability in behavioral
assessments.
In this study, signiﬁcant restoration of motor function was
observed at 7 weeks after SCI. However, beneﬁcial effects
were observed starting at 2 weeks, which could be earlier than
the timing typically observed for maturation of myelination. In
accordance with our results, previous studies that transplanted
human oligodendrogenic NPCs observed beneﬁcial motor
recovery effects at 3–6 weeks postinjury [42, 43]. This early
Figure 5.
oNPCs predominantly differentiated into oligo-lineage cells and myelinated host axons. (A–D): Representative images of
Olig2+/HuN+ immature (A) and GST-pi+/HuN+ mature (B) oligodendrocytes (arrowheads). The transplanted Stem121+ cells colocalized with
MBP at sagittal section (C; arrowheads), and there were MBP+/Stem121+ mature oligodendrocytes myelinating host NF 200+ neuronal
axons at axial section (D; arrowheads). These cells mainly existed in the white matter area of the spinal cord. (E–I): Representative images
of immunoelectron microscopy in oNPCs (E–G), NPC (H), and vehicle groups (I). Grafted cells were detected by the black dots observed
upon anti-Stem121 antibody staining. Note that myelination with and without attachment of nanogold particles was identiﬁed as being
attributed to oligodendrocytes derived from transplanted cells (E; arrowheads, F) and endogenous oligodendroglially-mediated myelina-
tion with thicker lamellar structure (E; arrows, G), respectively. At higher magniﬁcations in the oNPC group, remyelinated axons sur-
rounded by transplanted cells were identiﬁed with characteristic attachment of black dots (F, arrowheads), and endogenous myelin from
oligodendrocytes was preserved (G). Arrowheads and arrows indicate myelin derived from transplanted cells and endogenous cells,
respectively. (J): Regression analysis for plots of g-ratio versus axonal diameter at lesion epicenter. (K and L): The average number of mye-
linated axons derived from grafted cells (K) and endogenous cells (L) per ﬁeld at lesion epicenter by electron microscopic examination
(n = 3 per each group). Scale bar: 10 μm in (A, B, and D), 50 μm in (C), 2 μm in (E, H, and I), 5 μm in (small square in I), and 200 nm in (F,
G). Abbreviations: NPCs, neural precursor cells; oNPCs, oligodendrogenic-NPCs.
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
814
Oligodendrogenic NPCs for Spinal Cord Injury
 21576580, 2018, 11, Downloaded from https://stemcellsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sctm.17-0269 by Korea Economic Research Institute(KERI), Wiley Online Library on [23/01/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

recovery mechanism could be explained by neurotrophic fac-
tors, because past research has revealed that oligodendrocyte-
lineage cells, such as immature oligodendrocyte progenitor
cells or their derivative mature oligodendrocytes, secreted
neurotrophic factors, such as brain-derived neurotrophic fac-
tor, glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor, and neurotrophin-3
[44, 45]. These factors play an important role in enhancing
neuronal survival and promoting oligodendrocyte myelination,
Figure 6.
Histomorphometric analysis using luxol fast blue and hematoxylin and eosin staining. (A): Representative images of the spinal
cord at lesion epicenter and 0.96 mm rostral and caudal area in vehicle, directly reprogrammed human NPCs (drNPC)-derived oNPC
(oNPC) and unpatterned drNPC (control NPC) groups. Scale bar: 200 μm. (B): Calculation of white matter area between 0.96 mm rostral
and caudal from epicenter. Note that signiﬁcantly larger white matter area was observed in the oNPCs group around the epicenter area,
compared to the other groups. (C): Calculation of gray matter area. (D): Quantitative analysis of percentage of lesion area/total spinal
cord area. Note that a signiﬁcant reduction of lesion area was observed around the epicenter in the oNPC group. (E): Quantitative analy-
sis of percentage of cavity area/total spinal cord area. All analyses were conducted with six rats per group. *p < .05; **p < .01. Abbrevia-
tions: NPCs, neural precursor cells; N.S., not signiﬁcant; oNPCs, oligodendrogenic-NPCs.
www.StemCellsTM.com
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
Nagoshi, Khazaei, Ahlfors et al.
815
 21576580, 2018, 11, Downloaded from https://stemcellsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sctm.17-0269 by Korea Economic Research Institute(KERI), Wiley Online Library on [23/01/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

which both lead to neuronal protection. Although we did not
examine the secretion of these factors from our cultured
NPCs, the trophic support mechanism of transplanted cells
might contribute to the recovery of locomotor function at this
early stage.
The entire reprogramming process to generate human
drNPCs is shorter in duration than the process to generate
iPSC-derived NPCs [46]. This represents a signiﬁcant advantage
for using these cells because optimal timing for cell transplan-
tation is around 1 month after SCI in primates at the subacute
phase [47]. Thus, this process represents a feasible approach
to induce and transplant autologous directly reprogrammed
cells originating from the patient’s own somatic cells in a real-
istic time frame and decreasing the chance of rejection and
increasing the survival of transplants. Since our transplanted
drNPC-derived oNPCs showed effective and safe properties in
the injured spinal cord, future work should focus on improving
the induction and culture protocols, with the end goal of clini-
cal application.
The in vivo differentiation proﬁle of conventional NPCs in
SCI typically consists of approximately 80% astrocytes, which
are associated with increased allodynia [48]. Although they
used rodent NPCs and their results could not be directly com-
pared with ours, in vitro pro-oligodendrogenic conditioning of
hNPCs in our study can substantially reduce the number of
resultant astrocytes 9 weeks after transplant. Consequently,
we did not detect a signiﬁcant increase in allodynia by tail-ﬂick
test in the animals that received transplants.
Transplantation of iPS-NPCs requires particular attention to
risks associated with iPS-derived cells, namely tumor formation.
We demonstrated the safety of the oNPCs by grafting them
into injured rodent spinal cords and ﬁnding no morphological
or marker-based (Ki67+ percentage: 2.50  0.38%) evidence of
neoplastic transformation. Furthermore, after transplant of
oNPCs into intact spinal cords of immunodeﬁcient NOD/SCID
mice, we observed no evidence of tumor formation after
5 months of observation with a ratio of Ki67+ transplanted cells
of 0.97  0.47%. Although pathological condition (injury or
intact) and animal species (rat or mouse) were different, these
temporal data might indicate that cell division of the trans-
plants gradually decreased over time. Moreover, our histologi-
cal analysis using Nestin in NOS/SCID mice showed sparse
distribution of transplanted cells, without formation of tumor-
like masses (Supporting Information Fig. S2E and S2F). In the
same mice, we did not detect any formation of neural rosettes
using H&E staining (Supporting Information Fig. S2G and S2H).
While there is no standard deﬁnition of the tumor forming
potential of transplanted cells, our analysis of proliferation,
undifferentiation,
and
the
lack
of
tumor-like
masses
(as revealed by histological analysis) at 150 days suggest that
the oNPCs have considerable clinical potential with no overt
safety concerns.
A recently established preclinical grading system proposed
that rat models of SCI are more clinically relevant than mouse
models [49]. Unlike mouse models, rat models exhibit exten-
sive cavity formation in the chronic injury phase, which closely
resembles the pathophysiology of human SCI. Tests of motor
function and gait are also well validated for rats. For this rea-
son, we utilized a clinically relevant clip-contusion T7 SCI
model using athymic RNU rats. These rats are T-cell deﬁcient,
which allowed for enhanced xenograft survival for longer
periods without the need for repeated, invasive injections of
immunosuppressants. As a result, the animals tolerated the
SCI surgeries and postoperative care very well, leading to
reduced animal attrition compared to other published studies.
Additionally,
the
survival
of
transplanted
cells
at
the
Figure 7.
Functional analysis following cell transplantation. (A): Time course of motor functional recovery of hindlimbs in BBB score.
Rats with oNPCs transplantation showed signiﬁcant recovery from 7 to 9 weeks after spinal cord injury (SCI). (B): Representative images
of gait analysis with CatWalk system 9 weeks after SCI. Pink and green footprints indicate right and left hindlimbs, respectively. (C and D)
Gait analysis with the CatWalk system. Note that there was signiﬁcantly better recovery in stride length between the oNPC and vehicle
groups, and swing speed in the oNPC group compared to the other groups. (E): Evaluation of thermal allodynia in the tail-ﬂick test. In
each test, 10 rats per each group were examined. *p < .05; **p < .01. Abbreviations: BBB, Basso, Beattie, and Bresnahan; NPCs, neural
precursor cells; oNPCs, oligodendrogenic-NPCs; TP, transplantation.
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
816
Oligodendrogenic NPCs for Spinal Cord Injury
 21576580, 2018, 11, Downloaded from https://stemcellsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sctm.17-0269 by Korea Economic Research Institute(KERI), Wiley Online Library on [23/01/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

completion of the study was 24%, which is dramatically higher
than the rates in studies using immunocompetent animals
with immunosuppressants [50].
The current study has a few limitations that should be dis-
cussed. First, we transplanted cells in the subacute phase of
SCI. Given that many patients are in the chronic phase of
their injuries, future preclinical studies should evaluate the
efﬁcacy of oNPC transplantation in the chronic phase, com-
bined with modifying the chronic environment [51]. Similarly,
while it is likely that ﬁndings from this thoracic study will
extend to other spinal cord regions such as the cervical spine,
this must be assessed in a follow-up study [52]. Second, we
only transplanted oNPCs derived from a single parent line of
hNPCs; however, variation in differentiation and response to
the injury microenvironment between different cell lines may
exist. Thus, future studies are needed to conﬁrm our ﬁndings
across different cell sources. Finally, with respect to safety,
moving toward translation will require longer observation
periods to further assess tumorigenicity and the application
to additional large animal species. Moreover, genomic and
epigenomic stability should be evaluated to further assess
safety.
CONCLUSION
We report that human drNPC-derived oNPCs are an exciting
therapeutic option to regenerate the traumatically injured spi-
nal cord with clear evidence of efﬁcacy and data suggestive of
safety in vivo.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Paul Bradshaw for critical reading of the manu-
script and comments and Jonathon Chio for assisting with LFB
and H&E staining. This study was supported by an Industry
Sponsored Collaborative Research Grant with New World Lab-
oratories, Inc. and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR). C.S.A. is supported by fellowship funding from CIHR.
M.G.F. is supported by the Gerry and Tootsie Halbert Chair in
Neural Repair and Regeneration and by grant support from
the Dezwirek Foundation and the Krembil Foundation. J.E.A. is
CEO and CSO of New World Laboratories Fortuna Fix.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
N.N. and M.K.: conception and design, collection and/or assem-
bly of data, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing,
ﬁnal approval of manuscript; J.-E.A.: conception and design, pro-
vision of study material or patients; C.S.A.: collection and/or
assembly of data, manuscript writing, ﬁnal approval of manu-
script; S.N., J.W., and S.S.: collection and/or assembly of data;
M.G.F.: conception and design, collection and/or assembly of
data, provision of study material or patients, data analysis and
interpretation, ﬁnal approval of manuscript, ﬁnancial support.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
J.E.A. declared employment and stock ownership with New
World Laboratories and Fortuna Fix. The other authors indi-
cated no potential conﬂicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1
Baptiste DC, Fehlings MG. Pharmaco-
logical approaches to repair the injured spinal
cord. J Neurotrauma 2006;23:318–334.
2
Rowland JW, Hawryluk GWJ, Kwon B
et al. Current status of acute spinal cord
injury pathophysiology and emerging thera-
pies: Promise on the horizon. Neurosurg
Focus 2008;25:E2.
3
Tator CH, Duncan EG, Edmonds VE
et al. Changes in epidemiology of acute spinal
cord injury from 1947 to 1981. Surg Neurol
1993;40:207–215.
4
Li GL, Farooque M, Holtz A et al.
Apoptosis of oligodendrocytes occurs for long
distances away from the primary injury after
compression trauma to rat spinal cord. Acta
Neuropathol (Berl) 1999;98:473–480.
5
Tetzlaff W, Okon EB, Karimi-Abdolrezaee
S et al. A systematic review of cellular transplan-
tation therapies for spinal cord injury. J Neuro-
trauma 2011;28:1611–1682.
6
Trounson A, McDonald C. Stem cell
therapies in clinical trials: Progress and chal-
lenges. Cell Stem Cell 2015;17:11–22.
7
Ladran I, Tran N, Topol A et al. Neural
stem and progenitor cells in health and dis-
ease. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med
2013;5:701–715.
8
Barnabé-Heider F, Frisén J. Stem cells
for spinal cord repair. Cell Stem Cell 2008;3:
16–24.
9
Salewski
RP,
Mitchell
RA,
Li
L
et al. Transplantation of induced pluripotent
stem cell-derived neural stem cells mediate
functional recovery following thoracic spinal
cord injury through remyelination of axons.
STEM
CELLS
TRANSLATIONAL
MEDICINE
2015;4:
743–754.
10
Tsuji O, Miura K, Okada Y et al. Thera-
peutic potential of appropriately evaluated
safe-induced pluripotent stem cells for spinal
cord injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;107:
12704–12709.
11
Wilcox
JT,
Satkunendrarajah
K,
Zuccato JA et al. Neural precursor cell trans-
plantation enhances functional recovery and
reduces astrogliosis in bilateral compressive/-
contusive cervical spinal cord injury. STEM CELLS
TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2014;3:1148–1159.
12
Jakovcevski
I,
Filipovic
R,
Mo
Z
et al. Oligodendrocyte development and the
onset of myelination in the human fetal
brain. Front Neuroanat 2009;3:5.
13
Budday S, Steinmann PI, Kuhl E. Physi-
cal biology of human brain development.
Front Cell Neurosci 2015;9:257.
14
Sharp
J,
Frame
J,
Siegenthaler
M
et al. Human embryonic stem cell-derived oli-
godendrocyte
progenitor
cell
transplants
improve recovery after cervical spinal cord
injury. STEM CELLS 2010;28:152–163.
15
Faulkner
J,
Keirstead
HS.
Human
embryonic stem cell-derived oligodendrocyte
progenitors for the treatment of spinal cord
injury. Transpl Immunol 2005;15:131–142.
16
Cao Q, Xu XM, Devries WH et al. Func-
tional recovery in traumatic spinal cord injury
after transplantation of multineurotrophin-
expressing glial-restricted precursor cells. J
Neurosci 2005;25:6947–6957.
17
Gregori N, Pröschel C, Noble M et al.
The
tripotential
glial-restricted
precursor
(GRP) cell and glial development in the
spinal
cord:
Generation
of
bipotential
oligodendrocyte-type-2 astrocyte progenitor
cells and dorsal-ventral differences in GRP
cell function. J Neurosci 2002;22:248–256.
18
Kadoya K, Lu P, Nguyen K et al. Spinal
cord reconstitution with homologous neural
grafts enables robust corticospinal regenera-
tion. Nat Med 2016;22:479–487.
19
Fujimoto
Y,
Abematsu
M,
Falk
A
et al. Treatment of a mouse model of spinal
cord injury by transplantation of human in-
duced pluripotent stem cell-derived long-
term self-renewing neuroepithelial-like stem
cells. STEM CELLS 2012;30:1163–1173.
20
Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M
et al. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from
adult human ﬁbroblasts by deﬁned factors.
Cell 2007;131:861–872.
21
Kobayashi
Y,
Okada
Y,
Itakura
G
et al. Pre-evaluated safe human iPSC-derived
neural stem cells promote functional recovery
after spinal cord injury in common marmoset
www.StemCellsTM.com
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
Nagoshi, Khazaei, Ahlfors et al.
817
 21576580, 2018, 11, Downloaded from https://stemcellsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sctm.17-0269 by Korea Economic Research Institute(KERI), Wiley Online Library on [23/01/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

without tumorigenicity. PLoS One 2012;7:
e52787.
22
Lu P et al. Long-distance axonal growth
from human induced pluripotent stem cells after
spinal cord injury. Neuron 2014;83:789–796.
23
Nori S, Okada Y, Itakura G et al. Grafted
human-induced pluripotent stem-cell–derived
neurospheres
promote
motor
functional
recovery after spinal cord injury in mice. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2011;108:16825–16830.
24
Nori S, Okada Y, Nishimura S et al.
Long-term safety issues of iPSC-based cell
therapy in a spinal cord injury model: Onco-
genic
transformation
with
epithelial-
mesenchymal transition. Stem Cell Rep 2015;
4:360–373.
25
Yu DX, Marchetto MC, Gage FH. Thera-
peutic translation of iPSCs for treating neuro-
logical
disease.
Cell
Stem
Cell
2013;12:
678–688.
26
Chanda S, Ang CE, Davila J et al. Gen-
eration of induced neuronal cells by the sin-
gle reprogramming factor ASCL1. Stem Cell
Rep 2014;3:282–296.
27
Pang
ZP,
Yang
N,
Vierbuchen
T
et al. Induction of human neuronal cells by
deﬁned transcription factors. Nature 2011;
476:220–223.
28
Hong JY, Lee SH, Lee SC et al. Thera-
peutic potential of induced neural stem cells
for spinal cord injury. J Biol Chem 2014;289:
32512–32525.
29
Khazaei M, Ahuja CS, Fehlings MG.
Generation of oligodendrogenic spinal neural
progenitor cells from human induced pluripo-
tent stem cells. Curr Protoc Stem Cell Biol
2017;42:2D.20.1–2D.20.14.
30
Chambers SM, Fasano CA, Papapetrou
EP et al. Highly efﬁcient neural conversion of
human ES and iPS cells by dual inhibition of
SMAD
signaling.
Nat
Biotechnol
2009;27:
275–280.
31
Karimi-Abdolrezaee S, Eftekharpour E,
Wang J et al. Delayed transplantation of adult
neural precursor cells promotes remyelina-
tion and functional neurological recovery
after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci 2006;26:
3377–3389.
32
Nguyen DH, Cho N, Satkunendrarajah K
et al. Immunoglobulin G (IgG) attenuates neu-
roinﬂammation and improves neurobehavioral
recovery after cervical spinal cord injury. J
Neuroinﬂammation 2012;9:224.
33
Shibata
S,
Murota
Y,
Nishimoto
Y
et
al.
Immuno-electron
microscopy
and
electron microscopic in situ hybridization for
visualizing piRNA biogenesis bodies in drosoph-
ila ovaries. Methods Mol Biol 2015;1328:
163–178.
34
Basso DM, Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC.
A sensitive and reliable locomotor rating
scale for open ﬁeld testing in rats. J Neuro-
trauma 1995;12:1–21.
35
Le Dréau G, Martí E. Dorsal-ventral
patterning of the neural tube: A tale of three
signals. Dev Neurobiol 2012;72:1471–1481.
36
Wilson L, Maden M. The mechanisms
of dorsoventral patterning in the vertebrate
neural tube. Dev Biol 2005;282:1–13.
37
Fasano
CA,
Chambers
SM,
Lee
G
et al. Efﬁcient derivation of functional ﬂoor
plate tissue from human embryonic stem
cells. Cell Stem Cell 2010;6:336–347.
38
Piper M, Barry G, Hawkins J et al. NFIA
controls telencephalic progenitor cell differ-
entiation through repression of the notch
effector Hes1. J Neurosci 2010;30:9127–9139.
39
Yang
H.
Endogenous
neurogenesis
replaces
oligodendrocytes
and
astrocytes
after primate spinal cord injury. J Neurosci
2006;26:2157–2166.
40
Cloutier F, Siegenthaler MM, Nistor G
et al. Transplantation of human embryonic
stem cell-derived oligodendrocyte progenitors
into rat spinal cord injuries does not cause
harm. Regen Med 2006;1:469–479.
41
All
AH,
Gharibani
P,
Gupta
S
et al. Early intervention for spinal cord injury
with human induced pluripotent stem cells
oligodendrocyte progenitors. PLoS One 2015;
10:e0116933.
42
Kawabata
S, Takano
M,
Numasawa-
Kuroiwa Y et al. Grafted human iPS cell-derived
oligodendrocyte precursor cells contribute to
robust remyelination of demyelinated axons after
spinal cord injury. Stem Cell Rep 2016;6:1–8.
43
Keirstead
HS,
Nistor
G,
Bernai
G
et al. Human embryonic stem cell-derived oli-
godendrocyte
progenitor
cell
transplants
remyelinate and restore locomotion after spi-
nal cord injury. J Neurosci 2005;25:4694–4705.
44
Rosa PM, Martins LAM, Souza DO
et al. Glioprotective effect of resveratrol: An
emerging therapeutic role for oligodendrog-
lial cells. Mol Neurobiol 2018;55:2967–2978.
45
Bankston AN, Mandler MD, Feng Y.
Oligodendroglia and neurotrophic factors in
neurodegeneration. Neurosci Bull 2013;29:
216–228.
46
Shahbazi E, Mirakhori F, Ezzatizadeh V
et al. Reprogramming of somatic cells to
induced neural stem cells. Methods 2017;
133:21–28.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymeth.
2017.09.007.
47
Nishimura
S,
Sasaki
T,
Shimizu
A
et al. Global gene expression analysis following
spinal cord injury in non-human primates. Exp
Neurol 2014;261:171–179.
48
Hofstetter CP, Holmstrom NA, Lilja JA
et al. Allodynia limits the usefulness of in-
traspinal neural stem cell grafts; directed dif-
ferentiation improves outcome. Nat Neurosci
2005;8:346–353.
49
Kwon BK, Okon EB, Tsai E et al. A grad-
ing
system
to
evaluate
objectively
the
strength of pre-clinical data of acute neuro-
protective therapies for clinical translation in
spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma 2011;28:
1525–1543.
50
Pomeshchik Y, Puttonen KA, Kidin I
et al. Transplanted human induced pluripo-
tent stem cell-derived neural progenitor cells
do not promote functional recovery of phar-
macologically immunosuppressed mice with
contusion spinal cord injury. Cell Transplant
2015;24:1799–1812.
51
Suzuki
H,
Ahuja
CS,
Salewski
RP
et al. Neural stem cell mediated recovery is
enhanced by Chondroitinase ABC pretreat-
ment in chronic cervical spinal cord injury.
PLoS One 2017;12:e0182339.
52
Sekhon LH, Fehlings MG. Epidemiology,
demographics, and pathophysiology of acute
spinal cord injury. Spine 2001;26:S2–S12.
See www.StemCellsTM.com for supporting information available online.
© 2018 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
818
Oligodendrogenic NPCs for Spinal Cord Injury
 21576580, 2018, 11, Downloaded from https://stemcellsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sctm.17-0269 by Korea Economic Research Institute(KERI), Wiley Online Library on [23/01/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

===== Nemati2025_JNeurosciMethods+FibroticScarSCI =====
Development of an in vitro fibrotic scar model of spinal cord injury using 
macromolecular crowding
Sorour Nemati a,b, Alanna Stanley a, Michelle Kilcoyne c, Dimitrios Zeugolis d,  
Siobhan S. McMahon a,b,e,*
a Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of Galway, Galway, Ireland
b CÚRAM Research Ireland Centre for Medical Devices, University of Galway, Galway, Ireland
c Carbohydrate Signalling Group, Infectious Disease Section, School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, University of Galway, Ireland
d Regenerative, Modular & Developmental Engineering Laboratory (REMODEL), Charles Institute of Dermatology, Conway Institute of Biomolecular & Biomedical 
Research and School of Mechanical & Materials Engineering, University College Dublin (UCD), Dublin, Ireland
e Galway Neuroscience Centre, University of Galway, Galway, Ireland
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Astrocyte
Fibroblast
Macromolecular crowding
Extracellular matrix
Spinal cord injury
Fibrotic scar
A B S T R A C T
Background: Spinal cord injury (SCI) results in a cascade of cellular and molecular events that lead to permanent 
tissue damage and functional impairment. A key consequence of this injury is the formation of both glial and 
fibrotic scars, which pose significant barriers to regeneration. The fibrotic scar that forms following SCI remains a 
significant therapeutic challenge. One major obstacle in developing anti-fibrotic compounds is the absence of a 
comprehensive in vitro screening system.
New method: In this study, we employed a macromolecular crowding (MMC) technique to accelerate ECM 
deposition. Leptomeningeal (LPG) cells were cultured in media supplemented with the MMC Ficoll (FC). To 
mimic the injury environment in vivo, the cells were exposed to either physical or chemical injury.
Results: The growth and metabolic activity of the LPG cells remained unchanged under these different injuries 
and treatments. Groups supplemented with the MMC FC exhibited higher deposition of ECM proteins involved in 
fibrotic scar formation, including fibronectin, collagen IV, collagen I, and laminin, compared to those without FC.
Comparison with existing methods: A key limitation of conventional cell culture in aqueous media is its clear 
difference from the naturally ‘crowded’ tissue environment, resulting in a slow rate of ECM protein deposition. 
Using the MMC approach, we successfully accelerated ECM protein deposition within an in vitro model of the 
fibrotic scar.
Conclusions: Supplementing LPG culture media with MMCs can effectively mimic the fibrotic scar environment, 
providing a valuable refinement in developing SCI in vitro models for drug screening and therapeutic 
applications.
1. Introduction
Spinal cord injury (SCI) results in temporary or permanent functional 
impairments (Seblani et al., 2023). SCIs arise from various causes, 
including vehicular accidents, sports-related incidents, trauma, and 
combat injuries, often leading to sensorimotor impairments. Given the 
complex pathophysiology of these injuries, many cases result in per­
manent motor function loss despite medical intervention, profoundly 
impacting quality of life (Xue et al., 2024). After SCI, two distinct scar 
types form at the lesion site: astrocytic scars, composed of proliferating 
astrocytes, and fibrotic scars, characterized by the presence of 
extracellular matrix (ECM)-secreting fibroblasts (Hu et al., 2023). A 
major challenge in understanding SCI pathophysiology is the lack of 
models that accurately mimic cellular interactions with the ECM, 
limiting the ability to promote regeneration beyond the injury site 
(Ala-Kokko et al., 2024). Understanding the complex cellular and mo­
lecular processes underlying glial and fibrotic scar formation is crucial 
for developing therapeutic strategies aimed at promoting axonal 
regeneration and functional recovery after SCI (Orr and Gensel, 2018). 
Various animal models have been developed to study scar formation 
following SCI (Jin et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2020; Patil et al., 2023; Wu 
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2024). However, these models are often 
* Corresponding author at: Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of Galway, Galway, Ireland.
E-mail address: siobhan.mcmahon@universityofgalway.ie (S.S. McMahon). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Neuroscience Methods
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jneumeth
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2025.110601
Received 25 July 2025; Received in revised form 22 September 2025; Accepted 10 October 2025  
Journal of Neuroscience Methods 424 (2025) 110601 
Available online 12 October 2025 
0165-0270/© 2025 Published by Elsevier B.V. 

time-consuming, expensive, and pose technical and ethical challenges, 
particularly for routine molecular studies or therapeutic screening 
(Weightman et al., 2014). Consequently, there is a growing need for 
alternative, simplified experimental systems. While glial scarring 
following injury has been extensively studied, the cellular dynamics 
within the fibrotic scar have received comparatively less attention.
Fibrotic scarring begins in the subacute phase of SCI and matures 
during the chronic phase. It is recognized as an obstacle to axonal 
regeneration, thereby playing a significant role in the sustained loss of 
sensory and motor function following SCI (Ayazi et al., 2022). Fibro­
blasts and fibroblast-like cells proliferate and migrate into the lesion 
core, recruiting a significant number of macrophages to form a fibrotic 
scar medial to the astrocytic scar (Li et al., 2021). The fibrotic scar 
following CNS injuries consists of various components, including the 
ECM proteins collagen I, collagen IV, fibronectin, and laminin (Bi et al., 
2024; D’Ambrosi and Apolloni, 2020; Li et al., 2021).
Macromolecular crowding (MMC) is a process that accelerates ECM 
protein deposition through a volume exclusion effect (Silverstein and 
Slade, 2019). The addition of inert macromolecular crowders (MMCs) to 
culture medium significantly enhances the conversion of procollagen to 
collagen in cells (Chen et al., 2011). In standard culture conditions, the 
rate-limiting step in collagen maturation is the proteolytic cleavage of N- 
and C-propeptides by propeptidases. The presence of MMCs facilitates 
this process, promoting collagen formation (Coentro et al., 2021). MMC 
has been shown to influence the aggregation and interaction of various 
ECM molecules, enhancing their deposition, modulating stem cell dif­
ferentiation, regulating gene expression, promoting cell signaling, and 
increasing enzyme activity (Tsiapalis and Zeugolis, 2021). While the use 
of MMC in cell culture has been previously explored, its potential in 
research has gained increasing attention in recent years, particularly 
within the areas of tissue engineering and drug discovery (Benny and 
Raghunath, 2017; Chen et al., 2009; Gurdal and Zeugolis, 2025; Lareu 
et al., 2007). MMC-based fibrotic models have been developed to enable 
the screening of antifibrotic compounds across a range of fibrotic con­
ditions including dermal, lung, and vocal fold scarring (Fan et al., 2020; 
Graupp et al., 2018; Ronnow et al., 2020).
This study aimed, for the first time, to evaluate the effect of MMC on 
primary leptomeningeal (LPG) cells to develop an in vitro model of 
fibrotic scarring following SCI. LPG cells, which originate from the 
meningeal barriers, were used in this study due to their fibroblast-like 
characteristics. There is growing research on their role and signifi­
cance in injury and disease (Bolte et al., 2023; Como et al., 2023). A 
cocktail of Ficoll 70 kDa and Ficoll 400 kDa (FC) was selected as the 
MMC agent. The combination of FC 70 kDa and FC 400 kDa has been 
widely used as a neutral MMC system to enhance ECM deposition while 
maintaining cell viability (Nemati et al., 2025). Concentrations in the 
range of 25–50 mg/ml for each component have been reported to 
accelerate collagen and fibronectin accumulation without inducing 
cytotoxic effects in various fibroblast cultures (Chen and Raghunath, 
2009; Coentro et al., 2021). Based on these studies, we selected a 
Fig. 1. Schematic of experimental design and groups. Control (no FC or injury), SCR, LPS, CYT, FC-treated (FC), SCR+FC, LPS+FC, and CYT+FC.
S. Nemati et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Neuroscience Methods 424 (2025) 110601 
2 

mixture of Ficoll 70/400 kDa at 37.5/25 mg/ml, which falls within the 
established effective range, to maximize ECM deposition in LPG cells 
while avoiding growth inhibition.
A physical scratch injury or chemical treatment using a pro- 
inflammatory cytokine cocktail of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 (CYT) were 
employed to simulate injury conditions in vitro. FC-supplemented groups 
demonstrated increased deposition of ECM proteins. These data indicate 
that MMC supplementation of LPG culture can successfully model the 
fibrotic scar environment which opens up the possibility of more 
convenient and higher throughput screening of novel therapeutic drugs 
and treatment modalities for SCI rehabilitation and repair.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Cell culture
All animal experiments were approved by the Animal Care in 
Research Ethics Committee (approval reference numbers 15/DEC/05 
and 2023.06.003) at the University of Galway and licensed by the 
Health Products Regulatory Agency (HPRA) Ireland. All experimental 
methods were performed in accordance with ARRIVE guidelines. Pri­
mary leptomeninges were isolated from three litters of postnatal day 4 
(P4) Sprague Dawley rat pups (Charles River, UK). The pups were 
sacrificed using sedation with 5 % isoflurane, followed by decapitation. 
The spinal cords were carefully extracted by longitudinally cutting the 
vertebral column and then transferred into ice-cold Hanks’ balanced salt 
solution (Sigma-Aldrich, Dublin, Ireland). The leptomeninges were 
meticulously stripped from the spinal cord using curved forceps under a 
stereomicroscope. The isolated leptomeningeal tissue was incubated in 
trypsin/EDTA (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37 ◦C for 30 min. After incubation, the 
tissue was triturated and centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 min. The 
resulting cell pellet was re-suspended in warm culture medium and 
seeded into T25 tissue culture flasks, with three leptomeninges per flask. 
The cultures were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s medium/ 
nutrient mixture F-12 Ham (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10 % 
fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 % penicillin/strepto­
mycin (Sigma-Aldrich) (LPG medium). The medium was changed every 
3 days until the leptomeningeal (LPG) cells reached confluency, 
approximately 10 days post-isolation. The schematic of the experimental 
groups and experimental design is shown in Fig. 1 and described below.
2.2. Cell treatment with MMCs
The MMC Ficoll 70 kDa and Ficoll 400 kDa (FC) (Sigma-Aldrich) 
powders were sterilised under UV light for 1 h and subsequently dis­
solved in LPG media at 37.5 and 25 mg/ml, respectively. Furthermore, 
100 μM L-ascorbic acid 2-phosphate sesquimagnesium salt hydrate 
(Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the FC solutions at 1 μl/ml. After reaching 
confluency in T25 flasks, LPG cells were used at passage 1 for experi­
mental assays. Cells were seeded at 25,000 cells/cm² into 8-well 
chamber slides. Twenty-four hours after seeding, FC was introduced to 
the cells, and fresh medium was replenished every two days throughout 
the experiment. Both control (without FC) and treated groups (with FC) 
were cultured in FBS-containing LPG medium to ensure consistent 
baseline conditions. Cell morphology was assessed using a Leica phase 
contrast microscope, and images captured at 10X magnification. Each 
experiment was carried out in triplicate after 5 and 8 days growth with 
MMCs (Fig. 1).
2.3. Physical injury of LPG cells
To induce an in vitro SCI model through physical injury, a scratch 
assay was carried out. LPG cells were seeded into 8-well chamber slides 
at 25,000 cells/cm2 (three wells seeded per experimental group). After 
24 h, the cell monolayer was scraped in a straight line using a P200 
pipette tip to create a scratch injury (SCR). The cell debris was removed 
gently using a suction pipette, and the edges of the scratch were washed 
once with 1 ml of Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (Sigma- 
Aldrich) and LPG medium containing FC was added to the wells. Cells 
were examined on day 5 and day 8 (Fig. 1).
2.4. Chemical injury of LPG cells
To create an in vitro SCI model through chemical treatment, LPG cells 
were seeded at 25,000 cells/cm2 on 8-well chamber slides (three wells 
seeded per experimental group). After 24 h, cells were treated by adding 
a cytokine cocktail (CYT) of 10 ng/ml recombinant rat TNF-α, 10 ng/ml 
IL-6, and 10 ng/ml IL-1β protein (Bio-techne). A combination of 10 ng/ 
ml of each CYT was added to the cells with and without FC. Lipopoly­
saccharide (LPS) (Sigma-Aldrich) was included in this experiment as a 
positive inflammatory control at 100 ng/ml. Cells were examined at day 
5 and day 8 (Fig. 1).
2.5. Metabolic activity
The metabolic activity of LPG cells in the presence of FC was eval­
uated using the Alamar blue assay (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Cells were 
seeded in triplicate in a 24-well plate at 25,000 cells/cm2. After 24 h, 
LPG media containing FC was added. On day 5 and day 8, the media was 
replaced with Alamar blue reagent diluted 1:10 in LPG medium. The 
cells were then incubated at 37◦C for 1–2 h. Subsequently, 25 μl of the 
incubated Alamar Blue solution and 75 μl of PBS were added to a black 
96 well plate. The fluorescence was measured at λex 560 nm and λem 
590 nm.
2.6. Griess assay
Nitrite concentration was assessed using the Griesse colourimetric 
assay (Invitrogen). On day 5, conditioned LPG media was isolated from 
three replicate 24 well tray wells of the control (no FC or injury), SCR, 
LPS, CYT, FC-treated (FC), SCR+FC, LPS+FC, and CYT+FC groups. The 
Griess reagent (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) was prepared by combining 
equal volumes of N-(1-naphthyl)-ethylenediamine and sulfanilic acid. 
For each well, 150 μl sample, 20 μl Griess reagent, and 130 μl deionized 
water were sequentially added. The mixture was incubated at room 
temperature for 30 min. A blank reference sample was prepared using 
130 μl deionized water instead of sample. The absorbance was then read 
at 548 nm. The standard curve of concentration vs absorbance was 
plotted and the sample concentrations calculated using the generated 
linear equation.
2.7. Immunocytochemical staining
Cells from days 5 and 8 were stained for ECM proteins essentially as 
previously described with some minor modifications (McMahon and 
Kilcoyne, 2022). In brief, the cells were washed once with PBS and fixed 
with 4 % paraformaldehyde (PFA) (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 min. 
Following fixation, the cells were washed three times with PBS and 
blocked with 3 % normal goat serum (NGS) (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 min 
at 
room 
temperature. 
Primary 
antibodies 
(polyclonal 
rabbit 
anti-fibronectin (1:200, Abcam), polyclonal rabbit anti-collagen IV 
(1:200, Abcam), monoclonal mouse anti-collagen I (1:200, Abcam) and 
polyclonal rabbit anti-laminin (1:200; Abcam)) were diluted in PBS 
containing 3 % NGS and 0.02 % Triton-X100 (antibody diluent solu­
tion). The cells were incubated in primary antibody for 2 h at 37 ◦C. 
After three washes with PBS, secondary antibodies (anti-mouse Alexa 
Fluor 594 and anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen)) were diluted 
(1:200) in PBS, and the cells were incubated for 30 min at room tem­
perature in darkness. Subsequently, the cells were again washed three 
times with PBS and stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) 
at 1 μg/ml (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) for 4 min at room temperature. 
Following three additional PBS washes, the cells were imaged.
S. Nemati et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Neuroscience Methods 424 (2025) 110601 
3 

2.8. Phalloidin staining
Following fixation of day 5 cells as above, the PFA was removed, and 
the cells were washed three times for 5 min each with PBS containing 
Triton X-100 to permeabilize the cells. Alexa Fluor 488 phalloidin 
(Thermo-Fisher Scientific) (1:200) and the nuclear counterstain Hoechst 
(Invitrogen) (1:2000) were added, and the cells were incubated at room 
temperature in darkness for 20 min. The cells were then washed three 
times for 5 min each with PBS, with the final wash left on the cells to 
prevent drying. The cells were then imaged.
2.9. Imaging
Cell morphology was assessed using a phase contrast microscope 
(Leica). Phase contrast images were captured at 10× (3 images per well). 
Immunocytochemically stained cells and phalloidin stained cells were 
imaged on an Olympus IX81 fluorescence microscope at 20× magnifi­
cation (4 images per well). All imaging was carried out using the same 
exposure time.
2.10. Image analysis
The fluorescence intensity per cell of all immunocytochemical 
markers was estimated by using the raw integrated density function in 
ImageJ to quantify the sum of the pixel values in the image (Schindelin 
et al., 2012). The number of DAPI-stained nuclei per image was quan­
tified using nuclear particle counter. Results are presented as integrated 
density/number of nuclei. The fractal dimension, using box counting 
dimension method, and lacunarity of LPG cells were analysed using the 
FracLac plugin in ImageJ (Basavarajappa et al., 2021; Stanley et al., 
2016). Phalloidin stained images were opened in ImageJ and converted 
to binary format, ensuring that the structures of interest were accurately 
isolated by manually setting the threshold. Once the images were 
pre-processed, the FracLac plugin was launched. The analysis parame­
ters were carefully set to ensure consistent and comparable results across 
all images. A slow scan sliding box method was used from a minimum 
box size of 1 pixel to a maximum size of 45 % of the region of interest. 
For each image, five regions of interest (ROIs) to be analysed were 
selected. In control images, ROIs were randomly selected at the centre, 
while in images of interest (injured groups), ROIs were systematically 
placed along zones of interest (placed along the edges of the scratch in 
the SCR group). FracLac then measured the fractal dimension and 
lacunarity within each ROI and results were averaged across these ROIs.
2.11. Statistical analysis
Data is presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD) with experi­
ments conducted in triplicates. Statistical analysis was performed using 
GraphPad Prism® software, employing one-way analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) and Dunnett’s and Bonferroni’s posthoc test for comparisons 
among groups. Statistical significance was considered at probability (p) 
≤0.05.
3. Results
The schematic of the experimental groups and experimental design is 
shown in Fig. 1. LPG cells were cultured with and without the MMC FC 
and then subjected to either physical or chemical injury to simulate an 
injured environment (Fig. 1). The MMC FC, consisted of a combination 
of Ficoll 70 kDa and Ficoll 400 kDa. The scratch assay replicates me­
chanical disruption of the cellular monolayer, mimicking tissue damage 
(Kimura-Kuroda et al., 2010). The pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α, 
IL-1β, and IL-6 play key roles in the inflammatory response, driving ECM 
remodeling following injury (Patil et al., 2021).
3.1. FC had no negative effect on growth and metabolic activity of LPG 
cells
The growth and morphology of LPG cells was examined on days 5 
and 8 using phase-contrast microscopy (Supplementary Figure 1). This 
assessment aimed to evaluate the impact of various injury conditions, 
with and without FC, as these cells had not been previously cultured 
with MMCs. The growth of LPG cells treated with FC and a physical or 
chemical injury did not change compared to the control group at days 5 
and 8 (Figure S1), confirming that the culture conditions did not induce 
an injury response in the cells. LPG cultures exhibited a high level of 
confluency on days 5 and 8, with cells closely packed together, making it 
difficult to distinguish individual cell shapes and processes.
The metabolic activity of LPG cells was significantly lower in the 
SCR, SCR+FC, LPS, LPS+FC, CYT, and CYT+FC groups compared to the 
control group on day 5 (Fig. 2). However, the FC group showed no 
significant difference compared to control. On day 8, none of the groups 
showed a significant difference in metabolic activity compared to the 
control (Fig. 2).
3.2. Nitrite production increased in LPG cells treated with CYT and LPS
Nitrite produced by LPG cells was measured by the Griess assay. The 
Fig. 2. Metabolic activity of LPG cells after treatment with FC assessed using 
the Alamar blue assay. Graphs show the metabolic activity of LPG cells grown 
for 5 and 8 days without FC (Control) and with FC and/or a physical (SCR) or 
chemical (LPS, CYT) injury. n = 3. Mean ±SD. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** 
p < 0.001 compared to control. Dunnett’s posthoc test using one-way ANOVA.
Fig. 3. Nitrite production in LPG cells with and without injury and FC treat­
ment. Bar chart shows nitrite concentration produced by LPG cells without 
injury (Control, FC) and with scratch injury (SCR, SCR+FC), LPS treatment 
(LPS, LPS+FC) and cytokine combination treatment (CYT, CYT+FC), with and 
without FC at day 5 post FC and injury. n = 3. Mean ±SD. ** p < 0.01 
compared to control. Dunnett’s posthoc test using one-way ANOVA.
S. Nemati et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Neuroscience Methods 424 (2025) 110601 
4 

control group produced less than 2 μM nitrite. Both the FC alone treat­
ment and scratch injury treatments with and without FC (SCR and 
SCR+FC) did not show any increase in nitrite production compared to 
the control or FC treated cells (Fig. 3). In contrast, the LPS and CYT 
treatments resulted in a significant rise in nitrite concentration, reaching 
approximately 5 μM. This indicated a robust inflammatory response 
elicited by the LPS and cytokine combination treatments.
3.3. FC and physical/chemical injury did not affect LPG cell migration or 
cell morphology
After SCI, fibroblasts proliferate and migrate to the injury site, 
forming a fibrotic scar (Li et al., 2021). Since the aim of this study is to 
mimic the injury environment, it is important to assess whether the 
potential for LPG cell migration is affected. Specifically, we aimed to 
investigate whether FC alone, or in combination with physical or 
chemical injury, influenced the ability of cells to migrate. The 
phalloidin-stained images showed no noticeable changes in the actin 
cytoskeleton across different treatment and injury conditions in all cell 
treatment groups (Fig. 4A). The presence of FC did not alter the 
migration potential of LPG cells, as the organization and density of actin 
fibres remained consistent after FC treatment and also after physical and 
chemical injury.
The morphology of LPGs was further analysed using fractal dimen­
sion and lacunarity ImageJ analysis of phalloidin staining to evaluate 
whether FC, SCR and CYT treatment, affected cell morphology (Fig. 4B, 
C). Higher fractal dimension indicates greater cellular complexity, 
reflecting changes in the shape and branching of cell processes. 
Lacunarity is used to assess the structural variance, i.e. homogeneity/ 
heterogeneity of cell structure. Our data indicated that the complexity 
and heterogeneity of LPG cells remained unchanged compared to the 
control group, where cells exhibited a characteristic spindle-like 
morphology, except for a slight change in structural complexity in the 
SCR group (Fig. 4B).
3.4. FC promotes ECM protein deposition in LPG cells
LPG cells displayed no change in fibronectin expression when cells 
were exposed to a physical or chemical injury (Fig. 5). All FC treatments 
(FC alone, SCR+FC, LPS+FC, CYT+FC) significantly increased fibro­
nectin levels compared to their respective non-FC groups on days 5 and 8 
(Fig. 5C). Fibronectin was expressed in non-FC treated groups at both 
time points, but FC and its injury combinations showed the highest 
fibronectin deposition (Fig. 5A, B).
The expression of collagen IV on day 5 was significantly increased in 
FC, SCR+FC, LPS+FC, and CYT+FC compared to their corresponding 
non-FC groups (Fig. 6). The highest increase was observed in the FC only 
treated group (Fig. 6C). Similar trends were seen on day 8, with FC alone 
and FC with its injury combinations significantly increasing collagen IV 
levels. Representative images of collagen IV in LPG cells are shown in 
Fig. 6A,B.
Collagen I deposition was significantly higher on days 5 and 8 in the 
cell groups treated with FC, SCR+FC, LPS+FC, and CYT+FC compared 
to their corresponding non-FC groups, with FC alone showing the 
highest increase (Fig. 7C). On days 5 and 8, a slight increase in collagen I 
deposition was also observed in the LPS and CYT groups without FC 
Fig. 4. Phalloidin staining, fractal dimension, and lacunarity of LPG cells after FC treatment and physical or chemical injury. Fluorescent photomicrographs show 
phalloidin staining of F-actin (green) showing the cytoskeleton of LPG cells (A) without injury (Control, FC) and with scratch injury (SCR, SCR+FC), LPS treatment 
(LPS, LPS+FC) and cytokine treatment (CYT, CYT+FC). Scale bars= 50 µm. Graphs represent fractal dimension and lacunarity of LPG cells (B and C respectively) 
under different cell treatments (FC, SCR, SCR+FC, LPS, LPS+FC, CYT, CYT+FC). n = 3. Mean ±SD. **** p < 0.0001 compared to control. Dunnett’s posthoc test 
using one-way ANOVA.
S. Nemati et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Neuroscience Methods 424 (2025) 110601 
5 

Fig. 5. Expression of fibronectin in LPG cells after FC treatment and physical/chemical injury. Representative immunofluorescent photomicrographs show fibro­
nectin deposition in LPG cells on day 5 (A) and (B) 8 respectively without injury (control, FC) and with scratch injury (SCR, SCR+FC), LPS treatment (LPS, LPS+FC) 
and cytokine treatment (CYT, CYT+FC). Scale bars = 100 µm. Bar charts show the relative fluorescence intensity per cell analysis of fibronectin. n = 3. Mean ± SD. 
**** p < 0.0001 compared to their corresponding non-FC groups. Bonferroni’s posthoc test using two-way ANOVA.
S. Nemati et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Neuroscience Methods 424 (2025) 110601 
6 

Fig. 6. Expression of collagen IV in LPG cells after FC treatment and physical/chemical injury. Representative immunofluorescent photomicrographs show collagen 
IV deposition in LPG cells on day 5 (A) and (B) 8 respectively without injury (control, FC) and with scratch injury (SCR, SCR+FC), LPS treatment (LPS, LPS+FC) and 
cytokine treatment (CYT, CYT+FC). Scale bars = 100 µm. Bar charts show the relative fluorescence intensity per cell analysis of collagen IV. n = 3. Mean ± SD. **** 
p < 0.0001 compared to their corresponding non-FC groups. Bonferroni’s posthoc test using two-way ANOVA.
S. Nemati et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Neuroscience Methods 424 (2025) 110601 
7 

Fig. 7. Expression of collagen I in LPG cells after FC treatment and physical/chemical injury. Representative immunofluorescent photomicrographs show collagen I 
deposition in LPG cells on day 5 (A) and (B) 8 respectively without injury (control, FC) and with scratch injury (SCR, SCR+FC), LPS treatment (LPS, LPS+FC) and 
cytokine treatment (CYT, CYT+FC). Scale bars = 100 µm. Bar charts show the relative fluorescence intensity per cell analysis of collagen I. n = 3. Mean ± SD. **** 
p < 0.0001 compared to their corresponding non-FC groups. Bonferroni’s posthoc test using two-way ANOVA.
S. Nemati et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Neuroscience Methods 424 (2025) 110601 
8 

Fig. 8. Expression of laminin in LPG cells after FC treatment and physical/chemical injury. Representative immunofluorescent photomicrographs show laminin 
deposition in LPG cells on day 5 (A) and (B) 8 respectively without injury (control, FC) and with scratch injury (SCR, SCR+FC), LPS treatment (LPS, LPS+FC) and 
cytokine treatment (CYT, CYT+FC). Scale bars = 100 µm. Bar charts show the relative fluorescence intensity per cell analysis of laminin. n = 3. Mean ± SD. **** 
p < 0.0001 compared to their corresponding non-FC groups. Bonferroni’s posthoc test using two-way ANOVA.
S. Nemati et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Neuroscience Methods 424 (2025) 110601 
9 

(Fig. 7A,B).
The ECM protein laminin was also assessed in LPG cell groups 
(Fig. 8). On day 5 and day 8, FC, SCR+FC, LPS+FC, and CYT+FC 
significantly increased laminin deposition compared to their corre­
sponding non-FC groups. Low laminin expression was noted in the non- 
FC groups (control, SCR, LPS, CYT) at both time points (Fig. 8C).
4. Discussion
The accelerated ECM deposition observed in this study may 
contribute to the development of improved in vitro models of fibrotic 
scars following SCI, facilitating research on therapeutic strategies. This 
study demonstrated that the MMC FC had no negative effect on growth 
of LPG cells. Previous work on characterisation of LPG cells showed that 
the cells have rapid attachment and growth over 7 days in culture at 
various passage numbers (Abubaker et al., 2024). The immunofluores­
cence results and image quantification in this study confirmed the ho­
mogeneity of LPG cells at full confluency. In agreement with Abubaker 
et al. (2024), LPGs exhibited a smooth muscle-like morphology, char­
acterized by a long and slender shape. Additionally FC did not have alter 
the metabolic activity of LPG cells. Previous studies investigating the 
effects of MMCs have also reported no significant changes in the meta­
bolic activity of the cells (Gurdal and Zeugolis, 2025; Kumar et al., 2015; 
Nemati et al., 2025).
Nitrite production increased in LPG cells treated with CYT and LPS. 
In dermal fibroblasts, treatment with LPS activates the TLR4 signalling 
pathway and promote scar formation (Li et al., 2019), whereas cytokines 
such as TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 have been shown to activate fibroblasts in 
various tissues, including cardiac fibroblasts (Van Linthout et al., 2014). 
Our results align with a recent study by Patil et al. (2021), in which 
inflammation was induced by administering the pro-inflammatory cy­
tokines TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6, leading to increased nitrite production in 
mixed 
glial cultures. 
While 
TNF-α, IL-1β, 
and 
IL-6 
mimic 
pro-inflammatory signaling relevant to fibrosis, LPS acts primarily 
through the TLR4 pathway, representing a distinct inflammatory stim­
ulus. Including both LPS and the cytokine cocktail allows us to assess 
ECM deposition under different inflammatory mechanisms, providing 
complementary insights into how various inflammatory cues may in­
fluence fibrotic scar formation in vitro. Interestingly, although CYT and 
LPS treatments induced a measurable inflammatory response in LPG 
cells, as indicated by increased nitrite production, they did not result in a 
significant increase in ECM protein deposition. This discrepancy may 
reflect the unique nature of leptomeningeal cells, which might require 
additional cues, such as MMC, TGF-β signaling (Johnson et al., 1992), or 
mechanical stimuli (Greaney et al., 2025), to robustly upregulate ECM 
synthesis. Furthermore, ECM deposition is a slower process than nitrite 
production (Guchhait et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2023), and the time 
points examined here may not fully capture delayed matrix remodeling. 
Finally, pro-inflammatory stimuli may activate alternative signaling 
pathways that contribute to inflammation without directly inducing 
fibrotic ECM production in this cell type.
LPG cells were utilized in this study to represent fibroblasts in the 
development of an in vitro model for fibrotic scar formation. LPG cells 
play a crucial role in maintaining the homeostasis, integrity, and func­
tion of the ECM (Zorzin et al., 2021). Due to their ability to support the 
formation of neural and glial tissues, LPG cells contribute to protective 
mechanisms against injury and promote tissue repair processes (Chen 
et al., 2021). Transforming growth factor β1, a cytokine released by 
microglia and astrocytes during brain injury, activates LPG cells to 
stimulate their proliferation and ECM production (Komuta et al., 2010). 
LPG cells express the intermediate filament proteins vimentin, cyto­
keratin, and desmoplakin (Remsik et al., 2021) and they also express 
various ECM proteins, including collagen type IV, fibronectin, and 
laminin (Holman et al., 2005). While LPG cells do not represent all 
fibroblast populations implicated in fibrotic scar formation in vivo, 
including pericyte- or perivascular-derived fibroblasts, their established 
fibroblast-like morphology, rapid proliferation, and robust ECM protein 
expression make them a practical and biologically relevant choice for 
developing an initial in vitro model (Xue et al., 2024).
The findings of this study emphasize the importance of FC in ECM 
deposition of LPG cells. We showed that FC promoted collagen I, 
collagen IV, fibronectin and laminin deposition in LPG cells. FC was 
previously noted as an effective MMC agent, inducing the highest 
deposition of fibronectin and collagen types I, III, IV, V, and VI in human 
corneal fibroblast cultures (Gurdal and Zeugolis, 2025). Previous studies 
using dermal fibroblasts employed FC to create a model that mimics 
fibrotic skin diseases and demonstrated that FC treatment led to 
increased fibronectin synthesis (Juhl et al., 2020). A separate study with 
dermal fibroblasts indicated increased collagen type I deposition with 
FC treatment; however, the MMC CR showed an even higher increase in 
ECM deposition compared to FC (Gaspar et al., 2019). Additionally, 
primary human lung fibroblasts have been cultured with FC to establish 
an idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis model, which showed increased 
fibronectin synthesis upon FC treatment (Ronnow et al., 2020). Addi­
tionally, in a human gingival fibroblast cell model associated with 
scarless wound healing, FC has been shown to promote collagen I, 
fibronectin, tenascin, collagen IV and laminin (Ramalingam et al., 
2023). FC not only enhanced ECM deposition in 2D culture but also in a 
3D configuration, as demonstrated by Chiang et al. (2021) where 
mesenchymal stem cell spheroids cultures were supplemented with FC 
and showed increased laminin and fibronectin levels compared to 
groups without FC. Similarly, in microfluidic systems designed for in 
vitro microvasculature engineering, FC supplementation led to a signif­
icant accumulation of vascular ECM components, including collagen 
type IV and laminin (Wan et al., 2023).
The fibrotic scar that forms following SCI remains a significant 
therapeutic challenge. One major obstacle in developing antifibrotic 
compounds is the absence of a comprehensive in vitro screening system. 
A key limitation of conventional cell culture in standard aqueous media 
is its clear difference from the naturally ‘crowded’ tissue environment. 
As a result, the enzymatic conversion of procollagen to collagen by C- 
proteinase occurs at a slow rate, preventing substantial collagen matrix 
deposition within a practical timeframe. In this study, using the MMC 
approach, we successfully accelerated ECM protein deposition and 
developed an in vitro model of the fibrotic scar. This novel model can 
serve as a platform for future research, including drug screening and 
therapeutic applications.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Alanna Stanley: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Investi­
gation. Michelle Kilcoyne: Writing – review & editing, Supervision. 
Dimitrios Zeugolis: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Supervision, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. McMa­
hon Siobhan S.: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Supervision, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. 
Sorour Nemati: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This publication has emanated from research conducted with the 
support of Research Ireland (Grant Number 13/RC/2073-P2). The au­
thors acknowledge the facilities and scientific and technical assistance of 
the Anatomy Imaging and Microscopy Facility at the University of 
Galway (https://imaging.universityofgalway.ie/imaging/)
S. Nemati et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Neuroscience Methods 424 (2025) 110601 
10 

Appendix A. Supporting information
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the 
online version at doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2025.110601.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Abubaker, M., Greaney, A., Newport, D., Mulvihill, J.J.E., 2024. Characterization of 
primary human leptomeningeal cells in 2D culture. Heliyon 10 (5), e26744. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e26744.
Ala-Kokko, N., Baek, I., Song, Y., 2024. Development of Tissue-Engineered model of 
fibrotic scarring after spinal cord injury to study astrocyte activation and neurite 
outgrowth in vitro. ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 10 (10), 6545–6557. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acsbiomaterials.4c01100.
Ayazi, M., Zivkovic, S., Hammel, G., Stefanovic, B., Ren, Y., 2022. Fibrotic scar in CNS 
injuries: from the cellular origins of fibroblasts to the molecular processes of fibrotic 
scar formation. Cells 11 (15). https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11152371.
Basavarajappa, S., Konddajji Ramachandra, V., Kumar, S., 2021. Fractal dimension and 
lacunarity analysis of mandibular bone on digital panoramic radiographs of tobacco 
users. J. Dent. Res Dent. Clin. Dent. Prospects 15 (2), 140–146. https://doi.org/ 
10.34172/joddd.2021.024.
Benny, P., Raghunath, M., 2017. Making microenvironments: a look into incorporating 
macromolecular crowding into in vitro experiments, to generate biomimetic 
microenvironments which are capable of directing cell function for tissue 
engineering applications. J. Tissue Eng. 8, 2041731417730467. https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/2041731417730467.
Bi, Y., Duan, W., Silver, J., 2024. Collagen I is a critical organizer of scarring and CNS 
regeneration failure. bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.07.592424.
Bolte, A.C., Shapiro, D.A., Dutta, A.B., Ma, W.F., Bruch, K.R., Kovacs, M.A., Royo 
Marco, A., Ennerfelt, H.E., Lukens, J.R., 2023. The meningeal transcriptional 
response to traumatic brain injury and aging. Elife 12. https://doi.org/10.7554/ 
eLife.81154.
Chen, C., Loe, F., Blocki, A., Peng, Y., Raghunath, M., 2011. Applying macromolecular 
crowding to enhance extracellular matrix deposition and its remodeling in vitro for 
tissue engineering and cell-based therapies. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 63 (4-5), 277–290. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2011.03.003.
Chen, C.Z., Peng, Y.X., Wang, Z.B., Fish, P.V., Kaar, J.L., Koepsel, R.R., Russell, A.J., 
Lareu, R.R., Raghunath, M., 2009. The Scar-in-a-Jar: studying potential antifibrotic 
compounds from the epigenetic to extracellular level in a single well. Br. J. Pharm. 
158 (5), 1196–1209. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1476-5381.2009.00387.x.
Chen, C.Z., Raghunath, M., 2009. Focus on collagen: in vitro systems to study 
fibrogenesis and antifibrosis state of the art. Fibrogenes. Tissue Repair 2, 7. https:// 
doi.org/10.1186/1755-1536-2-7.
Chen, J., Wang, L., Xu, H., Wang, Y., Liang, Q., 2021. The lymphatic drainage system of 
the CNS plays a role in lymphatic drainage, immunity, and neuroinflammation in 
stroke. J. Leukoc. Biol. 110 (2), 283–291. https://doi.org/10.1002/JLB.5MR0321- 
632R.
Chiang, C.E., Fang, Y.Q., Ho, C.T., Assuncao, M., Lin, S.J., Wang, Y.C., Blocki, A., 
Huang, C.C., 2021. Bioactive decellularized extracellular matrix derived from 3D 
stem cell spheroids under macromolecular crowding serves as a scaffold for tissue 
engineering. Adv. Health Mater. 10 (11), e2100024. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adhm.202100024.
Coentro, J.Q., May, U., Prince, S., Zwaagstra, J., Ritvos, O., Jarvinen, T.A.H., Zeugolis, D. 
I., 2021. Adapting the Scar-in-a-Jar to skin fibrosis and screening traditional and 
contemporary Anti-Fibrotic therapies. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 9, 756399. https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2021.756399.
Como, C.N., Kim, S., Siegenthaler, J., 2023. Stuck on you: meninges cellular crosstalk in 
development. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 79, 102676. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
conb.2023.102676.
D’Ambrosi, N., Apolloni, S., 2020. Fibrotic scar in neurodegenerative diseases. Front. 
Immunol. 11, 1394. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2020.01394.
Fan, C., Lim, L.K.P., Wu, Z., Sharma, B., Gan, S.Q., Liang, K., Upton, Z., Leavesley, D., 
2020. In vitro model of human cutaneous hypertrophic scarring using 
macromolecular crowding. J. Vis. Exp. (159). https://doi.org/10.3791/61037.
Gaspar, D., Fuller, K.P., Zeugolis, D.I., 2019. Polydispersity and negative charge are key 
modulators of extracellular matrix deposition under macromolecular crowding 
conditions. Acta Biomater. 88, 197–210. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
actbio.2019.02.050.
Graupp, M., Rinner, B., Frisch, M.T., Weiss, G., Fuchs, J., Sundl, M., El-Heliebi, A., 
Moser, G., Kamolz, L.P., Karbiener, M., Gugatschka, M., 2018. Towards an in vitro 
fibrogenesis model of human vocal fold scarring. Eur. Arch. Otorhinolaryngol. 275 
(5), 1211–1218. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00405-018-4922-7.
Greaney, A.J., Abubaker, M., McCarthy, C.M., Reardon, E.C., Mulvihill, J.J.E., 2025. 
Mechanical contrast between brain and leptomeninges: insights into leptomeningeal 
cell and astrocyte responses to mechanical stiffness alterations. Acta Biomater. 203, 
492–508. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2025.07.019.
Guchhait, B., Kumari, M., Kaity, S., Roy, S., 2025. Comparison of natural polysaccharides 
and synthetic polymers in facilitating macromolecular crowding to create 
customized extracellular Matrix-Rich supramolecular assemblies from fibroblasts. 
ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 8 (8), 6701–6721. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsabm.5c01003.
Gurdal, M., Zeugolis, D.I., 2025. Macromolecular crowding agent dependent 
extracellular matrix deposition and growth factor retention in human corneal 
fibroblast cultures. Exp. Eye Res. 250, 110162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
exer.2024.110162.
Holman, D.W., Grzybowski, D.M., Mehta, B.C., Katz, S.E., Lubow, M., 2005. 
Characterization of cytoskeletal and junctional proteins expressed by cells cultured 
from human arachnoid granulation tissue. Cereb. Fluid Res. 2, 9. https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/1743-8454-2-9.
Hu, X., Xu, W., Ren, Y., Wang, Z., He, X., Huang, R., Ma, B., Zhao, J., Zhu, R., Cheng, L., 
2023. Spinal cord injury: molecular mechanisms and therapeutic interventions. 
Signal Transduct. Target Ther. 8 (1), 245. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-023- 
01477-6.
Jin, Z., Tian, L., Zhang, Y., Zhang, X., Kang, J., Dong, H., Huang, N., Pan, L., Ning, B., 
2022. Apigenin inhibits fibrous scar formation after acute spinal cord injury through 
TGFbeta/SMADs signaling pathway. CNS Neurosci. Ther. 28 (11), 1883–1894. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/cns.13929.
Johnson, M.D., Gold, L.I., Moses, H.L., 1992. Evidence for transforming growth factor- 
beta expression in human leptomeningeal cells and transforming growth factor-beta- 
like activity in human cerebrospinal fluid. Lab Investig. 67 (3), 360–368. 〈https:// 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1328762〉.
Juhl, P., Bondesen, S., Hawkins, C.L., Karsdal, M.A., Bay-Jensen, A.C., Davies, M.J., 
Siebuhr, A.S., 2020. Dermal fibroblasts have different extracellular matrix profiles 
induced by TGF-beta, PDGF and IL-6 in a model for skin fibrosis. Sci. Rep. 10 (1), 
17300. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-74179-6.
Kimura-Kuroda, J., Teng, X., Komuta, Y., Yoshioka, N., Sango, K., Kawamura, K., 
Raisman, G., Kawano, H., 2010. An in vitro model of the inhibition of axon growth in 
the lesion scar formed after central nervous system injury. Mol. Cell Neurosci. 43 (2), 
177–187. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcn.2009.10.008.
Komuta, Y., Teng, X., Yanagisawa, H., Sango, K., Kawamura, K., Kawano, H., 2010. 
Expression of transforming growth factor-beta receptors in meningeal fibroblasts of 
the injured mouse brain. Cell Mol. Neurobiol. 30 (1), 101–111. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10571-009-9435-x.
Kumar, P., Satyam, A., Fan, X., Rochev, Y., Rodriguez, B.J., Gorelov, A., Joshi, L., 
Raghunath, M., Pandit, A., Zeugolis, D.I., 2015. Accelerated development of 
supramolecular corneal Stromal-Like assemblies from corneal fibroblasts in the 
presence of macromolecular crowders. Tissue Eng. Part C. Methods 21 (7), 660–670. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/ten.TEC.2014.0387.
Lareu, R.R., Arsianti, I., Subramhanya, H.K., Yanxian, P., Raghunath, M., 2007. In vitro 
enhancement of collagen matrix formation and crosslinking for applications in tissue 
engineering: a preliminary study. Tissue Eng. 13 (2), 385–391. https://doi.org/ 
10.1089/ten.2006.0224.
Lee, J.S., Hsu, Y.H., Chiu, Y.S., Jou, I.M., Chang, M.S., 2020. Anti-IL-20 antibody 
improved motor function and reduced glial scar formation after traumatic spinal 
cord injury in rats. J. Neuroinflamm. 17 (1), 156. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12974- 
020-01814-4.
Li, X.P., Liu, P., Li, Y.F., Zhang, G.L., Zeng, D.S., Liu, D.L., 2019. LPS induces activation of 
the TLR4 pathway in fibroblasts and promotes skin scar formation through collagen I 
and TGF-beta in skin lesions. Int. J. Clin. Exp. Pathol. 12 (6), 2121–2129. 〈https:// 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31934034〉.
Li, Z., Yu, S., Hu, X., Li, Y., You, X., Tian, D., Cheng, L., Zheng, M., Jing, J., 2021. Fibrotic 
scar after spinal cord injury: crosstalk with other cells, cellular origin, function, and 
mechanism. Front. Cell Neurosci. 15, 720938. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fncel.2021.720938.
McMahon, S.S., Kilcoyne, M., 2022. Lectin histochemistry for tissues and cells, and dual 
lectin and antibody Co-localization. Methods Mol. Biol. 2370, 281–299. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/978-1-0716-1685-7_14.
Nemati, S., Kilcoyne, M., Zeugolis, D., McMahon, S.S., 2025. The effect of 
macromolecular crowders on deposition of extracellular matrix in astrocyte cultures. 
Cell Tissue Res. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00441-025-03980-4.
Orr, M.B., Gensel, J.C., 2018. Spinal cord injury scarring and inflammation: therapies 
targeting glial and inflammatory responses. Neurotherapeutics 15 (3), 541–553. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-018-0631-6.
Patil, V., Bohara, R., Krishna Kanala, V., McMahon, S., Pandit, A., 2023. Models and 
approaches to comprehend and address glial inflammation following spinal cord 
injury. Drug Discov. Today 28 (10), 103722. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
drudis.2023.103722.
Patil, V., O’Connell, E., Quinlan, L.R., Fearnhead, H., McMahon, S., Pandit, A., 2021. 
A robust platform for high-throughput screening of therapeutic strategies for acute 
and chronic spinal cord injury. IScience 24 (3), 102182. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
isci.2021.102182.
Ramalingam, R., Jiang, G., Larjava, H., Hakkinen, L., 2023. Macromolecular crowding 
regulates matrix composition and gene expression in human gingival fibroblast 
cultures. Sci. Rep. 13 (1), 2047. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1.
Remsik, J., Saadeh, F., Tong, X., Li, M.J., Snyder, J., Bale, T., Wu, J., Derderian, C., 
Guber, D., Chi, Y., Murali, R., Boire, A., 2021. Characterization, isolation, and in 
vitro culture of leptomeningeal fibroblasts. J. Neuroimmunol. 361, 577727. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroim.2021.577727.
Ronnow, S.R., Dabbagh, R.Q., Genovese, F., Nanthakumar, C.B., Barrett, V.J., Good, R.B., 
Brockbank, S., Cruwys, S., Jessen, H., Sorensen, G.L., Karsdal, M.A., Leeming, D.J., 
Sand, J.M.B., 2020. Prolonged Scar-in-a-Jar: an in vitro screening tool for anti- 
fibrotic therapies using biomarkers of extracellular matrix synthesis. Respir. Res. 21 
(1), 108. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12931-020-01369-1.
Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E., Kaynig, V., Longair, M., Pietzsch, T., 
Preibisch, S., Rueden, C., Saalfeld, S., Schmid, B., Tinevez, J.Y., White, D.J., 
S. Nemati et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Neuroscience Methods 424 (2025) 110601 
11 

Hartenstein, V., Eliceiri, K., Tomancak, P., Cardona, A., 2012. Fiji: an open-source 
platform for biological-image analysis. Nat. Methods 9 (7), 676–682. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/nmeth.2019.
Seblani, M., Decherchi, P., Brezun, J.M., 2023. Edema after CNS trauma: a focus on 
spinal cord injury. Int J. Mol. Sci. 24 (8). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24087159.
Silverstein, T.P., Slade, K., 2019. Effects of macromolecular crowding on biochemical 
systems. J. Chem. Educ. 96 (11), 2476–2487. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
jchemed.9b00399.
Stanley, A., Pedersen, E., Brakebusch, C., Quondamatteo, F., 2016. Changes in dermal 
matrix in the absence of Rac1 in keratinocytes. J. Anat. 228 (5), 826–837. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/joa.12442.
Tsiapalis, D., Zeugolis, D.I., 2021. It is time to crowd your cell culture media - 
physicochemical considerations with biological consequences. Biomaterials 275, 
120943. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2021.120943.
Van Linthout, S., Miteva, K., Tschope, C., 2014. Crosstalk between fibroblasts and 
inflammatory cells. Cardiovasc Res. 102 (2), 258–269. https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/ 
cvu062.
Wan, H.Y., Chen, J.C.H., Xiao, Q., Wong, C.W., Yang, B., Cao, B., Tuan, R.S., Nilsson, S. 
K., Ho, Y.P., Raghunath, M., Kamm, R.D., Blocki, A., 2023. Stabilization and 
improved functionality of three-dimensional perfusable microvascular networks in 
microfluidic devices under macromolecular crowding. Biomater. Res. 27 (1), 32. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40824-023-00375-w.
Weightman, A.P., Pickard, M.R., Yang, Y., Chari, D.M., 2014. An in vitro spinal cord 
injury model to screen neuroregenerative materials. Biomaterials 35 (12), 
3756–3765. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.01.022.
Wu, J., Lu, B., Yang, R., Chen, Y., Chen, X., Li, Y., 2021. EphB2 knockdown decreases the 
formation of astroglial-fibrotic scars to promote nerve regeneration after spinal cord 
injury in rats. CNS Neurosci. Ther. 27 (6), 714–724. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
cns.13641.
Xue, X., Wu, X., Fan, Y., Han, S., Zhang, H., Sun, Y., Yin, Y., Yin, M., Chen, B., Sun, Z., 
Zhao, S., Zhang, Q., Liu, W., Zhang, J., Li, J., Shi, Y., Xiao, Z., Dai, J., Zhao, Y., 2024. 
Heterogeneous fibroblasts contribute to fibrotic scar formation after spinal cord 
injury in mice and monkeys. Nat. Commun. 15 (1), 6321. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41467-024-50564-x.
Zhang, C., Shao, Q., Zhang, Y., Liu, W., Kang, J., Jin, Z., Huang, N., Ning, B., 2024. 
Therapeutic application of nicotinamide: as a potential target for inhibiting fibrotic 
scar formation following spinal cord injury. CNS Neurosci. Ther. 30 (7), e14826. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/cns.14826.
Zhang, M., Zhao, F., Zhang, X., Brouwer, L.A., Burgess, J.K., Harmsen, M.C., 2023. 
Fibroblasts alter the physical properties of dermal ECM-derived hydrogels to create a 
pro-angiogenic microenvironment. Mater. Today Bio 23, 100842. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.mtbio.2023.100842.
Zorzin, S., Corsi, A., Ciarpella, F., Bottani, E., Dolci, S., Malpeli, G., Pino, A., Amenta, A., 
Fumagalli, G.F., Chiamulera, C., Bifari, F., Decimo, I., 2021. Environmental 
enrichment induces meningeal niche remodeling through TrkB-Mediated signaling. 
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22 (19). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms221910657.
S. Nemati et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Journal of Neuroscience Methods 424 (2025) 110601 
12

===== NogueiraRodrigues2022_DevCell_SCI-SpinyMouse =====
Short Article
Rewired glycosylation activity promotes scarless
regeneration and functional recovery in spiny mice
after complete spinal cord transection
Graphical abstract
Highlights
d Acomys spontaneously regains motor and urinary functions
following complete SCI
d The Acomys SCI site shows abundant axon regeneration and
nerve conduction
d Acomys assembles a pro-regenerative environment with
rewired ECM glycosylation
d b3gnt7 is a novel axon regeneration enhancer
Authors
Joana Nogueira-Rodrigues,
Se´ rgio C. Leite, Rita Pinto-Costa, ...,
Gustavo Tisco´ rnia, Ineˆ s M. Arau´ jo,
Mo´ nica M. Sousa
Correspondence
msousa@ibmc.up.pt
In brief
Nogueira-Rodrigues et al. report that
Acomys can recover function after
complete spinal cord injury (SCI),
assembling a scarless tissue at the injury
site, unlike other adult mammals.
Transcriptomic analysis of the SCI site
shows that injured Acomys builds a
speciﬁc pro-regenerative proteoglycan
signature with a unique glycosylation
network.
Nogueira-Rodrigues et al., 2022, Developmental Cell 57, 440–450
February 28, 2022 ª 2021 Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2021.12.008
ll

Short Article
Rewired glycosylation activity promotes scarless
regeneration and functional recovery in spiny mice
after complete spinal cord transection
Joana Nogueira-Rodrigues,1,2 Se´ rgio C. Leite,1 Rita Pinto-Costa,1 Sara C. Sousa,1,2 Liliana L. Luz,3 Maria A. Sintra,1
Raquel Oliveira,4,5,6 Ana C. Monteiro,1 Gonc¸ alo G. Pinheiro,7,8 Marta Vitorino,7,8 Joana A. Silva,8 So´ nia Sima˜ o,8,9
Vitor E. Fernandes,8,9 Jan Provaznı´k,10 Vladimir Benes,10 Ce´ lia D. Cruz,4,5 Boris V. Safronov,3 Ana Magalha˜ es,11,12
Celso A. Reis,11,12,13 Jorge Vieira,14 Cristina P. Vieira,14 Gustavo Tisco´ rnia,7,15,17 Ineˆ s M. Arau´ jo,8,9,16,17
and Mo´ nica M. Sousa1,17,18,*
1Nerve Regeneration Group, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular (IBMC), Instituto de Investigac¸ a˜ o e Inovac¸ a˜ o em Sau´ de (i3S), University
of Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal
2Graduate Program in Molecular and Cell Biology, Instituto de Cieˆ ncias Biome´ dicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), University of Porto, 4050-313
Porto, Portugal
3Neuronal Networks Group, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular (IBMC), Instituto de Investigac¸ a˜ o e Inovac¸ a˜ o em Sau´ de (i3S), University
of Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal
4Translational NeuroUrology Group, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular (IBMC), Instituto de Investigac¸ a˜ o e Inovac¸ a˜ o em Sau´ de (i3S),
University of Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal
5Department of Biomedicine, Experimental Biology Unit, Faculty of Medicine of Porto, University of Porto, 4200-319 Porto, Portugal
6Regeneration Group, Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King’s College
London WC2R 2LS, London, UK
7Molecular & Regenerative Medicine Laboratory, Centro de Cieˆ ncias do Mar (CCMAR), University of Algarve, 8005-139 Faro, Portugal
8Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Algarve, 8005-139 Faro, Portugal
9Algarve Biomedical Center Research Institute (ABC-RI), University of Algarve, 8005-139 Faro, Portugal
10Genomics Core Facility, European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), 69117 Heidelberg, Germany
11Glycobiology in Cancer Group, Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology, IPATIMUP), Instituto de Investigac¸ a˜ o e Inovac¸ a˜ o em
Sau´ de (i3S), University of Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal
12Department of Molecular Biology, Instituto de Cieˆ ncias Biome´ dicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), University of Porto, 4050-313 Porto, Portugal
13Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine of Porto, University of Porto, 4200-319 Porto, Portugal
14Phenotypic Evolution Group, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular (IBMC), Instituto de Investigac¸ a˜ o e Inovac¸ a˜ o em Sau´ de (i3S),
University of Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal
15Clinica Eugin, Research and Development, 08006 Barcelona, Spain
16Champalimaud Research Program, Champalimaud Center for the Unknown, 1400-038 Lisbon, Portugal
17These authors contributed equally
18Lead contact
*Correspondence: msousa@ibmc.up.pt
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2021.12.008
SUMMARY
Regeneration of adult mammalian central nervous system (CNS) axons is abortive, resulting in inability to
recover function after CNS lesion, including spinal cord injury (SCI). Here, we show that the spiny mouse (Ac-
omys) is an exception to other mammals, being capable of spontaneous and fast restoration of function after
severe SCI, re-establishing hind limb coordination. Remarkably, Acomys assembles a scarless pro-regenera-
tive tissue at the injury site, providing a unique structural continuity of the initial spinal cord geometry. The Ac-
omys SCI site shows robust axon regeneration of multiple tracts, synapse formation, and electrophysiological
signal propagation. Transcriptomic analysis of the spinal cord following transcriptome reconstruction revealed
that Acomys rewires glycosylation biosynthetic pathways, culminating in a speciﬁc pro-regenerative proteogly-
can signature at SCIsite.Our workuncovers that a glycosylation switch is critical for axonregenerationafterSCI
and identiﬁes b3gnt7, a crucial enzyme of keratan sulfate biosynthesis, as an enhancer of axon growth.
INTRODUCTION
After trauma, mature mammalian central nervous system (CNS)
axons largely fail to regenerate. This inability of adult mammals
to regrow their axons is a major obstacle in the treatment of
CNS injuries, including spinal cord injury (SCI) that remains an
unmet medical condition. Despite the efforts and considerable
progress over the past decades in the scientiﬁc knowledge,
and in the medical, surgical, and rehabilitative care of SCI pa-
tients, there are currently no effective treatments to improve their
440
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450, February 28, 2022 ª 2021 Elsevier Inc.
ll

neurologic outcome. The unsuccessful regeneration of CNS
axons is largely caused by scarring at the injury site (Cregg
et al., 2014), that creates a physical barrier and inhibitory chem-
ical environment for axon regrowth. After CNS injury, ﬁbroblasts
proliferate into the lesion core and repress axon elongation
through the expression of repulsive axon guidance molecules
and inhibitory extracellular matrix (ECM) components (Dias and
Goritz, 2018; Giger et al., 2010), dictating tissue ﬁbrosis. Astro-
cytes, also recruited to the injury site, undergo phenotypic
changes and become reactive scar-forming cells, further
secreting inhibitory molecules (Okada et al., 2018; Yang
et al., 2020).
Outside the CNS, mammalian tissue regeneration is also a rare
event. The spiny mouse (Acomys cahirinus), a member of the
Muridae family (together with Mus musculus and Rattus norvegi-
cus, widely used in biomedical research), emerged as a curious
exception as it sustains scar-free regeneration of the skin (Seifert
et al., 2012) and ear (Gawriluk et al., 2016; Matias Santos et al.,
2016). Recently, following a minor lateral, dorsal crush injury of
the spinal cord, Acomys was shown to have reduced spinal
inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis, suggesting that this species might
be a useful model to study SCI (Streeter et al., 2020). A growing
body of evidence demonstrates that, in contrast with most other
mammals that heal their wounds by ﬁbrotic scarring, Acomys ex-
hibits decreased ﬁbrosis after wounding (Brant et al., 2015, 2016;
Seifert et al., 2012), and an altered inﬂammatory response (Cyr
et al., 2019; Gawriluk et al., 2020; Simkin et al., 2017).
Given the unprecedented capacity of the injured Acomys skin
and ear to heal after wounding, we explored the possibility that
the Acomys CNS might also regenerate. Here, we reveal that Ac-
omys is able to do what no other adult mammal can: spontane-
ously regenerate its spinal cord after complete transection with
fast restoration of function. Our data show that Acomys assem-
bles a pro-regenerative environment at the injury site with rewired
glycosyltransferase activity, dictating a speciﬁc proteoglycan
signature. Our results disclose the spiny mouse as a valuable
model to explore the molecular mechanisms enabling robust
functional axon regeneration in the adult mammalian CNS.
RESULTS
Acomys spontaneously recovers function following
complete spinal cord transection
To test if the spiny mouse regenerative capacity extends to the
CNS, complete spinal cord transection was performed at T8 in
Acomys cahirinus (Figure 1A) and in the non-regenerative control
Mus musculus. All sham and injured animals were tested during
8 weeks post-injury (WPI) to assess functional recovery (Fig-
ure 1B). Remarkably, Acomys started to regain motor function
at 2 WPI showing an average Basso mouse scale (BMS) score
of 2 (i.e., extensive ankle movement), whereas Mus remained
with the initial BMS score of 0 (i.e., no ankle movement) (Figures
1C and 1D). At the ﬁnal time point (8 WPI), Acomys presented an
average ﬁnal BMS score of 4, which implies the re-establishment
of the initial weight support with occasional plantar stepping (Fig-
ure 1D). Of note, at 8 WPI, 8 out of 14 injured Acomys gained full
weight support being able to stand on their hind limbs and pre-
sented consistent plantar stepping and a restored pattern of
fore and hind limb coordination (Figures 1C and 1D; Video S1).
In contrast, injured Mus had a dysfunctional locomotor pattern
in which plantar stepping and weight support were severely
compromised (Figures 1C and 1D; Video S2). Acomys were re-
injured at 8 WPI to further verify that motor recovery is caused
by axon regeneration. The second complete lesion generated
the immediate decrease of the BMS score to 0 (Figure 1D). Of
note, at 8 WPI, other Mus strains do not show BMS scores com-
parable to the ones here described for Acomys. Even in the case
of MRL/MpJ mice, a Mus strain with enhanced axon regenera-
tion, when gait of lesioned animals is evaluated, no statistical dif-
ferences were found when compared with injured C57BL/6 mice
(Thuret et al., 2012).
SCI usually abolishes voluntary control of micturition and SCI-
related bladder dysfunction is a major concern for patients as it
poses a signiﬁcant risk to their well-being (Hamid et al., 2018).
Exceptionally, injured Acomys regained normal bladder control
at 3 WPI, whereas Mus required manual bladder voidance
throughout the entire recovery period (Figure 1E). Upon SCI,
Mus presented
common
features
of bladder dysfunction
including urine leakage in random and small spots (Figures 1F
and 1G) and a decreased volume of voided urine compared
with sham-operated animals (Figure 1H), suggesting urine reten-
tion in the bladder. While Mus presented a micturition disability
with periods of incontinence, from 1 WPI on, injured Acomys
were indistinguishable from sham Acomys (Figures 1G and
1H), indicating a faster recovery from the bladder areﬂexia period
typically seen after SCI. These data show that the spiny mouse is
an outstanding exception to other adult mammals evaluated so
far, being capable of spontaneous, robust, and fast restoration
of function after severe CNS injury.
The Acomys SCI site shows robust axon regeneration of
multiple tracts, synapse formation, and signal
propagation
For an in-depth comprehension of Acomys CNS regeneration,
we ﬁrst examined whether there were any anatomical or struc-
tural differences between the spinal cords of Mus and Acomys.
Although Acomys (weight, 30–40 g) has a 1.3-fold larger cross
section area of the spinal cord than Mus (weight, 20–30 g), no
main differences in its anatomical organization (Figure S1A)
and white/gray matter ratio were found (Figure S1B). We then
analyzed the injured spinal cord from both genera. Unlike Mus,
in which the scar tissue does not respect the original tissue bor-
ders, the injured Acomys spinal cord established a bridging tis-
sue connecting the rostral and caudal boundaries of the lesion
site (Figure 2A), thus providing a unique structural continuity of
the initial spinal cord geometry. Eight WPI, Mus scar was mostly
devoid of bIII-tubulin-positive axons and these were only found
retracted in relation to the injury area (Figure 2B). Notably, Ac-
omys presented a wound densely ﬁlled with bIII-tubulin-positive
axons penetrating and spanning the new bridging tissue (Fig-
ure 2B), exhibiting a signiﬁcantly increased number of regenerat-
ing axons in comparison with Mus, in which axon growth is
strictly limited to the border lesion (Figure 2C). Importantly,
some of the axons crossing the lesion site in Acomys were
already myelinated (Figure 2D), indicating the execution of a
complete regenerative program encompassing myelination.
When assessing regeneration of individual axon tracts, we
found that superior cervical ganglion 10 (SCG10)-positive
ll
Short Article
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450, February 28, 2022
441

sensory axons penetrated the bridging tissue in injured Acomys
but were accumulated at the caudal border of the injury in Mus
(Figure 2E). Additionally, descending serotonin (5-HT) containing
axons from the motor raphespinal tract regenerated through the
lesion in Acomys spinal cord (Figures 2F and S1C). While no dif-
ferences in 5-HT-immunoreactivity were detected rostrally to the
lesion in Acomys and Mus, the former showed stronger 5-HT
staining caudally to the injury site (Figure S1D). In sagittal spinal
cord sections, 5-HT-positive axons regenerated extensively
through the lesion border, growing for large distances in Ac-
omys, whereas these axons mostly accumulated at the lesion
edge in Mus (Figures 2F–2H). Of note, similarly to humans and
unlike Mus, cysts were observed in the vicinity of the lesion
site of Acomys (Figure 2F, highlighted by an asterisk). The corti-
cospinal tract (CST)—the major descending tract involved in
voluntary motor function—was traced by intracortical AAV1/2-
eGFP injection at 8 WPI (Figure 2I). In cross sections, the CST
runs in the ventral part of the posterior funiculus in both Mus
and Acomys (Figures 2I0 and 2I%, highlighted by white arrow-
heads). In Acomys, in contrast to Mus, bilateral axon sprouting
was found caudally to the injury site at 12 WPI (Figure 2I0000). In
injured Acomys, CST axons developed a peculiar pattern of
axon arborizations with numerous ventrally directed collaterals
caudally to the lesion site (Figure 2J).
In Acomys, re-establishment of synaptic connectivity was
evidenced by the presence of the pre-synaptic vesicular gluta-
mate transporter 1 (vGlut1)-positive/eGFP-positive
buttons
caudally to injury site following AAV injection (Figure 2K), thus
indicating formation of synapses. Although the density of
vGlut1+ synaptic boutons on eGFP+ axons was low, as ex-
pected from the fact that intracortical AAV1/2-eGFP injection
transduces a limited number of neurons, no eGFP+/vGlut1+
axons were found in Mus (not shown). To study conduction of
compound action potentials (CAPs) in descending motor tracts,
the lateral funiculus was stimulated (Figure 2L). No difference
was found in the CAP amplitude for uninjured Mus and Acomys
(Figures 2M and 2N). Injured Acomys spinal cords (5 out of 10
animals) could conduct CAPs through the lesion site (Figures
2M and 2N). In contrast, no signal conduction across the lesion
was detected in Mus, as expected from the absence of func-
tional recovery (Figures 2M and 2N). In summary, upon com-
plete SCI, Acomys exhibits robust axon regeneration in several
A
C
E
F
G
H
D
B
Figure 1. Acomys spontaneously recovers
function following complete spinal cord tran-
section
(A) Image of an Acomys cahirinus.
(B) Timeline of the experimental setup. Both species
were maintained for 8 WPI for weekly functional
analysis.
(C) Sequential images (1 s) of Mus and Acomys at 8
WPI.
(D) Assessment of motor function in sham and
injured Mus and Acomys using BMS, showing the
average score of left and right hind limbs. Data
represent mean ± SEM (****p < 0.0001 injured Mus
versus injured Acomys, two-way ANOVA followed
by Tukey’s multiple comparison test); n = 5 sham
Mus, n = 14 injured Mus, n = 5 sham Acomys, and n =
14 injured Acomys until 8 WPI and n = 4 injured
Acomys until 16 WPI, that underwent a second
lesion (23 lesion).
(E) Percentage of animals recovering bladder control
in both genera (n = 4 sham Mus, n = 11 injured Mus,
n = 4 sham Acomys, and n = 9 injured Acomys).
(F) Representative images of the urine spots of Mus
(upper) and Acomys (lower).
(G) Number of voided urine spots. Data represent
mean ± SEM (ns: not signiﬁcant, *p < 0.05, ****p <
0.0001, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s mul-
tiple comparison test and Kruskal-Wallis followed by
Dunn’s multiple comparisons test). At 1 WPI n = 6
sham Mus, n = 7 injured Mus, n = 5 sham Acomys,
and n = 7 injured Acomys; at 8 WPI n = 6 sham Mus,
n = 11 injured Mus, n = 6 sham Acomys, and n = 7
injured Acomys.
(H) Average volume of voided urine spots. Data
represent mean ± SEM (ns, not signiﬁcant, *p < 0.05,
two-tailed unpaired t test). At 1 WPI n = 6 sham Mus,
n = 7 injured Mus, n = 5 sham Acomys, and n = 7
injured Acomys; at 8 WPI n = 6 sham Mus, n = 11
injured Mus, n = 5 sham Acomys, and n = 6 injured
Acomys.
Each data point in (D, G, and H) represents values of
single animals. See also Videos S1 and S2.
ll
Short Article
442
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450, February 28, 2022

A
E
I
J
K
L
M
N
F
G
H
B
C
D
Figure 2. Injured Acomys exhibits robust axon regeneration
(A) Representative images of injured Mus and Acomys spinal cords at 8 WPI. The injury site is boxed in white. The lesion site of Mus and Acomys is shown at higher
magniﬁcation in (A0 and A00), respectively.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
Short Article
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450, February 28, 2022
443

tracts, synapse formation, and efﬁcient signal propagation
throughout the lesion.
After SCI, rewired glycosylation activity is a feature of
the Acomys spinal cord
The environment created at the injury site is of paramount impor-
tance to dictate the success of axon regeneration (Cregg et al.,
2014). Given that, we explored the molecular differences that
enable Acomys to build a scarless injury site. In both genera, as-
trogliosis was present (Figure S2A). Pan-reactive astrocytes as
assessed by GFAP and Ngal/Lcn2 immunoﬂuorescence levels
were decreased in Acomys (Figures S2B and S2C), supporting
a weakened reactive proﬁle. However, no signiﬁcant differences
in A1 astrocytes (generally inferred as detrimental for regenera-
tion, Liddelow and Barres, 2017; Liddelow et al., 2017) and A2
astrocytes (commonly considered as neuroprotective and pro-
regenerative, Liddelow and Barres, 2017; Liddelow et al., 2017)
were observed between Mus and Acomys, as evaluated by the
expression levels of different markers of the two subpopulations
in the spinal cord (Figure S2D). Similar to the skin and ear (Gawri-
luk et al., 2016; Matias Santos et al., 2016; Seifert et al., 2012),
Acomys spinal cords exhibited reduced ﬁbrosis with lower total
collagen deposition when compared with Mus in which ﬁbrotic
scarring was detected (blue staining) (Figure S2E). Speciﬁcally,
Mus showed overt collagen type I deposition throughout the spi-
nal cord parenchyma whereas in injured Acomys, it was
restricted to the injury site (Figures S2F and S2G). Of note,
when comparing the content of pericytes in the lesion core of
Mus and Acomys, no differences were detected as assessed
by PDGFRb immunostaining (data not shown).
To further understand the molecular features of the unique
scarless environment formed upon SCI in Acomys, next-genera-
tion sequencing of RNA isolated from the injury site was con-
ducted to identify global differences in gene expression between
genus (Table S1), following reconstruction of the Acomys cahir-
inus transcriptome. From the 213 genes expressed in both
genera, grouped in 11 clusters based on their expression pattern
similarities (Figure S3), RNA-seq transcriptome analysis showed
differential gene expression between uninjured and injured Mus
and Acomys (Figure 3A). PANTHER analysis revealed the
involvement of two major functional categories: inﬂammation-
related pathways and acetylglucosaminyltransferase activity
(Figures 3B and 3C). As previously reported in other tissues (Ga-
wriluk et al., 2020; Simkin et al., 2017), inﬂammation was differ-
entially regulated after injury in Acomys (Figure 3B). Notably,
aside from the immune system, PANTHER analysis also unveiled
a SCI-speciﬁc alteration in acetylglucosaminyltransferase activ-
ity categories (Figure 3C). The Acomys injury site exhibited
considerable changes in the levels of key enzymes of the biosyn-
thetic pathways of major ECM glycosaminoglycans namely ker-
atan (KSPG) and heparan (HSPG) sulfate proteoglycans (Figures
3A and 3C).
b-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase 7 (b3gnt7), a crucial
enzyme for KSPG synthesis, was highly increased in injured Ac-
omys (Figures 3A and 3C), as validated by qPCR (Figure 3D) and
immunoﬂuorescence (Figures 3H and 3I). N-deacetylase-N-sul-
fotransferase 3 and 4 (Ndst3 and Ndst4), which participate in
HSPG post-synthesis modiﬁcations (Jao et al., 2016; Pallerla
et al., 2008), showed decreased levels in Acomys (Figures 3A,
3C, 3E, 3F, 3J, and 3K). PANTHER analysis additionally identiﬁed
b-1,3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase 1 (b3galnt1), also from
cluster 6, that participates in the biosynthesis of glycosphingoli-
pids, as decreased in Acomys upon injury (Figures 3A, 3C, and
3G). PANTHER analysis also included phosphoglucomutase
5 (Pgm5) and b-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (Mfng)
within the carbohydrate biosynthetic process/acetylglucosami-
nyltransferase categories (Figures 3A and 3C). However, Pgm5
has been reported as lacking enzymatic activity (Muenks et al.,
2017), whereas Mfng activity is involved in Notch modiﬁcation
and regulation (Kakuda and Haltiwanger, 2017). These genes
were therefore not considered for further analysis in the context
of the current study.
(B) Sagittal spinal cord sections encompassing the lesion core immunostained with bIII-tubulin of Mus (upper) and Acomys (lower) at 8 WPI. Black arrowheads in
(B00) indicate Mus axons interrupted caudally to the injury border; red arrowheads in (B%) indicate Acomys axons growing within the injury site.
(C) Number of bIII-tubulin-positive axons regenerating within the injury site related to (B). Data represent mean ± SEM (****p < 0.0001, two-tailed unpaired t test) of
n = 7 injured Mus and n = 7 injured Acomys.
(D) Acomys spinal cord lesion core stained with bIII-tubulin (green) and myelin-basic protein (MBP) (red) at 8 WPI.
(E) Sagittal spinal cord sections encompassing the lesion core immunostained with SCG10 of Mus (upper) and Acomys (lower) at 8 WPI. Black arrowheads
indicate Mus axons arrested at the lesion border and red arrowheads indicate Acomys axons penetrating the lesion.
(F) Sagittal spinal cord sections encompassing the lesion core immunostained with 5-HT of Mus (upper) and Acomys (lower) at 8 WPI. Red arrowheads in (F00) and
(F%) highlight Acomys axons regenerating caudally to injury. A cyst Acomys is highlighted by an asterisk in (F).
(G) Mean number of 5-HT-positive axons protruding for different distances beyond the lesion border related to (F). Data represent mean ± SEM (*p < 0.05, **p <
0.01, two-tailed Mann-Whitney test, ns: not signiﬁcant) of n = 3 injured Mus and n = 6 injured Acomys.
(H) Mean distance of 5-HT-positive axons protruding beyond the lesion border related to (F). Data represent mean ± SEM (*p < 0.05, two-tailed Mann-Whitney
test) of n = 3 injured Mus and n = 6 injured Acomys.
(I) Transverse spinal cord section of injured Mus and Acomys spinal cord showing eGFP expression at 12 WPI. White arrowheads in (I0) and (I00) highlight the CST
running in the ventral part of the posterior funiculus in both Mus and Acomys and in (I0%) regenerating CST ﬁbers.
(J) Sagittal spinal cord sections of an injured Acomys spinal cord showing CST axons labeled by eGFP expression at 12 WPI. White arrowheads highlight CST
axons rostrally (R, upper panel) and caudally (C, lower panel) to the lesion site.
(K) Pre-synaptic vGlut1 marker staining (magenta) of regenerating axons in injured AAV1/2-eGFP-injected Acomys at 12 WPI.
(L) Scheme of the experimental setup to measure CAP conduction in the lateral funiculus.
(M) CAP conduction of the uninjured and injured Mus and Acomys spinal cords at 8 WPI.
(N) Quantiﬁcation related to (M). Data represent mean ± SEM (*p < 0.05, two-tailed Mann-Whitney test; n.s., non-signiﬁcant); n = 5 sham Mus, n = 3 injured Mus,
n = 4 sham Acomys, and n = 5 injured Acomys.
Each data point in (C, G, H, and N) represents values of single animals. Zoom-ins of regions of interest are provided at the right side of each image. Dashed red
lines in (B, E, and F) deﬁne lesion borders. Dashed white line in (I) deﬁne spinal cord gray matter border. Scale bars: 1 mm in (A), 10 mm in (D), 20 mm in (K), and
100 mm in (B, E, F, I, and J). R, rostral; C, caudal. See also Figure S1.
ll
Short Article
444
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450, February 28, 2022

A
H
J
I
K
B
C
D
E
F
G
Figure 3. After SCI, rewired glycosyltransferase activity is a feature of the Acomys spinal cord
(A) Heatmap of RNA-seq transcriptome analysis showing differentially gene expression between uninjured and injured Mus and Acomys, by hierarchical cluster
analysis. Gene clusters are indicated by numbers, and genes within the clusters are alternately shown in blue and red.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
Short Article
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450, February 28, 2022
445

When we further examined differentially expressed genes, other
enzymes including carbohydrate sulfotransferases that partici-
pate in the biosynthesis of other ECM glycosaminoglycan such
as chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) were differentially
regulated in Acomys (Figure S4A). The glycosaminoglycan chains
of CSPGs are mainly sulfated in the 4 (C4) or 6 (C6) positions.
While C4S appears to be inhibitory for axonal growth, C6S can
positively affect regeneration and plasticity (Lin et al., 2011; Miller
and Hsieh-Wilson, 2015; Wang et al., 2008). No signiﬁcant differ-
ences were found on expression levels of major C4S-sulfotrans-
ferases; however, injured Acomys exhibits a large increase in
C6S-sulfotransferase Chst15 expression (Figure S4A). Although
no main gene expression alterations were detected in the levels
of known inhibitory CSPGs such as aggrecan, neurocan, versican,
or brevican between Mus and Acomys (not shown), the increase in
Chst15 expression may provide a more permissive environment
for axon growth. Alterations on the expression of these genes
reinforces a major rewiring of glycosyltransferase biosynthetic
pathways to ensure the regenerative response of Acomys.
Acomys exhibits a speciﬁc proteoglycan signature at the
lesion site where b3gnt7 acts as an axon growth
enhancer
Given that b3gnt7 expression is highly increased in the Acomys
spinal cord following injury (Figures 3C, 3D, 3G, and 3H), and its
essential role in KSPG synthesis, we further investigated the
consequences of b3gnt7 differential regulation in KSPG deposi-
tion. After injury, Acomys exhibited a robust over 30-fold
increased KSPG deposition that extended rostrally and caudally
to the lesion site, and that was reverted by keratanase treatment
(Figures 4A and 4B). Changes in proteoglycan deposition were
not limited to KSPG, as decreased deposition of HSPG was
also observed (Figures 4C and 4D), in accordance with the
decreased levels of Ndst3 and Ndst4 (Figures 3E and 3F).
HSPG staining was reverted by heparinase treatment, demon-
strating the speciﬁcity of analysis (Figures 4C and 4D).
To interrogate the role of b3gnt7 in the settings of axon growth,
we used similar assays to those previously developed by the Fil-
bin group to identify novel regulators of axon regeneration (Mu-
khopadhyay et al., 1994). For that, Chinese Hamster Ovary
(CHO) cells overexpressing b3gnt7 (i.e., modiﬁed in an Ac-
omys-like manner) were used as a substrate to grow Mus DRG
and cortical neurons (Figures 4E and 4I). Mus DRG neurons
had a very robust increased total neurite length (Figures 4F–
4H) when exposed to cells overexpressing b3gnt7. Similarly,
Mus cortical neurons exhibited an increased axon growth capac-
ity in the presence of high b3gnt7 levels, which was already
observed at an early time point (1 day) after plating (Figure 4I).
These data support that b3gnt7 is a target to increase axon
regeneration after SCI. In summary, our data reveal a unique
transcriptional program in Acomys, in which differential immune
response and rewired acetylglucosaminyltransferase activity
culminate in the assembly of a regeneration supportive scarless
injury site, and identiﬁes b3gnt7, a critical enzyme in KSPG
biosynthesis, as an enhancer of axon growth.
DISCUSSION
Theabilitytorestorefunctionalorgansupondamage,including the
spinalcord, occursinseveral non-mammalian vertebrates suchas
ﬁsh and reptiles but is extremely restricted or non-existent in adult
mammals (Diaz Quiroz and Echeverri, 2013; Lee-Liu et al., 2013).
As such, to date, despite the efforts to promote functional axon
regeneration in the adult mammalian CNS, SCI treatments remain
largely palliative. Here, we reveal that Acomys, a mammal closely
related to Mus, can spontaneously regenerate after SCI, overturn-
ing the established dogma. This discovery sets Acomys as a
unique model to investigate mammalian CNS regeneration and al-
lowed us to start interrogating the mechanisms required to sustain
axon regrowth in adult mammals.
One of the ﬁrst consequences of tissue injury is inﬂammation
(Oishi and Manabe, 2018). In Acomys, part of the receptor com-
plex for a major pro-inﬂammatory cytokine, interferon gamma
(IFN-ɣ) (Wu et al., 2014), is increased after injury. However, the
high expression levels of ifngr1 cannot be taken as evidence
for an ongoing pro-inﬂammatory response. Of note, the active
IFN-ɣ receptor is made of two ifngr1 and two ifngr2 chains (Ran-
dal and Kossiakoff, 2001), and only infgr1 expression is highly
increased in Acomys after SCI. In fact, ifngr2 expression is lower
in Acomys than in Mus (Table S1). Furthermore, the upregulation
of the receptors for the major anti-inﬂammatory cytokines sup-
ports that an anti-inﬂammatory response might be underway at
the Acomys lesion site, as is seen in other tissues (Gawriluk
et al., 2020; Simkin et al., 2017) warranting further investigation.
High-throughput analysis of the extracellular proteome in rats
has supported the importance of inﬂammation and ECM
(B and C) Average fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads (FPKM) values obtained by transcriptomic analysis of categories identiﬁed by
PANTHER. (B) Inﬂammation-related pathways and (C) acetylglucosaminyltransferase activity categories, from clusters 4, 6, and 22, detected from the 11 Trinity
gene clusters analyzed. Only clusters for which more than 75% of the members show a statistically signiﬁcant difference were analyzed. Data represent mean ±
SEM (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test, ns: not signiﬁcant) of n = 4 sham Mus; n = 4
injured Mus, n = 4 sham Acomys, and n = 4 injured Acomys.
(D–G) qPCR results for acetylglucosaminyltransferase-activity-related genes: (D) b3gnt7, (E) Ndst3, (F) Ndst4, and (G) b3galnt1. Data represent mean ± SEM (*p <
0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test, ns: not signiﬁcant); n = 4 sham Mus; n = 3 injured Mus,
n = 4 sham Acomys, and n = 4 injured Acomys.
(H) Sagittal spinal cord sections containing the injury site of Mus and Acomys stained for b3gnt7 at 8 WPI.
(I) Quantiﬁcation related to (H). Data represent mean ± SEM (*p < 0.05, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test, ns: not signiﬁcant); n = 6
sham Mus, n = 6 injured Mus, n = 6 sham Acomys and n = 6 injured Acomys.
(J) Sagittal spinal cord sections containing the injury site of Mus and Acomys stained for Ndst3 at 8 WPI.
(K) Quantiﬁcation related to (J). Data represent mean ± SEM (**p < 0.01, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test, ns: not signiﬁcant); n = 6
sham Mus, n = 6 injured Mus, n = 6 sham Acomys, and n = 6 injured Acomys.
Each data point in (B–G, I, and K) represents values of single animals. Dashed white lines in (H and J) deﬁne lesion borders. Scale bars, 100 mm (H and J). R: rostral;
C: caudal. See also Table S1 and Figures S2–S4.
ll
Short Article
446
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450, February 28, 2022

A
C
E
F
G
H
I
D
B
Figure 4. Acomys exhibits a speciﬁc proteoglycan signature at the lesion site where b3gnt7 acts as an axon growth enhancer
(A) Sagittal spinal cord sections encompassing the lesion core of injured Mus (left) and Acomys (right) stained for KSPG (5D4) and digested with keratanase at 8
WPI. Zoom-ins of regions of interest are provided in lower panels in (A0) and (A00). White arrowheads in (A00) highlight KSPG deposition with honeycomb-like shape
throughout the injured Acomys spinal cord.
(B) Quantiﬁcation of KSPG area of deposition related to (A). Data represent mean ± SEM (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, two-tailed Mann-Whitney test); n = 6 sham Mus, n =
6 injured Mus, n = 4 injured Mus with keratanase treatment, n = 6 sham Acomys, n = 6 injured Acomys, and n = 4 injured Acomys with keratanase treatment.
(C) Sagittal spinal cord sections encompassing the lesion core of injured Mus (left) and Acomys (right) stained for HSPG (10E4) and digested with heparinase III at
8 WPI.
(D) Quantiﬁcation of HSPG ﬂuorescence intensity at the lesion site related to (A). Data represent mean ± SEM (**p < 0.01,***p < 0.001, and ****p < 0.0001, one-way
ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test, ns: not signiﬁcant); n = 6 sham Mus, n = 6 injured Mus, n = 4 injured Mus with heparinase III treatment, n = 6
sham Acomys, n = 6 injured Acomys, and n = 4 injured Acomys with heparinase III treatment.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
Short Article
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450, February 28, 2022
447

composition in the response mounted upon SCI (Didangelos et al.,
2016). Studies comparing non-regenerative and regenerative non-
mammalian species after SCI, including the axolotl (Tica and
Didangelos, 2018) and zebraﬁsh (Tsata et al., 2021) have further
pinpointed inﬂammation and ECM components as critical factors
in interspecies regenerative differences. Similar to Acomys, in ze-
braﬁsh, the deposition of a growth-supporting ECM deprived of
growth inhibitory matrix molecules is crucial for axon regeneration
after SCI (Tsata et al., 2021). Furthermore, in zebraﬁsh, a regener-
ative permissive milieu is enabled by the recruitment of pdgfrb+
myoseptal and perivascular cells, in a PDGFR signaling-depen-
dentmanner (Tsata et al., 2021).InAcomys, we unveiled the glyco-
sylation gene regulatory network as a key spinal cord-speciﬁc
pathway that differentiates the Acomys and Mus lesion environ-
ment. In fact, injured Acomys exhibits a speciﬁc signature of
ECM glycosaminoglycans at the SCI site. Although previous
studies reported the potential role of KSPG as an inhibitor of
axon regeneration (Imagama et al., 2011; Ishikawa et al., 2015;
Jones and Tuszynski, 2002), here, we show that in fact KSPG
glycosaminoglycan chains are increased in the pro-regenerative
environment of the Acomys lesion site. Moreover, we identify
b3gnt7, a crucial enzyme in KSPG biosynthesis, as a potent
enhancer of axon growth, which may be explored in the future
design of therapies to enhance axon regeneration after SCI.
Taken together, our data establish that the Acomys acetylglu-
cosaminyltransferase gene regulatory network has distinctive
and exclusive features that reprograms the Acomys ECM after
SCI, being able to give rise to an effective pro-regenerative
wounding response. Our results underscore the importance of
investigating regenerative phenomena outside traditional model
organisms and suggest that some mammals may retain a so-
phisticated capacity for CNS regeneration. This fundamental
knowledge on pathways required for axon regrowth in adult
mammals may ultimately be used with the ﬁnal goal of devising
novel therapeutic applications for human CNS injury.
Limitations of the study
(1) Retrograde tracing: long-distance axon tracing was only per-
formed anterogradely; retrograde tracing to identify the soma of
the axon in regrown axonal tracts could be performed in the future.
(2)AnalysisofCSPGdeposition:inthisstudy,weopted tofocuson
KSPG and HSPG deposition, as the Acomys injury site exhibited
considerable changes speciﬁcally in the levels of key enzymes of
the biosynthetic pathways of these proteoglycans. Future work
will examine levels of deposition of CSPG, sulfated either in 4-O
position of the GalNAc residue (thought to be inhibitory for axon
growth) or 6-O position (permissive for axon growth). (3) In vivo as-
says: we show that after SCI, Acomys has increased levels of
b3gnt7, a crucial enzyme of KSPG biosynthesis, and increased
KSPG deposition in the spinal cord. We additionally demonstrate
that in vitro b3gnt7 is an enhancer of axon growth. Given these
ﬁndings, it would be of great interest to perform the in vivo overex-
pression of b3gnt7 in Mus, to determine if b3gnt7 is sufﬁcient to
dictate signiﬁcant axon regeneration after SCI in a non-regenera-
tive species. Furthermore, downregulation of b3gnt7 in injured Ac-
omys and investigation of subsequent axon regeneration would
further deﬁne the role and importance of this speciﬁc KSPG syn-
thetic enzyme in Acomys spinal cord regeneration. It would also
be of interest to analyze the effect of keratanase treatment on
axon regeneration of Acomys. This would allow to further validate
the role of KSPG deposition in contributing to a regeneration-pro-
moting environment.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
B Lead contact
B Materials availability
B Data and code availability
d EXPERIMENTAL MODELS AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Animals
B Cell lines
B Primary cultures
d METHOD DETAILS
B Spinal cord injury and post-surgical animal care
B Functional evaluation
B Histology and immunoﬂuorescence analysis
B AAV injection for anterograde tracing
B Electrophysiology
B RNA extraction and transcriptomic analysis
B Neurite outgrowth assay
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
devcel.2021.12.008.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the i3S Scientiﬁc Platforms (Animal, Histology and Electron Micro-
scopy, Advanced Light Microscopy and BioSciences Screening Facilities,
part of the national infrastructure Portuguese Platform of Bioimaging [PPBI];
PPBI-POCI-01-0145-FEDER-022122). This project was supported by Santa
Casa da Miserico´ rdia de Lisboa (MC-39-2019), Wings for Life (WFL-PT-21/
20), FCT (UID/BIM/04773/2013/CBMR, PTDC/BIA-ANM/0697/2014, PTDC/
MED-ONC/28489/2017). J.N.R. and S.C.S. are FCT fellows (SFRH/BD/
131565/2017; SFRH/BD/136760/2018).
(E) Scheme of the experimental setup of co-culture of transfected CHO cells and Mus DRG or cortical neurons.
(F) bIII-tubulin staining (yellow) of Mus DRG neurons plated on top of GFP-transfected or B3gnt7-GFP-transfected CHO cells (green).
(G and H) Total neurite length (G) and branching analysis (H) of Mus DRG neurons grown on top of transfected CHO cells related to (F). Data represent mean ±
SEM (*p < 0.05, two-tailed unpaired t test) of 3 independent experiments (52–104 neurons analyzed in each experiment).
(I) Axon length of Mus cortical neurons grown on top of transfected CHO cells. Data represent mean ± SEM (*p < 0.05, two-tailed unpaired t test) of 3 independent
experiments (73–287 neurons analyzed in each experiment).
Dashed white lines in (A and C) deﬁne lesion borders. Each data point in (B and D) represents values of single animals. Each data point in (G and I) represents
values of independent experiments. Scale bars, 100 mm (A, C, F, and J). R: rostral; C: caudal.
ll
Short Article
448
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450, February 28, 2022

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
M.M.S. coordinated the study; G.T. and I.M.A. coordinated research at Univer-
sity of Algarve; M.M.S., J.N.-R., C.D.C., B.V.S., A.M., and C.R. designed and
analyzed experiments; J.N.R., S.C.L., R.P.-C., S.C.S., L.L.L., M.A.S., R.O.,
and A.C.M. performed experiments and quantiﬁcations; G.G.P., M.V.,
J.A.S., S.S., and V.E.F. supported preliminary experiments in Acomys; V.B.
and J.P. performed RNA-seq experiments; C.P.V. and J.V. performed RNA-
seq analyzes and their interpretation; M.M.S. and J.N.R. wrote the paper
with input from all authors.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: March 26, 2021
Revised: November 26, 2021
Accepted: December 8, 2021
Published: January 4, 2022
REFERENCES
Basso, D.M., Fisher, L.C., Anderson, A.J., Jakeman, L.B., McTigue, D.M., and
Popovich, P.G. (2006). Basso mouse scale for locomotion detects differences
in recovery
after
spinal cord
injury
in ﬁve
common mouse
strains.
J. Neurotrauma 23, 635–659. https://doi.org/10.1089/neu.2006.23.635.
Brant, J.O., Lopez, M.C., Baker, H.V., Barbazuk, W.B., and Maden, M. (2015).
A comparative analysis of gene expression proﬁles during skin regeneration in
Mus and Acomys. PLoS One 10, e0142931. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0142931.
Brant, J.O., Yoon, J.H., Polvadore, T., Barbazuk, W.B., and Maden, M. (2016).
Cellular events during scar-free skin regeneration in the spiny mouse, Acomys.
Wound Repair Regen 24, 75–88. https://doi.org/10.1111/wrr.12385.
Chen, H., Zhang, L., Hill, W.G., and Yu, W. (2017). Evaluating the voiding spot
assay in mice: a simple method with complex environmental interactions. Am.
J. Physiol. Renal Physiol. 313, F1274–F1280. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajprenal.
00318.2017.
Cregg, J.M., DePaul, M.A., Filous, A.R., Lang, B.T., Tran, A., and Silver, J.
(2014). Functional regeneration beyond the glial scar. Exp. Neurol. 253,
197–207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2013.12.024.
Cyr, J.L., Gawriluk, T.R., Kimani, J.M., Rada, B., Watford, W.T., Kiama, S.G.,
Seifert, A.W., and Ezenwa, V.O. (2019). Regeneration-competent and -incom-
petent murids differ in neutrophil quantity and function. Integr. Comp. Biol. 59,
1138–1149. https://doi.org/10.1093/icb/icz023.
Dent, E.W., Callaway, J.L., Szebenyi, G., Baas, P.W., and Kalil, K. (1999).
Reorganization and movement of microtubules in axonal growth cones and
developing interstitial branches. J. Neurosci. 19, 8894–8908.
Dias, D.O., and Go¨ ritz, C. (2018). Fibrotic scarring following lesions to the cen-
tral nervous system. Matrix Biol 68 (69), 561–570. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
matbio.2018.02.009.
Diaz Quiroz, J.F., and Echeverri, K. (2013). Spinal cord regeneration: where
ﬁsh, frogs and salamanders lead the way, can we follow? Biochem. J. 451,
353–364. https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20121807.
Didangelos, A., Puglia, M., Iberl, M., Sanchez-Bellot, C., Roschitzki, B., and
Bradbury, E.J. (2016). High-throughput proteomics reveal alarmins as ampli-
ﬁers of tissue pathology and inﬂammation after spinal cord injury. Sci. Rep.
6, 21607. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep21607.
Du, K., Zheng, S., Zhang, Q., Li, S., Gao, X., Wang, J., Jiang, L., and Liu, K.
(2015). Pten deletion promotes regrowth of corticospinal tract axons 1 year af-
ter spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 35, 9754–9763. https://doi.org/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.3637-14.2015.
Gawriluk, T.R., Simkin, J., Hacker, C.K., Kimani, J.M., Kiama, S.G., Ezenwa,
V.O., and Seifert, A.W. (2020). Complex tissue regeneration in mammals is
associated With reduced inﬂammatory cytokines and an inﬂux of T cells.
Front. Immunol. 11, 1695. https://doi.org/10.3389/ﬁmmu.2020.01695.
Gawriluk, T.R., Simkin, J., Thompson, K.L., Biswas, S.K., Clare-Salzler, Z.,
Kimani, J.M., Kiama, S.G., Smith, J.J., Ezenwa, V.O., and Seifert, A.W.
(2016). Comparative analysis of ear-hole closure identiﬁes epimorphic regen-
eration as a discrete trait in mammals. Nat. Commun. 7, 11164. https://doi.org/
10.1038/ncomms11164.
Giger, R.J., Hollis, E.R., 2nd, and Tuszynski, M.H. (2010). Guidance molecules
in axon regeneration. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2, a001867. https://
doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a001867.
Haas, B.J., Papanicolaou, A., Yassour, M., Grabherr, M., Blood, P.D., Bowden,
J., Couger, M.B., Eccles, D., Li, B., Lieber, M., et al. (2013). De novo transcript
sequence reconstruction from RNA-seq using the Trinity platform for reference
generation and analysis. Nat. Protoc. 8, 1494–1512. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nprot.2013.084.
Hamid, R., Averbeck, M.A., Chiang, H., Garcia, A., Al Mousa, R.T., Oh, S.J.,
Patel, A., Plata, M., and Del Popolo, G. (2018). Epidemiology and pathophys-
iology of neurogenic bladder after spinal cord injury. World J. Urol. 36, 1517–
1527. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00345-018-2301-z.
Imagama, S., Sakamoto, K., Tauchi, R., Shinjo, R., Ohgomori, T., Ito, Z.,
Zhang, H., Nishida, Y., Asami, N., Takeshita, S., et al. (2011). Keratan sulfate
restricts neural plasticity after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 31, 17091–
17102. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5120-10.2011.
Ishikawa, Y., Imagama, S., Ohgomori, T., Ishiguro, N., and Kadomatsu, K.
(2015). A combination of keratan sulfate digestion and rehabilitation promotes
anatomical plasticity after rat spinal cord injury. Neurosci. Lett. 593, 13–18.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2015.03.015.
Jao, T.M., Li, Y.L., Lin, S.W., Tzeng, S.T., Yu, I.S., Yen, S.J., Tsai, M.H., and
Yang, Y.C. (2016). Alteration of colonic epithelial cell differentiation in mice
deﬁcient for glucosaminyl N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase 4. Oncotarget
7, 84938–84950. https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.12915.
Jin, D., Liu, Y., Sun, F., Wang, X., Liu, X., and He, Z. (2015). Restoration of
skilled locomotion by sprouting corticospinal axons induced by co-deletion
of PTEN and SOCS3. Nat. Commun. 6, 8074. https://doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms9074.
Jones, L.L., and Tuszynski, M.H. (2002). Spinal cord injury elicits expression of
keratan sulfate proteoglycans by macrophages, reactive microglia, and oligo-
dendrocyte progenitors. J. Neurosci. 22, 4611–4624.
Kakuda, S., and Haltiwanger, R.S. (2017). Deciphering the Fringe-mediated
Notch code: identiﬁcation of activating and inhibiting sites allowing discrimina-
tion between ligands. Dev. Cell 40, 193–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.
2016.12.013.
Law, C.W., Chen, Y., Shi, W., and Smyth, G.K. (2014). voom: Precision weights
unlock linear model analysis tools for RNA-seq read counts. Genome Biol 15,
R29. https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2014-15-2-r29.
Lee-Liu, D., Edwards-Faret, G., Tapia, V.S., and Larraı´n, J. (2013). Spinal cord
regeneration: lessons for mammals from
non-mammalian vertebrates.
Genesis 51, 529–544. https://doi.org/10.1002/dvg.22406.
Leite, S.C., Sampaio, P., Sousa, V.F., Nogueira-Rodrigues, J., Pinto-Costa, R.,
Peters, L.L., Brites, P., and Sousa, M.M. (2016). The actin-binding protein
alpha-Adducin is required for maintaining axon diameter. Cell Rep 15,
490–498. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.03.047.
Liddelow, S.A., and Barres, B.A. (2017). Reactive astrocytes: production, func-
tion, and therapeutic potential. Immunity 46, 957–967. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.immuni.2017.06.006.
Liddelow, S.A., Guttenplan, K.A., Clarke, L.E., Bennett, F.C., Bohlen, C.J.,
Schirmer, L., Bennett, M.L., M€unch, A.E., Chung, W.S., Peterson, T.C., et al.
(2017). Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated microglia.
Nature 541, 481–487. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature21029.
Lin, R., Rosahl, T.W., Whiting, P.J., Fawcett, J.W., and Kwok, J.C. (2011). 6-
sulphated chondroitins have a positive inﬂuence on axonal regeneration.
PLoS One 6, e21499. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0021499.
Lopez-Fernandez, H., Duque, P., Vazquez, N., Fdez-Riverola, F., Reboiro-
Jato, M., Vieira, C.P., and Vieira, J. (2020). SEDA: a desktop tool Suite for
FASTA ﬁles processing. IEEE/ACM Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinform. https://
doi.org/10.1109/TCBB.2020.3040383.
ll
Short Article
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450, February 28, 2022
449

Mar, F.M., da Silva, T.F., Morgado, M.M., Rodrigues, L.G., Rodrigues, D.,
Pereira, M.I.L., Marques, A., Sousa, V.F., Coentro, J., Sa´ -Miranda, C., et al.
(2016). Myelin lipids inhibit axon regeneration following spinal cord injury: a
novel perspective for therapy. Mol. Neurobiol. 53, 1052–1064. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12035-014-9072-3.
Martin, M. (2011). Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high-
throughput sequencing reads. EMBnet. j. 17, 10–12. https://doi.org/10.
14806/ej.17.1.200.
Matias Santos, D., Rita, A.M., Casanellas, I., Brito Ova, A., Arau´ jo, I.M., Power,
D., and Tiscornia, G. (2016). Ear wound regeneration in the African spiny
mouse Acomys cahirinus. Regeneration (Oxf) 3, 52–61. https://doi.org/10.
1002/reg2.50.
Miller, G.M., and Hsieh-Wilson, L.C. (2015). Sugar-dependent modulation of
neuronal development, regeneration, and plasticity by chondroitin sulfate pro-
teoglycans. Exp. Neurol. 274, 115–125. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.
2015.08.015.
Morii, H., Shiraishi-Yamaguchi, Y., and Mori, N. (2006). SCG10, a microtubule
destabilizing factor, stimulates the neurite outgrowth by modulating microtu-
bule dynamics in rat hippocampal primary cultured neurons. J. Neurobiol.
66, 1101–1114. https://doi.org/10.1002/neu.20295.
Muenks, A.G., Stiers, K.M., and Beamer, L.J. (2017). Sequence-structure rela-
tionships, expression proﬁles, and disease-associated mutations in the paral-
ogs of phosphoglucomutase 1. PLoS One 12, e0183563. https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0183563.
Mukhopadhyay, G., Doherty, P., Walsh, F.S., Crocker, P.R., and Filbin, M.T.
(1994). A novel role for myelin-associated glycoprotein as an inhibitor of axonal
regeneration. Neuron 13, 757–767. https://doi.org/10.1016/0896-6273(94)
90042-6.
Oishi, Y., and Manabe, I. (2018). Macrophages in inﬂammation, repair and
regeneration. Int. Immunol. 30, 511–528. https://doi.org/10.1093/intimm/
dxy054.
Okada, S., Hara, M., Kobayakawa, K., Matsumoto, Y., and Nakashima, Y.
(2018). Astrocyte reactivity and astrogliosis after spinal cord injury. Neurosci.
Res. 126, 39–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neures.2017.10.004.
Pallerla, S.R., Lawrence, R., Lewejohann, L., Pan, Y., Fischer, T., Schlomann,
U., Zhang, X., Esko, J.D., and Grobe, K. (2008). Altered heparan sulfate struc-
ture in mice with deleted NDST3 gene function. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 16885–
16894. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M709774200.
Randal, M., and Kossiakoff, A.A. (2001). The structure and activity of a mono-
meric interferon-gamma:alpha-chain receptor signaling complex. Structure 9,
155–163. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0969-2126(01)00567-6.
Salmela, L., and Schro¨ der, J. (2011). Correcting errors in short reads by multi-
ple alignments. Bioinformatics 27, 1455–1461. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioin-
formatics/btr170.
Schmitz, S.K., Hjorth, J.J., Joemai, R.M., Wijntjes, R., Eijgenraam, S., de
Bruijn, P., Georgiou, C., de Jong, A.P., van Ooyen, A., Verhage, M., et al.
(2011). Automated analysis of neuronal morphology, synapse number and
synaptic recruitment. J. Neurosci. Methods 195, 185–193. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jneumeth.2010.12.011.
Seifert, A.W., Kiama, S.G., Seifert, M.G., Goheen, J.R., Palmer, T.M., and
Maden, M. (2012). Skin shedding and tissue regeneration in African spiny
mice (Acomys). Nature 489, 561–565. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11499.
Simkin, J., Gawriluk, T.R., Gensel, J.C., and Seifert, A.W. (2017). Macrophages
are necessary for epimorphic regeneration in African spiny mice. Elife 6, 26.
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.24623.
Steppan, S., Adkins, R., and Anderson, J. (2004). Phylogeny and divergence-
date estimates of rapid radiations in muroid rodents based on multiple nuclear
genes. Syst. Biol. 53, 533–553. https://doi.org/10.1080/10635150490468701.
Streeter, K.A., Sunshine, M.D., Brant, J.O., Sandoval, A.G.W., Maden, M., and
Fuller, D.D. (2020). Molecular and histologic outcomes following spinal cord
injury in spiny mice, Acomys cahirinus. J. Comp. Neurol. 528, 1535–1547.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.24836.
Thuret, S., Thallmair, M., Horky, L.L., and Gage, F.H. (2012). Enhanced func-
tional recovery in MRL/MpJ mice after spinal cord dorsal hemisection. PLoS
One 7, e30904. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0030904.
Tica, J., and Didangelos, A. (2018). Comparative transcriptomics of rat and
axolotl after spinal cord injury dissects differences and similarities in inﬂamma-
tory and matrix remodeling gene expression patterns. Front. Neurosci. 12,
808. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2018.00808.
Tsata, V., Mollmert, S., Schweitzer, C., Kolb, J., Mockel, C., Bohm, B., Rosso,
G., Lange, C., Lesche, M., Hammer, J., et al. (2021). A switch in pdgfrb+ cell-
derived ECM composition prevents inhibitory scarring and promotes axon
regeneration in the zebraﬁsh spinal cord. Dev. Cell 56, 509–524.e9. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2020.12.009.
Wang, H., Katagiri, Y., McCann, T.E., Unsworth, E., Goldsmith, P., Yu, Z.X.,
Tan, F., Santiago, L., Mills, E.M., Wang, Y., et al. (2008). Chondroitin-4-sulfa-
tion negatively regulates axonal guidance and growth. J. Cell Sci. 121,
3083–3091. https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.032649.
Wu, C., Xue, Y., Wang, P., Lin, L., Liu, Q., Li, N., Xu, J., and Cao, X. (2014). IFN-
gamma primes macrophage activation by increasing phosphatase and tensin
homolog via downregulation of miR-3473b. J. Immunol. 193, 3036–3044.
https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1302379.
Yang, T., Dai, Y., Chen, G., and Cui, S. (2020). Dissecting the dual role of the
glial scar and scar-forming astrocytes in spinal cord injury. Front. Cell.
Neurosci. 14, 78. https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2020.00078.
Zabbarova, I.V., Ikeda, Y., Carder, E.J., Wipf, P., Wolf-Johnston, A.S., Birder,
L.A., Yoshimura, N., Getchell, S.E., Almansoori, K., Tyagi, P., et al. (2018).
Targeting p75 neurotrophin receptors ameliorates spinal cord injury-induced
detrusor sphincter dyssynergia in mice. Neurourol. Urodyn. 37, 2452–2461.
https://doi.org/10.1002/nau.23722.
ll
Short Article
450
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450, February 28, 2022

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Rabbit polyclonal anti-5HT
ImmunoStar
Cat# 20080; RRID: AB_572263
Rabbit polyclonal anti-collagen type I
Rockland
Cat# 600-401-103-0.1; RRID: AB_2074625
Rabbit polyclonal anti-GFAP
Agilent
Cat# Z0334; RRID: AB_10013382
Rabbit polyclonal anti-MBP
Proteintech
Cat# 10458-1-AP; RRID: AB_2250289
Rabbit polyclonal anti-Ndst3
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# PA5-63262; RRID: AB_2644540
Rabbit polyclonal anti-NGAL
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# PA5-88079; RRID: AB_2804634
Rabbit polyclonal anti-SCG10
Novus Biologicals
Cat# NBP1-49461; RRID: AB_10011569
Rabbit polyclonal anti-Vglut1
Synaptic Systems
Cat# 135 303; RRID: AB_887875
Rabbit polyclonal anti-b3gnt7
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# PA5-57342; RRID: AB_2638427
Rabbit polyclonal anti-bIII tubulin
Synaptic Systems
Cat# 302 302;
RRID: AB_10637424
Mouse monoclonal anti-Heparan Sulfate
(clone F58-10E4)
AMSBIO
Cat# 370255-1; RRID: AB_10891554
Mouse monoclonal anti-Keratan Sulfate
(clone 5D4)
AMSBIO
Cat# 270427-1; RRID: AB_10920069
Mouse monoclonal anti-bIII tubulin
Promega
Cat# G7121; RRID: AB_430874
Alexa Fluor 488-AfﬁniPure Goat
Anti-Mouse IgG (H+L)
Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs
Cat# 115-545-003; RRID: AB_2338840
Alexa Fluor 594-AfﬁniPure Donkey
Anti-Mouse IgG (H+L)
Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs
Cat# 715-585-150; RRID: AB_2340854
Alexa Fluor 488-AfﬁniPure Donkey
Anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L)
Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs
Cat# 711-545-152;
RRID: AB_2313584
Alexa Fluor 594 AfﬁniPure Donkey
Anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L)
Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs
Cat# 711-585-152; RRID: AB_2340621
Alexa Fluor 568 Goat anti-Mouse IgM
(Heavy chain) Cross-Adsorbed
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# A-21043; RRID: AB_2535712
Bacterial and Virus Strains
AAV1.CMV.PI.eGFP.WPRE.bGH
Penn Vector Core, University of
Pennsylvania
N/A
pAAV-CMV>hB3GNT7[NM_145236.3]
(ns):P2A:TurboGFP(ns):T2A:Puro:WPRE
(VB210409-1218swn)
VectorBuilder
N/A
pAAV-CMV>EGFP:WPRE
VectorBuilder
N/A
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
Ammonium chloride (NH4Cl)
Merck
Cat# 1011450500
B27
Invitrogen
Cat #17504
Bovine serum albumin (BSA)
Sigma
Cat# A3294
Calcium chloride dehydrate (CaCl2 $ 2H2O)
Sigma
Cat# 10035-04-8
Collagenase-IV-S
Sigma
Cat# C1889
D-(+)-Glucose (C6H12O6)
Sigma
Cat# G8270
DMEM
Sigma
Cat# D6429-500ML
DMEM-F12
Sigma
Cat# D8437
Donkey serum
Sigma
Cat# D9663; RRID:AB_2810235
Fetal bovine serum (FBS)
Sigma
Cat# F9665
Formalin
Bio-optica
Cat# 05-K01004
Gelatin from cold water ﬁsh
Sigma
Cat# G7041
(Continued on next page)
ll
Short Article
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450.e1–e7, February 28, 2022
e1

Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Glycine
Merck
Cat# 1042011000
Heparinase III
AMSBIO
Cat# AMS.HEP-ENZ III-S
Ibidi Mounting Medium
Ibidi
Cat# 50001
Keratanase (Endo-b-Galactosidase)
Sigma
Cat# 345811
L-glutamine
Invitrogen
Cat# 25030024
Lipofectamine 2000
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 116678030
Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
(MgCl2 * 6 H₂O)
Sigma
Cat# M2393
Neurobasal medium
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 21103–049
NGF
Millipore
Cat# 01-125
Paraformaldehyde (PFA)
Sigma
Cat# 158127
Penicillin/streptomycin
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 15140-122
Potassium chloride (KCl)
Sigma
Cat# 7447-40-7
PureBlu DAPI Nuclear Staining Dye
Bio-rad
Cat#1351303
Sodium bicarbonate (or Sodium hydrogen
carbonate) (NaHCO3)
Sigma
Cat# 144-55-8
Sodium borohydride (NaBH4)
Sigma
Cat# 452882
Sodium chloride (NaCl)
Sigma
Cat# S9888
Sodium phosphate monobasic
monohydrate (NaH2PO4 $ H2O)
Sigma
Cat# 10049-21-5
Sucrose
Merck
Cat# 1076511000
Triton X-100
Sigma
Cat# T9284
Trypsin from porcine pancreas
Sigma
Cat# T4799
Critical Commercial Assays
NZY Total RNA Isolation kit
NZYtech
Cat# MB13402
NZY First-Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit,
NZYtech
Cat# MB125
Trichrome Stain (Masson) Kit
Sigma
Cat# HT15
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Acomys cahirinus
N/A
N/A
Mus musculus: Adult C57BL/6
Charles River
N/A
Oligonucleotides
b3gnt7; sense primer
5’- CCTCAAGGAGATCCACT -3’
This paper
N/A
b3gnt7; anti-sense primer
5’- CGGTCAGACAGAAACTC -3’
This paper
N/A
Ndst3; sense primer
5’- TGGTGTGGGTATCATTGG -3’
This paper
N/A
Ndst3; anti-sense primer
5’- TCCAGTCAGTTCCAGGTA -3’
This paper
N/A
Ndst4; sense primer
5’- GTCACCAGCACTGAAGAG -3’
This paper
N/A
Ndst4; anti-sense primer
5’- CCTCCTGGATACTCCTTGT -3’
This paper
N/A
b3galnt1; sense primer
5’- GCGTCAACTGGATGTAC -3’
This paper
N/A
b3galnt1; anti-sense primer
5’- CTCTAATGGCTTGTCTGG -3’
This paper
N/A
Sdha; sense primer
5’- TGTTCAGTTCCACCCCAC -3’
This paper
N/A
Sdha; anti-sense primer
5’- TCTCCACGACATCCTTCTGT -3’
This paper
N/A
(Continued on next page)
ll
Short Article
e2
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450.e1–e7, February 28, 2022

RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the lead contact, Monica M
Sousa (msousa@ibmc.up.pt).
Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.
Data and code availability
All data generated and analyzed during this study are included in this published article (and its supplemental information ﬁles) and
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. The raw data on Acomys transcriptome reconstruction is depos-
ited in SRA (BioProject: PRJNA766650, accessions SRR16088842 to SRR16088857).
EXPERIMENTAL MODELS AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Animals
All animals were handled and euthanized according to the European Union Directive 2010/63/EU and the national Decreto-lei n113-
2013. The protocols here described have been approved by the i3S Ethical Committee and by the Portuguese Veterinarian Board.
Mus musculus (C57BL/6) were bred and provided by the animal house facility of the i3S. Acomys cahirinus were bred at the animal
house facility of the University of Algarve, Portugal. All animals were maintained with ad libitum access to water/food, and kept on a
12 hour light/dark cycle. Only adult (12-16 weeks old) females were used for SCI experiments.
Cell lines
Conﬂuent monolayers of Chinese Hamster Ovary cells (CHO) were maintained in 75 cm2 cell culture ﬂasks at 37 C in DMEM medium
(Sigma, D6429-500ML), supplemented with 10 % FBS (Sigma, F9665) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc,
15140-122). CHO cells were split into 4-well chambers slides (IBIDI, 80426) and following 3-4 days in culture, they were transfected
with a plasmid leading to the overexpression of hb3GNT7 linked to TurboGFP (pAAV-CMV>hB3GNT7[NM_145236.3]:P2A:TurboGFP:
T2A:Puro:WPRE; VectorBuilder) or a similar empty vector leading to the overexpression of TurboGFP (pAAV-CMV>EGFP:WPRE;
VectorBuilder) using Lipofectamine 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, cat# 116678030) and grown for 3-4 days.
Primary cultures
DRG neuron cultures were performed as detailed in Leite et al. (2016). Brieﬂy, DRG were collected from 3-4 weeks old Mus and di-
gested with 0.125% collagenase-IV-S (Sigma, C1889) for 90 minutes at 37C with 5% CO2, dissociated into a single cell suspension
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Software and Algorithms
Axiovision imaging software
Zeiss
RRID:SCR_002677
Beacon designer software
Biosoft
N/A
Fiji
NIH
RRID:SCR_002285
GraphPad Prism 6
GraphPad
RRID:SCR_002798
Leica LAS X software
Leica
RRID:SCR_013673
Olympus Cell software
Olympus
RRID:SCR_014342
Synapse Detector (SynD)
(Schmitz et al., 2011)
N/A
Others
Axio Imager microscope
Zeiss
RRID:SCR_018856
CFX384 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection
System
Bio-rad
N/A
Cryostat Leica CM 3050 S
Leica
RRID:SCR_020214
IN Cell Analyzer 2000 microscope
GE Healthcare
N/A
Isolated pulse stimulator
A-MSystems
RRID:SCR_016677
Leica DMI6000 B
Leica
RRID:SCR_018713
Motorized stereotaxic microinjetor
Stoelting
N/A
Olympus light microscope
Olympus
RRID:SCR_017564
ll
Short Article
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450.e1–e7, February 28, 2022
e3

by gentle trituration and centrifuged in a 15% BSA (Sigma, A3294) gradient. DRG neurons were plated at 5000 cells/well on top of
CHO cells previously established in 4-well chambers slides (IBIDI, 80426). Culture medium was DMEM:F12 (Sigma, D8437) supple-
mented with 1x B27 (Invitrogen, 17504), 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, 15140-122), 2 mM L-glutamine
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, 25030024) and 50 ng/mL NGF (Millipore, 01-125). The co-culture was maintained at 37C with 5% CO2
for 24h.
Similar experiments were performed using embryonic cortical neurons cultures. Cortical tissues were obtained from the brains of
E18 mouse embryos and cultured as described in Dent et al. (1999) and Mar et al. (2016). Brieﬂy, cortical tissue was digested 15 min
at 37C in 0.06% trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, T4799) and then centrifuged. Mus cortical neurons (25 000 cells/well) were plated onto CHO
cells previously established in 4-well chambers slides (IBIDI, 80426). Cortical neurons were cultured in Neurobasal medium (Thermo
Fisher Scientiﬁc, 21103–049) supplemented with 1x B27 (Invitrogen, 17504), 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc,
15140–122) and 2 mM L-glutamine (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, 25030024). The co-culture was maintained at 37C with 5% CO2
for 24h.
METHOD DETAILS
Spinal cord injury and post-surgical animal care
Adult (12-16 weeks old) female Mus and Acomys were deeply anesthetised with continuous inhalation of isoﬂurane (Isovet, B Braun,
469860). Laminectomy was performed at the thoracic vertebrae T7-79 and a complete transection of the spinal cord was done at T8
using a micro feather ophthalmic scalpel (Feather, Safety Razor Co. Ltd). Sham female animals of both genera were used to serve as
controls. Analgesia was performed for 72 hours with buprenorphine twice a day (3 mg/kg). At 8WPI, injured Acomys (n=4) were re-
injured (complete spinal cord transection) at T8 as previously performed. Upon surgery, animals were supplemented with fresh fruit
twice a week and fed with Anima-Strath. Only female animals were used for SCI experiments as females have less urinary infections
and bladder management is easier. Bladder management was done by gentle abdominal compression, twice-daily until voluntary
micturition was observed. Unless stated otherwise, all animals were euthanized at 8WPI; AAV-injected animals were euthanized
at 12 WPI and re-injured Acomys at 16WPI.
Functional evaluation
All functional analyses were performed at 2, 4 and 7 days and weekly for 8 WPI (or 16 WPI in the case of re-injured Acomys). Hindlimb
locomotor function was assessed using the Basso Mouse Scale (BMS) (Basso et al., 2006). Brieﬂy, patterns of hind limbs movement,
plantar stepping and paw positions were observed in a 5 min session per animal. All Mus (n=14) and Acomys (n=14) were habituated
to the BMS open-ﬁeld arena in 10 min sessions every day for 1 week. The locomotor score was given by two blinded independent
observers. To evaluate bladder function, the urine spot test was performed. Each animal was placed in a clean metabolic cage lined
with blotting ﬁlter paper at the bottom (Whatman, 3030-917) for 30 min without access to water or food during the assay as described
(Chen et al., 2017; Zabbarova et al., 2018). The ﬁlter papers were visualized under UV light of a Gel-Doc-XR (Bio-Rad), images were
saved as TIFF ﬁles and the urine spot areas were analyzed using Fiji software. To make a calibration curve, the areas of different vol-
umes of water were also measured with Fiji. For all the animals where functional analysis is provided, following the ﬁnal timepoint of
recovery, the completeness of spinal cord transection was conﬁrmed by the observation of all longitudinal sagittal sections
comprising the entire spinal cord. Only animals where complete injury was observed in all the sections have been included in
the study.
Histology and immunoﬂuorescence analysis
In all animals, axon regeneration wasanalyzedat 8 WPIor at 12 WPI (for AAV-injected animals). The same reagents andantibodies were
used for both Mus and Acomys spinal cords. Mus and Acomys were transcardially perfused with 10% formalin (Bio-optica, 05-K01004)
and the spinal cords were post-ﬁxed for 1 week at 4C and later cryoprotected in 30% sucrose and processed using a Cryostat Leica
CM3050 S(RRID:SCR_020214)(sectionthicknessof50 mm forfreeﬂoatingimmunohistochemistryand10mm forslide-mountedfrozen
cryosections).Serialsagittalspinalcordsectionscontainingthelesionsiteandrostral andcaudalcrosssectionswerecollectedforeach
animal. Only animals where a complete injury was conﬁrmed by observation of all longitudinal sagittal sections were analyzed. Sagittal
cryosections (50 mm) were incubated with 0.1M glycine (Merck, 1042011000) overnight at 4C, permeabilized with 1% Triton X-100
(Sigma, T9284) for 20 min, incubated with 0.2M NH4Cl (Merck, 1011450500) for 20 min and then incubated with 0.1% NaBH4 (Sigma,
452882) for 5 min. Sections were blocked with 1 mg of BSA (Sigma, A3294) and 1% Triton X-100 for 1 h at room temperature (RT) and
then incubated for 48 h at 4⁰C with the following primary antibodies: mouse anti-bIII tubulin (Promega, G7121; 1:1000; RRI-
D:AB_430874),rabbitanti-SCG10/Stathmin-2(NovusBiologicals, NBP1-49461; 1:5000;RRID:AB_10011569; a markerofregenerating
sensory axons (Morii et al., 2006)), rabbit anti-collagen type I (Rockland, 600-401-103-0.1; 1:750; RRID:AB_2074625), rabbit anti-glial
ﬁbrillary acidic protein (Agilent, Z0334; 1:2000; RRID:AB_10013382) and rabbit anti-myelin basic protein (Proteintech, 10458-1-AP;
1:1500; RRID:AB_2250289). Secondary antibodies included: Alexa Fluor 488 AfﬁniPure goat anti-mouse (Jackson Immunoresearch
Laboratories, 115-545-003; 1:1000; RRID:AB_2338840) and Alexa Fluor 594 AfﬁniPure donkey anti-rabbit (Jackson Immunoresearch
Laboratories, 711-585-152; 1:1000; RRID:AB_2340621). Serotonergic axons were visualized in cross/sagittal sections (50 mm) incu-
bated with 0.2M NH4Cl for 30 min and blocked with 10% donkey serum (Sigma, D9663) and 0.3% Triton X-100 for 1 h at RT, and incu-
bated with rabbit anti-5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) primary antibody (ImmunoStar, 20080; 1:5000; RRID:AB_572263) for 48 h at 4C.
ll
Short Article
e4
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450.e1–e7, February 28, 2022

Sections were then incubated for 2 h with Alexa Fluor 594 AfﬁniPure donkey anti-rabbit (Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories, 711-
585-152; 1:1000; RRID:AB_2340621). To identify synaptic boutons in close proximity to CST axons (previously labelled with AAV injec-
tion as detailed below), sagittal sections (50 mm) were blocked with a mixture of 2% ﬁsh gelatin (Sigma, G7041), 2% BSA and 2% fetal
bovine serum (FBS) (Sigma, F9665) for 1 h at RT and incubated with rabbit anti-vGlut1 primary antibody (Synaptic System, 135 303;
1:500; RRID:AB_887875) overnight at 4C. Sections were then incubated for 2 h with Alexa Fluor 594 AfﬁniPure donkey anti-rabbit
(Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories, 711-585-152; 1:500; RRID:AB_2340621). For the analysis of ECM proteoglycans, glycosyla-
tion-related enzymes and astrocytes immunoﬂuorescence was performed in sagittal slide-mounted frozen cryosections (10 mm) that
were permeabilized with ice-cold methanol for 15 min, incubated with 0.5% Triton X-100 for 20 min and with 0.2 M NH4Cl for
20 min. Sections were blocked with 2% BSA for 1 h at RT and incubated overnight at 4⁰C with the following primary antibodies: mouse
anti-keratan sulfate (clone 5D4) (Amsbio, 270427-CS; 1:50; RRID:AB_10920069), mouse monoclonal anti-heparan sulfate (clone F58-
10E4) (Ambsio,370255-1; 1:150; RRID:AB_10891554),rabbit polyclonal anti-b3gnt7 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, PA5-57342, 1:100; RRI-
D:AB_2638427), rabbit polyclonal anti-Ndst3 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, PA5-63262, 1:200; RRID:AB_2644540) and rabbit polyclonal
anti-NGAL (LCN2) (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, PA5-88079, 1:200, RRID:AB_2804634). Sections were incubated for 1 h at 4⁰C with the
secondary antibodies: Alexa Fluor 568 AfﬁniPure goat anti-mouse IgM, m chain speciﬁc (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, A-21043; 1:100; RRI-
D:AB_2535712) and Alexa Fluor 594 AfﬁniPure donkey anti-mouse IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, 715-585-150; 1:100;
RRID:AB_2340854). For enzymatic digestions, prior to immunoﬂuorescence, sections were incubated with heparinase III (EC 4.2.2.8; 5
mU/ml; Amsbio, AMS.HEP-ENZ III-S) or keratanase (endo-b-galactosidase; R14 U/mL; Sigma, 345811) for 2h at 37C. To visualise
connective tissue composition, sagittal sections (10 mm) were stained with Masson trichrome staining (Sigma, HT15). All histological
analyses were randomized and performed blinded to the genus of the animal. All spinal cord sections were used under the same expo-
sure for the same antibodies. Image acquisition was performed using the IN Cell Analyzer 2000 microscope (GE Healthcare) at 20x
magniﬁcation with acquisition software v4.5. and with an Axio Imager microscope (Zeiss, RRID:SCR_018856) at 20x and 40x magni-
ﬁcation with an Axiocam MR3.0 camera and Axiovision imaging 4.7 software (Zeiss, RRID:SCR_002677),and subsequently analyzed in
Fiji software (RRID:SCR_002285). Analysis of bIII-tubulin-positive axonal regeneration was performed by assessing the number of
axons penetrating or growing inside the lesion core in 20x magniﬁcation images of spinal cords from Mus (n=7) and Acomys (n=7),
in 7-17 sections per animal. Regeneration of 5-HT ﬁbers in spinal cord cross sections was assessed by measuring the mean pixel value
of ﬂuorescence intensity (the background was subtracted) inside a marked area spanning around the ventral part of the grey matter of
rostral and caudal sections of Mus (n=6) and Acomys (n=6) spinal cords. In spinal cord sagittal sections, the total number and axon
regeneration distance of 5-HT-positive axons growing within the injury site was assessed by using a vertical line placed at the rostral
end of the lesion border perpendicularly to the sagittal axis of each spinal cord of Mus (n=3) and Acomys (n=6), in at least 8 sections per
animal. Glycosylation related-enzymes and ECM proteoglycan ﬂuorescence intensity was measured from uninjured and injured Mus
and Acomys (n=4-6 each genus) spinal cord images at 20x magniﬁcation (2-6 sections of each spinal cord/animal). For b3gnt7 and
Ndst3 the mean pixel value of ﬂuorescence intensity in the lesion site was measured. For the quantiﬁcation of KSPG deposition in un-
injured and injured Mus and Acomys (n=4-6 each genus), the total area containing KSPG-positive staining (similar to a honeycomb-like
structure) was measured in each section (2-4 sections of each spinal cord/animal); for KSPG, normalization in relation to distal caudal
androstral stumpswasnot performedas staining wasnegligibleinallgroupsexceptinAcomys following SCI.ForHSPG, themeanpixel
value of ﬂuorescence intensity was measured in the region of the lesion site and the ratio relative to the staining in proximal and distal
spinal cord stumps was calculated. GFAP and col I ﬂuorescence intensity were assessed from injured Mus and Acomys (n=7, each
genus for GFAP and n=6 for col I) at 20x magniﬁcation by measuring the mean pixel value of ﬂuorescence intensity of the same ROI
in each section (2-4 sections of each spinal cord/animal). Analysis of gray/white matter ratios in cross sections of sham animals was
performed by measuring pixel area of total, gray and white matter area in spinal cord cross sections (3-6 sections) in Mus (n=2) and
Acomys (n=2). Images were acquired using a light microscope Olympus (RRID:SCR_017564) with an Olympus DP 25 camera and
Cell B software (RRID:SCR_014342).
AAV injection for anterograde tracing
For tracing of the descending CST, injured Mus (n=3) and Acomys (n=2) were injected intracortically with an AAV1/2 vector leading to
the expression of eGFP under the CMV promoter (AAV1.CMV.PI.eGFP.WPRE.bGH, 5.738 x1013 GC/ml, Penn University - in the text
referred as AAV1/2-eGFP) at 8 WPI. This timepoint of viral injection was chosen as viral injections at 4WPI could inﬂuence functional
analysis. Animals were deeply anesthetized with isoﬂurane and positioned in a stereotaxic device with motorized stereotaxic micro-
injetor (Stoelting). Following a midline incision, the bregma was exposed and four holes were drilled in the right sensorimotor cortex.
For Mus, the coordinates were as described (Du et al., 2015; Jin et al., 2015); in Acomys the following coordinates were used: ante-
roposterior/mediolateral: 1.35/-1.0 and 1.35/-2.6 (1.4mm DV); 0.63/-0.7 and 0.63/-2.2 (1.2mm DV). The injections were performed
using a 10 ml Hamilton syringe (Series 1700 Hamilton). Once the needle was at the appropriate depth, 0.3 ml of virus were injected
in each coordinate (0.1 ml /min). After the injection, the syringe was left for 2 minutes to avoid leakage. Four weeks later, the animals
were euthanized i.e., at 12 WPI.
Electrophysiology
Uninjured Mus (n=5) and Acomys (n=4), and injured Mus (n=3) and Acomys (n=10) were terminally anaesthetized with an i.p. injection
of 50 mg/kg of pentobarbital at 8 WPI. Spinal cord from the upper cervical to lower lumbar levels was quickly removed, cleaned from
the meninges and nerve roots, and kept in artiﬁcial cerebrospinal ﬂuid (aCSF) containing: 115 mM NaCl (Sigma, S9888), 3 mM KCl
ll
Short Article
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450.e1–e7, February 28, 2022
e5

(Sigma, 7447-40-7), 2.2 mM CaCl2 (Sigma, 10035-04-8), 1 mM MgCl2 (Sigma, M2393), 1 mM NaH2PO4 (Sigma, 10049-21-5), 25 mM
NaHCO3 (Sigma, 144-55-8) and 11 mM glucose (Sigma, G8270) (bubbled with 95% O2 and 5% CO2). The spinal cord was transferred
to the recording chamber perfused with oxygenated aCSF and allowed to recover for at least 45 min. All recordings were done at a
temperature of 22–24C. Suction electrodes fabricated from thick-walled glass (BioMedical Instruments, Germany) were used for
both stimulation and recording. To study CAP conduction in descending motor tracts, the lateral funiculus of each side of the spinal
cords (right/left) was stimulated at a location 8-10 mm rostral to the lesion site (Stim. A; Figure 2L) using the Isolated Pulse Stimulator
(2100, A-M Systems, RRID:SCR_016677). Two recording electrodes were positioned 4-5 mm rostrally (Rec. B; Figure 2L) and 4-5 mm
caudally to the lesion (Rec. C; Figure 2L), to compare CAP amplitudes before and after crossing the lesion site, thus revealing func-
tional ﬁbers crossing the scar. The recording electrode Rec.B allowed to control the viability of the spinal cord preparation and the
proper propagation of CAPs. Each suction electrode had its own reference electrode. Spinal cords were stimulated with a 50 ms pulse
of 200 mA at a 3s interval. For recording, we used the differential AC ampliﬁer (1700, A–M Systems), in which the low cut-off ﬁlter was
set 0.1 Hz. The signal was online low-pass ﬁltered at 10 kHz and sampled using the A/D converter of the EPC9 ampliﬁer (HEKA, Lam-
brecht, Germany). Of note, only injured Acomys that recovered weight support and presented locomotor recovery (BMS > 5) were
used. Quantiﬁcation of CAP conduction was performed by measuring the amplitude for each animal with the average of at least 10
traces.
RNA extraction and transcriptomic analysis
At 8 WPI, the lesion site (4-5 mm) from 4 injured Mus and 4 injured Acomys was collected and total RNA was extracted using NZY total
RNA isolation kit (MB13402). Thoracic spinal cord sites from sham animals (n=4 Mus and n=4 Acomys) were also collected to serve as
controls. RNA concentration and purity was determined by NanoDrop spectrophotometry, and integrity was conﬁrmed using Ex-
perion RNA StdSens Kit (Bio-Rad). Preparation of barcoded stranded RNAseq libraries and deep uni-directional sequencing (read-
length: 75 bases; yield: 550 million of paired sequence reads; FASTQ ﬁles have been deposited under BioProject: PRJNA766650,
accessions SRR16088842 to SRR16088857) were performed at the Genomics Core Facility (GeneCore) at EMBL, Heidelberg, Ger-
many. Since these two species have been diverging for 20 million years (Steppan et al., 2004), and non-coding regions evolve faster
than coding regions, the expression of coding sequence (CDS) isoforms (rather than transcript isoforms) was compared. Although the
Acomys cahirinus genome has been sequenced (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/assembly/GCA_004027535.1/), there is no genome
annotation available, and thus, Acomys transcriptome was assembled using all available data at the NCBI SRA database (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra) and data collected in this work. The average read quality of all datasets was evaluated using Fastqc.
Docker images and all other software applications here used are available at the pegi3s Bioinformatics Docker Images Project
(https://pegi3s.github.io/dockerﬁles/). The SRA datasets that were considered suitable for the transcriptome reconstruction are:
SRR636836, SRR636837, SRR636838, SRR2146799, SRR2146800, SRR2146801, SRR2146802, SRR2146803, SRR2146804,
SRR2146805, SRR2146806, SRR2146807, SRR2146808, SRR2146809, SRR2146810, SRR2146811, SRR2146812, SRR2146813,
SRR2146814, SRR2146815, SRR2146816, SRR2146817, SRR2146818, SRR2146819, SRR2146820, SRR2146821, SRR2146822,
SRR2146823, SRR2146824, SRR2146825, SRR2146826, SRR2146827, SRR2146828, SRR2146829, SRR2146830, SRR2146831,
SRR2146832, SRR2146833, SRR2146834, SRR2146835, SRR2146836, SRR2146837, SRR2146838, SRR2146839, SRR2146840,
SRR2146841, SRR2146842, SRR2146843, SRR3623231, SRR3623232, SRR3623233, SRR3623234, SRR3623235, SRR3623236,
SRR3623237, SRR3623238, SRR3623239, SRR3623240, SRR4279903, SRR4279904, SRR6994950, SRR6994951, SRR6994952,
SRR6994953, SRR6994954, SRR6994955, SRR6994956, SRR6994957, SRR6994958, SRR6994959, SRR6994960, SRR6994961,
and SRR6994962. Cutadapt (Martin, 2011) was used to trimmed the ﬁrst 20 positions of each read (usually of lower quality). FASTQ
ﬁles were transformed into FASTA ﬁles (using Docker image), and all Forward (F) and Reverse (R) read ﬁles concatenated separately.
At this point, both F and R FASTA ﬁles contain 1,326,395,625 reads. Reads showing ambiguous positions, as well as their respective
mates, were removed (51,012,743 and 2,929,801 reads from the F and R ﬁles, respectively). After this ﬁltering step, there were
1,273,100,625 reads on both F and R FASTA ﬁles. The average read quality for each of the 8 Acomys FASTQ ﬁles was assessed using
Fastqc and the ﬁrst 15 positions of each read trimmed using cutadapt. The resulting FASTQ ﬁles were transformed into FASTA ﬁles
(using Docker image) and the ﬁles concatenated. Reads showing ambiguous positions were removed. After this, there were
241,370,110 read sequences in the FASTA ﬁle. Coral (Salmela and Schroder, 2011) was used to correct reads at positions showing
variability in read alignments. This ﬁle was then used to correct, using Coral, the F and R FASTA ﬁles mentioned above, as well as the
8 Acomys FASTQ ﬁles here obtained. All corrected ﬁles were used to perform a transcriptome assembly using Trinity (Haas et al.,
2013) (468,445,830 reads were kept out of 1,273,100,625, i.e, 36.80%). The reconstructed Acomys cahirinus transcriptome is rep-
resented by 1,053,074 sequences, but it is unlikely that every sequence represents a full-length transcript. The EMBOSS getorf soft-
ware application was used to extract the longest ORF from the reconstructed sequences. For Mus, the average read quality for each
of the 8 FASTQ ﬁles here obtained was evaluated using the Fastqc software application. As for Acomys, the ﬁrst 15 positions of each
read were trimmed using cutadapt, and the resulting FASTQ ﬁles were transformed into FASTA ﬁles and concatenated. Reads
showing ambiguous positions were then removed, resulting in a 296,236,846 read sequences ﬁle. Coral was then used to correct
reads at positions showing variability in read alignments. The resulting ﬁle was then used to correct, using Coral, the ﬁle containing
all annotated Mus CDS in the reference genome (GCF_000001635.27) that was downloaded from the NCBI RefSeq database (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/assembly), as well as the 8 Mus FASTQ ﬁles here obtained were corrected. SEDA (Lopez-Fernandez et al.,
2020) was used to retain only Acomys CDS isoforms having an orthologue Mus sequence (identiﬁed using the ‘‘BLAST two-way or-
tholog’’ operation), that show less than 20% size difference relative to the Mus orthologous CDS, with a start codon and no in-frame
ll
Short Article
e6
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450.e1–e7, February 28, 2022

stop codons. 15,827 CDS isoforms were compared between Mus and Acomys. FPKM values were estimated using the RSEM
method, as implemented in Trinity, the reconstructed Acomys transcriptome and the paired Mus transcriptome, and the corrected
and ﬁltered read ﬁles here obtained for sham/injured Mus/Acomys. Differentially expressed CDS isoforms were identiﬁed using voom
(Law et al., 2014) and the four available biological replicates for each condition. CDS isoforms that have P-values at most 1e-3 and are
at least 2^2 fold were extracted and heatmaps produced. The differentially expressed CDS isoforms were partitioned into clusters
with similar expression patterns by cutting the hierarchically clustered gene tree at 10% the height of the tree. Only Trinity clusters
for which more than 75% of the members show a statistically signiﬁcant difference between conditions were selected. PANTHER
was used to identify overrepresented gene categories.
To validate transcriptomics of SCI sites, 200 ng of total RNA sample were used to synthesize ﬁrst-strand cDNA (NZY First-Strand
cDNA Synthesis Kit, MB125). SYBR-green quantitative PCR (CFX384 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System, Bio-rad) was per-
formed using species-speciﬁc primers (the sequence of species-speciﬁc PCR primers is detailed in the key resources table). Primers
were designed to bind orthologous regions of each gene in both species (similar GC content and PCR product size) using the Beacon
designer software (Biosoft). The fold change in gene expression was calculated using the DDCt relative expression method (Livak
method) and primers for Sdha were used as the endogenous control and calculated separately for each sample and respective spe-
cies/condition.
Neurite outgrowth assay
Neurite outgrowth was assessed following immunoﬂuorescence against bIII-tubulin. DRG and cortical neuron cultures of Mus were
plated on top of transfected CHO and ﬁxed at DIV1 with 2% paraformaldehyde (PFA) (Sigma, 158127) for 10 min at RT, followed by
cell membrane permeabilization (0.1% Triton X-100) and blocking with 5% FBS in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 1 hour at RT.
Incubation with rabbit anti-bIII-tubulin (Synaptic Systems 302 302; 1:1000, RRID:AB_10637424) was done overnight at 4C. The sec-
ondary antibody donkey anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 594 (Jackson ImmunoResearch, 711-585-152; 1:1000, RRID:AB_2340621) was used
for 1 hour at RT. Four-well cell chambers were incubated with DAPI for 15min (Bio-rad, #1351303). Images were acquired in a Leica
DMI6000 B (Leica, RRID:SCR_018713) equipped with an Hamamatsu FLASH4.0 digital camera and Leica Application Suite
Advanced Fluorescence (LAS AF) software (RRID:SCR_013673). Total neurite length was assessed in Matlab (RRID:SCR_001622)
with Synapse Detector (SynD) software (Schmitz et al., 2011) and Fiji software. Only DRG or cortical neurons grown on top of trans-
fected CHO cells were considered for analysis. A total of 3 independent experiments were analyzed for each cell type.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Data is shown as mean and standard error of the mean (SEM). The statistical analysis for all experiments was performed with
GraphPad Prism 6 (RRID:SCR_002798). Unless elsewhere stated, the following statistical tests were used as indicated in ﬁgure leg-
ends: two-tailed unpaired or paired t-test, one-way or two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test for samples
with Gaussian distribution. Two-tailed Mann-Whitney t-test and Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison test
were used for samples without Gaussian distribution. Sample sizes are indicated in ﬁgure legends and signiﬁcance was deﬁned
as p value*<0.05, p**<0.01, p***<0.001, p****<0.0001, ns: not signiﬁcant.
ll
Short Article
Developmental Cell 57, 440–450.e1–e7, February 28, 2022
e7

===== Nori2015_StemCellRep_iPSC+SCI =====
Stem Cell Reports
Article
Long-Term Safety Issues of iPSC-Based Cell Therapy in a Spinal Cord Injury
Model: Oncogenic Transformation with Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
Satoshi Nori,1,2 Yohei Okada,2,3 Soraya Nishimura,1,2 Takashi Sasaki,4,5 Go Itakura,1,2 Yoshiomi Kobayashi,1,2
Francois Renault-Mihara,1,2 Atsushi Shimizu,6 Ikuko Koya,2 Rei Yoshida,1 Jun Kudoh,7 Masato Koike,8
Yasuo Uchiyama,8 Eiji Ikeda,9,10 Yoshiaki Toyama,1 Masaya Nakamura,1,* and Hideyuki Okano2,*
1Department of Orthopedic Surgery
2Department of Physiology
3Kanrinmaru Project
4Center for Integrated Medical Research
5Department of Dermatology
6Department of Molecular Biology
7Laboratory of Gene Medicine
Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan
8Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyoku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan
9Department of Pathology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan
10Department of Pathology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1-1 Minami-Kogushi, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505, Japan
*Correspondence: masa@a8.keio.jp (M.N.), hidokano@a2.keio.jp (H.O.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.01.006
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
SUMMARY
Previously, we described the safety and therapeutic potential of neurospheres (NSs) derived from a human induced pluripotent stem cell
(iPSC) clone, 201B7, in a spinal cord injury (SCI) mouse model. However, several safety issues concerning iPSC-based cell therapy remain
unresolved. Here, we investigated another iPSC clone, 253G1, that we established by transducing OCT4, SOX2, and KLF4 into adult hu-
man dermal ﬁbroblasts collected from the same donor who provided the 201B7 clone. The grafted 253G1-NSs survived, differentiated
into three neural lineages, and promoted functional recovery accompanied by stimulated synapse formation 47 days after transplanta-
tion. However, long-term observation (for up to 103 days) revealed deteriorated motor function accompanied by tumor formation. The
tumors consisted of Nestin+ undifferentiated neural cells and exhibited activation of the OCT4 transgene. Transcriptome analysis re-
vealed that a heightened mesenchymal transition may have contributed to the progression of tumors derived from grafted cells.
INTRODUCTION
Advances in stem-cell-based therapies may help overcome
CNS disorders such as spinal cord injury (SCI). Transplanta-
tion of neural stem/progenitor cells (NS/PCs) has yielded
beneﬁcial effects and improved functional recovery in
SCI animal models (Cummings et al., 2005; Hofstetter
et al., 2005; Iwanami et al., 2005; Ogawa et al., 2002; Okada
et al., 2005; Salazar et al., 2010; Yasuda et al., 2011). Plurip-
otent stem cells (PSCs), including embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) and induced PSCs (iPSCs), can differentiate into
NS/PCs (Falk et al., 2012; Fujimoto et al., 2012a; Kumagai
et al., 2009; Miura et al., 2009; Nori et al., 2011; Okada
et al., 2004, 2008; Tsuji et al., 2010), oligodendrocyte pre-
cursor cells (OPCs) (Keirstead et al., 2005; Wang et al.,
2013), and motoneuron progenitors (Erceg et al., 2010; Lu-
kovic et al., 2014) in vitro. Previous studies demonstrated
the therapeutic potential of mouse and human iPSC-
derived NS/PCs for SCI in mice and non-human primates
(Fujimoto et al., 2012b; Kobayashi et al., 2012; Nori et al.,
2011; Tsuji et al., 2010). However, tumorigenicity remains
a major concern for clinical applications of iPSCs.
Previously, we reported the safety and therapeutic po-
tential of human iPSC-derived neurospheres (iPSC-NSs)
for SCI in non-obese diabetic–severe combined immuno-
deﬁcient (NOD-SCID) mice (Nori et al., 2011) using the
iPSC clone 201B7 (Nori et al., 2011; Takahashi et al.,
2007). Here, we aimed to characterize novel NS/PCs
derived from a different iPSC clone, 253G1. We estab-
lished this clone from the same adult human dermal ﬁbro-
blasts used for 201B7 by transducing three reprogram-
ming factors: OCT4, SOX2, and KLF4 (Nakagawa et al.,
2008). Grafted 253G1-derived neurospheres (253G1-NSs)
survived and differentiated into three neural lineages in
the injured spinal cord, and some of the resultant cells
formed synapses with host neurons. Motor function in
grafted
mice
initially
recovered
but
then
gradually
declined, and tumors emerged during long-term observa-
tion. These tumors consisted of undifferentiated Nestin+
cells, but not NANOG+ pluripotent cells. Late-onset acti-
vation of the OCT4 transgene (Tg) may be associated
with tumor formation. Transcriptome analysis revealed
altered expression of genes involved in the epithelial-
mesenchymal
transition
(EMT),
which
is
related
to
tumor invasion and progression. Moreover, canonical
pathway analysis revealed upregulation of the Wnt/b-cat-
enin signaling pathway after 253G1-NS transplantation,
which played a critical role in tumor development.
360
Stem Cell Reports j Vol. 4 j 360–373 j March 10, 2015 j ª2015 The Authors

Thus, although 253G1-NSs conferred temporary func-
tional recovery in mice with SCI, they later developed
into tumors and worsened the overall outcome.
RESULTS
Grafted 253G1-NSs Survive in Injured Spinal Cord and
Differentiate into Three Neural Lineages
Immunodeﬁcient (NOD-SCID) mice were used for xeno-
graft experiments. After laminectomy, contusive SCI was
induced at the Th10 level. Nine days after injury, 5 3 105
253G1-NS-derived cells, which were lentivirally transduced
with the ﬂuorescent protein Venus (an altered yellow ﬂuo-
rescent protein; Nagai et al., 2002) or ffLuc (Venus fused to
ﬁreﬂy luciferase; Hara-Miyauchi et al., 2012), were injected
into the lesion epicenter. Histological analyses were per-
formed 47 days (d) after transplantation. The grafted
253G1-NSs survived, migrated into the host spinal cord
(Figures 1A and 1B), and differentiated into neuronal
nuclei (NeuN)+ (17.2% ± 2.6%) and b-tubulin isotype III
(bIII tubulin)+ (42.2% ± 3.1%) neurons, glial ﬁbrillary acidic
protein (GFAP)+ astrocytes (15.0% ± 0.7%), and adenoma-
tous polyposis coli CC-1 (APC)+ oligodendrocytes (2.7% ±
0.3%; Figures 1C–1G). Quantitative analysis revealed that
67% of NeuN+ mature neurons were GAD67+ GABAergic
neurons (Figure 1H). Small numbers of grafted cells
differentiated into tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)+ and choline
acetyltransferase (ChAT)+ cholinergic neurons (Figures 1I
and 1J).
Grafted 253G1-NS-Derived Neurons Form Synaptic
Connections with Host Neurons
We performed triple immunostaining for human nu-
clear protein (HNu) and two neuronal markers, bIII
tubulin and the presynaptic protein Bassoon (Bsn).
Because the anti-Bsn antibody selectively recognized
the mouse and rat epitopes, but not the human epitopes
(Figure S1), we were able to evaluate the ability of
253G1-NS-derived neurons to integrate with the host
neural
circuitry
using
this
approach.
Grafted
bIII
tubulin+/HNu+
cells
in
parenchymal
locations
were
contacted by synaptic boutons of host neurons (Fig-
ure 1K). Moreover, triple immunostaining for HNu,
bIII tubulin, and human-speciﬁc synaptophysin (hSyn)
revealed dense terminal ﬁelds of human-derived bou-
tons apposed to host neurons (Figure 1L). Host ChAT+
neurons in the ventral gray matter were contacted by
the
hSyn+
graft-speciﬁc
terminals
(Figure
1M).
Im-
muno-electron microscopy also revealed Venus+ human
pre- and post-synaptic structures, as well as synapse for-
mation between host neurons and Venus+ 253G1-NS-
derived neurons (Figure 1N).
Grafted 253G1-NSs Promote Motor Function Recovery
after SCI
We assessed motor function recovery using the Basso
mouse scale (BMS) score, Rotarod test, and DigiGait system.
According to the BMS score, the 253G1-NS-grafted group
exhibited signiﬁcantly better functional recovery than
the PBS-injected control group R12 days after transplanta-
tion (BMS score = 3.2 ± 0.1 at 12 days post-transplantation
and 3.3 ± 0.2 at 47 days post-transplantation; Nori et al.,
2011; Figure 1O). In the Rotarod test, 253G1-NS-grafted
mice remained on the rod signiﬁcantly longer (61.1 ± 7.1
s) than the control group (33.0 ± 7.3 s; Nori et al., 2011)
at 47 days post-transplantation (Figure 1P). Gait perfor-
mance was evaluated using the DigiGait image analysis
system. All 253G1-NS-grafted mice could walk on the
treadmill at 8 cm/s, whereas some control mice (4/16)
could not. Stride length was signiﬁcantly longer in the
253G1-NS-grafted group (4.2 ± 0.1 cm) than in the control
group (2.2 ± 0.1 cm; Nori et al., 2011; Figure 1Q).
Tumors Form after 253G1-NS Transplantation,
Resulting in Deteriorated Motor Function
We extended the follow-up period to 103 days post-trans-
plantation to investigate the long-term safety of the grafted
253G1-NSs. Although recovery of motor function persisted
for up to 47 days post-transplantation, 253G1-NS-grafted
mice exhibited gradual deterioration of hind limb motor
function thereafter (Figure 2A). To monitor the survival
and growth of the grafted cells in the mouse spinal cord,
we lentivirally transduced 253G1-NSs with ffLuc, which
allowed us to identify grafted cells by their bioluminescent
luciferase signals and ﬂuorescent Venus signals. The
photon count of grafted 253G1-NSs decreased within the
ﬁrst week post-transplantation, but gradually increased at
14
days
post-transplantation
and
thereafter,
demon-
strating the survival and growth of the grafted cells. Be-
tween 42 and 70 days post-transplantation, the photon
counts sharply increased (Figures 2B and 2C), consistent
with the deterioration of the BMS score shown in Figure 2A.
At 103 days post-transplantation, the photon count of the
grafted 253G1-NSs increased more than 10-fold from its
initial value (Figure 2C).
Histological analyses revealed tumors in 253G1-NS-
grafted spinal cords. These tumors were divided into three
groups based on the diameter of the lesion (small-tumor
group, f < 200 mm; medium-tumor group, 200 < f <
700 mm; large-tumor group, 700 mm < f). Some of the tu-
mors (12/22) exhibited microcystic masses consisting of
HNu/Nestin double-positive human-derived bipolar cells
with hair-like processes. These masses were observed in
all tumors from the large-tumor group (7/7; Figures 2D
and 2E show representative images of microcystic masses
from the large-tumor group). Such masses were also present
Stem Cell Reports j Vol. 4 j 360–373 j March 10, 2015 j ª2015 The Authors
361

A
C-1
D-1
E-1
F-1
H-2
H-1
H-3
F-2
F-3
F-4
E-2
E-3
E-4
D-2
D-3
D-4
C-2
C-3
C-4
B
I-2
J-1
J-2
K-1
L-2
K-2
L-1
M-1
M-2
N
O
P
Q
I-1
G
Figure 1. Grafted 253G1-NSs Mainly Differentiate into Neurons and Form Synapses with Host Spinal Cord Neurons
(A and B) Venus+ 253G1-NSs integrated into the mouse spinal cord. Arrowheads indicate the lesion epicenter.
(C–F) Representative images of Venus+ grafted cells immunostained for the markers NeuN (mature neurons) (C), bIII tubulin (all neurons)
(D), GFAP (astrocytes) (E), and APC (oligodendrocytes) (F).
(G) Percentages of cell-type-speciﬁc marker-positive cells among Venus+ grafted cells at 47 days post-transplantation. Values are
expressed as the mean ± SEM (n = 4 mice).
(H) Most 253G1-derived neurons differentiated into GAD67+ (GABAergic) neurons.
(I and J) TH+/HNu+ neurons and ChAT+/HNu+ neurons were observed, but were rare.
(K) Sections were triple stained for HNu (green), bIII tubulin (red), and the presynaptic marker Bassoon (Bsn, white). The Bsn antibody
recognized the mouse, but not the human, protein.
(L) Sections triple stained for HNu (green), bIII tubulin (red), and the human-speciﬁc presynaptic marker hSyn (white). bIII tubulin+/
HNu neurons represented host mouse neurons. The hSyn antibody recognized the human, but not the mouse, protein.
(M) Large numbers of somatic and dendritic terminals from graft-derived nerve cells were present on host ChAT+ motor neurons at the
ventral horns.
(N) Electron microscopy (EM) images show synapse formation between host mouse neurons and graft-derived Venus+ (black) human
neurons. Pre- and post-synaptic structures indicate transmission from a graft-derived neuron to a host neuron, and from a host neuron to a
graft-derived neuron. H, host neuron; G, graft-derived neuron; arrowheads, post-synaptic density.
(O) Motor function in the hind limbs was assessed weekly using the BMS score until 47 days post-transplantation. Values are expressed as
the mean ± SEM (n = 32 mice).
(P) Rotarod test 47 days after transplantation. Graph shows total run time. Values are expressed as the means ± SEM (n = 10 mice).
(Q) Treadmill gait analysis using the DigiGait system 47 days post-transplantation. Graph shows stride length. Values are expressed as the
means ± SEM (n = 19 mice). Behavioral analyses were performed by two observers who were blinded to the treatment conditions.
Scale bars, 1,000 mm in (A); 100 mm in (B); 50 mm in (J-1); 20 mm in (F-3), (F-4), (H-1), (J-2), (K-1), (L-1), and (M-1); 10 mm in (H-2),
(J-3), (K-2), (L-2), and (M-2); 0.5 mm in (N). See also Figure S1.
362
Stem Cell Reports j Vol. 4 j 360–373 j March 10, 2015 j ª2015 The Authors

A
D
F
J
E-1
E
E-2
E-3
G-3
G-2
G-1
H-1
I-1
I-2
I-3
H-2
H-3
G
H
I
B
C
Figure 2. Tumor Formation during Long-Term Observation after 253G1-NS Transplantation
(A) Up to 103 days post-transplantation, motor function in the hind limbs was assessed weekly using the BMS score. Values are expressed
as the means ± SEM (n = 32 mice up to 47 days post-transplantation; thereafter, n = 22 mice until 103 days post-transplantation).
(B) Representative in vivo images of mice at 0, 14, 42, 70, and 103 days after 253G1-NS transplantation.
(C) Quantitative analysis of photon counts derived from grafted cells. Values are expressed as the means ± SEM (n = 20 mice up to 42 days
post-transplantation; thereafter, n = 14 mice until 103 days post-transplantation).
(D) Representative hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) image of a large tumor (700 mm < f).
(E) Boxed area in (D).
(E1–E3) Immunohistochemistry showing that most grafted cells in the microcystic area were Nestin+.
(F) Representative H&E image of a medium tumor (200 < f < 700 mm).
(G) Boxed area in (F). Immunohistochemistry shows that some grafted cells exhibited normal neural differentiation.
(H and I) Boxed area in (F). Some grafted cells formed microcystic masses that were positive for Nestin.
(J) Percentages of cell-type-speciﬁc, marker-positive cells among HNu+ grafted cells at 103 days post-transplantation. Values represent
the means ± SEM (n = 4 and 10 mice for 47 and 103 days post-transplantation, respectively). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
Scale bars, 500 mm in (D) and (F), 50 mm in (E) and (G–I). See also Figure S2.
Stem Cell Reports j Vol. 4 j 360–373 j March 10, 2015 j ª2015 The Authors
363

G
J
K
L
M
H
I
E
F
B
A
D
C
Figure 3. Histological and Gene-Expression Analyses of Tumors
(A) Schematic of histological analyses of tumors.
(B) Correlation between tumor diameter and the proportion of grafted cells that were Nestin+ at 47 and 103 days post-transplantation (TP).
(C) Correlation between tumor diameter and the proportion of grafted cells that were Ki-67+.
(D) Correlation between tumor diameter and the proportion of grafted cells that were OCT4+.
(E) Correlation between the tumor diameter and the proportion of grafted cells that were OCT4+/HNu+ at 103 days after TP.
(F) Correlation between the number of days after TP (47 or 103 days after TP) and the proportion of grafted cells that were OCT4+. In
(B)–(F), n indicates the number of mice.
(G) Schematic of mRNA expression analyses of tumors.
(H–M) The expression of human OCT4-Tg, OCT4-Endo, SOX2-Tg, SOX2-Endo, KLF4-Tg, KLF4-Endo, c-MYC-Tg, and c-MYC-Endo mRNA in 253G1
cells, 253G1-NSs, 103-day post-transplant 253G1-NSs (TP 103d), and adult human dermal ﬁbroblasts (HDFs) was analyzed by RT-PCR. Data
(legend continued on next page)
364
Stem Cell Reports j Vol. 4 j 360–373 j March 10, 2015 j ª2015 The Authors

in the majority of the medium tumors (5/7), whereas none
were found in the small-tumor group (0/8). In medium tu-
mors that exhibited microcystic masses, some grafted cells
underwent normal neural differentiation (Figures 2F and
2G). However, a portion of the grafted cells formed micro-
cystic masses positive for Nestin (Figures 2H and 2I), and
Nestin+ cells were also observed outside the microcystic
mass. Signiﬁcantly higher percentages of Nestin+ cells
(34.2% ± 7.3%) and APC+ oligodendrocytes (5.4% ±
0.7%), as well as signiﬁcantly lower percentages of bIII
tubulin+ neurons (32.1% ± 5.1%), were observed at
103 days relative to 47 days (Figure 2J). In addition,
15.8% ± 2.7% of grafted cells had differentiated into astro-
cytes at 103 days. Taken together, these data indicate that
approximately 87.5% of grafted cells differentiated toward
neural lineages. We observed no NANOG+ pluripotent cells
in grafted 253G1-NSs at 103 days post-transplantation
(Figure S2).
Next, we examined the correlation between tumor diam-
eter and the percentages of Nestin+, Ki-67+, or OCT4+ cells
among HNu+ grafted cells (Figure 3A). Statistical analysis
revealed a signiﬁcant correlation between tumor diameter
and the percentage of Nestin+/HNu+ cells (Figure 3B).
Compared with the small-tumor group, the large- and
medium-tumor
groups
contained
signiﬁcantly
higher
percentages of Ki-67+/HNu+ cells and OCT4+/HNu+ cells
(Figures 3C and 3D). However, there was no signiﬁcant cor-
relation between tumor diameter and the percentage of
OCT4+/HNu+ cells at 103 days post-transplantation (Fig-
ure 3E). Meanwhile, signiﬁcantly more OCT4+/HNu+ cells
were observed at 103 days than at 47 days (Figure 3F);
thus, the percentage of OCT4+/HNu+ cells correlated posi-
tively with post-transplant duration.
We also evaluated the expression of human OCT4-Tg,
OCT4-endogenous (Endo), SOX2-Tg, SOX2-Endo, KLF4-
Tg, and KLF4-Endo mRNAs in 253G1 cells, 253G1-NSs,
and spinal cord tissues of the 253G1-NS-grafted group,
which were harvested at 103 days post-transplantation
(253G1-NS/transplantation [TP]-103d group; Figures 3G–
3M). Compared with 253G1-NSs, OCT4-Tg expression
was signiﬁcantly higher in 253G1-NS/TP-103d spinal cords
(Figure 3H), whereas OCT4-Endo expression was only
observed in the 253G1 iPSCs (Figure 3I). SOX2-Endo was
expressed in both 253G1-NSs and the 253G1-NS/TP-103d
group, and levels of SOX2-Endo slightly increased after
transplantation (Figure 3K). KLF4-Tg expression was also
elevated in 253G1-NSs and the 253G1-NS/TP-103d group
(Figure 3L).
Transcriptomic Differences between 253G1-NSs and
201B7-NSs Post-Transplantation
Comparative transcriptome analyses of grafted cells and
surrounding host cells can reveal information regarding
the differentiation status of the grafted cells and the effects
of the graft on the host tissue. mRNA sequencing (mRNA-
seq) enables one to analyze the global expression of individ-
ual human and mouse genes from a mixture of human and
mouse cells (Bradford et al., 2013). Here, we sought to mea-
sure expression in mouse spinal cord tissue containing hu-
man cells derived from grafted human iPSC-NSs. To analyze
mRNA expression in both grafted human iPSC-NSs and
host spinal cord tissue, we analyzed the mRNA from NSs
of 253G1 and 201B7 cells, as well as mouse spinal cord tis-
sues containing grafted 253G1-NSs and 201B7-NSs, which
were harvested at 5 and 103 days post-transplantation
(PBS-5d
and
103d,
253G1-NS/TP-5d
and
103d,
and
201B7-NS/TP-5d and 103d). The ratio of human and mouse
mRNA-seq reads derived from epicenter segments (8 mm in
length) of iPSC-NS-grafted spinal cord tissue was considered
to reﬂect the ratio of human and mouse cells (Table S1). The
global gene-expression patterns of these tissues were hierar-
chically clustered into 5-day (PBS-5d, 253G1-NS/TP-5d, and
201B7-NS/TP-5d) and 103-day groups (PBS-103d, 253G1-
NS/TP-103d, and 201B7-NS/TP-103d), which may reﬂect
time-dependent changes in the spinal cord microenviron-
ment following SCI (Figure 4A). Similarly, the gene-expres-
sion proﬁles of the grafted iPSC-NSs clustered on the basis of
time post-transplantation (NS, 5 and 103 days) rather than
clonal (253G1 and 201B7) origin (Figure 4B). However, the
proﬁles of the two clones diverged at 103 days post-trans-
plantation. Furthermore, the gene-expression proﬁles of
253G1-NS/TP-103d and 201B7-NS/TP-103d differed signif-
icantly (Figures 4C and 4D).
Next, we identiﬁed human genes that were upregulated
in the mouse spinal cord at 103 days post-transplantation
relative to iPSC-NSs before transplantation (fold change >
5.0). As shown in the Venn diagram in Figure 4E, we iden-
tiﬁed 692 genes in the 253G1-NS/TP-103d group, 335
genes in the 201B7-NS/TP-103d group, and 1,023 genes
in both the 253G1-NS/TP-103d and 201B7-NS/TP-103d
groups that were expressed at higher levels than in
253G1-NSs and 201B7-NSs. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis
of the 335- and 1,023-gene groups indicated that synapto-
genesis was occurring in both the 253G1- and 201B7-NS/
TP-103d groups (Tables 1 and S2). GO analysis of the 692
genes that were exclusively activated in 253G1-derived
cells
at
103
days
post-transplantation
identiﬁed
a
are presented as expression levels relative to the control (HDFs) 11 days after retroviral transduction of OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, and c-MYC. Values
represent the means ± SEM (n = 3 independent experiments).
The p values shown in (B)–(F) were calculated using Scheffe’s test, and p values to determine signiﬁcance were calculated using the
Kruskal-Wallis non-parametric test: (B) 5.00E-06, (C) 7.20E-06, (D) 0.01, and (F) 1.33E-04. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. ns, non-signiﬁcant.
Stem Cell Reports j Vol. 4 j 360–373 j March 10, 2015 j ª2015 The Authors
365

A
B
C
G
M
Q
R
S
N
O
P
H
I
J
K
L
D
E
F
Figure 4. Global Human Gene-Expression Analysis
(A) Hierarchical clustering analysis of mouse gene-expression data from spinal cord tissues of the PBS-5d and -103d, 253G1-NS/TP-5d and
-103d, and 201B7-NS/TP-5d and -103d groups.
(B) Hierarchical clustering analysis of human gene-expression data: 253G1-NSs and 201B7-NSs, as well as spinal cord tissues of the 253G1-
NS/TP-5d and -103d, and 201B7-NS/TP-5d and -103d groups. In (A) and (B), the signal intensity of each gene is displayed as a heatmap
colored according to the expression level.
(legend continued on next page)
366
Stem Cell Reports j Vol. 4 j 360–373 j March 10, 2015 j ª2015 The Authors

number
of
mesenchyme-associated
terms,
including
‘‘mesenchymal cell differentiation,’’ ‘‘mesenchymal cell
development,’’ and ‘‘epithelial to mesenchymal transition’’
(Table 2). These terms were also identiﬁed in a comparison
of 253G1 and 201B7 NS cells, suggesting that 253G1-NS
cells were more prone to undergo EMT (Table S3). Further-
more, the mRNA-seq data revealed that EMT-related genes
such as LEF1, BMP2, HGF, SNAI1, SNAI2, TWIST1, and
TWIST2 (as suggested by GO analysis and previous reports
[Moody et al., 2005; Yang et al., 2004]) were signiﬁcantly
upregulated in the 253G1-NS/TP-103d group relative to
the 201B7-NS/TP-103d group (Figures 4F–4L). We also eval-
uated the expression of SNAI1, SNAI2, TWIST1, and
TWIST2 mRNAs in 201B7-NSs and 253G1-NSs prior to
transplantation (Figures 4M–4P). Expression of SNAI2,
TWIST1, and TWIST2 was signiﬁcantly higher in 253G1-
NSs than in 201B7-NSs (Figures 4N–4P), whereas SNAI1
expression was signiﬁcantly lower in 253G1-NSs than in
201B7-NSs (Figure 4M). Furthermore, we evaluated the
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3),
extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and v-akt mu-
rine thymoma viral oncogene (AKT) pathways, which are
involved in tumor maintenance. Speciﬁcally, we performed
immunohistochemical analyses to monitor the levels of
tyrosine 705-phosphorylated STAT3 (p-STAT3), tyrosine
202/204-phosphorylated ERK1/2 (p-ERK1/2), and serine
473-phosphorylated AKT (p-AKT). We observed p-STAT3+
cells (Figures 4Q–4S), but no p-ERK1/2+ or p-AKT+ cells,
in the 253G1-NS/TP-103d group.
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis Revealed Pathways that
Differed Signiﬁcantly between 253G1-NS and 201B7-
NS Transplantation
We used Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) to identify path-
ways differentially expressed between the 253G1-NS/TP-
103d and 201B7-NS/TP-103d groups. IPA detected a total
of 56 signiﬁcantly altered (p < 0.05) pathways. Figure 5
shows the ten most altered pathways, all of which were
signiﬁcantly upregulated in the 253G1-NS/TP-103d group
relative to iPSC-NSs prior to transplantation.
DISCUSSION
Because we generated the human iPSC clone 253G1
without introducing c-MYC, we initially speculated that
(C) Principal-component analysis (PCA) of human gene-expression data. x axis, component 1 (41.03%); y axis, component 2 (24.21%);
z axis, component 3 (13.88%).
(D) Two-dimensional PCA of human gene expression data. x axis, component 1 (41.03%); y axis, component 2 (24.21%).
(E) Venn diagram of human genes whose expression increased in the 253G1-NS/TP-103d and 201B7-NS/TP-103d groups relative to 253G1-
NSs and 201B7-NSs. Color key: red, 692 genes highly expressed in the 253G1-NS/TP-103d group; blue, 335 genes highly expressed in the
201B7-NS/TP-103d group; purple, 1,023 genes highly expressed in both the 253G1- and 201B7-NS/TP-103d groups.
(F–L) EMT-related human gene expression in 253G1- and 201B7-NSs and the 253G1- and 201B7-NS/TP-103d groups. Values represent the
means ± SEM (n = 1 each in the human iPSC-NS, n = 2 for 201B7-NS/TP-103d, and n = 3 for 253G1-NS/TP-103d; n indicates the number of
independent experiments).
(M–P) The expression of SNAI1, SNAI2, TWIST1, and TWIST2 mRNA in 201B7-NSs and 253G1-NSs was analyzed by RT-PCR. Data are pre-
sented as expression levels relative to the control (the U87 human glioblastoma cell line). Values represent the means ± SEM (n = 3
independent experiments).
(Q) Representative H&E image of the mid-sagittal section 103 days after transplantation.
(R) p-STAT3-stained image of the adjacent section of (Q). Arrow, lesion epicenter; arrowhead, distribution of grafted 253G1-NSs.
(S) Boxed area in (R).
Scale bar, 1,000 mm in (Q) and (R), 100 mm in (S). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. See also the mRNA-seq read distribution in Table S1.
Table 1. Gene Ontology Analysis of 335 Human Genes
Upregulated in 201B7-NS-Grafted Spinal Cord
GO Accession
GO Term
Corrected p Value
GO:0045202
synapse
7.05E-08
GO:0007399
nervous system development
3.56E-06
GO:0007267
cell-cell signaling
7.69E-06
GO:0019226
transmission of nerve impulse
4.68E-04
GO:0043005
neuron projection
1.76E-03
GO:0030182
neuron differentiation
1.26E-02
GO:0007154
cell communication
1.26E-02
GO:0048699
generation of neurons
1.40E-02
GO:0022008
neurogenesis
1.91E-02
GO:0050806
positive regulation of
synaptic transmission
3.52E-02
GO:0050804
regulation of synaptic
transmission
4.19E-02
GO:0007417
central nervous system
development
4.80E-02
GO:0051971
positive regulation of
transmission of nerve impulse
4.80E-02
See also Table S2.
Stem Cell Reports j Vol. 4 j 360–373 j March 10, 2015 j ª2015 The Authors
367

253G1-NSs would be less tumorigenic than 201B7-NSs.
Therefore, we performed transplantation of 253G1-NSs to
treat SCI in adult NOD-SCID mice. Like the 201B7-NSs,
the grafted 253G1-NSs differentiated into three neural lin-
eages, reconstructed local circuitry, and promoted angio-
genesis as well as axonal regrowth (data not shown).
Thus, 253G1-NS transplantation promoted motor function
recovery after SCI in NOD-SCID mice.
When considering the clinical use of iPSC-NSs, it is
important to address safety issues, especially with regard
to tumorigenicity. To this end, we extended the observa-
tion period after transplantation. Previously, we reported
that 201B7-NS-grafted mice maintained functional recov-
ery until 103 days post-transplantation, and conﬁrmed
that 201B7-NSs were non-tumorigenic based on histologi-
cal ﬁndings (Nori et al., 2011). Here, we found that
253G1-NS-grafted mice exhibited temporary motor func-
tion recovery for up to 47 days post-transplantation; how-
ever, this was followed by a gradual deterioration in motor
function, along with grafted cell proliferation and tumor
development. Bioluminescence imaging revealed that the
photon count of the grafted cells increased more than 10-
fold from the initial value by 103 days after transplanta-
tion. These tumors were negative for the pluripotency
marker NANOG. Tumor size correlated with the proportion
of Nestin+ cells in the graft at 103 days post-transplanta-
tion. Previously, we showed that after 201B7-NS transplan-
tation, the proportion of grafted cells that were Nestin+
decreased from 10.7% ± 2.2% at 47 days to 7.5% ± 1.0%
at 103 days post-transplantation, resulting in no evidence
of tumorigenicity (Nori et al., 2011). By contrast, the pro-
portion of Nestin+ cells increased from 19.6% ± 0.5% at
47 days to 33.1% ± 7.4% at 103 days after 253G1-NS
transplantation, suggesting that differentiation-resistant
Nestin+ cells proliferated over time and formed tumors.
Consistent with this, the proportion of Ki-67+ cells signiﬁ-
cantly increased from 1.7% ± 0.17% at 47 days to 3.0% ±
0.2% at 103 days after 253G1-NS transplantation, which
is signiﬁcantly higher than what was observed after
201B7-NS transplantation. These ﬁndings suggest that
the proportion of proliferating cells increased over time
and induced tumor formation in 253G1-NS-grafted mice
in the long term.
Tumor diameter exhibited no signiﬁcant correlation with
the proportion of OCT4+/HNu+ cells. Instead, the propor-
tion of grafted cells that were OCT4+ was solely dependent
on the post-transplantation observation period. In our pre-
vious study, we observed no evidence of OCT4+/HNu+ cells
or tumor formation in 201B7-NS-grafted mice after long-
term observation (Nori et al., 2011). It is likely that the
chronologically increasing OCT4 expression in the grafted
253G1-NSs is related to tumor formation, consistent with
the results of RT-PCR, which showed that the expression
of OCT4-Tg at 103 days post-transplantation was signiﬁ-
cantly higher than that in untransplanted 253G1-NSs.
OCT4 is a key regulator of self-renewal and plays a critical
role in maintaining ESC pluripotency (Niwa, 2007). In
addition, OCT4 is sometimes re-expressed in somatic cells
during carcinogenesis (Monk and Holding, 2001). OCT4
is also highly expressed in human gliomas and glioma
cell lines, and OCT4 overexpression in glioma cells induces
Nestin expression by inhibiting glioma cell differentiation
(Du et al., 2009; Ikushima et al., 2011). These ﬁndings are
consistent with the results we describe here, even though
the tumors observed in the present study were not patho-
logically identical to gliomas. We also observed that
KLF4-Tg was activated in 253G1-NSs, and that its expres-
sion increased after transplantation. KLF4 is highly ex-
pressed in primary breast ductal carcinoma and oral
squamous carcinoma (Foster et al., 2005; Pandya et al.,
Table 2. Gene Ontology Analysis of 692 Human Genes
Upregulated in 253G1-NS-Grafted Spinal Cord
GO Accession
GO Term
Corrected p Value
GO:0030198
extracellular matrix
organization and biogenesis
2.29E-16
GO:0001501
skeletal development
1.29E-14
GO:0043062
extracellular structure
organization and biogenesis
2.67E-13
GO:0001568
blood vessel development
1.88E-12
GO:0001944
vasculature development
3.51E-12
GO:0030199
collagen ﬁbril organization
5.50E-08
GO:0014031
mesenchymal cell
development
2.78E-07
GO:0048762
mesenchymal cell
differentiation
4.84E-07
GO:0001525
Angiogenesis
2.81E-06
GO:0048514
blood vessel morphogenesis
3.02E-06
GO:0001503
ossiﬁcation
1.74E-05
GO:0031214
biomineral formation
1.89E-05
GO:0014032
neural crest cell development
5.94E-04
GO:0014033
neural crest cell
differentiation
7.55E-04
GO:0007517
muscle development
3.04E-03
GO:0042127
regulation of cell proliferation
4.84E-03
GO:0001837
epithelial to mesenchymal
transition
2.02E-02
See also Table S3.
368
Stem Cell Reports j Vol. 4 j 360–373 j March 10, 2015 j ª2015 The Authors

2004). Previous reports also showed that KLF4 overexpres-
sion promotes self-renewal in ESCs (Li et al., 2005), and
KLF4 is an essential reprogramming factor that functions
by binding at Oct4 loci to initiate Oct4 transcription and
complete the reprogramming process (Wei et al., 2013).
These results suggest that KLF4 plays an important role
in maintaining PSCs, and that the tumor formation we
observed could be related to KLF4-Tg activation.
In a previous study, the molecular properties of engrafted
NS/PCs changed dramatically depending on the spinal
cord microenvironment (Kumamaru et al., 2012). Here,
we analyzed the changes in the microenvironment of
mouse spinal cord tissues affected by iPSC-NS transplanta-
tion. We observed no signiﬁcant differences in the mouse
gene-expression proﬁles of spinal cord tissues among the
253G1-NS/TP, 201B7-NS/TP, and control groups, suggest-
ing that mouse gene expression did not widely affect
tumorigenesis in grafted iPSC-NSs.
However,
human
gene-expression proﬁles from the 253G1- and 201B7-NS/
TP groups differed in a time-dependent manner, which
may have been related to tumor formation in the 253G1-
NS/TP group. GO analysis revealed increased progression
of EMT in the 253G1-NS and 253G1-NS/TP groups relative
to the 201B7-NS and 201B7-NS/TP groups.
During EMT, epithelial cells lose their epithelial char-
acteristics
and
acquire
the
properties
of
migratory
mesenchymal cells. This process is associated with the
early
stages
of
carcinogenesis,
cancer
invasion,
and
recurrence (Hay,
1995; Thiery,
2002). Brain tumors,
including some human gliomas, also contain stem-like
cells with both neural and mesenchymal potential that
are implicated in both tumor progression and invasive-
ness (Ricci-Vitiani et al., 2008). STAT3 is frequently over-
expressed in cancers, including gliomas (Abou-Ghazal
et al., 2008), and STAT3 phosphorylation leads to the
transcriptional activation of genes involved in processes
such as cell proliferation, apoptosis suppression, and
angiogenesis (Bowman et al., 2001). Moreover, STAT3
regulates the EMT gene TWIST (Cheng et al., 2008),
consistent with the more active EMT progression and
Figure 5. The Most Signiﬁcantly Altered
Common Pathways after Transplantation
of 253G1- and 201B7-NSs, as Revealed
by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
Canonical pathway analysis identiﬁed the
pathways from
the Ingenuity
Pathway
Analysis library that were signiﬁcantly en-
riched in the data set. Only genes that
showed a fold change R 3.0 were consid-
ered in this analysis. The black bars show
the human gene set in the 253G1-NS/TP-
103d group versus the 201B7-NS/TP-103d
group. The white bars show the comparison
of the human gene set in 253G1-NSs versus
201B7-NSs in the same pathway. Bars
represent the logarithmic values (log10) of
the signiﬁcance level (p); the solid line
corresponds to the threshold of p = 0.05.
Stem Cell Reports j Vol. 4 j 360–373 j March 10, 2015 j ª2015 The Authors
369

elevated TWIST expression in the 253G1-NS/TP group
observed in this study. Mesenchyme-like changes in
253G1-NSs following transplantation may contribute to
the
biological
characteristics
of
tumor
cells
derived
from parental 253G1-NSs.
IPA revealed upregulation of human ESC pluripotency
pathways in post-transplantation 253G1-NSs. This phe-
nomenon might be related to the population of differenti-
ation-resistant Nestin+ cells that proliferated over time and
formed tumors. Furthermore, the Wnt/b-catenin signaling
pathway was signiﬁcantly upregulated in the 253G1-NS/
TP group. Previous studies showed that Wnt/b-catenin
signaling is critical for regulating the self-renewal, prolifer-
ation, and differentiation of NS/PCs in the brain (Gong and
Huang, 2012), and that this pathway leads to enhanced
TERT expression in human cancers, resulting in the stabili-
zation of telomeres, a hallmark of tumorigenesis (Hoff-
meyer et al., 2012). In part, the tumorigenicity of 253G1-
NSs could be related to upregulation of the Wnt/b-catenin
signaling pathway. Moreover, consistent with GO analysis,
regulation of the EMT pathway was signiﬁcantly upregu-
lated in the 253G1-NS/TP group relative to the 207B7-NS/
TP group.
Recently, several clinical trials of stem-cell-based therapy
for SCI using either human NS/PCs (Cummings et al.,
2005; Salazar et al., 2010) or human ESC-derived OPCs
(Strauss, 2010) have been initiated. Compared with these
stem cells, iPSCs raise fewer ethical concerns in certain
countries (Nori et al., 2011; Tsuji et al., 2010). On the other
hand, the use of iPSC-derived cells risks tumorigenesis
(Miura et al., 2009; Tsuji et al., 2010). The present study
demonstrates that even unsafe iPSC-NSs can confer thera-
peutic beneﬁts against SCI, at least in the short term. How-
ever, long-term observation is required to assess the safety
of iPSC-NSs, because slow-growing tumors could cause mo-
tor function to deteriorate over longer periods of time. In
the present study, we used retrovirally generated iPSCs (Na-
kagawa et al., 2008; Takahashi et al., 2007) and showed that
activation of OCT4- and KLF4-Tg might be related to tumor
formation. Thus, from a clinical-applications perspective,
NS/PCs derived from integration-free iPSCs (Okita et al.,
2008, 2011) should be chosen to avoid Tg-induced tumor-
igenesis. Recently, a pilot clinical study of integration-free
iPSC-based therapy for age-related macular degeneration
was approved following review by the Japanese govern-
ment (Garber, 2013; Kamao et al., 2014). As a step toward
clinical applications in the SCI ﬁeld, we have already initi-
ated integration-free iPSC-NS transplantation in the NOD-
SCID mouse SCI model. At the same time, transplantation
into immune-deﬁcient animals, accompanied by subse-
quent long-term observation, should be used to determine
the safety and effectiveness of these cells (Okano et al.,
2013).
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Additional details regarding several of the protocols used in this
work are provided in Supplemental Experimental Procedures.
Cell Culture, Neural Differentiation, and Lentiviral
Transduction
Cell culture, neural differentiation of human iPSCs (253G1),
and lentiviral transduction of neurospheres were performed as
described previously (Nori et al., 2011; Okada et al., 2008). Brieﬂy,
253G1-derived primary neurospheres were dissociated and in-
fected with lentivirus expressing Venus or ffLuc under the control
of the EF promoter. Primary neurospheres were passaged into sec-
ondary and tertiary neurospheres. The ffLuc vector enabled detec-
tion of grafted cells as strong bioluminescent ffLuc signals in live
SCI mice, and as ﬂuorescent Venus signals in ﬁxed spinal cord
sections.
Animal Model and Cell Transplantation
Adult female NOD-SCID mice (20–22 g) were anesthetized via
intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of ketamine (100 mg/kg) and xyla-
zine (10 mg/kg). After laminectomy, contusive SCI was induced
at the Th10 level using an IH impactor (60 kdyn; Precision Systems
and Instrumentation) as described previously (Scheff et al., 2003).
Nine days after SCI, 253G1-NSs (5 3 105 cells) were transplanted
into the lesion epicenter of each mouse (n = 37) using a glass micro-
pipette and stereotaxic injector (KDS310; Muromachi Kikai). The
253G1-NSs were transplanted at approximately the same time as
the PBS injection and 201B7-NS transplantation described in our
previous report (Nori et al., 2011).
Bioluminescence Imaging
A Xenogen-IVIS spectrum-cooled, charge-coupled device optical
macroscopic imaging system (Summit Pharmaceuticals Interna-
tional) was used for bioluminescence imaging to conﬁrm the sur-
vival of the grafted cells as previously described (Itakura et al.,
2014; Okada et al., 2005; Takahashi et al., 2011). Monitoring was
performed for 103 days post-transplantation.
Motor Function and Histological Analyses
Motor function was evaluated using the BMS, Rotarod apparatus
(Muromachi Kikai), and DigiGait system (Mouse Speciﬁcs). For
histological analyses, the animals were anesthetized and trans-
cardially perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde (pH 7.4). Spinal
cords were removed and sectioned in the sagittal/axial plane
on a cryostat. All motor function and histological analyses
were conducted by observers blinded to the treatment condi-
tions. All animal experiments (approval number 09169) were
performed under the control of the Keio University Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee in accordance with the Institu-
tional Guidelines on Animal Experimentation at Keio University,
the Japanese Government Law Concerning the Protection and
Control of Animals, and the Japanese Government Notiﬁcation
of Feeding and Safekeeping of Animals, and approved by the
ethics committee of Keio University (IRB approval number
09091-8).
370
Stem Cell Reports j Vol. 4 j 360–373 j March 10, 2015 j ª2015 The Authors

RT-PCR
RNA isolation and RT-PCR were performed as previously described
(Nori et al., 2011; Okada et al., 2008).
Transcriptome Analysis
Total RNA from each sample was puriﬁed as previously described
(Okada et al., 2008). mRNA libraries were prepared according to
the TruSeq RNA sample prep kit protocol and sequenced using a
Genome Analyzer IIx (Illumina). Mouse and human mRNA se-
quences were separated using Xenome software (Conway et al.,
2012), and separated mRNA-seq data were mapped to the corre-
sponding genomic DNA sequences (human [hg19] and mouse
[mm9]) using TopHat software (Trapnell et al., 2009). The map-
ped sequences were normalized by trimmed mean of M values
(TMM) and analyzed using Avadis NGS software (Agilent Tech-
nologies). All software used default parameters. For principal
component analysis (PCA) and clustering analysis, the normal-
ized data were narrowed down to 13,693 genes using a cutoff
value for expression levels (reads per kilobase of exon per
million mapped reads [RPKM] > 100). A Venn diagram was con-
structed to visualize the 1,715 genes that were upregulated in
the 253G1-NS/TP-103d group and the 1,358 genes that were up-
regulated in the 201B7-NS/TP-103d group (RPKM > 100, fold
change > 5.0 versus each NS group). GO analysis was performed
using gene lists from the overlapping area, as well as from each
separate area, in the Venn diagram. For GO analysis, p values
were calculated using Fisher’s exact test. Subsequently corrected
p values were applied for multiple testing corrections using the
Benjamini-Yekutieli method with a cutoff at p = 0.05. Pathway
analysis
was
performed
via
IPA
(Ingenuity
Systems)
using
genes that were up- or downregulated in the 253G1-NS/TP-
103d group versus the 201B7-NS/TP-103d group, as well as in
253G1-NS versus 201B7-NS (RPKM > 100, fold-change > 3.0).
The genes were overlaid on the Ingenuity Knowledge Database
and networks were algorithmically generated based on their
connectivity. The p values were determined using Fisher’s exact
test and p = 0.05 was interpreted as indicating statistical
signiﬁcance.
Statistical Analyses
An unpaired, two-tailed Student’s t test was used to assess the
253G1-NS differentiation efﬁcacy. One-way ANOVA followed
by the Tukey-Kramer test for multiple comparisons was used
for the Ki-67, Rotarod, and DigiGait analyses. Repeated-mea-
sures, two-way ANOVA followed by the Tukey-Kramer test was
used for the BMS analysis. The Kruskal-Wallis non-parametric
test and Scheffe’s test were used to analyze tumor diameter
and the percentage of HNu+ grafted cells that were Nestin+, Ki-
67+, or OCT4+. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined as *p <
0.05, **p < 0.01.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental
Procedures, two ﬁgures, and three tables and can be found
with this article online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.
2015.01.006.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank A. Iwanami, S. Kaneko, K. Fujiyoshi, O. Tsuji, A. Yasuda,
Y. Takahashi, S. Kawabata, Y. Nishiyama, T. Iida, S. Shibata, T. Har-
ada, S. Miyao, and H.J. Okano for technical assistance and scientiﬁc
discussions, and H. Saya, M. Ko, M. Jakt, and K. Horiuchi for critical
readings of the manuscript. We also thank S. Yamanaka and M.
Nakagawa for the human iPSC clones (253G1 and 201B7). The p-
STAT3, p-ERK1/2, and p-AKT antibodies were kindly provided by
N. Onishi. This work was supported by grants from the JST-CIRM
collaborative program; Grants-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research from
JSPS and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and
Technology of Japan (MEXT); Research Center Network for
Realization of Regenerative Medicine from by the Japan Science
and Technology Agency (JST); the Kanrinmaru Project (Keio Uni-
versity); Research Fellowships for Young Scientists from the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science; Keio Gijuku Academic Devel-
opment Funds; and a Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research on Inno-
vative Areas (Comprehensive Brain Science Network) from the
MEXT.
Received: February 21, 2014
Revised: January 9, 2015
Accepted: January 12, 2015
Published: February 12, 2015
REFERENCES
Abou-Ghazal, M., Yang, D.S., Qiao, W., Reina-Ortiz, C., Wei, J.,
Kong, L.Y., Fuller, G.N., Hiraoka, N., Priebe, W., Sawaya, R., and
Heimberger, A.B. (2008). The incidence, correlation with tumor-
inﬁltrating
inﬂammation,
and
prognosis
of
phosphorylated
STAT3 expression in human gliomas. Clin. Cancer Res. 14, 8228–
8235.
Bowman, T., Broome, M.A., Sinibaldi, D., Wharton, W., Pledger,
W.J., Sedivy, J.M., Irby, R., Yeatman, T., Courtneidge, S.A., and
Jove, R. (2001). Stat3-mediated Myc expression is required for Src
transformation and PDGF-induced mitogenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 98, 7319–7324.
Bradford, J.R., Farren, M., Powell, S.J., Runswick, S., Weston, S.L.,
Brown, H., Delpuech, O., Wappett, M., Smith, N.R., Carr, T.H.,
et al. (2013). RNA-seq differentiates tumour and host mRNA
expression changes induced by treatment of human tumour xeno-
grafts with the VEGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor Cediranib. PLoS
ONE 8, e66003.
Cheng, G.Z., Zhang, W.Z., Sun, M., Wang, Q., Coppola, D., Man-
sour, M., Xu, L.M., Costanzo, C., Cheng, J.Q., and Wang, L.H.
(2008). Twist is transcriptionally induced by activation of STAT3
and mediates STAT3 oncogenic function. J. Biol. Chem. 283,
14665–14673.
Conway, T., Wazny, J., Bromage, A., Tymms, M., Sooraj, D., Wil-
liams, E.D., and Beresford-Smith, B. (2012). Xenome—a tool for
classifying reads from xenograft samples. Bioinformatics 28,
i172–i178.
Cummings, B.J., Uchida, N., Tamaki, S.J., Salazar, D.L., Hoosh-
mand, M., Summers, R., Gage, F.H., and Anderson, A.J. (2005).
Human neural stem cells differentiate and promote locomotor
Stem Cell Reports j Vol. 4 j 360–373 j March 10, 2015 j ª2015 The Authors
371

recovery in spinal cord-injured mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
102, 14069–14074.
Du, Z., Jia, D., Liu, S., Wang, F., Li, G., Zhang, Y., Cao, X., Ling, E.A.,
and Hao, A. (2009). Oct4 is expressed in human gliomas and pro-
motes colony formation in glioma cells. Glia 57, 724–733.
Erceg, S., Ronaghi, M., Oria, M., Rosello´, M.G., Arago´, M.A., Lopez,
M.G., Radojevic, I., Moreno-Manzano, V., Rodrı´guez-Jime´nez, F.J.,
Bhattacharya, S.S., et al. (2010). Transplanted oligodendrocytes
and motoneuron progenitors generated from human embryonic
stem cells promote locomotor recovery after spinal cord transec-
tion. Stem Cells 28, 1541–1549.
Falk, A., Koch, P., Kesavan, J., Takashima, Y., Ladewig, J., Alexander,
M., Wiskow, O., Tailor, J., Trotter, M., Pollard, S., et al. (2012). Cap-
ture of neuroepithelial-like stem cells from pluripotent stem cells
provides a versatile system for in vitro production of human neu-
rons. PLoS ONE 7, e29597.
Foster, K.W., Liu, Z., Nail, C.D., Li, X., Fitzgerald, T.J., Bailey, S.K.,
Frost, A.R., Louro, I.D., Townes, T.M., Paterson, A.J., et al. (2005).
Induction of KLF4 in basal keratinocytes blocks the proliferation-
differentiation switch and initiates squamous epithelial dysplasia.
Oncogene 24, 1491–1500.
Fujimoto, Y., Abematsu, M., Falk, A., Tsujimura, K., Sanosaka, T., Ju-
liandi, B., Semi, K., Namihira, M., Komiya, S., Smith, A., and Naka-
shima, K. (2012a). Treatment of a mouse model of spinal cord
injury by transplantation of human induced pluripotent stem
cell-derived long-term self-renewing neuroepithelial-like stem
cells. Stem Cells 30, 1163–1173.
Fujimoto, Y., Abematsu, M., Falk, A., Tsujimura, K., Sanosaka, T., Ju-
liandi, B., Semi, K., Namihira, M., Komiya, S., Smith, A., and Naka-
shima, K. (2012b). Treatment of a mouse model of spinal cord
injury by transplantation of human iPS cell-derived long-term
self-renewing neuroepithelial-like stem cells. Stem Cells 30,
1163–1173.
Garber, K. (2013). Inducing translation. Nat. Biotechnol. 31,
483–486.
Gong, A., and Huang, S. (2012). FoxM1 and Wnt/b-catenin
signaling in glioma stem cells. Cancer Res. 72, 5658–5662.
Hara-Miyauchi, C., Tsuji, O., Hanyu, A., Okada, S., Yasuda, A., Fu-
kano, T., Akazawa, C., Nakamura, M., Imamura, T., Matsuzaki, Y.,
et al. (2012). Bioluminescent system for dynamic imaging of cell
and animal behavior. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 419,
188–193.
Hay, E.D. (1995). An overview of epithelio-mesenchymal transfor-
mation. Acta Anat. (Basel) 154, 8–20.
Hoffmeyer, K., Raggioli, A., Rudloff, S., Anton, R., Hierholzer, A.,
Del Valle, I., Hein, K., Vogt, R., and Kemler, R. (2012). Wnt/b-cate-
nin signaling regulates telomerase in stem cells and cancer cells.
Science 336, 1549–1554.
Hofstetter, C.P., Holmstro¨m, N.A., Lilja, J.A., Schweinhardt, P.,
Hao, J., Spenger, C., Wiesenfeld-Hallin, Z., Kurpad, S.N., Frise´n,
J., and Olson, L. (2005). Allodynia limits the usefulness of intraspi-
nal neural stem cell grafts; directed differentiation improves
outcome. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 346–353.
Ikushima, H., Todo, T., Ino, Y., Takahashi, M., Saito, N., Miyazawa,
K., and Miyazono, K. (2011). Glioma-initiating cells retain their
tumorigenicity through integration of the Sox axis and Oct4 pro-
tein. J. Biol. Chem. 286, 41434–41441.
Itakura, G., Kobayashi, Y., Nishimura, S., Iwai, H., Takano, M., Iwa-
nami, A., Toyama, Y., Okano, H., and Nakamura, M. (2014). Con-
trol of the survival and growth of human glioblastoma grafted
into the spinal cord of mice by taking advantage of immunorejec-
tion. Cell Transplant. Published online May 9, 2014. http://dx.doi.
org/10.3727/096368914X681711.
Iwanami, A., Kaneko, S., Nakamura, M., Kanemura, Y., Mori, H.,
Kobayashi, S., Yamasaki, M., Momoshima, S., Ishii, H., Ando, K.,
et al. (2005). Transplantation of human neural stem cells for spinal
cord injury in primates. J. Neurosci. Res. 80, 182–190.
Kamao, H., Mandai, M., Okamoto, S., Sakai, N., Suga, A., Sugita, S.,
Kiryu, J., and Takahashi, M. (2014). Characterization of human
induced pluripotent stem cell-derived retinal pigment epithelium
cell sheets aiming for clinical application. Stem Cell Reports 2,
205–218.
Keirstead, H.S., Nistor, G., Bernal, G., Totoiu, M., Cloutier, F., Sharp,
K., and Steward, O. (2005). Human embryonic stem cell-derived
oligodendrocyte progenitor cell transplants remyelinate and
restore locomotion after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 25, 4694–
4705.
Kobayashi, Y., Okada, Y., Itakura, G., Iwai, H., Nishimura, S., Ya-
suda, A., Nori, S., Hikishima, K., Konomi, T., Fujiyoshi, K., et al.
(2012). Pre-evaluated safe human iPSC-derived neural stem cells
promote functional recovery after spinal cord injury in common
marmoset without tumorigenicity. PLoS ONE 7, e52787.
Kumagai, G., Okada, Y., Yamane, J., Nagoshi, N., Kitamura, K., Mu-
kaino, M., Tsuji, O., Fujiyoshi, K., Katoh, H., Okada, S., et al. (2009).
Roles of ES cell-derived gliogenic neural stem/progenitor cells in
functional recovery after spinal cord injury. PLoS ONE 4, e7706.
Kumamaru, H., Ohkawa, Y., Saiwai, H., Yamada, H., Kubota, K., Ko-
bayakawa, K., Akashi, K., Okano, H., Iwamoto, Y., and Okada, S.
(2012). Direct isolation and RNA-seq reveal environment-depen-
dent properties of engrafted neural stem/progenitor cells. Nat.
Commun. 3, 1140.
Li, Y., McClintick, J., Zhong, L., Edenberg, H.J., Yoder, M.C., and
Chan, R.J. (2005). Murine embryonic stem cell differentiation is
promoted by SOCS-3 and inhibited by the zinc ﬁnger transcription
factor Klf4. Blood 105, 635–637.
Lukovic, D., Valde´s-Sanchez, L., Sanchez-Vera, I., Moreno-Man-
zano, V., Stojkovic, M., Bhattacharya, S.S., and Erceg, S. (2014).
Brief
report:
astrogliosis
promotes
functional
recovery
of
completely transected spinal cord following transplantation of
hESC-derived
oligodendrocyte
and
motoneuron
progenitors.
Stem Cells 32, 594–599.
Miura, K., Okada, Y., Aoi, T., Okada, A., Takahashi, K., Okita, K., Na-
kagawa, M., Koyanagi, M., Tanabe, K., Ohnuki, M., et al. (2009).
Variation in the safety of induced pluripotent stem cell lines.
Nat. Biotechnol. 27, 743–745.
Monk, M., and Holding, C. (2001). Human embryonic genes re-ex-
pressed in cancer cells. Oncogene 20, 8085–8091.
Moody, S.E., Perez, D., Pan, T.C., Sarkisian, C.J., Portocarrero, C.P.,
Sterner, C.J., Notorfrancesco, K.L., Cardiff, R.D., and Chodosh, L.A.
372
Stem Cell Reports j Vol. 4 j 360–373 j March 10, 2015 j ª2015 The Authors

(2005). The transcriptional repressor Snail promotes mammary tu-
mor recurrence. Cancer Cell 8, 197–209.
Nagai, T., Ibata, K., Park, E.S., Kubota, M., Mikoshiba, K., and Miya-
waki, A. (2002). A variant of yellow ﬂuorescent protein with fast
and efﬁcient maturation for cell-biological applications. Nat. Bio-
technol. 20, 87–90.
Nakagawa, M., Koyanagi, M., Tanabe, K., Takahashi, K., Ichisaka,
T., Aoi, T., Okita, K., Mochiduki, Y., Takizawa, N., and Yamanaka,
S. (2008). Generation of induced pluripotent stem cells without
Myc from mouse and human ﬁbroblasts. Nat. Biotechnol. 26,
101–106.
Niwa, H. (2007). How is pluripotency determined and maintained?
Development 134, 635–646.
Nori, S., Okada, Y., Yasuda, A., Tsuji, O., Takahashi, Y., Kobayashi,
Y., Fujiyoshi, K., Koike, M., Uchiyama, Y., Ikeda, E., et al. (2011).
Grafted human-induced pluripotent stem-cell-derived neuro-
spheres promote motor functional recovery after spinal cord injury
in mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 16825–16830.
Ogawa, Y., Sawamoto, K., Miyata, T., Miyao, S., Watanabe, M., Na-
kamura, M., Bregman, B.S., Koike, M., Uchiyama, Y., Toyama, Y.,
and Okano, H. (2002). Transplantation of in vitro-expanded fetal
neural progenitor cells results in neurogenesis and functional
recovery
after
spinal
cord
contusion
injury
in
adult
rats.
J. Neurosci. Res. 69, 925–933.
Okada, Y., Shimazaki, T., Sobue, G., and Okano, H. (2004). Reti-
noic-acid-concentration-dependent
acquisition
of
neural
cell
identity during in vitro differentiation of mouse embryonic stem
cells. Dev. Biol. 275, 124–142.
Okada, S., Ishii, K., Yamane, J., Iwanami, A., Ikegami, T., Katoh, H.,
Iwamoto, Y., Nakamura, M., Miyoshi, H., Okano, H.J., et al. (2005).
In vivo imaging of engrafted neural stem cells: its application in
evaluating the optimal timing of transplantation for spinal cord
injury. FASEB J. 19, 1839–1841.
Okada, Y., Matsumoto, A., Shimazaki, T., Enoki, R., Koizumi, A.,
Ishii, S., Itoyama, Y., Sobue, G., and Okano, H. (2008). Spatiotem-
poral recapitulation of central nervous system development by
murine embryonic stem cell-derived neural stem/progenitor cells.
Stem Cells 26, 3086–3098.
Okano, H., Nakamura, M., Yoshida, K., Okada, Y., Tsuji, O., Nori, S.,
Ikeda, E., Yamanaka, S., and Miura, K. (2013). Steps toward safe
cell therapy using induced pluripotent stem cells. Circ. Res. 112,
523–533.
Okita, K., Nakagawa, M., Hyenjong, H., Ichisaka, T., and Yama-
naka, S. (2008). Generation of mouse induced pluripotent stem
cells without viral vectors. Science 322, 949–953.
Okita, K., Matsumura, Y., Sato, Y., Okada, A., Morizane, A., Oka-
moto, S., Hong, H., Nakagawa, M., Tanabe, K., Tezuka, K., et al.
(2011). A more efﬁcient method to generate integration-free hu-
man iPS cells. Nat. Methods 8, 409–412.
Pandya, A.Y., Talley, L.I., Frost, A.R., Fitzgerald, T.J., Trivedi, V.,
Chakravarthy, M., Chhieng, D.C., Grizzle, W.E., Engler, J.A., Kron-
tiras, H., et al. (2004). Nuclear localization of KLF4 is associated
with an aggressive phenotype in early-stage breast cancer. Clin.
Cancer Res. 10, 2709–2719.
Ricci-Vitiani, L., Pallini, R., Larocca, L.M., Lombardi, D.G., Signore,
M., Pierconti, F., Petrucci, G., Montano, N., Maira, G., and De Ma-
ria, R. (2008). Mesenchymal differentiation of glioblastoma stem
cells. Cell Death Differ. 15, 1491–1498.
Salazar, D.L., Uchida, N., Hamers, F.P., Cummings, B.J., and Ander-
son, A.J. (2010). Human neural stem cells differentiate and pro-
mote locomotor recovery in an early chronic spinal cord injury
NOD-scid mouse model. PLoS ONE 5, e12272.
Scheff, S.W., Rabchevsky, A.G., Fugaccia, I., Main, J.A., and Lumpp,
J.E., Jr. (2003). Experimental modeling of spinal cord injury: char-
acterization of a force-deﬁned injury device. J. Neurotrauma 20,
179–193.
Strauss, S. (2010). Geron trial resumes, but standards for stem cell
trials remain elusive. Nat. Biotechnol. 28, 989–990.
Takahashi, K., Tanabe, K., Ohnuki, M., Narita, M., Ichisaka, T., To-
moda, K., and Yamanaka, S. (2007). Induction of pluripotent stem
cells from adult human ﬁbroblasts by deﬁned factors. Cell 131,
861–872.
Takahashi, Y., Tsuji, O., Kumagai, G., Hara, C.M., Okano, H.J.,
Miyawaki, A., Toyama, Y., Okano, H., and Nakamura, M. (2011).
Comparative study of methods for administering neural stem/pro-
genitor cells to treat spinal cord injury in mice. Cell Transplant. 20,
727–739.
Thiery, J.P. (2002). Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in tumour
progression. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2, 442–454.
Trapnell, C., Pachter, L., and Salzberg, S.L. (2009). TopHat: discov-
ering splice junctions with RNA-Seq. Bioinformatics 25, 1105–
1111.
Tsuji, O., Miura, K., Okada, Y., Fujiyoshi, K., Mukaino, M., Nagoshi,
N., Kitamura, K., Kumagai, G., Nishino, M., Tomisato, S., et al.
(2010). Therapeutic potential of appropriately evaluated safe-
induced pluripotent stem cells for spinal cord injury. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 107, 12704–12709.
Wang, S., Bates, J., Li, X., Schanz, S., Chandler-Militello, D., Levine,
C., Maherali, N., Studer, L., Hochedlinger, K., Windrem, M., and
Goldman, S.A. (2013). Human iPSC-derived oligodendrocyte pro-
genitor cells can myelinate and rescue a mouse model of congen-
ital hypomyelination. Cell Stem Cell 12, 252–264.
Wei, Z., Gao, F., Kim, S., Yang, H., Lyu, J., An, W., Wang, K., and Lu,
W. (2013). Klf4 organizes long-range chromosomal interactions
with the oct4 locus in reprogramming and pluripotency. Cell
Stem Cell 13, 36–47.
Yang, J., Mani, S.A., Donaher, J.L., Ramaswamy, S., Itzykson, R.A.,
Come, C., Savagner, P., Gitelman, I., Richardson, A., and Weinberg,
R.A. (2004). Twist, a master regulator of morphogenesis, plays an
essential role in tumor metastasis. Cell 117, 927–939.
Yasuda, A., Tsuji, O., Shibata, S., Nori, S., Takano, M., Kobayashi, Y.,
Takahashi, Y., Fujiyoshi, K., Hara, C.M., Miyawaki, A., et al. (2011).
Signiﬁcance of remyelination by neural stem/progenitor cells
transplanted into the injured spinal cord. Stem Cells 29, 1983–
1994.
Stem Cell Reports j Vol. 4 j 360–373 j March 10, 2015 j ª2015 The Authors
373

===== Novak2020_SeminCancerBiol+SOX2 =====
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Seminars in Cancer Biology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/semcancer
Review
SOX2 in development and cancer biology
Daniel Novaka,b,1, Laura Hüsera,b,1, Jonathan J. Eltona,b, Viktor Umanskya,b, Peter Altevogta,b,
Jochen Utikala,b,⁎
a Skin Cancer Unit, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany
b Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, University Medical Center Mannheim, Ruprecht-Karl University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Sox2
Cancer
Development
Tumor
Stem cell
A B S T R A C T
The transcription factor SOX2 is essential for embryonic development and plays a crucial role in maintaining the
stemness of embryonic cells and various adult stem cell populations. On the other hand, dysregulation of SOX2
expression is associated with a multitude of cancer types and it has been shown that SOX2 positively aﬀects
cancer cell traits such as the capacity to proliferate, migrate, invade and metastasize. Moreover, there is growing
evidence that SOX2 mediates resistance towards established cancer therapies and that it is expressed in cancer
stem cells. These ﬁndings indicate that studying the role of SOX2 in the context of cancer progression could lead
to the development of new therapeutic options. In this review, the current knowledge about the role of SOX2 in
development, maintenance of stemness, cancer progression and the resistance towards cancer therapies is
summarized.
1. Introduction
In 1990, a new transcription factor with a distinctive DNA-binding
domain was described to be involved in testis determination. The gene
encoding for this protein was found to be located on the sex-de-
termining region of the Y chromosome and was therefore termed sex-
determining region Y (SRY) gene [1,2]. The Sry protein binds to speciﬁc
DNA sequences with its high-mobility-group (HMG) domain. Since its
discovery a new gene family has been established on the basis of se-
quence similarities to this HMG domain (Fig. 1). The so-called Sry-re-
lated HMG box (SOX) proteins contain an HMG domain with at least
50% sequence similarity to the HMG domain of Sry. Up to the present
day, 20 diﬀerent SOX genes have been found in the murine and human
genome which in turn have been divided into eight subgroups based on
sequence identity and similar functions [3,4]. In this review, we will
focus on SOX2, a member of the SOXB1 subgroup.
Among all SOX genes, SOX2 is probably the most recognized due to
its role in reprogramming somatic cells into induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) [5]. The human SOX2 gene is situated on chromosome 3 at
the position q26.3–27 and encodes for a protein of 317 amino acids [6].
The structural centerpiece of SOX2 is its HMG domain that is highly
conserved among species. Apart from binding to speciﬁc DNA con-
sensus sequences, this domain also contains a nuclear localization and a
nuclear export signal. The function of the C-terminal transactivation
domain is to recognize and bind the promoters of target genes and by
doing so activating or repressing gene expression [7].
2. SOX2 in development
SOX2 is expressed already very early in embryonic development.
Pan and Schultz reported the presence of SOX2 at the 2-cell stage of
murine embryos with increasing levels up to the blastocyst stage [8].
Indeed, SOX2 plays an essential role in the emergence of the pluripotent
inner cell mass during early embryonic development since its absence
results in embryonic lethality [9]. While SOX2 is homogeneously ex-
pressed in the inner cell mass, it becomes restricted to certain cell po-
pulations when the embryo undergoes the transformation from a single-
layered to a multi-layered structure during gastrulation. After this
process, SOX2 expression characterizes primordial germ cells, gut en-
doderm, presumptive neuroectoderm, sensory placodes and pharyngeal
arches [10,11]. The speciﬁcation of the neural lineage in early em-
bryonic development strongly relies on the activity of SOX2. SOX2
exerts this eﬀect by antagonizing transcription factors that would favor
the development of non-neural cell lineages. By suppressing the tran-
scription factor brachyury SOX2 shifts the decision pro neuroectoderm
and against mesendoderm [12,13]. The antagonism between SOX2 and
TBX6 regulates the diﬀerentiation of bipotential axial stem cells. SOX2
induces the diﬀerentiation of axial stem cells to the neural plate which
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcancer.2019.08.007
Received 10 December 2018; Received in revised form 5 August 2019; Accepted 8 August 2019
⁎ Corresponding author at: Skin Cancer Unit (G300), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69121, Heidelberg, Germany.
E-mail address: j.utikal@dkfz.de (J. Utikal).
1 These authors contributed equally to the manuscript
Seminars in Cancer Biology 67 (2020) 74–82
Available online 11 August 2019
1044-579X/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
T

later gives rise to the central nervous system (CNS). When TBX6 is
present, it blocks a speciﬁc enhancer of the SOX2 gene and thereby
inhibits SOX2 expression. Consequently, the inﬂuence of TBX6 drives
the diﬀerentiation of the axial stem cells towards paraxial mesoderm
from which the vertebral column, the skeletal musculature and the
dermis are derived [14]. Throughout further fetal development SOX2
impacts the proliferation and diﬀerentiation of progenitor cells of the
CNS and the peripheral nervous system (PNS) [15,16]. Complete ab-
sence of SOX2 expression in retinal progenitor cells (RPCs) abrogates
their proliferation capacity and the ability to diﬀerentiate. Even de-
creased SOX2 expression already aﬀects RPCs leading to micro-
phthalmia in mice. It could be demonstrated that SOX2 directly acti-
vates Notch1 in RPCs and that the disruption of this axis is responsible
for the described phenotype [17]. In Schwann cell precursors (SCPs),
the crosstalk between SOX2 and the melanocyte-speciﬁc transcription
factor MITF decides whether these cells commit to a glial or melano-
cytic fate. SOX2 directly suppresses the transcription of MITF and hence
causes SCPs to adopt a glial phenotype [18]. However, SOX2 was also
reported to prohibit the terminal diﬀerentiation of SCPs emphasizing its
dual role in promoting determination and maintaining the precursor
phenotype [19]. Interestingly, in the case of GABAergic neurons, SOX2
has a diﬀerentiation promoting eﬀect. In vitro and in vivo studies have
revealed that a lack of SOX2 interferes with the diﬀerentiation of GA-
BAergic neurons. Newborn SOX2 hypomorphic and knockout mice
showed less GABAergic interneurons in their cortex and olfactory bulb
[20,21]. Further tissues and organs originating from the ectoderm and
relying on SOX2 expression for proper development comprise the
dental epithelium and the inner ear [22,21,24]. The involvement of
SOX2 in the control of developmental processes is not limited to cell
lineages of ectodermal origin. Several studies revealed a role of SOX2 in
the formation of endoderm-derived structures. The diﬀerentiation of
tracheal cartilage, the emergence of the lung from the primary lung bud
and the development of taste bud sensory cells in the embryonic tongue
are examples for this [25–28]. Furthermore, the contribution of SOX2
to the origination of organs from the embryonal foregut endoderm was
described in detail. High levels of SOX2 in the anterior foregut induce
the formation of forestomach and esophagus. On the other hand, low
SOX2 levels are associated with the emergence of the posterior stomach
and the trachea. Remarkably, abnormally decreased SOX2 levels in the
Fig. 1. Schematic drawing and crystal structure of SOX2. A: SOX2 belongs
together with SOX1 and SOX3 to the SOXB1 group of the SOX family. All family
members have the DNA-binding HMG domain in common. B: Crystal structure
of SOX2 modulated with RasMol. The yellow and red part is reconstructed
based on NMR results while the grey part is a theoretical model based on
IntFOLD calculations with a global model quality score of 0.3263. The HMG
domain is labeled in yellow.
(HMG: High-mobility-group box DNA-binding domain; TAD: Transactivation
domain)
Fig. 2. SOX2 in development. A: Role of SOX2 in embryonic development. B: SOX2 in neuronal lineage diﬀerentiation. C: SOX2 in the formation of endoderm-
derived structures.
(TBX6=T-Box Protein 6; MITF = Microphthalmia-Associated Transcription Factor; CNS = central nervous system)
D. Novak, et al.
Seminars in Cancer Biology 67 (2020) 74–82
75

foregut result in a transformation of esophagus into trachea. Apart from
that SOX2 hypomorphic mouse embryos showed an abnormal pheno-
type of the forestomach with glandular instead of the normal kerati-
nized, squamous histology [29]. Much less is known about SOX2 in cells
of mesodermal origin. Although SOX2 initially suppresses the diﬀer-
entiation of mesendoderm in favor of neuroectoderm [12,13], some
studies suggest that SOX2 nevertheless also plays a role in cells of the
mesodermal lineage. The dermal sheath and dermal papilla (DP) of hair
follicles arise from dermal condensates which are populations of me-
senchymal cells that express SOX2 [30,31]. The established opinion
that DPs solely arise from neural crest cells has been disproved by Jinno
and colleagues showing that only facial DP cells derive from the neural
crest while DPs of the trunk are derived from mesodermal somites [32]
(Fig. 2).
3. The role of SOX2 in embryonic and adult stem cells
As already mentioned above, SOX2 is highly expressed in plur-
ipotent cells of the inner cell mass of a developing embryo. It is no
surprise that this is also true for embryonic stem cells (ESCs) which are
derived from the inner cell mass [9]. The importance of SOX2 for the
maintenance of the stem cell phenotype of ESCs could be demonstrated
by deleting SOX2 in these cells resulting in their diﬀerentiation to
trophectoderm-like cells [33]. The preservation of stemness of plur-
ipotent stem cells is achieved by the so-called core transcriptional
network consisting of SOX2 and the transcription factors OCT4 and
Nanog. These three factors cooperate functionally in order to promote
the expression of pluripotency-associated genes (Nanog, OCT4, SOX2
among others) and to suppress the expression of genes associated with
diﬀerentiation [34,35]. Interestingly, SOX2 and OCT4 synergistically
bind OCT4/SOX2 consensus binding sites in the promoters or enhancers
of their target genes showing their close functional connection. More-
over, a loss of SOX2 can to some extent be compensated by over-
expression of OCT4, suggesting that SOX2 contributes to the main-
tenance of stemness by sustaining OCT4 expression [33]. In 2006,
Takahashi and Yamanaka succeeded in reprogramming somatic cells to
iPSCs by ectopically overexpressing four transcription factors termed as
Yamanaka factors. Knowing about the role of SOX2 and OCT4 in sus-
taining the stemness of ESCs, it is not unexpected that both are among
these Yamanaka factors [5]. During the reprogramming process, ecto-
pically expressed SOX2 induces the transcription of endogenous SOX2
and other genes associated with pluripotency. That way, the en-
dogenous core transcriptional network is established and a stable
pluripotent state is reached [36]. Additionally, cells subjected to re-
programming undergo global epigenetic remodeling which resets their
epigenome to a state which is very similar to the one found in ESCs
[37]. Of note, cells expressing SOX2 endogenously can be repro-
grammed without additional ectopic SOX2 expression. In this way,
neural progenitor cells (NPCs), melanocytes and even melanoma cells
were converted to bona ﬁde iPSCs [38–40]. Despite being associated
with ESCs, SOX2 also undertakes important functions in later stages of
fetal development and in the adult organism. As already mentioned
before, SOX2 expression is detectable in embryonic NPCs [15,16], but
also persists in adult neural stem cells (NSCs) and NPCs in the neuro-
genic regions in the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral ventricle,
the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the hippocampus and the ependyma of
the adult central canal [20,41]. SOX2-expressing NPCs could be stably
cultured in vitro without losing their self-renewal capacity and their
ability to diﬀerentiate to neuronal or glial cells [41,42]. Knocking down
SOX2 in NPCs in vitrosigniﬁcantly reduces their capability to diﬀer-
entiate to neurons [21]. Similarly, conditional deletion of SOX2 in the
brains of mice leads to a depletion of NPCs and decreased cell pro-
liferation in the dentate gyrus [20,43]. SOX2-positive stem cell popu-
lations have been detected in several other adult tissues. Remarkably,
these tissues also depend on SOX2 during development. Among these
cell populations are progenitors of the retina, lens, tongue epithelium,
esophagus, forestomach, glandular stomach, anus, dermal papilla of the
hair
follicle,
pituitary
gland,
trachea,
testes,
and
cervix
[17,23,28,31,44–47]. Moreover, mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) from
diﬀerent sources have been found to rely on SOX2 expression for the
Fig. 3. SOX2 in embryonic and adult stem
cells. A: The role of SOX2 in maintaining the
pluripotency of ESCs. B: SOX2 is a Yamanaka
factor enabling reprogramming of somatic cells
into iPSCs. C: SOX2 is important to maintain
adult stem cells in an undiﬀerentiated state.
(ESC = embryonic stem cells; iPSC = induced
pluripotent
stem
cells;
NSC = neural
stem
cells)
D. Novak, et al.
Seminars in Cancer Biology 67 (2020) 74–82
76

maintenance of stemness, proliferation and proper diﬀerentiation
[48–50]. In an interesting study, Vilas and colleagues depleted SOX2-
positive adult stem cells in vivo and observed several signs of premature
aging in their mice like kyphosis, hair graying and reduced fat mass
demonstrating that SOX2 plays an essential role in the maintenance of
adult stem cells [51] (Fig. 3).
4. The role of SOX2 in disease and cancer
4.1. SOX2 in developmental disorders and cancer progression
SOX2 is essential for the normal progress of numerous develop-
mental processes. Its importance is evident by the fact that SOX2-de-
ﬁcient embryos die straight after implantation [9]. Moreover, even
heterozygous deletions of SOX2 have severe consequences. Fantes and
colleagues were the ﬁrst to link SOX2 loss-of-function mutations to
bilateral anophthalmia [52]. In addition, the well characterized auto-
somal dominant anophthalmia-esophageal-genital (AEG) syndrome re-
sults from a heterozygous loss-of-function mutation of SOX2. AEG
syndrome manifests itself in ocular malformations such as micro-
phthalmia or even anophthalmia, brain abnormalities, hearing loss,
trachea-esophageal ﬁstula, abnormalities in the hypothalamo-pituitary-
gonadal axis and testicular atrophy [53,54].
Dysregulation of SOX2 expression is also an important factor con-
tributing to cancer pathogenesis. Numerous studies have shown an
ampliﬁcation of the SOX2 gene locus and an increased SOX2 expression
that in turn aﬀects cancer progression (Table 1). SOX2 controls several
features of cancer cells such as proliferation, epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), migration, invasion, metastasis, sphere and colony
formation, tumor initiation, cancer stem cell formation as well as re-
sistance to apoptosis and therapy [4,55], (Fig. 4). Interestingly, the
eﬀect exerted by SOX2 can vary depending on the cancer type. Bass and
colleagues were able to show that the SOX2 locus is ampliﬁed in eso-
phageal and lung squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs), which results in
increased SOX2 expression enhancing proliferation and anchorage-in-
dependent growth of SCCs [56]. Lung SCCs with high SOX2 levels ex-
press also factors that are usually found in ESCs. This is not surprising
since SOX2 is part of the transcriptional network that controls
pluripotency [34]. Remarkably, patients with tumors expressing these
ESC-associated factors exhibited better survival compared to patients
whose tumors did not express these factors [56]. In a follow-up study,
Watanabe and colleagues discovered that SOX2 interacts with p63 in
diﬀerent SCC lines to jointly activate gene expression. One of their
targets is the oncogene ETV4 that is necessary for SCC cell survival
[57]. This study nicely demonstrates that SOX2 exerts diﬀerent eﬀects
in diﬀerent cell lineages based on its interaction partners. In ESCs, for
instance, SOX2 cooperates with OCT4 to regulate transcription [58].
SOX2 was also found to aberrantly activate Hedgehog (Hh) signaling in
lung SCC. SOX2 and protein kinase Cι (PRKCI) are often coampliﬁed
and overexpressed in primary lung SCCs. Upon being phosphorylated
by PRKCI, SOX2 enhances the transcription of the Hh acyltransferase
(HHAT). Elevated HHAT expression levels result in increased Hh ligand
production which in turn activates Hh signaling and fosters lung SCC
tumorigenesis [59]. An ampliﬁcation of the SOX2 gene and an in-
creased expression of SOX2 could be demonstrated for diﬀerent sub-
types of sinonasal carcinoma. The data analyzed in this study clearly
indicate that patients with tumors with SOX2 ampliﬁcation relapse
signiﬁcantly more often. Beyond that, there was a tendency for a lower
overall survival rate for SOX2-ampliﬁed patients. Of note, the authors
could not detect a correlation between relapse and SOX2 expression
levels [60]. In gliomas, SOX2 expression and malignancy grade corre-
late positively with the highest levels of SOX2 found in the hypercel-
lular and hyperproliferative areas of glioblastomas (GBMs). The SOX2
gene locus was ampliﬁed in 14.4% of GBMs and 11.1% of anaplastic
oligodendrogliomas [61]. The study from Alonso and colleagues re-
vealed that although only a small percentage of patient GBM samples
exhibited an ampliﬁcation of the gene locus, all of them showed in-
creased SOX2 expression. This is due to an aberrant hypomethylation of
the SOX2 promoter [62]. A more recent publication reported that all
grades of pediatric gliomas express SOX2. Moreover, SOX2-speciﬁc T
cells were found in tumor and blood samples of pediatric glioma pa-
tients indicating that SOX2 might be used as a target in immunotherapy
[63]. In non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), an ampliﬁcation of the
SOX2 gene locus has been detected. Interestingly, this ampliﬁcation
correlated with an increased median overall survival (OS) of patients
with early stages of this disease. At later stages there is no diﬀerence in
the median OS between patients with SOX2-positive and –negative
tumors [64]. Another study conﬁrmed this observation by showing that
patients with tumors expressing high levels of SOX2 have a signiﬁcantly
better prognosis than patients with tumors that only express low
amounts of SOX2 [65]. On the other hand, Chou and colleagues report
that SOX2 expression is associated with later stages of NSCLC and that
SOX2-positive tumors go along with lower overall survival rates. SOX2
was found to induce the expression of EGFR and BCL2L1 and thereby
promoting proliferation and survival of tumor cells. Moreover, SOX2
expression augmented chemoresistance [66]. In melanoma, the role of
SOX2 is still debatable. Weina and colleagues discovered that TGF-beta
induces the expression of SOX4 which in turn elevated the expression of
SOX2, resulting in an increased invasive capacity of melanoma cells
[67]. On the other hand, Schaefer and colleagues observed that the
deletion of the SOX2 gene in human melanoma cells or the conditional
inactivation of SOX2 in a melanoma mouse model do not alter mela-
noma initiation, growth or metastasis formation [68]. These contra-
dictory observations could be due to diﬀerent genetic backgrounds of
the melanoma cells and models used for the studies. According to that,
SOX2 could inﬂuence diﬀerent cellular mechanisms depending on the
regulatory network present in a particular cell. Also for ovarian cancer,
the most severe gynecologic cancer, a contradictory impact of SOX2 has
been reported. Two studies found SOX2 to be expressed grade depen-
dently with higher levels in more advanced stages of ovarian tumors. In
line with this, strong SOX2 expression correlates with decreased dis-
ease-free survival [69,70]. On the other hand, Belotte and colleagues
reported that SOX2 gene ampliﬁcation goes along with a signiﬁcantly
longer median overall survival time [71]. However, it was not
Table 1
List of cancer types with aberrant SOX2 expression and the corresponding
prognosis. Arrows in the middle column indicate an increased (↑) or decreased
(↓) expression. Arrows in the right column indicate a poor prognosis/high
tumor grade (↘) or good prognosis/low tumor grade (↗). Adapted from
Wuebben and Rizzino, 2017 [160].
Cancer type
Increased SOX2 expression
Poor prognosis/high
tumor grade
Breast
↑[141,142],
↘[84,142],
Colorectal
↑[143]
↘[106,151],
Esophageal
↑[56,143,144],
↘[107]
Glioblastoma
↑[61,62,145,146],
↘[61,152],
Liver
↑[111]
↘[111]
Lung adenocarcinoma
↑[108]
↘[108]
Nasopharyngeal
↑[110]
↘[110]
Oral SCC
↑[147]
↘[109]
Prostate
↑[120,148],
↘[120,153],
Sinonasal
↑[60]
↘[60]
Small cell lung
↑[149,150],
↘[149,150],
Increased SOX2 expression
Good prognosis/low
tumor grade
Lung, squamous cell
↑[56,108,123,154,155],
↗[156]
Increased SOX2 expression
Contradictory prognoses
Head and neck SCC
↑[95]
↘[94] / ↗[125]
Non-small cell lung
↑[66]
↘[94] / ↗[64,65],
Ovarian
↑[69–71]
↘[69,105],/ ↗[71]
Decreased SOX2 expression
Poor prognosis/high
tumor grade
Gastric
↓[72,73,74], [158,159],
↘[73,74,122],
D. Novak, et al.
Seminars in Cancer Biology 67 (2020) 74–82
77

mentioned if the gene ampliﬁcation also resulted in higher SOX2 ex-
pression. While many studies show that SOX2 promotes cancer cell
proliferation, the opposing eﬀect was observed in gastric cancer. Sev-
eral groups reported that SOX2 expression is downregulated in gastric
cancer cells in contrast to normal gastric mucosae. Otsubo and collea-
gues discovered that SOX2 exerts an antiproliferative eﬀect on gastric
cancer cells by inducing cell-cycle arrest. Furthermore, SOX2 has a
proapoptotic eﬀect. Downregulation of SOX2 in gastric cancer was
found to be due to hypermethylation of the SOX2 gene. The survival
time of patients with SOX2 gene methylation was signiﬁcantly shorter
compared to patients with non-methylated SOX2 gene [72]. Wang and
colleagues demonstrated that low SOX2 levels are associated with poor
patient prognosis. They could show that SOX2 exerts an anti-
proliferative, antimetastatic and pro-apoptotic eﬀect on gastric cancer
cells by directly regulating the PTEN/AKT pathway [73]. Another study
revealed that SOX2 reduces the migratory and invasive potential of
gastric cancer cells by upregulating p21 expression. Accordingly, pa-
tients with tumors with high SOX2 expression had less lymph node
metastases and responded better to treatment [74]. SOX2 controls the
expression of a plethora of genes and thereby aﬀects a lot of pathways
and cellular processes. The examples mentioned above reﬂect this
versatility and stress the importance of investigating the role of SOX2 in
cancer.
4.2. SOX2 in cancer stem-like cells
Over the years, it has become more and more evident that tumors
are complex structures with a cellular heterogeneity and hierarchy.
Genetic mutations, interactions with the tumor microenvironment and
the presence of cancer stem cells (CSCs) shape a tumor and crucially
aﬀect the progress of the disease, especially the response to therapeutic
measures and the development of resistances to antitumoral com-
pounds [75]. According to the CSC model, a small population of highly
treatment-resilient stem-like cells within the tumor bulk sustains the
growth of a tumor and causes relapses after initially successful treat-
ment [76]. Since CSC share the self-renewing capacity with normal
stem cells and since SOX2 plays an important role in maintaining the
stemness of pluripotent stem cells it is not surprising that many studies
report about SOX2 being involved in regulating the stemness and self-
renewal of CSC. Several groups were able to show that silencing SOX2
in GBM tumor-initiating cells drastically decreases their proliferative,
migrative, invasive and tumorigenic potential while arresting the cells
in the G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle underscoring the crucial role of
SOX2 in GBM progression and recurrence [62,77–82]. In medullo-
blastoma Vanner and colleagues identiﬁed a SOX2-positive cell popu-
lation that is quiescent and resistant to therapy. This cell population
gives rise to rapidly cycling doublecortin-positive progenitors that in
turn yield the tumor bulk of postmitotic cells. Interestingly, che-
motherapeutic treatment leads to an accumulation of SOX2-positive
cells which are responsible for relapse. Targeted removal of this po-
pulation with mithramycin completely abolishes tumor growth [83]. In
breast cancer, a SOX2-expressing stem cell population resists the
treatment with the estrogen receptor antagonist tamoxifen. The size of
this population and its resilience towards tamoxifen positively corre-
lates with SOX2 expression. It could be shown that the resistance to
tamoxifen is promoted via SOX2-mediated activation of Wnt signalling
[84]. Das and colleagues were able to deplete the stem cell population
in breast cancer by applying actinomycin D which speciﬁcally down-
regulates SOX2. This treatment completely abrogates the tumor-initia-
tion capacity of breast cancer cells [85]. Gong and colleagues conﬁrmed
the importance of SOX2 for the functionality of breast CSC by identi-
fying the transcriptional repressor GATA binding 1 as a suppressor of
SOX2 expression that could abolish the CSC features of breast CSC and
nullify their tumor initiation capacity [86]. Lundberg and colleagues
could identify a SOX2-expressing population in colorectal cancer that is
also positive for the stem cell markers CD24 and CD44 while showing
reduced expression of the tissue-speciﬁc intestinal marker CDX2.
Moreover, these cells are less proliferative and exhibit a spheroid
growth pattern which are features of stem-like cells [87]. In lung
squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC), SOX2 and the protein kinase Cι (PKCι)
jointly induce and sustain a stem-like phenotype. Upon being phos-
phorylated by PKCι SOX2 can bind to the promoter of HHAT and pro-
mote its expression. HHAT on the other hand plays an important role in
Hh ligand production. Thus, PKCι, SOX2 and HHAT enable cell-au-
tonomous Hh signaling which results in the maintenance of a stem-like
and tumorigenic phenotype [59]. Separating SOX2-positive from SOX2-
negative cervical cancer cells revealed that SOX2 expression goes along
with the expression of stemness markers and the capacity for self-re-
newal, diﬀerentiation and tumor formation [88]. In pancreatic cancer,
SOX2 expression goes along with the expression of the pancreatic CSC
markers ALDH1, ESA and CD44 and was found to be enriched in the
CSC populations from patient samples. Knocking down SOX2 results in
cell cycle arrest whereas overexpression of SOX2 promotes cell pro-
liferation. Beyond that, SOX2 stimulates EMT by activating the tran-
scription of Snail, Slug and Twist and downregulating E-cadherin and
ZO-1 [89]. There are many more studies that report a relation between
SOX2 expression and CSCs in other cancer entities, such as bladder
cancer, diﬀerent forms of lung cancer, melanoma, osteosarcoma,
ovarian cancer, prostate cancer, pancreatic carcinoma and diﬀerent
variants of SCCs [[90–92,94–104][89]]. Remarkably, the majority of
these studies show that SOX2 promotes CSC maintenance and therapy
resistance indicating that SOX2 drives a fundamental mechanism of
cancer progression beyond cell lineage of origin of a particular cancer.
4.3. SOX2-dependent clinical outcome and therapy resistance
As already mentioned in Section 4.2, SOX2 expression is aberrantly
increased in many diﬀerent cancer types and drives cancer progression.
Hence, the level of SOX2 expression in a tumor represents a prognostic
factor to determine the clinical outcome for a cancer patient (Table 1).
Expectedly, a great number of studies correlates high SOX2 expression
in diﬀerent cancer types with a poor prognosis, among them breast,
SOX2
Tumor initiation
proliferation
invasion
migration
resistance to apoptosis & therapy
cell cycle progression
metastasis formation
cancer stem cell formation
EMT
sphere & colony formation
Fig. 4. Role of SOX2 in cancer. SOX2 aﬀects diﬀerent features of cancer cells and thereby promotes tumorigenesis and cancer progression. (EMT = epithelial-to-
mesenchymal transition).
D. Novak, et al.
Seminars in Cancer Biology 67 (2020) 74–82
78

oral/tongue, esophageal, lung, hepatocellular, colorectal, ovarian and
prostate cancer as well as nasopharyngeal and sinonasal carcinoma
[66,69,84,94,105–111]. Poor prognosis is usually associated with high
migrative, invasive and consequently metastatic capacity of tumor cells.
A prerequisite for acquiring these characteristics is EMT. Evidence for
SOX2 promoting EMT in cancer cells has been found for laryngeal,
esophageal, gastric, pancreatic, colorectal, lung, breast and prostate
cancer [112–119]. A direct correlation between high SOX2 expression
and increased invasive and metastatic capacity of tumor cells has been
shown for colorectal and prostate cancer. Here, the amount of lym-
phatic and distant metastases is increased in tumors that express SOX2
[120,121]. In esophageal squamous cell carcinoma increased invasion,
poor diﬀerentiation and incomplete surgical resection were linked to
tumors with more than 50% of SOX2-expressing cells [106]. More ex-
amples of tumor types in which SOX2 expression correlates with in-
creased migrative and invasive capacity comprise gastric, liver, prostate
and laryngeal cancer [74,106,111,113,116,117,122]. Although these
examples demonstrate that high SOX2 expression is very often linked to
cancer progression, one must keep in mind that in the end not a single
molecule but the interplay between a multitude of factors determines
the course and severity of cancer. This is emphasized best by studies
showing that in gastric and squamous cell lung cancer poor prognosis is
not associated with high but with low SOX2 expression [74,123]. In-
terestingly, for ovarian cancer as well as head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma some studies show that poor prognosis is linked to high
SOX2 expression while others show the opposite [71,94,[105]125]. The
development of resistances to established cancer therapeutics is closely
linked to clinical prognosis and represents a massive problem that
drastically limits the eﬃcacy of the available therapeutic options. Many
studies reported on the involvement of SOX2 in therapy resistance and
demonstrated that it aﬀects a wide range of molecular mechanism. The
sensitivity of breast CSCS to paclitaxel was found to be dependent on
the presence of SOX2. Knockdown of SOX2 increased chemosensitivity
and reduced the invasion capacity of these cells [126]. Similarly, breast
cancer cells with a stem cell-like phenotype are resistant to tamoxifen.
This resistance can be abrogated by knocking down SOX2 [84]. Upre-
gulation of SOX2 in breast cancer cells can be triggered by tumor-as-
sociated macrophages via EGFR and STAT3 activation resulting in
chemoresistance [127]. In PC3 prostate cancer cells elevated SOX2 le-
vels promote resistance towards paclitaxel via activating the PI3K/Akt
pathway [128]. SOX2 was also linked to antiandrogen resistance in
prostate cancer since knocking down SOX2 negates this resistance
[129]. Ovarian cancer cell lines developed resistance to carboplatin,
cisplatin and paclitaxel after ectopically overexpressing SOX2. On the
other hand, knockdown of SOX2 in SOX2-positive ovarian cancer cells
renders them sensitive to these compounds [104][]. Like in prostate
cancer, resistance to paclitaxel in ovarian cancer has been shown to be
promoted by SOX2 via the PI3K/Akt pathway [131]. In glioma che-
moresistance was found to be mediated by upregulation of the ABCC3
and ABCC6 transporters [132] or via activation of the mTOR pathway
[78]. SOX2 as a mediator of drug resistance was also conﬁrmed for
glioblastoma and medulloblastoma [83,133]. In gastric cancer che-
moresistance to doxorubicin is reduced after knocking down SOX2. This
results in increased apoptosis and reduced tumorigenicity [134]. High
SOX2 expression is connected to gemcitabine resistance in pancreatic
cancer. Here, SOX2 promotes the expression of the transcription factors
GLI1 and GLI2 which in turn activate the transcription of CD24, a
marker of tumor-initiating cells in pancreatic cancer [135]. Chen and
colleagues discovered that the long non-coding RNA LBCS strongly
suppresses the self-renewal, chemoresistance and tumor initiation ca-
pacity of bladder CSCs by preventing SOX2 transcription. Accordingly,
low levels of LBCS correlate with a poor prognosis of bladder cancer
patients [136]. Colorectal cancer patients with tumors expressing high
amounts of SOX2 respond less to chemoradiotherapy and show higher
relapse rates [106]. Similarly, patients with cervical SCC highly positive
for SOX2 respond much less to radiotherapy than patients whose
tumors express low levels of SOX2 [137]. In head and neck SCC che-
moresistance is confered by SOX2-induced ABCG2 transporter expres-
sion. Knocking down SOX2 results in reduced ABCG2 expression and
restored sensitivity to chemotherapy [94]. In lung cancer SOX2-ex-
pressing cells are resistant to paclitaxel and cisplatin [66]. Another
study demonstrated that increased sensitivity to cisplatin can be
achieved by treating lung cancer cells with rapamycin. Rapamycin in-
hibits the mTOR pathway and thereby blocks SOX2 expression [138].
Also in terms of targeted therapy, SOX2 expression was linked to re-
sistance mechanisms. It was shown for NSCLC that SOX2 expression
favors a CSC phenotype which is resistant to EGFR inhibitors [139].
Recently, our group succeeded in showing that SOX2 is upregulated via
STAT3 in melanoma cells in response to BRAF inhibitor treatment. After
that, SOX2 activates the transcription of CD24 which results in de-
creased activity of Src and STAT3 and eventually in increased resistance
towards BRAF inhibitors [140].
5. Conclusions and future perspectives
SOX2 is absolutely essential for normal embryonic development and
its absence results in early embryonic lethality. It is also well-known for
being one of the members of the core-transcriptional network that
guarantees the maintenance of stemness in pluripotent stem cells. Here,
we summarized its role in cancer pathogenesis showing that SOX2
contributes to cancer progression and the emergence of therapy re-
sistance in a plethora of diﬀerent cancer types. SOX2 seems to trigger a
fundamental mechanism that enables cancer cells to acquire a stem-like
phenotype independent of the cell lineage of origin of a particular
cancer. Since therapy resistance and clinical prognosis are closely re-
lated to the expression and activity of SOX2 it is of great importance to
uncover the molecular network that is inﬂuenced and controlled by
SOX2. Compounds that inhibit SOX2 or its downstream eﬀectors might
have the potential to be eﬀective in the treatment of diﬀerent types of
cancer. On the other hand, SOX2 is still expressed in many tissues in the
adult and it is likely that targeting SOX2 directly might cause severe,
unwanted side eﬀects that outweigh the merits of SOX2-speciﬁc cancer
therapy. Future studies will shed light on molecular pathways and
signaling cascades aﬀected by SOX2 activity potentially discovering
points of vantage for eﬃcient new cancer therapies.
Declaration of Competing Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed
References
[1] J. Gubbay, et al., A gene mapping to the sex-determining region of the mouse Y
chromosome is a member of a novel family of embryonically expressed genes,
Nature 346 (6281) (1990) 245–250.
[2] A.H. Sinclair, et al., A gene from the human sex-determining region encodes a
protein with homology to a conserved DNA-binding motif, Nature 346(6281):240-
4 (6281) (1990) 240–244.
[3] M. Wegner, All purpose Sox: the many roles of Sox proteins in gene expression, Int.
J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 42 (3) (2010) 381–390–390.
[4] K. Weina, J. Utikal, SOX2 and cancer: current research and its implications in the
clinic, Clin. Transl. Med. 3 (19) (2014).
[5] K. Takahashi, S. Yamanaka, Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse em-
bryonic and adult ﬁbroblast cultures by deﬁned factors, Cell 126 (4) (2006)
663–676.
[6] M. Stevanovic, et al., The cDNA sequence and chromosomal location of the human
SOX2 gene, Mamm. Genome 5 (10) (1994) 640–642.
[7] S.D. Castillo, M. Sanchez-Cespedes, The SOX family of genes in cancer develop-
ment: biological relevance and opportunities for therapy, Expert Opin. Ther.
Targets 16 (9) (2012) 903–919.
[8] H. Pan, R.M. Schultz, SOX2 modulates reprogramming of gene expression in two-
cell mouse Embryos, Biol. Reprod. 85 (2) (2011) 409–416.
[9] A.A. Avilion, et al., Multipotent cell lineages in early mouse development depend
on SOX2 function, Genes Dev. 17 (1) (2003) 126–140.
[10] H.B. Wood, V. Episkopou, Comparative expression of the mouse Sox1, Sox2 and
Sox3 genes from pre-gastrulation to early somite stages, Mech. Dev. 86 (1–2)
(1999) 197–201.
D. Novak, et al.
Seminars in Cancer Biology 67 (2020) 74–82
79

[11] Y. Yabuta, et al., Gene expression dynamics during germline speciﬁcation in mice
identiﬁed by quantitative single-cell gene expression proﬁling, Biol. Reprod. 75
(5) (2006) 705–716.
[12] Z. Wang, et al., Cell stem cell distinct lineage speciﬁcation roles for NANOG,
OCT4, and SOX2 in human embryonic stem cells, Stem Cell 10 (4) (2012)
440–454.
[13] M. Thomson, et al., Pluripotency factors in embryonic stem cells regulate diﬀer-
entiation into germ layers, Cell 145 (6) (2011) 875–889.
[14] T. Takemoto, et al., Tbx6-dependent Sox2 regulation determines neural or meso-
dermal fate in axial stem cells, Nature 470 (7334) (2011) 394–398.
[15] L.H. Pevny, S.K. Nicolis, Sox2 roles in neural stem cells, Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol.
42 (3) (2010) 421–424.
[16] M. Wegner, C.C. Stolt, From stem cells to neurons and glia: a Soxist’s view of
neural development, Trends Neurosci. 28 (11) (2005) 583–588.
[17] O.V. Taranova, et al., SOX2 is a dose-dependent regulator of retinal neural pro-
genitor competence, Genes Dev. 20 (9) (2006) 1187–1202.
[18] I. Adameyko, et al., Sox2 and Mitf cross-regulatory interactions consolidate pro-
genitor and melanocyte lineages in the cranial neural crest, Development 139 (2)
(2012) 397–410.
[19] N. Le, et al., Analysis of congenital hypomyelinating Egr2Lo/Lo nerves identiﬁes
Sox2 as an inhibitor of Schwann cell diﬀerentiation and myelination, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 102 (7) (2005) 2596–2601.
[20] A.L.M. Ferri, Sox2 deﬁciency causes neurodegeneration and impaired neurogen-
esis in the adult mouse brain, Development 131 (15) (2004) 3805–3819.
[21] M. Cavallaro, et al., Impaired generation of mature neurons by neural stem cells
from hypomorphic Sox2 mutants, Development 135 (3) (2008) 541–557.
[22] A. Dabdoub, et al., Sox2 signaling in prosensory domain speciﬁcation and sub-
sequent hair cell diﬀerentiation in the developing cochlea, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
105 (47) (2008) 18396–18401.
[23] E. Juuri, et al., Sox2+ stem cells contribute to all epithelial lineages of the tooth
via Sfrp5+ progenitors, Dev. Cell 23 (2) (2012) 317–328.
[24] A.E. Kiernan, et al., Sox2 is required for sensory organ development in the
mammalian inner ear, Nature 434 (7036) (2005) 1031–1035.
[25] T. Okubo, L.H. Pevny, B.L.M. Hogan, Sox2 is required for development of taste bud
sensory cells, Genes Dev. 20 (19) (2006) 2654–2659.
[26] C. Gontan, et al., Sox2 is important for two crucial processes in lung development:
branching morphogenesis and epithelial cell diﬀerentiation, Dev. Biol. 317 (1)
(2008) 296–309.
[27] Y. Ishii, et al., Region-speciﬁc expression of chicken Sox2 in the developing gut
and lung epithelium: regulation by epithelial-mesenchymal interactions, Dev. Dyn.
213 (4) (1998) 464–475.
[28] J. Que, et al., Multiple roles for Sox2 in the developing and adult mouse trachea,
Development 136 (11) (2009) 1899–1907.
[29] J. Que, et al., Multiple dose-dependent roles for Sox2 in the patterning and dif-
ferentiation of anterior foregut endoderm, Development 134 (13) (2007)
2521–2531.
[30] M. Rendl, L. Lewis, E. Fuchs, Molecular dissection of mesenchymal-epithelial in-
teractions in the hair follicle, PLoS Biol. 3 (11) (2005) e331.
[31] R.R. Driskell, et al., Sox2-positive dermal papilla cells specify hair follicle type in
mammalian epidermis, Development 136 (16) (2009) 2815–2823.
[32] H. Jinno, et al., Convergent genesis of an adult neural crest-like dermal stem cell
from distinct developmental origins, Stem Cells 28 (11) (2010) 2027–2040.
[33] S. Masui, et al., Pluripotency governed by Sox2 via regulation of Oct3/4 expres-
sion in mouse embryonic stem cells, Nat. Cell Biol. 9 (6) (2007) 625–635.
[34] L.A. Boyer, et al., Core transcriptional regulatory circuitry in human embryonic
stem cells, Cell 122 (6) (2005) 947–956..
[35] Y.S. Chan, L. Yang, H.H. Ng, Transcriptional regulatory networks in embryonic
stem cells, Prog. Drug Res. 67 (2011) 239–252.
[36] J.M. Polo, et al., A molecular roadmap of reprogramming somatic cells into iPS
cells, Cell 151 (7) (2012) 1617–1632.
[37] N. Maherali, et al., Directly reprogrammed ﬁbroblasts show global epigenetic re-
modeling and widespread tissue contribution, Cell Stem Cell 1 (1) (2007) 55–70.
[38] S. Eminli, et al., Reprogramming of Neural Progenitor Cells into Induced
Pluripotent Stem Cells in the Absence of Exogenous Sox2 Expression, Stem Cells 26
(10) (2008) 2467–2474.
[39] J. Utikal, et al., Sox2 is dispensable for the reprogramming of melanocytes and
melanoma cells into induced pluripotent stem cells, J. Cell. Sci. 122 (Pt 19) (2009)
3502–3510.
[40] M. Bernhardt, et al., Mediators of induced pluripotency and their role in cancer
cells - current scientiﬁc knowledge and future perspectives, Biotechnol. J. 7 (6)
(2012) 810–821.
[41] P. Ellis, et al., SOX2, a persistent marker for multipotential neural stem cells de-
rived from embryonic stem cells, the embryo or the adult, Dev. Neurosci. 26 (2–4)
(2004) 148–165.
[42] H. Suh, et al., In vivo fate analysis reveals the multipotent and self-renewal ca-
pacities of Sox2+ neural stem cells in the adult Hippocampus, Cell Stem Cell 1 (5)
(2007) 515–528.
[43] R. Favaro, et al., Hippocampal development and neural stem cell maintenance
require Sox2-dependent regulation of Shh, Nat. Neurosci. 12 (10) (2009)
1248–1256.
[44] T. Fauquier, et al., SOX2-expressing progenitor cells generate all of the major cell
types in the adult mouse pituitary gland, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 105 (8) (2008)
2907–2912.
[45] J. Biernaskie, et al., SKPs derive from hair follicle precursors and exhibit proper-
ties of adult dermal stem cells, Cell Stem Cell 5 (6) (2009) 610–623.
[46] T. Okubo, C. Clark, B.L.M. Hogan, Cell Lineage Mapping of Taste Bud Cells and
Keratinocytes in the Mouse Tongue and Soft Palate, Stem Cells 27 (2) (2009)
442–450.
[47] K. Arnold, et al., Sox2+adult stem and progenitor cells are important for tissue
regeneration and survival of mice, Cell Stem Cell 9 (4) (2011) 317–329.
[48] S.M. Han, et al., Enhanced proliferation and diﬀerentiation of Oct4- and Sox2-
overexpressing human adipose tissue mesenchymal stem cells, Exp. Mol. Med. 46
(e101) (2014).
[49] O. Trohatou, et al., Sox2 suppression by miR-21 governs human mesenchymal
stem cell properties, Stem Cells Transl. Med. 3 (1) (2014) 54–68.
[50] D.S. Yoon, et al., SIRT1 directly regulates SOX2 to maintain self-renewal and
multipotency in bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells, Stem Cells 32 (12)
(2014) 3219–3231.
[51] J.M. Vilas, et al., Adult Sox2+ stem cell exhaustion in mice results in cellular
senescence and premature aging, Aging Cell 17 (5) (2018) e12834.
[52] J. Fantes, et al., Mutations in SOX2 cause anophthalmia, Nat. Genet. 33 (4) (2003)
461–463.
[53] D. Kelberman, et al., Mutations within Sox2/SOX2 are associated with abnorm-
alities in the hypothalamo-pituitary-gonadal axis in mice and humans, J. Clin.
Invest. 116 (9) (2006) 2442–2455.
[54] K.A. Williamson, et al., Mutations in SOX2 cause anophthalmia-esophageal-genital
(AEG) syndrome, Hum. Mol. Genet. 15 (9) (2006) 1413–1422.
[55] L. Hüser, et al., Targeting SOX2 in anticancer therapy, Expert Opin. Ther. Targets
22 (12) (2018) 983–991.
[56] A.J. Bass, et al., SOX2 is an ampliﬁed lineage-survival oncogene in lung and
esophageal squamous cell carcinomas, Nat. Genet. 41 (11) (2009) 1238–1242.
[57] H. Watanabe, et al., SOX2 and p63 colocalize at genetic loci in squamous cell
carcinomas, J. Clin. Invest. 124 (4) (2014) 1636–1645.
[58] J. Chew, et al., Reciprocal transcriptional regulation of Pou5f1 and Sox2 via the
Oct4/Sox2 complex in embryonic stem cells, Society 25 (14) (2005) 6031–6046.
[59] V. Justilien, et al., The PRKCI and SOX2 Oncogenes Are Coampliﬁed and
Cooperate to Activate Hedgehog Signaling in Lung Squamous Cell Carcinoma,
Cancer Cell 25 (2) (2014) 139–151.
[60] A. Schröck, et al., Sex Determining Region Y-Box 2 (SOX2) Ampliﬁcation Is an
Independent Indicator of Disease Recurrence in Sinonasal Cancer, PLoS One 8 (3)
(2013) e59201.
[61] L. Annovazzi, et al., SOX2 expression and ampliﬁcation in gliomas and glioma cell
lines, Cancer Genomics Proteomics 8 (3) (2011) 139–147.
[62] M.M. Alonso, et al., Genetic and epigenetic modiﬁcations of Sox2 contribute to the
invasive phenotype of malignant gliomas, PLoS One 6 (11) (2011) e26740.
[63] J.C. Vasquez, et al., SOX2 immunity and tissue resident memory in children and
young adults with glioma, J. Neurooncol. 134 (1) (2017) 41–53.
[64] L. Toschi, et al., Increased SOX2 gene copy number is associated with FGFR1 and
PIK3CA gene gain in non-small cell lung cancer and predicts improved survival in
early stage disease, PLoS One 9 (4) (2014) e95303.
[65] J. Ying, et al., Expression and signiﬁcance of SOX2 in non-small cell lung carci-
noma, Oncol. Lett. 12 (5) (2016) 3195–3198.
[66] Y.T. Chou, et al., The emerging role of SOX2 in cell proliferation and survival and
its crosstalk with oncogenic signaling in lung cancer, Stem Cells 31 (12) (2013)
2607–2619.
[67] K. Weina, et al., TGF- β induces SOX2 expression in a time-dependent manner in
human melanoma cells, Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 29 (4) (2016) 453–458.
[68] S.M. Schaefer, et al., Sox2 is dispensable for primary melanoma and metastasis
formation, Oncogene 36 (31) (2017) 4516–4524.
[69] J. Zhang, et al., Sex-determining region Y-box 2 expression predicts poor prognosis
in human ovarian carcinoma, Hum. Pathol. 43 (9) (2012) 1405–1412.
[70] F. Ye, et al., Expression of Sox2 in human ovarian epithelial carcinoma, J. Cancer
Res. Clin. Oncol. 137 (1) (2011) 131–137.
[71] J. Belotte, et al., Sox2 gene ampliﬁcation signiﬁcantly impacts overall survival in
serous epithelial ovarian cancer, Reprod. Sci. 22 (1) (2015) 38–46.
[72] T. Otsubo, et al., SOX2 is frequently downregulated in gastric cancers and inhibits
cell growth through cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis, Br. J. Cancer 98 (4) (2008)
824–831.
[73] S. Wang, et al., SOX2, a predictor of survival in gastric cancer, inhibits cell pro-
liferation and metastasis by regulating PTEN, Cancer Lett. 358 (2) (2015)
210–219.
[74] Y. Chen, et al., SOX2 inhibits metastasis in gastric cancer, J. Cancer Res. Clin.
Oncol. 142 (6) (2016) 1221–1230.
[75] D. Hanahan, R.A. Weinberg, Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation, Cell 144 (5)
(2011) 646–674.
[76] A. Kreso, J.E. Dick, Evolution of the cancer stem cell model, Cell Stem Cell 14 (3)
(2014) 275–291.
[77] R.M.R. Gangemi, et al., SOX2 Silencing in Glioblastoma Tumor-Initiating Cells
Causes Stop of Proliferation and Loss of Tumorigenicity, Stem Cells 27 (1) (2009)
40–48.
[78] L. Garros-Regulez, et al., mTOR inhibition decreases SOX2-SOX9 mediated glioma
stem cell activity and temozolomide resistance, Expert Opin. Ther. Targets 20 (4)
(2016) 393–405.
[79] H. Ikushima, et al., Autocrine TGF-β Signaling Maintains Tumorigenicity of
Glioma-Initiating Cells through Sry-Related HMG-Box Factors, Cell Stem Cell 5 (5)
(2009) 504–514.
[80] D. Hägerstrand, et al., Identiﬁcation of a SOX2-dependent subset of tumor- and
sphere-forming glioblastoma cells with a distinct tyrosine kinase inhibitor sensi-
tivity proﬁle, Neuro Oncol. 13 (11) (2011) 1178–1191.
[81] K.K. Velpula, et al., A Cord blood stem cells revert glioma stem cell EMT by down
regulating transcriptional activation of Sox2 and Twist1, Oncotarget. 2 (12)
(2012) 1028–1042.
D. Novak, et al.
Seminars in Cancer Biology 67 (2020) 74–82
80

[82] F. Oppel, et al., SOX2-RNAi attenuates S-phase entry and induces RhoA-dependent
switch to protease-independent amoeboid migration in human glioma cells, Mol.
Cancer 10 (137) (2011).
[83] R.J. Vanner, et al., Quiescent Sox2+Cells Drive Hierarchical Growth and Relapse
in Sonic Hedgehog Subgroup Medulloblastoma, Cancer Cell 26 (1) (2014) 33–47.
[84] M. Piva, et al., Sox2 promotes tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer cells, EMBO
Mol. Med. 6 (1) (2014) 66–79.
[85] T. Das, et al., Actinomycin D Down-regulates SOX2 Expression and Induces Death
in Breast Cancer Stem Cells, Anticancer Res. 37 (4) (2017) 1655–1663.
[86] X. Gong, et al., Transcriptional repressor GATA binding 1-mediated repression of
SRY-box 2 expression suppresses cancer stem cell functions and tumor initiation, J.
Biol. Chem. 293 (48) (2018) 18646–18654.
[87] I.V. Lundberg, et al., SOX2 expression is associated with a cancer stem cell state
and down-regulation of CDX2 in colorectal cancer, BMC Cancer 16 (471) (2016).
[88] X.F. Liu, et al., Cervical cancer cells with positive Sox2 expression exhibit the
properties of cancer stem cells, PLoS One 9 (1) (2014) e87092.
[89] M. Herreros-Villanueva, et al., SOX2 promotes dediﬀerentiation and imparts stem
cell-like features to pancreatic cancer cells, Oncogenesis 2 (e61) (2013).
[90] A.C. Hepburn, et al., Side Population in Human Non-Muscle Invasive Bladder
Cancer Enriches for Cancer Stem Cells That Are Maintained by MAPK Signalling,
PLoS One 7 (11) (2012) e50690.
[91] M. Nakatsugawa, et al., SOX2 is overexpressed in stem-like cells of human lung
adenocarcinoma and augments the tumorigenicity, Lab. Investig. 91 (12) (2011)
1796–1804.
[92] A.P. Rybak, D. Tang, SOX2 plays a critical role in EGFR-mediated self-renewal of
human prostate cancer stem-like cells, Cell. Signal. 25 (12) (2013) 2734–2742.
[94] S.H. Lee, et al., SOX2 regulates self-renewal and tumorigenicity of stem-like cells
of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, Br. J. Cancer 111 (11) (2014)
2122–2130.
[95] L.Y.W. Bourguignon, et al., Hyaluronan-CD44v3 interaction with Oct4-Sox2-
Nanog promotes miR-302 expression leading to self-renewal, clonal formation,
and cisplatin resistance in cancer stem cells from head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma, J. Biol. Chem. 287 (39) (2012) 32800–32824.
[96] S. Boumahdi, et al., SOX2 controls tumour initiation and cancer stem-cell func-
tions in squamous-cell carcinoma, Nature 511 (7508) (2014) 246–250.
[97] D. Coppola, et al., EGFR/Src/Akt signaling modulates Sox2 expression and self-
renewal of stem-like side-population cells in non-small cell lung cancer, Mol.
Cancer 11 (73) (2012).
[98] R. Xiang, et al., Downregulation of transcription factor SOX2 in cancer stem cells
suppresses growth and metastasis of lung cancer, Br. J. Cancer 104 (9) (2011)
1410–1417.
[99] T. Hussenet, et al., SOX2 is an oncogene activated by recurrent 3q26.3 ampliﬁ-
cations in human lung squamous cell carcinomas, PLoS One 5 (1) (2010) e8960.
[100] R. Santini, et al., SOX2 regulates self-renewal and tumorigenicity of human
melanoma-initiating cells, Oncogene 33 (38) (2014) 4697–4708.
[101] U. Basu-Roy, et al., Sox2 maintains self renewal of tumor-initiating cells in os-
teosarcomas, Oncogene 31 (18) (2012) 2270–2282.
[102] L. Ma, D. Lai, T. Liu, W. Cheng, L. Guo, Cancer stem-like cells can be isolated with
drug selection in human ovarian cancer cell line SKOV3, Acta Biochim. Biophys.
Sin. (Shanghai). 42 (9) (2010) 593–602.
[103] K. Yasuda, et al., Ovarian Cancer stem cells are enriched in side population and
aldehyde dehydrogenase bright overlapping population, PLoS One 8 (8) (2013)
e68187.
[104] P.M. Bareiss, et al., SOX2 expression associates with stem cell state in human
ovarian carcinoma, Cancer Res. 73 (17) (2013) 5544–5555.
[105] X. Wang, et al., SOX2 enhances the migration and invasion of ovarian cancer cells
via Src kinase, PLoS One 9 (6) (2014) e99594.
[106] S. Saigusa, et al., Correlation of CD133, OCT4, and SOX2 in rectal cancer and their
association with distant recurrence after chemoradiotherapy, Ann. Surg. Oncol. 16
(12) (2009) 3488–3498.
[107] Q.I. Wang, et al., Oct3/4 and sox2 are signiﬁcantly associated with an unfavorable
clinical outcome in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, Anticancer Res.
29 (4) (2009) 1233–1241.
[108] L.M. Sholl, et al., Sox2 protein expression is an independent poor prognostic in-
dicator in stage I lung adenocarcinoma, Am. J. Surg. Pathol. 34 (8) (2010)
1193–1198.
[109] L. Du, et al., Sox2 nuclear expression is closely associated with poor prognosis in
patients with histologically node-negative oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma,
Oral Oncol. 47 (8) (2011) 709–713.
[110] X. Wang, et al., Prognostic signiﬁcance of SOX2 expression in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma, Cancer Invest. 30 (1) (2012) 79–85.
[111] C. Sun, et al., Sox2 expression predicts poor survival of hepatocellular carcinoma
patients and it promotes liver cancer cell invasion by activating Slug, Med. Oncol.
30 (2) (2013) 503.
[112] D. Kong, et al., Epithelial to mesenchymal transition is mechanistically linked with
stem cell signatures in prostate cancer cells, PLoS One 5 (8) (2010) e12445.
[113] X. Han, et al., Silencing SOX2 induced mesenchymal-epithelial transition and its
expression predicts liver and lymph node metastasis of CRC patients, PLoS One 7
(8) (2012) e41335.
[114] X. Li, et al., SOX2 promotes tumor metastasis by stimulating epithelial-to-me-
senchymal transition via regulation of WNT/β-catenin signal network, Cancer
Lett. 336 (2) (2013) 379–389.
[115] Y. Xia, et al., Downregulation of miR-638 promotes invasion and proliferation by
regulating SOX2 and induces EMT in NSCLC, FEBS Lett. 588 (14) (2014)
2238–2245.
[116] N. Yang, et al., Overexpression of SOX2 promotes migration, invasion, and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition through the Wnt/β-catenin pathway in lar-
yngeal cancer Hep-2 cells, J. Immunother. Emphasis Tumor Immunol. 35 (8)
(2014) 7965–7973.
[117] H. Gao, et al., SOX2 promotes the epithelial to mesenchymal transition of eso-
phageal squamous cells by modulating slug expression through the activation of
STAT3/HIF-α signaling, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 16 (9) (2015) 21643–21657.
[118] S.K. Singh, et al., Antithetical NFATc1-Sox2 and p53-miR200 signaling networks
govern pancreatic cancer cell plasticity, EMBO J. 34 (4) (2015) 517–530.
[119] J. Guo, et al., Hypoxic microenvironment induces EMT and upgrades stem-like
properties of gastric Cancer cells, Technol. Cancer Res. Treat. 15 (1) (2016) 60–68.
[120] X. Jia, et al., SOX2 promotes tumorigenesis and increases the anti-apoptotic
property of human prostate cancer cell, J. Mol. Cell Biol. 3 (4) (2011) 230–238.
[121] J. Neumann, et al., SOX2 expression correlates with lymph-node metastases and
distant spread in right-sided colon cancer, BMC Cancer 11 (518) (2011).
[122] X. Zhang, et al., SOX2 in gastric carcinoma, but not hath1, is related to patients’
clinicopathological features and prognosis, J. Gastrointest. Surg. 14 (8) (2010)
1220–1226.
[123] T. Wilbertz, et al., SOX2 gene ampliﬁcation and protein overexpression are asso-
ciated with better outcome in squamous cell lung cancer, Mod. Pathol. 24 (7)
(2011) 944–953.
[125] P. Bayo, et al., Loss of SOX2 expression induces cell motility via vimentin up-
regulation and is an unfavorable risk factor for survival of head and neck squa-
mous cell carcinoma, Mol. Oncol. 9 (8) (2015) 1704–1719.
[126] P. Mukherjee, et al., Modulation of SOX2 expression delineates an end-point for
paclitaxel-eﬀectiveness in breast cancer stem cells, Sci. Rep. 7 (1) (2017) 9170.
[127] J. Yang, et al., Tumor-associated macrophages regulate murine breast cancer stem
cells through a novel paracrine egfr/stat3/sox-2 signaling pathway, Stem Cells 31
(2) (2013) 248–258.
[128] D. Li, et al., Sox2 is involved in paclitaxel resistance of the prostate cancer cell line
PC-3 via the PI3K/Akt pathway, Mol. Med. Rep. 10 (6) (2014) 3169–3176.
[129] P. Mu, et al., SOX2 promotes lineage plasticity and antiandrogen resistance in
TP53-and RB1-deﬁcient prostate cancer, Science 355 (6320) (2017) 84–88.
[131] Y. Li, et al., Overexpression of SOX2 is involved in paclitaxel resistance of ovarian
cancer via the PI3K/Akt pathway, J. Immunother. Emphasis Tumor Immunol. 36
(12) (2015) 9823–9828.
[132] H.M. Jeon, et al., ID4 imparts chemoresistance and cancer stemness to glioma cells
by derepressing miR-9*-mediated suppression of SOX2, Cancer Res. 71 (9) (2011)
3410–3421.
[133] W.S. Song, et al., Sox2, a stemness gene, regulates tumor-initiating and drug-re-
sistant properties in CD133-positive glioblastoma stem cells, J. Chinese Med.
Assoc. 79 (10) (2016) 538–545.
[134] T. Tian, Sox2 enhances the tumorigenicity and chemoresistance of cancer stem-
like cells derived from gastric cancer, J. Biomed. Res. 26 (5) (2012) 336–345.
[135] Y. Jia, et al., The role of GLI-SOX2 signaling axis for gemcitabine resistance in
pancreatic cancer, Oncogene 38 (10) (2018) 1764–1777.
[136] T. Lin, et al., Long noncoding RNA LBCS inhibits self-renewal and chemoresistance
of bladder cancer stem cells through epigenetic silencing of SOX2, Clin. Cancer
Res. 25 (4) (2018) 1389–1403.
[137] L. Shen, et al., High expression of SOX2 and OCT4 indicates radiation resistance
and an independent negative prognosis in cervical squamous cell carcinoma, J.
Histochem. Cytochem. 62 (7) (2014) 499–509.
[138] L.X. Xie, et al., Rapamycin inhibited the function of lung CSCs via SOX2, J.
Immunother. Emphasis Tumor Immunol. 37 (4) (2016) 4929–4937.
[139] N. Bora-Singhal, et al., Gli1-mediated regulation of Sox2 facilitates self-renewal of
stem-like cells and confers resistance to EGFR inhibitors in non-small cell lung
Cancer, Neoplasia 17 (7) (2015) 538–551.
[140] Hüser, et al., SOX2-mediated upregulation of CD24 promotes adaptive resistance
toward targeted therapy in melanoma, Int. J. Cancer 143 (12) (2018) 3131–3142.
[141] S.M. Rodriguez-Pinilla, et al., Sox2: a possible driver of the basal-like phenotype in
sporadic breast cancer, Mod. Pathol. 20 (4) (2007) 474–481.
[142] Y. Chen, et al., The molecular mechanism governing the oncogenic potential of
SOX2 in breast cancer, J. Biol. Chem. 283 (26) (2008) 17969–17978.
[143] K.B. Long, J.L. Hornick, SOX2 is highly expressed in squamous cell carcinomas of
the gastrointestinal tract, Hum. Pathol. 40 (12) (2009) 1768–1773.
[144] Y. Gen, et al., SOX2 identiﬁed as a target gene for the ampliﬁcation at 3q26 that is
frequently detected in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, Cancer Genet.
Cytogenet. 202 (2) (2010) 82–93.
[145] M. Schmitz, et al., Identiﬁcation of SOX2 as a novel glioma-associated antigen and
potential target for T cell-based immunotherapy, Br. J. Cancer 96 (8) (2007)
1293–1301.
[146] J.H. Phi, et al., Sox2 expression in brain tumors: a reﬂection of the neuroglial
diﬀerentiation pathway, Am. J. Surg. Pathol. 32 (1) (2008) 103–112.
[147] K. Freier, et al., Recurrent copy number gain of transcription factor SOX2 and
corresponding high protein expression in oral squamous cell carcinoma, Genes
Chromosom. Cancer 49 (1) (2010) 9–16.
[148] H.P. Sattler, et al., Novel ampliﬁcation unit at chromosome 3q25-q27 in human
prostate cancer, Prostate 45 (3) (2000) 207–215.
[149] A.O. Güre, et al., Serological identiﬁcation of embryonic neural proteins as highly
immunogenic tumor antigens in small cell lung cancer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S.
A. 97 (8) (2000) 4198–4203.
[150] C.M. Rudin, et al., Comprehensive genomic analysis identiﬁes SOX2 as a fre-
quently ampliﬁed gene in small-cell lung cancer, Nat. Genet. 44 (10) (2012)
1111–1116.
[151] I.V. Lundberg, et al., SOX2 expression is regulated by BRAF and contributes to
poor patient prognosis in colorectal cancer, PLoS One 9 (7) (2014) e101957.
[152] Y.H. Ma, et al., Expression of stem cell markers in human astrocytomas of diﬀerent
D. Novak, et al.
Seminars in Cancer Biology 67 (2020) 74–82
81

WHO grades, J. Neurooncol. 86 (1) (2008) 31–45.
[153] S. Kregel, et al., Sox2 Is an Androgen Receptor-Repressed Gene That Promotes
Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer, PLoS One 8 (1) (2013) e53701.
[154] T. Hussenet, S. Du Manoir, SOX2 in squamous cell carcinoma: amplifying a
pleiotropic oncogene along carcinogenesis, Cell Cycle 9 (8) (2010) 1480–1486.
[155] P. Yuan, et al., Sex determining region Y-box 2 (SOX2) is a potential cell-lineage
gene highly expressed in the pathogenesis of squamous cell carcinomas of the
lung, PLoS One 5 (2) (2010) e9112.
[156] Y. Lu, et al., Evidence that SOX2 overexpression is oncogenic in the lung, PLoS One
5 (6) (2010) e11022.
[158] X.L. Li, et al., Expression of the SRY-related HMG box protein SOX2 in human
gastric carcinoma, Int. J. Oncol. 24 (2) (2004) 257–263.
[159] T. Tsukamoto, et al., Sox2 expression in human stomach adenocarcinomas with
gastric and gastric-and-intestinal-mixed phenotypes, Histopathology 46 (6) (2005)
649–658.
[160] E.L. Wuebben, A. Rizzino, The dark side of SOX2: cancer - a comprehensive
overview, Oncotarget. 8 (27) (2017) 44917–44943.
D. Novak, et al.
Seminars in Cancer Biology 67 (2020) 74–82
82

===== Okumura2019_DevGrowthDiff_XenopusES1+TailRegeneration =====
Develop Growth Differ. 2019;61:447–456. 
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/dgd
  |  447
© 2019 Japanese Society of Developmental 
Biologists
1 | INTRODUCTION
Amphibians and fishes have robust regenerative ability, in contrast 
to mammals (Carlson, 2007; Gemberling, Bailey, Hyde, & Poss, 2013; 
Tanaka, 2016). They can restore amputated appendages, including 
limbs, tail, and fins, via proliferation and differentiation of remain-
ing stem or progenitor cells.  The first critical step for successful 
appendage regeneration is the formation of the wound epidermis 
(WE), which originates from the stump epidermis and rapidly cov-
ers the amputated surface. In amphibians, a specialized multilayered 
 
Received: 16 September 2019  |  Revised: 9 October 2019  |  Accepted: 14 October 2019
DOI: 10.1111/dgd.12635  
O R I G I N A L  A R T I C L E
Cell type‐specific transcriptome analysis unveils secreted 
signaling molecule genes expressed in apical epithelial cap 
during appendage regeneration
Akinori Okumura1 |   Tetsutaro Hayashi2 |   Masashi Ebisawa2 |   Mika Yoshimura2 |   
Yohei Sasagawa2 |   Itoshi Nikaido2,3 |   Yoshihiko Umesono1
 |   Makoto Mochii1
1Graduate School of Life Science, University 
of Hyogo, Akou-gun, Hyogo, Japan
2Laboratory for Bioinformatics 
Research, RIKEN Center for Biosystems 
Dynamics Research, RIKEN, Saitama, Japan
3School of Integrative and Global Majors 
(SIGMA), University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 
Japan
Correspondence
Makoto Mochii, Graduate School of Life 
Science, University of Hyogo, 3‐2‐1 Kouto, 
Akou‐gun, Hyogo 678‐1297, Japan.
Email: mmochii@sci.u-hyogo.ac.jp
Funding information
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, 
Grant/Award Number: 18K06266 and 
24570239; Platform Project for Supporting 
Drug Discovery and Life Science Research 
(Platform for Drug Discovery, Informatics, 
and Structural Life Science) by Innovative 
Technology from the Ministry of Education, 
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology 
(MEXT) of Japan and Japan Agency for 
Medical Research and Development
Abstract
Wound epidermis (WE) and the apical epithelial cap (AEC) are believed to trigger re-
generation of amputated appendages such as limb and tail in amphibians by produc-
ing certain secreted signaling molecules. To date, however, only limited information 
about the molecular signatures of these epidermal structures is available. Here we 
used a transgenic Xenopus laevis line harboring the enhanced green fluorescent pro-
tein (egfp) gene under control of an es1 gene regulatory sequence to isolate WE/AEC 
cells by performing fluorescence‐activated cell sorting during the time course of tail 
regeneration (day 1, day 2, day 3 and day 4 after amputation). Time‐course transcrip-
tome analysis of these isolated WE/AEC cells revealed that more than 8,000 genes, 
including genes involved in signaling pathways such as those of reactive oxygen spe-
cies, fibroblast growth factor (FGF), canonical and non‐canonical Wnt, transforming 
growth factor β (TGF β) and Notch, displayed dynamic changes of their expression 
during tail regeneration. Notably, this approach enabled us to newly identify seven 
secreted signaling molecule genes (mdk, fstl, slit1, tgfβ1, bmp7.1, angptl2 and egfl6) 
that are highly expressed in tail AEC cells. Among these genes, five (mdk, fstl, slit1, 
tgfβ1 and bmp7.1) were also highly expressed in limb AEC cells but the other two 
(angptl2 and egfl6) are specifically expressed in tail AEC cells. Interestingly, there was 
no expression of fgf8 in tail WE/AEC cells, whose expression and pivotal role in limb 
AEC cells have been reported previously. Thus, we identified common and different 
properties between tail and limb AEC cells.
K E Y W O R D S
apical epithelial cap, secreted signaling molecule, tail regeneration, wound epidermis, Xenopus 
laevis

448  |    
OKUMURA et al.
structure called the apical epithelial cap (AEC) is formed at the most 
distal portion of the WE (Carlson, 2007; Yokoyama, 2008). It is widely 
accepted that WE and/or AEC are essential for successful regener-
ation, based on findings of several studies. For example, removal 
of AEC from limbs in Amblystoma larvae resulted in regeneration 
failure (Thornton, 1957). Critical roles of WE/AEC in initiation and 
progression of appendage regeneration are thought to be mediated 
by extracellular signaling molecules which are released from WE/
AEC and regulate recruitment, proliferation and differentiation of 
underlying cells. In fact, WE cells in amputated zebrafish fin express 
wnt5a, wnt5b, and fgf20, which have significant roles in fin regener-
ation (Shibata et al., 2016; Stoick‐Cooper et al., 2006; Whitehead, 
Makino, Lien, & Keating, 2005). Several signaling molecules and their 
genes were reported to be expressed in WE/AEC during amphib-
ian appendage regeneration. FGF1 and FGF2 are found in WE of 
regenerating axolotl limb (Boilly et al., 1991; Mullen, Bryant, Torok, 
Blumberg, & Gardiner, 1996). WE and AEC of regenerating Axolotl 
limb express wnt5a, bmps and fgf8 (Campbell et al., 2011; Han, An, & 
Kim, 2001). AEC of regenerating limb bud in Xenopus expresses fgf8 
and wnt3a (Christen & Slack, 1997; Yokoyama, Ogino, Stoick‐Cooper, 
Grainger, & Moon, 2007). Based on the morphological similarity 
between apical epidermal ridge (AER) in developing limb bud and 
AEC in regenerating limb, the two structures are thought to share 
common roles in growth and patterning in limb formation in the 
respective situation, limb development or regeneration. FGF mol-
ecules, especially FGF8, are assumed to have a pivotal role in both 
processes, as the instructive role of fgf8 in limb development is evi-
dent in several vertebrate species (Crossley, Minowada, MacArthur, 
& Martin, 1996; Mahmood et al., 1995) and fgf8 is expressed in AEC 
during limb regeneration in amphibians (Christen & Slack, 1997; Han 
et al., 2001; Yokoyama et al., 2007). On the other hand, it was re-
ported that MARCKS‐like protein (MLP) was expressed in WE and 
induced cell proliferation during axolotl limb and tail regeneration, 
but its counterparts in other species, including Xenopus laevis, are 
not likely to be secreted (Sugiura, Wang, Barsacchi, Simon, & Tanaka, 
2016). It is thus uncertain whether FGFs are pivotal WE/AEC‐de-
rived factors in every appendage regeneration model system or not. 
Despite the significant role of WE/AEC in appendage regeneration, 
the gene expression profile of the WE/AEC cells still remains un-
clear. Comprehensive gene expression analysis would be required 
for better understanding of the roles of WE/AEC in appendage re-
generation. To catalogue genes for signaling molecules expressed in 
WE/AEC cells is the first important step toward understanding their 
functions.
We previously identified Xenopus laevis es1, which is expressed 
abundantly in AEC cells during tail regeneration of the larval tad-
pole (Sugiura, Tazaki, Ueno, Watanabe, & Mochii, 2009; Tazaki et 
al., 2005). A fluorescent reporter marks WE and AEC following tail 
amputation in transgenic tadpoles (es1:egfp) harboring the enhanced 
green fluorescent protein (EGFP) gene under control of the es1 gene 
regulatory sequence (Sato, Umesono, & Mochii, 2018). In this study 
we isolated EGFP‐positive cells by fluorescence‐activated cell sort-
ing from es1:egfp transgenic tadpoles at several time points after tail 
amputation, which should represent WE and AEC cells, and charac-
terized their gene expression profiles by RNA sequencing analysis.
2 | MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1 | Animals and surgery
Wild‐type Xenopus laevis adults were obtained commercially from 
Yumesaki Youshoku. Embryos were obtained by artificial insemina-
tion. The embryos and larvae were staged according to Nieuwkoop 
and Faber (1994). NF stage 49‐51 tadpoles were used for tail regen-
eration experiments after anesthetization in 0.03% MS222 (Sigma) 
as described previously (Taniguchi, Sugiura, Tazaki, Watanabe, & 
Mochii, 2008). NF stage 52‐53 tadpoles were used for limb bud ex-
periments. A hind limb was amputated at knee level using a pair of 
fine scissors (World Precision Instruments/501778). The es1:egfp 
transgenic animals were maintained in our laboratory and used in 
the same way as wild‐type animals (Sato et al., 2018). The animals 
were handled using a protocol approved by the animal care and use 
committee of the University of Hyogo.
2.2 | Cell dissociation and sorting
Regenerating tail stumps (2 mm in length) were isolated from es1:egfp 
tadpoles using a razor blade. Twenty stump fragments for each time 
point were pooled in a single tube with phosphate buffered saline 
without Ca2
+ and Mg2
+ [PBS(−)], and were minced with a pair of iris 
scissors. Samples were treated with 0.05% EDTA in PBS(−) at 22°C 
for 20 min to loosen cell adhesion of the epidermis. After rinsing 
with Holtfreter's solution, the samples were incubated with 2% col-
lagenase (Wako) at 22°C for 3 hr to dissociate cells. The dissociated 
cells were collected by centrifugation at 1,000 rpm (90 g) for 3 min 
and resuspended in 70% PBS(−). To eliminate dead cells, propidium 
iodide (PI) was added to the cell suspension at a final concentration 
of 1 μg/ml and incubated at 4°C for 5 min. The suspended cells were 
applied to an SH800 cell sorter (SONY) to identify and isolate a tar-
get cell fraction. To label intact epidermal cells, wild‐type tadpoles 
were incubated with 1 μg/ml Alexa Fluor 488‐labeled WGA (Thermo 
Fisher) for 20 min. WGA‐labeled tail fragments were processed in 
the same way as described above. One hundred EGFP‐positive or 
Alexa 488‐positive living cells were directly sorted into 10  µl of 
QIAzol lysis reagent (QIAGEN). The cell lysates were stored at −80°C 
until the RNA extraction step.
2.3 | cDNA library construction and 
RNA sequencing
Triplicates of 100 sorted cells were used for RNA extraction for each 
regeneration time point or uncut condition. Total RNA was extracted 
with a Direct‐zol RNA MiniPrep kit (Zymo Research). Before column 
extraction, 10 µl of the cell lysate was supplemented with 67.5 µl of 
TRIzol LS reagent (Thermo Fisher) and 20.5 µl of RNase free water 
(Takara). Whole transcript amplification (WTA) was performed from 

    |  449
OKUMURA et al.
200 pg of total RNA using Quartz‐Seq (Chai et al., 2018; Sasagawa 
et al., 2013). The number of PCR cycles in the WTA was 16. 
Subsequently, sequencing library preparation was carried out by 11 
PCR cycles using 100 pg of WTA cDNA supplemented with 2/5 reac-
tion volumes of Nextera XT kit solution (Illumina). The libraries were 
sequenced using an Illumina HiSeq2500. Approximately 300 million 
single‐end reads of 50 bp length for each sample were obtained. The 
sequenced reads were mapped to X. laevis v9.1 genome assembly 
(http://ftp.xenba​se.org/pub/Genom​ics/JGI/Xenla9.1/Xla.v91.repea​
tMask​ed.fa.gz) by HISAT2 (2.0.0) for quality checks of sequencing 
experiments (Kim et al., 2015). Gene expression matrices were cal-
culated using Sailfish 0.9.2 (Patro, Mount, & Kingsford, 2014) with 
gene model of X. laevis v9.1 genome assembly (http://ftp.xenba​
se.org/pub/Genom​ics/JGI/Xenla9.1/1.8.3.2/XL_9.1_v1.8.3.2.prima​
ryTra​nscri​pts.gff3.gz). Raw counts were normalized by gene length 
and total counts per sample, and converted to TPM (transcripts per 
million) (Table S1). Normalized count data were used for differen-
tial expression analysis using edgeR (ver. 3.5) (Robinson, McCarthy, 
& Smyth, 2009), which resulted in differentially expressed genes 
(DEGs) with padj < .05 (Table S2).
2.4 | Gene ontogeny enrichment analysis
We considered a gene with at least 10 TPM in any one condition 
as an expressed gene in our experimental condition. Xenopus laevis 
gene IDs of the expressed genes were converted to Human Entrez 
gene IDs using Xenopus orthology database (http://www.xenba​
se.org/other/​stati​c/ftpDa​tafil​es.jsp). A list of the human IDs corre-
sponding to Xenopus expressed genes for each condition was used 
for gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis by DAVID (ver. 6.8) 
(https​://david.ncifc​rf.gov). Minus log10 p‐values for each GO (biolog-
ical process) were transformed to Z‐scores and shown as a heat map 
made using ggplot2 (R package) after clustering (Table S3).
2.5 | Genes for potential secreted 
signaling molecules
To identify genes encoding signaling molecules secreted by AEC 
cells, we manually selected 649 genes as potential secreted signal-
ing molecule genes by referring to the human homologs of Xenopus 
DEGs in GeneCard (https​://www.genec​ards.org) and UniProt 
(https​://www.unipr​ot.org) databases (Table S4). The genes for po-
tential secreted signaling molecules do not include genes for ex-
tracellular matrix (ECM) components or ECM remodeling enzymes 
in this study.
2.6 | Plasmids for probe synthesis
Plasmids for Xenopus laevis fgf8 were described previously 
(Yokoyama, Endo, Tamura, Yajima, & Ide, 1998). Bluescript plasmids 
for bmp7.1.L (XL057h13), mdk.S (XL041d13), tgfβ1.L (XL060h14), 
slit1.L (XL059h23) and fstl1.L (XL059f20) were characterized using 
the NIBB/NIG/NBRP Xenopus laevis expressed sequence tag data-
base (XDB3; http://xenop​us.nibb.ac.jp/). Complementary DNAs for 
angptl2.S and egfl6.S were amplified from cDNA of the regenerating 
tail and cloned into a pCR2.1‐TOPO vector according to the manu-
facturer's protocol (Thermo Fisher). The primers used for the cloning 
were as follows:
angptl2.S (FW: 5’‐ACAAGGTCCTGAACCAGACG‐3’ and RV: 
5’‐ATAGAGTCCTTTGCAGGTGGA‐3’), egfl.S (FW: 5’‐ACGGCCAT 
GTGAACACAGAT‐3’ and RV: 5’‐TCCAGCTTCGTCCTTTCCAC‐3’).
2.7 | In situ hybridization
DIG‐labeled RNA probes were synthesized from the cDNA plasmids 
with T7 RNA polymerase (Thermo Fisher) and DIG nucleotide mix-
ture (Roche). Wild‐type tadpoles were fixed in methanol‐formalin 
solution and processed for whole‐mount and section in situ hybridi-
zations basically as described previously (Sugiura et al., 2004, 2009). 
To reduce the non‐specific staining, AP‐labeled anti‐DIG antibody 
(Roche) was diluted in a blocking solution containing an acetone 
powder (5 mg/ml) made from a whole tadpole extract.
3 | RESULTS
3.1 | Whole transcriptome shotgun sequencing of 
isolated EGFP‐positive WE/AEC cells
The amputated plane of a tail stump is completely covered with WE 
within 1 day after amputation (dpa), followed by thickening of the 
WE at its central region to become the multilayered structure, AEC, 
which is clearly observed at 2 and 3 dpa (Figure 1a) (Sugiura et al., 
2009; Taniguchi et al., 2008). Growth of regenerating tail is obvious 
at 4 dpa, after that the AEC becomes smaller (Figure 1a,b). EGFP flu-
orescence in es1:egfp transgenic tadpole is observed in WE covering 
amputation plane and the most posterior region of lateral epidermis 
at 1 dpa (Figure 1b) (Sato et al., 2018). At 2–4 dpa the fluorescence 
becomes prominent and restricted in the formed AEC (Figure 1b). 
All the deep region including the basal layer of AEC is labeled with 
the EGFP fluorescence, while the superficial cells are rarely labeled 
(Sato et al., 2018). The basal layer cells of AEC are thought to af-
fect underlying mesenchymal cells during regeneration (Carlson., 
2007). Cells expressing a certain level of EGFP should represent WE 
and AEC cells at each time point after amputation. Cells of the tail 
stump from es1:egfp tadpoles were dissociated at 1, 2, 3 or 4 dpa 
and sorted to collect EGFP‐positive cells using a fluorescence‐acti-
vated cell sorter (Figure 1c). Uninjured epidermal cells were sorted 
from wild‐type tadpoles incubated with Alexa488‐WGA and used as 
uncut samples (Figure 1c; Figure S1). Triplicate pools of the sorted 
cells in each condition were subjected to RNA sequencing. From a 
total of 45,099 detected transcripts (Table S1), by using edgeR we 
identified 8,017 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), of which the 
expression levels are significantly different between any two sam-
ples (Table S2; Figure 2a).

450  |    
OKUMURA et al.
We performed hierarchical clustering and principal compo-
nent analysis using expression of the DEGs to assess similarities 
and variations of each sample (Figure 2b,c). Samples with similar 
expression profiles were grouped into the same cluster by these 
analyses. The triplicate samples for each condition showed the 
clear cluster (Figure 2b), confirming reproducibility of the experi-
ments. We found the largest difference between the uncut sam-
ples and other samples from amputated tails (Figure 2b,c). This 
difference probably reflects not only different gene expression 
profiles between the uninjured condition and amputated condi-
tions, but also different cell types in the epidermis, as Alexa488‐
WGA selectively labels superficial epidermal cells, while most 
es1:EGFP‐positive cells are located in the deep region of AEC as 
described (Sato et al., 2018). A cluster containing 1 dpa and 2 dpa 
samples was clearly separated from another cluster containing 3 
dpa and 4 dpa samples (Figure 2b,c), suggesting a significant shift 
of gene expression profile from the early phase (1–2 dpa) to late 
phase (3–4 dpa) in es1:EGFP‐positive WE/AEC cells.
3.2 | Ontology analysis
Gene ontology enrichment analysis was performed using the gene 
set expressed in each condition (at least 10 TPM) using DAVID. 
The Z‐score of each GO term enrichment was calculated (Table 
S2) and the results were displayed as a heat map after clustering 
(Figure 3). GO terms enriched in uncut samples, such as “cell–cell 
adhesion” and “negative regulation of ERK1 and ERK2 cascade”, 
represent the stable epithelium state in normal epidermis. After tail 
FI G U R E 1 Summary of the transcriptome analysis of es1:EGFP‐positive cells during tail regeneration. (a) Schematic images of 
regeneration process of tadpole tail in Xenopus laevis. WE (green) covers amputated stump surface within 1 day. The most distal part of the 
WE overlying the amputated notochord (nc) becomes a multilayer structure, AEC (green), by 2 or 3 dpa. Progenitor and/or stem cells of the 
stump tissues, including notochord (nc), spinal cord (sc) and muscle (m), migrate, proliferate and differentiate to restore the functional tail, 
probably under the influence of the AEC. (b) EGFP expression in es1:egfp transgenic tadpole during tail regeneration. Upper panels show 
EGFP fluorescence images of regenerating tail at the indicated day. Lower panels show normal light images of the same field shown in upper 
panels. Anterior is to the left, and dorsal is up. Scale bar indicates 500 μm. (c) Experimental scheme of cell sorting and RNA‐Seq analysis. 
One hundred EGFP‐positive cells in triplicate were isolated using a fluorescence‐activated cell sorter. A cDNA library for each sample was 
constructed by Quartz‐Seq as described in Materials and Methods. Cells from uncut tail were prepared from wild‐type tadpoles incubated 
with WGA‐Alexa 488

    |  451
OKUMURA et al.
amputation, there was enrichment of several GO terms related to 
signaling pathways reported to play significant roles in tail regen-
eration, including canonical Wnt, non‐canonical Wnt, FGF, TGFβ, 
Notch and reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Beck, Christen, Barker, 
& Slack, 2006; Ho & Whitman, 2008; Lin & Slack, 2008; Love at al., 
2013; Sato et al., 2018; Sugiura et al., 2009). The enrichment of GO 
terms related to ER stress at 1 and 2 dpa may indicate enhanced 
secretory activity of WE/AEC cells during tail regeneration. GO 
terms related to cell division were enriched at 3 to 4 dpa. This may 
indicate that cell proliferation in AEC is induced at the late stage 
but not at the early stage of the regeneration, and may be consist-
ent with the previous report that the cell cycle is arrested in WE/
AEC during limb regeneration (Satoh, Bryant, & Gardiner, 2012). 
Change of representative GO terms according to time course will 
be discussed later.
3.3 | Genes for secreted signaling molecules 
expressed in WE/AEC
A manual curation of the annotated DEGs resulted in 649 genes 
encoding potential secreted signaling molecules (Table S4). We 
consider genes located on homeologous large (L) and short (S) chro-
mosomes with the same name as two different genes, for example, 
mdk.L and mdk.S (Session et al., 2016). Expression profiles of the 
genes with more than 10 TPM (Figure S2) or 100 TPM (Figure 4a) 
at least in any one condition are shown as heatmaps. The results 
suggest that more than 100 genes for potential secreted signaling 
molecules are expressed in WE/AEC cells (Figure S2). They include 
ligand genes for signaling pathways that have been reported to play 
significant roles in appendage regeneration, including bmp, wnt and 
tgfβ. Contrary to our expectation, we did not find expression of fgf8, 
which has been assumed to have an instructive role in limb or limb 
bud regeneration in urodele and anuran tadpoles (Christen & Slack, 
1997; Han et al., 2001; Yokoyama et al., 2007). Regarding other FGF 
genes, expressions of fgf20 and fgf13 were detected at low levels 
(Table S1, Figure S2). Reads of the fgf20 transcript were found in only 
one sample out of three at 1 dpa.
We then performed in situ analysis of the expression of the 
genes whose expression levels were expected to be high (Figure 4; 
Figure S3). In this study, hybridization using a cDNA probe for a 
single homeolog should detect the total transcripts from L and S 
homeologs, as sequences of their protein‐coding regions are very 
similar. Whole‐mount in situ hybridization of regenerating tail 
showed that mdk, fstl, slit1, tgfβ1, angptl2, and egfl6 were expressed 
in the epidermal region of regenerating tail, with especially intense 
signals at 2 and 3 dpa, suggesting that they are expressed in AEC 
cells (Figure 4; Figure S3). Section in situ hybridization showed that 
the signal for mdk was observed in the basal layer cells of the AEC 
region (Figure 4), while signals for other genes were not clearly de-
tected in sections, probably due to the high limit of detection of this 
method (data not shown). An expression signal for bmp7.1 was also 
detected in the AEC region, but a more intense signal was observed 
in the regenerating notochord region at 3 and 4 dpa (Figure S3).
To examine whether the genes expressed in the AEC of re-
generating tail are expressed in the AEC of regenerating limb bud, 
amputated hindlimb buds (3 dpa) at NF stage 52/53 were used 
for whole‐mount in situ hybridization. As reported previously 
(Yokoyama et al., 2007), fgf8 signal was detected in the AEC of 
FI G U R E 2 Hierarchical clustering and dimensionality reduction of regenerating epidermis. Similarity in gene expression profile for each 
sample was analyzed by hierarchal clustering and principal component analysis (PCA). Samples with similar gene expression profiles are 
grouped into a cluster. (a) Summary of the RNA sequencing results. We obtained 8,027 significantly differentially expressed genes (DEGs) 
from a total of 40,905 mapped genes. (b) Hierarchal clustering of DEGs is shown as a dendrogram with approximately unbiased (au) and 
bootstrap (bp) values (%). Triplicate for each condition shows a clear cluster. The most significant difference is found between the cluster 
of uncut samples and the cluster of other samples. (c) PCA map of gene expression data of DEGs. The largest difference along PC1 axis is 
observed between uncut samples and other samples. The cluster of 1 dpa and 2 dpa samples is separated from the cluster of 3 dpa and 4 
dpa samples (Plot color: , Uncut; , 1 dpa; , 2 dpa; , 3 dpa; , 4 dpa)

452  |    
OKUMURA et al.
the amputated limb bud, while it was not observed in the tail AEC 
(Figure 4). Expression signals for mdk, fstl, slit1, tgfβ1 and bmp7.1 
were observed in AEC of regenerating limb bud as well as regen-
erating tail, while signals for angptl2 and egfl6 were not detected in 
regenerating limb bud (Figure 4, Figure S3).
In summary, mdk, fstl, slit1, tgfβ1 and bmp7.1 were expressed in 
both limb and tail AEC cells, while fgf8 was specifically expressed in 
limb AEC cells, and angptl2 and egfl6 were specifically expressed in 
tail AEC cells (Figure 5a).
4 | DISCUSSION
In this study we performed a cell type‐specific transcriptome 
analysis according to time course of tadpole tail regeneration. 
Cells were isolated using fluorescence‐activated cell sorting from 
regenerating tails of transgenic Xenopus laevis tadpoles in which 
WE and AEC cells are labeled with EGFP fluorescence. Our tran-
scriptome analysis revealed that expression of more than 8,000 
genes in es1:EGFP‐positive cells changes dynamically during tail 
regeneration. The data should contain gene expression profiles 
representing multiple critical aspects of WE/AEC cells after tail 
amputation. We then identified more than 100 genes for po-
tential secreted signaling molecules expressed in es1:EGFP‐la-
beled cells. Expression of several of these genes was analyzed 
by in situ hybridization and compared between tail and limb bud 
regenerations.
4.1 | Dynamic gene expression changes in WE/AEC 
cells after tail amputation
The GO enrichment analysis suggested abundant expression of 
genes related to representative terms at each time point after tail 
amputation. The rapid wound healing of the amputation plane with 
remaining epidermis is the prerequisite for successive appendage 
regeneration (Carlson, 2007). GO terms enriched in 1 dpa WE are 
expected to contain biological processes concerning the wound 
healing. They include “cellular response to hydrogen peroxide”, “re-
active oxygen species metabolic process”, “fibroblast growth factor 
receptor signaling pathway” and “Ras protein signal transduction” 
(See Figure 3a), suggesting that multiple genes involved in ROS and 
ERK signaling pathways are significantly expressed in WE cells at 1 
dpa. This result is consistent with our previous findings that ROS 
and ERK signaling activities in WE are required for the successful 
FI G U R E 3 GO enrichment analysis of DEGs. Enrichment of GO terms (biological process) for expressed genes under each condition was 
analyzed by DAVID. (A) Heatmap showing dynamics of Z‐scores converted from p‐values for each GO term in each condition (left). All of 
the highly enriched GO terms are indicated. Representative GO terms indicated in the heat map are shown (right). All of the GO terms are 
listed in Table S2. (B) Graphs showing Z‐score dynamics for representative GO terms indicated in (A). Z‐score indicates dynamics of statistical 
significance (p‐value) for each GO term

    |  453
OKUMURA et al.
wound healing after tail amputation (Sato et al., 2018). GO terms 
enriched in uncut samples but not in 1 dpa samples, for example 
“cell–cell adhesion,” may also reflect cellular change during the 
wound healing, as epidermal cells lose their stable epithelial state 
and migrate on the wound surface after amputation (Carlson, 2007). 
Further analysis of genes related to GO terms enriched in these con-
ditions may uncover unidentified signaling pathways and/or mecha-
nisms governing the wound healing process.
A part of WE cells pile up to form the multilayered AEC at 2 dpa. 
GO term “epithelial to mesenchymal transition” is enriched at 2 dpa, 
suggesting gene expression is involved in cellular change to form the 
multilayered cap structure. AEC becomes smaller after day 4 and ulti-
mately unidentifiable. Dynamic change of gene expression obtained 
in this study should represent the morphological and functional 
change of WE/AEC cells during the course of the tail regeneration.
4.2 | Expression of potential secreted signaling 
molecule genes in WE/AEC
We are focusing on secreted signaling molecules, because WE/AEC 
is believed to regulate recruitment, proliferation and differentiation 
of various types of cells by releasing signaling molecules. Here we 
revealed that more than 100 genes for potential secreted signaling 
molecules are expressed in es1:EGFP‐labeled cells after tail ampu-
tation. More than two dozen of them are expressed at significant 
levels, suggesting that WE/AEC releases a cocktail of multiple signal-
ing molecules rather than just a few molecules.
After amputation inflammatory cells are recruited to the injured 
site through activities of cytokines (Julier, Park, Briquez, & Martino, 
2017). Such chemoattractive cytokine genes, including cxcl8 and 
csf3, were upregulated in WE at 1 dpa (See Figure 4), suggesting that 
they have roles in recruiting inflammatory cells. They may also have 
roles in recruiting other progenitor/stem cells at early stage of regen-
eration. Multiple ligand genes were abundantly expressed at 2 – 3 
dpa when the AEC is morphologically evident, and cell proliferation 
is active in regenerating tissues, including notochord, spinal cord and 
mesenchyme (Taniguchi, Watanabe, & Mochii, 2014). Genes abun-
dant in 2–3 dpa AEC includes tgfβ1 and bmp7.1. Actually, TGFβ and 
BMP signaling activities have significant roles in cell proliferation of 
regenerating tail tissues (Beck et al., 2006; Ho & Whitman, 2008). 
Functional analysis of uncharacterized genes identified in this study 
will reveal additional roles of AEC and AEC‐derived factors.
4.3 | Expression of FGF genes in WE/AEC
Fibroblast growth factor has been considered to be the pivotal WE/
AEC factor in appendage regeneration. In fact, fgf8 is expressed in 
AEC of regenerating urodele limb and regenerating anuran limb bud 
(Christen & Slack, 1997; Han et al., 2001; Yokoyama et al., 2007). fgf20 
is expressed in AEC and is essential for zebrafish fin regeneration 
FI G U R E 4 Expression of genes for potential secreted signaling molecules. (a) Heatmap indicates the relative expression of potential 
secreted signaling molecule genes with more than 100 TPM in at least any one condition. TPMs are converted to Z‐scores. (b) Whole‐mount 
in situ hybridization using probes for mdk.S and angptl2.S in regenerating tails (left 5 columns) and regenerating limb bud (right column). 
Arrowheads indicate hybridization signals. Scale bars indicate 500 μm. (c) Section in situ hybridization using a probe for mdk.S. Vertical 
section of tail (left) and limb bud (right) at 3 dpa were used. Arrowheads indicate hybridization signals. Left side: anterior, Upper side: dorsal. 
Scale bars indicate 200 μm. (d) Whole‐mount in situ hybridization for fgf8. Expression in regenerating tail (left) and regenerating limb bud 
(right). Arrowheads indicate hybridization signals. Scale bars indicate 500 µm. [Correction added on 9 December 2019, after first online 
publication: Figure 4a has been corrected]

454  |    
OKUMURA et al.
(Shibata et al., 2016; Whitehead et al., 2005). Furthermore, FGF 
signaling is required for tadpole tail regeneration (Lin & Slack, 2008). 
Unexpectedly our analysis showed that WE/AEC of Xenopus tadpole 
tail do not express fgf8, but express fgf20 and fgf13 at low levels 
(Table S1, Figure S2), suggesting that FGF molecules are not abun-
dantly produced by WE or AEC cells in this regenerating system. On 
the other hand, multiple FGF genes, such as fgf2, fgf10 and fgf20, 
are reportedly expressed in several other tissues during tail regen-
eration, especially in regenerating notochord (Lin & Slack, 2008; 
Taniguchi et al., 2008). Therefore, we consider that WE/AEC is not a 
major source of FGFs in regenerating tail, in contrast to AEC in regen-
erating limb bud (See Figure 4d) and zebrafish fin. FGF8 expression in 
mesenchyme but not in AEC was claimed to be essential for success-
ful limb regeneration in axolotl (Nacu, Gromberg, Oliveira, Drechsel, 
& Tanaka, 2016). Considering these results, FGF signaling appears 
to be essential for all the appendage regenerations, but the source 
of FGF ligands varies according to different experimental systems.
4.4 | AEC factors in tail and limb bud regenerations
Our in situ hybridization analysis showed that mdk, bmp7.1, tgfb1, 
fstl1, and slit1 are expressed in AEC of both tail and limb bud similarly, 
while angptl2 and egfl6 are expressed only in tail AEC. These results 
suggest that AEC releases pan‐AEC factors, which are secreted by 
both limb bud and tail AECs, as well as appendage‐specific AEC fac-
tors, such as FGF8 in limb and ANGPTL2/EGFL6 in tail (Figure 5a). 
The pan‐AEC factors are thought to be involved in processes shared 
by the tail and limb bud regenerations. As discussed, BMP and TGFβ 
signaling pathways are involved in cell proliferation of regenerating 
tissues. fstl1 encodes a follistatin‐like 1 protein which has been re-
ported to stimulate cell cycle of human cardiomyocytes (Wei et al., 
2015). FGF8 is the only limb‐specific AEC factor shown in this study. 
The role of FGF8 in regenerating limb bud is thought to correspond 
to that in developing limb bud. Expression of fgf8 in limb AEC can 
be considered as re‐activation of the gene, which has been active in 
AER of developing limb bud. The tail‐specific AEC factors may have 
tail‐specific roles in appendage regeneration. Human ANGPTL2 
have multiple roles, including pro‐angiogenic, anti‐apoptotic, inflam-
matory and tissue remodeling roles (Oike et al., 2017). ANGPTL2 
from tail AEC may regulate vascularization in regenerating tail, as 
vascular tissues are evident in regenerating tail at 2–3 dpa (Love et 
al., 2011), but may affect tail‐specific tissues, for example, notochord 
and spinal cord. Since the role of EGFL6 in notochord development 
was reported in zebrafish (Wang, Wang, Yuan, Chai, & Liu, 2015), it 
may regulate notochord regeneration in tadpole tail.
The regenerating notochord, especially the distal portion of it, is 
the abundant source of FGFs and SHH, both of which are essential 
for tadpole regeneration (Lin & Slack, 2008; Taniguchi et al., 2008, 
2014). It probably serves as a pivotal signaling center affecting 
whole regenerating tail tissues. We postulated that WE and/or AEC 
in tadpole tail has a role in establishment and maintenance of the no-
tochord signaling center, which then regulates growth of the whole 
regenerate by releasing signaling molecules including FGFs and SHH 
(Figure 5b). Pan‐AEC and tail‐specific AEC factors identified in this 
study may have such a role.
4.5 | es1:EGFP‐labeled cells and ROCs
Recently Aztekin et al. (2019) identified a subpopulation of epider-
mal cells, regenerating organizing cells (ROCs) in amputated Xenopus 
tadpole tail at NF stage 40‐41 embryonic stages by performing a sin-
gle‐cell transcriptome analysis. They showed that genetic ablation 
of ROCs blocked tail regeneration (Aztekin et al., 2019). There are 
several similarities and differences between ROCs and es1:EGFP‐
labeled WE/AEC cells analyzed in this study. ROCs are located in 
the WE region after tail amputation like es1:EGFP‐labeled cells. Our 
FI G U R E 5 AEC factors and model of 
their actions. (a) Venn diagram showing 
potential secreted signaling molecules 
released from AEC. Regenerating 
appendage (tail or limb bud) expresses 
pan‐AEC factors and appendage‐specific 
AEC factors in Xenopus. (b) Schematic 
model showing expression and action 
of AEC factors in regenerating tail 
and regenerating limb bud. Under the 
influence of both pan‐ and appendage‐
specific AEC factors, underlying 
notochord progenitor cells in tail 
regenerate express both FGFs and SHH, 
while blastema in regenerating limb bud 
expresses SHH to regulate growth and 
patterning of whole regenerates

    |  455
OKUMURA et al.
finding that fgf8 expression was not detected in WE/AEC is consist-
ent with the result of Aztekin et al. that ROCs do not express fgf8 
(Aztekin et al., 2019). However, gene expression pattern is differ-
ent between the two cell populations. For example, ROCs express 
fgf7, fgf9 and fgf10 at a significant level (https​://mario​nilab.cruk.
cam.ac.uk/Xenop​usReg​enera​tion), while only fgf13 and fgf20 were 
detected at a low level in WE/AEC in our study. ROCs are resident 
cells in normal epidermis (Aztekin et al., 2019), while es1:EGFP‐la-
bled cells are not detected before amputation in our experiments. 
Furthermore, we should note that the two cell populations were 
isolated at quite different developmental stages. ROCs were iso-
lated from embryonic tadpoles at NF stage 40‐41, while es1:EGFP‐
labeled cells were isolated from feeding larvae at NF stage 49‐51. 
Amputated tail regenerates very well at both developmental stages, 
but it hardly regenerates between NF stages 45 and 47, at the stage 
termed refractory period (Beck, Christen, & Slack, 2003). Since it is 
possible that there are significant differences in cellular mechanisms 
regulating tail regeneration between the two regenerating stages, 
ROCs may not present at NF stage 49‐51. If ROCs continue to be 
present throughout the larval stage, they may consist of a subpop-
ulation of es1:EGFP‐labeled WE/AEC cells at the NF stage 49‐51. 
Future study will uncover this point.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI (Grant 
Numbers 24570239 and 18K06266) to MM. We thank the members 
of the Laboratory for Bioinformatics Research, Manabu Ishii and 
Akihiro Matsushima, for the management of IT infrastructure. This 
work was partially supported by the Platform Project for Supporting 
Drug Discovery and Life Science Research (Platform for Drug 
Discovery, Informatics, and Structural Life Science) by Innovative 
Technology from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science 
and Technology (MEXT) of Japan and Japan Agency for Medical 
Research and Development (AMED).
ORCID
Yoshihiko Umesono 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0851-2003 
Makoto Mochii 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5837-6591 
REFERENCES
Aztekin, C., Hiscock, T. W., Marioni, J. C., Gurdon, J. B., Simons, B. D., & 
Jullien, J. (2019). Identification of a regeneration‐organizing cell in 
the Xenopus tail. Science, 364, 653–658.
Beck, C. W., Christen, B., Barker, D., & Slack, J. M. W. (2006). Temporal 
requirement for bone morphogenetic proteins in regeneration of the 
tail and limb of Xenopus tadpoles. Mechanisms of Development, 123, 
674–688. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.mod.2006.07.001
Beck, C. W., Christen, B., & Slack, J. M. W. (2003). Molecular path-
ways needed for regeneration of spinal cord and muscle in a ver-
tebrate. Developmental Cell, 5, 429–439. https​://doi.org/10.1016/
S1534-5807(03)00233-8
Boilly, B., Cavanaugh, K. P., Thomas, D., Hondermarck, H., Bryant, S. V., 
& Bradshaw, R. A. (1991). Acidic fibroblast growth factor is present 
in regenerating limb blastemas of axolotls and binds specifically to 
blastema tissues. Developmental Biology, 145, 302–310. https​://doi.
org/10.1016/0012-1606(91)90128-P
Campbell, L. J., Suárez‐Castillo, E. C., Ortiz‐Zuazaga, H., Knapp, D., 
Tanaka, E. M., & Crews, C. M. (2011). Gene expression profile 
of the regeneration epithelium during axolotl limb regeneration. 
Developmental Dynamics, 240, 1826–1840. https​://doi.org/10.1002/
dvdy.22669​
Carlson, B. M. (2007). Principles of regenerative biology. London, UK: 
Academic Press.
Chai, M., Sanosaka, T., Okuno, H., Zhou, Z., Koya, I., Banno, S., Kohyama, 
J. (2018). The chromatin remodeler CHD7 regulates stem cell identity 
of human neural progenitors. Genes and Development, 32, 165–180.
Christen, B., & Slack, J. M. W. (1997). FGF‐8 is associated with anteropos-
terior patterning and limb regeneration in Xenopus. Developmental 
Biology, 192, 455–466. https​://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.1997.8732
Crossley, P. H., Minowada, G., MacArthur, C. A., & Martin, G. R. (1996). 
Roles for FGF8 in the induction, initiation, and maintenance of 
chick limb development. Cell, 84, 127–136. https​://doi.org/10.1016/
S0092-8674(00)80999-X
Gemberling, M., Bailey, T. J., Hyde, D. R., & Poss, K. D. (2013). The zebraf-
ish as a model for complex tissue regeneration. Trends in Genetics, 29, 
611–620. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.tig.2013.07.003
Han, M. J., An, J. Y., & Kim, W. S. (2001). Expression patterns of 
Fgf‐8 during development and limb regeneration of the ax-
olotl. 
Developmental 
Dynamics, 
220, 
40–48. 
https​://doi.
org/10.10 02/1097- 0177(20 0 0)9999:9999<:AID-DVDY1​
085>3.0.CO;2-8
Ho, D. M., & Whitman, M. (2008). TGF‐β signaling is required for multiple 
processes during Xenopus tail regeneration. Developmental Biology, 
315, 203–216. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.12.031
Julier, Z., Park, A. J., Briquez, P. S., & Martino, M. M. (2017). Promoting tissue 
regeneration by modulating the immune system. Acta Biomaterialia, 
53, 13–28. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2017.01.056
Kim, D., Langmead, B., & Salzberg, S. L. (2015). Langmead & Steven L 
Salzberg. HISAT: A fast spliced aligner with low memory require-
ments. Nature Methods, 12, 357–360. https​://doi.org/10.1038/
nmeth.3317
Lin, G., & Slack, J. M. W. (2008). Requirement for Wnt and FGF signal-
ing in Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration. Developmental Biology, 316, 
323–335. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.01.032
Love, N. R., Chen, Y., Bonev, B., Gilchrist, M. J., Fairclough, L., Lea, R., … 
Amaya, E. (2011). Genome‐wide analysis of gene expression during 
Xenopus tropicalis tadpole tail regeneration. BMC Developmental 
Biology, 11, 70. https​://doi.org/10.1186/1471-213X-11-70
Love, N. R., Chen, Y., Ishibashi, S., Kritsiligkou, P., Lea, R., Koh, Y., … 
Amaya, E. (2013). Amputation‐induced reactive oxygen species are 
required for successful Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration. Nature 
Cell Biology, 15, 222–228. https​://doi.org/10.1038/ncb2659
Mahmood, R., Bresnick, J., Hornbruch, A., Mahony, C., Morton, N., 
Colquhoun, K., … Mason, I. (1995). A role for FGF‐8 in the initiation 
and maintenance of vertebrate limb bud outgrowth. Current Biology, 
5, 797–806. https​://doi.org/10.1016/S0960-9822(95)00157-6
Mullen, L. M., Bryant, S. V., Torok, M. A., Blumberg, B., & Gardiner, D. M. 
(1996). Nerve dependency of regeneration: The role of Distal‐less 
and FGF signaling in amphibian limb regeneration. Development, 122, 
3487–3497.
Nacu, E., Gromberg, E., Oliveira, C. R., Drechsel, D., & Tanaka, E. M. 
(2016). FGF8 and SHH substitute for anterior‐posterior tissue inter-
actions to induce limb regeneration. Nature, 533, 407–410. https​://
doi.org/10.1038/natur​e17972
Nieuwkoop, P. D., & Faber, J. (1994). Normal Table of Xenopus laevis 
(Daudin). New York, NY; London, UK: Garland Publishing.

456  |    
OKUMURA et al.
Oike, Y., Tian, Z., Miyata, K., Morinaga, J., Endo, M., & Kadomatsu, T. 
(2017). ANGPTL2 ‐ A new causal player in accelerating heart disease 
development in the aging. Circulation Journal, 81, 1379–1385. https​
://doi.org/10.1253/circj.CJ-17-0854
Patro, R., Mount, S. M., & Kingsford, C. (2014). Seq reads using light-
weight algorithms. Nature Biotechnology, 32, 462–464.
Robinson, M. D., McCarthy, D. J., & Smyth, G. K. (2009). edgeR: A 
Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digi-
tal gene expression data. Bioinformatics, 26, 139–140. https​://doi.
org/10.1093/bioin​forma​tics/btp616
Sasagawa, Y., Nikaido, I., Hayashi, T., Danno, H., Uno, K. D., Imai, T., & 
Ueda, H. R. (2013). Quartz‐Seq: A highly reproducible and sensi-
tive single‐cell RNA sequencing method, reveals non‐genetic gene‐
expression heterogeneity. Genome Biology 14, R31. Erratum. In: 
Genome Biol. 2017 18, 9.
Sato, K., Umesono, Y., & Mochii, M. (2018). A transgenic reporter under 
control of an es1 promoter/enhancer marks wound epidermis and api-
cal epithelial cap during tail regeneration in Xenopus laevis tadpole. 
Developmental Biology, 433, 404–415. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ydbio.2017.08.012
Satoh, A., Bryant, S. V., & Gardiner, D. M. (2012). Nerve signal-
ing regulates basal keratinocyte proliferation in the blastema 
apical epithelial cap in the axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum). 
Developmental Biology, 366, 374–381. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ydbio.2012.03.022
Session, A. M., Uno, Y., Kwon, T., Chapman, J. A., Toyoda, A., Takahashi, 
S., … Rokhsar, D. S. (2016). Genome evolution in the allotetraploid 
frog Xenopus laevis. Nature, 538, 336–343. https​://doi.org/10.1038/
natur​e19840
Shibata, E., Yokota, Y., Horita, N., Kudo, A., Abe, G., Kawakami, K., & 
Kawakami, A. (2016). Fgf signalling controls diverse aspects of fin re-
generation. Development, 143, 2920–2929. https​://doi.org/10.1242/
dev.140699
Stoick‐Cooper, C. L., Weidinger, G., Riehle, K. J., Hubbert, C., Major, M. 
B., Fausto, N., & Moon, R. T. (2006). Distinct Wnt signaling pathways 
have opposing roles in appendage regeneration. Development, 134, 
479–489. https​://doi.org/10.1242/dev.001123
Sugiura, T., Taniguchi, Y., Tazaki, A., Ueno, N., Watanabe, K., & 
Mochii, M. (2004). Differential gene expression between the em-
bryonic tail bud and regenerating larval tail in Xenopus laevis. 
Development Growth and Differentiation, 46, 97–105. https​://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1440-169X.2004.00727.x
Sugiura, T., Tazaki, A., Ueno, N., Watanabe, K., & Mochii, M. (2009). 
Xenopus Wnt‐5a induces an ectopic larval tail at injured site, sug-
gesting a crucial role for noncanonical Wnt signal in tail regeneration. 
Mechanisms of Development, 126, 56–67. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mod.2008.10.002
Sugiura, T., Wang, H., Barsacchi, R., Simon, A., & Tanaka, E. M. (2016). 
MARCKS‐like protein is an initiating molecule in axolotl appendage 
regeneration. Nature, 531, 237–240. https​://doi.org/10.1038/natur​
e16974
Tanaka, E. M. (2016). The molecular and cellular choreography of append-
age regeneration. Cell, 165, 1598–1608. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cell.2016.05.038
Taniguchi, Y., Sugiura, T., Tazaki, A., Watanabe, K., & Mochii, M. (2008). 
Spinal cord is required for proper regeneration of the tail in Xenopus 
tadpoles. Development Growth and Differentiation, 50, 109–120. https​
://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-169X.2007.00981.x
Taniguchi, Y., Watanabe, K., & Mochii, M. (2014). Notochord‐de-
rived hedgehog is essential for tail regeneration in Xenopus 
tadpole. 
BMC 
Developmental 
Biology, 
14, 
27. 
https​://doi.
org/10.1186/1471-213X-14-27
Tazaki, A., Kitayama, A., Terasaka, C., Watanabe, K., Ueno, N., & Mochii, 
M. (2005). Macroarray‐based analysis of tail regeneration in Xenopus 
laevis larvae. Developmental Dynamics, 233, 1394–1404. https​://doi.
org/10.1002/dvdy.20472​
Thornton, C. S. (1957). The effect of apical cap removal on limb. Journal 
of Experimental Zoology Part A: Ecological Genetics and Physiology, 134, 
357–381.
Wang, X., Wang, X., Yuan, W., Chai, R., & Liu, D. (2015). Egfl6 is involved in 
zebrafish notochord development. Fish Physiology and Biochemistry, 
41, 961–969. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s10695-015-0061-x
Wei, K. E., Serpooshan, V., Hurtado, C., Diez‐Cuñado, M., Zhao, M., 
Maruyama, S., … Ruiz‐Lozano, P. (2015). Epicardial FSTL1 reconstitu-
tion regenerates the adult mammalian heart. Nature, 525, 479–485. 
https​://doi.org/10.1038/natur​e15372
Whitehead, G. G., Makino, S., Lien, C.‐L., & Keating, M. T. (2005). fgf20 is 
essential for initiating zebrafish fin regeneration. Science, 310, 1957–
1960. https​://doi.org/10.1126/scien​ce.1117637
Yokoyama, H. (2008). Initiation of limb regeneration: The critical steps 
for regenerative capacity. Development Growth and Differentiation, 
50, 13–22. https​://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-169X.2007.00973.x
Yokoyama, H., Endo, T., Tamura, K., Yajima, H., & Ide, H. (1998). Digit 
formation in Xenopus limb bud recombinants. Developmental Biology, 
96, 1–10.
Yokoyama, H., Ogino, H., Stoick‐Cooper, C. L., Grainger, R. M., & Moon, 
R. T. (2007). Wnt/β‐catenin signaling has an essential role in the ini-
tiation of limb regeneration. Developmental Biology, 306, 170–178. 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.03.014
SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional supporting information may be found online in the 
Supporting Information section.       
How to cite this article: Okumura A, Hayashi T, Ebisawa M, et 
al. Cell type‐specific transcriptome analysis unveils secreted 
signaling molecule genes expressed in apical epithelial cap 
during appendage regeneration. Develop Growth Differ. 
2019;61:447–456. https​://doi.org/10.1111/dgd.12635​

===== Ortiz-Alvarez2019_Neuron_NSC+EC+Geminin =====
Article
Adult Neural Stem Cells and Multiciliated Ependymal
Cells Share a Common Lineage Regulated by the
Geminin Family Members
Highlights
d High-throughput clonal analysis shows a common origin of
ependymal and B1 stem cells
d Ependymal cells are mostly produced through symmetric
divisions
d B1 cells are generated through asymmetric divisions with
ependymal cells
d Geminin family members tune the proportion of ependymal
and B1 stem cells in clones
Authors
Gonzalo Ortiz-A´ lvarez, Marie Daclin,
Asm Shihavuddin, ..., Alice Meunier,
Auguste Genovesio, Nathalie Spassky
Correspondence
nathalie.spassky@ens.fr
In Brief
Adult neurogenesis persists in mammals.
Ortiz-A´ lvarez et al. analyze the clonal
relationship among ependymal cells and
B1 astrocytes, which together compose
the adult neurogenic niche. They show
that their proportion is tuned by the DNA
replication regulators Geminin
and GemC1.
Ortiz-A´ lvarez et al., 2019, Neuron 102, 159–172
April 3, 2019 ª 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2019.01.051

Neuron
Article
Adult Neural Stem Cells and Multiciliated
Ependymal Cells Share a Common Lineage
Regulated by the Geminin Family Members
Gonzalo Ortiz-A´ lvarez,1,6 Marie Daclin,1,6 Asm Shihavuddin,1,5 Pauline Lansade,1 Aure´ lien Fortoul,1 Marion Faucourt,1
Sole` ne Clavreul,2 Maria-Eleni Lalioti,3 Stavros Taraviras,3 Simon Hippenmeyer,4 Jean Livet,2 Alice Meunier,1
Auguste Genovesio,1 and Nathalie Spassky1,7,*
1Institut de Biologie de l’Ecole Normale Supe´ rieure (IBENS), Ecole Normale Supe´ rieure, CNRS, INSERM, PSL Universite´ Paris,
75005 Paris, France
2Sorbonne Universite´ , INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la Vision, 75012 Paris, France
3Department of Physiology, Medical School, University of Patras, 26504 Rio, Patras, Greece
4Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Am Campus 1, 3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria
5Present address: Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby, Denmark
6These authors contributed equally
7Lead Contact
*Correspondence: nathalie.spassky@ens.fr
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2019.01.051
SUMMARY
Adult neural stem cells and multiciliated ependymal
cells are glial cells essential for neurological func-
tions. Together, they make up the adult neurogenic
niche. Using both high-throughput clonal analysis
and single-cell resolution of progenitor division pat-
terns and fate, we show that these two components
of the neurogenic niche are lineally related: adult neu-
ral stem cells are sister cells to ependymal cells,
whereas most ependymal cells arise from the termi-
nal symmetric divisions of the lineage. Unexpectedly,
we found that the antagonist regulators of DNA repli-
cation, GemC1 and Geminin, can tune the proportion
of neural stem cells and ependymal cells. Our ﬁnd-
ings reveal the controlled dynamic of the neurogenic
niche ontogeny and identify the Geminin family
members as key regulators of the initial pool of adult
neural stem cells.
INTRODUCTION
Neurons and glial cells are continuously produced throughout
life. In the adult, a subpopulation of astrocytes (type B1) located
in the ventricular-subventricular zone (V-SVZ) region of the
lateral ventricles (LVs) retain stem cell properties; i.e., self-
renewal and multilineage differentiation (Doetsch et al., 1999).
These cells have a multipolar shape, contact both the LV and
the blood vessels, and are surrounded by multiciliated ependy-
mal cells (Shen et al., 2008; Tavazoie et al., 2008; Mirzadeh
et al., 2008). The coordinated beating of ependymal cilia contrib-
utes to cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) dynamics, which is crucial for
the exposure of type B1 cells to trophic and metabolic signals
and to clear toxins and waste from the brain (Spassky and
Meunier, 2017). Proper functioning of adult neurogenesis thus
depends on the production and positioning of the controlled
number of ependymal cells and type B1 astrocytes composing
the neurogenic niche.
Type B1 astrocytes and ependymal cells are both derived from
radial glial cells (RGCs) between embryonic day 13.5 (E13.5) and
E15.5 and progressively acquire identical phenotypic markers
(Sox2, Sox9, Nestin, and CD133) (Ferri et al., 2004; Mirzadeh
et al., 2008; Sun et al., 2017). However, in the adult, these cells
have very different morphologies and fulﬁll different functions:
e.g., although B1 astrocytes are reactivable quiescent neuronal
progenitors,
multiciliated
ependymal
cells
are
postmitotic
throughout life (Fuentealba et al., 2015; Furutachi et al., 2015;
Shah et al., 2018; Spassky et al., 2005). It is totally unknown
how these cells are allocated to the neurogenic niche and how
they acquire their common characteristics and distinct identities
and functions.
Recent studies have demonstrated that GemC1 and Mcidas
are early regulators of multiciliogenesis in different organs (Arbi
et al., 2016; Boon et al., 2014; Kyrousi et al., 2015; Ma et al.,
2014; Stubbs et al., 2012; Terre´ et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2015).
Interestingly, these coiled-coil proteins, together with their
antagonist Geminin, are part of the Geminin superfamily, which
was initially characterized for its role in DNA replication control
(Balestrini et al., 2010; McGarry and Kirschner, 1998; Pefani
et al., 2011). More recently, Geminin was found to regulate neural
cell fate and to be highly expressed in cycling type B1 cells in the
adult SVZ (Khatri et al., 2014; Sankar et al., 2016).
Here
we
exploited
high-resolution
lineage-tracing
tech-
niques—multi-addressable genome-integrative color (MAGIC)
markers (Loulier et al., 2014) and mosaic analysis with double
markers (MADM) strategies (Gao et al., 2014)—in the mouse
brain to show that type B1 astrocytes and ependymal cells share
a common RGC progenitor. These RGCs ﬁrst produce type B1
astrocytes through both symmetric and asymmetric divisions.
Ultimately, ependymal cells are produced through terminal
Neuron 102, 159–172, April 3, 2019 ª 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc.
159
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

symmetric division. We also examined the role of antagonist reg-
ulators of DNA replication (GemC1 and Geminin) in lineage pro-
gression. We show that GemC1 promotes premature symmetric
division of RGCs producing ependymal cells at the expense of
astrocytes, whereas Geminin favors symmetric divisions pro-
ducing type B1 astrocytes. Altogether, we show that ependymal
cells and type B1 astrocytes share a common lineage in which
type B1 cells are produced ﬁrst, followed by a majority of epen-
dymal cells. This dynamic can be modulated by the Geminin
family members.
RESULTS
Ependymal Cells Originate from Locally
Differentiated RGCs
Multiciliated ependymal cells are generated from RGCs around
E15 (Spassky et al., 2005). To determine how these cells
develop, we performed a single injection of 5-ethynyl-2’-deoxy-
uridine (EdU) at E15.5 and studied the relative positions of EdU+
ependymal cells on the ventricular walls at post-natal day 15
(P15). EdU+ ependymal cells were often juxtaposed or close to
each other (Figures S1A–S1C). To quantitatively assess their
spatial distribution, we performed a nearest neighbor distance
(NND) analysis on the datasets. The NNDs among EdU+ ependy-
mal cells were signiﬁcantly shorter than in simulated random da-
tasets, suggesting that ependymal cells born at the same time
remain in the same area (Figure S1D). To further test this possi-
bility, we employed a genetic fate-tracing strategy. We crossed
the Ai14 transgenic mouse line, which expresses tdTomato
after Cre-dependent excision of a ‘‘ﬂoxed stop’’ cassette
(Madisen et al., 2010), with Emx1-Cre, Gsh2-Cre, or Nkx2.1-
Cre transgenic mice, which express Cre recombinase in the dor-
sal-medial, lateral, and ventral regions of the LVs, respectively
(Figures 1A–1C). At P10, almost all ependymal cells were tdT+
in Cre-expressing ventricular walls (Figures 1D–1F), whereas
they were tdT in Cre-negative regions (Figures 1G–1I), showing
that ependymal cells do not migrate out of their site of origin dur-
ing maturation (Figures 1J–1M). We observed similar results in all
caudo-rostral regions examined. Together, these results show
that ependymal cells are produced locally and do not migrate
long distances from their site of origin.
IUE Labels Ependymal Cells and Type B1 Astrocytes in
the V-SVZ
Given that ependymal cells develop locally from RGCs, we
labeled their progenitors at E14.5 in the lateral ganglionic
eminence (LGE) by in utero electroporation and traced their line-
age at later stages. We ﬁrst veriﬁed that cells targeted by in utero
electroporation (IUE) are cycling by injecting EdU at E13.5 or
E14.5. The next day, 78% ± 2% of electroporated cells were
indeed EdU+ (Figure S2), conﬁrming that cycling cells are prefer-
entially transfected by IUE and that progenitor fate can be traced
by this technique, as shown previously (Loulier et al., 2014; Stan-
cik et al., 2010).
We then characterized the progeny of cells electroporated
at E14.5 with the H2B-GFP plasmid by immunostaining the
V-SVZ at P10–P15 with FoxJ1 and Sox9 antibodies to distin-
guish ependymal cells (FoxJ1+Sox9+) from other glial cells
(FoxJ1Sox9+) (Sun et al., 2017; Figures 2A and 2B). We
observed that around two-thirds of GFP+ cells were ependymal
cells, whereas most of the remaining FoxJ1 cells were Sox9+
astrocytes (Figure 2C). We also performed FGFR1OP (FOP)
and glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP) staining to distinguish
ependymal cells (multiple FOP+ basal bodies and GFAP) from
astrocytes (FOP+ centrosome and GFAP+). Most electroporated
cells close to the ventricular surface were either GFAP ependy-
mal cells containing multiple FOP+ basal bodies or GFAP+
astrocytes with one FOP+ centrosome (Figure 2D). A ventricular
contact emitting a primary cilium was also observed on GFP+
astrocytes (Doetsch et al., 1999). The GFP+ astrocytes often
had an unusual nuclear morphology with envelope invaginations,
as reported recently (Cebria´ n-Silla et al., 2017). Noteworthy,
neuroblasts with their typical migratory morphology were
observed deeper in the tissue and at a distance from the electro-
porated area in the direction of the olfactory bulb (data
not shown).
To further test whether some of the astrocytes originating from
the electroporated RGCs could act as adult neural stem cells
(type B1 astrocytes), we permanently labeled RGCs and their
progeny by IUE of a transposable Nucbow vector at E14.5
(nuclear MAGIC markers; Loulier et al., 2014) and administered
EdU through the animals’ drinking water for 14 days starting at
P21 (Figure 2E). One week after the end of EdU administration,
EdU+Nucbow+ neurons were observed on each olfactory bulb
section, showing that cells derived from electroporated RGCs
at E14.5 are adult neural stem cells that give rise to olfactory
bulb neurons (Figure 2F and 2G).
These results show that electroporation of RGCs at E14.5 la-
bels multiciliated ependymal cells and adult neural stem cells
(type B1 astrocytes) that are retained in the V-SVZ at adult
stages.
Lineage Tracing Using MAGIC Markers Shows that
Ependymal Cells Derive from Symmetric and
Asymmetric Divisions of RGCs
We then took advantage of the large panel of distinct colors
produced by the MAGIC markers approach to trace and
analyze the lineage of ependymal cells. The V-SVZ of P15–P20
brains electroporated with the Nucbow vector at E14.5 were
immunostained with the ependymal marker FoxJ1 in far red,
and colors were automatically analyzed to avoid any eye bias
(Figures 3A–3C). Brieﬂy, FoxJ1 staining was ﬁrst used as a refer-
ence for the ventricular surface, and 25-mm-thick 3D image
stacks of the ventricular whole-mounts were segmented as
described previously (Shihavuddin et al., 2017). Nucbow+ cells
were then sorted as FoxJ1+ or FoxJ1 (Figure S3; Figure 3D).
To deﬁne the criteria that identify two cells as sister cells, 2 inde-
pendent researchers manually picked 49 pairs of cells with
similar Nucbow colors (Figure S4A). Both their color content
(saturation, value, and hue in the RGB tridimensional space)
and their 3D spatial distances were computed (Figure 3E;
Figures S4B and S4C). The maximum difference found for
each of these parameters was chosen as a threshold for auto-
matic analysis of all Nucbow+ cells in each brain (Figures S4D–
S4G). This automatic analysis of all cells from 6 electroporated
brains (corresponding to a total of 7,668 Nucbow+ cells and
160
Neuron 102, 159–172, April 3, 2019

Emx1-cre; Ai14
Gsh2-cre; Ai14
Nkx2.1-cre; Ai14
Dorsal
wall
Transcription factor 
expression pattern
Emx1
Gsh2
Nkx2.1
Pallium
LGE
MGE
Septum
Lateral
wall
Medial
wall
Ventricular 
lumen
Ventricular 
lumen
CD24/tdT
A
B
C
D
E
F
J
K
L
M
Percentage of tdT+
ependymal cells (%)
Percentage of tdT+
ependymal cells (%)
Percentage of tdT+
 ependymal cells (%)
Embryo E12
Postnatal P10
G
H
I
D
M
***
**
***
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cre+ VZ
Cre+ VZ
Cre+ VZ
Cre- VZ
Cre- VZ
Cre- VZ
Cre+ VZ 
(dashed line)
Cre- VZ
FoxJ1/tdT
FoxJ1/tdT
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Figure 1. Ependymal Cell Progenitors Are
Produced Locally along the Brain Ventricles
(A–C) Representative images of coronal sections
of Emx1-Cre; Ai14 (A), Gsh2-Cre; Ai14 (B), and
Nkx2.1-Cre; Ai14 (C) forebrain at P10, immuno-
stained with CD24 (green) and DsRed (tdT, red)
antibodies. CD24+tdT+ ependymal cells are only
observed in the Cre-expressing domains in each
mouse line (indicated by a dashed line).
(D–I) Representative high-magniﬁcation images of
the Emx1-Cre; Ai14 (D and G), Gsh2-Cre; Ai14 (E
and H), and Nkx2.1-Cre; Ai14 (F and I) coronal
sections immunostained with FoxJ1 (green) and
DsRed (tdT, red) antibodies in the Cre+ domains
(D–F) or Cre domains (G–I), respectively. In the
Cre+ domains, almost all ependymal cells are tdT+,
whereas very few cells are double-labeled in the
Cre domains in each mouse line.
(J–L) Quantiﬁcation of the mean percentage of
tdT+ ependymal cells in different areas of the
ventricular zone from n = 6, n = 4, and n = 5 mice
from each of the three transgenic mouse lines:
Emx1-Cre; Ai14 (J), Gsh2-Cre; Ai14 (K), and
Nkx2.1-Cre; Ai14 (L), respectively. Error bars
indicate the SEM. The p values were determined
with a Mann-Whitney test; **p % 0.01 and ***p %
0.001.
(M) Schematic of the expression patterns of each
transcription factor in the mouse forebrain at E12
and model of the spatial origin of ependymal cells
at P10. D, dorsal; M, medial.
The scale bars represent 200 mm (A–C) and 10 mm
(D–I).
Neuron 102, 159–172, April 3, 2019
161

merge
GFAP
FOP
H2B-GFP
B
C
D
E
merge
Sox9
FoxJ1
H2B-GFP
Percentage of H2B-GFP+
cells (%)
1 week
P21
analysis on olfactory 
bulb sections
EdU 14d
E14.5
NucBow 
integrative 
IUE
Hoechst
NucBow
EdU
F
G
A
P15
analysis on 
V-SVZ WM
E14.5
H2B-GFP IUE
merge
G
100
25
50
75
**
**
***
NucBow
EdU
Sox9+
FoxJ1+
Sox9+
FoxJ1-
CC
Cx
LV
D
R
Figure 2. Radial Glial Cells Generate Ependymal Cells and Adult Neural Stem Cells (Type B1 Astrocytes)
(A) Experimental schematic for (B)–(D). The H2B-GFP-expressing plasmid was electroporated in utero at E14.5 and analyzed on V-SVZ whole-mount (WM) at P15.
CC, corpus callosum; Cx, cortex; LV, lateral ventricle; R, rostral; D, dorsal.
(B and D) P15 V-SVZ whole-mounts were double-immunostained with FoxJ1 (red) and Sox9 (blue) antibodies (B) or FOP (white) and GFAP (red) antibodies (D).
GFP+FoxJ1+Sox9+ ependymal cells are indicated by arrows, and GFP+FoxJ1Sox9+ astrocytes are outlined in white (B). GFP+GFAP ependymal cells with
multiple FOP+ dots are indicated by arrows, and a GFP+GFAP+ astrocyte with a FOP+ centrosome is indicated by an arrowhead (D).
(legend continued on next page)
162
Neuron 102, 159–172, April 3, 2019

418 clones of 2 cells or more) showed that more than 80% of
clones (with at least one Nucbow+FoxJ1+ cell) contained 8 or
less cells, suggesting that most ependymal cells were derived
from 3 or less cell divisions (Figures 3F and 3G; Figures S5A–
S5F). We excluded the largest clones (9 to 32 cells) because
we noted that they were often labeled with the most frequent la-
bels in the dataset (corresponding to the primary colors red,
green, and blue), suggesting that merging of juxtaposed clones
expressing the same label had occurred (Figure S5G).
Among the 349 clones with 8 or less cells, around half con-
tained only 2 cells, suggesting that, at E14.5, most clones were
generated from one terminal cell division of RGCs (n = 6 mice;
Figure 3H). These 2-cell clones were composed of 1 or 2
FoxJ1+ cells in a 1:1 ratio, showing that the terminal division
could be either symmetric or asymmetric (Figure 3I). Interest-
ingly, the 3D distance between cells was higher in mixed clones
(clones composed of ependymal and non-ependymal cells)
compared with pure ependymal clones (Figure 3J), showing
that FoxJ1 cells were deeper in the SVZ compared with
FoxJ1+ cells in the VZ.
Clones containing 3 to 8 cells were generated through 2 or 3
cell divisions, the last of which was either only symmetric (clones
containing FoxJ1+ cells only) or both symmetric and asymmetric
(clones containing FoxJ1+ and FoxJ1 cells). Interestingly, a ma-
jority of these clones contained more FoxJ1 cells than FoxJ1+
cells, suggesting that symmetric divisions giving rise to 2 FoxJ1
cells might have occurred in these clones (Figure 3K).
Lineage tracing experiments of RGCs using the MAGIC
markers strategy thus show that ependymal cells originate
from either one terminal symmetric division giving rise to 2 epen-
dymal cells or 1 asymmetric division giving rise to 1 ependymal
and 1 FoxJ1 cell. Most importantly, this analysis of a large num-
ber of clones distributed along the caudo-rostral and ventro-dor-
sal axis of the lateral wall of the LV of 6 different electroporated
brains did not reveal any regional differences. This observation
suggests that the ontogeny of the neurogenic niche can be
determined by analyzing individual cells along the LV.
MADM of V-SVZ Gliogenesis Reveals that Ependymal
and B1 Cells Share a Common Lineage
To obtain more insight into the cellular mechanisms and the
sequence of symmetric versus asymmetric divisions producing
each clone, we used the MADM system coupled with IUE of
Cre recombinase at E13.5 or E14.5 (Figure 4A; Gao et al.,
2014). In electroporated cells, Cre recombinase mediates inter-
chromosomal recombination, which reconstitutes cytoplasmic
enhanced GFP (EGFP, green) or tandem dimer Tomato (tdTo-
mato, red). If recombination occurs in G2 phase of the cell cycle,
and each red or green chromosome segregates in separate
daughter cells (X segregation), then the two descendent lineages
will be permanently labeled green or red by MADM events (Fig-
ure 4B). Analysis of cell number and identity will thus allow direct
assessment of the division pattern (symmetric versus asym-
metric) and cell fate decision of the original dividing progenitors.
Otherwise, if recombination occurs in G0/G1, or if both red and
green chromosomes segregate in the same cell (Z segregation),
then recombined cells appear yellow and will be excluded from
the analysis (Figure 4B). We thus induced Cre activity through
IUE in MADM pregnant mothers at E13.5 or E14.5 and analyzed
the V-SVZ at P15–P20 after immunolabeling of centrioles com-
bined with MADM cytoplasmic staining to identify the cell types
composing each clone (Figure 4C). This approach allowed a
clonal study of green-red clones because the efﬁciency of
recombination leading to green-red clones was low in these
mice (mean number of clones per animal, 5), and most recom-
bined cells were double-labeled (yellow) (Figure 4C). Cells were
considered a clone when their spatial distance was less than
100 mm, as deﬁned previously by the Nucbow lineage-tracing ex-
periments. Red or green cells located in the electroporated re-
gion of the V-SVZ were either multiciliated ependymal (E) cells,
characterized by a few short processes and multiple FOP+ basal
bodies in their cytoplasm associated with long cilia, or astrocytes
(type B1), whose cell body and multiple long processes were
deeper in the SVZ. These astrocytes contained 2 centrosomal
centrioles that occasionally contacted the ventricular surface
and extended a primary cilium. These cells were thus easily
discriminated from multiciliated ependymal cells (identiﬁed by
multiple centrioles and long cilia) or even neuroblasts, which
displayed typical migrating morphologies in the direction of the
olfactory bulb and were located deeper in the tissue at larger dis-
tances from the clone. When the cells of a clone were in close
proximity, their cell body or processes often contacted each
other, suggesting that they might maintain communication at
the adult stage (Figures 4C–4G; Videos S1 and S2). We observed
very few red or green cells alone (clone of 1 cell in Figure 4H) or
larger monochrome clones, if any, in the V-SVZ, suggesting that
asymmetric divisions giving rise to one ventricular and one non-
ventricular cell were rare in these experiments. In contrast, we
found that, among the 44 clones of 2–6 cells, 48% of them con-
tained 2 cells (21 clones), and 52% of them contained 3–6 cells
(23 clones), which is in line with our ﬁndings above showing
that half of the RGCs at E14.5 divided once to produce glial cells
in the V-SVZ. At E13.5, RGCs also produced V-SVZ cells, but the
majority divided twice or more because 90% of clones contained
3 or more cells (Figure 4H). The distance between cells in a clone
was higher at E13.5 compared with E14.5, showing that cells
disperse as cell divisions proceed (Figure 4I). Both the proportion
of mixed clones (containing both ependymal and B1 cells;
(C) Mean percentage of astrocytes (Sox9+FoxJ1), ependymal cells (Sox9+FoxJ1+), and others (Sox9FoxJ1) among H2B-GFP+ electroporated cells. Analyses
were done on n = 3 animals; a total of 441 cells were counted. Error bars represent the SEM. The p values were determined with a two-proportion Z test;
***p % 0.001, **p % 0.01.
(E) Experimental schematic for (F) and (G). Nucbow plasmids (PBCAG-Nucbow along with the PiggyBac transposase and the self-excising Cre recombinase) were
electroporated in utero at E14.5 and received EdU (through drinking water) for 14 days starting at P21.
(F and G) Coronal sections of the olfactory bulb (OB) were prepared 1 week after the last day of EdU administration. (G) is a high-magniﬁcation image of (F) to show
that some Nucbow+ interneurons in the OB are EdU+.
The scale bars represent 40 mm (B), 15 mm (C), 520 mm (F), and 180 mm (G).
Neuron 102, 159–172, April 3, 2019
163

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
Figure 3. Clonal Analysis of Ependymal Cells with MAGIC Markers Reveals Both Symmetric and Asymmetric Divisions of RGCs
(A) Experimental schematic. Nucbow plasmids were electroporated in utero at E14.5 and analyzed at P15–P20.
(B–D) Representative Z-projected image of an en face view of the V-SVZ (B) immunostained at P15 with anti-FoxJ1 antibody (C). (D) shows a segmented image of
(B) and (C), obtained using FoxJ1 staining, as a reference (STAR Methods; Figures S3–S5). FoxJ1+Nucbow+ cells are outlined in white.
(legend continued on next page)
164
Neuron 102, 159–172, April 3, 2019

Figure 4J) and the number of type B1 astrocytes (Figure 4K) in the
clones decreased at E14.5 compared with E13.5, suggesting
that fewer type B1 astrocytes are produced compared with
ependymal cells. Alternatively, type B1 astrocytes might be pro-
duced at earlier stages compared with ependymal cells. Note-
worthy is that the distribution of astrocytes (B1) and ependymal
cells in each clone revealed that astrocytes were produced at a
lower rate than ependymal cells and that symmetric divisions
producing 2 astrocytes (B1-B1) occurred more frequently at
E13.5 than at E14.5 (Figure 4L; Table S1).
Together, these results show that ependymal cells and astro-
cytes are sister cells produced through symmetric (B1-B1 or E-E)
and asymmetric (E-B1) divisions of RGCs at mid-gestation in the
mouse forebrain.
To gain more insight into the molecular regulation of RGC dif-
ferentiation into type B1 astrocytes or ependymal cells, we per-
turbed these divisions with members of the Geminin superfamily,
initially described as regulators of DNA replication (Balestrini
et al., 2010; Pefani et al., 2011). Two members of this family
(Mcidas and GemC1) were recently identiﬁed as master regula-
tors of multiciliated ependymal cell fate (Kyrousi et al., 2015),
whereas the other member, Geminin, was found to regulate neu-
ral cell fate and to be highly expressed in cycling type B1 cells in
the adult SVZ (Khatri et al., 2014; Sankar et al., 2016). We also
conﬁrmed that GemC1 and Geminin genes are expressed along
the LV at E14.5, in the choroid plexus and the ventricular zone,
respectively (Figure S6). Moreover, ependymal cell differentia-
tion was totally absent in cultured cells from the GemC1 full
mutant, whereas it was slightly (although not signiﬁcantly)
increased in cultured cells from the Geminin conditional mutant
(Figures S7B–S7E).
GemC1 Expression Induces Premature Ependymal Cell
Differentiation at the Expense of Type B1 Cells
Overexpression of GemC1 through IUE at E13.5 or E14.5
dramatically increased ependymal cell differentiation at the
expense of SVZ cells, as shown previously (Figures S7G–S7I;
Kyrousi et al., 2015). Interestingly, because B1 cells were absent,
pinwheels were not observed in densely GemC1-electroporated
regions (Figures S7J and S7K) compared with neighboring areas
in which GemC1 electroporation was sparse (Figure S7L). Over-
expression of GemC1 together with induction of Cre activity
through IUE in MADM embryos at E14.5 did not change the
size of the clones compared with controls, suggesting that
most RGCs were already undergoing their last division at that
stage (Figure 5C). In contrast, when IUE was performed at
E13.5, the clones were smaller compared with controls, sug-
gesting that GemC1 induced premature exit from the cell cycle
at that stage (Figure 5C). Consistently, the average distance be-
tween cells in the GemC1 clones at E13.5 was smaller than in
controls (compare Figures 4I and 5D; Mann-Whitney test,
**p % 0.01) and similar to E14.5 GemC1 (Figure 5D). Further-
more, overexpression of GemC1 at E13.5 or E14.5 promoted
the ependymal fate because the numbers of both pure ependy-
mal clones and ependymal cells in the clones were dramatically
increased compared with controls (two-proportion Z test be-
tween controls and GemC1: ***p % 0.001; compare Figures 4J
and 4K and 5E and 5F). Notably, although astrocytes were occa-
sionally produced through symmetric divisions in controls, they
were exclusively generated through asymmetric divisions with
ependymal cells after GemC1 overexpression at E13.5 or
E14.5. Indeed, no pairs of astrocytes were detected after
GemC1 overexpression (Figure 6F; Table S2).
Geminin Expression Favors the Generation of Type
B1 Cells
Geminin physically interacts with GemC1 and Mcidas (Caillat
et al., 2013, 2015), but its role during ependymal cell generation
is still unknown. We thus tested the inﬂuence of Geminin overex-
pression on the fate of RGCs through IUE with Cre in MADM
pregnant mothers at E13.5 or E14.5 (Figures 6A and 6B).
Notably, a majority of the clones contained type B1 astrocytes,
characterized by an apical contact with a primary cilium and
cytoplasmic extensions contacting blood vessels (Figure 6B;
Video S3; Table S3). The size of the clones was slightly increased
both in E13.5 and E14.5 Geminin-overexpressing clones but
similar to that of controls, suggesting that Geminin does not
act on the rate of cell division in RGCs (Figure 6C). Interestingly,
the proportion of mixed clones and the number of type B1 astro-
cytes were not signiﬁcantly increased after Geminin overexpres-
sion (two-proportion Z test between controls and Geminin: not
signiﬁcant, p > 0.05; compare Figures 4J and 4K and 6D and
6E; Figure 6F). However, Geminin overexpression led to signiﬁ-
cant formation of clones containing only B1 cells, which was
never observed in controls (two-proportion Z test between
E14.5 control and E14.5 Geminin for the B1-only population: *p
% 0.05; compare Figures 4 and 6D). Consistently, the number
of symmetric divisions producing 2 astrocytes (B1-B1) increased
signiﬁcantly after Geminin overexpression at E14.5 compared
with controls (Figure 6F; Table S3).
(E) Circular hue-saturation and hue-value plots of all Nucbow+ cells from (D).
(F and G) High-magniﬁcation images of the insets in (D), showing examples of clones: 2 ependymal doublets and 1 triplet containing 1 ependymal cell and 2
FoxJ1 cells (F) and 3 ependymal doublets, 1 ependymal triplet, and 1 triplet containing 1 ependymal cell and 2 FoxJ1 cells (G).
(H) Mean percentages of clones containing 2 or 3–8 Nucbow+ cells. Error bars represent the SEM of n = 163 clones of 2 cells and n = 186 clones of 3–8 cells;
p values were determined by Mann-Whitney test; ns, p > 0.05.
(I) Mean percentages of clones of 2 Nucbow+ cells containing 1 (mixed clones, gray) or 2 (ependymal clones, black) FoxJ1+ cells. Error bars represent the SEM of
n = 82 ependymal clones and n = 81 mixed clones from 6 independent experiments; p values were determined by Mann-Whitney test; ns, p > 0.05.
(J) Average 3D distances between the cells composing ependymal or mixed clones of 2 cells. Error bars represent the SEM of n = 82 ependymal clones and n = 81
mixed clones from 6 independent experiments; p values were determined by Mann-Whitney test; *p % 0.05.
(K) Mean percentages of clones of 3–8 Nucbow+ cells containing only FoxJ1+ cells (black), more or an equal number of FoxJ1+ compared with FoxJ1 cells (dark
gray), or more FoxJ1 cells (light gray) per clone. Error bars represent the SEM of n = 186 clones of 3–8 cells; p values were determined by Mann-Whitney test;
**p % 0.01; *p % 0.05; ns, p > 0.05.
The scale bars represent 100 mm (B)–(D) and 22 mm (F) and (G).
Neuron 102, 159–172, April 3, 2019
165

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
Figure 4. MADM Reveals the Presence of Ependymal-Ependymal and Ependymal-Astrocyte Divisions at E13.5 and E14.5
(A) Experimental schematic. The Cre plasmid was electroporated in utero in MADM-11TG/GT at E13.5 or E14.5, and V-SVZ WMs were analyzed at P15–P20.
(B) Schematic representation of Cre-mediated MADM clone induction in dividing RGCs. A G2-X event results in clones of red- and green-labeled cells, and a G2-Z
event generates double-labeled (yellow) and unlabeled clones of cells. Recombination occurring in G0/G1 phases of the cell cycle leads to double-labeled
(yellow) cells.
(legend continued on next page)
166
Neuron 102, 159–172, April 3, 2019

Altogether, these results show that ependymal cells and astro-
cytes are sister cells produced through symmetric or asymmetric
divisions, the balance of which is modulated by the level of
expression of Geminin family genes.
DISCUSSION
Using a Cre-lox fate mapping technique and complementary
MAGIC markers- and MADM-based clonal analysis, our study
revealed how glial cells are produced in the V-SVZ during
development. First, our results proved that ependymal cells
are derived from RGCs all along the embryonic neuroepithelium
(pallium and lateral and medial ganglionic eminences) and
differentiate locally; ependymal progenitors born in a speciﬁc
area of the VZ do not migrate long distances to colonize other
areas of the neuroepithelium (Figure 1). We then showed that
ependymal cells and B1-type astrocytes appear at the end of
neurogenesis, mainly through E-B1 asymmetric or E-E sym-
metric divisions of RGCs. B1-B1 symmetric divisions were
less frequent and always combined with E-E or E-B1 divisions
(Figure 7). These glial cells have a low migratory capacity and
often contact each other, even at the adult stage. Our study
thus demonstrates that multiciliated ependymal cells and adult
neural stem cells, ultimately forming the adult neurogenic niche,
are sister cells that share a common origin. We also provide ev-
idence that these cells are sequentially produced, with the bulk
of B1 astrocytes being produced just before the bulk of epen-
dymal cells. Interestingly, their respective numbers are pre-
cisely regulated by the Geminin family members. Overexpres-
sion of Geminin, a gene expressed more in cycling compared
with quiescent neural stem cells (Khatri et al., 2014) and in
the ventricular zone at E14.5 (Figure S6), favors B1-B1 symmet-
ric divisions (Figure 6F). On the contrary, overexpression of its
antagonist, GemC1, at E14.5 induces premature terminal E-E
divisions and leads to a sharp decrease in the ﬁnal number of
B1 cells (Figures 5E and 5F). Given that GemC1 expression is
only detected in the choroid plexus at that stage (Figure S6;
Arbi et al., 2016), one can hypothesize that it is expressed at
very low and/or undetectable levels in these progenitors. Alter-
natively, GemC1 might be expressed at later stages of devel-
opment because ependymal differentiation starts postnatally
in controls (Spassky et al., 2005). Both possibilities should be
tested further, but they might already explain why GemC1
expression at high levels and/or before its normal expression
in progenitors leads to premature ependymal differentiation.
The sequential expression of Geminin family members could
thus be responsible for the temporal differences in glia produc-
tion. The 2-fold presence of ependymal cells with respect to B1
cells (Mirzadeh et al., 2008) could result from the balance be-
tween the levels of expression of these genes. These ﬁndings
raise the question of the fate decision mechanisms driving
RGCs toward symmetric or asymmetric cell division. An analo-
gous question was addressed by others concerning neuronal
versus glial cell generation. Interestingly, it has been shown
that the number of neurons produced by RG is predictable
and that around one in 6 RGCs perform a gliogenic division
only when they have exhausted their capacity to proliferate
(Gao et al., 2014). At early stages of corticogenesis, RGCs
would thus divide asymmetrically to produce neurons and glial
progenitors, which would then generate type B1 astrocytes and
ependymal cells. Similarly, we found that RGCs generate more
mixed clones and more astrocytes when they are electropo-
rated at E13.5 than at E14.5 (Figures 4J and 4K). This suggests
that astrocytes are produced earlier than ependymal cells. One
might hypothesize that RGCs ﬁrst give rise to astrocytes until
they exhaust their proliferative capacity and yield two ependy-
mal cells through symmetric cell division at later developmental
stages. Further lineage studies would be required to identify
whether/which neuronal subtypes are lineally related to V-SVZ
glial cells (type B1 astrocytes and ependymal cells). Impor-
tantly, although ependymal cells become post-mitotic (Spassky
et al., 2005), most V-SVZ astrocytes can be reactivated in the
adult (Obernier et al., 2018). Altogether, this suggests that
RGCs ﬁrst produce quiescent daughter cells with the potential
to enter the cell cycle again (type B1 astrocytes) and then post-
mitotic ependymal cells. Interestingly, the description of distinct
pathways of glial production via symmetric or asymmetric divi-
sion unveils the existence of two separate fate decision mech-
anisms that occur subsequent to the last division of RGCs. This
indicates that ependymal versus astrocyte speciﬁcation might
be dependent on the correct segregation of organelles (i.e.,
centrioles or mitochondria), which have been shown to inﬂu-
ence neural stem cell self-renewal and fate decisions (Khacho
et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2009). Noteworthy is that Geminin
(C–G) Airyscan confocal image of a P15 MADM-labeled V-SVZ whole-mount electroporated with a CRE-expressing plasmid at E14.5. The ventricular wall was
stained with EGFP (green), tdTomato (red), and FOP (white) antibodies. (C) Double-labeled yellow cells issued from a G2-Z recombination event are indicated by
yellow arrows. Ependymal-ependymal (D and E) and ependymal-astrocyte (F and G) clones of two sister cells are shown at high magniﬁcation (D and F) and in a
3D view (E and G). See also Videos S1 and S2.
(H) Mean percentages of all clones generated from in utero electroporation with Cre at E13.5 or E14.5 according to the number of cells per clone (n = 6 and 16
animals at E13.5 and E14.5, respectively) are represented in a histogram. Also shown are dotted curves ﬁtting both the E13.5 and E14.5 distributions; p values
were determined with the c2 test for trend; *p % 0.05.
(I) Average distance between cells composing the clones. Error bars represent the SEM of 29 and 44 clones at E13.5 and E14.5, respectively; p values were
determined with a Mann-Whitney test; **p % 0.01.
(J) Mean percentage of all clones generated from E13.5 or E14.5 containing ependymal cells only or a mixed population of ependymal cells and astrocytes (B1).
Error bars represent the SEM of 29 and 44 clones at E13.5 and E14.5, respectively; p values were determined with a two-proportion Z test; *p % 0.05.
(K) Mean percentage of ependymal and B1 cells in all clones generated from E13.5 or E14.5. Error bars represent the SEM of 117 and 134 cells at E13.5 and E14.5,
respectively; p values were determined with a two-proportion Z test; *p % 0.05.
(L) Mean percentage of E-E, E-B1, and B1-B1 cell divisions in all clones generated from E13.5 or E14.5. Error bars represent the SEM of 24 and 54 cell divisions at
E13.5 and E14.5, respectively; p values were determined with a Mann-Whitney test; *p % 0.05.
The scale bars represent 30 mm (C) and 8 mm (D–G).
Neuron 102, 159–172, April 3, 2019
167

A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 5. GemC1 Favors the Formation of Pure Ependymal Clones at Both E13.5 and E14.5
(A) Experimental schematic. GemC1 and Cre plasmids were co-electroporated in utero in MADM-11TG/GT at E13.5 or E14.5, and V-SVZ WMs were analyzed at
P15–P20.
(B) Airyscan confocal image of a P15 MADM-labeled V-SVZ whole-mount immunostained with EGFP (green), tdTomato (red), and FOP (white) antibodies showing
a clone of 2 ependymal cells.
(C) Fitting curves of the distribution of clone size according to the number of cells per clone, issued from electroporation of Cre at E13.5 or E14.5 (dotted curves;
n = 6 and 16 animals at E13.5 and E14.5, respectively) or co-electroporation of Cre with GemC1 at E13.5 or E14.5 (solid curves; n = 4 and 9 animals at
E13.5GemC1 and E14.5GemC1, respectively); p values were determined with a c2 test for trend; ns, p > 0.05, **p % 0.01.
(D) Average distance between cells composing the clones generated from co-electroporation of Cre and GemC1 at E13.5 or E14.5. Error bars represent the SEM
of 20 and 41 clones at E13.5 and E14.5, respectively; p values were determined with a Mann-Whitney test; ns, p > 0.05.
(E) Mean percentage of all clones generated from co-electroporation of Cre and GemC1 at E13.5 or E14.5 containing ependymal cells only or a mixed population
of ependymal cells and B1 cells. Error bars represent the SEM of 20 and 41 clones, respectively; p values were determined with a two-proportion Z test; ns,
p > 0.05.
(F) Mean percentage of ependymal and B1 cells in all clones generated from co-electroporation of Cre and GemC1 at E13.5 or E14.5. Error bars represent the
SEM of 57 and 110 cells at E13.5 and E14.5, respectively; p values were determined with a two-proportion Z test; ns, p > 0.05.
The scale bar represents 50 mm.
168
Neuron 102, 159–172, April 3, 2019

A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 6. Geminin Favors the Formation of B1 Cell-Containing Clones at E14.5
(A) Experimental schematic. The Geminin and Cre plasmids were co-electroporated in utero in MADM-11TG/GT at E13.5 and E14.5, and V-SVZ WMs were
analyzed at P15–P20.
(legend continued on next page)
Neuron 102, 159–172, April 3, 2019
169

superfamily members were initially described as regulators of
DNA replication. It would thus be of interest to determine
whether fate decisions in RGCs are driven by DNA replication
events following re-entry into the cell cycle.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCES SHARING
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
d METHOD DETAILS
B In utero electroporation
B EdU administration and detection
B Primary Ependymal Cell culture
B Tissue and cell culture preparation
B Immunostaining
B In situ hybridization
B Imaging
B Automatic image analysis of MAGIC Markers
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSES
B Fate mapping of the spatial origin of ependymal cells
B Characterization of the cell types in the electroporated
V-SVZ
B Automatic image analysis of MAGIC markers
B MADM transgenic image analysis
B EdU incorporation in the V-SVZ analysis
B Characterization of the differentiation status in the V-
SVZ with or without GemC1
B Assessment of the differentiation status of GemC1 KO
and Geminin cKO primary cultures
d DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
(B) Airyscan confocal image of a P15 MADM-labeled V-SVZ whole-mount immunostained with EGFP (green), tdTomato (red), and FOP (white) antibodies showing
a clone containing 1 GFP+ ependymal cell (arrow) and two B1 cells (one GFP+ and one tdT+, arrowheads). Note that both B1 cells contain a centrosome at the
ventricular surface (arrowheads), and they extend a process toward a blood vessel (yellow asterisks). See also Video S3.
(C) Fitting curves of the distribution of clone size according to the number of cells per clone, issued from electroporation of Cre at E13.5 or E14.5 (dotted curves;
n = 6 and 16 animals at E13.5 and E14.5, respectively) or co-electroporation of Cre with Geminin at E13.5 or E14.5 (solid curves; n = 8 and 13 animals at E13.5
Geminin and E14.5 Geminin, respectively); p values were determined with a c2 test for trend; ns, p > 0.05, ***p % 0.001.
(D) Mean percentage of all clones generated from co-electroporation of Cre and Geminin at E13.5 and E14.5 and containing either B1 cells only, ependymal cells
only, or a mixed population of ependymal cells and B1 cells. Error bars represent the SEM of 73 or 107 clones; the p value was determined with a two-proportion
Z test; ns, p > 0.05.
(E) Mean percentage of ependymal and B1 cells in all clones generated from co-electroporation of Cre and Geminin at E13.5 and E14.5. Error bars represent the
SEM of 317 or 335 cells, respectively; the p value was determined with a two-proportion Z test; ns, p > 0.05.
(F) Mean percentage of E-E, E-B1, and B1-B1 cell division in clones generated from E14.5 in controls or after overexpression of GemC1 or Geminin. Error bars
represent the SEM of 16, 9, and 13 independent animals electroporated with Cre, Cre+GemC1, or Cre+Geminin, respectively; p values were determined with a
Mann-Whitney test; ***p % 0.001; **p % 0.01; *p % 0.05; ns, p > 0.05.
The scale bar represents 50 mm.
A
Figure 7. Ependymal Cells and B1 Astrocytes Form One Common Lineage Regulated by Geminin Family Members
(A) Model of adult neural stem cells (NSCs) and multiciliated ependymal cell generation. RGCs give rise to type B1 cells through symmetric divisions (rare event,
3%) or asymmetric divisions (frequent event, 50%) and to multiciliated ependymal cells through symmetric divisions (frequent event, 47%). The antagonistic
Geminin family members Geminin and GemC1 can modulate the cell fate decision. Geminin overexpression favors symmetric divisions giving rise to type B1
astrocytes. On the contrary, GemC1 overexpression triggers symmetric divisions giving rise to ependymal cells. The percentages of E-E, E-B1, and B1-B1
divisions are indicated for IUE at E14.5 in a control situation and upon GemC1 or Geminin overexpression, respectively.
170
Neuron 102, 159–172, April 3, 2019

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information can be found with this article online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuron.2019.01.051.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all members of the Spassky laboratory as well as the Jean-Franc¸ ois
Brunet, Sonia Garel, and Xavier Morin laboratories for comments and discus-
sions. We thank X. Morin for the pCAAGS-H2B-GFP and pCAGGS-Cre plas-
mids. We thank A.-K. Konate and R. Nagalingum for administrative support
and the IBENS Animal Facility for animal care. The team received support
from Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR) Investissements d’Avenir
(ANR-10-LABX-54 MEMO LIFE and ANR-11-IDEX-0001-02 PSL* Research
University). The Spassky laboratory is supported by INSERM, CNRS, E´ cole
Normale Supe´ rieure (ENS), ANR (ANR-17-CE12-0021-03), FRM (Equipe
FRM grant 20140329547), European Research Council (ERC Consolidator
grant 647466), and Cance´ ropoˆ le Iˆle-de-France (2014-1-PL BIO-11-INSERM
121). The Livet and Hippenmeyer laboratories are supported by the European
Research Council (ERC Consolidator grants 649117 and 725780, respec-
tively). G.O.-A. and M.D. received fellowships from Labex MEMOLIFE and
the French Ministry of Higher Education and Research, respectively. S.C.
received fellowships from the Re´ gion Ile-de-France and Association pour la
Recherche sur le Cancer (ARC).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
N.S. designed, funded, and supervised the research. G.O.-A., M.D., P.L., A.F.,
M.F., S.C., J.L., and N.S. designed the experiments and performed the
research. G.O.-A., M.D., P.L., A.F., A.S., A.M., A.G., and N.S. analyzed the
data. S.T. and S.H. provided resources. G.O.-A., M.D., and N.S. wrote the
manuscript with input from all authors.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: July 12, 2018
Revised: December 21, 2018
Accepted: January 24, 2019
Published: February 26, 2019
REFERENCES
Al Jord, A., Lemaıˆtre, A.-I., Delgehyr, N., Faucourt, M., Spassky, N., and
Meunier, A. (2014). Centriole ampliﬁcation by mother and daughter centrioles
differs in multiciliated cells. Nature 516, 104–107.
Arbi, M., Pefani, D.E., Kyrousi, C., Lalioti, M.E., Kalogeropoulou, A.,
Papanastasiou, A.D., Taraviras, S., and Lygerou, Z. (2016). GemC1 controls
multiciliogenesis in the airway epithelium. EMBO Rep. 17, 400–413.
Balestrini, A., Cosentino, C., Errico, A., Garner, E., and Costanzo, V. (2010).
GEMC1 is a TopBP1-interacting protein required for chromosomal DNA repli-
cation. Nat. Cell Biol. 12, 484–491.
Boon, M., Wallmeier, J., Ma, L., Loges, N.T., Jaspers, M., Olbrich, H.,
Dougherty, G.W., Raidt, J., Werner, C., Amirav, I., et al. (2014). MCIDAS muta-
tions result in a mucociliary clearance disorder with reduced generation of
multiple motile cilia. Nat. Commun. 5, 4418.
Caillat, C., Pefani, D.-E., Gillespie, P.J., Taraviras, S., Blow, J.J., Lygerou, Z.,
and Perrakis, A. (2013). The Geminin and Idas coiled coils preferentially form
a heterodimer that inhibits Geminin function in DNA replication licensing.
J. Biol. Chem. 288, 31624–31634.
Caillat, C., Fish, A., Pefani, D.-E., Taraviras, S., Lygerou, Z., and Perrakis, A.
(2015). The structure of the GemC1 coiled coil and its interaction with the
Geminin family of coiled-coil proteins. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr.
71, 2278–2286.
Cebria´ n-Silla, A., Alfaro-Cervello´ , C., Herranz-Pe´ rez, V., Kaneko, N., Park,
D.H., Sawamoto, K., Alvarez-Buylla, A., Lim, D.A., and Garcı´a-Verdugo, J.M.
(2017). Unique Organization of the Nuclear Envelope in the Post-natal
Quiescent Neural Stem Cells. Stem Cell Reports 9, 203–216.
de Frutos, C.A., Bouvier, G., Arai, Y., Thion, M.S., Lokmane, L., Keita, M.,
Garcia-Dominguez, M., Charnay, P., Hirata, T., Riethmacher, D., et al.
(2016). Reallocation of Olfactory Cajal-Retzius Cells Shapes Neocortex
Architecture. Neuron 92, 435–448.
Delgehyr, N., Meunier, A., Faucourt, M., Bosch Grau, M., Strehl, L., Janke, C.,
and Spassky, N. (2015). Ependymal cell differentiation, from monociliated to
multiciliated cells. Methods Cell Biol. 127, 19–35.
Doetsch, F., Caille´ , I., Lim, D.A., Garcı´a-Verdugo, J.M., and Alvarez-Buylla, A.
(1999). Subventricular zone astrocytes are neural stem cells in the adult
mammalian brain. Cell 97, 703–716.
Ferri, A.L., Cavallaro, M., Braida, D., Di Cristofano, A., Canta, A., Vezzani, A.,
Ottolenghi, S., Pandolﬁ, P.P., Sala, M., DeBiasi, S., and Nicolis, S.K. (2004).
Sox2 deﬁciency causes neurodegeneration and impaired neurogenesis in
the adult mouse brain. Development 131, 3805–3819.
Fuentealba, L.C., Rompani, S.B., Parraguez, J.I., Obernier, K., Romero, R.,
Cepko, C.L., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2015). Embryonic Origin of Postnatal
Neural Stem Cells. Cell 161, 1644–1655.
Furutachi, S., Miya, H., Watanabe, T., Kawai, H., Yamasaki, N., Harada, Y.,
Imayoshi, I., Nelson, M., Nakayama, K.I., Hirabayashi, Y., and Gotoh, Y.
(2015). Slowly dividing neural progenitors are an embryonic origin of adult neu-
ral stem cells. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 657–665.
Gao, P., Postiglione, M.P., Krieger, T.G., Hernandez, L., Wang, C., Han, Z.,
Streicher, C., Papusheva, E., Insolera, R., Chugh, K., et al. (2014).
Deterministic progenitor behavior and unitary production of neurons in the
neocortex. Cell 159, 775–788.
Gorski, J.A., Talley, T., Qiu, M., Puelles, L., Rubenstein, J.L.R., and Jones, K.R.
(2002). Cortical excitatory neurons and glia, but not GABAergic neurons, are
produced in the Emx1-expressing lineage. J. Neurosci. 22, 6309–6314.
Hadjantonakis, A.-K., and Papaioannou, V.E. (2004). Dynamic in vivo imaging
and cell tracking using a histone ﬂuorescent protein fusion in mice. BMC
Biotechnol. 4, 33.
Hippenmeyer, S., Youn, Y.H., Moon, H.M., Miyamichi, K., Zong, H., Wynshaw-
Boris, A., and Luo, L. (2010). Genetic mosaic dissection of Lis1 and Ndel1 in
neuronal migration. Neuron 68, 695–709.
Kessaris, N., Fogarty, M., Iannarelli, P., Grist, M., Wegner, M., and Richardson,
W.D. (2006). Competing waves of oligodendrocytes in the forebrain and post-
natal elimination of an embryonic lineage. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 173–179.
Khacho, M., Clark, A., Svoboda, D.S., Azzi, J., MacLaurin, J.G., Meghaizel, C.,
Sesaki, H., Lagace, D.C., Germain, M., Harper, M.E., et al. (2016).
Mitochondrial Dynamics Impacts Stem Cell Identity and Fate Decisions by
Regulating a Nuclear Transcriptional Program. Cell Stem Cell 19, 232–247.
Khatri, P., Obernier, K., Simeonova, I.K., Hellwig, A., Ho¨ lzl-Wenig, G., Mandl,
C., Scholl, C., Wo¨ lﬂ, S., Winkler, J., Gaspar, J.A., et al. (2014). Proliferation
and cilia dynamics in neural stem cells prospectively isolated from the SEZ.
Sci. Rep. 4, 3803.
Kyrousi, C., Arbi, M., Pilz, G.-A., Pefani, D.-E., Lalioti, M.-E., Ninkovic, J., Go¨ tz,
M., Lygerou, Z., and Taraviras, S. (2015). Mcidas and GemC1/Lynkeas are key
regulators for the generation of multiciliated ependymal cells in the adult
neurogenic niche. Development 142, 3661–3674.
Loulier, K., Barry, R., Mahou, P., Le Franc, Y., Supatto, W., Matho, K.S., Ieng,
S., Fouquet, S., Dupin, E., Benosman, R., et al. (2014). Multiplex cell and line-
age tracking with combinatorial labels. Neuron 81, 505–520.
Ma, L., Quigley, I., Omran, H., and Kintner, C. (2014). Multicilin drives centriole
biogenesis via E2f proteins. Genes Dev. 28, 1461–1471.
Madisen, L., Zwingman, T.A., Sunkin, S.M., Oh, S.W., Zariwala, H.A., Gu, H.,
Ng, L.L., Palmiter, R.D., Hawrylycz, M.J., Jones, A.R., et al. (2010). A robust
and high-throughput Cre reporting and characterization system for the whole
mouse brain. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 133–140.
Neuron 102, 159–172, April 3, 2019
171

McGarry, T.J., and Kirschner, M.W. (1998). Geminin, an inhibitor of DNA repli-
cation, is degraded during mitosis. Cell 93, 1043–1053.
Mirzadeh, Z., Merkle, F.T., Soriano-Navarro, M., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., and
Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2008). Neural stem cells confer unique pinwheel architec-
ture to the ventricular surface in neurogenic regions of the adult brain. Cell
Stem Cell 3, 265–278.
Mirzadeh, Z., Doetsch, F., Sawamoto, K., Wichterle, H., and Alvarez-Buylla, A.
(2010). The subventricular zone en-face: wholemount staining and ependymal
ﬂow. J. Vis. Exp. 39, 1938.
Morin, X., Jaouen, F., and Durbec, P. (2007). Control of planar divisions by the
G-protein regulator LGN maintains progenitors in the chick neuroepithelium.
Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1440–1448.
Obernier, K., Cebrian-Silla, A., Thomson, M., Parraguez, J.I., Anderson, R.,
Guinto, C., Rodas Rodriguez, J., Garcia-Verdugo, J.-M., and Alvarez-Buylla,
A. (2018). Adult Neurogenesis Is Sustained by Symmetric Self-Renewal and
Differentiation. Cell Stem Cell 22, 221–234.e8.
Ollion, J., Cochennec, J., Loll, F., Escude´ , C., and Boudier, T. (2013). TANGO: a
generic tool for high-throughput 3D image analysis for studying nuclear orga-
nization. Bioinformatics 29, 1840–1841.
Pefani, D.-E., Dimaki, M., Spella, M., Karantzelis, N., Mitsiki, E., Kyrousi, C.,
Symeonidou, I.-E., Perrakis, A., Taraviras, S., and Lygerou, Z. (2011). Idas, a
novel phylogenetically conserved geminin-related protein, binds to geminin
and is required for cell cycle progression. J. Biol. Chem. 286, 23234–23246.
Sage, D., Neumann, F.R., Hediger, F., Gasser, S.M., and Unser, M. (2005).
Automatic tracking of individual ﬂuorescence particles: application to the
study of chromosome dynamics. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 14, 1372–1383.
Sankar, S., Yellajoshyula, D., Zhang, B., Teets, B., Rockweiler, N., and Kroll,
K.L. (2016). Gene regulatory networks in neural cell fate acquisition from
genome-wide chromatin association of Geminin and Zic1. Sci. Rep. 6, 37412.
Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E., Kaynig, V., Longair, M., Pietzsch,
T., Preibisch, S., Rueden, C., Saalfeld, S., Schmid, B., et al. (2012). Fiji: an
open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 676–682.
Shah, P.T., Stratton, J.A., Stykel, M.G., Abbasi, S., Sharma, S., Mayr, K.A.,
Koblinger,
K.,
Whelan,
P.J.,
and
Biernaskie,
J.
(2018).
Single-Cell
Transcriptomics and Fate Mapping of Ependymal Cells Reveals an Absence
of Neural Stem Cell Function. Cell 173, 1045–1057.e9.
Shen, Q., Wang, Y., Kokovay, E., Lin, G., Chuang, S.-M., Goderie, S.K.,
Roysam, B., and Temple, S. (2008). Adult SVZ stem cells lie in a vascular niche:
a quantitative analysis of niche cell-cell interactions. Cell Stem Cell 3, 289–300.
Shihavuddin, A., Basu, S., Rexhepaj, E., Delestro, F., Menezes, N., Sigoillot,
S.M., Del Nery, E., Selimi, F., Spassky, N., and Genovesio, A. (2017).
Smooth 2D manifold extraction from 3D image stack. Nat. Commun. 8, 15554.
Smith, A.R. (1978). Color gamut transform pairs. ACM SIGGRAPH Comput.
Graph 12, 12–19.
Spassky, N., and Meunier, A. (2017). The development and functions of multi-
ciliated epithelia. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 423–436.
Spassky, N., Merkle, F.T., Flames, N., Tramontin, A.D., Garcı´a-Verdugo, J.M.,
and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2005). Adult ependymal cells are postmitotic and are
derived from radial glial cells during embryogenesis. J. Neurosci. 25, 10–18.
Spella, M., Britz, O., Kotantaki, P., Lygerou, Z., Nishitani, H., Ramsay, R.G.,
Flordellis, C., Guillemot, F., Mantamadiotis, T., and Taraviras, S. (2007).
Licensing regulators Geminin and Cdt1 identify progenitor cells of the mouse
CNS in a speciﬁc phase of the cell cycle. Neuroscience 147, 373–387.
Spella, M., Kyrousi, C., Kritikou, E., Stathopoulou, A., Guillemot, F., Kioussis,
D., Pachnis, V., Lygerou, Z., and Taraviras, S. (2011). Geminin regulates
cortical progenitor proliferation and differentiation. Stem Cells 29, 1269–1282.
Stancik, E.K., Navarro-Quiroga, I., Sellke, R., and Haydar, T.F. (2010).
Heterogeneity in ventricular zone neural precursors contributes to neuronal
fate diversity in the postnatal neocortex. J. Neurosci. 30, 7028–7036.
Stubbs, J.L., Vladar, E.K., Axelrod, J.D., and Kintner, C. (2012). Multicilin pro-
motes centriole assembly and ciliogenesis during multiciliate cell differentia-
tion. Nat. Cell Biol. 14, 140–147.
Sun, W., Cornwell, A., Li, J., Peng, S., Osorio, M.J., Aalling, N., Wang, S.,
Benraiss, A., Lou, N., Goldman, S.A., and Nedergaard, M. (2017). SOX9 Is
an Astrocyte-Speciﬁc Nuclear Marker in the Adult Brain Outside the
Neurogenic Regions. J. Neurosci. 37, 4493–4507.
Tavazoie, M., Van der Veken, L., Silva-Vargas, V., Louissaint, M., Colonna, L.,
Zaidi, B., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., and Doetsch, F. (2008). A specialized vascular
niche for adult neural stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 3, 279–288.
Terre´ , B., Piergiovanni, G., Segura-Bayona, S., Gil-Go´ mez, G., Youssef, S.A.,
Attolini, C.S., Wilsch-Br€auninger, M., Jung, C., Rojas, A.M., Marjanovic, M.,
et al. (2016). GEMC1 is a critical regulator of multiciliated cell differentiation.
EMBO J. 35, 942–960.
Wang, X., Tsai, J.-W., Imai, J.H., Lian, W.-N., Vallee, R.B., and Shi, S.-H.
(2009). Asymmetric centrosome inheritance maintains neural progenitors in
the neocortex. Nature 461, 947–955.
Xu, Q., Tam, M., and Anderson, S.A. (2008). Fate mapping Nkx2.1-lineage cells
in the mouse telencephalon. J. Comp. Neurol. 506, 16–29.
Zhou, F., Narasimhan, V., Shboul, M., Chong, Y.L., Reversade, B., and Roy, S.
(2015). Gmnc Is a Master Regulator of the Multiciliated Cell Differentiation
Program. Curr. Biol. 25, 3267–3273.
Zimmerman, L., Parr, B., Lendahl, U., Cunningham, M., McKay, R., Gavin, B.,
Mann, J., Vassileva, G., and McMahon, A. (1994). Independent regulatory ele-
ments in the nestin gene direct transgene expression to neural stem cells or
muscle precursors. Neuron 12, 11–24.
172
Neuron 102, 159–172, April 3, 2019

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Rat Monoclonal Anti-Mouse CD24
BD Biosciences
Cat#557436; Clone: M1/69; RRID:
AB_396700
Mouse IgG1 Monoclonal Anti FoxJ1
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#14-9965-82; Clone: 2A5; RRID:
AB_1548835
Chicken Polyclonal Anti GFP
Aves Labs
Cat#GFP-1020; RRID: AB_10000240
Rabbit Polyclonal Anti DsRed
Clontech Laboratories
Cat#632496; RRID: AB_10013483
Rabbit Polyclonal Anti Sox9
Millipore
Cat#AB5535; RRID:AB_2239761
Mouse IgG2b Monoclonal Anti FOP
Abnova Corporation
Cat#H00011116-M01; Clone: 2B1 RRID:
AB_463883
Mouse IgG1 Monoclonal Anti GFAP
Millipore
Cat#MAB3402; Clone: GA5 RRID:
AB_94844
Rabbit Polyclonal Anti ZO1
Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc
Cat#40-2200; RRID: AB_2533456
Mouse IgG1 Monoclonal Anti Gamma-
tubulin
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#T6557; Clone: GTU88 RRID:
AB_477584
Mouse IgG2b Monoclonal Anti Acetylated
Tubulin
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#T6793; Clone: 6-11B-1 RRID:
AB_477585
Donkey Polyclonal anti-Chicken IgY (IgG)
(H+L) AfﬁniPure, Alexa Fluor 488
Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs
Cat#703-545-155; RRID:AB_2340375
Donkey Polyclonal anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L)
Highly Cross-Adsorbed Secondary
Antibody, Alexa Fluor 594
Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc
Cat#A-21207; RRID: AB_141637
Donkey Polyclonal anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L)
Highly Cross-Adsorbed Secondary
Antibody, Alexa Fluor 647
Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc
Cat#A-31573; RRID: AB_2536183
Goat anti-Mouse IgG1 Cross-Adsorbed
Secondary Antibody, Alexa Fluor 488
Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc
Cat#A-21121; RRID:AB_2535764
Goat anti-Mouse IgG1 Cross-Adsorbed
Secondary Antibody, Alexa Fluor 594
Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc
Cat#A-21125; RRID:AB_2535767
Goat anti-Mouse IgG1 Cross-Adsorbed
Secondary Antibody, Alexa Fluor 647
Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc
Cat#A-21240; RRID:AB_2535809
Goat anti-Mouse IgG2b Cross-Adsorbed
Secondary Antibody, Alexa Fluor 647
Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc
Cat#A-21242; RRID:AB_2535811
Anti-Digoxigenin-AP, Fab fragments
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#11093274910; RRID: AB_2734716
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
EdU (5-ethynyl-2-deoxyuridine)
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#11590926, CAS: 61135-33-9
Hoechst (bisBenzimide H 33342
trihydrochloride)
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# B2261 CAS: 23491-52-3
T7 RNA Polymerase
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#RPOLT7-RO
T3 RNA Polymerase
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#RPOLT3-RO
DIG RNA Labeling Mix
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#11277073910
RNasin Ribonuclease Inhibitors
Promega
Cat#N2511
RQ1 RNase-Free DNase
Promega
Cat#M6101
BCIP (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-
phosphate)
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#BCIP-RO, CAS: 6578-06-9
NBT (4-Nitro blue tetrazolium chloride)
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#11585029001, CAS: 298-83-9
(Continued on next page)
Neuron 102, 159–172.e1–e7, April 3, 2019
e1

CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCES SHARING
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact, Nathalie
Spassky (spassky@biologie.ens.fr).
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Critical Commercial Assays
Click-iT EdU Alexa Fluor 488 Imaging Kit
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#C10337
Click-iT EdU Alexa Fluor 594 Imaging Kit
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#C10339
Click-iT EdU Alexa Fluor 647 Imaging Kit
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#C10340
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
B6.129S2-Emx1tm1(cre)Krj/J
The Jackson Laboratory (Gorski et al., 2002)
Cat#JAX:005628, RRID: IMSR_JAX:005628
B6;CBA-Tg(Gsx2-icre)1Kess/J
Gift from the laboratory of N. Kessaris
(Kessaris et al., 2006)
Cat#JAX025806 RRID: IMSR_JAX:025806
C57BL/6J-Tg(Nkx2-1-cre)2Sand/J
The Jackson Laboratory (Xu et al., 2008)
Cat#JAX:008661, RRID:IMSR_JAX:008661
B6;129S6-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm14(CAG-tdTomato)
Hze/J
The Jackson Laboratory (Madisen
et al., 2010)
Cat#JAX:007908, RRID:IMSR_JAX:007908
MADM-11GT
Hippenmeyer et al., 2010
Cat#JAX:013749 RRID:IMSR_JAX:013749
MADM-11TG
Hippenmeyer et al., 2010
Cat#JAX:013751 RRID:IMSR_JAX:013751
RjORL:SWISS
Janvier Labs
N/A
GemC1KO/KO
Arbi et al., 2016
N/A
Gemininﬂox/ﬂox
Spella et al., 2011
N/A
NestinCre ±
Zimmerman et al., 1994
N/A
Recombinant DNA
PBCAG-Nucbow Plasmid
Loulier et al., 2014
N/A
CAG-hypBase Plasmid
Loulier et al., 2014
N/A
CAG-seCre Plasmid
Loulier et al., 2014
N/A
CAG-H2B-GFP Plasmid
Gift from the laboratory of X. Morin
(Hadjantonakis and Papaioannou, 2004)
N/A
pCAGGS-Cre Plasmid
Gift from the laboratory of X. Morin (Morin
et al., 2007)
N/A
pCAGGS-GemC1 Plasmid
Kyrousi et al., 2015
N/A
pCAGGS-Geminin Plasmid
Spella et al., 2011
N/A
pBluesCriptKS-GemC1 Plasmid
This paper
N/A
pBluesCriptKS-Geminin Plasmid
Spella et al., 2007
N/A
Software and Algorithms
Fiji
Schindelin et al., 2012
https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/download.html;
RRID: SCR_003070
MATLAB
MATLAB and Statistics Toolbox Release
2012b, The MathWorks, Natick,
Massachusetts, United States
https://fr.mathworks.com/products/
matlab.html; RRID: SCR_001622
GraphPad Prism
GraphPad Prism version 7.00 for Windows,
GraphPad Software, La Jolla California USA
https://www.graphpad.com/; RRID:
SCR_002798
Other
Glass capillaries (for IUE)
Harvard Apparatus
Cat#30-0019
CUY21EDIT Square Wave Electroporator
Nepagene
N/A
ProbeQuant G-50 Micro Columns
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#GE28-9034-08
e2
Neuron 102, 159–172.e1–e7, April 3, 2019

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Mice were bred and the experiments were performed in conformity with French and European Union regulations and the recommen-
dations of the local ethics committee (Comite´ d’e´ thique en experimentation animale n005). The date of the vaginal plug was re-
corded as embryonic day (E) 0.5 and the date of birth as postnatal day (P) 0. Healthy, immunocompetent animals were kept in a
12 h light /12 h dark cycle at 22C and fed ad libitum. All the individuals used in our study were not previously subject to any unrelated
experimental procedures. Pregnant females were used for IUE (see below), but their littermates and any other mice of both
sexes were randomly used for all experiments in this study. Emx1-Cre+/ (B6.129S2-Emx1tm1(cre)Krj/J, JAX stock #005628, Gorski
et al., 2002), Gsh2-Cre+/ (B6;CBA-Tg(Gsx2-icre)1Kess/J, a gift from the laboratory of N. Kessaris, Kessaris et al., 2006) and
Nkx2.1-Cre+/ (C57BL/6J-Tg(Nkx2-1-cre)2Sand/J, JAX stock #008661, Xu et al., 2008) transgenic animals were crossed with
R26:tdTomatomT/mT homozygous animals, also called Ai14 (B6;129S6-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm14(CAG-tdTomato)Hze/J, Madisen et al.,
2010). The presence of the Cre transgene was assessed at birth by observing the neonatal brain (when the ﬂuorescence is still visible
through the skin with no fur) under the ﬂuorescent stereo microscope. MADMGT/+ and MADMTG/+ transgenic animals were a gift from
the laboratory of S. Hippenmeyer (Hippenmeyer et al., 2010). Heterozygous mice were crossed to obtain homozygous MADMGT/GT
and MADMTG/TG animals. These homozygous mice were then mated to obtain MADMGT/TG embryos. Expression of the Cre Recom-
binase in MADMGT/TG embryos was achieved by IUE of pcX-Cre plasmid (1mg/ml, Morin et al., 2007) at E13.5 or E14.5. All transgenic
mice lines were kept as B6D2F1/J or C57/Bl6 background. For all other experiments involving IUE, RjORL:SWISS pregnant females
were used due to their fertility and their maternal instinct. RjORL:SWISS embryos were also used for the in situ hybridization exper-
iment at E14.5 and cell culture. GemC1KO/KO homozygous animals were incrossed to obtain GemC1-deﬁcient cell cultures. Gemi-
ninﬂox/KO mice and NestinCre ± were crossed in order to have Geminin-deﬁcient glial progenitors in our culture system. All animals
analyzed in this study were sacriﬁced at P15-P20, except for the adult mice sacriﬁced at P42 to assess the neurogenic potential of
SVZ astrocytes, the embryos (and consequently, the mother, at E14.5-E15.5) used for the in situ hybridization studies or EdU-medi-
ated assessment of cell cycle stage of electroporated cells, and newborn pups (P0-P2) used for the cell culture.
METHOD DETAILS
In utero electroporation
In utero electroporation of mouse embryos was performed at E13.5 or E14.5. Pregnant females were injected subcutaneously with
buprenorphine (0.1 mg/kg) 15 minutes prior to surgery. They were subsequently anaesthetized by isoﬂurane inhalation, the abdom-
inal cavity opened and the uterine horns exposed. With a thin glass capillary (Harvard Apparatus), 1ml of plasmid in ﬁltered PBS was
injected together with FastGreen (0.025%, Sigma) into the LVs of the embryo. The ﬁnal concentrations of plasmids were 1 mg/ml
PBCAG-Nucbow, 0.5 mg/ml CAG-hypBase, 0.1 mg/ml CAG-seCre (Loulier et al., 2014), 1 mg/ml CAG-H2B-GFP (a gift from the labora-
tory of X. Morin, Hadjantonakis and Papaioannou, 2004), 1mg/ml pCAGGS-Cre (a gift from the laboratory of X. Morin, Morin et al.,
2007), or 1mg/ml pCAGGS-GemC1 or pCAGGS-Geminin (gifts from the laboratory of S. Taraviras, Kyrousi et al., 2015).
Immediately after injection, four pulses of 50 ms and 35 V were applied to the embryos’ telencephalon at 950 ms intervals with an
electroporator (CUY21 EDIT, Nepagene). Finally, the embryos were carefully placed back into the abdominal cavity and left to
develop before sacriﬁce.
EdU administration and detection
To determine the spatial disposition of newborn ependymal cells and the cell cycle stage at the time of electroporation, 50 mg/kg
body weight (8 mg/ml stock, dissolved in ﬁltered PBS) of EdU (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) was administered to pregnant mice by intra-
peritoneal injection. In the ﬁrst case, a single injection was administered at E15.5. In the second one two injections were performed;
the ﬁrst one 2 hours before and the second one 2 hours after IUE. To assess the neurogenic potential of SVZ astrocytes, EdU was
administered for 14 days through the drinking water (1 mg/ml) of P21 electroporated litters. EdU incorporation was detected using the
Click-iT EdU Alexa Fluor imaging kit (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc for Alexa Fluor 488, 594 or 647 staining), according to manufacturer’s
protocol. Brieﬂy, V-SVZ wholemounts or ﬁxed coronal sections of the forebrain or olfactory bulbs were permeabilized in blocking
solution with 0.1% Triton X-100 and 10% fetal bovine serum in PBS for 1h. After washing with PBS, sections were incubated for
1 hour with the Click-iT reaction cocktail, protected from light. The sections were washed again and incubated overnight at 4C
with the primary antibodies. After incubation with the secondary antibody for 2 hours and Hoechst staining, slices were mounted
with Fluoromount-G (Southern Biotech, 0100-01) mounting medium.
Primary Ependymal Cell culture
Primary culture of ependymal cells was done like previously described (Delgehyr et al., 2015; Al Jord et al., 2014). Brieﬂy, newborn
mice (P0–P2) were sacriﬁced by decapitation. Their brains were dissected in Hank’s solution (10% HBSS, 5% HEPES, 5% sodium
bicarbonate, 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S) in pure water) and the extracted ventricular walls were cut manually into small pieces,
followed by enzymatic digestion (DMEM glutamax, 33% papain (Worthington 3126), 17% DNase at 10 mg/ml, 42% cysteine at
12 mg/ml, using 1 mL of the enzymatic digestion solution per brain) for 45 min at 37C in a humidiﬁed 5% CO2 incubator.
Digestion was stopped by addition of a solution of trypsin inhibitors (Leibovitz Medium L15, 10% ovomucoid at 1 mg/ml, 2% DNase
Neuron 102, 159–172.e1–e7, April 3, 2019
e3

at 10 mg/ml, using 1 mL of enzyme inhibiting solution per brain). The cells were then washed in L15 and resuspended in 1 mL per brain
dissected of DMEM glutamax supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% P/S. Cells were then seeded in a Poly-L-
lysine (PLL)-coated ﬂask (1 mL per 75 cm2 ﬂask), containing 5 mL of the same medium in which cells were resuspended. Ependymal
progenitors proliferated for 5 days until conﬂuence followed by shaking (250rpm) overnight at room temperature. Pure conﬂuent
astroglial monolayers were replated at a density of 7 3 104 cells per cm2 in DMEM glutamax, 10% FBS, 1% P/S on PLL-coated
coverslides for immunocytochemistry experiments and maintained overnight. The medium was then replaced by serum-free
DMEM glutamax 1% P/S, to trigger ependymal differentiation gradually in vitro (DIV 0).
Tissue and cell culture preparation
When the immunostaining was performed on coronal sections of postnatal animals, these were previously anesthetized with a
mixture of 100 mg of ketamine and 10 mg of xylazine per kg of body weight, and then were perfused transcardially with 4% PFA.
Adult animals used for EdU-retaining olfactory bulb neuron analyses were not perfused, since no immunohistochemistry procedure
was performed on them. After overnight ﬁxation of the dissected brain in 4% PFA at 4C, of either perfused or non-perfused postnatal
mice or embryos, 80 mm-thick ﬂoating sections were cut on a vibratome. Wholemounts of the lateral walls of the LVs were dissected
(Mirzadeh et al., 2010) from animals sacriﬁced by cervical dislocation and ﬁxed for 15 minutes in 4% PFA at room temperature. Pri-
mary cultures of ependymal cells were ﬁxed for 10 minutes in 4% PFA at room temperature.
For in situ hybridization, an E14.5 pregnant female was sacriﬁced by cervical dislocation, the embryos were retrieved and their
whole brains ﬁxed for 3 days in 4% PFA at 4C. The sectioning of the tissue was done like described above.
Immunostaining
Tissue samples and primary ependymal cell cultures were incubated for 1h in blocking solution (1X PBS with 0.1%–0.2% Triton X-100
and 10% fetal bovine serum) at room temperature. All these were incubated overnight at 4C in the primary antibodies diluted in
blocking solution. The primary antibodies used targeted CD24 (1:200, BD PharMingen), FoxJ1 (1:500, Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc),
GFP (1:1600, Aves Labs), Dsred (1:400, Clontech Laboratories), Sox9 (1:1200, Millipore), FOP (1:600, Abnova Corporation), GFAP
(1:400, Millipore) ZO1 (1:100, Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc), Gamma-tubulin (1:500, Sigma-Aldrich) and Acetylated-tubulin (1:400,
Sigma-Aldrich). The following day, they were stained with species-speciﬁc AlexaFluor ﬂuorophore-conjugated secondary antibodies
(1:400, Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc or Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs, see Key Resources Table). Nuclei were counterstained with a
1:1500 Hoechst solution (from a 20 mg/ml stock, Sigma-Aldrich), containing the secondary antibodies for 2h at room temperature.
Finally, the wholemounts were redissected to keep only the thin lateral walls of the LV (Mirzadeh et al., 2010) which were mounted
with Vectashield mounting medium (Sigma, H-1000), for Nucbow samples, or Fluoromount-G mounting medium (Southern Biotech,
0100-01), for other stainings. Fluoromount-mounted slides were stored at 4C, whereas Vectashield-mounted wholemounts were
stored at 20C to avoid color fading. Cell culture coverslides were mounted with Fluoromount-G.
In situ hybridization
The GemC1 cDNA sequence was subcloned into a pBlueScriptKS plasmid by removing the former from the same pCAGGS-GemC1
plasmid used for GemC1 overexpression (see In Utero Electroporation, Kyrousi et al., 2015). Both plasmids were doubly digested
with XbaI and XhoI. Then the DNA fragment corresponding to the GemC1 cDNA size was isolated from an agarose gel and ligated
to the pBlueScriptKS backbone, upstream of the T3 promoter sequence. The pBlueScriptKS-Geminin plasmid was a gift from the
laboratory of S. Taraviras (Spella et al., 2007). Brieﬂy, in this study, the open reading frame of Geminin was cloned between the
EcoRI/BamHI sites of the pBlueScriptKS plasmid, upstream of the T7 promoter sequence.
pBlueScriptKS-GemC1 and pBlueScriptKS-Geminin were linearized with XbaI and EcoRI restriction enzymes. Using the T3 and T7
RNA polymerases (Sigma-Aldrich), respectively, DIG-labeled ribonucleotide mix (Sigma-Aldrich) and a Ribonuclease inhibitor
(Promega), a DIG-labeled gene-speciﬁc RNA probe was generated, according to manufacturer’s instructions. RNA probes were
subsequently treated with a Deoxyribonuclease (Promega) for 20 min at 37C. Once synthesized, the RNA probes were puriﬁed in
a ProbeQuant G-50 Micro Column (Sigma-Aldrich).
The in situ hybridization was performed as previously described (de Frutos et al., 2016). Unless stated otherwise, washing steps
were performed thrice for 5 min. Floating sections of E14.5 embryos were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature (RT) in the dark in
2% H2O2 in PBS-0.1% Tween-20 (PBT). After washing in PBT, sections were treated with Proteinase K (10 mg/ml in PBT) for 3-4 min at
RT and then the reaction was stopped in a 2mg/ml glycine solution in PBT for 5 min at RT. After washes in PBT, samples were post-
ﬁxed in 0.2% glutaraldehyde in 4% PFA for 30 min at RT. The tissue was washed again in PBT and then incubated for 1 hour at 60C in
hybridization buffer (50% formamide, 5X SSC, 1% SDS, 50 mg/ml heparin and 50 mg/ml yeast tRNA, in water). RNA probes were
diluted at 5-10 mg/ml in hybridization buffer and incubated with the samples at 60C overnight. The next day, sections were washed
twice in a 50% formamide, 5X SSC, 1% SDS solution, for 30 min at 60C. They were washed again twice in a 50% formamide, 2X
SSC, 0,5% SDS solution, for 30 min at 60C. Washing at RT in TBST (0.08% NaCl, 0.002%KCl, 2.5mM Tris, from a 1M Tris pH = 7.5
stock, 0.01% Tween-20) followed and blocking in 10% FBS in TBST for 1h 30 min at RT. An anti-DIG antibody (Sigma-Aldrich) was
diluted in blocking solution (1:2000) and incubated with the samples overnight at 4C. The next day, at least 8 washes in TBST and 3 in
NTMT (100 mM NaCl, 100 mM Tris, from a 1M Tris pH = 9.5 stock, 50 mM MgCl2, 0.01% Tween-20) for 10 min were done. Finally,
e4
Neuron 102, 159–172.e1–e7, April 3, 2019

color developing was performed in a 0.35% vol/vol BCIP (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.34% vol/vol NBT (Sigma-Aldrich) solution, from a 50
and 100 mg/ml stock dilution in dimethylformamide, respectivelty, in NTMT.
Imaging
Fixed slices or LV wholemounts were examined with an upright Zeiss Axio Observer.ZI epiﬂuorescence microscope, using an apo-
chromat 63 3 1.4 NA objective and a Zeiss Apotome with an H/D grid.
Confocal image stacks were collected with a 40 3 1.3 NA water objective on Olympus FV1000 and FV1200 microscopes, or with a
40 3 1.4 NA oil objective or a 63 3 1.4 NA oil objective on an inverted LSM 880 Airyscan Zeiss microscope with 440, 515 and 560 laser
lines to excite, independently, Cerulean, mEYFP and mCherry, or Alexa 488, 594 and 633/Cy5.
Finally, images of the in situ hybridization sections were taken with a Leica MZ16 F Fluorescence Stereo Microscope (Leica Micro-
systems), equipped with a plan-apochromatic objective 1.0x (Leica, 10447157) and a Nikon DS-Ri1 High Resolution Color Camera
(Nikon), with the assistance of the NIS-Element F Ver5.502 Imaging Software (Nikon).
Automatic image analysis of MAGIC Markers
For clarity, mCherry, EYFP and Cerulean Nucbow signals are represented as red, green and blue (RGB) values. 1) Local apical layer
extraction: to maintain consistency among datasets, only cells within 25 mm of the apical surface were considered using the SME
projection tool on the FoxJ1-stained cell nuclei (Shihavuddin et al., 2017). 2) Segmentation of ependymal cells stained with
FoxJ1: the 3D volume occupied by each cell nucleus was delineated using FoxJ1 far red staining. RGB information was extracted
from the segmented mask using the following steps implemented as a Fiji macro: Noise was reduced in a preprocessing step using
3D Gaussian ﬁltering, where the sigma values of the Gaussian kernel was set to 1/3rd of the estimated mean nuclear radius in 3D. This
was followed by Log3D ﬁltering (Sage et al., 2005) to select objects corresponding to nuclear size; the local 3D maximum was then
detected to determine the center of each cell nucleus. 3D-seeded watershed segmentation was performed from these maxima to
accurately detect the nuclear border in 3D. This 3D segmentation mask was used to compute the volume and the mean color of
each nucleus. 3) Segmentation of non-ependymal cells: After elimination of FoxJ1-positive ependymal cells, only FoxJ1-negative
non-ependymal cells remained in the 25mm apical layer. Since there is no speciﬁc marker for these cells, they were characterized
by their color information as follows: Projection: projection of the Nucbow color channels was maximized to obtain a 2D represen-
tation of all labeled non-ependymal cells. Color gradient extraction: In order to accentuate nuclear borders, the image gradient was
computed from the sum of the intensities of the three RGB channels. The gradient image was further ﬁltered with adaptive Gaussian
ﬁltering to improve the signal to noise ratio. The adaptive ﬁlter augments smoothing where the image gradient is weak and decreases
smoothing where the gradient is high, in order to preserve nuclear edges. Watershed segmentation: Local maxima were extracted
from the inverted smoothed gradient response to retrieve one maximum per nucleus. The seeded watershed transform was then
used (Ollion et al., 2013) to detect cells in 2D. 4) Color normalization: RGB channels were rescaled linearly from 0 and the 99th percen-
tile of their intensity distribution to ensure alignment of their relative intensity (1% of the most saturated cells were therefore excluded
from the analysis of each sample). 5) Determination of clonal lineage: To identify the cell lineage, each cell was characterized by the
median R G B values and their spatial location in 3D X, Y, Z. RGB values were converted to their equivalent in the HSV (Hue, Satu-
ration, Value) color space as described in Loulier et al. (2014). This conversion was performed in MATLAB with the HEXCONE model
proposed by Smith (1978).
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSES
Quantiﬁcation, image and statistical analyses were performed with Fiji (Schindelin et al., 2012), MATLAB (Mathworks, USA), Excel,
and GraphPad Prism software. Quantiﬁcations throughout the study are represented as the mean value, with the exception of the
clone size representation, which indicates the clone size frequency distribution (only Figure 4H), as well as the Gaussian non-linear
regression curve ﬁtting the frequency of clones of variable sizes (from 1 to 8 cells per clone, Figure 4H, 5C, 6C). Error bars indicate the
Standard Error of the Mean (SEM), except for Figure S1C, in which the Standard Deviation (SD) is depicted. P values in this manu-
script present the following star code: ns: p > 0.05 (non-signiﬁcant), *p % 0.05, **p % 0.01, ***p % 0.001.
Fate mapping of the spatial origin of ependymal cells
In order to characterize the spatial origin of ependymal cells and the presence or absence of ependymal progenitor cell migration, we
considered two areas along the ventricular wall in the Cre-expressing animals; a Cre-positive area, or the anatomical part of the
ventricle directly derived from the embryonic Cre-expressing area (Dorsal and Dorsal Medial Walls in the Emx1Cre mice, the Lateral
Wall in the Gsh2Cre mice and the ventral-most region of the wall in the Nkx2.1Cre animals), and a Cre-negative area, or the anatom-
ical part of the ventricle that is not derived from the embryonic Cre-expressing area, according to the literature. In the Emx1-cre; Ai14
group, 14 images from n = 6 animals were analyzed, with 1615 counted cells in the Cre-positive area and 1723 cells in the Cre-nega-
tive area. For the Gsh2-cre; Ai14 individuals, 15 images from n = 4 animals were used for quantiﬁcation, with 383 and 895 cells
counted on the Cre-positive and Cre-negative anatomical areas, respectively. Finally, 16 images from n = 5 Nkx2.1-cre; Ai14 animals
were used, with a total of 496 and 2367 cells analyzed in the Cre-positive and negative areas, respectively.
Neuron 102, 159–172.e1–e7, April 3, 2019
e5

===== Parker2017_FrontNeuralCircuits+Lamprey+SCI =====
REVIEW
published: 06 November 2017
doi: 10.3389/fncir.2017.00084
Edited by:
Jorn Hounsgaard,
University of Copenhagen, Denmark
Reviewed by:
Antón Barreiro-Iglesias,
Universidade de Santiago
de Compostela, Spain
C. J. Heckman,
Northwestern University,
United States
*Correspondence:
David Parker
djp27@cam.ac.uk
Received: 19 July 2017
Accepted: 16 October 2017
Published: 06 November 2017
Citation:
Parker D (2017) The Lesioned Spinal
Cord Is a “New” Spinal Cord:
Evidence from Functional Changes
after Spinal Injury in Lamprey.
Front. Neural Circuits 11:84.
doi: 10.3389/fncir.2017.00084
The Lesioned Spinal Cord Is a “New”
Spinal Cord: Evidence from
Functional Changes after Spinal
Injury in Lamprey
David Parker*
Department of Physiology, Neuroscience and Development, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Finding a treatment for spinal cord injury (SCI) focuses on reconnecting the spinal
cord by promoting regeneration across the lesion site. However, while regeneration is
necessary for recovery, on its own it may not be sufﬁcient. This presumably reﬂects
the requirement for regenerated inputs to interact appropriately with the spinal cord,
making sub-lesion network properties an additional inﬂuence on recovery. This review
summarizes work we have done in the lamprey, a model system for SCI research.
We have compared locomotor behavior (swimming) and the properties of descending
inputs, locomotor networks, and sensory inputs in unlesioned animals and animals
that have received complete spinal cord lesions. In the majority (∼90%) of animals
swimming parameters after lesioning recovered to match those in unlesioned animals.
Synaptic inputs from individual regenerated axons also matched the properties in
unlesioned animals, although this was associated with changes in release parameters.
This suggests against any compensation at these synapses for the reduced descending
drive that will occur given that regeneration is always incomplete. Compensation instead
seems to occur through diverse changes in cellular and synaptic properties in locomotor
networks and proprioceptive systems below, but also above, the lesion site. Recovery
of locomotor performance is thus not simply the reconnection of the two sides of the
spinal cord, but reﬂects a distributed and varied range of spinal cord changes. While
locomotor network changes are insufﬁcient on their own for recovery, they may facilitate
locomotor outputs by compensating for the reduction in descending drive. Potentiated
sensory feedback may in turn be a necessary adaptation that monitors and adjusts
the output from the “new” locomotor network. Rather than a single aspect, changes in
different components of the motor system and their interactions may be needed after
SCI. If these are general features, and where comparisons with mammalian systems
can be made effects seem to be conserved, improving functional recovery in higher
vertebrates will require interventions that generate the optimal spinal cord conditions
conducive to recovery. The analyses needed to identify these conditions are difﬁcult in
the mammalian spinal cord, but lower vertebrate systems should help to identify the
principles of the optimal spinal cord response to injury.
Keywords: spinal cord injury, lamprey, neuromodulation, regeneration, plasticity
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
1
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
INTRODUCTION
Recovery from a spinal cord injury (SCI) in mammals, including
humans, is minimal. Despite hopes, and claims, for eﬀective
therapies, the outlook for targeted improvement remains poor.
Injury is associated with the loss of motor, autonomic, and
sensory function, as well as the development of deleterious eﬀects
like spasticity and neuropathic pain (Störmer et al., 1997; Kuner,
2010). While several approaches that target diﬀerent aspects of
the spinal cord are being used to try to overcome the eﬀects of
injury, there is currently no eﬀective treatment. Fong et al. (2009)
write, “consumed with individual pieces of the puzzle, we have
failed as a community to grasp the magnitude of the sum of our
ﬁndings.”
Treatments for SCI have been categorized as those that rescue,
reactivate, and rewire (Ramer et al., 2014). Rescue involves early
interventions that try to reduce secondary damage after the
initial injury. Reactivation attempts to activate spared systems
after a SCI using rehabilitative, pharmacological, or electrical
stimulation. Reactivation may not be the correct term, as it
suggests a need to restore activity, but once the period of spinal
shock has passed activity can be excessive and lead to the
development of deleterious eﬀects (e.g., Kuner, 2010; D’Amico
et al., 2014). Rather than reactivation, recalibration may be
needed to restore the correct balance of activity. Rewiring is the
dominant approach in SCI research, and attempts to regenerate
the connections damaged by the lesion (see Ramer et al., 2014).
This is an obvious strategy given that SCI eﬀects are caused by
the loss of these inputs. Hundreds of preclinical studies have
reported functional improvements after SCI using regenerative
approaches (Ramer et al., 2014). However, while regeneration
or regrowth can lead to signiﬁcant functional improvements,
there is often a poor correlation between regeneration and
recovery (see for example, Blackmore et al., 2012; Granger
et al., 2012; Lu et al., 2012; Zukor et al., 2013), and the
replication of any eﬀect is also often limited (Steward et al.,
2012). Tuszynski and Steward (2012) wrote, “every report of
a treatment that produced dramatic regeneration and recovery
of function after SCI has failed to stand the test of time
and scrutiny.” Recently, a clinical trial using stem cells, the
latest approach claimed to oﬀer a potential treatment for SCI,
was terminated due to the lack of any improvement (Servick,
2017). In contrast to complete SCI, considerable functional
recovery can occur with incomplete lesions (although this
paradoxically leads to more severe neuropathic pain; Störmer
et al., 1997). Potassium channel blockers have been used to
improve conduction in spared axons across lesion sites, but
clinical trials again failed to show signiﬁcant motor, sensory,
or autonomic improvements (Cardenas et al., 2006). Lack of
replication is of course not limited to SCI research (Hartung,
2013).
Issues of replication in studies that attempt to promote
regeneration or alter the eﬀectiveness of spared axons may reﬂect
the fact that the descending input to the spinal cord is only one
of several factors needed to generate eﬀective outputs. The most
obvious is that while promoting regeneration or manipulating
the properties of spared axons seems necessary and reasonable,
these approaches can only be beneﬁcial if they lead to functionally
appropriate interactions below the lesion site.
Locomotor networks below lesion sites remain after injury,
and can control complex movements if they receive appropriate
inputs. This has been examined with epidural stimulation
of the
spinal cord
in experimental
and clinical studies
(“electro-enabling motor control,” Edgerton and Harkema, 2011).
Edgerton and Harkema (2011) say that the results of epidural
stimulation call for a change in SCI recovery strategies from the
focus on regeneration and repair to instead addressing how best
to activate remaining circuitry. Stimulation is suggested to work
by increasing spinal locomotor network excitability. However,
this is probably too simplistic, as network excitability cannot
go unchecked but needs to be balanced by appropriate levels of
presynaptic and postsynaptic inhibition (“balanced inhibition”;
Berg et al., 2007). The balanced inhibition model suggests
that rather than the assumed alternating phases of reciprocal
excitation and inhibition during locomotion, network excitation
occurs on a background of co-varying inhibition, resulting in a
critical state that allows excitatory phases to be rapidly modulated
to generate a reliable but ﬂexible motor output. If this is a general
mechanism in spinal cord networks (Berg et al., 2007), as it is in
other networks (Populin, 2005; Magnusson et al., 2008; Atallah
and Scanziani, 2009; Yizhar et al., 2011; Atallah et al., 2012;
Xue et al., 2014), then simply adding excitation could perturb
this balance and cause functional impairments (e.g., dystonia;
Quartarone et al., 2008), or excitotoxic damage and cell death.
Any system of feedforward and feedback pathways requires the
appropriate interactions between components for its eﬀective
activation, and this will also be necessary for any intervention
after SCI. Understanding the nature of spinal cord excitation and
inhibition rather than assuming a reciprocal pattern is thus an
outstanding basic question of general importance, that should
allow for more eﬀective spinal cord stimulation regimes.
This review summarizes published and unpublished work we
have done on SCI in the lamprey, a lower vertebrate model
system. The emphasis was initially on changes in the sub-lesion
locomotor network, but has been extended to include supra-
lesion changes, sensory feedback, and the functional properties
of regenerated synapses. The data suggests that even though
locomotor behavior returns to pre-lesion levels, this reﬂects
changes in spinal cord function and plasticity at all levels. Several
individual eﬀects have been identiﬁed that correlate with the
degree of recovery. However, the data suggests that neither
regenerated inputs, locomotor networks, nor sensory inputs
are both necessary and suﬃcient for recovery, and that rather
than a single aspect, recovery requires appropriate changes and
interactions within and between diﬀerent components of the
spinal cord motor system.
THE LAMPREY AS A MODEL FOR
SPINAL CORD IN INJURY
The lamprey is a lower vertebrate model system for analyses
of spinal cord function, and regeneration and recovery after
SCI (Rovainen, 1979; Cohen et al., 1988; McClellan, 1994;
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
2
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
Grillner et al., 1998; Buchanan, 2001). Axonal regeneration
across a lesion site and functional recovery in lamprey occur
by 8 weeks after a complete spinal cord transection (Selzer,
1978; Rovainen, 1979; Wood and Cohen, 1979). Regeneration
has been studied extensively, and seems a necessary condition for
recovery (McClellan, 1994; Cohen et al., 1988; Smith et al., 2011;
Rasmussen and Sagasti, 2017).
Lower vertebrates could claim to oﬀer support for the focus
on regeneration after SCI: lower vertebrates regenerate and
recover locomotor function, higher vertebrates don’t regenerate
and don’t recover locomotor function; thus, regeneration equals
recovery. However, this is a logical fallacy that confuses necessity
with suﬃciency: regeneration can be necessary for recovery
without being suﬃcient. Several aspects complicate the link
between regeneration and recovery in lamprey, but of importance
for the discussion here is that regeneration is never complete;
regenerated axons grow short distances and project to ectopic
locations; and regenerated synapses are sparser and smaller (see
Selzer, 1978; Rovainen, 1979; Wood and Cohen, 1981; Yin and
Selzer, 1983; Davis and McClellan, 1994; Armstrong et al., 2003;
Shifman et al., 2008; Oliphint et al., 2010; Jin et al., 2016). Similar
eﬀects are seen with regeneration in other lower vertebrates
(Bernstein and Gelderd, 1973). Regeneration is thus not repair in
the sense that the spinal cord is restored to the pre-lesion state. To
claim that regeneration equals recovery requires the assumption
that at least 30% of the descending input in the unlesioned
spinal cord is degenerate or redundant (the maximum extent of
regeneration in lamprey is ∼70%; McClellan, 1994), and that the
precise location of inputs is unimportant. Our hypothesis was
that regeneration was necessary, but not suﬃcient, for recovery,
and that compensatory changes in the spinal cord also inﬂuence
behavioral recovery.
The motor system can crudely be split into three components:
descending inputs from the brain, sensory inputs, and locomotor
networks. While these are often studied separately, motor outputs
will ultimately reﬂect their interactions through feedforward
and feedback pathways (Pearson, 2000). Lesioning disrupts
these interactions, and recovery thus needs to overcome this
disruption. These interactions could generate a continuum of
eﬀects, from regeneration alone being suﬃcient, to a stage
where recovery depends solely on other factors. The relative
balance between components, where each modiﬁes its activity to
match that of the others, would be an example of compensatory
plasticity. We have started to examine how each of these
components is altered after injury in lamprey.
The lesion is a critical variable in studies of regeneration.
SCI models with clinical relevance are better represented by
contusion injuries (Cheriyan et al., 2014). However, these cause
variable partial lesions that complicate the characterization of
changes after injury (e.g., regeneration; Geoﬀroy and Zheng,
2014). While a complete transection of the spinal cord is less
clinically relevant than a contusion injury, as clinical relevance
is not a factor in lower vertebrate analyses we have used complete
transection to that remove the variability introduced by partial
lesions.
Finally, functional recovery after SCI is greater in younger
patients than adults. This is also seen in various animal systems
despite the marked developmental diﬀerences in spinal cord
maturity and function across species. This presumably reﬂects
the greater plasticity of the immature spinal cord (Pape, 2012).
We have used two developmental stages, larval and juvenile adult
lampreys, to examine how systems in diﬀerent developmental
(and functional) states adapt to injury.
COMPENSATORY PLASTICITY
A major challenge to any intervention after SCI is that nervous
system components are altered, even when not directly aﬀected
by the injury (see Dunlop, 2008). These changes can be eﬀectively
instant (e.g., diaschisis; Carrera and Tononi, 2014). Rather than
being exceptional, diaschisis is expected in any feedforward
and feedback system, as even highly localized perturbations
will necessarily aﬀect other components. In addition, slower
secondary changes (minutes to weeks) can develop after injury
(e.g., inﬂammation and demyelination). Finally, compensatory
plasticity can develop that responds to the initial injury,
diaschisis, or the secondary changes (Turrigiano, 1999; Davis
and Bezprozvanny, 2001; Frank, 2014). A SCI will thus not
just disconnect the spinal cord, but will result in a period of
considerable ﬂux, the spinal cord ultimately settling into a new
functional state.
Compensatory eﬀects have been known for many years (e.g.,
denervation supersensitivity described by Walter Cannon in the
1930’s; see Thesleﬀand Sellin, 1980). These eﬀects have been
termed “homeostatic plasticity,” as they can develop in ways
that will oppose a perturbation (see Marder and Goaillard,
2006). However, the changes are not necessarily intuitive. For
example, inhibition increases when excitation is reduced in
cortical (Maﬀei et al., 2006) and hippocampal slices (Echegoyen
et al., 2007). This is the opposite to that expected of a homeostatic
response, which should trigger changes that reduce inhibition
or increase excitation. Increasing inhibition can lead to an
increase in excitation through disinhibition. However, even if
inhibition alone was increased this would not necessarily be
“non-homeostatic,” as homeostasis is not simply synonymous
with negative feedback clamping of parameter values (see
Buchman, 2006). Homeostasis can also include feedforward
prediction, variable and changing set-points, and hierarchical
control that can trigger variable changes at diﬀerent levels
(including positive feedback and ampliﬁcation of perturbations),
to ultimately maintain higher level function despite marked
changes in lower level properties (Cannon, 1932). What may
seem non-homeostatic at one level may ultimately be homeostatic
at the system level.
There is evidence for a role for compensatory changes in
recovery from stroke (Dancause and Nudo, 2011). Similar eﬀects
would have obvious relevance to recovery from SCI. Functional
changes after SCI are demonstrated clinically by the appearance
of spasticity once the period of spinal shock has passed (Bennett,
2008). They have also been shown experimentally. For example,
cats that had a spinal cord hemisection followed by a complete
transection 64–80 days later learnt to step on a treadmill faster
than those that received a single complete transection (Frigon
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
3
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
et al., 2009). Courtine et al. (2008) showed a similar eﬀect using
two staggered hemisections on diﬀerent sides of the mouse
spinal cord: mice quickly recovered locomotion and weight
support after the second lesion even though all descending inputs
were disrupted. A spinal hemisection in rats initially reduced
synaptic inputs to motor neurons, but these inputs subsequently
recovered, albeit with a reduction of putative inhibitory synapses
made onto the cell body (Nacimiento et al., 1995). There is
also evidence for increased GABA and glycine levels after SCI
(Tillakaratne et al., 2000), which could suggest an increase
in inhibition (but see Boulenguez et al., 2010 for changes in
inhibitory eﬀects after SCI). These are just a few of very many
examples, but while functional changes after SCI are endemic, the
limited spontaneous recovery after SCI in mammals shows that
on their own they are not suﬃcient for recovery. This may reﬂect
the necessary requirement for communication between the brain
and spinal cord, and the absence of an alternative pathway around
a complete spinal lesion.
While compensatory or homeostatic plasticity could facilitate
recovery, plasticity is not a ubiquitous phenomenon. Plasticity
is claimed to be greater in “higher” centers than in the
brainstem and spinal cord where functions have become
relatively ﬁxed during evolution (Delgado-Garcia, 2015; but see
Wolpaw and Tennissen, 2001). However, the latter areas are
claimed to have a greater potential for compensatory changes
to maintain their more stereotyped functions (see Delgado-
Garcia, 2015). If this is the case, it would support a focus on
compensatory plasticity after SCI. Plasticity is also not necessarily
a desirable phenomenon, but can also result in deleterious
eﬀects (neuropathic pain, autonomic dysreﬂexia; Störmer et al.,
1997; Quartarone et al., 2008; Kuner, 2010). Avoiding these
eﬀects requires insight into the type of plasticity needed, and
as inappropriately timed plasticity can be deleterious (e.g.,
Kozlowski et al., 1996; Scivoletto et al., 2005), when it should be
evoked. This is especially important after SCI, where the wave
of functional changes caused by the initial injury, diaschisis,
secondary eﬀects, and associated compensations, could result
in state-dependent inﬂuences on plasticity mechanisms or
interventions.
All of these functional and structural changes will alter
processing within spinal cord networks. This has led to the
claim that the spinal cord below a lesion site is a “new”
spinal cord (Edgerton et al., 2001). This might account for
the inconsistent eﬀects of regeneration: even if restoration of
the pre-lesion descending input was possible, it may or may
not generate a pre-lesion output depending on the current
functional state of the spinal cord. An optimal output after SCI
requires understanding how spinal cord circuitry is changed
by injury (which necessitates an understanding of the normal
spinal cord), and how best to integrate any input with these
changes. Given the diﬃculties of understanding mammalian
spinal cord networks (Rybak et al., 2015), these analyses should
be facilitated in lower vertebrate systems. While these are
not clinically relevant (there are issues of clinical relevance
with any animal model; Hartung, 2013), the insight obtained
can provide general principles of spinal cord adaptations to
injury.
BEHAVIORAL RECOVERY IN LAMPREY
To assess locomotor activity after recovery from lesioning
we scored swimming behavior on a six-point scale based on
Ayers (1989): stage 6 animals recover locomotion function
(Figure 1Ai), while stage 1 animals fail to show any recovery
(Figure 1Aii). In larval and juvenile adult lampreys that
recovered well (stage 5/6; 80–90% of animals), swimming
parameters (frequency, phase lag, and regularity) assessed from
electromyograms did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly to unlesioned
animals (Figures 1Ai,Ci–Ciiii; Hoﬀman and Parker, 2011; see
also Cohen et al., 1988; McClellan, 1994), although the duration
of a swimming episode was signiﬁcantly increased (Figure 1Civ).
Recovery thus restores normal locomotor function.
Stage 1/2 animals typically lacked regeneration, shown by
the absence of activity in the spinal cord below the lesion site
when stimulating above the lesion site (A3 and A4 responses;
see Figure 3Ai). While stage 5/6 activity can occur without any
regeneration (Cooke and Parker, 2009; Hoﬀman and Parker,
2011), there was a signiﬁcant correlation between regeneration
and recovery that supported a necessary role for regeneration
(Figure 1B; Hoﬀman and Parker, 2011). However, there was
variability and overlap in the extent of regeneration in stage
1/2 and stage 5/6 animals (see Figure 1B). This, together
with the potential for recovery in some cases in the absence
of regeneration, suggests the involvement of other factors in
recovery.
While analyses typically focus on successful recovery, analyses
of the small proportion of animals that fail to recover could
be more informative. Poor recovery is associated with several
behavioral defects (see Cohen et al., 1999; Hoﬀman and Parker,
2011), including the absence of activity above or below the
lesion site (Figures 1Di,Dii); poor co-ordination across the lesion
site associated with diﬀerences in the frequency or pattern of
activity; and defects in the reciprocal coupling between the left
and right sides of the spinal cord above and below the lesion
site (Figure 1Diii). In an analysis of 16 stage 1/2 animals,
none were able to generate activity below the lesion site, and
7 were also incapable of generating reliable alternating activity
above the lesion site. Even when there was alternation above
the lesion site, alternating activity was absent 20–80% of the
time (Parker, unpublished observations). These defects need to
be characterized as they could suggest inﬂuences on the success or
failure of recovery. Their potential range and variability of defects
means that this will require a large sample size.
FICTIVE LOCOMOTION
In addition to monitoring swimming in intact animals, spinal
cord function can be examined in the isolated spinal cord
using ﬁctive locomotion evoked by glutamate-receptor agonists
(e.g., McClellan, 1994). This allows locomotor networks to be
examined in the absence of sensory and descending inputs.
However, ﬁctive activity can be diﬃcult to evoke, and diﬀers
to normal locomotor activity (see Ayers et al., 1983; McClellan,
1990). This is not surprising given the nature of the preparation
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
4
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
FIGURE 1 | Behavioral recovery. (Ai) Video frames from an animal that recovered good locomotor function. The bar indicates a mechanical stimulus given to the
body, and shows the coordinated movement away from the stimulus. (Aii) Swimming of an animal that failed to recover. (B) Graph showing the correlation of
swimming performance with the degree of regeneration, assessed from ventral root responses below the lesion site ipsilateral (A3) and contralateral (A4) to
stimulation above the lesion. (Ci–Civ) Graphs comparing the swimming performance in animals that recovered well with that of unlesioned animals: the only
signiﬁcant difference was the duration of a swimming episode. (Di–Diii) Example of myogram activity from animals that failed to recover locomotor function. Data
from Hoffman and Parker (2011). Permission granted to reproduce. ∗Indicates statistical signiﬁcance at p < 0.05.
(no sensory or descending input, tonic application of glutamate
receptor agonists; see Parker and Srivastava, 2013). In addition
to Ayers et al. (1983), swimming was also compared in intact
and in vitro preparations by Wallen and Williams (1984). Their
analysis has been used to claim that “locomotor coordination
can be generated by the isolated spinal cord in the same
way as the intact behaving lamprey” (Grillner, 2003). However,
Wallen and Williams state “that there was an experimental
bias . . .. the sequences selected for analysis in each preparation
were those that appeared least variable,” and they thus don’t
contradict the conclusion of Ayers et al. (1983) and McClellan
(1990) of disparities between ﬁctive and actual locomotor
activity.
While ﬁctive locomotion oﬀers experimental advantages,
there are issues surrounding its use in SCI given the hypothesis
that spinal cord perturbation evokes compensatory changes.
Fictive activity varies between experiments for a given drug
concentration, and shows a prolonged and variable development
that requires preparations to be left for some hours before
activity is examined (see Parker et al., 1998). Hemisection of
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
5
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
FIGURE 2 | Properties of regenerated synapses. (Ai) The initial EPSP amplitude from reticulospinal axons in unlesioned and lesioned spinal cords. The inset shows
the largest response seen in an unlesioned spinal cord (Aii), and the occasional very large inputs seen in lesioned animals (Aiii). (B) Proportions of connections
showing different forms of activity-dependent plasticity in unlesioned and lesioned spinal cords. (C) Graph comparing facilitation in unlesioned spinal cords and from
above the lesion site. The inset shows facilitation above the lesion. (D) The effect of high and low Ca2+ on the properties of reticulospinal EPSPS. (E) Variance-mean
plots in high and low calcium for four connections.
the spinal cord can trigger signiﬁcant changes in cellular and
synaptic properties within ∼30 min (Hoﬀman and Parker,
2010). As the spinal cord is removed and tonically activated
non-physiologically for some hours before experiments start,
similar changes could also be introduced under ﬁctive conditions.
Fictive locomotion also assumes regular activity as the norm
(this presumably inﬂuenced the data selection by Wallen
and Williams, 1984). However, actual locomotion varies, the
loss of variability being associated with motor pathologies
(see Hausdorﬀ, 2009). The highly regular activity sought and
presented in ﬁctive locomotion studies may thus reﬂect a
pathological loss of complexity (Pincus, 1994; Bienenstock and
Lehmann, 1998; Berg et al., 2007). Consistent with this, ﬁctive
activity diﬀers to intact activity in being less susceptible to
modiﬁcation by sensory or descending inputs in both lamprey
and mammals (see Fagerstedt and Ullén, 2001; Musienko et al.,
2012; Hsu et al., 2016). These eﬀects could reﬂect the tonic
application of glutamate receptor agonists that contrasts the
normal spatial and temporal variability of glutamate release, or
the removal of descending and sensory inputs [see Cohen et al.,
1996; Wang and Jung, 2002; in the tadpole spinal cord brainstem
input is needed for normal locomotor activity (Li et al., 2009)].
As a result of these features, we have only examined locomotion
in intact animals.
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
6
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
PROPERTIES OF REGENERATED AXONS
The morphology of regenerated axons have been studied
extensively in lamprey. Analyses typically focus on the larger
Muller reticulospinal axons, as these can be uniquely identiﬁed
(Wood and Cohen, 1981; Hall et al., 1989; McHale et al., 1995;
Oliphint et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2011). These axons make
functional connections below the lesion site, although electrical
synapses are reduced (Wood and Cohen, 1981). Changes in the
functional properties of these axons have been studied, with
short-term changes in excitability developing that recover to
unlesioned levels once regeneration has occurred (McClellan
et al., 2008). However, while they are convenient models systems,
the Muller axons may not be the most important in terms of
recovery, as lesions of the medial column (where Muller axons
project) do not abolish locomotion in functionally recovered
animals (McClellan, 1990).
In contrast to the detailed anatomical analyses of regenerated
axons (e.g., McClellan, 1994), the functional properties of
regenerated synapses have received little attention (Oliphint et al.,
2010). These properties will ultimately determine the functional
eﬀects of regenerated axons, and diﬀerences in these properties
may explain some of the variability between regeneration and
recovery (see above). We have examined the properties of
regenerated synapses by making paired recordings from axons
above the lesion site and motor neurons either above or below
the lesion site (Cooke and Parker, 2009; Parker, unpublished
data). Axons have been targeted in the lateral columns as re-
lesion studies suggest that these regenerated inputs are important
for functional recovery (McClellan, 1990), possibly due to their
greater regenerative capacity (Chen et al., 2017). These axons are
smaller than the medial column Muller axons, and stable long-
term recordings are not as routine. Connections in unlesioned
spinal cords (n = 42) and above (n = 22) and below a lesion site
(n = 14) were examined in response to presynaptic stimulation at
20 Hz to characterize the initial and activity-dependent properties
of the connections (see Parker, 2000). The data presented is from
ongoing analyses. Because most animals recover well, and those
that don’t usually lack regeneration, the data focuses on animals
that recovered good locomotor function.
The basic properties of reticulospinal inputs, the amplitude
(Figure 2Ai), rise-time and half-width, did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly
in lesioned and unlesioned animals. This suggests against any
compensation at individual synapses for the reduced innervation
of the sub-lesion spinal cord that will occur given that
regeneration is never complete (see Frank, 2014). However, we
occasionally ﬁnd responses that are much larger than the largest
responses in unlesioned animals (>10 mV; Cooke and Parker,
2009) (Figures 2Aii,Aiii), suggesting increased variability after
lesioning. In unlesioned animals most connections depressed
over spike trains (Figure 2B). The proportion of connections
showing diﬀerent forms of plasticity was the same below the
lesion site as in unlesioned animals, but above the lesion
site connections usually facilitated (Figures 2B,C). While this
analysis is on lateral tract axons, these features were also seen
for putative Muller axons (Cooke and Parker, 2009; Parker,
unpublished observations).
Regenerated Muller axons in the ventromedial region of
the spinal cord make fewer synapses below the lesion site,
contain fewer vesicles, and have smaller active zones than
comparable synapses from unlesioned animals (Oliphint et al.,
2010). These ultrastructural diﬀerences make it surprising
that regenerated inputs matched those in unlesioned animals
(Cooke and Parker, 2009), and suggest that some adaptation
is needed for regenerated synapses to maintain the same
output. This was examined using a variance-mean analysis
(see Clements and Silver, 2000 for details), which examines
excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) in normal, high, and
low calcium Ringer. Plotting the EPSP variance against the
mean under these conditions results in a parabolic relationship
(unless the release probability is low (<0.3) when the relationship
is linear). The parabolic ﬁt allows synaptic parameters to
be estimated (Figures 2D,E): the initial slope represents Q
(the quantal amplitude, the postsynaptic response to a single
vehicle), the width represents N (the number of release sites),
and the degree of curvature represents Pr (the transmitter
release probability). These analyses were performed in the
larger medial column Muller axons, ﬁrstly to relate functional
properties to the ultrastructural features in Oliphint et al.
(2010), and secondly because they allow the stable recordings
needed for the multiple Ringer changes needed for this
analysis.
In regenerated axons below the lesion site N was generally
reduced, consistent with the sparser anatomical connectivity
(Oliphint et al., 2010); Pr was generally unchanged, consistent
with a lack of diﬀerence in activity-dependent plasticity (see
above); but Q was consistently increased, suggesting a change
in postsynaptic responsiveness. Analyses of connections above
the lesion site showed a linear relationship between the variance
and mean indicative of a low release probability (Pr < 0.3;
Clements and Silver, 2000). This prevented estimates of N and
Pr. However, Q could be determined, and was consistently
increased.
While these analyses are not deﬁnitive, they suggest lesion-
induced changes of reticulospinal synapses that diﬀer above and
below the lesion site. The increased Q below the lesion site could
scale regenerated inputs so that they match unlesioned synapses
despite the sparser connectivity. The postsynaptic increase in
Q but reduced Pr above the lesion site allows connections to
facilitate without the reduction of the initial input that would
occur with a reduction of Pr alone, resulting in a net increase
in connection strength above the lesion site (see Bevan and
Parker, 2004). A reduction of transmitter release associated with
a reduced Pr is also energetically favorable (Howarth et al.,
2012), a potentially important consideration in injured nervous
systems.
While this analysis focuses on animals that recovered well,
connections have been examined below the lesion site in animals
that failed to recover despite regeneration. The sample size
is small (n = 4) making the data very preliminary. These
connections had initial inputs that were markedly smaller than
unlesioned connections (<0.3 mV) and tended to depress
strongly, to the extent that the connections failed (connections
were monosynaptic as they persisted in high divalent Ringer).
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
7
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
FIGURE 3 | (Ai) Experimental approach to examine changes in spinal cord excitability. A1–C4 are ventral root locations along the body relative to a lesion site (or
where the lesion would be in an unlesioned spinal cord). A1–A2 are ipsilateral or contralateral ventral root responses recorded one segment above the lesion in
response to stimulation three segments above the lesion (AStim); A3 and A4 are ipsilateral and contralateral responses, respectively, evoked by AStim two segments
below the lesion site. B1–B8 are ventral root locations 2–20 segments below the lesion site (B1/2, 2 segments below; B3/4, 5 segments below; B5/6, 10 segments
below B7/8, 20 segments below) ipsilateral to stimulation one segment below the lesion (BStim). C1−4 are ventral root locations 10–20 segments below the lesion site
(C1/2, 11 segments below; C3/4, 20 segments below) in response to stimulation 10 segments below the lesion (CStim). (Aii) Changes in excitability in larvae that
showed good recovery. The colored squares represent increased excitability for stimulation in the regions indicated by the boxes. (Aiii) Excitability changes in larvae
that showed poor recovery and regeneration, and (Aiv) in larvae that showed poor recovery and no regeneration. (Av) Excitability changes in juvenile adults that
showed poor recovery. (Avi) Excitability changes in juvenile adults that showed good recovery. (Bi) The relationship between the extent of regeneration and the
excitability below the lesion site. With good recovery sub-lesion excitability increased as regeneration increased, but in poor recovery excitability decreased as
regeneration increased (Bii).
This suggests a potential failure of the postsynaptic scaling of
the connection (increase in Q), while compromised function over
repetitive stimulation could reﬂect a failure of activity-dependent
replenishment mechanisms (Parker, 2000).
A feature to note from these analyses is the marked variability
of connections (see Figure 2E for an example of various-mean
plots from four individual axons). Averaging these responses to
give mean values does not seem appropriate. Synapses vary in
unlesioned animals (Brodin et al., 1994), but this seems to be
increased after lesioning (Cooke and Parker, 2009). Larger sample
sizes are needed to characterize this variability and the functional
properties of regenerated synapses (Parker, 2003a).
CHANGES IN SPINAL CORD NETWORKS
Even with the highest levels of regeneration (∼70%; McClellan,
1994), the apparent absence of a change in the amplitude of
individual regenerated synapses means that the descending drive
to the spinal cord will be reduced. This can only be avoided if
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
8
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
there was redundancy or degeneracy in the descending input in
unlesioned animals, or if there was some adaptation below the
lesion site that allowed the same output to be generated from a
reduced descending input. Selzer (1978) suggested that functional
recovery in lamprey would reﬂect a combination of regeneration
and network plasticity, but the latter has subsequently received
little attention. We have thus examined changes in the locomotor
network above and below the lesion site.
We initially examined global levels of spinal cord excitability
by recording extracellular activity from ventral roots or the
surface of the spinal cord (both responses are generally similar)
in response to spinal cord stimulation at diﬀerent supra- and
sub-lesion sites (or comparable regions in the unlesioned spinal
cord; Figure 3Ai; Cooke and Parker, 2009; Hoﬀman and Parker,
2011; Parker, unpublished data). In larvae, with good recovery
excitability was increased locally (up to ﬁve segments) below,
but was not altered above the lesion site (Figure 3Aii; Cooke
and Parker, 2009). Excitability was also increased distal to the
lesion site (11–20 segments below the lesion in response to
stimulation 10 segments below; Figure 3Aii). Eﬀects diﬀered in
poorly recovered animals, depending on whether regeneration
occurred: in poor recovery with regeneration excitability was not
increased locally only distally below the lesion site (Figure 3Aiii),
but without regeneration excitability was increased immediately
below the lesion site but distal eﬀects were reduced (Figure 3iv).
This suggests several aspects: ﬁrstly, increased excitability locally
(1–5 segments) below the lesion site is needed for good recovery;
secondly, excitability changes occur diﬀusely below the lesion site,
(see Grasso et al., 2004 for a similar eﬀect in the human spinal
cord); and ﬁnally, regenerated inputs inﬂuence the excitability
changes.
While increased excitability was associated with recovery,
there was marked variability in responses between animals, and
overall the excitability changes did not correlate statistically
signiﬁcantly with the degree of recovery. Several factors could
underlie this variability: the magnitude of extracellular signals
could have diﬀered due to electrode location in diﬀerent
animals; and secondly, descending inputs were activated using
relatively crude stimulation that did not address regional
(various descending or ascending pathways, propriospinal or
reticulospinal inputs) or other divisions (e.g., transmitter
content) that may better reveal a link between the excitability
changes and degree of regeneration. Alternatively, rather than
being “noise” associated with these eﬀects, variability may be a
signal that allows the spinal cord to sample a range of options to
optimize recovery (Ashby, 1958), or it reﬂects the need for spinal
cord excitability to be adapted to the varying inﬂuence of sensory
and regenerated inputs.
Juvenile adults also showed changes in excitability. In contrast
to larvae these were signiﬁcantly related to diﬀerent degrees
of recovery. Animals that failed to recover had signiﬁcantly
increased excitability ipsilateral to the stimulation site up to
10 segments below the lesion (Figure 3Av), and a signiﬁcant
reduction of activity when stimulating across the lesion site,
indicative of a lack of functional regeneration. In animals
that showed good recovery, regeneration had occurred and
there was a signiﬁcant increase in excitability ipsilateral to
stimulation above the lesion site (Figure 3Avi). However, below
the lesion site excitability did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly to unlesioned
animals. This suggests that in adults as regeneration occurs
sub-lesion excitability falls back to match that in unlesioned
animals. However, this restoration was associated with changes
in functional properties and spinal cord organization (see below).
A signiﬁcant feature of this analysis was the interaction
of regenerated inputs with sub-lesion networks in larvae. As
outlined above, the relationship between regeneration and
recovery is inconsistent (Steward et al., 2012). Rather than
regeneration per se, recovery may depend on how regenerated
inputs interact with sub-lesion networks. When animals showed
good recovery there was a positive correlation between the extent
of regeneration (assessed from the A3/A4 responses) and the
magnitude of the excitability changes below the lesion site (B1–B4
responses; Figure 3Bi). However, animals that failed to recover
showed negative correlations between the degree of regeneration
and excitability (Figure 3Bii; Hoﬀman and Parker, 2011). If the
changes in sub-lesion excitability are compensations for the loss
of descending excitation, regeneration should lead to adjustments
of excitability. In poor recovery this adjustment may be excessive,
leading to the negative correlation shown here. This interaction
needs further study, but it supports the idea that recovery is more
than regeneration.
BELOW LESION CELLULAR CHANGES
Understanding the changes in spinal cord networks and the
interactions with regenerated inputs requires understanding the
cellular mechanisms of the lesion-induced changes. These have
been examined by recording from spinal cord neurons above and
below the lesion site. The analysis has focused on motor neurons
and their inputs, as these are easier to record from. However,
as eﬀects cannot be generalized between neurons or synapses
(Parker, 2006) analyses of locomotor network interneurons has
started.
In larvae, the resting membrane potential, input resistance,
and excitability in response to depolarizing current pulses
(including the appearance of plateau potentials) were all
signiﬁcantly increased in motor neurons below the lesion site
compared to unlesioned animals (Figures 4Ai–Aiii; Cooke and
Parker, 2009). These changes occurred in animals that recovered
well or poorly, suggesting that they don’t directly determine
the degree of recovery. There was a signiﬁcant increase in the
spontaneous EPSP amplitude and frequency below the lesion
site with good and poor recovery, but the IPSP amplitude
and frequency were signiﬁcantly increased with poor recovery
(Figure 4B). As a result, the synaptic excitation:inhibition
ratio was increased in animals that recovered well compared
to unlesioned animals (9.84 and 2.45, respectively), but was
reduced in animals that failed to recover (1.36; Cooke and
Parker, 2009). This provides a link to a cellular mechanism
for the changes in spinal cord excitability outlined above.
Similar cellular and synaptic eﬀects occur in the glutamatergic
excitatory interneurons (EIN), which are identiﬁed by their
ability to make monosynaptic connections onto motor neurons
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
9
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
and other network interneurons (Buchanan, 2001), including
the development of plateau potentials and marked increase in
spontaneous excitatory synaptic inputs, although the sample size
of recordings from these cells is still relatively small (Cooke and
Parker, 2009; Parker, unpublished observations). These changes
may be needed to compensate for the reduced descending
excitation, but also for a reduction in intraspinal glutamatergic
interneurons (Fernández-López et al., 2016).
Synaptic eﬀects below the lesion site were examined in
more detail using TTX-resistant miniature EPSPs (mEPSPs)
to remove the inﬂuence of changes in cellular excitability.
The amplitude, frequency, and half-width of mEPSPs were all
increased, and there was an increase in summated or “double”
mEPSPs (Figure 4C). These eﬀects could reﬂect presynaptic
and postsynaptic changes. An ultrastructural analysis of synaptic
terminals from putative network interneurons showed that in
lesioned animals the total and docked vesicle numbers were
signiﬁcantly greater (Figures 4Di,Dii) and the vesicle diameter
and synaptic gap signiﬁcantly reduced at asymmetric (putative
excitatory) synapses. However, there was a reduction in the
post-synaptic density length at symmetric (putative inhibitory)
synapses (Cooke and Parker, 2009). These eﬀects were only
studied in animals that showed good recovery, and thus we do
not yet know whether they discriminate between recovery stages.
Despite
evidence
for
changes
in
excitatory
synaptic
ultrastructure after lesioning, as with regenerated axon synapses
there were no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the amplitude, rise-
time or half-width of single EPSPs evoked by EINs to motor
neurons (Cooke and Parker, 2009). However, during spike
trains a very pronounced slow depolarization developed that
was not seen in unlesioned animals (Figure 4E). This was
signiﬁcantly larger in animals that recovered well than those
that recovered poorly where it was small or absent, suggesting
another potential factor in good recovery. The mechanism
underlying this eﬀect is unknown. It does not seem to reﬂect an
L-type calcium, persistent sodium, or NMDA conductance (see
Li et al., 2004a), increased EPSP summation due to changes in
half-width, or the recruitment of polysynaptic inputs (Cooke and
Parker, 2009; Becker and Parker, 2015). One possibility is that
it reﬂects “synaptic drag” (Martin and Pilar, 1964), an increase
in asynchronous vesicle release that can cause slowly developing
depolarizations with repetitive stimulation (Hjelmstad, 2005;
Iremonger and Bains, 2007). This is supported by the double
mEPSPs in lesioned animals (Figure 4C), which could be
facilitated by the larger glutamatergic vesicle pool. We tried
to mimic the eﬀect in unlesioned animals using strontium to
increase spontaneous release and N-ethylmaleimide to increase
the number of docked vesicles (Lonart and Sudhof, 2000), but
have failed to evoke a slow depolarization (Parker, unpublished
observations). While this oﬀers no support for vesicle “drag,” we
cannot yet claim to have mimicked the properties of synapses in
lesioned animals.
In contrast to larvae, juvenile adult animals showed no
statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in motor neuron cellular
properties after lesioning [resting potential, input resistance, slow
afterhyperpolarization (sAHP), excitability; Becker and Parker,
2015], but there was an increase in spontaneous excitatory and
inhibitory synaptic inputs (Figure 4F). Unlike larvae, where
increased inhibition was associated with poor recovery, in
juvenile animals increased inhibition also occurred in good
recovery (Figures 4F,G; Becker and Parker, 2015). This may be a
necessary requirement to deal with developmental diﬀerences in
spinal cord circuitry: inhibition is reduced in juveniles compared
to larvae (Parker and Gilbey, 2007), which could make juveniles
more susceptible to runaway excitation after SCI. A lack of
appropriate inhibition is associated with various dysfunctions
[e.g., dystonia (Quartarone et al., 2008); neuropathic pain (Kuner,
2010)]. This suggests that activation of sub-lesion networks is
not simply about increasing excitation, but about ensuring the
appropriate balance between excitation and inhibition (Berg
et al., 2007).
ABOVE LESION CHANGES
The defects in locomotor activity (Figure 1Diii) and changes in
excitability (Figure 3Avi) suggest that there are changes above
the lesion site. This may reﬂect the degeneration of damaged
neurons above the lesion site. In addition, there are ascending
propriospinal inputs to the spinal cord and brainstem that will
be aﬀected by a lesion (see Armstrong et al., 2003 for lamprey).
This could result in diaschisis above the lesion site, either by the
removal of ascending inputs or by changes in their properties
after regeneration. Changes above the lesion (e.g., increased
excitation; Figure 3Avi) may also be programmed directly to
increase propriospinal signals across the lesion site to compensate
for the reduction of descending brainstem inputs (Courtine
et al., 2008). We have thus also examined cellular changes
above the lesion site, so far only in juvenile animals (Becker and
Parker, 2015).
Cellular properties (resting potential, input resistance, sAHP,
excitability) and the slow synaptic depolarization did not diﬀer
signiﬁcantly above and below the lesion site to the properties
in unlesioned animals (Becker and Parker, 2015). However,
synaptic eﬀects did diﬀer. As outlined above, reticulospinal inputs
signiﬁcantly facilitated above but depressed below the lesion site
(Figures 2C, 5A). The frequency of spontaneous excitatory and
inhibitory synaptic inputs was increased above and below the
lesion site compared to unlesioned animals, but spontaneous
inhibitory inputs were greater below and excitatory inputs greater
above the lesion (Figures 4F, 5B). The increased excitatory input
above the lesion was lacking in animals that failed to recover
(Figure 4G), again suggesting a potential role in good recovery,
but the increased inhibition below the lesion site occurred
irrespective of the degree of recovery. The changes in supra-
lesion excitation were supported by the increased feedforward
excitatory interactions above the lesion site seen in paired
recordings from EINs and motor neurons (Figures 5C,D, and
an increased connection probability between EINs (from a very
sparse unlesioned probability of <0.1 (Jia and Parker, 2016) to a
probability of 0.5; but n = 4 connections). However, feedforward
inhibition was increased below the lesion (Figures 5E,F). These
eﬀects suggest a potential diﬀerence in the reorganization of sub
and supra-lesion locomotor networks (Becker and Parker, 2015),
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
10
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
FIGURE 4 | Lesion-induced changes in cellular properties. (Ai) Graph showing changes in excitability in unlesioned larvae, and in lesioned larvae showing good and
poor recovery. Traces show excitability changes in a lesioned (Aii) and unlesioned animal (Aiii). (B) Spontaneous synaptic inputs in an unlesioned spinal cord, and
below the lesion site in animals that showed good or poor recovery. (C) Graph and traces showing “double” spontaneous miniature EPSPs. (Di) Graph showing the
number of vesicles in synaptic terminals in an unlesioned and a lesioned spinal cord. (Dii) Electron micrographs showing examples of putative glutamatergic
synapses in an unlesioned (top) and a lesioned spinal cord (below). (E) Example of an excitatory interneuron to motor neuron connection in an unlesioned animal and
the slow depolarization that occurs at the same type of connection in a lesioned animal. (F) Changes in spontaneous synaptic inputs above and below the lesion site
in juvenile adult animals. (G) Changes in excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs above and below the lesion site in juvenile animals that recovered well or poorly.
Data is presented as a boxplot to indicate the variability. Data from Cooke and Parker (2009) and Becker and Parker (2015). No permission is required to reproduce
this material. ∗Indicates statistical signiﬁcance at p < 0.05.
To summarize, there are signiﬁcant changes in locomotor
network cellular and synaptic properties after lesioning, that
are speciﬁc to the developmental stage, degree of recovery, and
location relative to the lesion site. There is also evidence for
the reorganization of locomotor networks above and below the
lesion site, shown by the increased feedforward excitation and
inhibition, respectively. These changes support the claim that
the lesioned spinal cord is functionally “new” (Edgerton et al.,
2001). Some of the changes correlated signiﬁcantly with recovery
(e.g., sub and supra-lesion excitability, excitation:inhibition ratio,
interaction of regenerated inputs with sub-lesion excitability,
slow synaptic depolarization, role of inhibition), and could
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
11
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
FIGURE 5 | Changes in reticulospinal-evoked synaptic inputs to motor neurons in unlesioned juvenile animals, and lesioned animals above and below the lesion site.
(A) Note the facilitation above, but depression below the lesion site and in unlesioned animals. (B) Spontaneous synaptic inputs above and below the lesion site in
juvenile adult animals. (C,D) Evidence for polysynaptic excitatory synaptic interactions (indicated by ∗) above the lesion site. (E,F) Polysynaptic inhibition below the
lesion site in juvenile adult animals (in this case ∗refers to inputs that failed to evoke an input, IPSPs only developing during the spike train as a result of activation of
the feedforward inhibitory pathway). Data from Becker and Parker (2015). No permission is required to reproduce this material.
suggest potential compensations for the reduced descending
drive to motor neurons and EINs. As animals that showed
poor recovery always lacked regeneration these changes alone
are presumably insuﬃcient for recovery. Lurie and Selzer
(1991) showed that re-transection abolished recovered locomotor
function in lamprey (n = 2), suggesting that regeneration was
necessary. Interestingly, recovery was faster after the second
transection (Wood and Cohen, 1981; Lurie and Selzer, 1991),
possibly reﬂecting the prior development of the functional
changes (see Courtine et al., 2008 and Frigon et al., 2009 for
similar eﬀects in mammals). Re-transection also only shows that
regeneration is necessary, not that it is suﬃcient for recovery, and
does not rule out some role for the sub-lesion changes. A feature
is again variability (see Figures 4F,G). This may be “noise”
(e.g., diﬀerences between animals, or poorly deﬁned neuronal
populations; Parker, 2003a), but may again be a signal that allows
the spinal cord to explore a range of options to optimize recovery.
The changes in cellular properties in larval EINs and motor
neurons suggest a switch from synaptic to cellular driven
excitability that may allow these cells to be activated by reduced
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
12
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
synaptic inputs. This may be advantageous: the main energy cost
in the nervous system is for synaptic transmission (Howarth
et al., 2012), and as sources of energy may be compromised
after injury or used elsewhere (e.g., in repair), this economy
might be beneﬁcial. However, this switch does not seem to
occur in juvenile animals, where synaptic eﬀects dominate.
The reasons for this are unknown, but may reﬂect diﬀering
network requirements. Juveniles actively swim whereas larvae
are passive and swim only when disturbed. This is associated
with diﬀerences in the locomotor network (Parker and Gilbey,
2007), and the more active juveniles may need a network where
synaptic co-ordination rather than intrinsic cellular properties
are more important for ensuring optimal activity. This needs
further work, but the diﬀerences in these systems oﬀer the chance
to examine how systems with diﬀering initial properties respond
to perturbation.
Inhibitory inputs, most likely from the glycinergic small
ipsilateral inhibitory interneurons (SiINs) that are identiﬁed by
their ability to make monosynaptic connections onto motor
neurons (Buchanan, 2001) and the EINs (Parker, 2003b), could
have a key role. These have opposite inﬂuences in larvae and
adults on the degree of recovery. While these neurons have
been removed from some network schemes (Grillner, 2003),
they have criteria consistent with a network role (Buchanan
and Grillner, 1988), and can modify the eﬀects of EIN-driven
network activity (Jia and Parker, 2016). This modifying eﬀect may
also underlie their diﬀering inﬂuence on recovery in larvae and
juveniles, making consideration of inhibitory control rather, than
excitation, a consideration in recovery strategies.
SENSORY CHANGES
Proprioceptive inputs can be examined simply in the lamprey as
the proprioceptive edge cells are located on the lateral margin of
the spinal cord (Rovainen, 1974). They serve a similar function
as mammalian muscle spindles, but monitor stretch of the spinal
cord rather than muscles (Vinay et al., 1996). Edge cell axons
project to the ipsilateral and contralateral side of the spinal
cord where they make excitatory and inhibitory connections,
respectively (Di Prisco et al., 1990). The spinal location of these
cells allows sensory inputs to be examined by imposing sinusoidal
movements onto the isolated spinal cord while monitoring the
movement-evoked activity from the lateral tracts where edge cell
axons run (Figure 6A; McClellan and Sigvardt, 1988).
After
recovery
from
lesioning,
sensory
feedback
was
potentiated and adaptation reduced in response to bending-
evoked stretch of the spinal cord (Figures 6Bi,Bii; Hoﬀman
and Parker, 2011; Svensson et al., 2013). Intracellular recordings
showed that lesioning depolarized the edge cell resting potential,
increased the input resistance, and reduced the sAHP after an
action potential (Figure 6Ci), eﬀects associated with an increase
in the excitability in response to current injection (Figure 6Cii).
There also seems to be an interaction of sensory systems with the
locomotor network, as after lesioning there was an increase in
spontaneous synaptic inputs in the edge cells (Figures 6Di,Dii;
Hoﬀman and Parker, 2011). This presumably reﬂects locomotor
network inputs that regulate edge cell responses (Vinay
et al., 1996), and again illustrates the interactions between
components rather than the focus on single properties. The
sensory potentiation may be a direct adaptive response to the
reduced excitability below the lesion site caused by the reduced
descending excitation, or a secondary eﬀect triggered by the need
to monitor and adjust the altered locomotor network output.
The potentiation seems to be speciﬁc to proprioceptive inputs,
as the somatosensory dorsal cells are not signiﬁcantly aﬀected by
lesioning (Parker, unpublished data).
While the sensory changes should have had some positive
or negative inﬂuence on locomotion, there was no signiﬁcant
correlation between the sensory potentiation and the degree
of locomotor recovery (Hoﬀman and Parker, 2011). There was
also no signiﬁcant correlation between the sensory potentiation
and the extent of regeneration, suggesting that while the eﬀect
is triggered by the lesion, it is not regulated by regenerated
inputs. It is possible that a threshold level of descending input
is needed to reverse the sensory potentiation that was not
reached in our experiments, or that the sensory potentiation
reverses at later recovery times. Alternatively, it may reﬂect a
secondary adaptation to the changing locomotor network. It has
been argued that sensory input is not needed for functional
recovery (McClellan, 1990) because ﬁctive locomotion can be
evoked in the isolated spinal cord. This is not good evidence,
but McClellan (1990) also examined the involvement of sensory
inputs by re-transecting the spinal cord after recovery or by
removing a 2–5 mm region of the spinal cord. Both approaches
abolished activity below the lesion site even though body
movements spread mechanically below the lesion site. This
suggests that sensory inputs were unable to detect or relay sub-
lesion movements to locomotor networks to propagate activity
below the lesion site. However, this does not rule out some
contribution of sensory feedback in recovery.
Various types of locomotor activity can improve motor
function after SCI (Wernig et al., 1995; D’Amico et al.,
2014). Locomotor recovery in lamprey does not seem to be
activity-dependent, as restraining animals in plastic tubes to
prevent movement did not abolish locomotor recovery or
the potentiation of sensory responses (Hoﬀman and Parker
unpublished data; see also Cohen et al., 1988). While the restraint
was not total, movement was markedly reduced and some eﬀect
would have been expected if movement was needed for recovery.
Changes in sensory inputs have been implicated in the
development of spasticity (Li et al., 2004b; Mukherjee and
Chakravarty, 2010). They are also targeted in treadmill training to
enhance motor function below a lesion site (Smith and Knikou,
2016), and have been implicated in locomotor recovery following
electrical or pharmacological stimulation of the sub-lesion spinal
cord (Lavrov et al., 2008). While the lack of correlation between
the sensory potentiation and degree of recovery in lamprey
seems surprising, the relationship between sensory changes and
function after SCI generally seems complex (see Smith and
Knikou, 2016). For example, there was a lack of correlation
between stretch reﬂex-activated inputs (analogous to edge cell
inputs in lamprey) and stepping after human SCI (Dietz et al.,
2002), and a lack of correlation between H reﬂex changes
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
13
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
FIGURE 6 | Changes in sensory feedback after lesioning. (A) Diagram
showing the experimental procedure for evoking and monitoring
proprioceptive feedback to the spinal cord. The spinal cord is ﬁxed except at a
free end that is attached to a computer-driven motor that imposes sinusoidal
movements of the cord. Movement-dependent activity is recorded from the
lateral tract where edge cell axons run. Stretch-evoked responses to a 1 Hz
bending command in an unlesioned (Bi) and lesioned spinal cord (Bii). (Ci)
Graph showing the signiﬁcant reduction of the post-spike slow
afterhyperpolarization (sAHP) in an edge cell in a lesioned spinal cord. The
inset shows an edge cell action potential in an unlesioned and lesioned spinal
cord (thick line). (Cii) Traces showing the increase in edge cell excitability in
response to depolarizing current injection in the unlesioned and lesioned
spinal cord. (Di) Traces showing spontaneous synaptic inputs in an edge cell
in an unlesioned and lesioned spinal cord. (Dii) Graph showing the signiﬁcant
increase in the integrated spontaneous synaptic input in edge cells after
lesioning. Data from Hoffman and Parker (2011). Permission granted to
reproduce. ∗Indicates statistical signiﬁcance at p < 0.05.
and behavioral scores assessed from hind limb function in rat
(Lee et al., 2005). Lee et al. (2005) also showed a correlation
between spared white matter after contusion injury and hindlimb
function, but no correlation between the degree of spared white
matter and H reﬂex changes, mimicking the lack of correlation
between regeneration and the sensory changes that we saw. Thus,
while changes in sensory systems occur routinely after SCI, their
inﬂuence is complicated (Morawietz and Moﬀat, 2013; Smith and
Knikou, 2016), and suggests a role that involves interactions with
other motor system components.
NEUROMODULATION
The existence of spinal cord locomotor networks that can
be activated pharmacologically has led to the search for
pharmacological
approaches
for
activating
the
sub-lesion
spinal cord. Despite a vast literature on drug eﬀects (Rossignol
et al., 2001; Tillakaratne et al., 2002; Barbeau and Norman,
2003; Parker, 2005), there is still little insight into what
might constitute an optimal pharmacological treatment for
SCI. This is complicated by the diversity of neuron and
synapse-speciﬁc
eﬀects
that
make
a
complete
functional
description
of
any
neuromodulator
diﬃcult;
by
state-
dependent inﬂuences that can alter modulatory eﬀects; and
by interactions between modulatory systems (see for example,
Yang and Faber, 1991; Katz and Frost, 1995; Harris-Warrick
et al., 1998; Katz and Edwards, 1999; Svensson et al., 2001;
Sakurai and Katz, 2003; Brezina, 2010; Harris-Warrick and
Johnson, 2010; Zhao et al., 2011; Parker, 2015). We have
started to examine modulatory eﬀects after lesioning in
lamprey (Svensson et al., 2013; Becker and Parker, 2015;
McClelland and Parker, 2017) as a parallel to studies of
anatomical changes in transmitter systems (Cohen et al., 2005;
Cornide-Petronio et al., 2014; Fernández-López et al., 2014,
2015).
Proprioceptive inputs oﬀered a convenient system for
examining modulatory eﬀects as they can be examined relatively
easily, and receive modulatory inputs from cells that co-
localize GABA and somatostatin (Christenson et al., 1991).
Exogenously applied GABA signiﬁcantly reduced proprioceptive
responses in unlesioned animals (Figures 7Ai,Bi). But in lesioned
animals, where proprioceptive activity was potentiated (see
above), GABA was less eﬀective (Figures 7Aii,Bii; Svensson
et al., 2013). Reduced GABA inhibition could have accounted
for the potentiated proprioceptive response. However, blocking
endogenous GABA with bicuculline signiﬁcantly potentiated
proprioceptive responses in lesioned, but not unlesioned, animals
(Figures 7Ci,Cii; Svensson et al., 2013), suggesting that there was
increased tonic GABAergic inhibition after lesioning. This may
be an example of the need for potentiated excitatory eﬀects to be
balanced by increased inhibition (see above, Becker and Parker,
2015).
Bicuculline could cause long-lasting sensory discharges,
suggesting that unregulated proprioceptive feedback would
disrupt locomotion. Bicuculline can improve locomotor function
after SCI when the lesion was made in adult cats and
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
14
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
FIGURE 7 | Modulation of proprioceptive activity. (Ai,Aii) The effect of GABA
on bending-evoked activity recorded from the lateral margin of the spinal cord.
Notice that GABA effects are weaker in lesioned animals. Traces showing
proprioceptive activity in an unlesioned (Bi) and a lesioned animal (Bii).
(Ci,Cii) The effects of bicuculline on bending-evoked activity depended on the
degree of recovery: note that bicuculline effects are only signiﬁcant in lesioned
animals that showed good recovery. Traces showing the effects of bicuculline
on bending-evoked activity in animals that showed poor (Di) and good
recovery (Dii). Data from Svensson et al. (2013). Permission granted to
reproduce. ∗Indicates statistical signiﬁcance at p < 0.05.
resulting recovery was poor; but disrupted activity when
the lesion was made in kittens that subsequently recovered
good locomotor function, suggesting that increased GABAergic
inhibition was needed for recovery (Robinson and Goldberger,
1986a,b). This was mimicked in lamprey: bicuculline only
potentiated proprioceptive responses when animals recovered
good locomotor function, suggesting increased GABA levels
occur with good recovery (Figures 7Ci–Dii).
Somatostatin, which co-localizes with GABA (Christenson
et al., 1991), did not aﬀect proprioceptive responses on its
own in lesioned or unlesioned animals. However, in lesioned
animals, it further reduced the eﬀects of GABA (Svensson et al.,
2013), suggesting a lesion-induced metamodulatory inﬂuence
that regulates GABA eﬀects.
5-HT is arguably the dominant transmitter system studied
after SCI. 5-HT has signiﬁcant eﬀects on motor outputs and
sensory processing in the unlesioned spinal cord (Schmidt and
Jordan, 2000), and there is evidence that 5-HT receptor levels
(Giroux et al., 1999; Otoshi et al., 2009) and 5-HT receptor
agonists can inﬂuence locomotion after injury (Giménez y
Ribotta et al., 1998; Hains et al., 2001; Hochman et al., 2001;
Antri et al., 2003; Nothias et al., 2005; Murray et al., 2010;
D’Amico et al., 2013; Barreiro-Iglesias et al., 2015; see Gackière
and Vinay, 2014, for a recent review). However, the mechanisms
underlying any improvements, which should be targeted to
improve recovery, are unclear. We have thus started to examine
5-HT eﬀects after lesioning.
The eﬀects of 5-HT diﬀered in unlesioned and lesioned
animals that recovered well or poorly. 5-HT consistently evoked
a hyperpolarization of the membrane potential in unlesioned
animals (∼1 mV; see also Buchanan and Grillner, 1991). After
lesioning 5-HT eﬀects were more variable: with good recovery
it typically depolarized the resting potential above and below
the lesion site (Becker and Parker, 2015), but in animals that
failed to recover it evoked a relatively large hyperpolarization
below the lesion site (>2 mV, Figure 8A). This may negatively
aﬀect recovery by reducing the excitation:inhibition ratio from an
optimal level (see above). 5-HT reduced the post-action potential
sAHP and increased excitability in control animals and animals
that recovered well (above and below the lesion site), but had no
eﬀect in animals that didn’t recover (Figure 8B), again suggesting
a potential role in good recovery. A striking eﬀect was that
the 5-HT-mediated reduction of glutamatergic inputs, a highly
consistent modulatory eﬀect in unlesioned animals (Buchanan
and Grillner, 1991; Parker and Grillner, 1999; Becker and Parker,
2015; McClelland and Parker, 2017), was absent above and below
lesion sites (Figure 8C), suggesting that the synaptic eﬀects of
5-HT are reduced after SCI.
We have also examined the eﬀects of 5-HT on locomotor
behavior (Becker and Parker, 2015). 5-HT typically slows
swimming in unlesioned animals and could improve its
regularity. It had little eﬀect in lesioned animals that recovered
well (Becker and Parker, 2015), but could modestly improve
swimming in animals that recover poorly (behavioral score
change from 1/2 to stage 3; Figures 9Ai,Aii). However, 5-HT
seems
to
be
essential
during
recovery.
Depleting
5-HT
with
p-chloro-phenylalanine
(PCPA),
a
5-HT
synthesis
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
15
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
FIGURE 8 | 5-HT-mediated modulation after lesioning. (A) Graph showing the
effects of 5-HT on the resting membrane potential in unlesioned animals, and
lesioned animals that showed good and poor recovery. (B) Graph showing the
effects of 5-HT on the sAHP in good and poor recovery: note the amplitude
was only signiﬁcantly reduced in animals that showed good recovery.
(C) Graph showing the effects of 5-HT on glutamatergic synaptic inputs in
unlesioned animals and lesioned animals above and below the lesion site. The
inset shows the effect of 5-HT in an unlesioned spinal cord. Data from Becker
and Parker (2015). No permission is required to reproduce this material.
∗Indicates statistical signiﬁcance at p < 0.05.
inhibitor, markedly disrupted activity in unlesioned animals
(Figures 9Bi,Bii), suggesting a necessary role for endogenous
5-HT in normal locomotor activity. Animals usually recovered
normal swimming after removal of PCPA for 5 days (Becker and
Parker, 2015). When lesioned animals were incubated in PCPA
during recovery they consistently failed to recover locomotor
function, suggesting a necessary role for 5-HT in recovery
(Figure 9Ci). However, PCPA was without aﬀect when it was
applied after locomotor function had recovered (Figure 9Cii),
suggesting that endogenous 5-HT becomes less important
once recovery had occurred. These results are based on small
numbers of animals. Given the variability of eﬀects, especially
after lesioning, further experiments are needed.
The simple conclusion from these analyses is that modulatory
eﬀects diﬀer in lesioned animals. This seems to be a conserved
eﬀect (see Giroux et al., 2003 for diﬀerences after lesioning in
cats), and suggests that drug eﬀects after SCI cannot be predicted
from eﬀects in unlesioned animals. Even if this was unique to
lamprey, assuming that a drug that targets a single transmitter
system can restore function seems unlikely given the multiple
transmitter systems and their potential interactions in the spinal
cord (see above). An eﬀective pharmacological approach after
SCI will require understanding the functional state of locomotor
networks and their inputs in the lesioned and unlesioned state,
and the changes in transmitter systems and their eﬀects.
CONCLUSION
What Have We Learnt from Lamprey?
(1) Regeneration is usually necessary for recovery, but as
recovery can occur in its absence it may not be an
absolute necessity. This does not negate the importance of
promoting regeneration, but means that other approaches,
for example electrical or pharmacological stimulation,
could substitute for regeneration given optimal conditions.
(2) Regeneration is not restoration: regeneration is never
complete, regenerated axons project ectopically, and
regenerated synapses have a diﬀerent ultrastructure. Even
though pre-lesion functional properties are restored at
regenerated synapses, this reﬂects changes in synaptic
function.
(3) As inputs from individual regenerated axons match those
in unlesioned animals, there is no compensation at
individual synapses for the reduced descending drive
caused by incomplete regeneration (cf. Frank, 2014). There
may be little point making this compensation, as stronger
activation of a limited pool of neurons will not necessarily
translate into optimal activation of the whole sub-lesion
network, will be energetically expensive (Howarth et al.,
2012), and could cause excitotoxic damage.
(4) Compensation seems to occur in locomotor networks
through wide-ranging changes in cellular and synaptic
properties and synaptic reorganization. The net eﬀect of
the cellular and synaptic changes seems to be an increase
in spinal cord excitability, although this requires balancing
by a parallel increase in inhibition.
(5) Even though regeneration is usually necessary for recovery,
it is not suﬃcient. Regeneration does not equal recovery:
recovery instead depends on how altered regenerated
inputs interact with altered sub-lesion networks.
(6) Proprioceptive inputs are potentiated after SCI. The lack
of correlation between the sensory changes and recovery
could suggest that sensory inputs have no inﬂuence on
recovery, which seems unlikely given the powerful sensory
entrainment/reﬂex eﬀects (McClellan and Sigvardt, 1988),
or that the eﬀect of sensory inputs depends on their
interaction with other components of the motor system.
The latter seems likely given the association between
sensory systems and locomotor networks (Pearson, 2000).
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
16
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
FIGURE 9 | Effects of 5-HT on swimming. (Ai,Aii) EMG traces from swimming animals showing activity above and below the lesion site in an animal that failed to
recover locomotor function, and the effects of 5-HT in improving activity in the same animal. (Bi,Bii) EMG traces showing activity in an unlesioned animal, and in the
same animal after incubation in PCPA for 72 h to deplete 5-HT. (Ci) EMG traces showing the poor activity in an animal that was incubated in PCPA after lesioning.
(Cii) EMG traces showing activity in a lesioned animal after incubation in PCPA after it had recovered. Note that after recovery incubation in PCPA was without effect.
Data from Becker and Parker (2015). No permission is required to reproduce this material.
The restoration of normal locomotion after SCI thus reﬂects
regeneration and functional changes in locomotor networks and
sensory inputs (see Figure 10): the same behavioral output
is generated by an anatomically and functionally diﬀerent
spinal cord. Recovery is thus more than reconnecting the
two sides of the spinal cord. Sub-lesion changes may adapt
the spinal cord to the reduced descending excitatory drive,
while supra-lesion changes may generate stronger proprioceptive
or mechanical responses to relay activity across the lesion
site. Potentiated sensory feedback may in turn be needed to
regulate the activity in these altered networks. While these
are plausible responses to injury, we lack insight into their
direct roles. Understanding their inﬂuence and underlying
mechanisms will allow them to be targeted to improve functional
recovery. Even if not targeted directly, as they will inﬂuence
any regenerative, prosthetic, training or pharmacological input,
understanding these changes is necessary to any rational
intervention after SCI.
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
17
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
FIGURE 10 | Summary of changes after lesioning. (A) The unlesioned network. Descending inputs project to the locomotor network. The network scheme is
simpliﬁed to focus on known aspects, essentially limited to one half-center or hemisegmental network (open circles are glutamatergic synapses, ﬁlled circles are
glycinergic synapses). Two hemisegmental networks in each spinal segment control activity on the left and right sides of the body, and are coupled by reciprocal
inhibitory connections, the nature of which remains uncertain (Parker, 2006). The hemisegmental network contains EINs that provide glutamatergic inputs to other
EINs, motor neurons, and the small ipsilateral inhibitory interneurons (SiIN): the latter provide feedback inhibition to the EINs and feedforward inhibition to motor
neurons (this circuitry has been characterized in adults (Jia and Parker, 2016)). Movement is detected by proprioceptive edge cells that provide feedback to the
locomotor network. (B) General summary of the changes after injury: see text for details of above/below, good/poor recovery, and larval/adult changes. Thicker lines
represent increased activity, thinner reduced. Descending inputs to the spinal cord are reduced in number but individual connections are unaltered after lesioning. In
the locomotor network there are changes in the cellular properties of EINs and motor neuron (larvae) and the connectivity and synaptic properties of the EINs (larvae
and juveniles). Connections to the SiINs seem a key difference, with increased activity associated with poor recovery in larvae but with good recovery in adults.
Sensory inputs are also increased after lesioning.
However, understanding these mechanisms and relating them
to behavior is not trivial, even for simpler systems likes the
lamprey (see Parker, 2010). It seems reasonable that the role of
a component can be inferred by manipulating it and monitoring
the eﬀect on the system. However, this assumes that separate
parts can be altered in isolation, an unlikely assumption in
any feedforward and feedback (i.e., circular) system where even
highly focused perturbations can cause eﬀectively instantaneous
changes at non-perturbed sites (Otchy et al., 2015). Even without
these eﬀects, loss of function when a component is removed only
shows necessity, not suﬃciency, while absence of an eﬀect may
reﬂect degeneracy or redundancy by compensatory adjustments
rather than it being unnecessary.
What Do We Need to Do: How Can
Lower Vertebrates Help?
(1) We need to understand the properties of regenerated
synapses.
While
synaptic
properties
will
ultimately
determine what regenerated axons will do, this aspect
has received very little attention compared to axonal
regeneration across lesion sites. The changes in the
sub-lesion spinal cord mean that restoring a pre-lesion
descending
input
will
be
unnecessary,
unsuccessful,
or even undesirable. We instead need to ensure that
regenerated inputs make appropriate connections with
sub and supra-lesion networks. Anatomical and functional
connectivity arises in an orchestrated developmental
process that may be diﬃcult to recapitulate in adults (see
Cardozo et al., 2017), but understanding how regenerated
connections interact eﬀectively with locomotor networks
will provide options for interventions. The analysis of
regenerated connections is feasible in lamprey (Figure 2),
and
can
identify
features
associated
with
successful
synaptic re-integration that can be applied to mammalian
analyses.
(2) A core requirement is the need to determine whether
the changes in spinal cord networks are beneﬁcial or
deleterious to recovery. Sub-lesion changes in locomotor
networks and sensory systems are routine across systems.
However, their roles are generally complex and unclear:
even deleterious eﬀects (e.g., spasticity) can be beneﬁcial
under
some
conditions
(Adams
and
Hicks,
2005).
The routine pharmacological block of these changes
clinically after SCI may be inadvisable as it could remove
potentially beneﬁcial intrinsic eﬀects: it is better to
try to understand the changes and ﬁnd ways to utilize
them.
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
18
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
The impact of any eﬀect will depend on its intrinsic
properties and how it interacts with the locomotor network.
Identifying these changes and their impact on recovery is
crucial, but can be diﬃcult in mammals (Rybak et al., 2015).
Lower vertebrates oﬀer advantages. The lamprey allows
cellular and synaptic eﬀects to be examined. The zebraﬁsh
may be especially useful, as it oﬀers the opportunity to
combine molecular and physiological analyses (Ampatzis
et al., 2014; Barreiro-Iglesias et al., 2015) that can identify
functional changes and their inﬂuence on recovery.
(3) We need to understand the interventions needed after
SCI. Self-organization through compensatory changes may
underlie spontaneous recovery in lower vertebrates or
neonatal mammals, but the limited recovery of adult
mammals suggests that these mechanisms are insuﬃcient,
absent or, like the regenerative capacity of the spinal
cord, actively suppressed. We need to understand how
to intervene to trigger eﬀects conducive to recovery, and
when to intervene given that eﬀects can be beneﬁcial or
deleterious depending on timing (Reiss et al., 2012). This
could reﬂect state-dependent inﬂuences, possibly caused
by secondary changes and compensations after injury.
Sensory modiﬁcation with locomotor training currently
seems the best approach to SCI (D’Amico et al., 2014),
and presumably drives the reorganization of spinal and
other circuits (e.g., as in constraint-induced therapy after
stroke; Kwakkel et al., 2015). However, training studies
often lack standardized methods and assessment and have
insuﬃcient sample sizes. Improvements are also variable
and modest (see Morawietz and Moﬀat, 2013). As with
regeneration (Tuszynski and Steward, 2012) this may
reﬂect the focus on a single aspect in an integrated
system: interactive eﬀects seem to oﬀer greater promise
(see Fong et al., 2009; Roy et al., 2012). The ultimate
functional eﬀects of any intervention will depend not
just on the properties of the targeted component but
on the state of the system it interacts with. Rational
interventions require understanding the role of changes in the
spinal cord outlined above, and knowing how these can be
manipulated to move the system into an optimal functional
state.
(4) We need to understand the relevance of variability
after SCI. Parameters vary in spinal cord circuits (e.g.,
Parker, 2003a), and this seems to increase after lesioning
(Cooke and Parker, 2009; Hoﬀman and Parker, 2011;
Becker and Parker, 2015), the appearance of values
three to four times the standard deviation suggestive
of a power law relationship (Buzsaki and Mizuseki,
2014). Analyses sometimes reduce variability to improve
statistical signiﬁcance (see Steward et al., 2012; Tuszynski
and Steward, 2012). While extraneous variables should
be minimized, controlling system variables to maximize
statistical eﬀects is unlikely to identify strategies that
translate to highly variable clinical situations. Disease
states can show regular periodic activity indicative of a
loss of complexity and variability (Mackey and Glass,
1977; West, 2010), suggesting that rather than being
noise, variability is a signal that allows the system to
explore a range of values in parameter space to optimize
recovery (Ashby, 1958). This makes a “ﬁx the numbers”
approach that attempts to restore parameters to some
average value unlikely to be successful (see Goldberger
et al., 2000; Mutch et al., 2000; Volkmann et al., 2006).
While not directly related to variability of functional
parameters, introducing variability into locomotor training
regimes resulted in a greater improvement in function
(Shah et al., 2012). Analyses of variability need the
characterization of identiﬁed parameters pre and post-
lesion. This is possible in mammalian systems (Butt and
Kiehn, 2003; Hinckley and Ziskind-Conhaim, 2006), but
is easier in lower vertebrate systems (e.g., of excitatory
network interneurons in lamprey and zebraﬁsh; Parker,
2003a; Ampatzis et al., 2014). Testing the role of variability
requires that it is manipulated without changing mean
values. This can be diﬃcult to do experimentally in any
system, but the characterization of variability after SCI will
allow computational analyses.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author conﬁrms being the sole contributor of this work and
approved it for publication.
FUNDING
This work has received no direct funding. The early stages of
the work were partly supported by a Royal Society University
Research Fellowship, and by a UK Medical Research Council
studentship to Ria Cooke.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I thank Dr. Erik Svensson and Megan Parker for comments on
the manuscript.
REFERENCES
Adams, M. M., and Hicks, A. L. (2005). Spasticity after spinal cord injury. Spinal
Cord 43, 577–586. doi: 10.1038/sj.sc.3101757
Ampatzis, K., Song, J., Ausborn, J., and El Manira, A. (2014). Separate
microcircuit modules of distinct V2a Interneurons and Motoneurons Control
the Speed of Locomotion. Neuron 83, 934–943. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.
07.018
Antri, M., Mouﬄe, C., Orsal, D., and Barthe, J. (2003). 5-HT1A receptors are
involved in short- and long-term processes responsible for 5-HT-induced
locomotor function recovery in chronic spinal rat. Eur. J. Neurosci. 18,
1963–1972. doi: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2003.02916.x
Armstrong, J., Zhang, L., and McClellan, A. (2003). Axonal regeneration of
descending and ascending spinal projection neurons in spinal cord-transected
larval lamprey. Exp. Neurol. 180, 156–166. doi: 10.1016/S0014-4886(02)
00057-2
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
19
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

Parker
Spinal Cord Injury in Lamprey
Ashby, W. (1958). Requisite variety and its implications for the control of complex
systems. Cybernetics 1, 83–99.
Atallah, B. V., Bruns, W., Carandini, M., and Scanziani, M. (2012). Parvalbumin-
expressing interneurons linearly transform cortical responses to visual stimuli.
Neuron 73, 159–170. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.12.013
Atallah, B. V., and Scanziani, M. (2009). Instantaneous modulation of gamma
oscillation frequency by balancing excitation with inhibition. Neuron 62,
566–577. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.04.027
Ayers, J. (1989). “Recovery of oscillator function following spinal regeneration in
the sea lamprey,” in Cellular and Neuronal Oscillators, ed. J. Jacklet (New York,
NY: Marcel Dekker), 349–383.
Ayers, J., Carpenter, G., Currie, S., and Kinch, J. (1983). Which behavior does the
lamprey central motor program mediate? Science 221, 1312–1314.
Barbeau, H., and Norman, K. (2003). The eﬀect of noradrenergic drugs on
the recovery of walking after spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord 41, 137–143.
doi: 10.1038/sj.sc.3101374
Barreiro-Iglesias, A., Mysiak, K. S., Scott, A. L., Reimer, M. M., Yujie, Y., Becker,
C. A. G., et al. (2015). Serotonin promotes development and regeneration of
spinal motor neurons in zebraﬁsh. Cell Rep. 13, 924–932. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.
2015.09.050
Becker, M., and Parker, D. (2015). Changes in functional properties and 5-HT
modulation above and below a spinal transection in lamprey. Front. Neural
Circuits 8:148. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2014.00148
Bennett, D. (2008). Demystifying spasticity. J. Neurophsyiol. 99, 1041–1043.
doi: 10.1016/j.pmrj.2016.05.015
Berg, R., Alaburda, A., and Hounsgaard, J. (2007). Balanced inhibition and
excitation drive spike activity in spinal half-centers. Science 315, 390–393.
doi: 10.1126/science.1134960
Bernstein,
J.,
and
Gelderd,
J.
(1973).
Synaptic
reorganization
following
regeneration
of
goldﬁsh
spinal
cord.
Exp.
Neurol.
41,
402–410.
doi: 10.1016/0014-4886(73)90282-3
Bevan, S., and Parker, D. (2004). Metaplastic facilitation and ultrastructural
changes in synaptic properties are associated with long-term modulation of
the lamprey locomotor network. J. Neurosci. 24, 9458–9468. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.3391-04.2004
Bienenstock, E., and Lehmann, D. (1998). Regulated criticality in the brain? Adv.
Complex Syst. 1, 361–384. doi: 10.1142/S0219525998000223
Blackmore, M. G., Wang, Z., Lerch, J. K., Motti, D., Zhang, Y. P., Shields, C. B.,
et al. (2012). Kruppel-like Factor 7 engineered for transcriptional activation
promotes axon regeneration in the adult corticospinal tract. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 109, 7517–7522. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1120684109
Boulenguez, P., Liabeuf, S., Bos, R., Bras, H., Jean-Xavier, C., Brocard, C.,
et al. (2010). Down-regulation of the potassium-chloride cotransporter KCC2
contributes to spasticity after spinal cord injury. Nat. Med. 16, 302–308.
doi: 10.1038/nm.2107
Brezina, V. (2010). Beyond the wiring diagram: signalling through complex
neuromodulator networks. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 365, 2363–2374.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2010.0105
Brodin, L., Shupliakov, O., Pieribone, V. A., Hellgren, J., and Hill, R. H. (1994).
The reticulospinal glutamate synapse in lamprey: plasticity and presynaptic
variability. J. Neurophysiol. 72, 592–604.
Buchanan, J. (2001). Contributions of identiﬁable neurons and neuron classes to
lamprey vertebrate neurobiology. Prog. Neurobiol. 63, 441–466. doi: 10.1016/
S0301-0082(00)00050-2
Buchanan, J., and Grillner, S. (1988). A new class of small inhibitory interneurones
in the lamprey spinal cord. Brain Res. 438, 404–407. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(88)
91373-X
Buchanan, J., and Grillner, S. (1991). 5-hydroxytryptamine depresses reticulospinal
excitatory postsynaptic potentials in motoneurones of the lamprey. Neurosci.
Lett. 112, 71–74. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(91)90196-Z
Buchman, T. (2006). “Physiologic failure: multiple organ dysfucntion syndrome,”
in Complex Systems Science in Biomedicine, eds T. Deisboeck and S. Kaufmann
(New York, NY: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers), 631–640. doi: 10.1007/
978-0-387-33532-2_27
Butt, S., and Kiehn, O. (2003). Functional identiﬁcation of interneurons responsible
for left-right coordination of hindlimbs in mammals. Neuron 38, 953–963.
doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(03)00353-2
Buzsaki, G., and Mizuseki, K. (2014). The log-dynamic brain: how skewed
distributions aﬀect network operations. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 15, 264–278.
doi: 10.1038/nrn3687
Cannon, W. (1932). The Wisdom of the Body. New York City, NY: W. W. Norton
and Company.
Cardenas, D. D., Ditunno, J., Graziani, V., Jackson, A. B., Lammertse, D., Potter, P.,
et al. (2006). Phase 2 trial of sustained-release fampridine in chronic spinal cord
injury. Spinal Cord 45, 158–168. doi: 10.1038/sj.sc.3101947
Cardozo, M. J., Mysiak, K. S., Becker, T., and Becker, C. G. (2017). Reduce,
reuse, recycle - Developmental signals in spinal cord regeneration. Dev. Biol
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2017.05.011 [Epub ahead of print].
Carrera, E., and Tononi, G. (2014). Diaschisis: past, present, future. Brain 137,
2408–2422. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu101
Chen, J., Laramore, C., and Shifman, M. I (2017). The expression of chemorepulsive
guidance receptors and the regenerative abilities of spinal-projecting neurons
after spinal cord injury. Neuroscience 341, 95–111. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.
2016.11.020
Cheriyan, T., Ryan, D. J., Weinreb, J. H., Cheriyan, J., Paul, J. C., Lafage, V.,
et al. (2014). Spinal cord injury models: a review. Spinal Cord 52, 588–595.
doi: 10.1038/sc.2014.91
Christenson, J., Alford, S., Grillner, S., and Hokfelt, T. (1991). Co-localised GABA
and somatostatin use diﬀerent ionic mechansisms to hyperpolarise traget
neurones in the lamprey spinal cord. Neurosci. Lett. 134, 93–97. doi: 10.1016/
0304-3940(91)90516-V
Clements, J., and Silver, R. (2000). Unveiling synaptic plasticity: a new graphical
and analytical approach. Trends Neurosci. 23, 105–113. doi: 10.1016/S0166-
2236(99)01520-9
Cohen, A., Abdelnabi, M., Guan, L., Ottinger, M., and Chakrabarti, L. (2005).
Changes in distribution of serotonin induced by spinal injury in larval lampreys:
evidence from immunohistochemistry and HPLC. J. Neurotrauma 22, 172–188.
doi: 10.1089/neu.2005.22.172
Cohen, A., Kiemel, T., Pate, V., Blinder, J., and Guan, L. (1999). Temperature can
alter the functional outcome of spinal cord regeneration in larval lampreys.
Neuroscience 90, 957–965. doi: 10.1016/S0306-4522(98)00502-8
Cohen, A., Mackler, S., and Selzer, M. (1988). Behavioral recovery following spinal
transections: functional regeneration in the lamprey CNS. Trends Neurosci. 11,
227–231. doi: 10.1016/0166-2236(88)90131-2
Cohen, A. H., Guan, L., Harris, J., Jung, R., and Kiemel, T. (1996). Interaction
between the caudal brainstem and the lamprey central pattern generator for
locomotion. Neuroscience 74, 1161–1173. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(96)00184-4
Cooke, R., and Parker, D. (2009). Locomotor recovery after spinal cord lesions
in the lamprey is associated with functional and ultrastructural changes below
lesion sites. J. Neurotrauma 26, 597–612. doi: 10.1089/neu.2008.0660
Cornide-Petronio, M., Fernández-López, B., Barreiro-Iglesias, A., and Rodicio, M.
(2014). Traumatic injury induces changes in the expression of the serotonin
1A receptor in the spinal cord of lampreys. Neuropharmacology 77, 369–378.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2013.10.017
Courtine, G., Song, B., Roy, R. R., Zhong, H., Herrmann, J. E., Ao, Y., et al. (2008).
Recovery of supraspinal control of stepping via indirect propriospinal relay
connections after spinal cord injury. Nat. Med. 14, 69–74. doi: 10.1038/nm1682
D’Amico, J., Condliﬀe, E., Martins, K., Bennett, D., and Gorassini, M. (2014).
Recovery of neuronal and network excitability after spinal cord injury and
implications for spasticity. Front. Integr. Neurosci. 8:36. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2014.
00036
D’Amico, J., Murray, K., Li, Y., Chan, K., Finlay, M., Bennett, D., et al. (2013).
Constitutively active 5-HT2/a1 receptors facilitate muscle spasms after human
spinal cord injury. J. Neurophsyiol. 109, 1473–1484. doi: 10.1152/jn.00821.
2012
Dancause, N., and Nudo, R. J. (2011). Shaping plasticity to enhance recovery
after injury. Prog. Brain Res. 192, 273–295. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-53355-5.
00015-4
Davis, G., and Bezprozvanny, I. (2001). Maintaining the stability of neural function:
a homeostatic hypothesis. Ann. Rev. Neurosci. 63, 847–869. doi: 10.1146/
annurev.physiol.63.1.847
Davis, G., and McClellan, A. (1994). Extent and time course of restoration of
descending brainstem projections in spinal cord-transected lamprey. J. Comp.
Neurol. 344, 65–82. doi: 10.1002/cne.903440106
Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org
20
November 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 84

===== Pelzer2021_EMBOrep_FoxM1+Xenopus =====
Article
Foxm1 regulates neural progenitor fate during
spinal cord regeneration
Diane Pelzer1,†,‡
, Lauren S Phipps1,†
, Raphael Thuret1, Carlos J Gallardo-Dodd1,#
,
Syed Murtuza Baker2
& Karel Dorey1,*
Abstract
Xenopus tadpoles have the ability to regenerate their tails upon
amputation.
Although
some
of
the
molecular
and
cellular
mechanisms that globally regulate tail regeneration have been
characterised, tissue-specific response to injury remains poorly
understood. Using a combination of bulk and single-cell RNA
sequencing on isolated spinal cords before and after amputation,
we identify a number of genes specifically expressed in the
spinal cord during regeneration. We show that Foxm1, a tran-
scription factor known to promote proliferation, is essential for
spinal cord regeneration. Surprisingly, Foxm1 does not control
the cell cycle length of neural progenitors but regulates their
fate after division. In foxm1−/−tadpoles, we observe a reduction
in the number of neurons in the regenerating spinal cord,
suggesting that neuronal differentiation is necessary for the
regenerative process. Altogether, our data uncover a spinal cord-
specific response to injury and reveal a new role for neuronal
differentiation during regeneration.
Keywords differentiation; Foxm1; regeneration; spinal cord; Xenopus
Subject Categories Development; Neuroscience; Stem Cells & Regenerative
Medicine
DOI 10.15252/embr.202050932 | Received 20 May 2020 | Revised 24 June
2021 | Accepted 1 July 2021 | Published online 24 August 2021
EMBO Reports (2021) 22: e50932
Introduction
Mammals have limited tissue regeneration capabilities, particu-
larly in the case of the central nervous system. Spinal cord inju-
ries (SCIs) are often irreversible and lead to the loss of motor
and sensory function below the site of the damage (McDonald &
Sadowsky, 2002). In contrast, amphibians such as Xenopus (X.)
tadpoles have far greater regenerative abilities as they can regen-
erate a fully functional tail following amputation, including their
spinal cord (Deuchar, 1975; Love et al, 2011; Kakebeen et al,
2020). The injured spinal cord is sealed within a day by the
formation of the neural ampulla, and lineage tracing has revealed
that the spinal cord regenerates from its original stump (Gargioli
& Slack, 2004; Slack et al, 2008). A hallmark of spinal cord
regeneration is the re-activation of Sox2/3+ neural progenitor cells
(NPCs) to induce both regrowth of the spinal cord and the gener-
ation of new neurons (Mu~noz et al, 2015). In axolotl, the spinal
cord regrows from extensive proliferation of NPCs located in the
“source zone” adjacent to the site of amputation (Mchedlishvili
et al, 2007; Rost et al, 2016). This increase in proliferation is
tightly regulated as progenitors switch from a neurogenic to a
proliferative division. A key factor driving that switch is the
planar cell polarity (PCP) pathway which is re-activated in the
spinal cord following amputation (Rodrigo Albors et al, 2015).
However, how the balance between self-renewal proliferation and
differentiation is controlled during regeneration is currently not
well understood.
During development, the switch from a proliferative to a
neurogenic division depends at least in part on changes in the
relative length of the different phases of the cell cycle (Cheffer
et al, 2013; Hardwick & Philpott, 2014). We therefore took an
unbiased approach to identify cell cycle regulators expressed
specifically during X. tropicalis spinal cord regeneration by RNA-
seq. This led to the identification of Foxm1, a transcription
factor known to promote G2/M transition, as a potential key
transcription
factor
for
spinal
cord
regeneration.
Foxm1−/−
X. tropicalis tadpoles develop normally but their ability to regen-
erate their spinal cords is impaired. Using single-cell (sc)RNA-
seq and immunolabelling experiments, we show that foxm1+
cells in the regenerating spinal cord undergo a transient but
dramatic change in the relative proportions of cells in different
phases of the cell cycle, suggesting a change in their ability to
differentiate. Surprisingly, Foxm1 does not regulate the rate of
progenitor proliferation or the length of the cell cycle but is
required for neuronal differentiation leading to successful spinal
cord regeneration.
1
Division of Developmental Biology and Medicine, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, School of Medical Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
2
Division of Informatics, Imaging & Data Sciences, Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inflammation, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, School of Biological
Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
*Corresponding author. Tel: +44 161 275 5319; E-mail: karel.dorey@manchester.ac.uk
†These authors contributed equally to this work
‡Present address: Institut Curie, Sorbonne Universite, CNRS UMR3215, INSERM U934, PSL Research University, Paris, France
#Present address: Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden
ª 2021 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license
EMBO reports
22: e50932 | 2021
1 of 16

Results
Foxm1 is specifically expressed in the regenerating spinal cord
We compared the transcriptome of isolated spinal cords at 1 day
post-amputation (1 dpa) and 3 dpa to spinal cords from intact tails
(0 dpa, Fig 1A). Principal component plot, dendrogram of sample-
to-sample distances and MA plot of the log2 fold change (FC) of
expression in relation to the average count confirmed the quality of
the data (Fig EV1A–D). Between 0 dpa and 1 dpa, 2447 differen-
tially expressed (DE) transcripts (|log2(FC)|> 1 and FDR < 0.01)
were identified (1,125 down- and 1,322 upregulated). Between
0 dpa and 3 dpa, 5,383 genes are differentially expressed (2,746
down- and 2,637 upregulated, Fig EV1E, Dataset EV1).
To identify the most enriched biological processes by gene ontol-
ogy (GO), a non-biased hierarchical clustering for all DE genes was
performed (Fig 1B). We observed three phases: first an increase in
expression of genes involved in metabolic processes (cluster I), then
a strong upregulation of genes associated with cell cycle regulation
(clusters II and III) and finally, a downregulation of expression of
genes involved in nervous system development (clusters IV and V,
Fig 1B).
Using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA), we identified potential
upstream regulators that could explain changes in expression of
downstream target genes, with Foxm1 showing the highest signifi-
cance at 3 dpa (Fig 1C). Using published RNA-seq of tail regenera-
tion in X. tropicalis (Chang et al, 2017), we compared changes in
expression of known Foxm1 target genes between 0 and 3 dpa in
whole tail (WT_d0d3), 0 and 1 dpa (SC_d0d1) and 0 and 3 dpa
(SC_d0d3) in spinal cord. Foxm1 and its transcriptional targets are
significantly upregulated only in the spinal cord at 3 dpa, but not in
the whole tail (Fig 1D).
We wanted to confirm the expression of foxm1 during regenera-
tion by in situ hybridisation (ISH) and RT–qPCR. ISH shows that
foxm1 is not expressed in the spinal cord at 0 and 1 dpa but is
restricted to the regenerating spinal cord at 3 dpa (Fig 1E). The
whole-mount ISH was then sectioned to confirm that foxm1 is
expressed specifically in the regenerating spinal cord (Fig 1E). We
then performed RT–qPCR for foxm1 over a period of 7 days, and its
expression peaks at 3 dpa and decreases back to baseline levels at
7 dpa (Fig 1F).
We next wanted to identify the upstream signal(s) regulating
its expression. As foxm1 expression starts at 3 dpa, it is not a
direct response to the injury. We tested whether signalling path-
ways required for tail regeneration promote foxm1 expression at
3 dpa. A sustained increase of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in
the tail is required for its regeneration (Love et al, 2013). ROS
levels were decreased following amputation using DPI, an inhi-
bitor of the NADPH oxidases (NOX). In NF50 tadpoles treated
with DPI from 36hpa until 72hpa, foxm1 expression decreases by
69% (P = 0.032) compared to DMSO controls (Fig EV1F and G).
ROS are upstream of different signalling pathways, including FGF
(Lin & Slack, 2008; Love et al, 2013). Furthermore, Sonic hedge-
hog (Shh) signalling is also required for tail regeneration (Beck
et al, 2003; Hamilton et al, 2021) and induces Foxm1 expression
in the developing cerebellar granule neuron precursors (Sch€uller
et al, 2007). However, foxm1 expression is not affected by treat-
ing amputated tails treated with an FGF receptor kinase inhibitor
(SU5402, Fig EV1H) or a Shh signalling inhibitor (cyclopamine,
Fig EV1I).
Foxm1 is required for spinal cord regeneration
To test the role of Foxm1 during regeneration, we designed a guide
RNA (gRNA) targeted at bases 129–152 downstream of the ATG to
knock down and knock out foxm1 expression using CRISPR/Cas9
(Fig EV2A). The efficacy of the gRNA was assessed by restriction
fragment length polymorphism analysis (RFLP). Co-injection of the
gRNA with cas9 mRNA did not lead to the destruction of the NcoI
site but co-injection with 0.6 and 1.5 ng of Cas9 protein leads to
NcoI-resistant PCR products in a dose-dependent fashion (Fig
EV2B). Sequencing of individual clones revealed that indels occur in
50–90% of the foxm1 locus. We have identified four frameshift
mutations that were germline transmitted and F0 frogs with these
mutations were backcrossed with wild types to establish foxm1+/−
lines used to generate foxm1−/−tadpoles (Fig EV2C and D). We then
confirmed these mutations lead to a decrease in foxm1 expression
by RT–qPCR, with homozygotes mutants displaying an 80% reduc-
tion in foxm1 expression compared to wild type (P < 0.0001, Fig
EV2E).
We then analysed the ability of NF40 tadpoles to regenerate
their spinal cord depending on their genotype (Fig 2A and B).
▸
Figure 1.
Analysis of differentially expressed genes during spinal cord regeneration.
A
Twenty spinal cords of NF50 tadpoles were isolated at 0, 1 and 3 days post-amputation (dpa) and pooled for RNA sequencing.
B
Genes with a |log2(FC)|> 1 and P-adj< 0.01 were used for hierarchical clustering. For each cluster, the gene list was uploaded on Fidea (http://circe.med.uniroma1.it/
fidea/) (D’Andrea et al, 2013). The five most significant enrichment of GO (biological processes) terms are shown, and the −log10(P_value) with Bonferroni correction
is shown.
C
The dataset was uploaded on the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (Qiagen). Genes with a |log2(FC)|> 1 and P_adj < 0.01 were considered. The software identified
upstream regulators based on the changes in expression levels of known downstream targets. Each upstream regulator is attributed a z-score, corresponding to the
negative log of the P-value derived from the Fisher’s exact test.
D
Changes in the expression of foxm1 and known downstream targets in the whole tail comparing day 0 and day 3 (WT_d0d3) and in the spinal cord comparing day 0
and day 1 (SC_d0d1) and day 0 and day 3 (SC_d0d3). The whole tail dataset was obtained from (Chang et al, 2017).
E
Tadpoles at NF50 were amputated, fixed at the indicated time and then processed for whole-mount in situ hybridisation using a probe specific for foxm1. The two
last panels show transverse section in the non-regenerating spinal cord (nr) and the regenerate (r) at 3dpa. The red circle highlights the spinal cord and the asterisk
the notochord.
F
Total RNA was isolated from regenerating tails at indicated timepoints post-amputation, reverse-transcribed into cDNA and analysed for foxm1 expression by qPCR,
using ef1α as a reference gene. The graph represents the mean  SD of three independent experiments. One-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s multiple comparison test
was used. *P = 0.0149.
2 of 16
EMBO reports
22: e50932 | 2021
ª 2021 The Authors
EMBO reports
Diane Pelzer et al

d0 d1 d3
A
B
Cluster I
n=1184
Cluster III
n=1160
Cluster IV
n=6293
Cluster V
n=702
5
10
15
20
-log adjusted 
p-value
25
ncRNA processing
rRNA processing
ribosome biogenesis
reg. of metabolic process
ncRNA metabolic process
30
5
10
15
20
25
mitotic cell cycle
cell cycle
M phase
cell cycle process
cell cycle phase
10
5
DNA metabolic process
mitotic cell cycle
mRNA splicing
DNA repair
cell. component organisation
5
10
15
20
25
30
synaptic transmission
neurogenesis
nervous system development
transimission of nerve impulse
multicell. organismal signalling
5
organ morphogenesis
loop of Henle development
anatomical str. morphogenesis
2
0
-2
C
Upstream 
regulators
SC_d0d1
 
FOXM1
N/A
 
ERBB2
2.44
 
RABL6
1.51
 
CSF2
2.22
 
CCND1
1.79
 
TBX2
-0.37
 
E2F
N/A
 
EP400
N/A
 
MYC
2.99
 
XBP1
4.67
 
E2F3
N/A
 
TGFB1
3.61
 
Hdac
-0.36
 
HGF
3.04
 
E2F2
-0.42
 
SC_d0d3
5.58
5.22
4.95
4.75
4.70
4.50
4.38
4.14
4.13
3.98
3.74
3.72
3.58
3.52
3.46
D
Gene 
WT_d0d3 SC_d0d1 SC_d0d3
foxm1
-0.74
-0.17
2.94
ccna2
-1.31
0.1
2.88
ccnb2
NA
0.26
3.62
ccnb1
-0.85
-0.09
3.49
aurka
-0.9
-0.01
3.32
ccnb3
-0.85
-0.26
2.99
cdc25a
-1
0.72
2.99
cdk1
-0.93
0.04 
2.89
aurkb
-1.08
-0.25 
2.75
snai1
-0.12
1.91 
2.54
twist2
0.66
-0.06 
2.42
pcna
-0.26
1.1 
2.23
cenpi
-0.47
0.15 
2.18
cdc20
-0.11
0.2 
2.12
mmp2
1.05
-0.25 
1.88
snai2
-0.01
-0.76 
1.83
myc
-0.01
2.18 
1.57
ccne1
0.16
0.14 
1.54
cenpn
-1.13
0.7 
1.45
cdc25c
-1
-0.71 
1.02
cdkn1b
-0.84
0.23 
-0.67
0dpa
notochord
spinal cord
foxm1
1dpa
nc
sc
3dpa
nc
sc
Cluster II
n=738
-log adjusted 
p-value
-log adjusted 
p-value
-log adjusted 
p-value
regionalisation
brain development
-log adjusted 
p-value
sc 3dpa
sc 0dpa 
sc 1dpa
0h 6h 2d 3d 5d 7d
2
4
6
8
Relative foxm1 expression
E
F
*
*
*
nr
r
Figure 1.
ª 2021 The Authors
EMBO reports
22: e50932 | 2021
3 of 16
Diane Pelzer et al
EMBO reports

About 40% of the tails were removed and the ratio of regenera-
tion was determined between 0 to 3 and 0 to 7 dpa by dividing
the length of the regenerate by the length of the amputated tail.
No differences were observed for 0 to 3 dpa, but for 0 to 7 dpa
the rate of regeneration was on average 35% lower (P < 0.0001)
compared to controls (Fig 2B). Interestingly, foxm1+/−tadpoles
have an intermediate phenotype (reduction of 17%, P = 0.0055),
suggesting
a
dose-dependent
effect
of
foxm1
expression
on
appendage regeneration. The same effect was observed in F0
mosaic tadpoles at NF50, suggesting that the impairment in
spinal
cord
regeneration
is
not
stage
or
mutation
specific
(Fig EV2F–H).
Could the impaired regeneration be caused by defective prolif-
eration? To determine the rate of proliferation in the regenerating
spinal cord, wt and foxm1−/−tadpoles were injected with EdU at
3 dpa, followed by a 2-day chase (Fig 2C–E). As expected, we
observed a higher proportion of EdU+ cells in the regenerate than
in the non-regenerating spinal cord (~45 and ~20%, respectively).
However, no difference in the proportion of EdU+ cells between
wt and foxm1−/−was observed, suggesting that Foxm1 does not
affect the overall length of cell cycle. To confirm these data, we
measured the absolute length of the cell cycle by Dual-Pulse S-
phase Labelling (DPSL; Thuret et al, 2015). We first established
the growth fraction by quantifying the proportion of cycling
progenitors in the regenerating spinal cord (PCNA+ Sox3+) in wt
and mutant tadpoles. In both cases, around 95% of Sox3+ cells
are also PCNA+ (Appendix Fig S1A and B). To establish the abso-
lute length of the cell cycle at 3 dpa, the tadpoles were injected
first with EdU, then 3 h later with BrdU and fixed 3 h later (Fig 2
F). The total length of the cell cycle (Tc) was about 50 h both in
wild type and in foxm1−/−tadpoles, confirming that Foxm1 does
not regulate the overall length of the cell cycle during spinal cord
regeneration (Fig 2G and H).
As it has been shown that knocking down foxm1 expression
decreases the proliferation of neuronal progenitors during primary
neurogenesis in X. laevis (Ueno et al, 2008), we tested whether
this was also the case in X. tropicalis (Appendix Fig S2). Embryos
at 1-cell stage were injected either with morpholino control
(MOC)
or
with
morpholino
targeted
to
the
exon3–intron3
(MOe3i3) and intron3–exon 4 (MOi3e4) splice sites of the foxm1
mRNA (MOF1). In parallel, we also analysed embryos injected
with Cas9/gRNA against foxm1 (Crispr F1) or Cas9 alone (Crispr
C). We first analysed the ability of the morpholino and gRNA/
Cas9 to reduce foxm1 expression by RT–qPCR when injected at
the one-cell stage (solid bars) or in one cell of a 2-cell stage
embryo (hatch bars Appendix Fig S2A). Injection of MOF1 at 1-
cell stage leads to a reduction of ~70% of foxm1 expression
(~40% when injected in 1 cell at 2-cell stage), whilst injection of
Crispr F1 causes a reduction of about 55% (and ~30% when
injected in 1 cell at 2-cell stage, Appendix Fig S2A). We then
injected 1 cell at the 2-cell stage with MOC, MOF1, Crispr F1 or
Crispr
C
together
with
a
rhodamine-DEXTRAN
as
a
tracer
(Appendix Fig S2B). Embryos were fixed at NF13 and stained for
phospho-Histone H3 (pH3). Quantification of pH3 cells in the
neural plate shows no difference between injected and non-
injected sides in all conditions, suggesting that Foxm1 does not
promote proliferation during primary neurogenesis in Xenopus
tropicalis (Appendix Fig S2C).
Organisation of the Xenopus spinal cord at stage NF50
To understand the role of Foxm1 during spinal cord regeneration,
we wanted to characterise this cell population at the molecular level
using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). As the cellular
organisation of the Xenopus spinal cord is not well described, we
first used the 10X Genomics platform to sequence 2908 cells from
uninjured spinal cord (Fig EV3A–C). Twelve clusters were identified
comprising the different cell types expected in the spinal cord: roof
and floor plate (bmp4 and shh, respectively), dorsal (lmx1a/zic5),
intermediate (pax6, vit) and ventral (nkx2.2, nkx6.2) progenitors,
neurons (tubb3, snap25), oligodendrocytes (mpz, prx) and oligo-
dendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs; sox2, olig1). Two clusters corre-
spond to cells present in spinal ganglia: dorsal root ganglia (wif1
and twist1) and Schwann cells (sox10). Finally, we observed a small
population of inflammatory (csf1r, alox5), vascular and endothelial
(fli1, cav1) cells that may be spinal cord resident cells or a contami-
nation from the dissection. However, no mesodermal or skin
contamination was identified (Fig EV3B and C).
▸
Figure 2.
Foxm1 is required for spinal cord regeneration but does not regulate the length of the cell cycle.
A
NF40 tadpoles with the following genotypes foxm1−/−(mut), foxm1+/−(het) and foxm1+/+ (wt) were amputated and left to regenerate for 7 days. The images show
representative tails at 3 and 7 dpa. The white arrowheads indicate the amputation site.
B
Quantification of the rate of regeneration. The ratio of the length of the tail regenerate at 3 and 7 dpa was compared to the length of the tail originally amputated at
0 dpa. The graph represents the mean  SD of five independent experiments from three different clutches with at least five tadpoles in each experiment.
C
Experimental setup for EdU labelling, foxm1 knockout and wt tadpoles were amputated and left to regenerate for 3 days. Tadpoles were then injected with EdU and
2 days later the tails were fixed, sectioned and stained for EdU and DAPI.
D
Representative images of EdU (red) and DAPI (blue) staining at 5 dpa.
E
The graph represents the mean  SD of EdU+ cells over the total number of cells in the spinal cord of 5–12 tadpoles. Each data point represents a tadpole, with an
average of 9 sections analysed per animal.
F
Experimental setup for Dual-Pulse S-phase Labelling: NF50 tadpoles at 3 dpa were injected with EdU, and 3 h later, the same tadpoles were injected with BrdU. Six
hours after the first injection, the tails were fixed, sectioned and labelled for Sox3, Edu, BrdU and DAPI.
G
Representative images of EdU (green), BrdU (magenta), Sox3 (white) and DAPI (blue) staining at 3 dpa.
H
Quantification of images in (G). The graph represents the mean  SD of 6 tadpoles with an average of 13 sections per tadpole analysed.
Data information: Two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc tests was used for B and E and an unpaired t-test for H. ns: non-significant, **P < 0.01 and ****P < 0.001.
Scale bar is 500 µm in A and 25 µm in D and G.
4 of 16
EMBO reports
22: e50932 | 2021
ª 2021 The Authors
EMBO reports
Diane Pelzer et al

A
B
3 days
2 days
E
EdU injection
non-regen.
spinal cord
regen.
spinal cord
C
D
non regen.
regenerate
wt
foxm1-/-
EdU
DAPI
80
60
40
20
EdU+ve / DAPI (%)
wt
foxm1-/-
wt
foxm1-/-
non-regen.
regenerate
ns
ns
****
0 to 3 dpa
0 to 7 dpa
100
200
300
400
%tail regrowth after amputation
wt
het
mut
ns
ns
**
****
wt
het
mut
0 dpa
3 dpa
7 dpa
F
50
100
150
wt
foxm1-/-
regenerate
Tc (hours)
H
ns
EdU injection
BrdU injection
3 days
3h
3h
G
EdU / BrdU
Sox3
EdU / BrdU / Sox3 / DAPI 
wt
foxm1-/-
Figure 2.
ª 2021 The Authors
EMBO reports
22: e50932 | 2021
5 of 16
Diane Pelzer et al
EMBO reports

Characterisation of foxm1+ cells during regeneration
We then analysed the changes in the transcriptome during regenera-
tion by combining both 0 dpa and 3 dpa scRNA-seq datasets (Figs 3
and EV4A and B). We noticed that whilst the different cell types
were clustering together, there was a clear shift between cells from
0 and 3 dpa possibly due to a batch effect (Fig EV4A, left panel). To
correct for this technical bias, we assessed the two widely used algo-
rithms for batch correction, Harmony and Seurat, using the k-
nearest-neighbour batch-effect test (kBET) (Butler et al, 2018;
B€uttner et al, 2019; Korsunsky et al, 2019). Whilst both algorithms
improve acceptance rate compared to the non-corrected data, Seurat
outperformed Harmony at all subsampling rates (Fig EV4B). After
batch correction, most cells from 0 and 3 dpa aligned in the same
space on a UMAP representation with the exception of two areas
(Figs EV4A and 3A) corresponding to lep+ neurons (snap25+ Fig 3B
and C) and foxm1+ve progenitors (sox2+ Fig 3D and E).
We next assigned a cell type identity for each cluster based on
the most significant differentially expressed genes (Dataset EV2,
Fig 3F and G). The same clusters as 0 dpa were identified with the
addition of the two 3 dpa-specific clusters (lep+ and foxm1+ clus-
ters). We then performed pseudo-time analysis at both timepoints to
explore the origin of foxm1+ cells (Fig EV4C–E, Trapnell et al,
2014). Unsupervised pseudo-time using the Monocle algorithm
places the root on progenitor clusters (Fig EV4C) with one branch
terminating with differentiated neurons. However, a 3 dpa-specific
branch was identified with foxm1+ cells clustering at the end of this
branch (Fig EV4D and E).
To characterise the foxm1+ cells, we identified DE genes between
the foxm1+ cluster and the rest of progenitors (sox2+, Fig 3H). The
list of the 20 top DE genes ranked by false discovery rate (FDR)
shows that the majority are upregulated and many are linked to the
cell cycle (ccna2, pcna, cdk2, Fig 3I)). We then identified the GO
terms that were significantly over-represented with PANTHER and
used Revigo to generate a plot representation (Fig 3J). Whilst some
GO terms are associated with development, neurogenesis and
signalling, the majority of the GO terms identified are linked to cell
cycle dynamics.
Cell cycle dynamics during regeneration
The result of our GO analysis led us to analyse changes in cell cycle
dynamics between 0 and 3 dpa (Fig 4). We first used computational
inference of cell cycle state on our scRNA-seq dataset (Fig 4A and B,
Aztekin et al, 2019). Whilst clusters representing neurons are
mainly in G1/G0 both at 0 and at 3 dpa, this proportion decreases in
differentiating neurons and progenitor clusters have the highest
proportion of cells in G2/M and S phases. The small number of cells
in G2, M and S phases in neuronal clusters is probably due to some
sox2+ cells present in these clusters (Fig 3D). Interestingly, more
than 50% of the cells in the foxm1+ cluster appeared to be in S
phase.
To confirm these changes in cell cycle dynamics, we performed
PCNA staining on sections at 0, 3 and 5 dpa (Fig 4C–E). The
percentage of PCNA+ cells in the spinal cord increases sharply at
3 dpa when compared to 0 dpa (from 18 to 68%) and remains high
until 5 dpa (88%; Fig 4D). To estimate the proportion of cells in dif-
ferent phases of the cell cycle, we used the fact that PCNA expres-
sion is punctate in S phase and diffuse in G1/G2 phase (Celis et al,
1986; Rottach et al, 2008) and the chromatin is condensed in M
phase (Fig 4C). We observed a transient increase of the proportion
of the cells in S phase from 6.6% at 0 dpa to 45.7% at 3 dpa with a
return to baseline by 5 dpa (12%; Fig 4E). These data confirmed our
scRNA-seq experiments and suggest that proliferative cells in the
spinal cord may have a long S phase in early regeneration.
Foxm1 regulates the fate of dividing progenitors
during regeneration
Because Foxm1 promotes neuronal differentiation in early Xenopus
laevis development (Ueno et al, 2008), we analysed the relative
proportions of progenitors and neurons in the regenerating spinal
cord in wt and foxm1−/−tadpoles. Expression analysis by RT–qPCR
shows an 33% increase (P = 0.02) in sox2 and a 18% (P = 0.01)
decrease in ntub expression in F0 tadpoles with knocked-down
foxm1 expression (Fig EV5A). Interestingly, reducing ROS levels
with DPI also impairs expression of ntub and ccnb3, a well-
characterised Foxm1 transcriptional target. However, DPI treatment
had no effect on the expression of ami, a gene expressed in endothe-
lial cells (Fig EV5B).
We next analysed Sox3 expression by immunofluorescence using
anti-Sox3 antibodies in the non-regenerating and regenerating spinal
cord of wt and foxm1−/−NF50 tadpoles at 5 dpa. As expected, in
the non-regenerating spinal cord Sox3 is expressed in the cells lining
the ventricle and we do not observe major differences between wild
type and foxm1−/−(Fig 5A and C). We also observe Sox3+ staining
outside of the progenitor zone of the spinal cord (Fig 5A and B,
white arrowheads). We confirmed that these Sox3 projections
expand to the mantle zone of the spinal cord by co-staining with an
anti-acetylated Tubulin antibody (Fig 5B). In the wt regenerate, the
spinal cord appears as an almost monolayer of cells around the
central canal. Sox3 is expressed only in cells of the lateral spinal
▸
Figure 3.
Characterisation of the foxm1+ cells in the regenerating spinal cord.
A
UMAP representation of the whole scRNA-seq dataset (0 dpa and 3 dpa) showing the cell density distribution of the 3 dpa sample.
B–E
Expression of snap25 (neuronal marker), leptin, sox2 (progenitor marker) and foxm1 on the same UMAP representation as in (A).
F
UMAP representation of the 16 clusters identified in the scRNA-seq dataset.
G
Identity of the clusters with the most significant differentially expressed gene(s).
H
Schematic representation of the cells used to identify DE genes and over-representation of GO terms for cluster 5 (blue cells) corresponding to the foxm1+ cluster
against the rest of the progenitor cells (red cells).
I
Twenty most significantly DE genes comparing blue versus red cells ranked by FDR.
J
GO-Slim Biological Process terms over-represented were identified by uploading the DE genes into PANTHER. The GO terms significantly upregulated were then
inputted into Revigo (http://revigo.irb.hr/) to generate a plot representation.
6 of 16
EMBO reports
22: e50932 | 2021
ª 2021 The Authors
EMBO reports
Diane Pelzer et al

A
foxm1
4
8
E
11
12
13
15
14
4
3
1
2
6
5
7
9
8
16
16
10
F
 
 
 
 
 
C). 
-
 
snap25
5
10
Gene name
Log2(FC)
FDR
rsph9
4.06
3.35E-106
ccna2
4.89
2.33E-105
pcna
3.99
1.36E-102
rrm2.2
4.34
6.98E-100
tubb4b
3.85
3.18E-99
cks2
4.38
2.03E-95
birc5.2
4.40
2.71E-92
kiaa0101
3.86
8.12E-90
hmgb2
3.55
1.20E-88
odf3
4.43
2.05E-85
mcm6.2
4.12
9.70E-85
stmn2
-4.75
7.00E-84
LOC100498440
3.96
2.77E-82
incenp
4.53
2.27E-80
nme5
3.87
5.62E-80
mcm5
3.98
5.21E-76
tuba3c
3.64
9.35E-75
cdk2
3.74
1.17E-74
kif20b
4.22
3.11E-74
mcm7
3.81
9.72E-73
cdca7
3.77
1.13E-72
H
semantic space x
semantic space y
I
signalling
metabolism
DNA/RNA
processing developmental
processes
ion transport
nucleotide
biosynthesis
cell division
cell cycle
cellular 
response
development/
neurogenesis
5
4
3
2
-log10(FDR)
B
sox2
4
8
D
leptin
3
6
C
regen. MNs 
cluster
cell type
sample
10
6
4
5
11
3
9
1
2
7
8
12
13
14
15
day 3
neurog+ prog.
day 3
day 0/3
day 0/3
day 0/3
day 0/3
day 0/3
day 0/3
floor plate
shh, nkx6.2
day 0/3
foxm1
wif1, foxc1
NCCs/DRGs
day 0/3
ventral prog.
dI neurons
lep
neurog1/3
nkx2.2
lhx1, rcor2
ventral neurons
foxa2, gata2/3
neurod1
day 0/3
day 0/3
diff. prog.
Schwann cells
oligodendrocytes
day 0/3
OPCs
day 0/3
inflammatory cells day 0/3
cdh5 cav1  
interm. prog.
RP / dorsal prog.
regen. prog
alox5, csf1r
mpz
wif1
vit  
bmp4, gdf10, lmx1a
marker genes
16
vasc/endothelial
day 0/3
cdh6
G
J
cell density
(3dpa)
0
1
Figure 3.
ª 2021 The Authors
EMBO reports
22: e50932 | 2021
7 of 16
Diane Pelzer et al
EMBO reports

cord. These data reveal that the regenerating spinal cord conserved
some cellular organisation (Fig 5A). In contrast, in foxm1−/−
tadpoles, we observed multiple cell layers and Sox3 expression is
expressed more broadly (Fig 5A). To assess the distribution of cells
in wt and foxm1−/−spinal cords, the angle of all nuclei (DAPI, Fig
EV5C) and Sox3+ nuclei (Fig EV5D) relative to the centre of the
central canal was calculated. Whilst in the wt regenerating spinal
cords, there are less cells laterally, this is not the case in foxm1−/−
tadpoles (Fig EV5C). Furthermore, we observed a greater proportion
of Sox3+ cells both dorsally and ventrally in the mutant compared to
wt (Fig EV5D). Interestingly, no difference was observed in the
distribution of DAPI and Sox3 in the anterior spinal cord (non-
regen. Figure EV5C and D). Taken together, these data may explain
why the spinal cord does not elongate in foxm1 mutants, whilst the
rate of proliferation is unchanged.
The proportion of Sox3+ cells in the non-regenerating spinal cord
is about 50% in wt and foxm1−/−tadpoles. In contrast, the propor-
tion of progenitors increased in the regenerating spinal cord from
62.1  3.5% in wt to 69.4  2.9% in foxm1−/−(P < 0.001, Fig 5C).
Importantly, this increase in the proportion of Sox3+ cells is not due
to an overall change in the number of cells in the regenerate. When
considering absolute number of Sox3+ cells, we observe a significant
increase in foxm1−/−compared to wild type (Fig EV5E), whilst the
average number of cells (quantified using DAPI) is unchanged (Fig
EV5F). Furthermore, very little apoptosis is observed in the spinal
cord at this stage and no significant difference in the proportion of
apoptotic cells between wt and foxm1−/−regenerate was detected
(Appendix Fig S3A–C).
Because we estimated the cell cycle to be approximately 2 days
(Fig 2H), we labelled cycling cells with EdU at 3 dpa and deter-
mined their fate after one cell cycle at 5 dpa using immunofluores-
cence. We first quantified the proportion of dividing progenitors
over the total number of cells (S3+E+/DAPI) or over the total
number of progenitors (S3+E+/S3+, Fig 5D) in tadpoles following
amputation. Both ratios are similar in wt and foxm1−/−tadpoles,
indicating that knocking out foxm1 does not alter the rate of progen-
itor division. In contrast, the proportion of self-renewal (S3+E+/E+)
increases significantly in the foxm1−/−compared to wt tadpoles
(from 65 to 75%, P = 0.006, Fig 5D). The stable rate of proliferation
of progenitors combined with the increased rate in self-renewal
suggests that there is a shift in the fate of dividing progenitors from
differentiation towards self-renewal.
To confirm these data, we analysed the expression of Myt1 as a
neuronal marker in wt and foxm1−/−NF50 tadpoles at 5 dpa (Fig 5E
and F). Knocking out foxm1 does not affect the percentage of Myt1+
cells in the non-regenerating spinal cord (~43% of spinal cord cells).
However, in the regenerate we observed a sharp reduction of Myt1+
cells in the mutant compared to wt (30% versus 14%, P < 0.01).
Similar data were obtained when we analysed mosaic F0 injected
with gRNA targeting the foxm1 locus compared to Cas9-injected
controls (Fig EV5G). Thus, in foxm1 mutants, there is an increase of
progenitors at the expense of differentiated neurons. Rather than
promoting proliferation, Foxm1 affects cell fate by promoting dif-
ferentiation.
Discussion
Using a combination of bulk and single-cell RNA-seq experiments
on isolated spinal cords during tail regeneration in X. tropicalis, we
identified a new population of cells present exclusively in the regen-
erating spinal cord. It is characterised by the expression of foxm1,
and GO analysis reveals that genes involved in cell cycle, metabo-
lism and neurogenesis are over-represented. Knocking out the
foxm1 gene impairs spinal cord regeneration and alters the fate of
the dividing progenitors with an increase in self-renewal division
and a decrease in the production of neurons (Fig 6).
To characterise the Xenopus spinal cord at the molecular level,
we undertook a single-cell RNA-seq approach. The number of cells
and the depth of sequencing did not allow us to unambiguously
determine the identity of progenitors and neurons subtypes but we
identified the main cell types present in a vertebrate spinal cord,
such as roof plate, dorsal and ventral progenitors, neurons and
oligodendrocytes. Comparison of their transcriptomes at 0 and
3 dpa reveals that only two clusters are 3 dpa-specific: a cluster of
progenitors characterised by foxm1 expression and a cluster of dif-
ferentiated neurons characterised by leptin and leptin receptor
expression. These neurons have been identified previously but
whether they are located in the regenerate and their role(s) during
regeneration is still unclear (Aztekin et al, 2019; Kakebeen et al,
2020).
Foxm1 has been shown to have a role in neuronal differentiation
during primary neurogenesis in Xenopus laevis (Ueno et al, 2008)
and in the mouse telencephalon (Wu et al, 2014). However, in both
▸
Figure 4.
Changes in cell cycle dynamics during regeneration.
A
UMAP projection with inferred cell cycle phase for each cell.
B
Bar plot showing the proportion of cells in G1, G2/M and S phases of clusters of progenitor cells (prog., expressing sox2 and sox3) and differentiating progenitors (diff.
prog., expressing neurod1, neurog1) and neurons (neur., expressing snap25). The total does not always amount to 100% as some clusters have cells from both 0 and
3 dpa. The bar boxes in red represent the foxm1 positive cluster, and the cluster numbering refers to the cluster identity defined in Fig 3G.
C
Representative sections labelled with an anti-PCNA antibody (red) and DAPI (blue) at the indicated day after amputation (dpa). The white arrowheads point to cells in
S phase in the spinal cord and the yellow arrowhead at cells in G1, G2 and M phases. The right panels correspond to the inset indicated as a white box in the middle
panels.
D
The ratio of PCNA+ per total number of cells (DAPI) in the spinal cord was determined at the indicated times after amputation (n = 3, with a mean of 14 sections per
data point).
E
The PCNA+ cells were then distributed in G1/G2 (diffuse signal), S (punctated signal) or M phase (condensed chromatin) at the indicated stage of regeneration.
Data information: In D-E, Data are the mean  SD of three independent experiments, and one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc tests was used. ns: non-significant,
**P < 0.01 and ****P < 0.0001. In C, scale bar represents 25 µm for the left and middle panels and 5 µm for the right panels.
8 of 16
EMBO reports
22: e50932 | 2021
ª 2021 The Authors
EMBO reports
Diane Pelzer et al

B
D
0dpa 3dpa 5dpa
20
40
60
80
100
%
( I
P
A
D
/
+
A
N
C
P
)
**
ns
**
E
20
40
60
80
100
0dpa
3dpa 5dpa
S
G1/G2
M
****
****
ns
ns
ns
ns
%
( 
s
ll
e
c
 
e
v
+
A
N
C
P
 f
o
 
n
o
it
u
b
irt
s
i
D
)
prog.
neur.
day 0
day 3
G1
G2/M
S
foxm1+ve
20
40
60
80
100
e
l
c
y
c
 ll
e
c
 
e
h
t f
o
 
s
e
s
a
h
p
 
n
i 
s
ll
e
c
 f
o
 
%
1 2 3 6 7 8
diff. prog.
prog.
neur.
diff. prog.
cluster #
9
1 2 3
6 7 8 9
5
S
G1
G2/M
A
DAPI
PCNA
0dpa
3dpa
5dpa
PCNA
C
Figure 4.
ª 2021 The Authors
EMBO reports
22: e50932 | 2021
9 of 16
Diane Pelzer et al
EMBO reports

cases, the role of Foxm1 seems to be dependent on its ability to
control the overall length of the cell cycle. By contrast, in Xenopus
tropicalis we do not observe a difference in proliferation during
primary neurogenesis and in the regenerating spinal cord in
foxm1−/−compared to controls. Furthermore, the total length of the
cell cycle of neural progenitors in the regenerating spinal cord is not
affected by Foxm1 expression. These data suggest a cell cycle inde-
pendent role for Foxm1 during this process. Cell cycle regulators
25µm
A
wt
foxm1-/-
non-regen.
regenerate
B
20
40
60
80
wt
foxm1-/-
wt
foxm1-/-
non regen.
regen.
Sox3+ve / DAPI (%)
C
***
ns
****
Sox3/Edu/DAPI
Sox3/Edu/DAPI
Sox3
20
40
60
80
100
wt
foxm1-/-
self renewal
(S3+E+/E+)
*
wt
foxm1-/-
cycling prog.
(S3+E+/DAPI)
ns
ns
wt
foxm1-/-
prog. divided 
(S3+E+/S3+)
percentage
D
E
20
40
60
wt foxm1-/-
wt foxm1-/-
Myt1+/DAPI (%)
**
ns
non regen.
regen.
Sox3
non-regen.
regenerate
Myt1/AcTub/DAPI
Myt1/AcTub/DAPI
Myt1
Myt1
wt
foxm1-/-
F
Sox3/AcTub/DAPI
Sox3
non-regen.
regen.
Figure 5.
10 of 16
EMBO reports
22: e50932 | 2021
ª 2021 The Authors
EMBO reports
Diane Pelzer et al

such as Cdc25b and Ccnd1 have been shown to play a role during
neuronal development independently of their primary function
(Lukaszewicza & Anderson, 2011; Hydbring et al, 2016; Bonnet
et al, 2018). Thus, it is possible that Foxm1 can promote neuronal
differentiation in the regenerating spinal cord without affecting the
overall length of the cell cycle.
Whilst we do not observe differences in the rate of proliferation
in mutant and wt tadpoles, a striking characteristic of the foxm1+
cluster is the changes in the proportion of cells in each phase of the
cell cycle compared to foxm1−progenitors. About 50% of the
foxm1+ cells are in S phase and 40% in G2/M, leaving only about
10% of cells in G1. Interestingly, similar changes in cell cycle have
been observed in Axolotls, suggesting that changes in cell cycle
dynamics may be a general principle of spinal cord regeneration
(Rodrigo Albors et al, 2015; Cura Costa et al, 2021). The high
proportion of cells in S phase could be due to a synchronised cell
cycle as suggested in Axolotl (Cura Costa et al, 2021) or an exten-
sion of the relative length of S phase. It has been suggested that a
long S phase may be necessary for progenitors undergoing self-
renewal division to ensure genome integrity, especially in response
to high level of ROS present in the nervous system (Arai et al, 2011;
Narciso et al, 2016; Turrero Garcı´a et al, 2016). The regenerating tail
is an oxidative environment and we show here that foxm1 requires
ROS for its expression. Furthermore, Foxm1 has been shown to
ensure chromosomal stability and genome integrity in U2OS and
aged fibroblasts (Laoukili et al, 2005; Macedo et al, 2018), raising
the intriguing possibility that Foxm1 might ensure that the expan-
sion of the progenitor pool does not lead to genomic instability
during regeneration.
The expansion of the neural stem cell pool is required for
spinal cord regeneration in axolotl, zebrafish and Xenopus (Ogai
et al, 2014; Mu~noz et al, 2015; Rodrigo Albors et al, 2015). Here,
we show that regeneration also requires the precise control of
neuronal differentiation (Fig 6). In mammals, ependymal cells also
re-enter the cell cycle upon spinal cord injury (SCI) and are able
to self-renew but differentiate mainly into astrocytes (Meletis et al,
2008). Recent evidence suggests increased neuronal differentiation
improves the recovery of function following SCI in mice (Fukuoka
et al, 2021). Our data show that Foxm1 has an important role in
promoting NPCs to differentiate into neurons during regeneration.
Uncovering the signals and regulatory networks that allow Foxm1
to drive neuronal differentiation may open new opportunity to
enhance spinal cord regeneration in species with limited regenera-
tive capabilities.
◀
Figure 5.
Foxm1 promotes the differentiation of neural progenitors in the regenerating spinal cord.
A
Representative sections of spinal cords from tadpoles injected with EdU at 3 dpa and fixed at 5 dpa. After sectioning, the samples were labelled with antibodies
against Sox3 (green), EdU (magenta) and DAPI (blue). White arrowheads show Sox3 positive extensions.
B
Sections of spinal cords at 5 dpa in the stump (non-regen.) or in the regenerate (regen) labelled with anti-Sox3 (green), anti-Acetylated Tubulin (AcTub, magenta) and
DAPI (blue). White arrowheads show Sox3 positive extensions.
C
Quantification of the images shown in (A). The ratio of Sox3+ per total number of cells (DAPI) in the spinal cord was determined in the stump (non-regen.) and the
regenerating spinal cord (regen.) in wt and foxm1−/−tadpoles (n = 3–8, with an average of 15 sections per data point).
D
Quantification of the proportion of cycling progenitors (Sox3+EdU+/DAPI, S3+E+/DAPI), the proportion of progenitors having divided (Sox3+EdU+/Sox3+, S3+E+/S3+) and
the proportion of progenitors self-renewal (Sox3+EdU+/EdU+, S3+E+/E+) in the regenerate. The graph represents the mean  SD from 9 tadpoles (wt) and 8 tadpoles
(foxm1−/−) with an average of 18 sections per data point.
E
Representative sections of spinal cords from tadpoles injected with EdU at 3 dpa and fixed at 5 dpa. After sectioning, the samples were labelled with antibodies
against Myt1 (green), EdU (magenta) and DAPI (blue).
F
Quantification of images shown in (E). The graph represents the mean  SD from 3 tadpoles with an average of 12 sections each.
Data information: For C, D and F, a two-way-ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc tests was used and the graphs represent the mean  SD. ns = non-significant, *P < 0.05,
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 and ****P < 0.0001. For A, B and E, the scale bar represents 25 µm.
S
G2
M
G1
neural progenitor
amputation
neural progenitor
day 3
S
G2
M
G1
day 0
day 5
impaired
regeneration
regeneration
foxm1
foxm1 -/-
ROS
Figure 6.
Model of neural progenitor cell behaviour during spinal cord regeneration in wild type (wt) and foxm1−/−tadpoles.
The blue circles correspond to sox2/3+ve cells (progenitors) and the orange circle to snap25+ cells (neurons).
ª 2021 The Authors
EMBO reports
22: e50932 | 2021
11 of 16
Diane Pelzer et al
EMBO reports

Materials and Methods
Xenopus tropicalis growth and tail amputation
X. tropicalis embryos were obtained and raised as described (Collu
et al, 2012). Tail amputation was performed at Nieuwkoop and
Faber stages (NF)40-50 using a scalpel (Nieuwkoop & Faber, 1994).
Tadpoles were anaesthetised with 0.01–0.02% MS-222 (for NF40
and NF50 tadpoles, respectively) in 0.01× Marc’s Modified Ringer
(MMR) solution (10 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM KCl, 0.1 mM MgSO4,
0.2 mM CaCl2, 0.5 mM HEPES, pH 7.4), followed by recovery in
0.01X MMR. All animal procedures complied with the UK Animal
(Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 and were conducted with UK Home
Office approval.
RNA sequencing
Bulk sequencing: Twenty spinal cords were isolated and immedi-
ately transferred into TRIzol (Life Technologies) for each timepoint
in triplicate. Following RNA extraction according to the manufac-
turer’s instructions, total RNA concentration was quantified using
Qubit HS RNA assay kit (Invitrogen) on the Qubit Fluorometer 2.0
(Invitrogen). Integrity was tested with the Agilent RNA 6000 Pico kit
on the Agilent Bioanalyser. Samples with an RNA Integrity Number
(RIN) ≥7 were considered of acceptable quality. RNA-seq was
performed with Illumina NextSeq 500 using unpaired-end sequenc-
ing at the GeneCore facility (EMBL). Adapter sequences were
trimmed using Trimmomatic v0.38. After quality control, the reads
were converted to a FASTQ format and mapped on the v9.1 of the
X. tropicalis transcriptome using bwa. The number of reads per
transcript was determined using HTseq, and the idxstats files were
used to identify differentially expressed (DE) genes using the general
linear model glmQLFit in DESeq2 with R. DE genes with a |log2(FC)|
> 1 and FDR < 0.01 were considered significant. For the clustering,
the k-mean was determined at 5 using the Elbow method and
enriched gene ontology (GO) terms were identified using Fidea
(D’Andrea et al, 2013). The full RNA-seq dataset was then uploaded
onto the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Qiagen) software.
Upstream regulatory analysis was performed for DE genes with a
|Log2FC|> 1 and FDR < 0.001 (992 genes for 0 dpa/1 dpa and 2720
genes for 0 dpa/3 dpa). This analysis predicts upstream molecules
such as transcription factors that may be causing the observed
change in gene expression (Kr€amer et al, 2014).
For single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq), ten spinal cords at 0 and
3 dpa were isolated and transferred in Modified Ringer’s (MR,
100 mM NaCl, 1.8 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 5 mM Hepes
pH7) with 20 µM actinomycin D for 10 min to prevent de novo
synthesis of mRNA (Wu et al, 2017). The spinal cords were trans-
ferred in CMF-MR (100 mM NaCl, 1.8 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA and
5 mM Hepes pH7), cut in small pieces using a fine scapel and incu-
bated in 200 µl of 0.5% Trypsin-EDTA without dye (GIBCO) for
30 min at 28°C with shaking at 600 rpm. After a 5 min spin at
300 rcf at 4°C, the spinal cords were incubated for 15 min at room
temperature (RT) in 180 µl of MR with 0.3 U/µl of DNaseI (D5025,
Sigma). After trituration, 20 µl of Collagenase IV at 50 U/µl was
added and the samples were incubated 30 min at 28°C with shaking
at 600 rpm. The samples were passed through a flame elongated
capillary, applied to a 5 µm strainer and collected in MR with
0.0375% BSA. The samples were pelleted by centrifugation at
300 rcf at 4°C for 5 min, washed with MR-BSA and resuspended in
35 µl of MR-BSA. The cell number (4.105–5.105 cells/ml) and viabil-
ity (above 90%) were estimated on a Countess Cell Counter (Invit-
rogen). The cells were then loaded onto the 10X Genomics platform
for processing.
Single-cell RNA-seq analysis
• Building custom genome for mapping: The X. tropicalis genome
v.9.1 was downloaded from Xenbase.org. A number of genes had
duplicated entries where the same gene ID was assigned to dif-
ferent gene names. The majority of these genes had an overlap-
ping transcript; we therefore used the GFFReads merging option
to merge these transcripts.
• Data pre-processing: The sequence files from the sequencer were
processed using 10x Genomics custom pipeline Cell Ranger
v2.2.0. The fastq files were aligned to the custom genome using
the default parameters of Cell Ranger. The pipeline identified the
barcodes associated with cells and counted UMIs mapped to each
cell. Cell Ranger uses STAR aligner to align reads to the genome
discarding all the counts mapping to multiple loci. The uniquely
mapped UMI counts are reported in a gene by cell count matrix
represented as a sparse matrix format. The Cell Ranger’s aggr
command was used to aggregate the samples from 0 and 3 dpa
whilst keeping the default down-sampling parameter enabled.
• Filtering: Low-quality cells were removed from the dataset to
ensure that the technical noise did not affect the downstream
analysis. Three commonly used parameters were used for cell
quality evaluation: the number of UMIs per cell barcode (library
size), the number of genes per cell barcode and the proportion of
UMIs that are mapped to mitochondrial genes. Cells that have
lower UMI counts than three median absolute deviation (MAD)
for the first two matrices and cells having higher proportion of
reads mapped to mitochondrial genes with a cutoff of four MADs
were filtered out.
After this initial filtering, 5,271 cells (2,870 0 dpa and 2,401
3 dpa) out of 5,411 cells remained for downstream analysis. Violin
plots for these three metrics were then plotted to identify cells that
have outlier distributions which can indicate doublets or multiplets
of cells. However, no outliers were identified so no further filtering
was done.
• Classification
of
cell
cycle
phase:
Seurat’s
CellCycleScoring
method was used to calculate for each cell the score of S phase
and G2 M phase based on expression of S and G2/M phase mark-
ers. The cell cycle phase of each cell was identified based on the
highest positive score of the phases. Cells that are expressing
neither of the S phase and G2/M phase genes would have a nega-
tive value for both of these phases and were assigned as being in
G1 (Aztekin et al, 2019).
• Gene filtering and Normalisation: Genes with average UMI counts
below 0.01 were filtered out. After this filtering, 11,215 genes
were left for downstream analyses. To take into account the effect
of variable library size for each cell, raw counts were normalised
using the deconvolution-based method (Lun et al, 2016). Counts
from many cells are pooled together to circumvent the issue of
12 of 16
EMBO reports
22: e50932 | 2021
ª 2021 The Authors
EMBO reports
Diane Pelzer et al

higher number of zeros that are common in scRNA-seq data. This
pool-based size factors are then deconvoluted to find the size
factor
of
each
cell.
These
normalised
data
are
then
log-
transformed with a pseudo-count of 1.
• Visualisation and Clustering: The first step for visualisation and
clustering is to identify the highly variable genes (HVGs). To do
this, we first decomposed the variance of each gene expression
values into technical and biological components and identified
the genes for which biological components were significantly
greater than zero. These genes are called HVG. HVGs were then
used to reduce the dimensions of the dataset using PCA. The
dimensions of dataset were further reduced to 2D using t -SNE,
where 1–14 components of the PCA were given as input. The cells
were grouped into their putative clusters using the dynamic tree
cut method. Dynamic tree cut method identified the branch
cutting point of a dendrogram dynamically and combined the
advantage of both hierarchical and K-medoid clustering approach.
Pseudo-time trajectory was performed using the Monocle 2 algo-
rithm (Qiu et al, 2017).
• Batch correction. Two approaches were followed to batch correct
the data: (i) using the integration strategy in-built to Seurat (Butler
et al, 2018) and (ii) using the Harmony method for single-cell data
integration (Korsunsky et al, 2019). Batch-effect quantification and
batch correction method selection were conducted in an unbiased
way using the k nearest-neighbour batch-effect test (kBET, B€uttner
et al, 2019). For Seurat integration, 500 highly variable genes
(HVGs) were first detected using the FindVariableFeatures() func-
tion set to the vst selection method. The integrated dataset was
obtained by subsequently calling the FindintegrationAnchors() and
IntegrateData() functions, both set to a total of 30 dimensions to
generate a series of anchors across the data provided in separate
Seurat objects. For Harmony, a single Seurat object with the
combined
data
for
both
timepoints
was
forwarded
to
the
Harmony::RunHarmony() function in R whilst indicating a sample
grouping variable. To evaluate the effectiveness of each method,
an evaluation approach was performed using the kBET::kBET()
function in R as described in (Tran et al, 2020).
• Identification of marker genes: To identify the marker gene for a
cluster, we compared a given cluster with all other clusters and
changes in expression were tested using the sSeq package. We
selected the marker genes for the cluster using manual curation of
DE genes with an FDR < 0.01. For PANTHER analysis, all DE
genes between the foxm1+ cluster were uploaded and tested
against the pseudo-bulk of all the genes expressed in the scRNA-
seq experiment.
Morpholinos, CRISPR/Cas9 microinjection and
inhibitor treatment
The following morpholinos (Gene Tools) were used: foxm1 MO e3i3
5’-GAAAGgtactgcacgtataatgaga-3’,
foxm1
MO
i3e4
5’-tttcccttta
tagCCAAGCA,
Ctrl
MO
5’-CCTCTTACCTCAGTTACAATTTATA.
Morpholinos were injected at either 1- or 2-cell stage with a combi-
nation of 10 ng of foxm1 e3i3 and 5ng of foxm1 i3e4 or 15 ng Ctrl
MO. The foxm1 CRISPR gRNA was designed using Crisprdirect
(http://crispr.dbcls.jp) with the target sequence 5’-CCTGAGCAAA
CCCTTGTCCATGG. The gRNA cloning was carried out according to
published protocols using the following primers fwd 5’-TAgg
AACTGTCAAGAAGGCGTTCC, rev 5’-AAACGGAACGCCTTCTTGA
CAGTT (Jao et al, 2013). Eggs were injected with 300 pg gRNA and
600 ng Cas9 mRNA (from pT3TS-nCas9n, Addgene; Jao et al, 2013)
or 600 pg/1.5 ng of Cas9 Protein (M0386, NEB). In all experiments,
foxm1 knockdown corresponds to mosaic F0 tadpoles injected with
foxm1 specific gRNA and 1.5 ng of Cas9 protein (NEB). For foxm1
knockout, the embryos have been generated from F1 or F2 animals
with heterozygous foxm1 mutations.
For chemical inhibitor treatments, tadpole tails were amputated
at NF50 and left to recover for 36 h in 0.01X MMR. Then, ROS signal-
ling was inhibited with 4 µM diphenyleneiodonium (DPI, Merck),
FGF signalling with 20 µM SU5402 (Calbiochem) and Shh signalling
with 2.5 µM of cyclopamine (Merck). At 3 dpa, the regenerates were
collected, total RNA extracted and then processed for RT–qPCR.
Genotyping
Genomic DNA was extracted from embryos or tails removed by
amputation by incubation for 3 h at 55°C in 10 mM Tris pH8, 1 mM
EDTA, 80 mM KCL, 0.3% NP40, 0.3% Triton X-100 and 0.2 mg/ml
of proteinase K. The samples were subsequently processed for PCR
amplication using the following primers: fwd 5’-CCACTCATACT
CAAGAGACGC, rev 5’-TGTGAGTTTGCTGGAAGTCCTA. The PCR
product was subsequently digested with NcoI for restriction frag-
ment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis. Alternatively, high-
resolution capillary electrophoresis was performed using a QIAxcel
Advanced System (QIAgen).
Isolation of RNA and qPCR
RNA was isolated from total embryos, tail regenerates and isolated
spinal cord using TRIzol (Life Technologies) according to manufac-
turer’s instructions. cDNA was generated using the Reverse Tran-
scriptase AMV kit (Roche) for whole embryos and tails and
Sensiscript Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen) for isolated spinal
cords. qPCR analysis was performed on the StepOnePlus Real-Time
PCR System using SYBR-Green reagents (Applied Biosystems).
Expression was normalised to the expression levels of ef1a or odc,
and expression values were calculated using the ΔΔCt method.
The following primers were used (5’–3’ sequences): foxm1 fwd
5’-AAAGAGGAAGAGAGTGCGCC, rev 5’-TGGCATTTAGCTGCTCC
TCC; cyclinb3 fwd 5’-CTGCACTTCCACCATCCAATCCA, rev 5’-CAA
CTATATGCGGGACAGAGAG; cdc25b fwd 5’-GCCCAAACCCCTCGA
GAAGA, rev 5’-GCCATCGAAGGTGCGTAGCCT; ntubulin fwd 5’-GG
CAGTTACCATGGAGACAGT, rev 5’-GCCTGTGCCACCACCCAGAGA;
sox2 fwd 5’-CATGATGGAGACCGATCTCA, rev 5’-CTTACTCTGGTT
GGAGCC; and ef1a fwd 5’-GGATGGAACGGTGACAACATGCT, rev
5’-GCAGGGTAGTTCCGCTGCCAGA. The primers for ami and odc
are described in Nagamori et al (2014).
Immunofluorescence and in situ hybridisation
The tails were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) or MEMFA
(0.1 M MOPS pH7.4, 2 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgSO4, 3.7% formalde-
hyde) and dehydrated in methanol. Rehydrated samples were
embedded in 25% fish gelatin / 20% sucrose and cryosectioned at
12 μm thickness. For non-regenerating spinal cords, sections were
taken at least 250 µm anterior to the amputation plane. For the
ª 2021 The Authors
EMBO reports
22: e50932 | 2021
13 of 16
Diane Pelzer et al
EMBO reports

regenerate, only sections posterior to the amputation plane and
anterior to the neural ampulla were considered. The following anti-
bodies were used: rabbit anti-Sox3 (1:500 at 3 dpa or 1:1,000 at 0
and 5 dpa) and anti-Myt1 (1:750) were a gift from Nancy Papalop-
ulu; mouse anti-PCNA was used at 1:500 (PC10, Sigma); rabbit anti-
cleaved caspase 3, Asp175 (1:100, 9661, Cell Signalling Technol-
ogy), rabbit anti-pH3 (1:100, 06-570, Sigma), mouse anti-BrdU
(1:300, clone MoBU-1, B35128, Invitrogen) and anti-Acetylated
Tubulin (1:1,000, clone 6-11B1, Sigma). Secondary antibodies were
goat anti-rabbit IgG, Alexa Fluor 488 (A-11008, Invitrogen) and goat
anti-mouse IgG, Alexa Fluor 568 (A-11004, Invitrogen).
Whole-mount in situ hybridisation on embryos and tails was
performed as previously described (Harland, 1991). The foxm1
probe was generated from the TGas064p23 clone linearised with
ClaI and transcribed using T7 polymerase.
Cell cycle analyses
For EdU labelling, NF50 tadpoles at 3 dpa were injected with 12.6 nl
of 10 mM EdU (Life Technologies) in DMSO and after 2 days, tails
were collected and fixed in MEMFA. EdU was detected using Click-
iT EdU Alexa Fluor 594 Imaging Kit (Life Technologies) following
the manufacturer’s instructions.
Dual pulse labelling was used to determine the cell cycle length (Tc)
of Sox3+ NPCs within the regenerate (Martynoga et al, 2005). Labelling
was performed as described in Thuret et al (2015) with minor modifi-
cations. NF50 tadpoles at 3 dpa were anaesthetised in MS-222 and
injected with 10 mM EdU (Invitrogen). After 3 h (the injection interval,
Texp), animals were anaesthetised in MS-222 and injected with 12.6 nl
of 10 mM BrdU (Sigma-Aldrich). Six hours after the first injection, tails
were collected and fixed in 4% PFA, and processed for sectioning as
described above. For BrdU staining, sections were incubated for 40 min
in pre-warmed 1N HCl held at a constant temperature of 37°C. The
sections were then washed thrice in PBSTx and incubated in blocking
solution with 10% heat-treated lamb serum (HTLS) for 1h at RT. EdU
labelling was performed as described above using the Click-iT EdU
Alexa Fluor 647 Imaging Kit (Life Technologies).
The following equation was used to calculate Tc:
Tc ¼
Texp
Lcells
Scells


0
B
B
@
1
C
C
A
Scells
Pcells


where
S cells = Sox3+ cells staying in S phase (Sox3+EdU+BrdU+).
L cells = Sox3+ cells leaving S phase (Sox3+EdU+BrdU−).
P cells = proliferative Sox3+ cells, calculated as follows:
P cells ¼ ðSox3þ cells  growth fractionÞ:
The growth fraction was calculated in Appendix Fig S1B.
Imaging
Z stacks were acquired on a Cell Observer Z1 widefield microscope
(Zeiss) using a 63× 1.4NA oil immersion objective. Images were
deconvolved using ZEN 2.3 software (adjustable deconvolution).
The fast iterative algorithm, Poisson (Richardson Lucy) likelihood,
40 iterations or 0.1% quality threshold) or the constrained iterative
algorithm (Poisson likelihood, 40 iterations or 0.1% quality thresh-
old) was used. Cell populations were analysed using the cell counter
module of Fiji.
Statistics
For all the experiments apart from the results of the RNA-seq,
scRNA-seq and experiments shown on Fig EV5C and D, the normal-
ity of the distribution of the data was tested using a Shapiro–Wilk
test. When two conditions were compared, a two-tail unpaired t-test
was used. If three or more conditions were compared, a one-way
ANOVA followed by a Tukey post hoc test was used. When multiple
conditions were compared across different genotype, a two-way
ANOVA followed by a Tukey post hoc test was performed. For Fig
EV5C
and
D,
cumulative
distributions
were
assessed
using
Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests. All the statistical tests were done using
Prism 9.
Data and software availability
• Bulk RNA-seq data: ArrayExpress at EMBL-EBI E-MTAB-8785
(https://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/experiments/E-MTAB-8785/).
• Single-cell RNA-seq: ArrayExpress at EMBL-EBI E-MTAB-8839
(https://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/experiments/E-MTAB-8839/).
Expanded View for this article is available online.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a Wellcome Trust Seed Award (ref 205894/Z/
17/Z), the Manchester Regenerative Medicine Network (MaRMN) and The
University of Manchester Strategic Fund (ISSF) to K.D and MRC single-cell
centre award to S.M.B. (ref MR/M008908/1). D.P. and L.S.P. are supported
by BBSRC-DTP PhD studentships. L.S.P. is supported by a Biotechnology
and Biological Sciences Research Council Research Training Support Grant
(ref BB/M011208/1). We thank the EMBL core facility for performing the
bulk RNA-seq experiments, the Genomics Core Facility (University of
Manchester) for the scRNA-seq, the Genome Editing Unit and Histology
Core Facilities for use of genotyping and cryotomy equipment (University
of Manchester) and the National Xenopus Resource (NXR, Marine Biology
Laboratories, Woods Hole, USA) for their bioinformatics workshop (National
Xenopus Resource RRID:SCR_013731). We thank Xenbase (www.xenbase.org)
for posting Xenopus genome assemblies and annotation of literatures to
assist research in the Xenopus community. We thank Andy Rowntree and
Jessica Forsyth for helping to develop macros to analyse cell positions,
Nancy Papalopulu for the anti-Sox3 and anti-Myt1 antibodies and
Enrique Amaya, Raman Das and Shane Herbert for comments on
the manuscript.
Author contributions
Conceptualisation, DP and KD; Formal analysis, DP, LSP, CJG-D, SMB, Method-
ology, DP, LSP, RT, SMB and KD; Software, LSP, CJG-D, SMB and KD; Investiga-
tion, DP, LSP, RT and KD; Data curation, SMB and CJG-D; Visualisation, SMB
Writing—original draft, KD; Review & editing, DP, LSP, RT, CJG-D, SMB and KD;
Supervision, KD; Funding acquisition, SMB, KD.
14 of 16
EMBO reports
22: e50932 | 2021
ª 2021 The Authors
EMBO reports
Diane Pelzer et al

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
References
Arai Y, Pulvers JN, Haffner C, Schilling B, N€usslein I, Calegari F, Huttner WB
(2011) Neural stem and progenitor cells shorten S-phase on commitment
to neuron production. Nat Commun 2: 154
Aztekin C, Hiscock TW, Marioni JC, Gurdon JB, Simons BD, Jullien J (2019)
Identification of a regeneration-organizing cell in the Xenopus tail. Science
364: 653–658
Beck CW, Christen B, Slack JM (2003) Molecular pathways needed for
regeneration of spinal cord and muscle in a vertebrate. Dev Cell 5: 429–439
Bonnet F, Molina A, Roussat M, Azais M, Vialar S, Gautrais J, Pituello F, Agius
E (2018) Neurogenic decisions require a cell cycle independent function of
the CDC25B phosphatase. Elife 7: e32937
Butler A, Hoffman P, Smibert P, Papalexi E, Satija R (2018) Integrating single-
cell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and
species. Nat Biotechnol 36: 411–420
B€uttner M, Miao Z, Wolf FA, Teichmann SA, Theis FJ (2019) A test metric for
assessing single-cell RNA-seq batch correction. Nat Methods 16: 43–49
Celis JE, Madsen P, Nielsen S, Celis A (1986) Nuclear patterns of cyclin (PCNA)
antigen distribution subdivide S-phase in cultured cells — Some
applications of PCNA antibodies. Leuk Res 10: 237–249
Chang J, Baker J, Wills A (2017) Transcriptional dynamics of tail regeneration
in Xenopus tropicalis. Genesis 55: e23015
Cheffer A, Tarnok A, Ulrich H (2013) Cell cycle regulation during neurogenesis
in the embryonic and adult brain. Stem Cell Rev Rep 9: 794–805
Collu GM, Hidalgo-Sastre A, Acar A, Bayston L, Gildea C, Leverentz MK, Mills
CG, Owens TW, Meurette O, Dorey K et al (2012) Dishevelled limits Notch
signalling through inhibition of CSL. Development 139: 4405–4415
Cura Costa E, Otsuki L, Rodrigo Albors A, Tanaka EM, Chara O (2021)
Spatiotemporal control of cell cycle acceleration during axolotl spinal cord
regeneration. Elife https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55665
D’Andrea D, Grassi L, Mazzapioda M, Tramontano A (2013) FIDEA: a server for
the functional interpretation of differential expression analysis. Nucleic
Acids Res 41: W84–W88
Deuchar EM (1975) Regeneration of the tail bud in Xenopus embryos. J Exp
Zool 192: 390
Fukuoka T, Kato A, Hirano M, Ohka F, Aoki K, Awaya T, Adilijiang A, Sachi M,
Tanahashi K, Yamaguchi J et al (2021) Neurod4 converts endogenous
neural stem cells to neurons with synaptic formation after spinal cord
injury. iScience 24: 102074
Gargioli C, Slack JMW (2004) Cell lineage tracing during Xenopus tail
regeneration. Development 131: 2669–2679
Hamilton AM, Balashova OA, Borodinsky LN (2021) Non-canonical Hedgehog
signaling regulates spinal cord and muscle regeneration in Xenopus laevis
larvae. Elife 10: e55665
Hardwick LJA, Philpott A (2014) Nervous decision-making: to divide or
differentiate. Trends Genet 30: 254–261
Harland RM (1991) In situ hybridization: an improved whole-mount method
for Xenopus embryos. Methods Cell Biol 36: 685–695
Hydbring P, Malumbres M, Sicinski P (2016) Non-canonical functions of cell
cycle cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 17: 280–292
Jao L-E, Wente SR, Chen W (2013) Efficient multiplex biallelic zebrafish
genome editing using a CRISPR nuclease system. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
110: 13904–13909
Kakebeen AD, Chitsazan AD, Williams MC, Saunders LM, Wills AE (2020)
Chromatin accessibility dynamics and single cell RNA-Seq reveal new
regulators of regeneration in neural progenitors. Elife 9: e52648
Korsunsky I, Millard N, Fan J, Slowikowski K, Zhang F, Wei K, Baglaenko Y,
Brenner M, Loh P, Raychaudhuri S (2019) Fast, sensitive and accurate
integration of single-cell data with Harmony. Nat Methods 16: 1289–1296
Kr€amer A, Green J, Pollard J, Tugendreich S (2014) Causal analysis approaches
in ingenuity pathway analysis. Bioinformatics 30: 523–530
Laoukili J, Kooistra MRH, Bras A, Kauw J, Kerkhoven RM, Morrison A, Clevers
H, Medema RH (2005) FoxM1 is required for execution of the mitotic
programme and chromosome stability. Nat Cell Biol 7: 126–136
Lin G, Slack JM (2008) Requirement for Wnt and FGF signaling in Xenopus
tadpole tail regeneration. Dev Biol 316: 323–335
Love NR, Chen Y, Bonev B, Gilchrist MJ, Fairclough L, Lea R, Mohun TJ,
Paredes R, Zeef LAH, Amaya E (2011) Genome-wide analysis of gene
expression during Xenopus tropicalis tadpole tail regeneration. BMC Dev
Biol 11: 70
Love NR, Chen Y, Ishibashi S, Kritsiligkou P, Lea R, Koh Y, Gallop JL, Dorey K,
Amaya E (2013) Amputation-induced reactive oxygen species are required
for successful Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration. Nat Cell Biol 15: 222–228
Lukaszewicza AI, Anderson DJ (2011) Cyclin D1 promotes neurogenesis in the
developing spinal cord in a cell cycle-independent manner. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 108: 11632–11637
Lun ATL, Bach K, Marioni JC (2016) Pooling across cells to normalize single-
cell RNA sequencing data with many zero counts. Genome Biol 17: 75
Macedo JC, Vaz S, Bakker B, Ribeiro R, Bakker PL, Escandell JM, Ferreira MG,
Medema R, Foijer F, Logarinho E (2018) FoxM1 repression during human
aging leads to mitotic decline and aneuploidy-driven full senescence. Nat
Commun 9: 2834
Martynoga B, Morrison H, Price DJ, Mason JO (2005) Foxg1 is required for
specification of ventral telencephalon and region-specific regulation of dorsal
telencephalic precursor proliferation and apoptosis. Dev Biol 283: 113–127
McDonald JW, Sadowsky C (2002) Spinal-cord injury. Lancet 359: 417–425
Mchedlishvili L, Epperlein HH, Telzerow A, Tanaka EM (2007) A clonal analysis
of neural progenitors during axolotl spinal cord regeneration reveals
evidence for both spatially restricted and multipotent progenitors.
Development 134: 2083–2093
Meletis K, Barnabe-Heider F, Carlen M, Evergren E, Tomilin N, Shupliakov O,
Frisen J (2008) Spinal cord injury reveals multilineage differentiation of
ependymal cells. PLoS Biol 6: e182
Mu~noz R, Edwards-Faret G, Moreno M, Zu~niga N, Cline H, Larraín J (2015)
Regeneration of Xenopus laevis spinal cord requires Sox2/3 expressing cells.
Dev Biol 408: 229–243
Nagamori Y, Roberts S, Maciej M, Dorey K (2014) Activin ligands are required
for the re-activation of Smad2 signalling after neurulation and vascular
development in Xenopus tropicalis. Int J Dev Biol 58: 783–791
Narciso L, Parlanti E, Racaniello M, Simonelli V, Cardinale A, Merlo D,
Dogliotti E (2016) The response to oxidative DNA damage in neurons:
mechanisms and disease. Neural Plast 2016: 1–14
Nieuwkoop PD, Faber J (1994) Normal table of Xenopus laevis (Daudin) : a
systematical and chronological survey of the development from the
fertilized egg till the end of metamorphosis.
Ogai K, Nakatani K, Hisano S, Sugitani K, Koriyama Y, Kato S (2014) Function
of Sox2 in ependymal cells of lesioned spinal cords in adult zebrafish.
Neurosci Res 88: 84–87
Qiu X, Hill A, Packer J, Lin D, Ma Y-A, Trapnell C (2017) Single-cell mRNA
quantification and differential analysis with Census. Nat Methods 14:
309–315
ª 2021 The Authors
EMBO reports
22: e50932 | 2021
15 of 16
Diane Pelzer et al
EMBO reports

Rodrigo Albors A, Tazaki A, Rost F, Nowoshilow S, Chara O, Tanaka EM (2015)
Planar cell polarity-mediated induction of neural stem cell expansion
during axolotl spinal cord regeneration. Elife 4: e10230
Rost F, Rodrigo Albors A, Mazurov V, Brusch L, Deutsch A, Tanaka EM, Chara
O (2016) Accelerated cell divisions drive the outgrowth of the regenerating
spinal cord in axolotls. Elife 5: e20357
Rottach A, Kremmer E, Nowak D, Boisguerin P, Volkmer R, Cardoso MC,
Leonhardt H, Rothbauer U (2008) Generation and characterization of a rat
monoclonal antibody specific for PCNA. Hybridoma 27: 91–98
Sch€uller U, Zhao Q, Godinho SA, Heine VM, Medema RH, Pellman D, Rowitch
DH (2007) Forkhead transcription factor FoxM1 regulates mitotic entry
and prevents spindle defects in cerebellar granule neuron precursors. Mol
Cell Biol 27: 8259–8270
Slack JMW, Lin G, Chen Y (2008) The Xenopus tadpole: a new model for
regeneration research. Cell Mol Life Sci 65: 54–63
Thuret R, Auger H, Papalopulu N (2015) Analysis of neural progenitors from
embryogenesis to juvenile adult in Xenopus laevis reveals biphasic
neurogenesis and continuous lengthening of the cell cycle. Biol Open 4:
1772–1781
Tran HTN, Ang KS, Chevrier M, Zhang X, Lee NYS, Goh M, Chen J (2020) A
benchmark of batch-effect correction methods for single-cell RNA
sequencing data. Genome Biol 21: 12
Trapnell C, Cacchiarelli D, Grimsby J, Pokharel P, Li S, Morse M, Lennon NJ,
Livak KJ, Mikkelsen TS, Rinn JL (2014) The dynamics and regulators of cell
fate decisions are revealed by pseudotemporal ordering of single cells. Nat
Biotechnol 32: 381–386
Turrero García M, Chang Y, Arai Y, Huttner WB (2016) S-phase duration is the
main target of cell cycle regulation in neural progenitors of developing
ferret neocortex. J Comp Neurol 524: 456–470
Ueno H, Nakajo N, Watanabe M, Isoda M, Sagata N (2008) FoxM1-driven cell
division is required for neuronal differentiation in early Xenopus embryos.
Development 135: 2023–2030
Wu X, Gu X, Han X, Du A, Jiang Y, Zhang X, Wang Y, Cao G, Zhao C (2014) A
novel function for Foxm1 in interkinetic nuclear migration in the
developing telencephalon and anxiety-related behavior. J Neurosci 34:
1510–1522
Wu YE, Pan L, Zuo Y, Li X, Hong W (2017) Detecting activated cell
populations using single-cell RNA-Seq. Neuron 96: 313–329
License: This is an open access article under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
License, which permits use, distribution and reproduc-
tion in any medium, provided the original work is
properly cited.
16 of 16
EMBO reports
22: e50932 | 2021
ª 2021 The Authors
EMBO reports
Diane Pelzer et al

===== Phipps2020_Development_RegenerationModel-Xenopus =====
PRIMER
Model systems for regeneration: Xenopus
Lauren S. Phipps1, Lindsey Marshall1, Karel Dorey2 and Enrique Amaya1,*
ABSTRACT
Understanding how to promote organ and appendage regeneration is
a key goal of regenerative medicine. The frog, Xenopus, can achieve
both scar-free healing and tissue regeneration during its larval stages,
although it predominantly loses these abilities during metamorphosis
and adulthood. This transient regenerative capacity, alongside their
close evolutionary relationship with humans, makes Xenopus an
attractive model to uncover the mechanisms underlying functional
regeneration. Here, we present an overview of Xenopus as a key
model organism for regeneration research and highlight how studies
of Xenopus have led to new insights into the mechanisms governing
regeneration.
KEY WORDS: Heart, Regeneration, Spinal cord, Tail, Xenopus,
Appendage
Introduction
The goal of regenerative medicine is to identify novel therapies
aimed at stimulating a full regenerative response in humans
following injury, disease or during ageing. As such, uncovering
the mechanisms employed by organisms with high regenerative
capacity may lead to new therapies for humans, which generally
have poor regenerative capabilities. As originally discovered by
Lazzaro Spallanzani in the mid-18th century, the anuran (‘tailless’)
amphibians, which include Xenopus laevis (X. laevis) and Xenopus
tropicalis (X. tropicalis), are one such group of animals with high
regenerative capacity (Dinsmore, 1991). Originally introduced as a
model organism for endocrinology and physiology, but later
adopted
for
cell
and
developmental
biology
(Gurdon
and
Hopwood, 2000), the African clawed frog (X. laevis) has been
increasingly appreciated over the past 50 years for its regenerative
capacity (Deuchar, 1975). Although this species has many
advantages, its allotetraploid genome and long generation time
make it less attractive for genetic studies. For this reason, its diploid
relative, the Western clawed frog (X. tropicalis) was introduced as
an experimental organism in the late 1990s to mitigate these
disadvantages (Amaya et al., 1998).
In this Primer, we give an overview of the life cycle, evolutionary
position and regenerative capacity of X. laevis and X. tropicalis. We
then summarise the tools and techniques that are available to study
regeneration in these species and review how studies of Xenopus
have informed our current understanding of the cellular and
molecular mechanisms of regeneration. Finally, we discuss the
major benefits and limitations of using Xenopus as a model system
to understand regeneration.
Life cycle, evolutionary position and regenerative potential
of Xenopus
Although X. laevis and X. tropicalis diverged between 30 million
and 90 million years ago (Evans et al., 2004; Session et al., 2016),
there are many similarities between the two species (Fig. 1). Both
follow the same morphological changes during development and
can be staged using the same developmental staging system
(Nieuwkoop and Faber, 1994; Zahn et al., 2017). Embryos can be
generated in large numbers following a simple hormone injection
and the rate of Xenopus development can be manipulated by
modifying temperature, which greatly facilitates experimental
manipulation during early development. It was this ease of
generation of embryos that led to their adoption as models for
developmental biology (Amaya et al., 1998; Gurdon and Hopwood,
2000). Although X. tropicalis embryos proceed slightly faster
through gastrulation and neurulation than X. laevis embryos, and
optimal housing temperatures differ between the two species
(Ishibashi et al., 2017; Khokha et al., 2002), the timing and levels of
orthologous gene expression are remarkably similar at comparable
developmental stages, particularly after gastrulation (Yanai et al.,
2011). Both species reach tadpole stages by 3-4 days post-
fertilisation and metamorphosis within 2-3 months, although
X. tropicalis commonly reaches sexual maturity quicker (Ishibashi
et al., 2017) and is therefore the favoured species for genetic studies
(Amaya et al., 1998; Tandon et al., 2017). Importantly, both species
are supported by advanced genomic resources, including annotated
genomes (Amaya, 2005; Hellsten et al., 2010; Session et al., 2016),
and genetic approaches, such as transgenesis and gene-editing tools
(Blitz et al., 2013; Hartley et al., 2002; Ishibashi et al., 2012; Kroll
and Amaya, 1996; Love et al., 2011b; Ogino et al., 2006; Tandon
et al., 2017).
Xenopus species occupy a phylogenetic position between urodele
amphibians and amniotes and in concordance with this position
their regenerative capacity is intermediate between the two (Fig. 2).
Whereas urodeles display life-long regenerative capacity of many
Model systems for regeneration
This article is part of a series entitled ‘Model systems for regeneration’.
This series of articles aims to highlight key model systems and species
that are currently being used to study tissue and organ regeneration.
Each article provides background information about the phylogenetic
position of the species, its life-cycle and habitat, the different organs and
tissues that regenerate, and the experimental tools and techniques that
are available for studying these organisms in a regenerative context.
Importantly, these articles also give examples of how the study of these
models has increased our understanding of regenerative mechanisms
more broadly, and how some of the open questions in the field of
regeneration may be answered using these organisms. To see the full
collection as it grows, please visit: https://dev.biologists.org/collection/
regeneration_models.
1Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological
Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester,
Manchester, M13 9PT, UK. 2Division of Developmental Biology and Medicine,
School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of
Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK.
*Author for correspondence (Enrique.Amaya@manchester.ac.uk)
L.S.P., 0000-0001-9324-5469; L.M., 0000-0002-0735-6582; K.D., 0000-0003-
0846-5286; E.A., 0000-0002-1805-8548
1
© 2020. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Development (2020) 147, dev180844. doi:10.1242/dev.180844
DEVELOPMENT

organs and appendages (Joven et al., 2019), amniotes and mammals
generally
display
only
embryonic
or
neonatally
restricted
regeneration, particularly of the central nervous system (CNS)
(Bernstein and Stelzner, 1983; Boulland et al., 2013; Chen et al.,
1997; Gaillard et al., 2007; Karl and Reh, 2010) and heart (Price
et al., 2019). Notably, amniotes fail to regenerate their limbs or
tailbuds even during embryogenesis (Schoenwolf, 1977, 1978;
Summerbell, 1974). In contrast, Xenopus has high regenerative
capacity in the pre-metamorphic larval stages, but this capacity is
largely lost following metamorphosis, with the exception of a few
tissues, such as the retina (see Table 1). Thus, X. laevis and
X. tropicalis are in a useful position to understand the evolutionary
transition between organisms with life-long regenerative capacity
and those with limited regenerative capacity (a question of
phylogeny) and to investigate the mechanisms that underlie the
changes from regenerative capacity to non-regenerative capacity
during the lifetime of an organism (a question of ontogeny). For
brevity, hereafter we focus on regeneration in the context of tissues
for which recent findings have led to new insights, namely the
appendages (tail/limb), CNS and heart. Where similar regenerative
processes have been reported in both X. laevis and X. tropicalis, we
will refer to these species collectively as ‘Xenopus’.
Insights gained from studying regeneration in Xenopus
Appendage regeneration
Tail regeneration
Xenopus tadpoles can regenerate their tails, including all of the
associated tissues, such as the spinal cord, major blood vessels,
muscles and fin (Fig. 3A), from the early tailbud stages (Deuchar,
1975) through to pre-metamorphosis [Nieuwkoop and Faber stage
(NF) 53] (Fukazawa et al., 2009; Gaete et al., 2012; Love et al.,
2011a; Nieuwkoop and Faber, 1994). This ability is transiently lost
at the start of feeding in X. laevis (the ‘refractory period’; NF45-47)
(Beck et al., 2003). Regeneration encompasses three broad phases
NF1 
NF41
NF45
NF48
NF66 
NF10.5 
NF15 
Fertilisation
NF20
Pre-metamorphosis (NF45-54)
Start of feeding
Pro-metamorphosis (NF54-58)
NF55
Metamorphic climax
Juvenile frog
Tail resorption (NF62-65)
NF62
Organogenesis, tailbud extension
Neurulation
Gastrulation
Early development
NF54
NF53
NF52
NF50
NF49
NF58
NF57
NF56
NF65
Fig. 1. The key life stages of Xenopus.
Stages of Xenopus development as
illustrated by Nieuwkoop and Faber (1994).
Eggs are fertilised externally and embryos
begin to develop, undergoing gastrulation,
neurulation, organogenesis and tailbud
extension. They then hatch as larvae within
3-4 days (NF22-27), dependent on
temperature. After 5-7 days of development,
the larvae/tadpoles begin feeding (from
NF45 onwards). From NF48 onwards,
during a ‘pre-metamorphic’ phase, animals
develop limb buds, starting with the
hindlimbs, which form joints and digits during
metamorphosis. Metamorphosis ends with
resorption of the tail at NF62-66. Following
tail resorption, froglets become juveniles in
around 4-6 months and grow until they reach
sexual maturity by 6-18 months, depending
on sex and species.
2
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev180844. doi:10.1242/dev.180844
DEVELOPMENT

(Fig. 3B): (1) an initial wound closure and inflammatory response
phase at 0-1 days post-amputation (dpa); (2) the formation of a
blastema-like regenerative bud at 1-2 dpa; and (3) an outgrowth and
overt regeneration phase, starting from 2-3 dpa (Love et al., 2011a).
Although the newly formed tail does not regain the entirety of its
original tissue patterning, and exhibits differences in muscle,
vasculature and axonal organisation, the regenerated tail is fully
functional by 7 dpa (Deuchar, 1975; Love et al., 2011a).
A fundamental question in regenerative biology is what drives the
process of regeneration? When addressing this question, attention
has primarily focused on the ‘blastema’ – a group of mesenchymal
and proliferative cells located at the tip of regenerating tissues.
At the cellular level, the Xenopus tail blastema was initially
postulated to contain de- or trans-differentiating cells, based on
early experiments in urodeles (Brockes and Kumar, 2002; Echeverri
and Tanaka, 2002; Okada, 1980). However, grafting experiments in
the X. laevis tail showed that the regenerating muscle, spinal cord
and notochord are derived from their respective tissue lineages
without de- or trans-differentiation (Gargioli and Slack, 2004;
Ryffel et al., 2003). Thus, for a time, the regenerative structure was
termed a ‘regeneration bud’ to distinguish it from groups of de-
differentiated blastema cells containing pluripotent stem or
progenitor cells (Gargioli and Slack, 2004; Beck et al., 2006;
Love et al., 2011a). Subsequently, the presence of lineage-restricted
progenitors was also found during limb regeneration in axolotls
(Kragl et al., 2009) and digit regeneration in mice (Lehoczky et al.,
2011; Rinkevich et al., 2011), suggesting that the existence of
lineage-restricted progenitors may be a general property of
regenerative tissues. In the X. laevis tail, the regeneration bud is
now known to contain a number of lineage-restricted progenitors,
such as Sox2/3+ neural progenitor cells (NPCs) (Gaete et al., 2012)
and Pax7+ satellite cells (Chen et al., 2006).
Where studies of Xenopus appendage regeneration have been
particularly instrumental is in promoting our understanding of the
molecular
mechanisms
required
to
initiate
a
regenerative
programme. Early assessment of drivers of regeneration focused
on known developmental signalling pathways. These studies,
alongside more recent genome-wide approaches, confirmed that
developmental pathways, such as the Notch, bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP), Wnt, fibroblast growth factor (FGF), transforming
growth factor β (TGFβ) and sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathways,
become reactivated during tail regeneration (Aztekin et al., 2019;
Beck et al., 2003, 2006; Ho and Whitman, 2008; Lin and Slack,
2008; Lin et al., 2012; Taniguchi et al., 2014). Further studies have
also highlighted the importance of additional cellular mechanisms
and factors in tail regeneration, such as apoptosis (Tseng et al.,
2007) and the extracellular matrix (ECM) (Contreras et al., 2009).
Additionally,
a
subpopulation
of
epidermal
cells,
named
‘regeneration-organising cells’ (ROCs), have been reported to
migrate to the amputation edge and release signals that promote the
proliferation of the axial tissues (Aztekin et al., 2019). Using
genome-wide approaches to assess changes in the transcriptome
during the different phases of tail regeneration in X. tropicalis, two
previously unappreciated processes unfolded (Love et al., 2011a).
One was that the expression of many genes associated with
metabolism change during regeneration, suggesting a potential role
for metabolic reprogramming during regeneration (Love et al.,
2014). In addition, genes implicated in the production of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) were upregulated during regeneration.
A follow-up study revealed that tail regeneration is associated with
a sustained increase in ROS levels and that this is required for
Xenopus tail regeneration to proceed (Love et al., 2013). It has since
become apparent that sustained ROS production is a common feature
of tissue and appendage regeneration in both invertebrates and
vertebrates (Gauron et al., 2013; Khan et al., 2017; Pirotte et al., 2015;
Zhang et al., 2016), suggesting that a role for ROS in regeneration is
ancient and conserved. The current challenges are to ascertain how
ROS levels are regulated during regeneration and to identify the
downstream
targets
of
ROS
production
that
promote
cell
proliferation, growth factor signalling and metabolic reprogramming.
In addition to elevated ROS production, a requirement for
bioelectrical changes has been observed following tail amputation
in X. laevis. This includes the repolarisation of cellular membrane
potential (Vm) (Adams et al., 2007; Tseng et al., 2010), the transient
activation of a voltage-gated sodium channel, NaV1.2 (Tseng et al.,
2010), and the reversal of electric current densities (JI) driven by
changes in trans-epithelial potential (TEP) (Ferreira et al., 2016). In
addition, depletion of ROS in regeneration-competent animals
using the NADPH oxidase (Nox) inhibitor DPI impairs TEP and JI
dynamics, suggesting that bioelectrical signals are downstream of
ROS (Ferreira et al., 2018). An indirect link between extracellular
oxygen (O2) influx and ROS production has also been proposed
(Ferreira et al., 2018). Elevated O2 influx correlates with closure of
the wound epithelium and formation of the blastema; a similar
increase is also observed following skin wounding in mice,
suggesting this process is evolutionarily conserved (Ferreira et al.,
2018). This process also appears to be downstream of ROS, as DPI-
treated tadpoles show significant decreases in O2 influx. It should be
noted, however, that stabilization of a key mediator of hypoxia,
hypoxia-inducible factor α (Hif1α), is not sufficient to rescue
regeneration in DPI-treated tadpoles, even though Hif1α is itself
necessary and sufficient for tail regeneration, via modulation of JI
current reversal. This suggests that both ROS and Hif1α are
independently required for regeneration (Ferreira et al., 2018).
An interesting conundrum is how and why regenerative processes
change with age. The ability to study regenerative and non-
regenerative phases within the same species makes Xenopus a useful
model to tackle this question. Although the presence of a ‘refractory
period’ has not yet been documented in X. tropicalis, assessmentofthe
refractory period in NF45-47 X. laevis tadpoles has confirmed the
absence of some pro-regenerative mechanisms during the refractory
Primates
Rodents
Chicken
Xenopus
Salamanders
Lizard
Zebrafish
Urodele
Anuran
Fish
Amphibia
Mammalia
Aves
Reptilia
Regenerative capacity
Low
High
Medium
Fig. 2. Phylogenetic tree of taxons and common species used as models
of regeneration. Coloured dashed lines denote the general regenerative
capacity of each taxon, from high (green) to low (dark red). However, it should
be noted that this capacity might vary amongst species within the same taxon
(e.g. salamanders, teleost fish) and with age within the same species (e.g. fetal
versus adult in mammals, or tadpoles versus adults in Xenopus). Lines are not
to scale with regards to time.
3
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev180844. doi:10.1242/dev.180844
DEVELOPMENT

period. For example, it has been shown that ROS levels, Nav1.2
expression and TEP/JI dynamics are impaired during the refractory
stages in X. laevis tadpoles (Ferreira et al., 2018; Tseng et al., 2010),
confirming the importance of ROS production and changes in
bioelectrical dynamics for establishment of a full regenerative
programme. At the cellular level, ROCs fail to migrate to the
amputation site during the refractory stages (Aztekin et al., 2019),
although the reason for this is currently unknown. Studies of the
refractory period have also implicated the importance of inflammatory
processes
during
tail
regeneration.
In
regeneration-competent
X. tropicalis tadpoles, inflammatory cells are recruited to the wound
site over the first 6 h post-amputation (hpa) (Love et al., 2011a), in line
with genome-wide studies in Xenopus, which demonstrated an
enrichment of inflammation-associated genes during the early phase
of regeneration (Aztekin et al., 2019; Chang et al., 2017; Love et al.,
2011a). In the refractory period, however, inappropriate activation
of
the
immune
system
may
impair
tail
regeneration,
as
immunosuppression
improves
regeneration
in
these
animals
(Fukazawa et al., 2009). Contradicting this finding, the presence of
bacteria and the activation of complexes downstream of the NF-kB
Table 1. Regenerative capacity of tissue and appendages in Xenopus laevis and Xenopus tropicalis
Tissue/appendage
Xenopus laevis
Xenopus tropicalis
NF stage
Regeneration?
Reference(s)
NF stage
Regeneration?
Reference(s)
Tail
26-44; 48-50; 52-53
✓
(Beck et al., 2003; Deuchar,
1975; Fukazawa et al.,
2009; Gargioli and Slack,
2004)
41-47; 49-51
✓
(Love et al.,
2011a, 2013)
45-47
✗
(Beck et al., 2003)
<49; 51+
?
–
Hindlimb
48-50
?
–
52-53
✓
(Hayashi et al.,
2015)
51-55
✓(>60% of animals
regenerate 3-5
digits)
(Dent, 1962; Hayashi et al.,
2015; Muneoka et al.,
1986)
48-50; 54+
?
–
57; 59-60
↓
(Dent, 1962; Muneoka et al.,
1986)
Forelimb
66 (5 months old)
↓
(Géraudie et al., 1990)
All stages
?
–
Spinal cord (after tail
amputation)
40-44; 49-50
✓
(Gaete et al., 2012;
Taniguchi et al., 2008)
49-50
✓
(Love et al.,
2011a)
45-47
✗
(Beck et al., 2003)
<49; 51+
?
–
Spinal cord (after
spinal cord
transection)
50-54
✓
(Muñoz et al., 2015)
All stages
?
v
56-66
✗
(Muñoz et al., 2015)
Telencephalon
47-53
✓
(Endo et al., 2007)
All stages
?
–
66
✗
(Endo et al., 2007; Yoshino
and Tochinai, 2004)
Heart
57-58
✓
(Marshall et al., 2019)
<66
?
–
61-62 to froglet
✓✗
Frog (6 months old;
5 years old)
✗
(Marshall et al., 2017;
Marshall et al., 2019)
Frog (1 year old)
✓
(Liao et al.,
2017)
Eye (full removal)
27-47
✓
(Kha and Tseng, 2018)
All stages
?
–
Eye (partial
removal)
32-48
✓
(Ide et al., 1984; Wunsh and
Ide, 1990)
All stages
?
–
Retina
47-48; 51-54; 66
(3-9 months old)
✓
(Lee et al., 2013; Yoshii
et al., 2007)
66 (3-19 months
old; 7 years
old)
✓
(Miyake and
Araki, 2014)
<66
?
–
Lens
46-56
✓(although capacity
declines with age)
(Filoni et al., 1997;
Freeman, 1963)
50-54
✓
(Henry and
Elkins, 2001)
58; 66
✗
(Filoni et al., 1997;
Freeman, 1963)
>54
?
–
Optic nerve
54-58; 66
(<6 months,
1 year and
10 years old)
✓
(Gaze, 1959; Reier and de
Webster, 1974; Taylor
et al., 1989)
All stages
?
–
Jaw
All stages
?
–
66
✗
(Kurosaka
et al., 2008)
Bone (skull injury)
All stages
?
–
66
✓
(Muñoz et al.,
2018)
Skin (after full-
thickness wound)
66
✓
(Otsuka-Yamaguchi et al.,
2017; Yokoyama et al.,
2011)
All stages
?
–
Summary of the regenerative ability of X. laevis and X. tropicalis tissues at different stages of development, as classified by Nieuwkoop and Faber (NF; Nieuwkoop
and Faber, 1994). Symbols are used to represent the presence, to the authors’ knowledge, of peer-reviewed observations of regeneration as successful (✓),
unsuccessful (✗), a mixture of complete, incomplete and unsuccessful (✓✗) or lacking of peer-reviewed experimental data (?). ↓denotes the regeneration of a
hypomorphic spike (i.e. impaired regeneration). Where appropriate, specific experimental information is given. Note the exclusion of the intestine from this
summary as, although the intestine is used as a stem cell niche model, intestinal remodelling during metamorphosis is fundamentally a developmental process
rather than an injury-induced regenerative process.
4
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev180844. doi:10.1242/dev.180844
DEVELOPMENT

pathway have recently been suggested to promote regeneration in the
refractory period (Bishop and Beck, 2019 preprint). Further studies are
requiredto fullyelucidatetheinvolvementoftheimmunesystem,butit
is likely that tight regulation of the inflammatory response is required
for efficient tail regeneration.
Limb regeneration
Xenopus tadpoles can regenerate their hindlimbs at the pre-
metamorphic stages, especially during the early limb bud stages
(NF50-52), but regenerative capacity diminishes steadily as limb
development progresses (NF53 and onwards) (Keenan and Beck,
2016). In X. laevis, the number of digits formed at the completion of
regeneration decreases as development proceeds until only a
cartilaginous, hypomorphic spike is formed in pro- and post-
metamorphic animals (Dent, 1962; Goss and Holt, 1992). Owing to
its enclosed development, regeneration of the forelimb has only
been studied in post-metamorphic frogs, when amputation also
results in the regeneration of a hypomorphic spike (Endo et al.,
2000). Xenopus therefore offers several advantages as a model
system for investigating limb regeneration as one can study: (1) the
Melanophore
Notochord
Fin 
vasculature
Vasculature
Fin axon
Somite
Intersomitic 
artery
Motor neuron
Spinal cord
ROCs
A Structure of tail
B  Stages of tail regeneration
Wound closure and
 migration of ROCs
ROS production and 
bioelectric changes
ROS
O2 flux
0 6
24
48
72
TEP 
EF
JI
Blastema formation 
(6-48 hpa)
Regenerative outgrowth 
(2-6 dpa)
hpa
FGF
Wnt
Notch
Key
TGFβ
ROS
Hippo
TGFβ
Shh
ROS
BMP
TGFβ
V-ATPase
activity
BMP
FGF
Wnt
Notch
Wound healing and initiation
of regeneration (0-6 hpa)
Myofibre
p-Smad2+ p63+ cell
Lef1+p63+ ROC
p63+ epidermal cell
Lef1+ ROC
Axon
Inflammatory cell
Proliferating cell
Fig. 3. Tail regeneration. (A) The intact tadpole tail contains somitic muscle (orange), a notochord (light blue), vasculature (red) and epidermal cells, including the
recently identified re-organisation cells (ROCs, purple) and melanophores (black). The tail also contains a spinal cord (dark blue), from which axons exit through
spinal ganglia to innervate the fin. Motor neurons extend axons along the intersomitic boundaries. Regeneration of the tail can be studied following amputation,
which is commonly made at a position halfway to two-thirds of the way along the total tail length (shown here by a dotted line). (B) Key stages of regeneration of the
Xenopus tail are shown in bold. Injury induces wound healing and the initiation of regeneration (0-6 h post-amputation, hpa), which requires bioelectric changes
and the upregulation of signalling molecules (shown in inset), including reactive oxygen species (ROS) and transforming growth factor β (TGFβ). TGFβ signalling
is required for wound healing by p63+ epidermal cells. Lef1+ ROCs, which can also express p63, contribute to the wound epithelium and to the initiation of
regeneration. From 6-48 hpa, the blastema forms, containing proliferating cells and the regenerative structures of the spinal cord and notochord. From 2 dpa,
regenerative outgrowth begins, coinciding with innervation of the regenerate by neuronal axons from the rostral spinal cord and outgrowth of the spinal cord,
notochord and vasculature. Myofibres degenerate and are replaced with new myofibres, which originate from Pax7+ satellite cells (not shown). Melanophores
arise within the regenerate from melanophore precursors. Some of the key signalling pathways implicated in regeneration are shown alongside the regenerating
tail. EF, electric field; JI, electric current density; TEP, transepithelial potential.
5
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev180844. doi:10.1242/dev.180844
DEVELOPMENT

successful regeneration during early hindlimb development; (2) the
mechanism(s) responsible for progressive loss of regenerative
capacity of the limb; and (3) the mechanisms that promote
successful limb regeneration and patterning in the limb when
regeneration is normally limiting.
Differential expression of genes involved in tissue patterning,
inflammation, ECM composition and metabolism (Grow et al.,
2006; King et al., 2003; Mescher et al., 2013), and the expression of
developmental genes (e.g. fgf8, fgf10, msx1, sall4 and hoxa13)
(Christen and Slack, 1997; Endo et al., 2000; Neff et al., 2011;
Yokoyama et al., 2001) have all been reported during limb
regeneration.
Interestingly,
it
has
been
found
that
the
developmental
stage
of
the
limb
mesenchyme
determines
regenerative capacity far more than the developmental stage of the
overlying epidermis (Yokoyama et al., 2000). Recent re-assessment
of X. laevis limb development has led to the postulation that, like the
chick, Xenopus has specific regions within the mesenchyme (i.e. the
zone of polarizing activity; ZPA) and epidermis (i.e. the apical
epithelial ridge; AER) that direct anterior-posterior patterning
during development (Christen and Slack, 1997; Christen et al.,
1998; Endo et al., 1997; Yokoyama, 2007; for a review, see Keenan
and Beck, 2016). As development proceeds, the expression of ZPA
and AER markers (shh and fgf8, respectively) decreases, correlating
with the loss of regenerative capacity at ∼NF55-57 (Endo et al.,
1997; Wang and Beck, 2014). Chromatin immunoprecipitation has
also shown that histone modifications within the limb blastema are
unchanged compared with those in the developing NF52-53 limb
bud (Hayashi et al., 2015), suggesting that regenerative cells at this
stage of development seem to retain memory of what they were prior
to amputation. It is plausible that, as the mesenchyme differentiates
into subpopulations as the limb develops (Tschumi, 1957), these cells
are less able to acquire different identities following amputation,
leading to inappropriate tissue patterning. However, other work has
suggested distinct regeneration-specific mechanisms, including some
regeneration-specific genes (grem1 and hsp70) (Pearl et al., 2008)
and the differential involvement of micro-RNAs in regeneration-
competent limb buds and regeneration-incompetent limbs (Zhang
et al., 2018).
In the adult limb, studies have predominantly focused on
assessing treatments that may promote successful regeneration or
tissue patterning. This includes the modulation of bioelectricity
(Herrera-Rincon et al., 2018; Tseng and Levin, 2013), the
stimulation of regeneration with exogenous growth factors and
forced gene expression, or cell transplantation (Lin et al., 2013;
Wang et al., 2015). Although exogenous application of Fgf10 is
sufficient to stimulate X. laevis hindlimb regeneration (Yokoyama
et al., 2001), forced expression of Shh and Fgf10 is insufficient to
enhance forelimb regeneration (Lin et al., 2013). However,
regeneration of multiple digits can be stimulated by transplanting
larval limb cells with activated Wnt/β-catenin signalling, when
combined with a cocktail of Shh, Fgf10 and thymosin-β4 (Lin et al.,
2013). Interestingly, the survival of the transplanted grafts relies on
host thymectomy prior to metamorphosis, suggesting that immune
suppression is required for donor cell survival. However, given that
contralateral limbs −which were amputated, but not treated with the
cell transplant or growth factor cocktail −fail to regenerate, it is
clear that immune suppression alone is not sufficient to promote
regeneration in the adult forelimb. Although complex treatment was
required in this instance to stimulate regeneration, short-term
modulation of bioelectricity has shown similar levels of success. For
instance, chemical induction of sodium influx for 1 h is sufficient to
induce regeneration of toes and toenails at 45 dpa (Tseng and Levin,
2013), and 24-h treatment with a wearable progesterone-containing
bioreactor restores locomotor function to near-control levels by
7.5 months
post-amputation,
despite
the
animals
failing
to
regenerate an appropriately patterned limb (Herrera-Rincon et al.,
2018). Treated animals also display increased major blood vessel
vascularization, increased innervation and re-organisation of bone
patterning.
This
suggests that
short-term
treatment
aimed
at
modulating
bioelectricity
is
able
to
stimulate
a
long-term
regenerative programme, which can promote functional regeneration,
in spite of differences in morphology compared with intact
appendages. Intriguingly, bioelectrical changes following injury can
act over a long range, via a process termed bioelectric injury mirroring
(Busse et al., 2018). It would be interesting to assess whether longer-
term bioreactor treatment would induce improved patterning of the
regenerate.
Conserved mechanisms of appendage regeneration
Overall, Xenopus appendages have provided useful mechanistic
insights into the general properties of a core regenerative
programme and suggest that the blastema of both the tail and limb
are strikingly similar with regards to the production and pro-
regenerative nature of ROS and bioelectric gradients. A recent study
has also outlined a previously unknown role for melanocortin
signalling in the production of ROS in the regenerating limb bud,
showing that the application of melanocortin-stimulating hormone
rescues regeneration in denervated limbs (Zhang et al., 2018);
reduced ROS levels in denervated limbs further suggests a
possible role of nerve signalling in the production of ROS in the
blastema. Considering that both tail and limb regeneration are
nerve dependent (Cannata et al., 2001; Filoni and Paglialunga,
1990; Suzuki et al., 2005; Taniguchi et al., 2008), it would be
interesting to assess whether stimulation of the CNS is a general
source of ROS production in regenerating tissues. In the future, it
will be important to understand the differential regulation of
signalling pathways during development and regeneration, the
mechanism
underlying
the
relationship
between
ROS,
bioelectricity and nerve dependency, and the contribution of
cellular memory of cells in the blastema to regeneration
competency.
Regeneration of CNS tissues
The regenerative potential of the mammalian CNS is very limited.
As such, injuries to the brain or spinal cord commonly lead to
devastating consequences. This can include motor, sensory and
autonomic dysfunction, as well as the development of a chronic
inflammatory state (Allison and Ditor, 2015; Sun et al., 2016).
Research in mammalian models of CNS injury have focused on
improving the ability of axons to grow through the injury site, or
transplantation of exogenous stem cells, but these interventions
have only shown limited success (Anderson et al., 2018; Dias et al.,
2018; Jessberger, 2016). In X. laevis tadpoles, however, a crucial
feature of the regenerative process in the CNS appears to be the
ability to activate endogenous NPCs to proliferate and generate new
neurons (Fig. 4A) (Bernardini et al., 2010; Gaete et al., 2012;
Muñoz et al., 2015; Yoshino and Tochinai, 2004). Note that,
although we term these cells ‘NPCs’, they are sometimes described
in the literature as radial glia (RG) or ependymal cells (Chernoff
et al., 2018; Edwards-Faret et al., 2018; McKeown et al., 2013).
Brain regeneration
The X. laevis telencephalon and mesencephalon can regenerate up
to pre-metamorphic stages (NF47-54). Injury can be achieved by
6
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev180844. doi:10.1242/dev.180844
DEVELOPMENT

partial removal of the olfactory bulb and cerebrum (Yoshino and
Tochinai, 2004) or via vacuum aspiration of neurons in the optic
tectum (McKeown et al., 2013). Both injuries induce the
proliferation of NPCs and the generation of newborn neurons
(McKeown et al., 2013; Yoshino and Tochinai, 2004). In the
mesencephalon, recovery, as measured by visual avoidance
behaviour, is delayed by treatment with cell cycle inhibitors
hydroxyurea and aphidicolin (McKeown et al., 2013), showing that
proliferation is a key process required for functional regeneration.
Newborn neurons integrate into the regenerating tectal circuit;
integration and behavioural recovery is significantly enhanced at
24 h post-injury by visual stimulation (Gambrill et al., 2019),
B  Regeneration following amputation
0 dpa
3 dpa
+ Spinal cord
− Spinal cord
Identification of
mechanisms underlying
nerve dependency 
‘Source zone’
of regenerate
spinal cord
Shh
?
?
?
Persistent injury
Axonal growth
Closure of
central canal
Central canal reformed
0 dpt
2-20 dpt
40 dpt
2-10 dpt
20 dpt
NR
R
Proliferation of 
Sox2/3− cells
Transient proliferation
of Sox2/3+ cells (2 dpt)
Key
Deposition of 
ECM/fibrillary material
A  Regeneration following transection
Identification of pro-regenerative
stimuli, polarisation cues, 
tissue-tissue interactions 
Sox2/3− cell
Proliferating Sox2/3+ cell
Sox2/3+ cell
Spinal cord
Vasculature
Notochord
Muscle
Fig. 4. Spinal cord regeneration. (A) Spinal cord regeneration following spinal cord transection. The rostral spinal cord contains a ventricular zone (pink)
containing Sox2/3+ progenitor cells and neuronal cell bodies, and white matter (green) containing axonal tracts. In pre-metamorphosis regenerative stages (R),
the cut stumps close, Sox2/3+ cells transiently proliferate and axonal tracts bridge the cut tissue by 10 days post-transection (dpt). Cells migrate to reform the
central canal by 20 dpt. In non-regenerative (NR) stages, proliferation is predominantly observed in Sox2/3−cells outside of the spinal cord stumps. Fibrillary
material (blue) is observed within the transection gap by 20 dpt, and injury persists up to 40 dpt. (B) Spinal cord regeneration following tail amputation. The
regenerate spinal cord originates from cells rostral to the amputation site (blue). The injured spinal cord first forms a bulbous neural ampulla. This structure (shown
in inset) contains Sox2/3+ cells (red) that begin to proliferate (yellow) at 2-3 dpa, correlating with the onset of spinal cord outgrowth. Axons do not exit the
regenerate spinal cord; instead, axons from the rostral tail grow into the regenerate to innervate the new tail. This model can be used to identify the molecular
mechanisms required for epimorphic regeneration, and to assess interactions with other regenerating tissues. As an example, the notochord (light blue, shown in
inset) has previously been shown to express sonic hedgehog (Shh), which promotes proliferation of cells in the spinal cord. This model can also be used to study
nerve dependency, as without the spinal cord the tail does not regenerate. Dashed lines indicate amputation site.
7
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev180844. doi:10.1242/dev.180844
DEVELOPMENT

suggesting that experience-dependent plasticity can increase the rate
of regeneration. Complete regeneration of the olfactory bulb
following injury to the telencephalon requires reconnection to the
olfactory nerve, consistent with an activity-dependent regenerative
mechanism also in the telencephalon. However, the cerebrum can
regenerate independently of this connection, suggesting that this
may be a unique feature of sensory brain regions (Yoshino and
Tochinai, 2006).
Spinal cord regeneration
Like the brain, the Xenopus spinal cord can regenerate up to pre-
metamorphosis following tail amputation (Gaete et al., 2012;
Love et al., 2011a). An X. laevis transection model has also been
published (Gaete et al., 2012; Muñoz et al., 2015). In X. laevis,
both injuries induce the upregulation of Sox2/3 expression and the
proliferation of Sox2/3-positive cells (Gaete et al., 2012;
Muñoz et al., 2015). Spinal cord-specific manipulation of
Sox2
expression,
either
by
morpholino
oligonucleotide
knockdown or the expression of a dominant-negative form of
Sox2, prevents spinal cord regeneration (Gaete et al., 2012;
Muñoz et al., 2015). In non-regenerative (NR) post-metamorphic
froglets, Sox2/3 expression is very low in the intact spinal cord
and, although Sox2/3 expression increases upon transection, these
cells do not proliferate and the spinal cord does not recover its
integrity, leading to persistent paralysis (Fig. 4A) (Muñoz et al.,
2015). These studies suggest that, like in the brain, the
proliferation of NPCs is a key feature of successful spinal cord
regeneration.
The ability to use two different injury models to study spinal cord
regeneration is a key advantage of Xenopus. Whereas transection
requires the bridging of two stumps, tail amputation requires the
growth of multiple tissues in an organised fashion from a single
wound (Fig. 4B). Studying how each of these processes is controlled
enables researchers to address different questions. For example,
transection allows the study of a purely spinal injury and, as this can
be assessed in both regenerative (R) and NR stages, key factors that
promote successful regeneration in NR stages can be elucidated. For
instance,
regeneration
in
NR
stages
can
be
improved
by
transplanting dissociated spinal cord cells from R, but not NR,
animals (Méndez-Olivos et al., 2017). In this study, the grafted cells
were first treated with a cocktail of epidermal growth factor (EGF),
FGF2 and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) to aid survival,
before retention in a fibrinogen/thrombin matrix. Grafted Sox2/3+
cells from R animals self-organised into rosette-like structures and
proliferated, and by 60 days post-transection had differentiated into
neurons that projected axons into the host spinal cord. In turn, host
axons were also able to grow into the graft, suggesting that the
transplanted cells support a permissive environment for axonal
growth. By contrast, transplanted cells from an NR host in the same
paradigm are unable to survive, form rosette structures or
differentiate into neurons. This suggests an intrinsic cellular
difference between cells from R and NR stages, rather than a non-
permissive environment in the injured NR spinal cord. This study
also highlights the possibility of using transection in NR animals to
assess therapeutics that can promote the regeneration of host axons.
On the other hand, tail amputation allows one to study
mechanisms of nerve dependency, reparative organogenesis and
tissue-to-tissue interactions. For instance, it has been shown that
surgical removal of the spinal cord before amputation prevents the
tail from regenerating, in part due to impaired cell proliferation in
the notochord (Taniguchi et al., 2008). Conversely, it has been
reported that notochord-derived Shh promotes proliferation in the
spinal cord during tail regeneration (Taniguchi et al., 2014). These
examples highlight the importance of communication between
different tissues and cell types during epimorphic regeneration.
Furthermore, the requirement for neuronal innervation is a common
but poorly understood phenomenon of successful regeneration
(Boilly et al., 2017).
Optic nerve and retinal regeneration
Unlike the brain and spinal cord, the Xenopus optic nerve and retina
retain regenerative capacity throughout life. Interestingly, retinal
regeneration is achieved by a different cellular mechanism in
X. laevis compared with X. tropicalis. In adult X. laevis, precursors
of the ciliary marginal zone (CMZ) repopulate the injured retina
following partial removal; however, after full removal of the retina,
cells of the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE) transdifferentiate to
form the new neural retina (Yoshii et al., 2007). By contrast, in adult
X. tropicalis, cells of the CMZ rather than the RPE appear to
regenerate the retina following total removal (Miyake and Araki,
2014), similar to retina regeneration in zebrafish (Raymond et al.,
2006). Following on from research in non-mammalian vertebrates, a
population of retinal progenitors has recently been identified in the
developing mouse CMZ (Bélanger et al., 2017), although whether
these cells are retained in adulthood, and how they may respond to
injury, is unknown.
Unlike other tissues in the CNS, optic nerve regeneration
following crush is not predominantly due to the proliferation of
existing cells or new neurogenesis (Beaver et al., 2001). Instead, X.
laevis retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) are protected from death
following axonal injury, and these cells regrow their axons to
reconnect the retina to the optic tectum by 15 days post-crush (dpc)
(Gaze, 1959; Zhao and Szaro, 1994). Regeneration follows two key
phases: (1) inflammation and degeneration of injured axons up to
5 dpc; and (2) regeneration of RGC axons across the injury site from
5 dpc (Wilson et al., 1992; Zhao and Szaro, 1994). Translational
ribosomal
affinity
purification
has
been
used
to
assess
transcriptomic changes specifically in regenerating RGCs at 1, 3,
7 and 11 dpc (Whitworth et al., 2017). Interestingly, although
axonal growth-associated genes such as klf6 and gap43 are
upregulated, as well as responses to endoplasmic reticulum stress,
oxidative stress, hypoxia and inflammation, the majority of
differentially expressed genes are down regulated, including genes
involved
in
axonogenesis,
axonal
guidance
and
synaptic
communication. This suggests that regenerating RGCs switch
from a mature ‘neuronal’ gene expression profile to a programme
that prioritises cell survival (Whitworth et al., 2017).
In summary, Xenopus tadpoles use a range of different
mechanisms to regenerate their nervous system, from the activation
of tissue resident cells in the spinal cord to transdifferentiation in the
retina. Unlike mammals, the X. laevis optic nerve and retina can
regenerate throughout life. The ability to regenerate the brain and
spinal cord changes during the life cycle of Xenopus, from being near
perfect before metamorphosis (as in axolotl or zebrafish), to being
very limited after metamorphosis (as in mammals). This offers an
opportunity to assess experimentally the mechanisms underlying this
transition
within
the
same
species.
Indeed,
datasets
using
transcriptomic and proteomic approaches are starting to provide
clues relating to the differences in response to injury in R and NR
spinal cords (Gibbs et al., 2011; Lee-Liu et al., 2014, 2018), such as
upregulation of metabolism, cell cycle control genes and the immune
response in R, but not NR, stages. The challenge now isto identify the
important players that will allow us to promote regeneration in non-
regenerative animals such as mammals.
8
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev180844. doi:10.1242/dev.180844
DEVELOPMENT

Cardiac regeneration
Heart disease is the leading cause of death worldwide. It is therefore
understandable why so many organisms have been investigated for
their cardiac regenerative capacity, in the hope of applying lessons
learned from those organisms to advance regenerative approaches in
humans. Although cardiac regeneration work has largely been
dominated by studies in zebrafish and mice, heart regeneration has
also recently been evaluated in Xenopus (Marshall et al., 2017).
Heart regeneration in adult X. laevis frogs (>5 years old) is absent 1
year after endoscopy-based resection of the heart apex, which is
calculated to remove approximately 4% of cardiac tissue (Marshall
et al., 2017). In their study, the authors found evidence of persistent
fibrosis, cardiac hypertrophy and deterioration of cardiomyocyte
sarcomere structure, with no change in proliferation as evidenced
by mRNA expression of cell cycle-related genes (Fig. 5A). They
therefore concluded that the adult Xenopus heart responds
similarly to the mammalian adult heart following injury. By
contrast, a separate study (Liao et al., 2017) found that 12-month-
old X. tropicalis frogs are capable of near scar-free regeneration by
30-60 days following approximately 10% apical resection of the
heart (Liao et al., 2017) (Fig. 5B). There are notable differences in
methodologies
between
these
two
studies,
including
the
injury technique, the techniques used to assess proliferation,
and the age of the animals, all of which might influence
the observed regenerative outcomes (Liao et al., 2018; Marshall
et al., 2018).
Given that Xenopus is well known to exhibit a diminishing
regenerative capacity from larval to adult stages, a more detailed
follow-up study assessed heart regeneration in X. laevis across
different life stages, including metamorphic onset (NF57-58),
climax (NF61-62) and end (NF66), as well as a few weeks after
completion of metamorphosis (froglet) and in 6-month-old juvenile
7-14 dpa
1 mpa-3.3 ypa
Hypertrophy
Sarcomere
disorganisation
Proliferation
Persistent
fibrotic scarring
X. laevis
Juvenile/adult
B
A
LA
RA
X. laevis
NF57 tadpole
0-3 dpa
7-14 dpa
 14-90 dpa
 90-180 dpa
X. tropicalis
adult
0-1 mpa
 1-2 mpa
LA
RA
V
RA
LA
V
Fibrosis
Myocardial
wall closure
Proliferation of
cardiomyocytes
Regression of fibrosis
V
E
Fig. 5. Cardiac regeneration. (A) In 6-month-old juvenile and >5-year-old adult X. laevis frogs, heart regeneration is unsuccessful following apical resection
using either surgical scissors (in the case of juveniles) or endoscopy-based resection (E, in the case of adults). Amputation results in hypertrophy of
cardiomyocytes, with limited wound closure and fibrotic scarring from 1 month post-amputation (mpa) to 3.3 years post-amputation (ypa). (B) By contrast, heart
regeneration is successful in X. laevis tadpoles (NF57) and X. tropicalis adults (1 year old) following apical resection using surgical scissors. Amputation of the
ventricular apex (dashed line) leads to wound healing, cardiomyocyte proliferation (yellow nuclei) and deposition of connective tissue (fibrosis, pink), which
gradually reduces as regeneration continues until little to no scar is present. The time required for heart regeneration in the X. laevis tadpole (top time line;
dpa, days post-amputation) is longer than that required in the X. tropicalis adult (bottom timeline; mpa, months post-amputation).
9
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev180844. doi:10.1242/dev.180844
DEVELOPMENT

frogs (Marshall et al., 2019). Although cardiomyocyte proliferation
was investigated, as is often the focus in heart regeneration studies,
changes relating to the ECM were also studied. Specifically, it was
shown that whereas R animals (injured before metamorphosis) are
able to clear deposited fibronectin and collagen and successfully
complete
cardiac
regeneration,
NR
animals
(injured
after
metamorphosis) display persistent fibrotic scars and fail to
complete regeneration (Marshall et al., 2019). It therefore appears
that cardiac regeneration may be stage and species dependent.
However, it is unknown whether pro-metamorphic X. tropicalis
tadpoles display increased regenerative capacity relative to their
X. laevis cousins, or what mechanisms allow heart regeneration to
proceed better in adult X. tropicalis. Similar differences have been
observed between the teleost fish zebrafish and medaka (Lai et al.,
2017) and in surface-dwelling versus cave-living Mexican cavefish
(Stockdale et al., 2018).
But what might underlie the change in regenerative capacity as
metamorphosis proceeds? It is known that neonatal mice lose
cardiac regenerative capacity at around 1 week after birth (Porrello
et al., 2011), a time that is also associated with a peak in serum
thyroid hormone (TH) levels (Hadj-Sahraoui et al., 2000). It is also
notable that the regeneration of other Xenopus tissues is diminished
during and after TH-regulated metamorphosis (Beck et al., 2009).
This led Marshall and colleagues to ask whether TH levels or
availability
might
be
responsible
for
the
switch
between
regenerative and non-regenerative states in X. laevis. They showed
that both TH excess and deprivation in tadpoles impair fibrotic
clearance and reduce regeneration efficiency. This was associated
with increased fibrotic scar extent, a reduction in complete
myocardial wall closure, altered ECM gene expression, and
changes in the kinetics of tenacin-C deposition and elimination.
These observations suggest that ontogenic loss of regenerative
capacity is not simply due to increased TH levels, as both too little
and too much TH have negative impacts on regeneration. Two
plausible hypotheses for this exist: (1) that causing an animal to
develop too quickly (i.e. with excess TH) or stunting its development
(via TH deprivation) will have a knock-on effect on its ability to
regenerate, or (2) that the exact level and/or timing of TH availability
and function is key to maintaining a full regenerative response.
In summary, the regenerative capacity of its heart makes Xenopus
an attractive model for heart regeneration studies. In the future, we
expect Xenopus to be used more widely and in comparative studies
with the mouse model. This should reveal similarities and differences
with regard to permitting or inhibiting heart regeneration, findings
that will no doubt provide essential information that could aid
regenerative medicine approaches following heart injury in the clinic.
Conclusions and future perspectives
A major advantage of using Xenopus as a model species for
regeneration comes from the fact that it harbours life stages during
which it is regeneration competent and others when it is
regeneration incompetent. As these stages are experimentally
accessible, one can compare the key mechanisms that permit the
switch between regeneration competence and incompetence in the
same organism. Xenopus also provides an accessible testing ground
for
exploring
pre-clinical
interventions
that
may
enhance
regeneration in NR stages, prior to exploring related approaches in
other models that are poor at regenerating, such as mammals.
Of course, as with any model organism, Xenopus has its
limitations. In particular, the generation of transgenic and mutant
lines is time consuming, primarily because of the time required for
Xenopus to reach sexual maturity, which can range from 6 months to
over a year in X. tropicalis and X. laevis, respectively. In addition,
although Xenopus is becoming more widely used as a model
organism for regeneration studies, it is relatively new compared with
other models, and therefore regeneration research in Xenopus,
especially X. tropicalis, is largely in its infancy. Nonetheless, many
general principles of regeneration were first found in Xenopus,
including the lineage-restricted nature of blastemal stem/progenitor
cells, the reactivation of developmental signalling pathways during
regeneration, and the key role of ROS and bioelectricity for
successful regeneration outcomes.
An additional key advantage of Xenopus is that it is not only an
excellent model for regeneration, but also for developmental
studies. Hundreds of animals per fertilisation can be grown
cheaply and whole-animal or targeted manipulations can be easily
performed. This includes the ability to genetically modify only the
left or right side of an embryo, leaving a contralateral control side,
which is a unique advantage of Xenopus. We and others have also
shown remarkable parallels between the mechanisms underpinning
tissue regeneration and development. For example, sustained ROS
production is required both for appendage regeneration and for early
development (Han et al., 2018; Love et al., 2013). Xenopus provides
an excellent model to study the shared mechanisms, and any
interplay between them, that are responsible for both tissue
formation and regeneration.
Finally, despite the time required for the generation of transgenic
and mutant Xenopus lines, there is an ever-growing body of
methodologies and resources available for Xenopus, including
centralised information resources, and reagent and animal suppliers,
such as Xenbase, the National Xenopus Resource and the European
Xenopus Resource Centre, that facilitate access to transgenic and
mutant lines, but also where researchers can learn techniques and
tools especially relevant to Xenopus (Gilchrist et al., 2004; Grant
et al., 2015; James-Zorn et al., 2013; Pearl et al., 2012). For these
reasons, we anticipate that continued studies in X. laevis and
X. tropicalis will continue to provide important new insights
relevant to regenerative medicine for decades to come.
Acknowledgements
We apologise to authors whose work could not be included in this Primer owing to
space constraints.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Funding
L.S.P. is supported by a Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
Research Training Support Grant (BB/M011208/1). L.M. and E.A. are supported by
a grant from the British Heart Foundation Oxbridge Regenerative Medicine Centre
(RM/17/2/33380).
References
Adams, D. S., Masi, A. and Levin, M. (2007). H+ pump-dependent changes in
membrane voltage are an early mechanism necessary and sufficient to induce
Xenopus tail regeneration. Development 134, 1323-1335. doi:10.1242/dev.02812
Allison, D. J. and Ditor, D. S. (2015). Immune dysfunction and chronic inflammation
following spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord 53, 14-18. doi:10.1038/sc.2014.184
Amaya, E. (2005). Xenomics. Genome Res. 15, 1683-1691. doi:10.1101/gr.
3801805
Amaya, E., Offield, M. F. and Grainger, R. M. (1998). Frog genetics: Xenopus
tropicalis jumps into the future. Trends Genet. 14, 253-255. doi:10.1016/S0168-
9525(98)01506-6
Anderson, M. A., O’Shea, T. M., Burda, J. E., Ao, Y., Barlatey, S. L., Bernstein,
A. M., Kim, J. H., James, N. D., Rogers, A., Kato, B. et al. (2018). Required
growth facilitators propel axon regeneration across complete spinal cord injury.
Nature 561, 396-400. doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0467-6
10
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev180844. doi:10.1242/dev.180844
DEVELOPMENT

Aztekin, C., Hiscock, T. W., Marioni, J. C., Gurdon, J. B., Simons, B. D. and
Jullien, J. (2019). Identification of a regeneration-organizing cell in the Xenopus
tail. Science 364, 653-658. doi:10.1126/science.aav9996
Beaver, R. S., Dunlop, S. A., Harman, A. M., Stirling, R. V., Easter, S. S., Roberts,
J. D. and Beazley, L. D. (2001). Continued neurogenesis is not a pre-requisite for
regeneration of a topographic retino-tectal projection. Vision Res. 41, 1765-1770.
doi:10.1016/S0042-6989(01)00053-0
Beck, C. W., Christen, B. and Slack, J. M. W. (2003). Molecular pathways needed
for regeneration of spinal cord and muscle in a vertebrate. Dev. Cell 5, 429-439.
doi:10.1016/S1534-5807(03)00233-8
Beck, C. W., Christen, B., Barker, D. and Slack, J. M. W. (2006). Temporal
requirement for bone morphogenetic proteins in regeneration of the tail and limb of
Xenopus tadpoles. Mech. Dev. 123, 674-688. doi:10.1016/j.mod.2006.07.001
Beck, C. W., Izpisúa Belmonte, J. C. and Christen, B. (2009). Beyond early
development: Xenopus as an emerging model for the study of regenerative
mechanisms. Dev. Dyn. 238, 1226-1248. doi:10.1002/dvdy.21890
Bernardini, S., Gargioli, C., Cannata, S. M. and Filoni, S. (2010). Neurogenesis
during optic tectum regeneration in Xenopus laevis. Dev. Growth Differ. 52,
365-376. doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.2010.01176.x
Bernstein, D. R. and Stelzner, D. J. (1983). Plasticity of the corticospinal tract
following midthoracic spinal injury in the postnatal rat. J. Comp. Neurol. 221,
382-400. doi:10.1002/cne.902210403
Bélanger, M.-C., Robert, B. and Cayouette, M. (2017). Msx1-positive progenitors
in the retinal ciliary margin give rise to both neural and non-neural progenies in
mammals. Dev. Cell 40, 137-150. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2016.11.020
Bishop, T. F. and Beck, C. W. (2019). Bacteria are required for regeneration of the
Xenopus tadpole tail. bioRxiv 12, 319939. doi:10.1101/319939
Blitz, I. L., Biesinger, J., Xie, X. and Cho, K. W. Y. (2013). Biallelic genome
modification in F0 Xenopus tropicalis embryos using the CRISPR/Cas system.
Genesis 51, 827-834. doi:10.1002/dvg.22719
Boilly, B., Faulkner, S., Jobling, P. and Hondermarck, H. (2017). Nerve
dependence: from regeneration to cancer. Cancer Cell 31, 342-354. doi:10.
1016/j.ccell.2017.02.005
Boulland, J.-L., Lambert, F. M., Zü chner, M., Strö m, S. and Glover, J. C. (2013).
A neonatal mouse spinal cord injury model for assessing post-injury adaptive
plasticity and human stem cell integration. PLoS ONE 8, e71701. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0071701
Brockes, J. P. and Kumar, A. (2002). Plasticity and reprogramming of differentiated
cells in amphibian regeneration. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3, 566-574. doi:10.1038/
nrm881
Busse, S. M., McMillen, P. T. and Levin, M. (2018). Cross-limb communication
during Xenopus hindlimb regenerative response: non-local bioelectric injury
signals. Development 145, dev164210. doi:10.1242/dev.164210
Cannata, S. M., Bagni, C., Bernardini, S., Christen, B. and Filoni, S. (2001).
Nerve-independence of limb regeneration in larval Xenopus laevis is correlated to
the level of fgf-2 mRNA expression in limb tissues. Dev. Biol. 231, 436-446. doi:10.
1006/dbio.2001.0161
Chang, J., Baker, J. and Wills, A. (2017). Transcriptional dynamics of tail
regeneration in Xenopus tropicalis. Genesis 55, e23015. doi:10.1002/dvg.23015
Chen, D. F., Schneider, G. E., Martinou, J.-C. and Tonegawa, S. (1997). Bcl-2
promotes regeneration of severed axons in mammalian CNS. Nature 385,
434-439. doi:10.1038/385434a0
Chen, Y., Lin, G. and Slack, J. M. W. (2006). Control of muscle regeneration in the
Xenopus tadpole tail by Pax7. Development 133, 2303-2313. doi:10.1242/dev.
02397
Chernoff, E. A. G., Sato, K., Salfity, H. V. N., Sarria, D. A. and Belecky-Adams, T.
(2018). Musashi and plasticity of Xenopus and axolotl spinal cord ependymal
cells. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 12, 45. doi:10.3389/fncel.2018.00045
Christen, B. and Slack, J. M. W. (1997). FGF-8Is associated with anteroposterior
patterning and limb regeneration in Xenopus. Dev. Biol. 192, 455-466. doi:10.
1006/dbio.1997.8732
Christen, B., Christen, B., Slack, J. and Slack, J. M. W. (1998). All limbs are not
the same. Nature 395, 230-231. doi:10.1038/26133
Contreras, E. G., Gaete, M., Sánchez, N., Carrasco, H. and Larraı́n, J. (2009).
Early requirement of Hyaluronan for tail regeneration in Xenopus tadpoles.
Development 136, 2987-2996. doi:10.1242/dev.035501
Dent, J. N. (1962). Limb regeneration in larvae and metamorphosing individuals of
the South African clawed toad. J. Morphol. 110, 61-77. doi:10.1002/jmor.
1051100105
Deuchar, E. M. (1975). Regeneration of the tail bud in Xenopus embryos. J. Exp.
Zool. 192, 381-389. doi:10.1002/jez.1401920311
Dias, D. O., Kim, H., Holl, D., Werne Solnestam, B., Lundeberg, J., Carlén, M.,
Gö ritz, C. and Frisén, J. (2018). Reducing pericyte-derived scarring promotes
recovery after spinal cord injury. Cell 173, 153-165.e22. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.
02.004
Dinsmore, C. E. (1991). Lazzaro Spallanzani: concepts of generation and
regeneration. In A History of Regeneration Research: Milestones in the
Evolution of a Science (ed. C. E. Dinsmore), pp. 67-90. Cambridge University
Press.
Echeverri, K. and Tanaka, E. M. (2002). Ectoderm to mesoderm lineage switching
during axolotl tail regeneration. Science 298, 1993-1996. doi:10.1126/science.
1077804
Edwards-Faret, G., Cebrián-Silla, A., Méndez-Olivos, E. E., González-Pinto, K.,
Garcı́a-Verdugo, J. M. and Larraı́n, J. (2018). Cellular composition and
organization of the spinal cord central canal during metamorphosis of the frog
Xenopus laevis. J. Comp. Neurol. 526, 1712-1732. doi:10.1002/cne.24441
Endo, T., Yokoyama, H., Tamura, K. and Ide, H. (1997). Shh expression in
developing and regenerating limb buds of Xenopus laevis. Dev. Dyn. 209, 227-232.
doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-0177(199706)209:2<227::AID-AJA8>3.0.CO;2-K
Endo, T., Tamura, K. and Ide, H. (2000). Analysis of gene expressions during
Xenopus forelimb regeneration. Dev. Biol. 220, 296-306. doi:10.1006/dbio.2000.
9641
Endo, T., Yoshino, J., Kado, K. and Tochinai, S. (2007). Brain regeneration in
anuran amphibians. Dev. Growth Differ. 49, 121-129. doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.
2007.00914.x
Evans, B. J., Kelley, D. B., Tinsley, R. C., Melnick, D. J. and Cannatella, D. C.
(2004). A mitochondrial DNA phylogeny of African clawed frogs: phylogeography
and implications for polyploid evolution. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 33, 197-213.
doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2004.04.018
Ferreira, F., Luxardi, G., Reid, B. and Zhao, M. (2016). Early bioelectric activities
mediate redox-modulated regeneration. Development 143, 4582-4594. doi:10.
1242/dev.142034
Ferreira, F., Raghunathan, V., Luxardi, G., Zhu, K. and Zhao, M. (2018). Early
redox activities modulate Xenopus tail regeneration. Nat. Commun. 9, 4296.
doi:10.1038/s41467-018-06614-2
Filoni, S. and Paglialunga, L. (1990). Effect of denervation on hindlimb
regeneration in Xenopus laevis larvae. Differentiation 43, 10-19. doi:10.1111/j.
1432-0436.1990.tb00425.x
Filoni, S., Bernardini, S., Cannata, S. M. and D’Alessio, A. (1997). Lens
regeneration in larval Xenopus laevis: experimental analysis of the decline in the
regenerative capacity during development. Dev. Biol. 187, 13-24. doi:10.1006/
dbio.1997.8598
Freeman, G. (1963). Lens regeneration from the cornea in Xenopus laevis. J. Exp.
Zool. 154, 39-65. doi:10.1002/jez.1401540105
Fukazawa, T., Naora, Y., Kunieda, T. and Kubo, T. (2009). Suppression of the
immune response potentiates tadpole tail regeneration during the refractory
period. Development 136, 2323-2327. doi:10.1242/dev.033985
Gaete, M., Muñoz, R., Sánchez, N., Tampe, R., Moreno, M., Contreras, E. G.,
Lee-Liu, D. and Larraı́n, J. (2012). Spinal cord regeneration in Xenopus tadpoles
proceeds through activation of Sox2-positive cells. Neural Dev. 7, 13. doi:10.1186/
1749-8104-7-13
Gaillard, A., Prestoz, L., Dumartin, B., Cantereau, A., Morel, F., Roger, M. and
Jaber, M. (2007). Reestablishment of damaged adult motor pathways by grafted
embryonic cortical neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1294-1299. doi:10.1038/nn1970
Gambrill, A. C., Faulkner, R. L., McKeown, C. R. and Cline, H. T. (2019).
Enhanced visual experience rehabilitates the injured brain in Xenopus tadpoles in
an NMDAR-dependent manner. J. Neurophysiol. 121, 306-320. doi:10.1152/jn.
00664.2018
Gargioli, C. and Slack, J. M. W. (2004). Cell lineage tracing during Xenopus tail
regeneration. Development 131, 2669-2679. doi:10.1242/dev.01155
Gauron, C., Rampon, C., Bouzaffour, M., Ipendey, E., Teillon, J., Volovitch, M.
and Vriz, S. (2013). Sustained production of ROS triggers compensatory
proliferation and is required for regeneration to proceed. Sci. Rep. 3, 2084.
doi:10.1038/srep02084
Gaze, R. M. (1959). Regeneration of the optic nerve in Xenopus laevis. Q. J. Exp.
Physiol. Cogn. Med. Sci. 44, 290-308. doi:10.1113/expphysiol.1959.sp001402
Géraudie, J., Hourdry, J., Vriz, S., Singer, M. and Méchali, M. (1990). Enhanced
c-myc gene expression during forelimb regenerative outgrowth in the young
Xenopus laevis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 87, 3797-3801. doi:10.1073/pnas.87.
10.3797
Gibbs, K. M., Chittur, S. V. and Szaro, B. G. (2011). Metamorphosis and the
regenerative capacity of spinal cord axons in Xenopus laevis. Eur. J. Neurosci. 33,
9-25. doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07477.x
Gilchrist, M. J., Zorn, A. M., Voigt, J., Smith, J. C., Papalopulu, N. and Amaya, E.
(2004). Defining a large set of full-length clones from a Xenopus tropicalis EST
project. Dev. Biol. 271, 498-516. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.04.023
Goss, R. J. and Holt, R. (1992). Epimorphic vs. tissue regeneration in Xenopus
forelimbs. J. Exp. Zool. 261, 451-457. doi:10.1002/jez.1402610412
Grant, I. M., Balcha, D., Hao, T., Shen, Y., Trivedi, P., Patrushev, I., Fortriede,
J. D., Karpinka, J. B., Liu, L., Zorn, A. M. et al. (2015). The Xenopus ORFeome:
a resource that enables functional genomics. Dev. Biol. 408, 345-357. doi:10.
1016/j.ydbio.2015.09.004
Grow, M., Neff, A. W., Mescher, A. L. and King, M. W. (2006). Global analysis of
gene expression in Xenopus hindlimbs during stage-dependent complete and
incomplete regeneration. Dev. Dyn. 235, 2667-2685. doi:10.1002/dvdy.20897
Gurdon, J. B. and Hopwood, N. (2000). The introduction of Xenopus laevis into
developmental biology: of empire, pregnancy testing and ribosomal genes.
Int. J. Dev. Biol. 44, 43-50.
11
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev180844. doi:10.1242/dev.180844
DEVELOPMENT

Hadj-Sahraoui, N., Seugnet, I., Ghorbel, M. T. and Demeneix, B. (2000).
Hypothyroidism prolongs mitotic activity in the post-natal mouse brain. Neurosci.
Lett. 280, 79-82. doi:10.1016/S0304-3940(00)00768-0
Han, Y., Ishibashi, S., Iglesias-Gonzalez, J., Chen, Y., Love, N. R. and Amaya, E.
(2018). Ca2+-induced mitochondrial ROS regulate the early embryonic cell cycle.
Cell Rep. 22, 218-231. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2017.12.042
Hartley, K. O., Nutt, S. L. and Amaya, E. (2002). Targeted gene expression in
transgenic Xenopus using the binary Gal4-UAS system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 99, 1377-1382. doi:10.1073/pnas.022646899
Hayashi, S., Kawaguchi, A., Uchiyama, I., Kawasumi-Kita, A., Kobayashi, T.,
Nishide, H., Tsutsumi, R., Tsuru, K., Inoue, T., Ogino, H. et al. (2015).
Epigenetic modification maintains intrinsic limb-cell identity in Xenopus limb bud
regeneration. Dev. Biol. 406, 271-282. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.08.013
Hellsten, U., Harland, R. M., Gilchrist, M. J., Hendrix, D., Jurka, J., Kapitonov, V.,
Ovcharenko, I., Putnam, N. H., Shu, S., Taher, L. et al. (2010). The genome of
the Western clawed frog Xenopus tropicalis. Science 328, 633-636. doi:10.1126/
science.1183670
Henry, J. J. and Elkins, M. B. (2001). Cornea-lens transdifferentiation in the anuran,
Xenopus tropicalis. Dev. Genes Evol. 211, 377-387. doi:10.1007/s004270100163
Herrera-Rincon, C., Golding, A. S., Moran, K. M., Harrison, C., Martyniuk, C. J.,
Guay, J. A., Zaltsman, J., Carabello, H., Kaplan, D. L. and Levin, M. (2018).
Brief local application of progesterone via a wearable bioreactor induces long-term
regenerative response in adult Xenopus Hindlimb. Cell Rep. 25, 1593-1609.e7.
doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.10.010
Ho, D. M. and Whitman, M. (2008). TGF-β signaling is required for multiple
processes during Xenopus tail regeneration. Dev. Biol. 315, 203-216. doi:10.
1016/j.ydbio.2007.12.031
Ide, C. F., Reynolds, P. and Tompkins, R. (1984). Two healing patterns correlate
with different adult neural connectivity patterns in regenerating embryonic
Xenopus retina. J. Exp. Zool. 230, 71-80. doi:10.1002/jez.1402300110
Ishibashi, S., Cliffe, R. and Amaya, E. (2012). Highly efficient bi-allelic mutation
rates using TALENs in Xenopus tropicalis. Biol. Open 1, 1273-1276. doi:10.1242/
bio.20123228
Ishibashi, S., Saldanha, F. Y. L. and Amaya, E. (2017). Xenopus as a model
organism for biomedical research. In Basic Science Methods for Clinical
Researchers (ed. M. Jalali, F. Y. L. Saldanha and M. Jalali), pp. 263-290.
Academic Press.
James-Zorn, C., Ponferrada, V. G., Jarabek, C. J., Burns, K. A., Segerdell, E. J.,
Lee, J., Snyder, K., Bhattacharyya, B., Karpinka, J. B., Fortriede, J. et al.
(2013). Xenbase: expansion and updates of the Xenopus model organism
database. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D865-D870. doi:10.1093/nar/gks1025
Jessberger, S. (2016). Stem cell-mediated regeneration of the adult brain. Transfus
Med. Hemother. 43, 321-326. doi:10.1159/000447646
Joven, A., Elewa, A. and Simon, A. (2019). Model systems for regeneration:
salamanders. Development 146, dev167700. doi:10.1242/dev.167700
Karl, M. O. and Reh, T. A. (2010). Regenerative medicine for retinal diseases:
activating endogenous repair mechanisms. Trends Mol. Med. 16, 193-202. doi:10.
1016/j.molmed.2010.02.003
Keenan, S. R. and Beck, C. W. (2016). Xenopus Limb bud morphogenesis. Dev.
Dyn. 245, 233-243. doi:10.1002/dvdy.24351
Kha, C. X. and Tseng, K. A.-S. (2018). Developmental dependence for functional
eye regrowth in Xenopus laevis. Neural Regen. Res. 13, 1735-1737. doi:10.4103/
1673-5374.238611
Khan, S. J., Abidi, S. N. F., Skinner, A., Tian, Y. and Smith-Bolton, R. K. (2017).
The Drosophila Duox maturation factor is a key component of a positive feedback
loop that sustains regeneration signaling. PLoS Genet. 13, e1006937. doi:10.
1371/journal.pgen.1006937
Khokha, M. K., Chung, C., Bustamante, E. L., Gaw, L. W. K., Trott, K. A., Yeh, J.,
Lim, N., Lin, J. C. Y., Taverner, N., Amaya, E. et al. (2002). Techniques and
probes for the study of Xenopus tropicalis development. Dev. Dyn. 225, 499-510.
doi:10.1002/dvdy.10184
King, M. W., Nguyen, T., Calley, J., Harty, M. W., Muzinich, M. C., Mescher, A. L.,
Chalfant, C., N’Cho, M., McLeaster, K., McEntire, J. et al. (2003). Identification
of genes expressed during Xenopus laevis limb regeneration by using subtractive
hybridization. Dev. Dyn. 226, 398-409. doi:10.1002/dvdy.10250
Kragl, M., Knapp, D., Nacu, E., Khattak, S., Maden, M., Epperlein, H. H. and
Tanaka, E. M. (2009). Cells keep a memory of their tissue origin during axolotl
limb regeneration. Nature 460, 60-65. doi:10.1038/nature08152
Kroll, K. L. and Amaya, E. (1996). Transgenic Xenopus embryos from sperm
nuclear transplantations reveal FGF signaling requirements during gastrulation.
Development 122, 3173-3183.
Kurosaka, H., Takano-Yamamoto, T., Yamashiro, T. and Agata, K. (2008).
Comparison of molecular and cellular events during lower jaw regeneration of
newt (Cynops pyrrhogaster) and West African clawed frog (Xenopus tropicalis).
Dev. Dyn. 237, 354-365. doi:10.1002/dvdy.21419
Lai, S.-L., Marı́n-Juez, R., Moura, P. L., Kuenne, C., Lai, J. K. H., Tsedeke, A. T.,
Guenther, S., Looso, M. and Stainier, D. Y. (2017). Reciprocal analyses in
zebrafish and medaka reveal that harnessing the immune response promotes
cardiac regeneration. eLife 6, 1382. doi:10.7554/eLife.25605
Lee, D. C., Hamm, L. M. and Moritz, O. L. (2013). Xenopus laevis tadpoles can
regenerate neural retina lost after physical excision but cannot regenerate
photoreceptors lost through targeted ablation. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 54,
1859-1867. doi:10.1167/iovs.12-10953
Lee-Liu, D., Moreno, M., Almonacid, L. I., Tapia, V. S., Muñoz, R., von Marées, J.,
Gaete, M., Melo, F. and Larraı́n, J. (2014). Genome-wide expression profile of
the response to spinal cord injury in Xenopus laevis reveals extensive differences
between regenerative and non-regenerative stages. Neural Dev. 9, 12. doi:10.
1186/1749-8104-9-12
Lee-Liu, D., Sun, L., Dovichi, N. J. and Larraı́n, J. (2018). Quantitative proteomics after
Spinal Cord Injury (SCI) in a regenerative and a nonregenerative stage in the frog
Xenopus laevis. Mol. Cell Proteomics 17, 592-606. doi:10.1074/mcp.RA117.000215
Lehoczky, J. A., Robert, B. and Tabin, C. J. (2011). Mouse digit tip regeneration is
mediated by fate-restricted progenitor cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108,
20609-20614. doi:10.1073/pnas.1118017108
Liao, S., Dong, W., Lv, L., Guo, H., Yang, J., Zhao, H., Huang, R., Yuan, Z., Chen,
Y., Feng, S. et al. (2017). Heart regeneration in adult Xenopus tropicalis after
apical resection. Cell Biosci. 7, 1-16. doi:10.1186/s13578-017-0199-6
Liao, S., Dong, W., Zhao, H., Huang, R., Qi, X. and Cai, D. (2018). Cardiac
regeneration in Xenopus tropicalis and Xenopus laevis: discrepancies and
problems. Cell Biosci. 8, 32-33. doi:10.1186/s13578-018-0230-6
Lin, G. and Slack, J. M. W. (2008). Requirement for Wnt and FGF signaling in
Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration. Dev. Biol. 316, 323-335. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.
2008.01.032
Lin, G., Chen, Y. and Slack, J. M. W. (2012). Transgenic analysis of signaling
pathways required for Xenopus tadpole spinal cord and muscle regeneration.
Anat. Rec. 295, 1532-1540. doi:10.1002/ar.22437
Lin, G., Chen, Y. and Slack, J. M. W. (2013). Imparting regenerative capacity to
limbs by progenitor cell transplantation. Dev. Cell 24, 41-51. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.
2012.11.017
Love, N. R., Chen, Y., Bonev, B., Gilchrist, M. J., Fairclough, L., Lea, R., Mohun,
T. J., Paredes, R., Zeef, L. A. H. and Amaya, E. (2011a). Genome-wide analysis
of gene expression during Xenopus tropicalis tadpole tail regeneration. BMC Dev.
Biol. 11, 70. doi:10.1186/1471-213X-11-70
Love, N. R., Thuret, R., Chen, Y., Ishibashi, S., Sabherwal, N., Paredes, R.,
Alves-Silva, J., Dorey, K., Noble, A. M., Guille, M. J. et al. (2011b).
pTransgenesis: a cross-species, modular transgenesis resource. Development
138, 5451-5458. doi:10.1242/dev.066498
Love, N. R., Chen, Y., Ishibashi, S., Kritsiligkou, P., Lea, R., Koh, Y., Gallop, J. L.,
Dorey, K. and Amaya, E. (2013). Amputation-induced reactive oxygen species
are required for successful Xenopus tadpole tail regeneration. Nat. Cell Biol. 15,
222-228. doi:10.1038/ncb2659
Love, N. R., Ziegler, M., Chen, Y. and Amaya, E. (2014). Carbohydrate metabolism
during vertebrate appendage regeneration: what is its role? How is it regulated? A
postulation that regenerating vertebrate appendages facilitate glycolytic and
pentose phosphate pathways to fuel macromolecule biosynthesis. BioEssays 36,
27-33. doi:10.1002/bies.201300110
Marshall, L., Vivien, C., Girardot, F., Péricard, L., Demeneix, B. A., Coen, L. and
Chai, N. (2017). Persistent fibrosis, hypertrophy and sarcomere disorganisation
after endoscopy-guided heart resection in adult Xenopus. PLoS ONE 12,
e0173418. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0173418
Marshall, L., Girardot, F., Demeneix, B. A. and Coen, L. (2018). Is adult cardiac
regeneration absent in Xenopus laevis yet present in Xenopus tropicalis? Cell
Biosci. 8, 31-34. doi:10.1186/s13578-018-0231-5
Marshall, L. N., Vivien, C. J., Girardot, F., Péricard, L., Scerbo, P., Palmier, K.,
Demeneix, B. A. and Coen, L. (2019). Stage-dependent cardiac regeneration in
Xenopus is regulated by thyroid hormone availability. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
116, 3614-3623. doi:10.1073/pnas.1803794116
McKeown, C. R., Sharma, P., Sharipov, H. E., Shen, W. and Cline, H. T. (2013).
Neurogenesis is required for behavioral recovery after injury in the visual system of
Xenopus laevis. J. Comp. Neurol. 521, 2262-2278. doi:10.1002/cne.23283
Méndez-Olivos, E. E., Muñoz, R. and Larraı́n, J. (2017). Spinal cord cells from pre-
metamorphic stages differentiate into neurons and promote axon growth and
regeneration after transplantation into the injured spinal cord of non-regenerative
Xenopus laevis froglets. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 11, 398. doi:10.3389/fncel.2017.
00398
Mescher, A. L., Neff, A. W. and King, M. W. (2013). Changes in the inflammatory
response to injury and its resolution during the loss of regenerative capacity in
developing Xenopus limbs. PLoS ONE 8, e80477. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0080477
Miyake, A. and Araki, M. (2014). Retinal stem/progenitor cells in the ciliary marginal
zone complete retinal regeneration: a study of retinal regeneration in a novel
animal model. Dev. Neurobiol. 74, 739-756. doi:10.1002/dneu.22169
Muneoka, K., Holler-Dinsmore, G. and Bryant, S. V. (1986). Intrinsic control of
regenerative loss in Xenopus laevis limbs. J. Exp. Zool. 240, 47-54. doi:10.1002/
jez.1402400107
Muñoz, R., Edwards-Faret, G., Moreno, M., Zuñiga, N., Cline, H. and Larraı́n, J.
(2015). Regeneration of Xenopus laevis spinal cord requires Sox2/3 expressing
cells. Dev. Biol. 408, 229-243. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.03.009
12
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev180844. doi:10.1242/dev.180844
DEVELOPMENT

Muñoz, D., Castillo, H., Henrı́quez, J. P. and Marcellini, S. (2018). Bone
regeneration after traumatic skull injury in Xenopus tropicalis. Mech. Dev. 154,
153-161. doi:10.1016/j.mod.2018.06.007
Neff, A. W., King, M. W. and Mescher, A. L. (2011). Dedifferentiation and the role of
sall4 in reprogramming and patterning during amphibian limb regeneration. Dev.
Dyn. 240, 979-989. doi:10.1002/dvdy.22554
Nieuwkoop, P. D. and Faber, J. (1994). Normal table of Xenopus laevis (Daudin). A
Systematical and Chronological Survey of the Development from the Fertilized
egg till the end of Metamorphosis. New York: Garland Publishing, Inc.
Ogino, H., McConnell, W. B. and Grainger, R. M. (2006). Highly efficient
transgenesis in Xenopus tropicalis using I-SceI meganuclease. Mech. Dev. 123,
103-113. doi:10.1016/j.mod.2005.11.006
Okada, T. S. (1980). Cellular metaplasia or transdifferentiation as a model for retinal
cell differentiation. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 16, 349-380. doi:10.1016/S0070-
2153(08)60162-3
Otsuka-Yamaguchi, R., Kawasumi-Kita, A., Kudo, N., Izutsu, Y., Tamura, K. and
Yokoyama, H. (2017). Cells from subcutaneous tissues contribute to scarless
skin regeneration in Xenopus laevis froglets. Dev. Dyn. 246, 585-597. doi:10.
1002/dvdy.24520
Pearl, E. J., Barker, D., Day, R. C. and Beck, C. W. (2008). Identification of genes
associated with regenerative success of Xenopus laevis hindlimbs. BMC Dev.
Biol. 8, 66-15. doi:10.1186/1471-213X-8-66
Pearl, E. J., Grainger, R. M., Guille, M. and Horb, M. E. (2012). Development of
Xenopus resource centers: the National Xenopus Resource and the European
Xenopus Resource Center. Genesis 50, 155-163. doi:10.1002/dvg.22013
Pirotte, N., Stevens, A.-S., Fraguas, S., Plusquin, M., Van Roten, A., Van
Belleghem, F., Paesen, R., Ameloot, M., Cebrià, F., Artois, T. et al. (2015).
Reactive oxygen species in planarian regeneration: an upstream necessity for
correct patterning and brain formation. Oxid. Med. Cell Longev. 2015, 392476-19.
doi:10.1155/2015/392476
Porrello, E. R., Mahmoud, A. I., Simpson, E., Hill, J. A., Richardson, J. A., Olson,
E. N. and Sadek, H. A. (2011). Transient regenerative potential of the neonatal
mouse heart. Science 331, 1078-1080. doi:10.1126/science.1200708
Price, E. L., Vieira, J. M. and Riley, P. R. (2019). Model organisms at the heart of
regeneration. Dis. Model. Mech. 12, dmm040691. doi:10.1242/dmm.040691
Raymond, P. A., Barthel, L. K., Bernardos, R. L. and Perkowski, J. J. (2006).
Molecular characterization of retinal stem cells and their niches in adult zebrafish.
BMC Dev. Biol. 6, 36-17. doi:10.1186/1471-213X-6-36
Reier, P. J. and de Webster, H. F. (1974). Regeneration and remyelination of
Xenopus tadpole optic nerve fibres following transection or crush. J. Neurocytol. 3,
591-618. doi:10.1007/BF01097626
Rinkevich, Y., Lindau, P., Ueno, H., Longaker, M. T. and Weissman, I. L. (2011).
Germ-layer and lineage-restricted stem/progenitors regenerate the mouse digit
tip. Nature 476, 409-413. doi:10.1038/nature10346
Ryffel, G. U., Werdien, D., Turan, G., Gerhards, A., Goosses, S. and Senkel, S.
(2003). Tagging muscle cell lineages in development and tail regeneration using
Cre recombinase in transgenic Xenopus. Nucleic Acids Res. 31, e44. doi:10.
1093/nar/gng044
Schoenwolf, G. C. (1977). Tail bud contributions to the posterior region of the chick
embryo. J. Exp. Zool. 201, 227-245. doi:10.1002/jez.1402010208
Schoenwolf, G. C. (1978). Effects of complete tail bud extirpation on early
development of the posterior region of the chick embryo. Anat. Rec. 192, 289-295.
doi:10.1002/ar.1091920209
Session, A. M., Uno, Y., Kwon, T., Chapman, J. A., Toyoda, A., Takahashi, S.,
Fukui, A., Hikosaka, A., Suzuki, A., Kondo, M. et al. (2016). Genome evolution
in the allotetraploid frog Xenopus laevis. Nature 538, 336-343. doi:10.1038/
nature19840
Stockdale, W. T., Lemieux, M. E., Killen, A. C., Zhao, J., Hu, Z., Riepsaame, J.,
Hamilton, N., Kudoh, T., Riley, P. R., van Aerle, R. et al. (2018). Heart
regeneration in the Mexican cavefish. Cell Rep. 25, 1997-2007.e7. doi:10.1016/j.
celrep.2018.10.072
Sugiura, T., Taniguchi, Y., Tazaki, A., Ueno, N., Watanabe, K. and Mochii, M.
(2004). Differential gene expression between the embryonic tail bud and
regenerating larval tail in Xenopus laevis. Dev. Growth Differ. 46, 97-105.
doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.2004.00727.x
Summerbell, D. (1974). A quantitative analysis of the effect of excision of the AER
from the chick limb-bud. J. Embryol. Exp. Morphol. 32, 651-660.
Sun, X., Jones, Z. B., Chen, X.-M., Zhou, L., So, K.-F. and Ren, Y. (2016). Multiple
organ dysfunction and systemic inflammation after spinal cord injury: a complex
relationship. J. Neuroinflamm. 13, 260-211. doi:10.1186/s12974-016-0736-y
Suzuki, M., Satoh, A., Ide, H. and Tamura, K. (2005). Nerve-dependent and
-independent events in blastema formation during Xenopus froglet limb
regeneration. Dev. Biol. 286, 361-375. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.08.021
Tandon, P., Conlon, F., Furlow, J. D. and Horb, M. E. (2017). Expanding the
genetic toolkit in Xenopus: approaches and opportunities for human disease
modeling. Dev. Biol. 426, 325-335. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.04.009
Taniguchi, Y., Sugiura, T., Tazaki, A., Watanabe, K. and Mochii, M. (2008). Spinal
cord is required for proper regeneration of the tail in Xenopus tadpoles. Dev.
Growth Differ. 50, 109-120. doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.2007.00981.x
Taniguchi, Y., Watanabe, K. and Mochii, M. (2014). Notochord-derived hedgehog
is essential for tail regeneration in Xenopus tadpole. BMC Dev. Biol. 14, 27.
doi:10.1186/1471-213X-14-27
Taylor, J. S. H., Jack, J. L. and Easter, S. S. (1989). Is the capacity for optic nerve
regeneration related to continued retinal ganglion cell production in the frog? A test
of the hypothesis that neurogenesis and axon regeneration are obligatorily linked.
Eur. J. Neurosci. 1, 626-638. doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.1989.tb00368.x
Tschumi, P. A. (1957). The growth of the hindlimb bud of Xenopus laevis and its
dependence upon the epidermis. J. Anat. 91, 149-173.
Tseng, A. S. and Levin, M. (2013). Cracking the bioelectric code: probing
endogenous ionic controls of pattern formation. Commun. Integr. Biol. 6, e22595.
doi:10.4161/cib.22595
Tseng, A.-S., Adams, D. S., Qiu, D., Koustubhan, P. and Levin, M. (2007).
Apoptosis is required during early stages of tail regeneration in Xenopus laevis.
Dev. Biol. 301, 62-69. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.10.048
Tseng, A.-S., Beane, W. S., Lemire, J. M., Masi, A. and Levin, M. (2010). Induction
of vertebrate regeneration by a transient sodium current. J. Neurosci. 30,
13192-13200. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3315-10.2010
Wang, Y.-H. and Beck, C. W. (2014). Distal expression of sprouty (spry) genes
during Xenopus laevis limb development and regeneration. Gene Expr. Patterns
15, 61-66. doi:10.1016/j.gep.2014.04.004
Wang, Y.-H., Keenan, S. R., Lynn, J., McEwan, J. C. and Beck, C. W. (2015).
Gremlin1 induces anterior-posterior limb bifurcations in developing Xenopus
limbs but does not enhance limb regeneration. Mech. Dev. 138, 256-267. doi:10.
1016/j.mod.2015.10.003
Whitworth, G. B., Misaghi, B. C., Rosenthal, D. M., Mills, E. A., Heinen, D. J.,
Watson, A. H., Ives, C. W., Ali, S. H., Bezold, K., Marsh-Armstrong, N. et al.
(2017). Translational profiling of retinal ganglion cell optic nerve regeneration in
Xenopus laevis. Dev. Biol. 426, 360-373. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.06.003
Wilson, M. A., Gaze, R. M., Goodbrand, I. A. and Taylor, J. S. H. (1992).
Regeneration in the Xenopus tadpole optic nerve is preceded by a massive
macrophage/microglial response. Anat. Embryol. 186, 75-89. doi:10.1007/
BF00710404
Wunsh, L. M. and Ide, C. F. (1990). Fully differentiated Xenopus eye fragments
regenerate to form pattern-duplicated visuo-tectal projections. J. Exp. Zool. 254,
192-201. doi:10.1002/jez.1402540211
Yanai, I., Peshkin, L., Jorgensen, P. and Kirschner, M. W. (2011). Mapping gene
expression in two Xenopus species: evolutionary constraints and developmental
flexibility. Dev. Cell 20, 483-496. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2011.03.015
Yokoyama, H. (2007). Initiation of limb regeneration: the critical steps for
regenerative capacity. Dev. Growth Differ. 50, 13-22. doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.
2007.00973.x
Yokoyama, H., Ide, H. and Tamura, K. (2001). FGF-10 stimulates limb regeneration
ability in Xenopus laevis. Dev. Biol. 233, 72-79. doi:10.1006/dbio.2001.0180
Yokoyama, H., Yonei-Tamura, S., Endo, T., Izpisúa Belmonte, J. C., Tamura, K.
and Ide, H. (2000). Mesenchyme with fgf-10 expression is responsible for
regenerative capacity in Xenopus limb buds. Dev. Biol. 219, 18-29. doi:10.1006/
dbio.1999.9587
Yokoyama, H., Maruoka, T., Aruga, A., Amano, T., Ohgo, S., Shiroishi, T. and
Tamura, K. (2011). Prx-1 expression in Xenopus laevis scarless skin-wound
healing and its resemblance to epimorphic regeneration. J. Invest. Dermatol. 131,
2477-2485. doi:10.1038/jid.2011.223
Yoshii, C., Ueda, Y., Okamoto, M. and Araki, M. (2007). Neural retinal regeneration
in the anuran amphibian Xenopus laevis post-metamorphosis: transdifferentiation
of retinal pigmented epithelium regenerates the neural retina. Dev. Biol. 303,
45-56. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.11.024
Yoshino, J. and Tochinai, S. (2004). Successful reconstitution of the non-
regenerating adult telencephalon by cell transplantation in Xenopus laevis. Dev.
Growth Differ. 46, 523-534. doi:10.1111/j.1440-169x.2004.00767.x
Yoshino, J. and Tochinai, S. (2006). Functional regeneration of the olfactory bulb
requires reconnection to the olfactory nerve in Xenopus larvae. Dev. Growth
Differ. 48, 15-24. doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.2006.00840.x
Zahn, N., Levin, M. and Adams, D. S. (2017). The Zahn drawings: new illustrations
of Xenopus embryo and tadpole stages for studies of craniofacial development.
Development 144, 2708-2713. doi:10.1242/dev.151308
Zhang, Q., Wang, Y., Man, L., Zhu, Z., Bai, X., Wei, S., Liu, Y., Liu, M., Wang, X.,
Gu, X. et al. (2016). Reactive oxygen species generated from skeletal muscles
are required for gecko tail regeneration. Sci. Rep. 6, 20752. doi:10.1038/
srep20752
Zhang, M., Chen, Y., Xu, H., Yang, L., Yuan, F., Li, L., Xu, Y., Chen, Y., Zhang, C.
and Lin, G. (2018). Melanocortin receptor 4 signaling regulates vertebrate limb
regeneration. Dev. Cell 46, 397-409.e5. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2018.07.021
Zhao,
Y.
and
Szaro,
B.
G.
(1994).
The
return
of
phosphorylated
and
nonphosphorylated epitopes of neurofilament proteins to the regenerating optic
nerve of Xenopus laevis. J. Comp. Neurol. 343, 158-172. doi:10.1002/cne.
903430112
13
PRIMER
Development (2020) 147, dev180844. doi:10.1242/dev.180844
DEVELOPMENT

===== Prater2023_NatAging+microglia_AD =====
Nature Aging | Volume 3 | July 2023 | 894–907
894
nature aging
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
Human microglia show unique 
transcriptional changes in Alzheimer’s 
disease
Katherine E. Prater 
  1,15, Kevin J. Green1,15, Sainath Mamde1, Wei Sun2, 
Alexandra Cochoit 
  1, Carole L. Smith1, Kenneth L. Chiou3,4, Laura Heath 
  5, 
Shannon E. Rose6, Jesse Wiley5, C. Dirk Keene 
  6, Ronald Y. Kwon7,8, 
Noah Snyder-Mackler 
  3,4,9, Elizabeth E. Blue 
  10,11, Benjamin Logsdon5,12, 
Jessica E. Young6,7, Ali Shojaie13, Gwenn A. Garden14 & Suman Jayadev 
  1,7,10 
Microglia, the innate immune cells of the brain, influence Alzheimer’s 
disease (AD) progression and are potential therapeutic targets. However, 
microglia exhibit diverse functions, the regulation of which is not fully 
understood, complicating therapeutics development. To better define 
the transcriptomic phenotypes and gene regulatory networks associated 
with AD, we enriched for microglia nuclei from 12 AD and 10 control human 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortices (7 males and 15 females, all aged >60 years) 
before single-nucleus RNA sequencing. Here we describe both established 
and previously unrecognized microglial molecular phenotypes, the 
inferred gene networks driving observed transcriptomic change, and apply 
trajectory analysis to reveal the putative relationships between microglial 
phenotypes. We identify microglial phenotypes more prevalent in AD cases 
compared with controls. Further, we describe the heterogeneity in microglia 
subclusters expressing homeostatic markers. Our study demonstrates 
that deep profiling of microglia in human AD brain can provide insight into 
microglial transcriptional changes associated with AD.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is pathologically characterized by extracellular 
amyloid-beta (Aβ) plaques, neuronal intracellular neurofibrillary tangles 
and neuroinflammation. Interest in neuroinflammation as a modifiable 
feature of AD pathology has grown in conjunction with genetic stud-
ies identifying AD risk variants localized to coding and non-coding 
regions of genes uniquely expressed by brain myeloid cells1. Microglia 
are resident innate immune myeloid cells of the brain and contribute to 
the neuroinflammatory processes hypothesized to promote AD patho-
physiology2–10. Previous studies suggested that, in AD, microglia release 
inflammatory mediators that influence the behavior and function of 
Received: 7 July 2022
Accepted: 25 April 2023
Published online: 29 May 2023
 Check for updates
1Department of Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 2Biostatistics Program, Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA. 3Center for Evolution and Medicine, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. 4School of Life Sciences, Center 
for Evolution and Medicine, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. 5Sage Bionetworks, Seattle, WA, USA. 6Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 7Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 
8Department of Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 9ASU-Banner Neurodegenerative Disease Research 
Center, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. 10Division of Medical Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 11Brotman Baty Institute for 
Precision Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA. 12Cajal Neuroscience, Seattle, WA, USA. 13Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 
14Department of Neurology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 15These authors contributed equally: Katherine E. Prater, Kevin J. Green. 
 e-mail: sumie@uw.edu

Nature Aging | Volume 3 | July 2023 | 894–907
895
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
distinct microglia gene expression patterns (63% of the nuclei; 
Fig. 1c). The initial dataset consisted of 205,226 nuclei, with 200,948 
nuclei (98%) passing quality control and doublet removal. Gene expres-
sion of cell type marker genes demonstrates that clusters identified as 
microglia (1, 2, 3, 7, 16 and 17; Fig. 1d) in the dataset have high expres-
sion of microglia markers and do not express canonical marker genes 
of other cell types. Thus, of the 200,948 nuclei, 127,371 were identi-
fied as microglia (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 2), with an average 
of 5,790 nuclei per individual. This dataset is the largest microglia 
per sample dataset generated thus far, including compared to other 
published datasets that have used alternative enrichment techniques. 
Detailed gene expression plots of both microglia (Extended Data 
Fig. 2) and astrocyte or peripheral monocyte markers (Extended Data 
Fig. 3) demonstrate high expression of microglia genes in the microglia 
subset dataset across all subclusters and the lack of other cell type and 
peripheral markers.
Complexity of microglia states
Cluster analysis of the 127,371 nuclei with microglia-like expression 
identified 10 clusters (Fig. 2a) characterized by differentially expressed 
genes (DEGs) comparing the cluster to all other nuclei (Fig. 2b). Using 
gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), we determined the enrichment 
of biological pathways in each cluster (Fig. 2c). There was little to no 
overlap in the DEGs defining each cluster or the biological pathways 
identified by GSEA, supporting the uniqueness of each cluster.
First, we found clusters with annotations similar to microglia 
phenotypes previously described in human brain. We identified cluster 
1, the largest cluster, as the cluster enriched for homeostatic genes, 
including high expression of CX3CR1 and P2RY12 (refs. 19,24–26). We 
abbreviated this homeostatic-marker-expressing cluster as ‘HM’. HM 
was established as the basis for comparison to assess DEGs for other 
clusters, replicating the approach in previous publications22,25,26 (Sup-
plementary Data 1). Cluster 4 was enriched for pathways involved in 
apoptosis, response to interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) and mitochondrial 
and respiratory functions (Fig. 2c), including Alzheimer, Parkinson 
and Huntington disease KEGG pathways. The most highly DEG in this 
cluster is FTL. Taken together, the profile of cluster 4 is suggestive 
of a degenerative or dystrophic phenotype12,26. Cluster 7 was char-
acterized by expression of genes involved in migration and motility 
(Fig. 2b). Pathways enriched in cluster 7 included membrane organiza-
tion and motility (Fig. 2c). Cluster 8 featured a canonical inflammatory 
phenotype with expression of classic inflammatory activation genes, 
including NFκB1, RELB and IL1β (Fig. 2b)2,31,32. GSEA revealed that this 
cluster was enriched in NFκB signaling, interferon signaling, Toll-like 
receptor (TLR) signaling and RIG-I-mediated signaling pathways, 
indicating downstream effector inflammatory responses to stimuli 
(Fig. 2c). Additional Gene Ontology (GO) terms associated with cluster 
8 included lipid synthesis and localization. Cluster 9 is defined by genes 
and pathways involved in senescence, iron homeostasis and cytokine 
production (Fig. 2b), including CDKN1A, CEBPB, ZFP36 and FTL33. This 
profile is suggestive of senescent microglia34. Cluster 10 is defined by 
expression of genes involved in cell cycle regulation and DNA repair35,36 
(Fig. 2b). The pathways enriched in cluster 10 confirm the relative 
increase of genes involved in cell cycle processes and a decrease of 
endosome and cytokine processing genes (Fig. 2c). As expected for 
microglia of varying activated and non-activated phenotypes, genes 
such as P2RY12 varied in expression, whereas microglia genes, such 
as C3 and CD74, had more similar representation across the microglia 
subclusters (Fig. 2d).
Next, we found three clusters, clusters 3, 5 and 6, not previously 
described in human brain. These clusters were distinguished by their 
endolysosomal network (ELN) gene expression and enrichment for ELN 
pathway signatures relative to HM microglia. We, therefore, annotate 
them collectively as ELN. Cluster 3 is defined by genes implicated in 
aggregate protein internalization (Fig. 2b)19,20,24–26,37 phagocytosis and 
surrounding neurons, and glia lose neuroprotective functions and ini-
tiate aberrant phagocytosis of synapses and neurons3,7,11,12. Microglia 
appear to contribute to tau spreading in model systems13,14 and are likely 
to be the primary cell type involved in Aβ removal, including the reduc-
tion in Aβ observed in response to antibody-based immunotherapy 
approaches15. As such, microglia inflammatory behaviors are relevant 
to therapeutic target design. However, large gaps remain in our under-
standing of microglia responses in AD brain.
Microglia phenotypes are differentiated by morphology, physiol-
ogy and gene or protein expression patterns. Experiments performed 
in model systems suggest that these heterogenous features are likely 
to associate with specific functional microglia phenotypes10,16–21. Less 
is known about the heterogeneity of microglia phenotypes within the 
adult human brain, especially in the setting of specific disease states, 
such as AD. Single-cell and single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-
seq) studies of fresh and frozen human cortical tissue have revealed 
multiple microglia transcriptional phenotypes in the context of AD 
and other brain pathologies22–29. Distinguishing transcriptomically 
distinct clusters enables the identification of candidate genetic and 
epigenetic factors regulating specific cellular behaviors, which might 
be leveraged in precision therapeutics approaches. However, standard 
snRNA-seq methods often include small numbers of microglia per 
individual. Low cell numbers may diminish the ability to map the full 
range of microglial transcriptional phenotypes and limit capacity to 
identify disease-associated gene expression change within a cluster 
or subcluster. We hypothesized that additional cellular processes and 
regulatory factors of microglia transcriptional phenotypes would be 
uncovered by using datasets that contain much larger numbers of 
microglia per individual sample.
We employed fluorescence-activated nuclei sorting (FANS) for 
PU.1 as a microglia enrichment technique for snRNA-seq. The myeloid 
marker PU.1 has been used to enhance the investigation of the epige-
netics of microglia using assay for transposase-accessible chromatin 
using sequencing30, and, in the present study, it was applied to RNA 
sequencing (RNA-seq). This approach facilitated the acquisition of 
single-nucleus transcriptome profiles from thousands of microglia per 
subject. We generated microglia transcriptional profiles from a cohort 
of 22 individuals with and without AD, enabling us to annotate micro-
glia clusters with plausible biological roles and identify differences in 
microglia between AD and control individuals. The large number of 
profiles in this dataset also allowed us to identify AD-specific subclusters 
within the microglia cluster typically annotated as ‘homeostatic’ based 
upon its gene expression profile22,25,26,29. In addition to homeostatic and 
inflammatory phenotypes described in previous reports, we uncovered 
microglial phenotypes with transcriptomic profiles that may give addi-
tional insight into AD pathogenesis. These findings provide new avenues 
for hypotheses testing in future studies on the roles of microglia in AD.
Results
FANS for PU.1 expression enriches microglia nuclei 20-fold
We enriched nuclei isolated from postmortem human brain for micro-
glia using FANS for expression of the myeloid-specific transcription 
factor PU.1 (Extended Data Fig. 1a,b). To confirm that PU.1 FANS was 
effective, we isolated and sequenced nuclei with and without PU.1 FANS 
(n = 4). We analyzed similar numbers of total nuclei in the unsorted 
(46,085; Extended Data Fig. 1c) and PU.1 sorted (41,488; Extended Data 
Fig. 1d) datasets. The PU.1 sorted dataset contained 20× more microglia 
nuclei defined by high expression of C3, CD74, C1QB, CX3CR1 and SPI1 
(23,310 microglia nuclei) than the unsorted dataset (1,032 microglia 
nuclei). The microglia nuclei observed in the PU.1 sorted dataset also 
demonstrate further complexity as evidenced by more microglia clus-
ters (Extended Data Fig. 1d).
We next applied PU.1 FANS to a cohort of 22 individuals (Fig. 1a). 
After PU.1 FANS, samples retain a variety of non-myeloid cell types 
(Fig. 1b) while providing clear resolution of clusters demonstrating 

Nature Aging | Volume 3 | July 2023 | 894–907
896
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
vesicle-mediated transport32. Pathways enriched in cluster 3 include 
endosome and lysosome pathways as well as catabolism and lipid bind-
ing but no inflammatory processes (Fig. 2c). Genes involved in glyco-
lysis have lower expression in cluster 3, differentiating it from the two 
other ELN clusters, suggesting that these cells have not undergone the 
metabolic switch to glycolysis observed in the microglia inflammatory 
phenotype38. Clusters 5 and 6 displayed an ELN signature, although 
they also appeared metabolically active with distinct inflammatory 
characteristics. Cluster 5 had increased expression of HSP90AA1, HIF1A 
and BAG3 in addition to other heat shock protein genes (Fig. 2b), sug-
gesting that these cells are responding to external stress. Genes driving 
glycolysis were also higher in cluster 5 when compared to HM, possibly 
a
b
d
4
4
3
4
5
4
4
4
3
3
2
4
4
Cluster
Expression level
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
P2RY12
C1QB
CX3CR1
CD163
GFAP
AQP4
ALDH1L1
MAP2
NRGN
GAD2
COL20A1
ST18
ITIH5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
CX3CR1
C1QB
CD74
C3
SPI1
GFAP
MAP2
COL20A1
ST18
ITIH5
Microglia
markers
Cluster number
% expressed
0
25
50
75
0
1
2
Avg. 
expression
Other cell type
markers
c
dlPFC
PU.1
sorting
snRNA-seq
−4
0
4
8
−10 −5
0
5
UMAP 1
UMAP 2
Gene expression
Predicted
transcription factors
IHC
validation
Astrocytes
Neurons
OPC
Oligs
Endothelial cells
Microglia
–5
0
10
–15
–10
−5
0
5
UMAP 1
UMAP 2
5
10
–10
–15
4
15
7
9
10
8
14
13
11
6
5
3
2
17
1
16
12
Fig. 1 | PU.1 enrichment yields a large dataset of microglia nuclei.  
a, Experimental design of 22 postmortem human dorsolateral prefrontal cortices 
(created in part with BioRender). b, UMAP of the PU.1 sorted nuclei from the 
22-subject dataset demonstrates that, although other cell types, including 
neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes (Oligs) and their progenitors (OPCs) as 
well as endothelial cells, are present, six clusters, including the three largest,  
are composed of microglia nuclei. c, Representative cell type marker genes  
(x axis) with the percent of nuclei that express a gene (size of dot) in each cluster 
(distributed along the y axis) and the average expression level (color intensity) 
are shown for microglia (CX3CR1, C1QB, CD74 and C3), astrocytes (GFAP), 
neurons (MAP2), OPCs (COL20A1), Oligs (ST18) and endothelial cells (ITIH5) 
for each cluster. d, Gene expression of a wider set of cell type marker genes 
demonstrates that clusters 1, 2, 3, 7, 16 and 17 are composed of microglia. IHC, 
immunohistochemistry.

Nature Aging | Volume 3 | July 2023 | 894–907
897
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
reflecting a switch to glycolysis in these cells38. The pathways enriched 
in this cluster indicate that it is active in endocytosis, autophagy and 
mitophagy (Fig. 2c). Cluster 6 is characterized by metabolic activ-
ity genes and stress response pathways similar to cluster 5 (Fig. 2c) 
although with an additional component of interferon signaling sug-
gested by significantly higher levels of IRF3, IRF5 and IRF7. Cluster 
6 also showed increased expression of cytosolic DNA/RNA recogni-
tion and antiviral genes, including IFIT2, IFIT3 and TRIM22 (ref. 39), as 
well as the pattern recognition receptor CARD9 and mediators of the 
NLRP3 inflammasome31,32,40–43. Of note, unique to cluster 6, we found 
that the DNA repair genes ATM and RNASEH2B were lower in expres-
sion. Whereas IL1β was increased in cluster 6 compared to HM, even 
higher levels of IL1β and expression of other inflammatory effector 
molecules, such as NFkB1, were found in cluster 8, the more canonical 
‘inflammatory’ cluster. Pathways enriched in cluster 6 also support 
upstream inflammatory responses to danger-associated molecular 
pattern stimuli, such as enrichment in NOD-like receptor (NLR) signal-
ing. In addition, we used alternative methodology to identify biological 
pathways and the links between them, providing validation for the ELN 
functions of clusters 3, 5 and 6 (Extended Data Fig. 4). Supplementary 
tables containing the genes driving the presence of each node in the 
network are available on Synapse.
Despite the role of APOE in risk and progression of AD44, to date no 
studies have defined microglia states in individuals with a specific APOE 
genotype. Because most (13/22) of our samples were homozygous for 
the APOE ε3 allele, we generated a subset of our dataset that consisted 
entirely of APOE ε3/ε3 individuals (seven controls and six AD pathol-
ogy, nine females and four males; 75,018 microglia nuclei). After re-
normalizing and re-clustering, we identified nine clusters of microglia 
(Extended Data Fig. 5a). These clusters were defined by genes similar 
to those that defined the clusters in the Mixed APOE genotype dataset 
(Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Data 2). We found that, in 
most clusters, the DEGs were very similar (~60% or higher match) to 
those in the Mixed APOE dataset (Extended Data Fig. 5c). The HM, neu-
rodegenerative, inflammatory, cell cycle and endolysosomal clusters 
were similar to those of the Mixed APOE cohort. This suggests that the 
presence of multiple distinct ELN microglia clusters is common in the 
human brain even when controlling for APOE genotype.
Microglia cluster-specific transcription factor regulatory 
networks
To characterize the regulatory networks of the populations in the 
dataset, we identified the top transcription-factor-driven networks 
(regulons) controlling gene expression in each of the microglia clusters 
(Fig. 3). Each cluster is defined by a specific set of regulons (Fig. 3a), 
supporting the hypothesis that the differential gene expression charac-
terizing each cluster is determined by transcriptional regulation mecha-
nisms. To demonstrate the diversity of regulons predicted to drive gene 
expression in different clusters, we highlight cluster 3, cluster 5, cluster 
6 and cluster 8 (Fig. 3b). Each of these clusters shows a different set of 
regulons that appear as one of the top 10 for that cluster repeatedly 
across permutations of the analysis. For example, cluster 5 shares a 
glycolytic and endolysosomal phenotype with cluster 6 but does not 
share the interferon response factor regulons predicted for cluster 6. 
In addition, whereas we observed IRF1 and NFKB2 regulons in cluster 8, 
the canonical ‘inflammatory’ effector cluster, we observed additional 
(and different) interferon response factor regulons in cluster 6. The top 
regulons for other clusters also differ from each other (Extended Data 
Fig. 6). MAFB, a transcription factor associated with anti-inflammatory 
gene regulation, was top of the list in cluster 3 (ref. 16). In contrast, regu-
lons directed by transcription factors typically associated with antiviral 
responses, IRF7, and to a lesser extent IRF3, were top of the list in cluster 
6, consistent with the observation that these cells are also enriched for 
nucleic acid recognition and endolysosomal pathways (Fig. 3b). The 
top regulons for the APOE ε3/ε3 subset of individuals demonstrate 
similar unique diversity to those described in the larger dataset, again 
suggesting homology across APOE genotypes (Extended Data Fig. 7). 
Together, these inferred gene networks and their transcription factor 
regulons demonstrate the diversity of the clusters identified here and 
provide potential regulatory targets for future studies to investigate.
Microglia transcriptomic progression takes multiple paths
Experiments in model systems with defined stimuli have demonstrated 
the potential of microglia to acquire diverse phenotypes. However, 
understanding the progression and phenotypic switches acquired 
by human microglia in vivo is challenging. We employed our single-
nucleus dataset to investigate microglia transcriptomic transitions 
using the Monocle3 (ref. 45) trajectory inference method (Fig. 4). 
We asked which cluster may be end state versus transition state as a 
hypothesis-generating exercise. The resulting branching trajectories 
suggest that multiple transition states radiate out from HM, the cluster 
enriched for homeostatic gene expression, supporting the hypoth-
esis that ‘homeostatic’ microglia may transition to multiple endpoint 
phenotypes in humans as predicted by model studies10,16,17. We found 
relationships between clusters that were not immediately apparent 
when exploring DEGs and GSEA alone. Trajectory analysis revealed a 
branch point where cell progression continues to either the autophagic 
stress ELN cluster (cluster 5) or the inflammatory ELN, cluster 6 (Fig. 4). 
Cluster 5 is adjacent to the senescent-like cluster (cluster 9), consistent 
with the notion that autophagy and senescence are related biological 
pathways and endpoints. Similar to work by Nguyen et al.26, the motile 
cluster (cluster 7) is another endpoint.
Inflammatory ELN profile microglia are increased in AD cases
Both homeostatic-marker-expressing and canonical inflammatory 
clusters (HM and cluster 8, respectively) were equally represented 
by both AD and control brain. In contrast, we found that cluster 6 
had more AD nuclei than would be expected in our dataset (adjusted 
P = 0.006), suggesting that AD-relevant processes may be repre-
sented in the profile of this cluster (Fig. 5a). Multiple AD genome-
wide association studies have identified risk alleles associated with 
genes expressed in microglia or myeloid cells4. Using a list of 46 genes 
in single-nucleotide polymorphism loci associated with altered AD 
risk44,46, we used GSEA to assess enrichment of these genes in the 10 
identified microglia clusters. We observed that more AD risk genes 
are differentially expressed in cluster 6 (Fig. 5b) compared to all other 
clusters (adjusted P < 0.001). Gene expression of PICALM, SORL1 and 
PLCG2 were significantly lower in cluster 6 compared to the rest of the 
clusters, whereas other genes, including APP, APOE and BIN1, were 
significantly higher in expression (all adjusted P < 0.001; Fig. 5b). Using 
an alternative set of ELN genes, we demonstrate significant differential 
expression in cluster 6, whereas TLR-associated genes were more 
often highly expressed in cluster 8 (Extended Data Fig. 8a,b). Genes 
associated with ‘disease-associated microglia’ were enriched across 
Fig. 2 | Microglia states have diverse gene expression and biological pathway 
correlates. a, UMAP of unbiased clustering on the nuclei from the six PU.1 sorted 
clusters (1, 2, 3, 7, 16 and 17, shown in Fig. 1d) meeting criteria for microglia from 
the 22-sample dataset contains 10 microglia clusters. b, Differential expression 
analysis comparing each cluster to all other clusters demonstrates distinct 
gene expression profiles for each. The top 25 genes from each cluster are 
displayed with gene names annotated on the right. Cluster 1 is high in expression 
of canonical microglia genes (CX3CR1 and P2RY12). c, GSEA analysis of genes 
that differentiate each cluster from cluster 1 (‘homeostatic marker’) suggests 
distinct biological pathways. d, Canonical microglia marker gene expression 
in the microglia dataset versus other cell types sorted during PU.1 enrichment 
demonstrates enrichment of microglia marker gene expression in the 10 clusters. 
NES, normalized enrichment score.

Nature Aging | Volume 3 | July 2023 | 894–907
898
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
−4
0
4
8
−10
−5
0
5
UMAP 1
UMAP 2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
a
b
–1
1
–2
0
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
1
2
Cell motility
Membrane organization
Vesicle membrane
Actin filament organization
Secretory vesicle
Myeloid leukocyte activation
c
Secretory vesicle
Lipid binding
Macromolecule catabolic process
Late endosome
Endocytic vesicle membrane
Ribonucleoprotein complex
Lysosomal lumen
0
1
2
Response to toxic substance
Autophagosome
Response to IFN-γ
Mitochondrial protein complex
Intrinsic apoptotic signaling
Respiratory chain complex
0
1
2
Mitochondrial respiratory chain complex
Leukocyte-mediated immunity
Ubiquitin-like protein ligase binding
ATP metabolic process
NLR signaling
Glucose catabolic process
Lysosomal lumen
Chaperone binding
0
1
2
Cellular senescence
Cellular response to lipid
Cytokine production
Response to dsRNA
Type I interferon production
I kappaB kinase NFkB signaling
TLR signaling pathway
0
1
2
NES
–3
–2
–1
Regulation of TLR signaling
Endosome
Cell cycle checkpoint
Cell division
Mitotic cell cycle
Meiotic cell cycle
DNA replication
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
Receptor-mediated endocytosis
NLR signaling pathway
Macroautophagy
Autophagy of mitochondria
Cellular response to stress
ATP metabolic process
Pyruvate metabolic process
Cluster 3
Cluster 4
Cluster 5
Cluster 6
Cluster 7
Cluster 8
Cluster 10
0
1
2
3
4
Expression level
C3
0
1
2
3
4
5
Expression level
CD74
0
1
10
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Astrocytes−1
Astrocytes−2
Endothelial−1
Endothelial−2
Neurons−1
Neurons−2
Neurons−3
Neurons−4
CD163+
Oligodendrocytes
OPC
1
10
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Astrocytes−1
Astrocytes−2
Endothelial−1
Endothelial−2
Neurons−1
Neurons−2
Neurons−3
Neurons−4
CD163+
Oligodendrocytes
OPC
1
10
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Astrocytes−1
Astrocytes−2
Endothelial−1
Endothelial−2
Neurons−1
Neurons−2
Neurons−3
Neurons−4
CD163+
Oligodendrocytes
OPC
1
2
3
4
Expression level
P2RY12
d
APOLD1
CENPP
HELLS
MELK
BRIP1
HAMP
TMEM2
LIMK2
NFKBIA
RELB
TRAF3
NFKB1
TNFAIP3
GAS7
PPARG
PTPRG
MYO1E
STAB1
CKB
PTGDS
MEG3
HIF1A
CD83
HSP90AA1
FTL
RPL19
PLEKHA7
FTH1
APOE
MITF
DPYD
CD163
BIN1
RASGEF1C
TMEM156
CX3CR1
P2RY12
GRID2

Nature Aging | Volume 3 | July 2023 | 894–907
899
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
multiple clusters, in contrast to a single cluster observed in AD mouse 
models19 (Extended Data Fig. 8c). We further investigated whether a 
microglia phenotype present in healthy aging was reduced in AD brain. 
We determined that cluster 10, the cluster differentially expressing cell 
cycle regulatory genes, is larger in control brain compared to AD brain 
(Mixed APOE adjusted P < 0.001 and APOE ε3/ε3 adjusted P < 0.001; 
Fig. 5a). Cluster 10 is the smallest cluster in our dataset and, therefore, 
deserves replication; however, these data suggest that AD pathology 
a
b
KDM5B
JUNB
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
PPARA
ZNF768
CEBPA
IRF7
IRF3
SREBF1
MAZ
XBP1
RUNX3
RELB
NFKB1
ETV6
NFKB2
IRF1
HIVEP3
STAT1
ATF3
MAFB
JDP2
CEBPB
EZH2
NFIA
FOXO1
CREM
KLF12
STAT1
FOXO3
MAFB
EZH2
HIVEP1
PBX3
CREBL2
NR1D2
ZBTB16
BRCA1
% replicates
in top 10
100
96.30
92.59
77.78
59.26
51.85
44.44
37.04
29.63
25.93
Cluster 3
Cluster
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
AUC
TF
FOS
JUN
ATF1
HESX1
Cluster 5
JDP2
JUN
POlR2A
CREM
FOS
TBX6
RUNX3
TFDP1
CEBPD
FOXP1
% replicates
in top 10
96.30
96.30
96.30
92.59
88.89
88.89
77.78
59.26
51.85
44.44
Cluster 6
MAZ
IRF7
SREBF1
FOXP2
BHLHE41
KLF16
SIRT6
FOXN3
IRF3
KLF2
% replicates
in top 10
96.30
92.59
88.89
81.48
70.37
55.56
48.15
44.44
44.44
40.74
Cluster 8
HIVEP3
NFKB2
CEBPB
IRF1
SP4
ELK1
POU2F2
ETV3
RELB
ETV6
% replicates
in top 10
96.30
96.30
88.89
88.89
74.04
70.37
70.37
66.67
51.85
51.85
Fig. 3 | Transcription factor regulatory networks are specific to microglia 
phenotypes. a, SCENIC workflow identified transcription factor regulated 
networks associated with different phenotypic clusters of microglia. Heat map 
of area under the curve (AUC) of the transcription factor (regulon activity in 
clusters). b, Percentage of instances where transcription factor regulons occured 
in the top 10 regulon specificity scores per cluster (out of 27 permutations). 
Darker color indicates higher percentage of replication.

Nature Aging | Volume 3 | July 2023 | 894–907
900
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
may involve a detectable reduction in a microglia cluster enriched for 
cell cycle and DNA repair genes.
Protein expression of microglial phenotype markers
The transcriptomic data predict heterogeneity in microglia endolyso-
somal phenotypes in both aged control and AD brain. Immunostain-
ing for LAMP1, a lysosomal marker, revealed a spectrum of lysosomal 
phenotypes with varying lysosomal size and number (Fig. 5c). Microglia 
expressing cluster 6 markers were identified in AD brain by immunola-
beling for the protein products of PTGDS (Fig. 5d) and P2RX7 (Fig. 5e), 
both highly expressed genes in that subcluster. Cluster 6 and cluster 8 
microglia both demonstrate differential expression of genes involved 
in the detection of DNA/RNA molecules, suggesting that microglia 
may be activated by exposure to cytosolic nucleic acids. To assess the 
presence of cytosolic nucleic acids in microglia, we immunolabeled 
microglia for double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) (Fig. 5d). We observed that 
microglia with immunoreactivity for dsDNA also contained enlarged 
lysosomes, whereas other microglia in the same tissue section had nor-
mal lysosome size and no immunoreactivity for dsDNA (Extended Data 
Fig. 9). These findings suggest that microglia heterogeneity reflected 
by gene expression patterns may represent morphological phenotypes 
that can be detected in human tissue.
An AD-specific state exists within the cluster enriched for 
homeostatic genes
We reasoned that, given the known inflammaging changes associated 
with human brain molecular profiles, it could be challenging to detect 
AD-specific signatures when studying polarized subpopulations in 
AD and aged brain tissue. We turned our attention to the complexity 
within HM. As previously reported, we observed that HM is the largest 
population and proportionally similar in AD and aged control brain 
samples22,25,26. This population has not been extensively characterized 
to understand the impact of AD on gene expression within homeostatic 
microglia. Our dataset studied over 50,000 microglia enriched for 
homeostatic markers, enabling detection of subclusters within the 
HM microglia population. Subclustering HM microglia revealed seven 
populations with differential gene expression (Fig. 6a). We found that, 
in contrast to the larger microglia dataset, there was a subcluster nearly 
unique to AD cases. This AD-specific microglia subcluster, subclus-
ter 1.5 (Fig. 6b), was almost exclusively composed of AD microglia, 
suggesting that it may be uniquely driven by AD pathology (adjusted 
P < 0.001). In contrast, subcluster 1.4 was overrepresented by con-
trol nuclei (Fig. 6b; adjusted P < 0.05). HM subclusters showed high 
expression of P2RY12, with the highest expression in subcluster 1.5 
(Fig. 6c). Other gene expression markers of HM subcluster 1.5 were 
more specific, including the DEGs WIPF3, PDE4B and KCNIP (Fig. 6c). 
To begin to characterize the putative biological processes represented 
in these subclusters, we performed GSEA as above. Subcluster 1.5 had 
a unique profile of enrichment for genes involved in cellular motility 
and calcium signaling (Fig. 6d). Using immunohistochemistry, we vali-
dated the presence of double-positive high P2RY12 and PDE4B protein 
expression in microglia in human AD brain (Fig. 6e). We additionally 
verified these results in our cohort of all APOE ε3/ε3 individuals. We 
confirmed that, again, the microglia cluster enriched for homeostatic 
gene expression could be divided into multiple populations with dis-
tinct gene expression and that one such cluster was enriched in AD 
cases (Extended Data Fig. 10).
Discussion
This study identified 10 distinct microglia clusters from aged human 
brain. These included previously described homeostatic, senescent 
and inflammatory microglia transcriptional phenotypes as well as addi-
tional clusters of transcriptional specification, which may give insight 
into AD pathogenesis, providing a platform for hypothesis generation. 
We describe the diversity of microglia clusters with endolysosomal 
gene signatures, one of which is enriched with nucleic acid recognition 
and interferon regulation genes. Inferred gene networks predict that 
individual clusters are driven by distinct transcription factors, lending 
further support for the functional diversity of clusters. Using trajectory 
inference analysis, we observed transitions in microglia phenotypes 
and predicted relationships that can be tested experimentally. AD 
cases were distinguished by the emergence of a subcluster expressing 
homeostatic genes (subcluster 1.5) that was characterized by altered 
transcription of genes involved in calcium activation, response to injury 
and motility pathways.
Endolysosomal function is critical for trafficking and degrad-
ing pathologic proteins, and dysfunction of the ELN is implicated 
in AD pathogenesis. Less is known about the implications of ELN 
dysfunction specifically in AD microglia47. This study identified three 
microglia clusters, clusters 3, 5 and 6, distinguished by expression 
of ELN components, each with a distinct pattern of endocytosis, 
vesicle trafficking, endolysosomal and autophagosome pathway gene 
expression. Impaired microglial endolysosomal function is proposed 
to contribute to AD pathogenesis through insufficient amyloid clear-
ance1,47. However, the ELN in myeloid cells also plays a critical role in 
identifying and processing foreign microbes, including initiation of 
TLR and interferon signaling31,48. Gene expression in cluster 6 (the sub-
type overrepresented in AD cases) was characterized by enrichment 
for expression of genes involved in lysosomal and vesicular function 
and concomitantly increased expression of interferon regulatory 
factor and inflammasome activation genes40,42,49,50. Although there 
is not a single ‘DAM’ phenotype in human AD, we did observe a type 1 
interferon response cluster distinct from a dystrophic or canonical 
inflammatory phenotype18,19,37,51. We hypothesize that IRF expression 
here may reflect exposure to danger-associated molecular pattern 
molecules, including nucleic acids from microglia or neighboring 
cells. This hypothesis is supported by our observation of microglia 
with immunoreactivity to cytosolic dsDNA and amoeboid morphol-
ogy (Fig. 5). These findings align with murine and in vitro studies 
demonstrating that amyloid fibrils contain nucleic acids and induce a 
type I interferon response in microglia, leading to synapse loss50. Song 
et al.49,52 reported a key role for the ELN in nucleic acid degradation 
and the interferon response to DNA damage after release of nuclear 
DNA into the cytosol, consistent with the phenotype that we describe 
here. Cluster 6 microglia not only were increased as a population in 
AD cases but also demonstrate significant differential expression 
of a number of genes associated with genetic risk for AD (Fig. 5). 
This observation supports the hypothesis that inflammatory cell 
–5
5
0
5
0
–5
UMAP 1
UMAP 2
10
10
4
6
2
9
5
8
7
3
1
Interferon
ELN
Canonical
inflammatory
Senescent-like
Motile
Homeostatic
ELN
Stress-autophagy
ELN
Dystrophic
Cell cycle
Fig. 4 | Microglia transcriptomic progression may take multiple paths. 
Monocle trajectory inference applied to the microglia dataset demonstrates that 
multiple phenotypic options radiate outward from cluster 1. Each branch has 
several potential endpoints, suggesting that microglia may not progress along 
a single staged linear trajectory but, instead, proceed through one of several 
transition states to reach various transcriptomic end phenotypes.

Nature Aging | Volume 3 | July 2023 | 894–907
901
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
dysfunction is an important contributor to AD risk and suggests that 
the subtype of microglia represented by cluster 6 may be a microglia 
subtype to target for therapeutic intervention.
We leveraged our dataset to apply trajectory methods to infer 
the potential relationships between microglial transcriptional phe-
notypes. Dystrophic (cluster 4) and senescent (cluster 9) clusters 
a
b
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
CR1
BIN1
INPP5D
MEF2C
CD2AP
ZCWPW1
EPHA1
PTK2B
CLU
CELF1
MS4A6A
MS4A4E
PICALM
SORL1
FERMT2
DSG2
ABCA7
CD33
CASS4
TYROBP
AGER
C4A
C4B
TRIM35
RIN3
ADAM10
KANSL1
EPHX2
TRIP4
ACE
PLD3
APP
PLCG2
MS4A4A
PILRA
ABI3
RABEP1
APBB3
ZKSCAN1
TP53INP1
ZYX
AP4E1
AP4M1
SPPL2A
GRN
APOE
–2
–1
0
1
2
AD risk genes
10
0
50
100
Cluster
% nuclei
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Ctrl
AD
**
**
c
Iba-1 Lamp-1 DAPI
d
Iba-1
PTGDS
DAPI
PTGDS
DAPI
e
Iba-1
P2RX7
DAPI
P2RX7
DAPI
Iba-1
f
dsDNA
Lamp-1
DAPI
Fig. 5 | Cluster 6 demonstrates enrichment of AD risk genes and suggests 
the presence of dysregulated lysosomal and cytosolic DNA regulation in 
microglia in AD. a, Cluster 6 is significantly increased in AD brain (chi-square 
FDR-corrected P = 0.0064), whereas cluster 10 is increased in control (Ctrl) 
samples (chi-square FDR-corrected P = 0.0006). b, Heat map of AD-associated 
risk gene expression across microglia clusters shows stronger differential 
expression in cluster 6. c, Demonstration of lysosome morphology heterogeneity 
in microglia. Representative images from an AD case demonstrate microglia 
(Iba-1, green) with heterogeneity in morphology and Lamp-1 signal. Examples 
are of a ramified (top arrow) and greater lysosome (Lamp-1, magenta) signal 
and an ‘activated’ or less-ramified phenotype (bottom arrow). d, Representative 
microglia (Iba-1, green) with high PTGDS (red) expression, a cluster 6 marker in 
an AD case. e, Representative microglia (Iba-1, green) with high expression of 
P2RX7 (magenta) expression, a cluster 6 marker in an AD case. f, A representative 
example of activated microglia with both large numbers of lysosomes (Lamp-1, 
white) and cytosolic dsDNA (magenta) in an AD case. All representative images in 
c–f display staining replicated in multiple fields and at least three human brains. 
All scale bars represent 15 µm. **Corrected P < 0.01.

Nature Aging | Volume 3 | July 2023 | 894–907
902
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
emerge as ‘end states’, demonstrating how computational trajectory 
inference can map microglial phenotypes consistent with predictions 
from previous empirical data10,16,17. Nevertheless, as with all bioinfor-
matic analyses, these results should be viewed as hypothesis generat-
ing. Trajectory analysis also showed that the autophagic stress and 
inflammatory ELN clusters (cluster 5 and cluster 6, respectively) 
represented a branch point from cluster 1. Alternatively, cluster 3 
appeared to be a transition phase between the homeostatic cluster 
and either the motile or dystrophic clusters. These findings are simi-
lar to a previous report by Nguyen et al.26. Our analysis nominates 
genetic regulators of each cluster, and together these data can be 
used to guide further studies to test the plasticity or reversibility of 
microglia phenotype53. Furthermore, unlike other cell types that are 
terminally differentiated, it is plausible that microglia may transition 
in and out of transcriptomic states, underscoring the ‘snapshot’ 
nature of tissue omics.
We detected an AD-specific microglia phenotype, subcluster 
1.5, within the homeostatic-marker-expressing cluster, cluster 1. The 
‘homeostatic’ moniker is often invoked to describe a cluster expressing 
genes termed homeostatic because of their decreased expression upon 
microglial activation. Whether these genes truly have an active role in 
directing an activated or injured cell to resume a less reactive state or in 
maintaining a particular state is unknown. Nevertheless, we found that 
the cluster identified as ‘homeostatic’ using the typical homeostatic 
markers belies a complexity of microglia profiles that may hold clues 
to early or subtle microglial changes in response to AD pathology. 
As an example, subcluster 1.5 shows the highest expression of P2RY12 
as well as expression of genes that suggest another layer of activity. 
Of note, P2RY12 is associated with active microglial phenotypes and is 
considered essential for the initial stages of motility during inflamma-
tion54. The most highly differentially regulated gene in subcluster 1.5 
is PDE4b, a phosphodiesterase implicated in cognitive function55 and 
a
RASGEF1C
HTRA1
GRID2
SMAP2
CCND3
NAV2
APOE
DPYD
CD163
MYO1E
SPP1
SOCS6
SRGN
RGS1
HSP90AA1
PDE4B
IFI44L
HSPA5
TMEM163
HSP90B1
CD14
HAMP
PDK4
–2
–1
0
1
2
1.0
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.7
b
d
0
50
100
Ctrl
AD
% nuclei
**
1.0
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.7
*
UMAP 1
UMAP 2
–2.5
–3
0
3
0
2.5
5
1.1
1.3
1.6
1.2
1.7
1.5
1.4
1.0
Cluster 1.5
e
0
1
2
Neuron projection
Reg. of cellular component movement
Neuron spine
Actin filament based movement
Voltage gated ion channel activity
Cation channel complex
NES
c
0
1
2
3
Cluster
Expression level
WIPF3
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
0
1
2
3
4
Expression level
P2RY12
Cluster
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
0
1
2
3
4
Expression level
PDE4B
Cluster
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
0
1
2
3
4
Expression level
KCNIP1
Cluster
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
PDE4B DAPI
P2RY12 DAPI
P2RY12 PDE4B DAPI
Fig. 6 | Within microglia expressing homeostatic markers there is a 
subcluster uniquely enriched in AD brain samples. a, Subclustering of cluster 
1 homeostatic marker microglia (HM) revealed seven subpopulations defined 
by differential gene expression. b, Subcluster 1.5 is greatly expanded in AD brain 
samples (chi-square FDR-corrected P = 6.2936 × 10−13), whereas subcluster 1.4 is 
increased in control (Ctrl) brain samples (chi-square FDR-corrected P = 0.0194). 
c, Gene expression of P2RY12 demonstrates high expression across the HM 
subclusters, with highest expression in subcluster 1.5. Genes differentially 
expressed in subcluster 1.5, such as WIPF3, PDE4B and KCNIP, also demonstrate 
high expression. d, Pathway enrichment in subcluster 1.5 demonstrates unique 
enrichment for motility, ion channel activity and neuron-related processes.  
e, Immunohistochemistry validates the presence of double-positive high P2RY12-
expressing and PDE4B-expressing microglia in AD brain. Representative images 
display staining replicated in multiple fields and at least three human brains. 
Scale bars, 25 µm. *Corrected P < 0.05; **corrected P < 0.01. Reg., regulation.

Nature Aging | Volume 3 | July 2023 | 894–907
903
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
myeloid cell inflammatory activation56,57. PDE4b regulates levels of 
cAMP, which was shown to modulate microglia surveillance behavior58. 
Subcluster 1.5 also demonstrates enrichment of motility and calcium 
signaling pathways, which could suggest response to neuronal activity 
or extension of microglial processes53. Therefore, we speculate that 
subcluster 1.5 may represent early or subtle microglial phenotype 
changes in response to pathologic protein but not a fully immunologi-
cally activated phenotype.
As with all snRNA-seq studies, there are limitations to our study. 
Although PU.1 sorting provides a way to increase microglia nuclei 
for greater resolution of phenotypes at an individual subject level, it 
potentially selects for a specific population of microglia. Additionally, 
although known microglial and peripheral myeloid markers used to 
annotate cells increased confidence of a microglial designation, it is still 
possible that nuclei included may be a different brain myeloid cell type. 
DEGs that were identified using clusters defined by the same data are 
not necessarily properly controlled59; however, our dataset will allow 
others to use our clusters to mitigate this in the future. Although the 
total number of microglia from each subject is large, the total num-
ber of subjects studied is 22. Additional studies in larger cohorts are 
needed to validate these findings or perhaps give additional insight 
into microglial diversity. Gene expression is a useful molecular tool 
for cellular subtyping, but it does not always directly describe protein 
expression, localization or function60. Future studies assaying for a 
panel of proteins based upon the transcriptomic signatures reported 
here will be valuable for both validation as well as the spatial correla-
tion with pathological features. Assessment of microglial phenotypes 
across brain regions can provide further context to the understanding 
of phenotypic heterogeneity. Another significant limitation is the use of 
autopsy brain tissue. It is possible that events just before death or post-
mortem changes contribute to the expression changes measured here. 
To mitigate the variability of tissue quality, we selected only tissues with 
a pH greater than 6.0 and a postmortem interval (PMI) less than 10 h.
In this study, we identified microglia states from isolated human 
postmortem brain nuclei. Among the nuclei meeting criteria for a 
microglia transcriptomic signature, an ‘aging signature’ was observed 
in all clusters in this study23, consistent with our older age cohort. 
Inflammaging61 may not only confound interpretations of gene expres-
sion profiles attributable to AD but may also contribute to the disease 
mechanisms hypothesized to drive AD. Additional studies exploring 
differences between younger controls and early-onset AD may also 
help to explore the aging, inflammaging and AD-specific signatures. 
Our identification of multiple internalization and trafficking clusters 
with varying metabolic and inflammatory gene expression patterns 
provides a platform for further studies. Finding an AD-specific sub-
cluster within the population of microglia enriched for homeostatic 
gene expression also suggests that AD changes and, thus, molecu-
lar pathways driving AD can be identified in cells that have not yet 
been fully explored. The cluster-specific alterations in composition, 
gene expression and gene regulation in AD brain provide additional 
information to support tailored targeting of microglial physiological 
responses that will be critical moving forward in neurodegenerative 
disease therapeutics.
Methods
Human brain tissue
Our research complies with all relevant ethical regulations and was 
approved by the institutional review board at the University of Washing-
ton. Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) tissue from human brains 
was obtained from the Neuropathology Core of the Alzheimer’s Disease 
Research Center at University of Washington after written informed 
consent. Patients (n = 12) were confirmed postmortem to have AD 
pathology (Alzheimer’s Disease Neuropathic Change (ADNC) score of 
2–3; Table 1). Control individuals (n = 10) had low or no neuropathology 
postmortem (ADNC score 0–1; Table 1).
Brain samples were flash frozen and stored at −80°C. Criteria for 
inclusion included PMI ≤10 h, low comorbid pathology (Lewy bodies 
and hippocampal sclerosis) and a brain pH at autopsy ≥6.
Isolation of nuclei for unsorted snRNA-seq
Nuclei from brain samples were isolated using protocols adapted 
from 10x Genomics Demonstrated Protocols and De Groot et al.62. In 
brief, four 2-mm punches of dlPFC gray matter were collected using a 
biopsy punch (Thermo Fisher Scientific) into a 1.5-ml microcentrifuge 
tube on dry ice. All buffer, solution and media recipes can be found in 
Supplementary Tables 1–7. Nuclei isolation used nuclei lysis buffer. 
The nuclei in nuclei suspension solution was layered onto 900 µl of 
percoll/myelin gradient buffer62. The gradient was centrifuged at 950g 
for 20 min at 4 °C with slow acceleration and no brake. Myelin and 
supernatant were aspirated, and the nuclei pellet was resuspended in 
resuspension buffer at a concentration of 1,000 nuclei per microliter 
and proceeded immediately to snRNA-seq.
Isolation of nuclei for FANS
In brief, 100–250 mg of dlPFC gray matter was collected into a 1.5-ml 
microcentrifuge tube on dry ice. Brain tissue was homogenized as 
above. The homogenate was incubated at 4 °C under gentle agitation 
for 10 min, pelleted at 500g for 7 min at 4 °C and resuspended in 900 µl 
of percoll/myelin gradient buffer supplemented with protease and 
phosphatase inhibitors. The suspension was gently overlaid with 300 µl 
of nuclei suspension solution supplemented with protease and phos-
phatase inhibitors. The gradient was centrifuged at 950g for 20 min at 
4 °C with slow acceleration and no brake. The myelin and supernatant 
were aspirated, and the nuclei pellet proceeded immediately to FANS.
FANS
Nuclei were washed with cold FANS media (10% FBS, 10 mM HEPES, 
100 μM ATA, 10% 10× HBSS, 0.5% Protector RNase Inhibitor, protease 
and phosphatase inhibitors and 1% saponin in nuclease-free water) and 
resuspended in FANS media at a concentration of 2–2.5 × 106 nuclei 
per milliliter. Nuclei were incubated with 1% Human Fc Block (clone 
Fc1.3216, BD Biosciences) on ice for 10 min. Nuclei were labeled with 
either anti-PU.1-PE (clone 9G7, 1:50, Cell Signaling Technology) or IgG-
PE isotype control (clone DA1E, 1:50, Cell Signaling Technology) for 4 h 
on ice, followed by three washes with cold FANS media and resuspended 
in FANS media supplemented with 10 μg ml−1 DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich). 
Nuclei were sorted using a FACSAria III (BD Biosciences) until 30,000 
PU.1-positive nuclei were collected. Sorted nuclei were centrifuged at 
1,000g for 10 min at 4 °C. The nuclei pellet was resuspended in resus-
pension buffer at a concentration of 1,000 nuclei per microliter and 
proceeded immediately to snRNA-seq.
snRNA-seq
Single-nucleus libraries were generated using the Chromium Next 
GEM Single Cell 3′ GEM, Library and Gel Bead Kit version 3 (10x Genom-
ics) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and a target capture 
of 10,000 nuclei. Gene expression libraries were sequenced on the 
NovaSeq 6000 platform (Illumina).
Alignment and quality control
Gene counts were obtained by aligning reads to the hg38 genome 
(GRCh38-1.2.0) using CellRanger 3.0.2 software (10x Genomics). Reads 
mapping to precursor mRNA were included to account for unspliced 
nuclear transcripts. Most of our analysis was performed in R (R Devel-
opment Core Team 2010). Droplets from 22 PU.1 sorted samples were 
combined using Seurat version 3.3 (ref. 63). Unsorted and PU.1 sorted 
droplets isolated from the same four subjects were combined using 
Seurat and analyzed in the same manner. Droplets containing fewer 
than 350 unique molecular identifiers, fewer than 350 genes or more 
than 1% mitochondrial genes were excluded from analysis. Ambient 

Nature Aging | Volume 3 | July 2023 | 894–907
904
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
RNA was removed from the remaining droplets using SoupX64. Droplets 
containing multiple nuclei were scored using Scrublet65 and removed. 
In total, 200,948 nuclei with an average of 1,787 genes per nucleus 
remained in the dataset for further analysis.
Normalization and cell clustering
Normalization and clustering of the nuclei were performed using 
Seurat version 3.3 (ref. 63). Data were normalized for read depth, and 
mitochondrial gene content was regressed out using Seurat’s SCTrans-
form66. Individual sample variability was removed using Seurat’s Anchor-
ing and Integration functions63. The top 5,000 variable genes were kept. 
Fifteen principal components (PCs) were used to create a shared nearest 
neighbors graph with k = 20. The modularity function was optimized 
using a resolution of 0.2 to determine clusters using the Louvain algo-
rithm with multilevel refinement to determine broad cell types. Each 
cluster met a minimum threshold of 30 defining DEGs and comprised 
nuclei from more than 10% of the cohort (more than two individuals).
Clusters were annotated for cell type using manual evaluation for a 
set of known genetic markers67. A new Seurat object was made contain-
ing only the microglia nuclei (n = 127,371). Normalization, individual 
variability removal, integration and shared nearest neighbors graph 
creation were repeated as above on the microglia nuclei. Twenty PCs 
were chosen to account for a significant amount of the variance. Clusters 
were determined using the Leiden algorithm68 with method=igraph 
and weights=true. Clusters were highly conserved across analysis by 
Louvain, Louvain with multilevel refinement and Leiden algorithms. 
Homeostatic cluster subclustering for both the 22-sample dataset and 
the APOE ε3/ε3 allele dataset occurred after normalization, individual 
variability removal and integration as before and was performed using 
10 PCs and the Louvain with multilevel refinement algorithm. Distribu-
tion of nuclei within each cluster was calculated using the ‘chisq.test’ 
function in R to compare the actual percentage of nuclei from either 
the AD or control group within the cluster to the expected proportion 
of nuclei that would be contributed based on dataset composition. 
P values from the chi-squared tests were adjusted using false discovery 
rate (FDR) and considered significant if adjusted P < 0.05.
snRNA-seq differential gene expression and GSEA
Differential gene expression analysis of the clusters was performed with 
the MAST algorithm. Genes tested had expression in at least 25% of the 
nuclei in the cluster. DEGs had an FDR-adjusted P < 0.05 and a log fold 
change > 1.25. Cluster 1 was annotated as inactivated, often referred 
to as ‘homeostatic’ in single-nucleus studies of microglia. Differential 
gene expression analysis was repeated as above comparing each other 
cluster to cluster 1. GSEA was performed in ClusterProfiler69 modified 
to use a set seed for reproducibility, using the GO, KEGG and Reactome 
pathway sets, version 7.2. Enriched pathways had an FDR-adjusted 
P < 0.05. We considered pathways to be representative if significant 
results included similar genes and biological functions in at least two 
of the three major databases (GO, KEGG and Reactome).
GO biological process clustering
A complementary approach to GSEA is to perform biological process 
ontology clustering to identify a more extensive set of terms associated 
with the gene list. To further characterize the ELN clusters (3, 5 and 6), 
we implemented this approach to get a more refined examination of the 
biologically linked process driven by each cluster. We employed several 
different approaches to perform this analysis, ultimately choosing the 
Cytoscape network clustering application ClueGO70,71, which has been 
employed extensively in recent years for this purpose72–75. This creates a 
network of genetically linked processes that goes beyond a singular GO 
term hit, providing greater confidence that a basic biological process 
is being impacted based on the differential expression of a particular 
set of genes. Clusters 3, 5 and 6 were each independently submitted for 
analysis using a one-sided positive enrichment algorithm that employs 
hypergeometric testing, with a kappa threshold of 0.4 to optimize the 
biological process connections. Each term drawn into the network was 
initially filtered for multiple testing corrections threshold of P < 0.05 
and hierarchically weighted for terms with a Benjamini–Hochberg 
correction value of P < 0.01. As this procedure is performed for valida-
tion and visualization, we trimmed networks of lesser-ranked terms to 
permit ease of visualization.
Trajectory and lineage analysis
Trajectory analysis was performed using Monocle3 (ref. 45) on multiple 
permutations of our downsampled dataset. The data were downsam-
pled to 1,000, 2,000, 3,000 or 5,000 nuclei per cluster and transferred 
to a cell dataset object, and Monocle3 ‘learn_graph’ was run. Principal 
component analysis and uniform manifold approximation and projec-
tion (UMAP) embeddings were extracted from the Seurat object. We 
applied the algorithm both with and without a defined starting point. 
The 5,000 nuclei-per-cluster downsampled data began to break down 
the ability of Monocle to form a consistent trajectory, whereas the 1,000, 
2,000 and 3,000 multiple permutations consistently formed something 
similar to the representative image in Fig. 5 (3,000 nuclei per cluster).
Gene regulatory network inference
Regulons were inferred using the SCENIC workflow in Python (pySCE-
NIC)76,77. We randomly selected 2,000, 3,000 or 5,000 nuclei in each 
cluster (or, if they have fewer than this number, all the nuclei in the 
cluster) to reduce the computational time and have proportional repre-
sentation of all the clusters. We made five subsets of each combination 
and repeated the analysis twice for each subset to assess the consist-
ency of the regulons in the analysis. First, we used normalized counts 
with highly variable genes to generate the co-expressing regulatory 
network modules using the machine learning algorithm GRNBoost2 
with function ‘grn’ and default settings76. Second, the modules were 
filtered using the ‘-ctx’ function, which uses cis-regulatory motif 
analysis (RcisTarget) to keep only modules enriched for putative target 
genes of the transcription factor. Regulons are identified by combining 
multiple modules for a single transcription factor. Third, the AUCell 
function was used to calculate the regulon activity for each nucleus. 
Regulon specificity scores were calculated for each regulon in every 
cluster. Ranking specificity scores identified the top 10 regulons for a 
specific cluster for a given subset of the dataset and the consistency 
of the findings across subsets.
Immunostaining of human tissue
Dissected tissues from the dlPFC of the 22 cases in the cohort were 
fixed with paraformaldehyde and paraffin embedded. Samples were 
Table 1 | Postmortem brain sample demographics
Group
Males
Females
Avg. age
Avg. PMI
ADNC
E2/3
E3/3
E3/4
E4/4
Ctrl
4
6
85.9
5.53
0–1
2
7
1
AD
3
9
86.5
4.67
2–3
6
5
1
Total
7
15
86.23
5.42
2
13
6
1
AD, Alzheimer’s disease pathology; Avg. age, average years of age at death; APOE genotypes: APOE alleles 2/3 (E2/3), APOE alleles 3/3 (E3/3), APOE alleles 3/4 (E3/4) and APOE alleles 4/4 
(E4/4); Ctrl, control; Avg. PMI, average postmortem interval in hours.

Nature Aging | Volume 3 | July 2023 | 894–907
905
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
sectioned at 15 µm and deparaffinized before immunostaining. Slides 
were boiled in citrate buffer (Sigma-Aldrich, C9999) for 20 min and 
then transferred into blocking buffer (10% donkey serum, 0.1% Trition 
X-100 and 0.05% Tween 20 in TBS) for 1 h at room temperature. Slides 
were incubated in primary antibodies (anti-LAMP1 1:100, Invitrogen, 
14-1079-80; anti-Iba-1 1:250, Abcam, ab5076; anti-dsDNA 1:250, Mil-
lipore, MAB1293; anti-PTGDS/PGD2 1:100, R&D Systems, MAB10099; 
anti-P2RX7 1:100, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-514962; anti-P2RY12 
1:50, Alomone, APR-012; and anti-PDE4B 1:50, LSBio, LS-C173292-100) 
overnight at 4 °C. Slides were rinsed three times in TBS-T for 5 min 
before secondary antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Alexa Fluor 488 
donkey anti-goat, A11055; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Alexa Fluor 555 
donkey anti-mouse, A31570; Alexa Fluor 555 donkey anti-rabbit 555, 
A31572; Alexa Fluor 647 donkey anti-mouse, A31571; or Alexa Fluor 647 
donkey anti-rabbit, A32795) incubation for 1 h at room temperature. 
Slides were then stained with DAPI (1:1,000, Millipore, D8417) for 5 min, 
followed by three 5-min TBS-T washes. True Black (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific, NC1125051) diluted 1:20 in 70% ethanol was added to the 
slides for 50 s, followed by two additional 5-min washes in TBS before 
being mounted with Fluoromount-G (Southern Biotech, 0100-01). 
Slides were imaged using either an Olympus FluoView-1000 confocal 
microscope or a spinning disk confocal microscope (Nikon A1R with 
Yokogawa W1 spinning disk head) with ×40 and ×100 oil objectives, 
and the maximum projection of z-stack images was generated. Images 
were despeckled using Fiji.
Statistics and reproducibility
No statistical methods were used to pre-determine sample sizes, but 
our sample sizes are similar to those reported in previous publica-
tions22,25,26. Data collection and analyses were not performed blinded 
to the conditions of the experiments. No data were excluded from 
the analyses. The main snRNA-seq dataset of PU.1 enrichment from 
dlPFC is from 22 humans (12 AD and 10 healthy aged donors), all aged 
>60 years. Because the samples were obtained from humans, and 
the study was designed to detect differences between AD cases and 
healthy aged brains, the samples were not randomized between con-
ditions. We counterbalanced sequencing batches by sex and disease 
status such that all conditions were present in each sequencing batch. 
Statistical analysis for pseudobulk RNA-seq data and snRNA-seq data 
used DESeq2 and MAST, respectively. DESeq2 is designed to model the 
RNA-seq count data by a negative binomial distribution, and MAST 
is designed to model the zero inflation observed in snRNA-seq data. 
For statistical analysis of cluster proportion, counts data were used, 
which does not rely on a normal distribution. When the dataset was 
downsampled for trajectory analysis and regulon detection, the nuclei 
were randomly downsampled to generate multiple iterations of the 
dataset that evenly represented the clusters and kept the samples in 
their original proportions. For trajectory analysis, three downsam-
pled permutations at three downsample resolutions (1,000, 2,000 or 
3,000 nuclei per cluster) were analyzed for a total of nine iterations, 
resulting in similar findings as those displayed in Fig. 4. For pySCENIC 
regulon detection, the dataset was downsampled with five permuta-
tions at 1,000 nuclei per cluster and three permutations at 2,000 and 
3,000 nuclei per cluster. Each of these permutations was run through 
the pySCENIC pipeline multiple times, resulting in 27 instances of 
regulon detection. These 27 instances were compiled into the consist-
ency scores displayed in Fig. 3 and Extended Data Fig. 6. Experiments 
involving immunohistochemistry of human tissue were replicated 
on, at minimum, samples from five humans, and images displayed 
are representative of staining observed in multiple fields of at least 
three human samples.
Reporting Summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Port-
folio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The entire anonymous dataset generated for this resource in its raw and 
Seurat object processed forms is available via Synapse (https://www.
synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn51272688). The data are available under 
controlled use conditions set by human privacy regulations. To access 
the data, a data use agreement is needed. This registration is in place 
solely to ensure anonymity of the study participants. All other study 
data are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable 
request. This resource also used the publicly available human hg38 
genome (GRCh38-1.2.0).
Code availability
The scripts used to generate our analyses are available at https://github.
com/keprater/jayadevlab_pu.1_project. The container needed to run 
the scripts with the same Seurat and other package versions as are used 
in the code is available for download at https://hub.docker.com/r/
keprater/jayadevlab/tags or in the Synapse project with the dataset. 
Use container Tag 6.3 to replicate our analyses with the same package 
versions.
References
1.	
Podlesny-Drabiniok, A., Marcora, E. & Goate, A. M. Microglial 
phagocytosis: a disease-associated process emerging from 
Alzheimer’s disease genetics. Trends Neurosci. 43, 965–979 (2020).
2.	
Calsolaro, V. & Edison, P. Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s 
disease: current evidence and future directions. Alzheimers 
Dement. 12, 719–732 (2016).
3.	
Colonna, M. & Butovsky, O. Microglia function in the central 
nervous system during health and neurodegeneration. Annu. Rev. 
Immunol. 35, 441–468 (2017).
4.	
McQuade, A. & Blurton-Jones, M. Microglia in Alzheimer’s disease: 
exploring how genetics and phenotype influence risk. J. Mol. Biol. 
431, 1805–1817 (2019).
5.	
Milner, M. T., Maddugoda, M., Gotz, J., Burgener, S. S. & Schroder, 
K. The NLRP3 inflammasome triggers sterile neuroinflammation 
and Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 68, 116–124 (2021).
6.	
Prinz, M., Jung, S. & Priller, J. Microglia biology: one century of 
evolving concepts. Cell 179, 292–311 (2019).
7.	
Salter, M. W. & Stevens, B. Microglia emerge as central players in 
brain disease. Nat. Med. 23, 1018–1027 (2017).
8.	
Streit, W. J., Xue, Q. S., Tischer, J. & Bechmann, I. Microglial 
pathology. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 2, 142 (2014).
9.	
Webers, A., Heneka, M. T. & Gleeson, P. A. The role of innate 
immune responses and neuroinflammation in amyloid 
accumulation and progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Immunol. 
Cell Biol. 98, 28–41 (2020).
10.	 Wolf, S. A., Boddeke, H. W. & Kettenmann, H. Microglia in 
physiology and disease. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 79, 619–643 (2017).
11.	
Hansen, D. V., Hanson, J. E. & Sheng, M. Microglia in Alzheimer’s 
disease. J. Cell Biol. 217, 459–472 (2018).
12.	 Streit, W. J., Khoshbouei, H. & Bechmann, I. Dystrophic microglia 
in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Glia 68, 845–854 (2020).
13.	 Hopp, S. C. et al. The role of microglia in processing and 
spreading of bioactive tau seeds in Alzheimer’s disease.  
J. Neuroinflammation 15, 269 (2018).
14.	 Asai, H. et al. Depletion of microglia and inhibition of  
exosome synthesis halt tau propagation. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 
1584–1593 (2015).
15.	 Shi, M., Chu, F., Zhu, F. & Zhu, J. Impact of anti-amyloid-β 
monoclonal antibodies on the pathology and clinical profile of 
Alzheimer’s disease: a focus on aducanumab and lecanemab. 
Front. Aging Neurosci. 14, 870517 (2022).
16.	 Holtman, I. R., Skola, D. & Glass, C. K. Transcriptional control of 
microglia phenotypes in health and disease. J. Clin. Invest. 127, 
3220–3229 (2017).

Nature Aging | Volume 3 | July 2023 | 894–907
906
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
17.	 Stratoulias, V., Venero, J. L., Tremblay, M. E. & Joseph, B. Microglial 
subtypes: diversity within the microglial community. EMBO J. 38, 
e101997 (2019).
18.	 Mathys, H. et al. Temporal tracking of microglia activation 
in neurodegeneration at single-cell resolution. Cell Rep. 21, 
366–380 (2017).
19.	 Keren-Shaul, H. et al. A unique microglia type associated with 
restricting development of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 169, 
1276–1290 (2017).
20.	 Rexach, J. E. et al. Tau pathology drives dementia risk-associated 
gene networks toward chronic inflammatory states and 
immunosuppression. Cell Rep. 33, 108398 (2020).
21.	 Tan, Y. L., Yuan, Y. & Tian, L. Microglial regional heterogeneity and 
its role in the brain. Mol. Psychiatry 25, 351–367 (2020).
22.	 Olah, M. et al. Single cell RNA sequencing of human microglia 
uncovers a subset associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. 
Commun. 11, 6129 (2020).
23.	 Olah, M. et al. A transcriptomic atlas of aged human microglia. 
Nat. Commun. 9, 539 (2018).
24.	 Mathys, H. et al. Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Nature 570, 332–337 (2019).
25.	 Gerrits, E. et al. Distinct amyloid-β and tau-associated  
microglia profiles in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 141, 
681–696 (2021).
26.	 Nguyen, A. T. et al. APOE and TREM2 regulate amyloid-responsive 
microglia in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 140,  
477–493 (2020).
27.	 Alsema, A. M. et al. Profiling microglia from Alzheimer’s disease 
donors and non-demented elderly in acute human postmortem 
cortical tissue. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 13, 134 (2020).
28.	 Smith, A. M. et al. Diverse human astrocyte and microglial 
transcriptional responses to Alzheimer’s pathology. Acta 
Neuropathol. 143, 75–91 (2022).
29.	 Patel, T. et al. Transcriptional landscape of human microglia 
implicates age, sex, and APOE-related immunometabolic 
pathway perturbations. Aging Cell 21, e13606 (2022).
30.	 Nott, A. et al. Brain cell type-specific enhancer–promoter 
interactome maps and disease-risk association. Science 366, 
1134–1139 (2019).
31.	 Schoggins, J. W. et al. A diverse range of gene products are 
effectors of the type I interferon antiviral response. Nature 472, 
481–485 (2011).
32.	 Wang, D. et al. The role of NLRP3-CASP1 in inflammasome-
mediated neuroinflammation and autophagy dysfunction in 
manganese-induced, hippocampal-dependent impairment of 
learning and memory ability. Autophagy 13, 914–927 (2017).
33.	 Xu, P. et al. The landscape of human tissue and cell type specific 
expression and co-regulation of senescence genes. Mol. 
Neurodegener. 17, 5 (2022).
34.	 Angelova, D. M. & Brown, D. R. Microglia and the aging brain:  
are senescent microglia the key to neurodegeneration?  
J. Neurochem. 151, 676–688 (2019).
35.	 Reijns, M. A. et al. Enzymatic removal of ribonucleotides 
from DNA is essential for mammalian genome integrity and 
development. Cell 149, 1008–1022 (2012).
36.	 Mjelle, R. et al. Cell cycle regulation of human DNA repair and 
chromatin remodeling genes. DNA Repair (Amst). 30, 53–67 (2015).
37.	 Sala Frigerio, C. et al. The major risk factors for alzheimer’s 
disease: age, sex, and genes modulate the microglia response to 
abeta plaques. Cell Rep. 27, 1293–1306 (2019).
38.	 Lauro, C. & Limatola, C. Metabolic reprograming of microglia 
in the regulation of the innate inflammatory response. Front. 
Immunol. 11, 493 (2020).
39.	 Pagani, I., Poli, G. & Vicenzi, E. TRIM22. A multitasking antiviral 
factor. Cells 10, 1864 (2021).
40.	 Subramanian, N., Natarajan, K., Clatworthy, M. R., Wang, Z. & 
Germain, R. N. The adaptor MAVS promotes NLRP3  
mitochondrial localization and inflammasome activation. Cell 
153, 348–361 (2013).
41.	 Di Virgilio, F., Dal Ben, D., Sarti, A. C., Giuliani, A. L. & Falzoni, S. 
The P2X7 receptor in infection and inflammation. Immunity 47, 
15–31 (2017).
42.	 Drummond, R. A. et al. CARD9+ microglia promote antifungal 
immunity via IL-1β- and CXCL1-mediated neutrophil recruitment. 
Nat. Immunol. 20, 559–570 (2019).
43.	 Li, L. et al. Thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) associated 
NLRP3 inflammasome activation in human Alzheimer’s disease 
brain. J. Alzheimers Dis. 68, 255–265 (2019).
44.	 Kunkle, B. W. et al. Genetic meta-analysis of diagnosed 
Alzheimer’s disease identifies new risk loci and implicates Aβ, tau, 
immunity and lipid processing. Nat. Genet. 51, 414–430 (2019).
45.	 Cao, J. et al. The single-cell transcriptional landscape of 
mammalian organogenesis. Nature 566, 496–502 (2019).
46.	 Lambert, J. C. et al. Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 
11 new susceptibility loci for Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet. 45, 
1452–1458 (2013).
47.	 Nixon, R. A. Amyloid precursor protein and endosomal-lysosomal 
dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease: inseparable partners in a 
multifactorial disease. FASEB J. 31, 2729–2743 (2017).
48.	 Van Acker, Z. P., Bretou, M. & Annaert, W. Endo-lysosomal 
dysregulations and late-onset Alzheimer’s disease: impact of 
genetic risk factors. Mol. Neurodegener. 14, 20 (2019).
49.	 Song, X. et al. DNA repair inhibition leads to active export of 
repetitive sequences to the cytoplasm triggering an inflammatory 
response. J. Neurosci. 41, 9286–9307 (2021).
50.	 Roy, E. R. et al. Type I interferon response drives 
neuroinflammation and synapse loss in Alzheimer disease.  
J. Clin. Invest. 130, 1912–1930 (2020).
51.	 Yang, H. S. et al. Natural genetic variation determines microglia 
heterogeneity in wild-derived mouse models of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Cell Rep. 34, 108739 (2021).
52.	 Song, X., Ma, F. & Herrup, K. Accumulation of cytoplasmic DNA 
due to ATM deficiency activates the microglial viral response 
system with neurotoxic consequences. J. Neurosci. 39,  
6378–6394 (2019).
53.	 Augusto-Oliveira, M. et al. Plasticity of microglia. Biol. Rev. Camb. 
Philos. Soc. 97, 217–250 (2022).
54.	 Gomez Morillas, A., Besson, V. C. & Lerouet, D. Microglia and 
neuroinflammation: what place for P2RY12? Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22, 
1636 (2021).
55.	 Delhaye, S. & Bardoni, B. Role of phosphodiesterases in  
the pathophysiology of neurodevelopmental disorders.  
Mol. Psychiatry 26, 4570–4582 (2021).
56.	 Jin, S. L., Lan, L., Zoudilova, M. & Conti, M. Specific role of 
phosphodiesterase 4B in lipopolysaccharide-induced signaling in 
mouse macrophages. J. Immunol. 175, 1523–1531 (2005).
57.	 Haynes, S. E. et al. The P2Y12 receptor regulates microglial 
activation by extracellular nucleotides. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 
1512–1519 (2006).
58.	 Bernier, L. P. et al. Nanoscale surveillance of the brain by microglia 
via cAMP-regulated filopodia. Cell Rep. 27, 2895–2908 (2019).
59.	 Lähnemann, D. et al. Eleven grand challenges in single-cell data 
science. Genome Biol. 21, 31 (2020).
60.	 Koussounadis, A., Langdon, S. P., Um, I. H., Harrison, D. J. &  
Smith, V. A. Relationship between differentially expressed mRNA 
and mRNA–protein correlations in a xenograft model system.  
Sci. Rep. 5, 10775 (2015).
61.	 Franceschi, C., Garagnani, P., Parini, P., Giuliani, C. & Santoro, A. 
Inflammaging: a new immune-metabolic viewpoint for age-
related diseases. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 14, 576–590 (2018).

Nature Aging | Volume 3 | July 2023 | 894–907
907
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
62.	 de Groot, C. J., Hulshof, S., Hoozemans, J. J. & Veerhuis, 
R. Establishment of microglial cell cultures derived from 
postmortem human adult brain tissue: immunophenotypical  
and functional characterization. Microsc. Res. Tech. 54,  
34–39 (2001).
63.	 Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive integration of single-cell data. Cell 
177, 1888–1902 (2019).
64.	 Young, M. D. & Behjati, S. SoupX removes ambient RNA 
contamination from droplet-based single-cell RNA sequencing 
data. Gigascience 9, giaa151 (2020).
65.	 Wolock, S. L., Lopez, R. & Klein, A. M. Scrublet: computational 
identification of cell doublets in single-cell transcriptomic data. 
Cell Syst. 8, 281–291 (2019).
66.	 Hafemeister, C. & Satija, R. Normalization and variance 
stabilization of single-cell RNA-seq data using regularized 
negative binomial regression. Genome Biol. 20, 296 (2019).
67.	 Hodge, R. D. et al. Conserved cell types with divergent features in 
human versus mouse cortex. Nature 573, 61–68 (2019).
68.	 Traag, V. A., Waltman, L. & van Eck, N. J. From Louvain to  
Leiden: guaranteeing well-connected communities. Sci. Rep. 9, 
5233 (2019).
69.	 Wu, T. et al. clusterProfiler 4.0: a universal enrichment tool for 
interpreting omics data. Innovation (Camb) 2, 100141 (2021).
70.	 Mlecnik, B., Galon, J. & Bindea, G. Automated exploration of 
gene ontology term and pathway networks with ClueGO-REST. 
Bioinformatics 35, 3864–3866 (2019).
71.	 Bindea, G. et al. ClueGO: a Cytoscape plug-in to decipher 
functionally grouped gene ontology and pathway annotation 
networks. Bioinformatics 25, 1091–1093 (2009).
72.	 Zhu, G. et al. Exploration of the crucial genes and molecular 
mechanisms mediating atherosclerosis and abnormal endothelial 
shear stress. Dis. Markers 2022, 6306845 (2022).
73.	 Verma, P. & Shakya, M. Machine learning model for predicting 
major depressive disorder using RNA-seq data: optimization of 
classification approach. Cogn. Neurodyn. 16, 443–453 (2022).
74.	 Dong, L. et al. Construction, bioinformatics analysis, and 
validation of competitive endogenous RNA networks in ulcerative 
colitis. Front. Genet. 13, 951243 (2022).
75.	 Lee, H. J., Kim, J. S., Moon, C. & Son, Y. Profiling of gene 
expression in the brain associated with anxiety-related behaviors 
in the chronic phase following cranial irradiation. Sci. Rep. 12, 
13162 (2022).
76.	 Aibar, S. et al. SCENIC: single-cell regulatory network inference 
and clustering. Nat. Methods 14, 1083–1086 (2017).
77.	 Van de Sande, B. et al. A scalable SCENIC workflow for  
single-cell gene regulatory network analysis. Nat. Protoc. 15, 
2247–2276 (2020).
Acknowledgements
Funding for these studies was provided by RF1AG063540 (S.J. and 
G.A.G.), P30AG066509 (S.J., K.E.P., J.E.Y. and C.D.K.), R01AG073918  
(S.J and J.E.Y.) and the Weill Neurohub (S.J. and C.D.K.). Additional 
support was provided by the Ellison Foundation (S.J.). K.E.P. was 
supported by National Institute on Aging 5T32-AG052354-02. 
Autopsy materials used in this study were obtained from the University 
of Washington Neuropathology Core, which is supported by the 
Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (P50AG005136-33) and the 
Adult Changes in Thought Study (U01AG006781). This work was 
facilitated by the use of the advanced computational, storage and 
networking infrastructure provided by the Hyak supercomputer 
system at the University of Washington.
Author contributions
Conceived and designed experiments: S.J., K.J.G., K.E.P., J.E.Y., C.L.S., 
B.L. and G.A.G. Performed the experiments: K.J.G., C.L.S., A.C., S.R. 
and C.D.K. Analyzed data: K.E.P., K.J.G., S.M., A.C., K.L.C. and J.W. 
Biostatistics oversight: W.S. and A.S. Wrote the paper: K.E.P., K.J.G., 
S.J., S.M. and A.C. Edited the paper: C.L.S., W.S., A.S., J.Y., E.E.B. 
and G.A.G. Provided code: W.S., S.M., K.L.C., N.S.-M., R.Y.K. and L.H. 
Conceptualized the research and collaborations: S.J., G.A.G., J.E.Y., 
E.E.B. and B.L.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y.
Supplementary information The online version  
contains supplementary material available at  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to 
Suman Jayadev.
Peer review information Nature Aging thanks the anonymous 
reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at  
www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, 
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate 
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless 
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted 
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023

Nature Aging
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
Extended Data Fig. 1 | PU.1 enrichment increases the number of microglia 
nuclei and enhances microglia cluster resolution in snRNAseq studies.  
(A) Fluorescence-activated nuclei sorting plot of nuclei isolated from 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex grey matter of postmortem human brain tissue 
demonstrate a DAPI-positive population from which later populations are 
drawn. (B) Isotype and PU.1 staining examples demonstrating the PU.1 positive 
population. (C) Unsorted snRNAseq data from four samples demonstrates 
multiple brain cell types and a small population of microglia (n = 1032 cells) 
that can be further subdivided into five clusters. (D) After PU.1 enrichment, a 
snRNAseq dataset from the same four individuals contains a larger number of 
microglia (n = 23,310 cells), and these microglia can be further discriminated into 
nine clusters.

Nature Aging
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Gene expression of microglia marker genes in the 10 identified microglia subclusters. Microglia marker genes, CX3CR1, C1Qb, SPI1 
(PU.1), and APOE all demonstrate higher expression in the 10 microglia subclusters (numbered 1–10 on the left) than in other cell type clusters (labeled by cell type 
on the right).

Nature Aging
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Gene expression of astrocyte and peripheral monocyte 
marker genes in the 10 identified microglia subclusters. (A) Astrocyte marker 
genes GFAP and S100B demonstrate higher expression in the two Astrocytes-1 
and Astrocytes-2 subclusters than in the 10 defined microglia subclusters. While 
microglia cluster 6 does have expression of GFAP, it does not have expression 
of S100B. (B) Peripheral monocyte markers CCL5 and have low expression in 
our dataset but are most highly expressed by the CD163+ cluster which was not 
included in our microglia dataset.

Nature Aging
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Gene Ontology Network Enrichment of the 
Endolysosomal Microglia Clusters 3, 5, and 6. The genes differentially 
expressed in Clusters 3, 5, and 6 were employed to drive a network-based gene 
ontology enrichment using the Cytoscape application ClueGO. This approach 
uses a one-sided positive enrichment algorithm that employs hypergeometric 
testing, with a kappa-threshold of 0.4 to optimize the biological process 
connections. Each term drawn into the network was initially filtered for multiple 
testing corrections threshold of p < 0.05, and hierarchically weighted for 
terms with a Benjamini-Hochberg correction value of p < 0.01. The nodes are 
represented within each network based upon two factors: number of genes (size 
of circle) and statistical significance (bright red = Benjamini-Hochberg corrected 
p < 0.05; dark brown = Benjamini-Hochberg corrected p < 0.0005). (A) In Cluster 
3, three small subclusters were identified associated with endocytosis, receptor 
mediated endocytosis, and lipid binding and synthesis (far left); a second 
subcluster centers on synaptic endocytosis (middle group); and a third involves 
vesicle transport (far right). (B) In Cluster 5, a subcluster of terms was identified 
spanning autophagy, receptor mediated autophagy, and the regulation of these 
two terms (far left); a second larger cluster identifies endocytosis and receptor-
mediated endocytosis, processes linked with autophagic regulation, as well as 
vesicular transport. (C) In Cluster 6, three subnetworks were identified within the 
ELN space, demonstrating active endocytosis, lysosomal processes and transfer 
between these compartments and the trans-golgi network (left). A second 
large cluster of terms was identified associated with innate immune function, 
activation, and regulation, as well as linked inflammatory processes (right side).

Nature Aging
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
Extended Data Fig. 5 | APOE ε3/ε3 genotype does not substantially alter 
microglial clustering in human autopsy brain. (A) UMAP of unbiased 
clustering on 13 samples of only APOE ε3/ε3 individuals shows 9 clusters.  
(B) Similar to the clusters identified in the Mixed APOE genotype dataset, the 
clusters identified in the APOE ε3/ε3 genotype dataset are distinct by gene 
expression. The top 5 genes are displayed for each cluster. (C) Venn diagrams 
demonstrating overlap between clusters from the Mixed APOE and APOE ε3/ε3 
cohorts demonstrating significant overlap in gene expression profiles.

Nature Aging
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-023-00424-y
Extended Data Fig. 6 | Top transcription factors for each cluster from the full 
cohort microglia subclusters are unique and represent biological function 
switches. These are the transcription factors that most often drove gene 
expression in clusters 4, 7, 9, and 10. Values denote the percentage of replicates 
of permutations of the dataset where that transcription factor was unique to the 
given cluster, with darker color indicating higher percentages. Note that while 
a few similar transcription factors are seen in multiple clusters, particularly the 
most prevalent transcription factors are unique, and are representative of gene 
expression driving biological functions in these clusters.

